As INTRODUCED IN LOll 8ABHA ON 
1 5 UtC 3&9 
THE ASSAM REORGANISATION 
Blll No. 1I1oflH9 
(MEGHALAYA) BILL, 1969 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
PART I 
CLAUS. 
l. Short title and commencement. 
2. Definitions. 
PART II 
FORMATION OF THE AUTONOMOUS STATa OF MEGHALAYA 
3. Formation of Meghalaya. 
4. Executive power of Meghalaya. 
5. Extent of executive power of Meghalaya. 
6. Council of Ministers. 
7. Other provisions as to Ministers. 
8. Advocate-General for Meghalaya. 
9. Conduct of business. 
10. Duties of Chief Minister as respects the furnishine of informa-
tion to Governor, etc. 
PART III 
THI LBGISLATUU 
General 
11. Constitution of the Legislature of Megllalaya. 
12. Delimitation of Constituencies. 
13. Power of Election Commission to maintain delimitation orden 
u}>-to-date. 
14. Electors and electoral rolls. 
15. Right to vote. 
16. Qualification for membership. 
17. Election to the Legislative Assembly. 
18. Duration of Legislative Assembly. 
19. Sessions of Legislative Assembly, prorogation and dissolution. 
20. Right of Governor to address and send messages to Legislative 
Assembly. 
21. Special address by the Governor. 
22. Rights of Minister. as respects Legislative Aisembly. 

(ii) 
Officer, of the Legi.dative Auembly 
23. Speaker and Deputy Speaker of Legislative Assembly. 
24. Speaker and Deputy Speaker not to preside while a resolution 
for his removal from office is under consideration. 
25. Secretariat of Legislative Assembly. 
Conduct of btUin.ess 
26. Oath or affirmation by members. 
'1:1. Voting in Assembly, power of Assembly to act notwithBtand~ 
ing vacancies and qUOn&IIl. 
Disqualifications oj members 
28. Vacation of seats. 
29. Disqualifications for membership. 
30. Penalty for sitting and voting before making an oath or amr~ 
mation or when not qualified or when disqualified.. 
31. Powers, privileges, etc., of members. 
32. Salaries and allowances of memben. 
Legislative powers and procedure 
33. Extent of Legislative power. 
34. Exemption from taxation of properties Of the Union and the 
State of Assam and of certain vehicles registered in Assam 
or Meghalaya. 
35. Inconsistency between laws made by Parliament and laws made 
by the Legislature of Meghalaya. 
36. InCOnsistency between laws made by the Legislature of the 
State of Assam and laws made by the Legislature of Megba-
laya. 
37. Special provisions as to financial Bills. 
3&. Procedure as to lapsing of Bills. 
39. Assent to Bills. 
40. Bills reserved for consideration. 
41. Requirements as to sanction and recommendation to be re-
garded as matters of procedure only. 
Procedure in financial ma.tter& 
42. Annual Financial Statement. 
~. Procedure in Legislative Assembly with respect to estimates. 
·M. Appropriation Bills. 
45. Supplementary, additional or excess grants 
46. Votes on Account and exceptional grant. 
Procedure generally 
47. Rules of procedure . 
•. Restrictions on discussion in the Legislative Auembly. 

(Ui) 
-- ""-'-"T 
49. Courts not to enquire into the proceedings of Legislative AaIem-
bly. 
LegiBlatit1e power of the Governor 
50. Power of Governor to promulgate Ordinances during receII 
of Legislative Assembly. 
PART IV 
FINANCIAL PROVISION'S 
51. Consolidated Fund. 
52. Contingency Fund. 
53. Custody of suitors' deposits and other moneys received by 
public servants and courts. 
54. Custody, etc., of Consolidated Fund, Contingency, Fund and 
moneys credited to the public accounts. 
55. Certain duties levied by Assam to be approfjrtated by 
Meghalaya. 
56. Distribution of revenues. 
57. Authorisation of expenditure pending its sanction by Legisla-
tive Assembly. 
PART V 
AssETS AND LIABILlTIBI!J 
58. Apportionment of assets and liabilities. 
PART VI 
ADMINISTRATIVE RELAnoNS 
59. Obligation of Meghalaya, the State of Assam and the Union· 
60. Control over the autonomous State in certain Casel. 
61. Entrustment of functions. 
PART VII 
TltANsmONAL PftOVISIONS 
62. Provisions as to Provisional Legislative Assembly. 
PART VOl 
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
63. Special Committee for development of Shillong. 
64. Provisions as to continuance of courts. 
65. Provisions relating to services. 
66. Continuance of existing laws and thelr adaptations. 
67. Autonomous State to be a State for certain purposes of the 
Constitution. 

(iv) 
CLAU" 
se. Power of Governments of Assam and Meghalaya to carry on 
trade, etc., in Meghalaya. 
69. Power to suspend provisions of this Act in case of failure of 
constitutional machinery. 
70. Construction of references to "State" and "State Government" 
in other laws in relation to Meghalaya. 
71. Power to construe laws. 
72. Effect of provisions of Act inconsistent with other lawi. 
73. Power to remove difficulties. 
74. Amendment of -the Sixth Schedule. 
75. Amendment of Act 2 of 1934. 
76. Amendment of Act 37 of 1956. 
77. Power to make rules. 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE. 
THE &ECOND SCHEDULE. 
THE THIRD SCHEDULE. 
THE FOURTH SCHEDULE. 

5 
Bill No. II" of 1969 
THE ASSAM REORGANISATION (MEGHALAYA) BILL, 1969 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the formation within the State of Assam of an autOnomo\1.8 
State to be known as MeghaZaya and for matters connected tht.-Tewilth. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twentieth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
PART I 
PRELIMINARY 
1. (1) This 'Act may be called the Assam Reorganisation 
laya) Act, 1969. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central 
ment may, by notification in the 0fficial Gazette, appoint: 
(Megha- Short 
title 
and 
Govern- Com-
mence-
ment. 
Provided that different dates may be appointed for different provi-
10 sions of this Act. 
15 
20 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,- Deftni-
(a) "appointed day" means such date as the Central Government tiona. 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint for the forma-
tion of the autonomous State; 
(b) "article" means an article of the Constitution; 
(c) "autonomous State" means the autonomous State of Megh .. -
laya formed under section 3; 
(d) "constituency" means a territorial constituency provided 
by order made under section 12 for the purpose of election to the 
Legislative Assembly; 
(e) "Election Commission" means the Election Commission 
appointed by the President under article 324; 
(f) "Governor" means the Governor of Assam exercising his 
functions as Governor in relation to Meghalava by virtue of this Act; 
(g) "law" includes any enactment, Ordinance, regulation, order, 
bye-law, rule, scheme, notification or other instrument, having imme-
diately before the appointed day, the force of law in the whole or 
in any part of the autonomous State; 

Forma-
tion of 
Megha-
laya. 
Execu-
tive 
power 
of 
Meeha-
lay •. 
2 
(h) "Legislative Assembly" meana the Legislative Aasembly of 
Meghalaya; 
(i) ''Meghalaya'' means the autonomous State referred to in 
section 3; 
(;) "member" means a member of the Legislative Assembly; 5 
(k) "Official Gazette" means the Official Gazette of Meghalaya 
or the Gazette of India; and 
(l) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act. 
PART II 
FORMATION OF THE AUTONOMOUS STATE 01-' MBGHALAYA 
3. (1) On and from the appointed day, there shall be formed within 
the State of Assam an autonomous State to be known as Meghalaya 
which shall, subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), comprise the fol-
lowing tribal areas, namely:-
10 
(i) The United Kbasi-Jaintia Hills District as described in lub- IS 
paragraph (2) of paragraph 20 of the Sixth Schedule to the Consti-
tution (exclusive of the proviso thereto) but excluding the areas 
transferred to the Mikir Hills autonomous district by the notification 
of the Government of Assam No. TADIR/31150/149 dated the 13th 
April, 1951, and 
(ii) the Garo Hills District specified in Part A of the table ap-
pended to paragraph 20 aforesaid. 
(2) If, before such date as the Central Government may, by notifica-
tion in the Official Gazette, fix for the purpose not being a date later 
than the appointed day, the District Council for the autonomous district zs 
of the North Cachar Hills or the Mikir Hills or both, as the ease may be, 
has or have by resolution passed by a majority of not less than two-
thirds of the members thereof. expressed a desire that the said autono-
mous district or districts shall form part of Meghalaya, the President 
may, by order, make a declaration to that effect and accordingly, on and 30 
from the appointed day, the North Cachar Hills District or the Miktr 
Hills District or both, as the easf' may be. shall also form part of 
Meghalaya. 
4. (1) The executive power of Meghalaya shall be vested in the 
Governor and shall be exercised by him either directly or through 3' 
oftlcers subordinate to him in accordance with this Act. 
(2) Nothing in this section shall-
(4) be deemed to transfer to the Governor any functions con-
ferred by any existing law on any other authority; or 
(b) prevent Parliament or the Legislature of the State of Assam ,,0 
or Meghalaya from conferring by law functions on any authority 
subordinate to the Governor. 

3 
S. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the executive power of Extent 
Meghalaya shall extend to the matters with respect to which the Legisla- of ~xe-
tUre of Meghalaya has power to make laws: cutlve power 
Provi-ded that in any matter with respect to which the Legislature of of 
5 Meghalaya, the Legislature of the State of Assam and Parliament have Melba-
power to make laws, the executive power of Meghalaya shall be subject laya. 
to, and limited by. the executive power expressly conferred by this Act 
or by any law made by Parliament upon the Union or the State of Assam 
or the authorities thereof or, as the case may be, by the Legislature of 
lO the State of Assam upon the State of Assam or authorities thereof. 
(2) On and from the appointed day, the executive power of the State 
of Assam shall not extend, in relation to Meghalaya, to the matters with 
respect to which the Legislature of Meghalaya has exclusive power to 
make laws under this Act. 
15 (3) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that, save as· 
otherWise provided in this Act, the executive power of the State of Assam 
shall, in relation to Meghalaya, continue to extend to the matters with 
respect to which the Legislature of Meghalaya has no power to make laws. 
6. (1) There shall be a Council of Ministers with the Chief Minister CoUJt. 
:ao at the head to aid and advise the Governor in the exercise of his func- cO ot 
tions in relation to Meghalaya. Minis-ters. 
(2) The question whether any, and if so, what, advice was tendered 
by Ministers to the Governor shall not be inquired into in any court. 
7. (1) The Chief Minister shall be appointed by the Governor and the Other 
25 other Ministers shall be appointed by the Governor on the advice of the provi-
Chief Minister. and the Ministers shall hold office during the pleasure of mona 
~~~. ~ 
(2) The Council of Ministers shall be collectively responsible to the ters. 
Legislative Assembly. 
30 (3) Before a Minister enters upon his office, the Governor shall ad-
minister to him the oaths of office and of secrecy according to the form 
set out for this purpose in the First Schedule. 
(4) A Minister who for any period of six consecutive months is not 
a member of the Legislative Assembly shall at the expiration of that 
period cease to be a Minister. 
" th (5) The salaries and allowances of Ministers shall be such as e 
Legislature of Meghalaya may from time to time by law detennine and, 
until the Legislature so determines, shall be determined by the Gover-
nor. 
S. (1) The Governor may, if he thinks fit to do so, appoint a person Advo-
40 who is qualified to be appointed a Judge of a High Court to be Advocate- ~=~_ 
General for Meghalay3 ral for 
(2) It shall be the duty of the Advocate-General to give advice to the ~.-
Government of Meghalaya upon such legal matters, and to perform such . 
other duties of a legal character as may, from time to time, be. refel."ced 
4S or assigned to him by the Governor, and to discharge the func~lon8 c?n-
ferred on him by or under this Act or any other law for the time bemg 
in force. 
(3) The Advocate-General shall hold office during the pleasure of the 
Governor, and shall receive such remuneration as the Governor may 
50 determine. 

Con-
duct 01 
busi-
ness. 
Duties 
of 
Chief 
Minil· 
ter as 
res-
pects 
the fUr-
Dishing 
of infor-
mation 
to Gov-
ernor. 
etc. 
, 
Consti. 
tution 
of the 
Leala-
Iature 
of 
Melha-
laya. 
Delimi-
tation 
of cons-
tituen-
c1es. 
.. 
9. (J) All executive action of the Government of Meghalayashall be 
expressed to be taken in the name of the Governor. 
(2) Orders and other instruments made and executed in the name of 
the Governor shall be authenticated in such manner as may be specified 
in rules to be made by the Governor, and the validity of an order or ins- 5 
trument which is so authenticated shall not be called in question on the 
ground that it is not an order or instrument made or executed by the 
Governor. 
(3) The Governor shall make I:ules for the more convenient traDIac-
tion of the business of the Government of Meghalaya and for the aHoea- 10 
tion among Ministers of the said business. 
10. It shall be the duty of the Chief Minister of Meghalaya-
(a) to communicate to the Governor all deCisions of the Council 
of Ministers relating to the administration of the affairs of ~a-
laya and proposals for legislation; IS 
(b) to furnish such information relating to the administration 
of the affairs of Meghalaya and proposals for legislation as the Gover-
nor may call for; and 
(c) if the Governor so requires, to submit for the consideration 
of the Council of Ministers any matter on which a decision has been 20 
taken by a Minister but which has not been considered by the 
Council. 
PART III 
THE LEGISLATURE 
General 
11. (1) There shall be a Legislature for Meghalaya which shall consist 
of the Governor and the Legislative Assembly. 
(2) The total number of seats in the Legislative Assembly to be filled 
25 
by persons chosen by direct election from constituencies in Meghalaya 
shall be fixed by the Central Government by nottfieation in the Oftlclal 30 
Gazette after consultation with the Election Commission, but shall not be 
less than thirty-five or more than fifty-ftve. 
(3) The Governor may, if he i9 of opinion that any minority commu-
nities in Meghalaya need representation in the Legislative Assembly and 
are not adequately represented therein, nominate not more than three 3S 
members of such communities, not being persons in the service of the 
Government, to the Legislative Assembly. 
12. (1) The Election Commission shall, in the manner herein provided, 
distribute the total number of .seats in the Lepslative Assembly as Axed 
under sUb-section (2) of section 11 .to single member constituencies aDd 40 
delimit them on the basis of the latest censull figures havin, regard to the 
foUowinIC provitrions, namely:-
(a) all constituencies shaH. as far as practicable. consist of 
geographically compact areas. and in delimiting them, regard shall 
be had to the physical features. eXisting boundaries of admini8.tra- 4~ 
tive units, facilities of communication and pubUc convenience; 
• 

~ 
(b) every constituency shall be so de.limHed as to fall ouly with-
in an Assembly constituency of the Legislative Assembly of the State 
o{ As8am; 
(c) the population of each constituency shall, as far as practi. 
S cable, be the same throughuut Meghalaya. 
(2) For the purpose of 8S5isting the Election CommiMien ita the per-
formance of its fundions under this section, the Commission .h.H ..... 
ciate with itself such number of as~jate meftlbers not MceediD, five as 
the Governor may nominate to represent Mcghalaya: 
10 Provided that none of the associate lOOmber~ ·shall have a right to 
vote or to sign any decision of the Election Commission. 
(3) If owing to death or resignation, the office of an associate mem-
ber faUs vacant, it shall be filled as soon as may be practicable by the 
Governor in accordance with ijle provisions of sub-section (2). 
15 (4) The Election Commission shall-
(a) publish its proposals for the delimitation of constituencies, to 
gether with the dissenting proposals, if any, of any associate member 
who desires publication thereof. in the Official Gstette and in such 
other manner as the Commission may consider fit, together with a 
20 notice inviting objections and suggestions in relation to' the proposals 
and specifying a date on or after which the proposals wHl be further 
considered by It; 
(b) consider all objections and suggestions which may ba~ 
been received by it before the date so specified. and for the purpose 
25 of such consideration hold one or more public sittings at such place 
or places as it may think fit; 
(c) after conSidering all objections and suggestions whieh may 
have been received by it before the d'ltc so specified, determine by 
one or more orders the delimitation of constituencies and cause such 
30 order or orders to be published in the official Gazette; and upon such 
publication, the order or orders shall have the full force of law and 
stmll not be called in question in any court. 
(5) As soon al!! may be after such publication, every such order shall 
be laid before the Legislative Assembly. 
35 (6) Upon the completion of each census, thetota,l number of seats 
in the Legislative Assembly and the division of Meghalaya into terri· 
torial constituencies shall be readjusted by such authority and in such 
mnnner as Parliament may by law determine: 
Provided that such readjustment shall not Hffect represetitation in the 
40 Legislative Assembly until the dissolution of tb~ then e:odsting A8sembl~'. 
Explanation.-In this section "latest census figures" mean the census 
fi.gures with respect to Meghalaya ascertainable from the latest census 
of which the flnally pu blfshed flgurp.s nTe AVanA hI" 

Power 
Of Elec-
tion 
Cornmis-
Ilion to 
main-
tain de-
limitatloA 
orden! 
up-to-
date, 
I:lectoH 
and 
electoral 
rollll. 
Hi,ht 
to vote. 
Qualifi-
cation 
for 
member-
ship. 
Elec-
tion to 
the I.e-
IiIIIatift 
Allllem-
bly. 
Duration 
of I.e-
lillative 
As.ern-
bl,.. 
6 
11. (1) The Election Commission may, from time to tim~, by notiftca. 
tion in the otftcial Gazette,-
(,,) correct any printing mistake in ftny order made under sec-
tion 12 or any error arising therein from inadvertent slip or omis-
~~; 5 
(b) where the boundaries or name of any territorial division 
mentioned in any such order arc or is altered, make such amendments 
as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for bringing such order 
up-to-date. 
(2) Every notification under this section shall be laid, as soon as may 10 
be after it ia issued, before the Legis1<ltive Assembly. 
14. (1) The persons mtitled to vote at an election of members' shall 
be the persons entitled by virtue of the provisions of the Constitution and 
the Representation of the People Act. 1950 to be registered as voters at 
elections to the House of the People. 
(2) The electoral roll for every constituency shall consist of so much 
of the electoral roll for an Assembly constituency of the Legislative 
Assembly of the State of Assam as relates to the areas comprised within 
each such constituency and it shall not be necessary to prepare or revise 
43 of 
15 1910. 
separately the electoral roll for any such constituency. 20 
15. Every person, whose name is for the time bein,g entered in th~ 
electoral roll for a constituency, shall be entitled to vote at the election 
of a member from that constituency. 
16. A person shall not be qualified to be choSEm to fill a seat in th~ 
LegiRlativ~ Assembly unless he- 25 
(a) ifl a citizen of IndiA nnd makes and subscribes bErlore som~ 
person authorIsed in that behalf Iw the Election Commission an oath 
or atftnnation according to the form set out for the purpose in the 
P'irst Schedule; 
(b) is not less than twenty-five years of age: and 
(c) is an elector in :my ('onstituenry in Meghalaya. 
t'f. The provision!! of Part I. Chapters DI and IV of Part II and Part or; 
30 
m to XI of the Representation of the People Act, 1951, and of any rule~ 43 of 
and orders made thereunder for the time betng in force, shall apply to 1911. 
and in relation to the elections to the Legislnth;e Assembly of Meghabya 35 
as they apply to and ill relation to an election to the rA,~slative .\.sselnbly 
of a State, subject to such modiftcations as the Pre'!ident may. after COIl-
mltation with th .. EI~tior Commission. b:\, nrder. direct. 
18. The Legislative Assembly. unless soonf~r dissolved, shall continue 
for five years from th~ date appointed fOr its first meeting and no longer 40 
and the expiration of the said perio-l I)f 1',,'0 "'''m~ sn;111 operatp as a dis-
.. eolutlon of the LegislativE' Assembly: 
Provided that the said period ma~·. while ::l ProclamRtion t"ff Emergency 
issued under clau~(' (1) of article 3')2 io; in :"'Iperatjon. he extended by 
Parliament by law for :\ peri()~ not (,:"C(,eE-clint{ one year at a time nnd not 4.~ 
extending in any case beyond n per;od of six months aftp.T the Proclama-
tfon has ceased to operate, 

5 
19. (1) The Governor shall, from time tu time, summon the Legisla- Set-
tive Assembly to meet at such time and place as he thinks fit, but six al0M ot 
mOl1ths shall not jntervene betwl;!l;!n its last sitting in one session and the~gj·· 
date appointed for its first sitting in the next session. ~!~_ 
{2) The Governor may, from time to time,-
(a) prorogue the Legislative Assembly; 
(b) cUsso1\c the Legislative Assembly. 
bIy, pro-
rogation 
and dis-
IOlutlon. 
20. (1) The Governor may address the Legislative Assembly and may Ri,ht 
for: that purpose require the attendance of members. at Gov-
ernor 
10 (2) The Governor may send messages to the Legislative Assembly, to add-
whether with respect to a Bill then pending in the Legislative Assembly ress 
or otherwise and when a message is so sent, th& Legislative Assembly and send 
shall with all convenient despatch consider any matter required by the =~ 
message to be taken into consideration. to Le. 
gislative 
Assem-
bl,.. 
15 n. (1) At the commencement of the first session after eact general Special 
election to the Legislathre Assembly and at the commencemmt of the addr8ls 
ftrst session of each year, the Governor shall address the Legislative by the 
Assembly and inform the Assembly of the causes of it. summons. Gover-nor. 
(2) Provision shall be made by the rules regulating the procedure of 
20 the Legislative Assembly for the allotment of time for disC\li8ion of the 
matters referred to in such address. 
22. Every Min.ist.el' and the Advocate-General for Meghalaya shall Rights· 
have the right to speak in, and otherwise to take part in the proceedings ot MIa. 
of, the Legislative Assembly, and to speak in, and otherwise to take part lsters , 
25 in the proceedings of, any committee of the Legislative Assembly of as rell-
which he may be named a member, but shall not, by virtue of this sec- i.:;:. 
tion, be entitled to vote. lative 
Assem-
OVJrcers of the Legislative Assemblll 
bly. 
23. (1) The Legislative Assembly shall, as soon as may be, choose two Speaker 
30 members of the Assembly to be respectively Speaker and Deputy Speaker and 
thel'eol. and, so often as the office of Speaker or Deputy Speaker becomes DeSPpukty 
ea er vacant, the Assembly shall choose another member to be Speaker or of Le,ia-
Deputy Speaker, as the case may be. lative 
AI •• IIl-
(2) A member holding office all Speaker or Deputy Speaker of the bly. 
3S Legislative Assembly-
(a) shall vacate his oflice i! he ceases to be a member of the 
Assembly; 
(b) may at any time by writing under his hand addressed, i1 
such member is the Speaker, to the Deputy Speaker, and if such 
member is the Deputy Speaker, to the Speaker, reaign hia office; and 
(c) may be removed from his office by a resolution of the Legia-
lative Assembly passed by a majority of all the then memberll of 
the As.embly: 

Speaker 
lind 
Deputy 
Speaker 
not to 
preside 
while 
I reso-
lution 
fOr hW 
removal 
from 
oft\ce 
1. under 
CODIi-
deration. 
Seer. 
tarlat of 
Lelil-
lattv. 
AIMm-
bI),. 
8 
Provided that no resolution for the purpose of clause (c) shall be 
moved unless at least fourteen days' notice has been given of the inten-
tion to move the resolution: 
Provided further that whenever the Legislative Assembly is dis· 
solved, the Speaker shall not vacate his office until immediately before ~ 
the first meeting of the Assembly after the dissolution. 
(3) While the office of Speaker is vacant, the duties of the office 
shall be performed by the Deputy Speaker or, if the office of Deputy 
Speaker is also vacant, by such member of the Legislative Assembly all 
the Governor may appoint for the purpose. 
(4') During the absence of the Speaker from any sitting of the Legis-
lative Assembly, the Deputy Speaker or, if he is also absent, such per-
son as may be determined by the rules of procedure of the Legisl'Stive 
Assembly, or, if no such person is present, such other person as may be 
determined by thf' Legislative Assembly, shall act as Speaker. 
(5) There shall be paid to the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker ot 
the Legislative Assembly such salaries and allowances as may be res-
pectively fixed by the Legislature of Meghalaya by law and, until pro-
vision in that behalf is so made, such salaries and allowances as the 
Governor may, by order, determine. 
10 
.20 
14. (1) At any sitting of the Legislative Assembly, while any resolu-
tion for the removal of the Speaker from his oftice is under considera-
tion, the Speaker, or, while any resolution for the removal of the 
Deputy Speaker from his office is under consideration, the Deputy 
Speaker, shall not, though he is present, preside, and the provisions of 25 
sub-section (4) of section 23 shall apply in relation to every such sitting 
as they apply in relation to a sitting from which thE' Speaker or, as thf'l 
case may be, the Deputy Speaker is ab!'lent. 
(2) The Speaker shall have the right to speak in, and otherwise to 
take part in the proceedings of, the Legislative Assembly while any 30 
resolution for his removal from office is under consideration in the 
Legislative Assembly and shall, notwithstanding anything in section 
2'1, be entitled to vote only in the first instance on such resolution or on 
any other matter during such proceedings but not in the case of an 
equality of votes. 35. 
25, (1) The L(~~is]ative Assembly shall have a sl'parate secretarial 
itaft. 
(2) The Legislatul't' of Meghalaya may by law regulatt· the recruit-
ment, and the conditions of service of persons appointed, to the geC-
retartal staff of the- Legislative Assembly. 40 
(3) Until provision is made by the Legislature of Meghalaya under 
S\tb-sectlon (2), the Governor may, after consultation with the Speakp.r 
of the Legislative As~emhly, make rules regulating the recruitment, and 
the conditions of service of persons appointed, to the secretarial staff of 
the Legislative Assembly, and any rule~ so made shaU have etrect sub- .. 5 
ject to the provisions of any law made under the said sub-section. 

Conduct of bUBinl!ss 
26. Every member of the Legislative Assembly shall, before takiug Oath or 
his seat, make and subscribe befotre the Governor, or some person ap- affirma-
pointed in that behalf by him, a-n oath or at1lrm1ltion accord.inf{ to the tion by 
5 fonn set out for the purpose in the First Schedule. ::~-
rz. (1) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, all questions at any Voting 
sitting of the Legislative Assembly shaH be determined by a majority in Assem-
of votes of the members present and voting other than the Speaker or bly. PO\\'-
person acting as such. Aer ot slem-
10 (2) The Speaker or person acting as such shall not vote in the first bly to 
instance, but &hall have and exercise a casting vote in the case of an ~~:h~t~~d-
equality of votes. ing 
(3) The Legislative Assembly shall have power to act notwithstanding vncdsncies 
an 
any vacancy in the membership thereof, and any proceedings in the Legis- quorum. 
15 lative Assembly shall be valid notwithstanding that it is discovered sub-
sequently that some person who was not entitled so to do sat or voted or 
otherwise took part in the proceedings. 
(4) Until the Legislature of Mcghalaya by law otherwise provides, 
the quorum to constitute a meeting of the Legislative Assembly shall be 
20 ten members. 
(5) If at any time during a meeting of the Legislative Assembly 
there is no quorum, it shall be the duty of the Speaker or person acting 
as such either to adjourn the Assembly or suspend the meeting until 
therE' i!'i a quorum. 
Disqualifications Of members 
28. (1) No person shall be a member of Parliament or of the Legis- Vaea-
lative Assembly of the State of Auam and also of the Legislative tion of 
Assembly of Meghalaya, and if a person is chosen a member of ParHa- leatA. 
ment or of the Legislative Assembly of Assam and also of the Legisla-
tive Assembly of Meghalaya, then, at the expiration of such period, as 
30 may be specified in rules made by the President, that person's seat in 
Parltanumt or,as the case may be, in the Legislative Assembly of Asaam 
shall become vacant unless he has previously resigned his seat in the 
Legislative Assembly of Meahalaya. 
35 
(2) If !l member of the Legislative Assembly-
(4) becomes subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned 
in section 29, or 
(b) resigns his seat by writing under his hand addressed to the 
Speaker, 
his seat shall thereupon become vacant. 
40 
(3) If for a period of sixty days a member of the Legislative Assemb-
ly is without permi'SSion of the Legislative Assembly absent from .U 
meetings thereof, the Assembly may declare his seat vacant: 
Provided that in computing the said period of sixty days no account 
f5 shall be taken of any period during which the Legislative Asaetnbly is 
proroeued or is adjourned for more than four consecutive day •. 

Disquali-
ftcation~ 
for 
memh(~I'­
ship. 
Penalty 
for sitt-
ing and 
votin, 
before 
makin, 
an oath 
or affir-
mation 
or when 
not 
quali-
fled or 
when 
dilqua-
lifted. 
Powers, 
privileges. 
etc., of 
members. 
28. (1) A person shall be disqualified for being chosen as, and for 
being, a member of the Legislative Assembly,-
(a) if he holds any office of profit under the 
India or the Government of any State or the 
Meghalaya other than an office declared by the 
Meihalaya by law not to disqualify its holder; or 
Government of 
Government of. 
Legislature of 
(b) if he is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a com-
petent court; 
(c) if he is an undischarged insolvent; 
5 
(d) if he is not a citizen of India, or has voluntarily acquired the 10 
citizenship of a foreign State or is under any acknowlEidgement 
of allegiance or adherence to a foreign State; . 
(e) if he is so disqualified by or under any of the provisions of 
Chapter III of Part II of the Representation of the People Act, 1951, 
as applied to and in relation to the Legislative Assembly by section 
17. 
43 er 
15 1.il. 
(2) For the purposes of this section, a person shall not be deemed to 
hold an office of profit under the Government of India Or the Govern-
ment of any State or the Government of Meghalaya by reason only, 
that he is a Minister either for the Union or for such State or for 20 
Meghalaya. 
(3) If any question arises as to whether a member has become dis-
qualified for being such a memher under the provisions of sub-section (1). 
the question shall be refen-ed for the decision of the Governor and his 
decision shall be final. 
(4) Before giving any decision on any such question, the Governor 
shall obtain the opinion of the Election Commission and shall act accord-
ing to such opinion. 
30. If a person sits or votes as a member of the Legislative Assembly 
before he has complied with the requirements of section 26. or when 30 
he knows that he is not qualified or that he is disqualified for membership 
thereof, or that he is prohibited from so doing by the provisions of any 
law made by Parliament or the Legislature of Meghalaya, he shall be liable 
in respect of each day on which he so sits or votes, to a penalty of five 
hutldred rupees to he recovered as a deht due to Meghalaya. 35 
31. (1) Subject to the prOVlSlOns of this Act and to the rules and 
standing orders regulating the procedure of the Legislature of 
Megha]aya. there shall be freedom of speech in the Legislative Assembly 
of Meghalaya. 
(2) No member of the. Legislative Assembly of Meghalaya shall be Afl 
liable to any proceedings in any court in respect of anythini said or any 

"11 
vote etc iivi!n by him in the Assembly or any committee thereof, and 
no person shall be so liabl~ in respect of the publication by or under the 
authority of the Assembly of any report, paper, votes or proceedings. 
(3) In other respects, the powers, privileges and immunities of the 
5 Legislative Assembly and of the members and the committees thereof 
shall be sueh as may from time to time be defined by the Legislature of 
Meghalaya by law, and until so defined, shall be those for the time being 
enjoyed by the House of the People and its members and committees. 
(4) The provisions of sub-sections (1), (2) and (1) shall apply in 
10 relation to persons who by virtue of this Act have the right to speak 
in, or otherwise to take part in the proceedings of, the Legislative As-
sembly 'OT any committee thereof as they apply in relation to members of 
that Assembly. 
32. Members of the Legislative Assembly shall be entitled to receive Salaries 
15 such salaries and allowances as may froml time to time be determined by and 
the Legislature of Meghalaya by law and, until provision in that respect allowan-
i~ eo made, such salaries and allowances as the Governor may, ,by order. ::;~rs. 
determine. 
Legislative powers and procedure 
20 33. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Legislature of Megha- Extent 
laya has ·exclusive power to make laws for Meghalaya or any part there- of ,Legis-
of with respect to 'anv of the matters enumerated in Part A or Part B ot laptlve . ower. the Second Schedule: 
Provided that the exclusive power of the Legishture of Meghalaya 
25 lo make laws in so far as it relates to that part of the area comprised 
within the municipality of Shillong as immediately before the commence-
ment of the Constitution formed p~rt of the Khasi State of Mylliem, shall 
extend only to matters with respect to which the District Council having 
authority in that area has power to make laws (in whatever (orm it may 
30 be) immediately before the appointed day in exercise of any of the 
powers conferred by the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution .. 
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Legislature of MeghalaYR 
and the Legislature of the State of Assam also shall have power to make 
laws for Meghalaya or any part thereof with respect to any of the mat-
35 ten enumerated in Part C of the Second Schedule: 
Provided that the poweJ: of the Legislature of Meghalaya to make any 
such law shall not extend to the area comprised within the municipality 
of ShiIlong which immediately before the commencement of the Consti-
tution forme~ part of the Khasi State of Mylliem. 
40 (3) For the removal of doubts it is hereby declared that nothing in 
sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) shall derogate from the powers confer-
red by the Constitution-
45 
(a) on Parliament to make laws for the whole or any part of 
the State of Assam, including Meghalaya, with respect to any of the 
mattt'r~ enumerated in the Second Schedule; or 

Exemp-
tion 
from 
taxation 
of pro-
pertie! 
of the 
Union 
and the 
State 
of AS!lnm 
and of 
certain 
vehicles 
l"egi!-
tered ill 
Assam 
or Megha-
laya. 
InC'onsis-
tency bet-
ween 
laws 
made by 
Parlia-
ment and 
laws 
made by 
the Legis-
lature 
of Megha-
laya. 
12 
(b) on the Legislature of the State .of Assam to make laws for 
the whole or any part of Assam, including Meghalaya, with respect to 
any of the matters enumerated in List II or List III in the Seventh 
Schedule to the Constitution. except in so far as any of the matters 
aforesaid falls within sub-section (1). 5 
34. (1) The property of the Union shall; save in so far as Parliament 
may. by law. otherwise provide, be exempt from all taxes imposed by 
Meghalaya or by any authority within Meghalaya. 
(2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall, until Parliament by law otherwise 
provides, prevent any authority within Me.ghalaya from levying aoy tax 10 
on any property of the Union to which such property was immediAtely 
before the commencement of this Act liable or treated as Hable 1H) long R~ 
that tax continues to be levied in Meghalaya. 
(3) The property of the State of Assam shall, so long as the property 
of Meghalaya in the rest of Assam is exempt from taxes imposed by the 15 
Government of Assam or by any authority within the State of Assam, be 
exempt from all taxes imposed by Meghalaya or by any authority within 
Meghalaya. 
(4) No vehicle registered at any place in the State of Assam. not being 
a place in Meghalaya, and transiting through Meghalaya shall be liable 20 
to any tax under any law enacted by thp 'Leogi!!lature of Meghalaya so 
long as any vehicle registered at any place in MeghnlaYfl and transiting 
through the territory of Assa~ (not comprised in Meghalaya) is exempt 
from payment of any tax under any law enacted by the Legislature of 
the State of Assam. 25 
35. (1) If any provision of a law made by the Legislature of Megha-
laya is repugnant to any provision of a law made by Parliament which 
Parliament is competent to enact, or to any provision of any existing law 
with respect to one of the matters enumerated in the Concurrent List 
in the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution. then, subject to the provi- 30 
!'dons of sub-section (2), the law made by Parliament, whether passed 
before or after the law made by the Legislature of Meghalaya. cr, as the 
case may be, the existin,g law. shall prevail and the law made by the Le-
gislature of Mcghalaya shall, to the extent of the repugnancy, be V'oi9.. 
(2) Where a law made by the Legislature of Meghalaya with respect 35 
to one of the matters enumerated in the Concurrent List in the Seventh 
Schedule to the Constitution. which the Legislature of Meghalaya is com-
petent to enact under this Act contains any provision repugnant to the 
provisions of an earlier law made by Parliament or an existing law with 
respect to that matter, then, the law so made by the Legislature of Me· 40 
~halaya shall. if it has been reserved for the consideration of the Prec;j-
dent and has received his assent. prevail in Meghalaya: 
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shaH prevent Parliament from 
enacting at any time anv law with respect to the same matter. includin~ 
fl lRw adding to. amending. varyin~ or r6pealin~ the law so mAd-e by th£' 45 
Legislaturf' of Me~halHya. 

11 
II. Where a law made by the Legislature of Meghalaya with respect Inconab-
to one of the matters enumerated In Part C of the Second Schedule con- tency 
tains any provision repugnant to the provision of an earlier law made by :een 
the LegislatW'e of the S~ate of Assam which that Leg151ature is competent made by 
, to enact, or to any prllvision of any existing law with respect to that mat- the Legia-
ter, then, the law so made by the Legislature of Meghalaya shall, to the lature of 
extent of the repugnancy, be void unless the law has received assent !~e!:~ 
under section 39 a~r the Governor has obtained the advice of the Chief and laws 
Minister of Assam: made by 
I the 
10 Provided that nothing contained in this section shall prevent the Legis- ~lisla-
I.ture of the State of Assam from enacting at any time any law with o~~.ba­
respect to the same matter including a law adding to, amending, varying la;ya. 
or repealing the law so made by the LegislatW'e of Meghalaya. 
Explanation J .-In this section and in sections 35 and 59 "existing law" 
15 means any law, Ordinance, order, bye-law, rule or regulation passed or 
made before the apPointed day by any LeigislatW'e, authority or person 
having power to make such a law, Ordinance, order, bye-law, rule or regu-
lation. I 
Explanation 2.-1n this section and in .secti<ms 39 and 50, the refer-
20 ence to the advice of the Chief Minister of Assam shall, while a Proclama-
tion issued in relation to the State of Assam under clause (1) of article 
356 of the Constitution is in operation, be construed as a reference to the 
instructions from the President. 
37. (1) A Bill or amendment shall not be introduced into, or moved Special 
2S in, the Leiislative Assembly except on the recommendation of the Gov- provi-
ernor if such Bill or amendment makes provisions dealing with any of sions u 
the following matters, namely:- ~flnanl But"'.. 
(a) the imposition, abolition, remission, alteration or regulation 
of any tax; 
30 (b) the regulation of the borrowing of money or the giving of 
any guarantee by Meghalaya, or the amendment of the law with res-
pect to any financial obligations undertaken or to be undertaken by 
Meghalayaj 
(c) the custody of the Consolidated Fund or the Contingency 
3.5 Fund of Meghalaya, the payment of moneys into, or withdrawal of 
moneys from, any such Fundj 
(d) the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund 
of Meghalayaj 
(e) the declaring of any expenditure to be expenditure charged 
",0 on the Consolidated Fund of Meghalaya, or the increasing of the 
amount of any such expenditurej 
<f) the receipt of money on account of the Consolidated Fund 
of Meghalaya or the public account of Meghalaya or the custody or 
issue of such money: 
4.5 Provided that no recommendation shall be required under this sub-
seJction fOr the moving of an amendment making provision for the re-
ciuction or abolition of any tax. 
CIa UMI. 

Pr0-
cedure 
as to 
lapsing 
of Bills. 
Assent to 
BillJ. 
M 
(2) A Bill or amendment shall not be deemed to make provision for 
any of the matters specified in sub-section (1) by reason only that it 
provides for the imposition of fines or other pecuniary penalties, or for 
the demand or payment of fees for licences or fees for services rendered, 
or by reason that it provides for the imposition, abolition, remission, al- 5 
teration or regulation of any tax by any local authority or body for 
local pur.poses. 
(3) A Bill, which, if enacted and brought into operation, would in-
volve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of Meghalaya, shall not 
be passed by the Legislative Assembly unless the Governor has recom- 10; 
mended to the Assembly the consideration of the Bill. 
38. A Bill pending in the Legislative Assembly shall not lapse by 
reason of the prorogation of the Assembly, but shall lapse on a dissolu-
tion thereof. 
39. When a Bill has been passed by the Legislative Assembly, it shall IS 
be presented to the Governor and the Governor shall 'declare either that 
he assents to the Bill or that he withholds assent thehefrom or that he 
reserves the Bill for the consideration of the President: 
Provided that the Governor may, as soon as possible after the presen-
tation to him of the Bill for assent, return the Bill if it is not a Money :30 
Bill together with a message requesting that the Legislative Assembly 
will reconsider the Bill or any specified provisions thereof and, in parti-
cular, will consider the desirability of introducing any such amendments 
: as he may recommend in his message and, when a Bill is so returned. the 
Legislative Assembly shall reconsider the Bill accordingly, and if the 25 
Bill is passed again by the Assembly with or without amendment 'and 
presented to the Governor for assent, the Governor shall not-
(a) give assent in the case of a Bill containing provisions of the 
nature referred to in section 36 except after obtaining the advice 01 
the Ch.ief Minister of Assam; 30 
(b) withhold assent in the case of any other Bill. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section and section 40, a Bill 
shall be deemed to be a Money Bill if it contains only provisions dealing 
with all or any of the matters specified in sub-section (1) of section 37 or 
any matter incidental to any of those matters and there is endorsed 35 
thereon the certificate of the Speaker of the Legislative Assembly signed 
by him that it is a Money Bill: 
ProvIded that a Bill shall not be deemed to be a Money Bill by reason 
only that it provides for the imposition of fines or other pecuniary penal-
ties, or for the demand or payment of fees for licences or fees for ser- 040 
vices rendered or by reason that it provides for the imposition, abolition, 
remission, alteration or regulation of any tax by any local authority or 
body for local purposes. 
Bill. 40. When a bill is reserved by the Governor for the consideration of 
reserved the President, the President shall declare either that he assents to the 045'· 
for con- Bill or that he withholds ass,ent therefrom: 
.deration. 

Provided that where the Bill is not a Money Bill, the President may 
direct the Governor to return the Bill to the Legislative Assembly to-
gether with such a message as is referred to in section 39, and when a 
Bill is so returned, the Legislative Assembly shall reconsider it accord-
Singly within a period of six months from the date of receipt of such mes-
sage, and if it is again passed by the Legislative Assembly with or with-
out amendment, it s1').a11 be presented again to the President for his 
consideration. 
'1. No Act of the Legislature of Meghalaya and no prOVIsIon in any Require-
10 such Act shall be invalid by reason only that some recommendation or menu 
previous sanction required by the Constitution or this Act was not. s to 
given, if assent to that Act was given- sandction an re-
(a) where the recommendation required was that of the Gover- commen-
nor, either by the Governor or by the President; dation to be 
15 (b) where the recommendation or previous sanction required regard-
was that of the President, by the President. eel as 
matters ot 
proce-
Procedure in finanCial matter. dure 
only. 
42. (1) The Governor shall in respect of every financial yE'ar cause Annual 
to be laid before the Legislative Assembly a statement <1f the estimat~d Finan-
20 receipts and expenditure of Meghalaya for that year, hereinafter refer- cial 
red to as "the annual financial statement". :=.-
(2) The estimates of expenditure embodied in the annual finan-
cial statement shall show separately-
(a) the sums required to meet expenditure described by this 
25 Act as expenditure charged upon the Consolidated Fund of Megha-
laya; and 
(b) thE' sums required to meet other expenditure proposed to 
be made from the Consolidated Fund of Meghalaya, 
and shall distinguish expenditure on revenue account from other 
30 expenditure. 
(3) The following-, 1 "lditure shall be expenditure charged upon 
. the Consolidated Fund 'i~: Meghalaya-
(a) the salaries and allowances of the Speaker and the Deputy 
Speaker of the Legislative Assembly; 
3S (b) debt charJjtes for which the autonomous State is liable in-
cluding interest, sinking fund charges and redemption charges, and 
other expenditure relating to the raiSing of loans and the service 
and redemption of debt; 
(c) any sums required to satisfy any judgement, decree or 
40 . award of any court or arbitral tribunal; and 
(d) any other expenditure declared by the COBstitution or by 
the Legislature of Meghalaya to be so charged. 
43. (1) So much of the estimates as relates to expenditure charged Proce-
upon the Consolidated Fund of MeJjthalaya shall not be submitted to the d~ in 
45 vote of the Legislative Assembly, but nothing in this sub-section shall ::J~:­
AaIem-
bly 
with 
respect 
to est!-
maw. 

Appro-
priation 
Bi11& 
Supple-
mentary, 
addl-
tionalor 
ucesl 
gants. 
15 
be construed as preventing the discussion in the Legislative Assembly 
of any of those estimates. 
(2) So much of the said estimates as relates to other expenditure 
shall be submitted in the form of demands for grants to the Legislative 
Assembly, and the Legislative Assembly shall have power to assent, or 5 
to refuse to assent, to any demand, or to assent to any demand subject 
to a reduction of the amount specified therein. 
(3) No demand for a grant shall be made except on the recommen-
dation of the Governor. 
44. (1) As SO'on as may be after the grants under section 43 have 10 
been made by the Legislative Assembly, there shall be introduced a B1ll 
to provide for the appropriation out of the Consolidated Fund of Megha-
laya of all moneys required to meet-
(a) the grants so made by the Legislative Assembly; and 
(b) the expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of IS 
Meghalaya, 
but not exceeding in any case the amount shown in the statement pre-
viously laid before the Assembly. 
(2) No amendment shall be proposed to any such Bill in the Legisla-
tive Assembly which will have the effect of varying the amount or alter- 20 
ing the destination of any grant so made or of varying the amount of any 
expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of Meghalaya, and the 
decision of the person presiding as to whether an amendment is inadmis-
sible under this sub-section shall be final. 
(3) Subject to the provisions of sections 45 anod 46, no money shall 25 
be withdrawn from the Consolidated Fund of Meghalaya except under 
appropriation made by law passed in accordance with the provisions of 
this section. 
45. (1) The Governor shall,-
(a) if the amount authorised by any law made in accordance 30 
with the provisions of section 44 to be expended for a particular 
service for the current financial year is found to be insufficient for 
the purpose of that year or when a need has arisen during the cur-
rent financial year for supplementary or additional expenditure 
upon some new service not contemplated in the annual financial 3' 
statement for that year, or 
(b) if any money has been spent on any service during a ftnan~ 
cial year in excess of the amount granted for that service and for 
that year, 
cause to be laid before the Legis:ative Assembly another statement shoW'~ 40 
ing the estimated amount of that expenditure or cause to be presented 
to the Legislative Assembly a demand for such excess, as the case may 
be. 
(2) The provisions of sections 42, 43 and 44 shall have effect in rela-
tion to any such statement and expenditure or demand and also to any 4S 
law to be made authorising the appropriation of moneys out of the 
consolidated Fund of Meghalaya to meet such expenditure or the grant 

I' 
in respect of such demand as they have effect in relation to the annual 
financial statement and the expenditure mentioned therein or to a 
demand for a grant and the law to be made for the authorisation of 
appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of Meghalaya to 
S meet such expenditure or grant. 
46. (1) Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of Votel 
this Part, the Legislative Assembly shall have power- on 
.. . Account (a) to make any grant In advance In respect of the t;'c;bmated and 
expenditure for a part of any financial year pending the completion excep-
10 (1f the procedure prescribed in section 43 for the voting of such grant tiona! 
and the passing of the law in accordance with the provisions of sec- grant. 
tion 44 in relation to that expenditure; 
(b) to make a grant for meeting an unexpected demand upon 
the resources of the autonomous State when on account of the magni· 
15 tude or the indefinite character of the service the demand cannot be 
stated with the details ordinarily given in an annual financial state-
ment; 
(c) to make an exceptional grant which forms no part of the 
current service of any financial year; 
20 and the Legislature of Meghalaya shall have power to authorise by law 
the withdrawal of moneys from the Conso'lidated Fund of Meghalaya 
for the purpose for which the said grants are made. 
(2) The provisions of sections 43 and 44 shall have eft'ect in relation 
to the making of any grant under sub-section (1) and to any law to be 
25 made under that sub-section, as they have effect in relation to the making 
of a grant with regard to any expenditure mentioned in the annual finan-
cial statement and the law to be made for the authorisation of appropria-
tion of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of Meghalaya to meet such 
expenditure. 
30 Procedure gtmerally 
47. (1) The Legislative Assembly may make rules for regul&tfng, mb- Rulesot 
ject to the provisions of this Act, its procedure and the conduct of its proce· 
business including the language or languages to be used in the Legislative dure. 
Assembly. 
35 (2) Until rU11'5 are made under sub-section (1), the rule~ of proep.dure 
and standing orders with respect to the LeRislative As~embly of the State 
of Assam in force immediRtely before the commencement of this Act 
~hal1 have effect in relAtion to the Legislative Assembly imbject to such 
modifications and adaptations as may be made therein by the Governor. 
40 48. No discussion shal1 take place in thE- Le~slative A~semblv with Restric-
respect to the conduct of any Junge of the ~unr~me Court, or of ~ High ~ona o~ 
Court, in the discharge of his duties. in sc~:lllOn 
Legislative 
A.!sembly. 
49. (1) The validity of any proceedings in the Legislative A!'I~embly Court8 
shan not be called in qUE-stion on the ground of any alleRed irr.elnJlarlty not to 
~f ed ~~ o proc ure. into the 
proceed-
(2) No offtcer or member of the LeRislative A!'I8embly in whom poweT~ ~:i~~!. 
are Ve!'lt!"d by or under this Act for regulating procedure or the conduct tive 
of business or for mgintaining order. in the TJelrislative Assemblv .. hall Aaeembly. 

be subject to the jurisdiction ot any court in respect ot the exerclSe by 
him of those powers. 
Legislative power 01 the Governor 
PoW'erot 50. (I) If at any time, except when the Legislative Assembly is in 
Governor session, tht! Governor is satisfied that circumstances exist which render S 
~Oa:omu1- it necessary for him to take immediate action, he may promulgate such 
Ordi- Ordinances as the circumstances appear to him to require: 
nance. during Provided that the Governor shall not without instructions from the 
receaaof President, promulgate any such Ordinance, if-
Legia-
lative 
Assembly. 
(a) a Bill containing the same provisions would under the Cons- 10 
titution or this Act have required the previous sanction of the Presi-
dent for the introduction thereof into the Legislative Assembly of 
Meghalaya; or 
(b) he would have deemed it necessary to reserve a Bill con. 
taining the same provisions for the consideration of the President; or IS 
(c) an Act of the Legislature of Meghalaya containing the same 
provisions would under this Act have been invalid unless, having been 
reserved for the consideration of the President, it had received the 
assent of the President: 
Provided further that the Governor shall not, except on the advice of 20 
the Chief Minister of Assam, promulgate any such Ordinance if with 
respect to a Bill containing the same provisions he would have deemed 
it necessary under this Act to obtain the advice of the Chief Minister be-
fore assenting thereto. 
(2) An Ordinance promulgated under this section shall have the same 2S 
force and effect as an Act of the Legislative Assembly assented to by the 
Governor, but every such Ordinance--
(a) shall be laid before the Legislative Assembly and shall cease 
to operate at the expiration of six weeks from the reassembly of the 
Legislative Assembly or if before the expiration of that period a 30 
resolution disapproving it is passed by the Legislative Assembly, 
upon the passing of the resolution; and 
(b) may be withdrawn at any time by the Governor. 
(3) If and so far as an Ordinance under this section makes any pro-
vision which would not be valid if enacted in an Act of the Legislature of 3S 
Meghalaya assented to by the Governor, it shall be void: 
Provided that-
(a) for the purposes of section 35 relating to the effect of an Act 
of the Legislature of Meghalaya, which is repugnant to an Act of 
Parliament or an existing law with respect to a matter enumerated 40 
in the Concurrent List in the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution, 
an Ordinance promulgated under this section in pursuance of instruc-
tions from the President shall be deemed to be an Act of the Legisla-
ture which has been reserved for the consideration of the President 
and assented to by him; 4' 

• 
(b) for the purpoaes of section 36 relating to the effect of an Act 
of the Legislature of Meghalaya which is repugnant to an Act of the 
Legislatul'e of the State of Assam or an existing law with respect to 
a matter enumerated in Part C of the Second Schedule, an Ordinance 
promulgated under this section on the advice of the Chief Minister of 
Assam shall be deemed to be an Act of the Legislature which has been 
assented to on the advice of the Chief Minister. 
PART IV 
FINANCIAL PROVISIONS 
10 51. (1) Subject to the provisions of section 52, all revenue received by ConlOll. 
the Government of Meghalaya, all loans raised by that Government by dated 
the issue of treasury bills, loans or ways and means advances and all Fund. 
moneys received Iby that Government in repayment of loans shall form one 
consolidated fund to be entitled "the Consolidated Fund of Meghalaya". 
IS (2) All other public moneys received by or on behalf of the Govern-
20 
ment of Meghalaya shall be credited to the public account of Meghalaya. 
(3) No moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of Meghalaya shall be 
appropriated except in accordance with law and for the purposes and in 
the manner prOvided in this Act. 
52. The Legislature of Meghalaya may, by law, establish a Contingency Contin-
Fund in the nature of an imprest to be entitled "the Contingency Fund gency 
of Meghalaya" into which shall be paid from time to time such sums Fund. 
as may be determined by such law, and the said Fund shall be placed at 
the disposal of the Governor to enable advances to be made by him out 
25 of such Fund for the purposes of meeting unforeseen expenditure pend-
ing authorisation of such expenditure by the Legislature of Meghalaya 
by law under section 45 or section 46. 
30 
53. All moneys received by or deposited with- Custody 
(a) any officer employed in connection with the affairs of of s,ui. 
Meghalaya in his capacity as such, other than revenues or public ~::Osita 
moneys raised or received by the Government of Meghalaya, or and 
other (b) any court within Meghalaya to the credit of any cause, money. 
matter, account or perlOns, received 
by pub-shall be paid into the public account of Meghalaya. lic .er-
vanta 
end 
courtl. 
35 54 The custody of the Consolidated Fund and the Contingency Fund Custody, 
of Megbalaya, the payment of moneys into such Funds, the withdrawal etc., of 
of moneys therefrom, the custody of public moneys other than those Consoli-
credited to such Funds received by or on behalf of the Government of ~e: 
Meghalaya, their payment into the public account of Meghalaya and the Contino 
40 withdrawal of moneys from such account and all other matters connected gency 
with or ancillary to matters aforesaid shall be regulated by law made by Fund 
the Legislature of Meghalaya, and, until provision in that behalf is so and money. made, shall be regulated by rules made by the Governor. credit. 
ed to 
the pub-
lic 
accounts. 

Certain-
taxes 
levied 
by 
Assam 
to be ap-
propriat-
ed by 
Meiha-
laya. 
Distri-
bution 
o'! reve· 
nue •. 
Authori-
sation of 
e%pendi-
ture 
pendinl 
ita sane· 
tiM by 
Leli.la-
tive 
A.uembl1· 
Appor-
tiOD-
mentol 
aueta 
and 
llabili-
ti ... 
55. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, any tax on the 
consumption or sale of electricity relatable to entry 53 in the State List 
in the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution, and any tax on the sale or 
purchase of goods relatable to entry 54 in the said List levied by the 
Government of Assam shall be collected within Meghalaya but not in- S 
eluding any area comprised within the municipality of Shillong by the 
Government of Meghalaya, and the proceeds in any financial year of any 
such tax leviable within Meghalaya shall not form part of the Consolidat-
ed Fund of Ass3m, but shall form part of the Consolidated Fund of 
Meehalaya. 10 
(2) Where a tax relatable to cntry 54 in the State List aforesaid levied 
by the Government of Assam is collected by that Government at the first 
point of sale or purchase of goods, such portion of the tax so collected as 
may be agreed upon by the Governments of Assam and Meghalaya or in 
default of such agreement, as the Central Government may determine, IS 
shall be payable to Meghalaya. 
(3) The laws with respect to the taxes referred to in sub-section (1) 
shall have effect subject to such exceptions and modifications as the Cen-
tral Government, may, by order, specify for the purpose of giving effect 
to the provision of that sub-section. 20 
56. (1) The vants-in-aid under clause (1) of article 275 and the share 
of the taxes on income, the distributable Union duties of excise, the addi-
tional duties of excise on &,oods of spC(!ial importance and estate duty 
payable to the State of Assam under the Constitution (Distribution of 
Revenues) order, 1969, the Union Duties of Excise (Distribution) Act, 25 
1962, the Additional Duties of Excise (Goods of Special Importance) Act, 3 of lQ6J. 
1957 and the Estate Duty (Distribution) .'\ct, 1962, shall be construed, as !lB ot 19'7. 
from the appointed day, as payable to the State of Assam and the auto- 9 ot 1Q82. 
nomous State of Meh&"alaya in such proportion as the Preisident may, by 
order, determine. 30 
(2) Every order made by the President under sub.-section (1) shall be 
laid before Parliament as 800n as may be after it is made. 
57. The Governor may, at any time before the appointed day, authorise 
such expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of Meghalaya as he deems 
necessary for a period of not more than six months beginning with the 3' 
appointed day pending the sanction of that expenditure by the Legisla-
tive Assembly: 
Provided that the Governor may, after the appointed day, authorise 
such further expenditure as he deems necessary from the Consolidated 
Fund of Meghalaya for any period not extending beyond the said period 40 
of six months. 
PART V 
Aneta and liabilities 
58. The assets and liabilities of the State of Assam immediately before 
the appointed day shall be apportioned between that State and Meghalaya 45 
in accordance with the provisions contained in the Third Schedule. 

21 
PART VI 
ADMINISTRATIVE RELATIONi 
51. The executive power of Meghalaya shall be so exercised as to Oblip-
ensure compliance with the laws made by Parliament, the Legislature tion of 
5 of the State of Assam and any existing laws which apply in Meghalaya, Mecha-
and the executive power of the Union and of the State of Assam shall laya, the 
extend to the giving of such directions to Meghalaya as may appear to Astate of S8am 
the Government of India or the Government of Assam, as the case may and the 
10 
be. to be necessary for that purpose. Union. 
00. The executive power of Meghalaya shall be so exercised as Control 
not to impede or prejudice the exercise of the executiv~ power of the over the 
Union or the Government of Assam, as the case may be, and the execu- autono-
tive power of the Union and the State of Assam shall extend to the ~~~ i 
giving of such directions to Meghalaya as may appear to the Govern- cert:; 
IS ment of India or the Government of Assam, as the case may be, to be cases. 
necessary for that purpose. 
20 
61. Notwithstanding anything in this Act,- Entrust-
(a) The Government of Assam may, with the consent of the ~e~t 
Government of Meghalaya, entrust either conditionally or uncondi- ~ion~c­
tionally to that Government or to its officers functions in relation 
to any matter to which the executive power of the State of Assam 
extends: 
(b) the Government of Meghalaya mllY, with the consent of the 
Government of Assam, entrust either conditionally or uncondi-
tionally to that Government or to its officers functions in relation to 
any matter to which the executive power of Meghalaya extends. 
PART VII 
TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS 
62. (1) Until the Legislative Assembly of Megbalaya bas been Provl-
30 duly constituted and summoned to meet for the first session under siona u 
the provisions of Part m, there shall be a Provisional LegIslative to Provl-
Assembly which shall consist of not less than thirty-five and not more ~:a­
than fifty-five persons as the Central Government may, after consulta- tiv. 
tion with the Election Commission, by order, determine, and such per- A.em-
35 lIOns shall be elected in the manner specified in sub-section (2). bly. 
45 
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (1), the members of the 
Provisional Legislative Assembly shall be elected in the followinc 
manner, namely:-
(a) there shall be an electoral college for each autonomous 
district within Meghalaya which shall consist of the elected mem-
bers of the District Council thereof, and each electoral college shall 
elect such number of persons to the Provisional Legislative Assem-
bly a5 the President may, after con~ultation with the Election Com-
mission, by order, determine; 
(b) the election of members to the Provisional LegillaUve 
;Asaemhlv shall be in accordance with the system of propertional 

Special 
commit-
tee for 
develop-
mentol 
Shillong. 
22 
representation by means of t.he single transferable vote and shall 
be subject to such rules as the Central Government may, after 
consultation with thE' Election Commission, makE' in this behalf. 
(3) The Central Government may nominate to the Provisional 
Legislative Assembly not more than three persons, not being persoDi 
in the service of the Government., to represent any minority communities 
in Meghalaya which. in its opinion. need representation in the Assembly, 
(4) No person shall be qualified to be chosen as a member of the 
Provisional Legislative Assembly unless he is a person whose name is 
:5 
for the time being entered in the electoral roll for so much of any 10 
constituency of the Legislative Assembly of Assam as is comprised 
within Meghalaya and is not less than twenty-five years of age. 
(5) If owing to death, resignation or otherwise, the office of a mem-
ber of the Provisional Legislative Assembly falls vacant, it may be fil-
led up as soon as practicable under and in accordance with the foregoing IS 
provisions of this section. 
(6) The term of office of the members of the Provisional Legislative 
Assembly shall expire immediately before the first meeting of the Legis-
latjve Assembly duly constituted under this Act. 
(7) The election by the electoral college under this section shall not 20 
be called in question on the ground merely of the existence of a vacancy 
in the membership of any District Council forming part of the electoral 
college. 
(8) The Provisional Legislative Assembly constituted under this 
section shall, for so long it is in existence, be deemed to be the Legis- 25 
lative Assembly duly constituted under this Act, and accordingly the 
provisions of Part III shall, so far as may be, apply in relation to the 
Provisional Legislative Assembly as they apply in relation to the 
Legislative Assembly. 
PART VIII 
MIscELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
13. The Central Government may, in consultation with the Govern-
menta of Assam and Meghalaya, by order, constitute a committee con-
sisting of such number of persons as it may think fit for advising the 
two Governments on matters of common interest with respect to 3S 
Shillong in the field of education and water supply in particular, and 
with respect to its development and administration in general. 
Explanatwn.-In this section, Shillong shall mean the areas com-
prised within the cantonment and municipality of Shillong and include 
such other areas adjoining the said cantonment or municipality as may 40 
be agreed upon by the Governments of Assam and Meghalaya in this 
behalf. 
Provi-
liona .. 
to conti. 
nuance of 
courta. 
.... All courts and tribuna]s and all authorities discharging lawful 
functions throughout Meghalaya or any part thereof immediately before 
the appointed day shall, unless their continuance is inconsistent with the 45 
provisions of this Act or until other provision is made by a com;.etent 
authority, continue to exercise their respective functions. 

23 
65. (l? Ever~ person who being a member of an All-India Service is Provi. 
for the tIme bemg borne on the Assam State Cadre of that Service or is siaM 
otherwise serving in connection with the affairs of the State of Assam relating 
as a member of class I service of that State may be required by the to .er· 
S Government of that State to serve in connection with the affairs of vices. 
Meghalaya for such period or periods as the Government ot Assam may, 
by order, direct: 
Provided that no such order shall be made-
(a) before the apPOinted day, except with the approval of the 
10 Central Government; and 
(b) on or after the appointed day, except after consulting the 
Government of Meghalaya. 
(2) Subject to any general or special order which the Central Gov-
ernment may make in this behalf, the control over any such person as 
15 is referred to in sub-section (1) shall, for so long as he is required to 
serve in connection with the affairs of Meghalaya, be vested :n the 
Government of Meghalaya. 
(3) Such persons serving in connection with the affairs of the State 
of Assam immediately before the appointed day, not being a person 
20 referred to in sub·section (1), as may be determined by agreement bet-
ween the Government of Assam and the Government of Meghalaya or 
in default of agreement, by the Central Government, may, notwithstand-
ing anything in the terms of their appointments or their conditions of 
service, be required to serve in connection with the affairs of the auto-
25 nomous State. 
(4) All previous service rendererl by a person referred to in sub-
»ection (3) in connection with the affairs of the State of Assam shall be 
dee~ed to have been rendered in connection with the affairs of the 
autonomous State for the purposes of the rules re~ulating his conditions 
30 of service. 
(5) Nothing in sub-sections (3) and (4) shall be deemed to affect the 
power of the Legislature of Meghalaya or the Governor to determine the 
conditions of service of persons serving in connection with the affairs of 
Meghalaya: 
3S Provided that the conditions of service applicable immediately before 
the appointed day to any person referred to in sub-section (3) shall not 
be varied to his disadvantage except with the previous apprctval of the 
Government of Assam. 
66. (1) All laws in force immediately before the appointed day in Conti-
40 the autonomous Statp. shall continue to br in force th~rein until altered, nuance at 
repealed or amended by a competent legislature or other competent existin, . laws and 
authorlty. their 
(2) For the purpose of facilitating the application in relation to the adapta. 
autonomous State of any Jaw made before the appointed day, the appro- tlO!1l. 
4S priate Government may, within two years from that day, by order, make 
such adaptations or modifications of the law. whether by way at repeal 
or amendment. as may be necessary or expedient and thereupon ev('ry 
such law shall have effect subject to the adaptatifiJ1S nnd modification!' 

Autono-
mou. 
State 
to bea 
State tor 
certa.ln 
purposes 
01 the 
Conati-
tution. 
Power 
otOov-
ernments 
ot Assam 
and 
Megha-
laya to 
carryon 
trade, 
etc., in 
Me,ha-
laya. 
Power to 
suspend 
prov!-
sioMot 
this Act 
in cue 
C1ftaf-
lureot 
cODStitu-
tiona! 
maehl-
nery. 
so made until altered, repealed or amended by 8 competent legislaturp 
or other competent authority. 
Ezplanation_-In this section, the expression "appropriate Govern-
ment" mear.s as respects any law relating to a matter enumerated in 
the Union List in the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution, the Central 5 
Government, as respects any law relating to a matter in the Second 
Schedule, the Government of Meghalaya, and, as respects any other 
law. the Government of Assam. 
67. Subject to the other provisions contained in this Act, reference to 
a State (by whatever form of words) in any of the following articles of 10 
the Constitution shall be construed as including a reference to the auto-
nomous State, namely:-
Articles 12 to 15 (inclusive), 16 [except clause (3) thereof], 18, 19, 23, 
25, 28 to 31 (inclusive), 31A, 34 to 51 (inclusive), 58, 59, 66, 73, 102, 110(1) 
<f), 131, 138, 149, 150, 151, 161, 209, 210, 233, 234, 235, 237, 251, IS 
252, 256 to 258A (inclusive), 261, 262, 263, 268, 269, 270, 272, 274 to 280 
(inclusive), 282, 288, 289, 293, 296, 298 to 305 (inclusive), 308 to 311 
(inclusive), 320, 323(2), 324 to 329 (inclusive), 339 to 342 (inclusive), 345 
to 348 (inclusive), 350, 350A, 350B, 353, 355 to 358 (inclusive), 360, 361, 
364 to 367 (inclusive), 20 
Expla1l4tion.-Reference in any of the articles above specified to the 
High Court or to the State Public Service Commission shall be cons-
trued as reference to the High Court of Assam or the Public Service 
Commission of the State of Assam. as the case may be. 
61. (1) The executive power which the Government of Assam may 25 
exercise under article 298 in Meghalaya for the carrying 011 of any trade 
or business and for the acquisition, holding and disposal of property 
and the making of contracts for any purpose shall, in so far as such 
trade or business or such purpose is not one with respect to which the 
Legislature of the State of Assam may make laws, be subject to legisla- 30 
tion by the Legislature of Meghalaya. 
(2) The executive power which the Government of Meghalaya may 
exercise under article 298 in Meghalaya for the carrying on of any trade 
or business and for the acquisition, holding and disposal of property and 
the making of contracts for any purpose shall, in so far as such trade 35 
or business or such purpose is not one with respect to which the Legi. 
lature of Meghalaya may make laws, be subject also to legislation by 
the Legislature of the State of Assam. 
U. Where a Proclamation is issued under article 356 in reBpect of 
Meghalaya. the President may, by the same Proclamation or a subsequent 40 
Proclamation varying it, suspend also, in whole or in part, the operation 
of any of the provisions of this Act. 

2 ot 1t14. 
37 of 1956. 
25 
70. Without prejudice to the provisions of sections 66 and 71 the CoJWtne. 
Central Government may, after consulting the Government of Assam, tion of 
by notification in the Official Gazette, declare that any reference toa referen_ 
"State" in a Central Act specified in the notification shall, in its appli- :.:.a=-, 
5 cation to Meghalaya, be construed as a reference to the whole or any and 
part of Meghalaya and any reference to "State Government" in a "State 
Central Act specified in the notification shall in its application to Govern· ment" Meghalaya be construed as a reference to the Central Government. . th mo er 
Iawain 
relation 
to Melba-
laya. 
71. Notwithstanding that no provision or insufficient provision has been Power to 
10 made under section 66 for the adaptation of a law made before the ap- conatrue 
'pointed day, any court, tribunal or authority required or empowered to laws. 
enforce such law may, for the purpose of facilitating its application in 
relation to the autonomous State, construe the law in such manner not 
affecting the substance as may be necessary or proper in regard to the 
IS matter before the court, tribunal or authority, as the case may be. 
7Z. The provisions of this Act l:ihall have effect notwithstanding any- meet 
thing inconsistent therewith contained in any other law. of pro-
vision. 
of Act 
inCOD-
si6tent 
with 
other 
haws. 
n. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Power to 
Act, the President may, by order, do anything not inconsistent with such remove 
~o provisions which appears to him to be necessary or expedient for the pur- diftlcuI-
pose of removing the difficulty. tiea. 
25 
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid before 
both Houses of Parliament as soon as may be after it is made. 
74. The Sixth Schedule in the Constitution shall stand amended 
specified in the Fourth Schedule. 
• 
81 Amend-
mentol 
the 
Sixth 
Schedule . 
75. In section 21A of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 19M, in sub- Amend-
section (1), after the words "any State", the brackets and words "(in- mental 
cluding the autonomous State of Meghalaya)'f shall be inserted. ~.2 of 
76. In section 16 of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956, in sub-section Amend-
(1) for clause (d), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:- mentof 
~ , ~H 
"(d) in the case of the Eastern Zone,- ollen. 
(i) the Chief Minister and another Minister of the autono-
mous State of Meghalaya to be nominated by the Governor of 
Assam and if there is no Council of Ministers therein, not more 

Power to 
make 
rules. 
28 
than two members from the autonomous State of Meghalaya to 
be nominated by the President; and 
(ii) the person for the time being holding the office of the 
Adviser to the Governor of Assam for Tribal areas .... 
11. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official S 
Gazette, make rules to give effect to the provisions of this Act. 
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid as soon as may 
be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in ses~ 
sion for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one 
session or in two successive sessions. and, if before the expiry of the 10 
session in which it is so laid or the session immediately following, both 
Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree 
that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect 
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be, so 
however, that ,any such modification or annulment shall be without preju- IS 
dice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 

1'HE FIRST SCHEDULE 
(See sections 7, 16 and 26) 
FORMS OF OATHS OR AFFIRMATIOl'iS 
I 
5 Form of oath or affirmation to be made by a candidate for election to 
the Legislative Assembly:-
"I, AB., having ,been nominated 88 a candidate to fill a seat in the 
_ do swear in the name of God 
Legislative Assembly of Meghalaya .. -- -- that solemnly aftirm 
10 I will bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India as by 
law established and that I will uphold the sovereignty and integrity of 
India." 
n 
Form of oath or affirmation to be made by a member of the Legislativ~ 
J 5 Assembly:-
"I, AB., having been elected (or nominated) a member of the Legis-
do swear in the name of God 
lative Assembly of Meghalaya ------ that I will solemnly affinn 
bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law 
20 established, that I will uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India and 
that I will faithfully discharge the duty upon which I am about to enter." 
ill 
Form of oath of office for a member of the Council of Ministers:-
swear in the name of God 
"I, A.B., do. I mnl ftlnn that I will bear true faith and .25 so e Y a 
allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law established, that I will 
uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India, that I will faithfully and 
conscientiously discharge my duties as a Minister for Meghalaya, and 
that I will do right to all mariner of people in accordance with the Cen-
30 stitution and the law without fear or favour, affection or ill-Will." 
IV 
Fonn of oath of secrecy for a member of the Council of Ministers:-
"I. A.B., do 
swear in the name of God 
solemnly affinn 
that I will not directly or in-
35 directly communicate or reveal to any perlOl1 or persons any matter 
which shall be brought under my consideration or shall become known to 
me as a Minister for Meghalaya except as may be required for the due 
discharge of my duties as such Minister." 

28 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE 
(iee sections 33 and 36) 
AUTONOMOUS STATE LIST 
[See sections 33 (1)] 
Matters with respect to which the Legislative Assembly has exclusive 
power to make laws. 
PART A 
The following matters enumerated or to the extent included in List 
U-State List·. 
5 
1. Village and town police within the meaning of clause (f) of sub- 10 
paragraph (1) of paragraph 3 of title Sixth Schedule to the Constitution 
(Entry 2). 
2. Administration of justice; constitution and organisation of all 
courts, except the Supreme Court and the High Court; procedure in rent 
and revenue courts; fees taken in all courts except the Supreme Court 15 
and the High Court (Entry 3). 
3. Prisons, refonnatories, Borsta1 institutions and other institutions 
of a like nature, and persons detained therein; arrangements with the 
State of Assam and other States for the use of prisons and other jnstitu-
tions (Entry 4). 20 
4. Local government, that is to say, the constitution and powers of 
municipal corporations, improvement trusts, district boards, mining set-
tlement authorities and other local authorities for the purpose of local 
self-government or village admiaistration (Entry 5). 
5. Public health and sanitation; hospitals and dispensaries (Entry 6). 2S 
6. Pilgrimages, other than pilgrimages to places outside India (Entry 7) . 
7. Intoxicating liquors, that is to say, the production, manufacture, 
possession, transport, purchase and sale of intoxicating liquors (Entry 8). 
8. Relief of the disabled and unemployable (Entry 9). 
9. Burials and burial grounds; cremaftons and cremation grounds 30 
(Entry 10). 
10. Education including universities, subject to the prclVisions of entries 
83, 64, 65 and 66 of List I and Entry 25 of List III (Entry 11). 
·NOTE.-References in this Schedule to List I, List II or List III or to entries 
therein are references to the said List or entries therein in the Seventh J5 
Schedule to the Constitution; and references in brackets at the end of each entry 
are reference to the corresponding entries in List II or List m in the aaid Schedule 
and have been inserted for the sake of convenience only. 

29 
11. Ubraries, musewns and other similar institutions controlled or fin. 
anced by the autonomous State; ancient and historical monuments and 
records other than those declared by or under law made by Parliament 
to be of national importance (Entry 12). 
5 12. Communications, that is to say, roads, bridges, ferries and other 
means of communication not specified in List I, but excluding roads, 
bridges and ferries declared by the Legislature of Assam by law to ~ 
State highways; municipal tramways; ropeways; inland waterways and 
traffic thereon subject to the provisions of List I and List III with regard 
10 to such waterways; vehicles other than mechanically propelled vehicles 
(Entry 13). 
13. Agriculture, including agricultural education and research, pro-
tection against pests and prevention of plant diseases subject to the provi-
sions of entry I of Part C (Entry 14). 
15 14. Preservation, protection and improvement of stock and prevention 
of animal diseases; veterinary training and practice (Entry 15). 
15. pounds and the prevention of cattle trespass (Entry 16). 
16. Water, that is to say, water supplies, irrigation and canals, drain-
age and embankments, water storage and water power, subject to the 
20 prOvisions of entry 56 of List I, but excluding water-supplies, irrigation 
and canals, drainage and embankments, water storage and water power 
in relation to irrigation, hydro-electric and navigation projects financed 
by the Government of Assam wholly or in part and declared by the 
Legislature of the State of Assam by law to be projects of State fmport-
25 ance (Entry 17). 
17. Land, that is to say, rights in or over land, land tenures including 
the relation of landlord and tenant, and the collection of rents; transfer 
and alienation of agricultural land; land improvement and agricultural 
loans, colonization (Entry 18). ! 
30 18. Forests, subject to the provisi9ns of entry 2 of Part C (Entry 19). 
19. Protection of wild animals and birds (Entry 20). 
20. Fisheries (Entry 21). 
21. Courts of wards subject to the provisions of entry 34 of List I; 
encumbered and attached estates (Entry 22). 
35 22. Regulation of mines and mineral development subject to the provi-
sions of List I with respect to regulation and development under the con-
trol of the Union (Entry 23). 
23. aas and gas-works (Entry 25). 
24. Trade and commerce within the autonomous State subject to the 
40 provisions of entry 33 of List III (Entry 26). . 
25. Markets and fairs (Entry 28). 
26. Weights and measures except e5tablishment of standard. (Entry 
2~). 

30 
27. Moz.wy·lending and money-lenders; relief of agricultural indebted-
ne~~ (Entry 30). 
28. Inns and inn· keepers (Entry 31). 
29. Incorporation, regulation and winding up of universities; unincor-
porated trading. literary, scientific, religious and other societies and ~ 
a~sociations; co·operative societies (Entry 32). 
30. Theatres and dramatic performances; cinemas subject to the pro-
visions of entry 60 of List 1; sports, entertainments and amusements 
(Entry 33). 
31. Betting and gambling (Entry 34). 
32. Works, lands and buildings vested in or in the possession of th~ 
autonomous State (Entry 35). 
33. Elections to the legislature of the autonomous State subject to the 
provisions of any law made by Parliament (Entry 37). 
}o 
34. Salaries and allowances of members, Speaker and Deputy Speaker 1 'i 
of the Legislative Assembly (Entry 38). 
35. Powers, privileges and immunities of the Legislative Assembly and 
of toe members and committees thereof, enforcement of attendance of 
per!lOns for giving evidence or .producing documen.ts before committees 
of the Legislature of Meghal~ya .(Entry 39). 20 
36. Salaries and allowances of Ministers for the autonomous State 
(Entry 40). 
37. Public services of the autonomous State (Entry 41). 
38. Pensions payab:e by the autonomous State or out of the Consolida-
ted Fund of Meghalaya (Entry 42). 25 
39. Public debt of the autonomous State (Entry 43). 
40. Treasure trove (Entry 44). 
41. Land revenue, including the assessment and collection of revenue, 
the maintenance of land records, sw-vey for revenue purposes and records 
of rights, and alienaticm of revenues (Entry 45). 
42. Taxes on agricultural income (Entry 46). 
43. Duties in respect of succession to agricultural land (Entry 47). 
44. Estate duty in respect of agricultural land (Entry 48). 
45. Taxes on lands and buildings (Entry 49). 
46. Tax.es on mineral rights subject to any limitations imposed by 35 
Parliament by law relating to mineral development (Entry 50). 
47. Duties of excise on the following goods manufactured or produced 
In the autonomoUs State and countervailing duties at the same or lower 
ra~s on similar goods manufactured or produced elsewhere in India:-
(a) alcoholic liquors for human consumption; 
(b) opium. Indian hemp and other narcotic drugs and narcotics; 
but not including medicinal and toilet preparations containing alcohol or 
any substance included in su\)..paragraph (b) of this entry (Entry 51). 

31 
48. Taxes on the entry of goods into a local area for consumption. use 
or sale therein (Entry 52). . 
49. Taxes on advertisements other than advertisements published in the 
newspapers (Entry 55). 
5 50. Taxes on goods and passengers carried by road or on inland water-
ways (Entry 56). 
51. Taxes on vehicles, whether mechanically propelled or' not, suitable 
for use on roads including tram·cars subject to 'the provisions of ('ntry 35 
of List III (Entry 57). 
10 52. Taxes on animals and boats (Entry 58). 
53. Tolls (Entry 59). 
54. Taxes on professions, trades, callings and employments (Entry 60). 
55. Capitation taxes (Entry 61). 
56. Taxes on luxuries, including taxes on entertainment, amwoements, 
15 betting and gambling (Entry 62). 
57. Rates of stamp duty in respect of documents other thag, those 
speCified in the provisions of List I with regard to rates of st~mp duty 
(Entry 63). 
58. Any other matter not enumerated. in !.his Part and in respect of 
20 which a District Council has power to make laws under paragraph 3 or 
the Sixth Schedule in the Constitution, to the extent to which it is not 
included in entry 16 of this Part and entry 2 of Part C. 
59. Offences against laws with respect to any of the matters in this 
Part (Entry 64). 
:!5 RD. Jurisdiction and powers of all court. .. , except the Supreme Court, 
with respect to any of the matters in this Part. (Entry 6~). 
61. Fees in respect of any of the matters in this Part. but not including 
fees taken in any court (Entry 66). 
PART B 
The following matters enumerated or to the extent included in List 
3° III-Concurrent List. 
1. Marriage and divorce; wills. intestacy and succession: social cus-
lams; appointment or succession of Chiefs or Headmen (Entry 5). 
2. Offenet~s against laws with respect to any of the matters in this Part 
~5 (Entry). 
~.Jurisdiction and powers of all courts, except the Supreme Court, 
with respect to any of the matters in this Part (Entry 46). 
4. Fees in respect of any of the matters in this Part, but not including 
fees taken in any court (Entry 4'1). 

Concurrent List .between the autonomous State and the State 0/ Assctm 
PART C 
[See section 33(2)] 
Matters with respect to which the Legislature of Meghalaya and the 
Legislature of the State of Assam also have power to make laws, namely, 5 
the following matters enumerated or to the extent included in List U-
State List and List III-Concurrent List. 
1. Scheme of agriculture designed to benefit both the areas of the 
autonomous State as well as the rest of Assam (Entry 14 of List II). 
2. Conservation of forests in catchment areas of projects referred to in 
entry 16 of Part A, financed by the Government of Assam wholly or in 
part and declared by the Legislature of the State of Assam by law to be 
projects of State importance (Entry 19 of List II). 
3. Industries subject to the provisions of entries 7 and 52 of List I 
(Entry 24 of List ll). 
4. Production, supply and distribution of gooci.c;, subject to the provi-
sions of entry 33 of List III (Entry 27 of List II). 
5. Removal from the autonomous State to any other area of the State 
of Assam or to any other State of prisoners and accused persons (Entry 4 
10 
15 
of List III). 20 
6. Transfer of property other than agricultural land, subject to entry 
58 of Part A; registration of deeds and documents (Entry 6 of List III). 
7. Economic aud social planning (E'ntry 20 01 List III). 
8. Acquisition and requisitioning of property (Entry 42 of List ITT). 
9. Recovery in the autonomous State of claims in respect of taxes and 2S 
other public demands, including arrears of land revenue and sums re-
coverable as luch arrears, arising outside the autonomous State (Entry 43 
of List III). 
10. Inquiries and statistics for the purposes of any' of the matters 
specified in this Schedule (Entry 45 of List III). 30 
11. Offences against laws with respect to any of the matters in this 
Part (Entry 64 of List II and Entry 1 of List III). 
12. Jurisdiction and powers of all courts, except the Supreme Court, 
with respect to any of the matters in this Part (Entry 65 of List II and 
Entry 46 of List nl). 
13. Fees in respect of any of the matters in this Part, but llQ't includ-
ing fees taken in any court (Entry 66 of List II and Entry 47 of List III). 
35 

33 
THE THIRD SCHEDULE 
(See section 58) 
ApPORTIONMtNT OF ASStTS AND LIABILITIES 
1. In this Schedule:-
S (a) "purpose of the autonomous State" means a purpose relatable 
to any of the matters in respect of which the Legislature of Megha-
laya has power to make laws under this Act; and 
(lJ) "population ratio", in relation to Meghalaya, means such ratio 
as the Central Government may, by order, specify as the ratio bet-
10 ween the population as ascertained at the last preceding cenSllS of 
Meghalaya and the rest of the State of Assam. 
Defini-
tions. 
2. (1) SUbject to the other pl'ovisions contained in this Schedule, all Lands 
land and all stores, articles and other goods held by the State of Assam and 
within the territories of Meghalaya shall, on the appointed day. pciSS to goods. 
15 M('~halaya. if thp PUl'pos('s fur which they we]'£' held will be purposes of 
the autonomous State. 
(2) Stores relating to the Secretariat and offices of Heads uf Depart 
menta having jurisdiction over the areas comprised partly in Meghalaya 
and partly in the rest of Assam and unissued stores shall be divided bet-
20 ween the State of Assam and Meghalaya in accordance with such direc-
tions as the Central Government may think fit to issue for a just and 
('quita-ble distribution thereof. 
Explanation.-In this paragraph. the expression "land" includes im-
movable property of every description and any rights in or over such 
25 property, and the expression "goods" does not include coins. bank notes 
alld currency notes. 
3. 1'he total of the cash balances in all treasuries of the State of TrealW"Y 
Assam and the baJances of that State with the Reserve Bank of India or and bank 
any other bank immediately before the appointed day shall be divided bal'mees. 
30 between the State of Assam and Meghalaya accoroing to the population 
ratio: 
Provided that for the purpose of such division there shall be no transfer 
of cash balance from any treasury to any other treasury, and the appor-
tionment shall be effected by adjusting the balance of the State of Assam 
35 and Meghalaya in the books of the Reserve Bank of India on the ap-
pointed day or in such ,other manner as the Central Government may, by 
0rder. direct. 
4. Meghalaya sha 11 have the right to recover the arrears of any tax Arrears 
or duty, including the arrears of land revenue, on property situate in of taxes. 
40 MeghaJaya, and shall also have the right to recover thp arrears of any 
other tax or duty if the place of assessment of that tax or duty is located 
in Meghalaya: 
Provided that nothing in this section shall apply in relation to arrears 
<'f any tax or duty which Me~ha13ya is not competent to coJIp.ct. 

Right to 
recover 
loans 
and 
advRnces. 
Invest· 
. ments 
and 
credits 
in cer-
tain 
funds. 
Assets 
'and lia-
bilities of 
State 
under-
takings 
and 
invest-
menb. 
Public 
debt. 
34 
5. (1) The right to recover any loans or advances made before the 
appointed day by the State of Assam to any local body. society. agricul-
turist or other person in Meghalaya shall belong to Meghalaya, if the 
purpose for which the loans or advances were made will thereafter be a 
purpose of the autonomous State. S 
(2) The right to' recover loans and advances of pay and travelling 
allowances to a Government servant made before the appointed day by 
the State of Assam shall pass to Meghalaya if, after the appointed day, 
that Government servant is required to serve in connection with the 
affairs of Meghalaya under sub-section (3) of section 65. 10 
6. The investments made before the appointed day from the Cash 
Balance Investment Account and any other general fund of the State of 
Assam shall, after the appointed day, be divided between the State of 
Assam and MaghaJaya according to the population ratio; and the in-
vestments in any special fund the objects of which are confined to a ) 5 
local area in Meghalaya shall pass to Meghalaya if such investment T£'-
Iates to a purpose of the autonomous State. 
7. (1) The assets and liabilities in Meghalaya on the appointed day re 
lating to any commercial or industrial undertaking of the State of Assam 
other than an undertaking on which the State of Assam has incurred a 20 
capital outlay exceeding rupees fifty lakhs or a Government company 
shall. after the appointed day, pass to Meghalaya if the purpose of the 
undertaking relates to a purpose of the autonomous State. 
(2) Where a depreciatiO'n reserve fund is maintained by the State of 
Assam for any such undertaking as is referred to in sub-paragraph (1). 25 
the securities held in respect of such investments made from that funrl 
shall pass to Meghalaya. 
(3) The investments of the State of Assam made before the appoint-
ed day in any body corporate or co-operative society whose area 
of operation or jurisdiction extends to areas comprised partly with- 30 
in Meghalaya and partly within the rest of' the State of Assam, or in any 
Governm.ent c()mnanv or privatI" commercial or industrial undertaking. 
shall. if the Central Government so directs. be allce-flted between the 
Government of Assam and the Government or Mcghalaya in such pro-
portion as may be alZreed upon between the two GoveTnments within 35 
one year from the (late of the direction ;lf~)resai(! or, in default of such 
a.~reement. M; the Central Government may h" orrt('r direct. 
8. (1) The public debt of the State of Assam attributable to loans 
raised by the issue (If Government securities and outstanding with the 
public immediately before thf' Rnpointed day shan continue to be the 40 
public debt of that State. and Meghalaya shall be liable to P3y to the 
State of Ac;sam its share of the sums due from time to time for the ser-
vicing and repavm('nt of the debt. 
(2) For thE' purposf' of detp.rmining the shaJ'f' referred to in sub-para-
graph (1). the debt shall be deemed to be divided between the State of 45 
Assam and Meghalav(1 n:o: if it were n debt referred to in sub-para~ltn" 
(4). 

35 
(3) Out of so much of the public debt of Assam, other than the public 
debt referred to' in sub-paragraph (1). as is equal to the amount of loans 
and advances made by that State and outstanding on the appointed day. 
the share of the liability of Meghalaya shall be for an amount equal to 
5 the loans and advances recoverable by Meghalaya under paragraph 5. 
(4) The remaining public debt of the State of A"sam attributable to 
loans taken from the Central Government. the Reserve Bank of India 
or any other body or bank outstanding immediately before the appointed 
day. shall be divided between the State of Assam and Meghalaya in pro-
IO portion to the total capital expenditure on all capital works and other 
eapital outlays incurred or deemed to have been incurred by the State of 
Assam up to the appointed day and the total expenditure on all capital 
works and other capital outlays incurred or deemed to have been incurred 
upto that day in Meghalaya for purposes of the autonomous State. 
I5 (5) }<'or the purposes of this paragraph. "Government security" means 
a security created and issued by the State of Assam for the purpose of 
raising a public loan and having any of the forms specified in. or prescrib-
18 of 1944. cd under, clause (2) of section 2 of the Public Debt Act, 1944. 
9. After the appOinted day, it shall he the liability of Meghalaya to Refund 
20 refund any tax or duty on property, including land revenue, collected of taxes 
in excess on any prol,erty situate in Meghalaya or any other tax or duty ~ollected 
collected in excess, if the place of assessment of that tax or duty is 111 exee •. 
situate in Meghalaya: 
Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to the refund of any 
25 tax or duty which Meghalaya is not competent to collect. 
10. The liability of the State of Assam in respect of any civil deposit Deposits. 
or local fund deposit made before the appointed day in any place situate etc. 
in Meghalaya, shall become the liability of Meghalaya if the deposit is 
for any purpose of the autonomous State. 
30 11. The liability of the State of Assam in respect of the Provident Provi-
Fund account of a Government servant required to serve in connection dent d 
with the affairs (if Meghalaya under sub-section (3) of section 65 shall, Fun. 
on and from the appointed day, be the liability of Meghalaya. 
12. The liability of the State of Assam or Meghalaya in respect of Pensions. 
35 pensions shall be apportioned between the two in such manner as may 
be agreed upon between them or in default of such agreement, in such 
manner as the Central Government may, by order, specify. 
13. (1) Where, before the appointed day, the State of Assam has Con-
made any contract in the exercise of its executive power for any of the tracts. 
40 purposes of that State, that contract shall be deemed to have been made 
in the exercise of the executive power of Meghalaya if the purpose is 
as from that day exclusively a purpose of the autonomous State, and all 
rights and liabilities which have accrued, or may accrue, under any such 
contract shall, to the extent to which they would have been rights or 
45 liabilities of Assam; be rights or liabilities of Meghalaya. 

Liabi-
lit yin 
respect 
oj action-
able 
wrong. 
Liabi· 
lityas 
guaran-
tor. 
Items in 
RUSpenSe. 
Resi-
duary 
provi-
SiOnll. 
Appor_ 
tionment 
of assets 
and liabi. 
lities by 
agree-
ment. 
PoW\!rof 
Central 
Govern-
mentto 
order 
alloca-
tion or 
adjust-
ment 
in cer· 
tain 
cases. 
(2) For the purposes of this paragraph, there shall be deemed to he 
included in the liabilities which have accrued or may accrue under any 
contract-
(a) any liability to satisfy an order or award made by any court 
Or tribunal in proceedings relating to the contract; and 
(u) any liability in respect of expenses incurred in, or in oon· 
nection with, any such proceedings. 
(3) This paragraph shall have effect subject to the other prOVISIOns 
s 
of this Schedule relating to the apportionment of liabilities in respect of 
loans, guarantees and other financial obligations; and bank balances and 10 
securities shall, notwithstanding that they partake of the nature of con-
tractual rights, be dealt with under those provisions. 
14. Where, immediately before the appointed day, the State of Assam 
is subject to any liability in respect of an actionable wrong other than 
a breach of contract, that liability shall be the liability of Meghalaya if it 15 
relates thereafter to a purpose of the autonomous State. 
15. Where, immediately before the appointed day, the State of Assam 
is liable as guarantor in respect of any liability of a registered co-
operative society or other person, that liability shall be the liability of 
Meghalaya if it relates thereafter to a purpose of the autonomous State. 20 
16. If any item in suspense relating to a purpose of the autonomous 
State is ultimately found to affect an asset or liability of the nature 
referred to in any of the foregoing paragraphs of this Schedule, it shall 
he dealt with in accordance with that provision. 
17. The benefit or burden of any asset or liability of the State of 25 
Assam which relates to a purpose of the autonomous State nnd which 
is not dealt with in any of the foregoing paragraphs of this- &chedule, 
shall pass to Meghalaya. 
18. Where the State of Assam and Meghalaya agree that the benefit 
or burden of any particuJar asset or liability should be apportioned 30 
between them in a manner other than that as provided for in the 
foregoing paragraphs of this Schedule, then, notWithstanding anything 
contalned therein, the benefit or burden of that asset or liability shall 
be apportioned in the manner agreed upon. 
19. Where, by virtue of any of the provisions of this Schedule, 1;he 35 
State of Assam or Meghalaya is entitled to any property, or obtains any 
benefits or becomes subject to any liability, and the Central Government 
is of opinion. on a reference mlade to it within a: period of three yelirs 
from the appOinted day by the State of Assam or the autonomous State, 
as th(> case may be, that it is just and equitable that that property or 40 
those benefits should be transferred to one of the two States or shared 
between them, or that a contribution towards that liability should be 
made by either of the States, the said property or benefits shall be 
allocated in such manner, or Meghalaya or the State of Assam shall 
make to the other State primarily subject to the liability such contribl1- 45 
tion in respect thereof, as the Central Government may, ~fter consulta· 
tion with the Government of Assam and the Government of Meghalaya, 
by order, determine. 

!, 
THJ: FOURTH SCHEDULE 
(See section 74) 
AMENDMENTS TO THE SIXTH SCHEDULE OF THE CoNSTITUTION 
1. In the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution (hereinafter referred 
5 to as the Sixth Schedule), in sub-paragraph (3) of paragraph 1, after 
clause, (1), the follpwing clause shall be inserted, namely:-
"(I) alter the name of any autonomous district,"; 
2. In paragraph 2 of the Sixth Schedule,-
, (i) for sub-paragraph (1), the following sub-paragraph shall be 
10 substituted, namely:-
J, 
25 
30 
." "0) There shall be, a District Council for each autonomous 
, district consisting of not mote than thirty members, of whom 
not more than four persons shall be n<1minated by the Governor 
I !., , ., I. '. I 
and the rest shall be elected on the basis of 'adult suffrage!'; . .' , . . 
(ii) in sub-paragraph (6)-
'(Ii) in' clause (e), for· the ,words "such Councils", the words 
" ~Reg1onal Councils"" shall 'be "ubstit~ed; " 
r" . 'f '0>)' iii ~lauSe' (gL attet: toe' 'VttordS '''c6i1dUct tlf buSiness", the 
o ~ ~': r,pT.~¢~e'tS' and words' f il (in~1JBi~~ • thl 'pO\Ver 'ttl f:at!t t1<1tWithStand-
!"1.,~. f ;~'~ '~,; 'v~can,ey) n' shalf' ";1' 'inserted; :" -'.f. ,'" '" I 
(. rrT'-', t t(, N 1 .. " r ' .,., r-:~), I r )' , . I" ., . 
PI (~ r~ ,r '''J ", ',q("I:: "'f"1 ~, I' 
(iii) after sub-ptii'a~rlipt\lIi8),' rtlu!,'fOU6Wing., 5uD1'aragraph, shall 
be inserted, i ~elv.:..- ... (f (.) I . ,(' ) . f '. . 'J' ):1 ". ,. ·'f:'. "'. -,( ql:~~.tl.;'I':(; ,"I'.' f' , 
"(6A) The elected members ('9f ,~h~l"P,i~,~ri~., .Co1.plcil . shall 
hold office for a term of five years from the date appointed for 
;- ~ ~nJJtlif! ·1fttst·ftieetirl.g.rof,lOui,.{Joqaoll after, lihe g~.e.J;iU eJ.~tions to the 
)" t!llulIdI'i 1Mles9,<thedDi8trictv.c-otmCH·/iflf1sopn.er .... s$ol~q under 
. 'r. 't:la'tiSl''l1t (and·' a' nbminatedi ,JDembe~ 'IS~ fPoW, fq~~ )81" UIe plea-
I·c~ r'Suft!.Il0fi tttJeI ; Govetrlm "'1f' iJ 1'.11,1)'" ;," I ,,"I,: In I:"', ,,,. , 
dm: f!~lpto\lidt!dl~tltheiRidl,}leri()d ~\ftve;~earslmaYI"while a Pro-
Of.. clamation of Emergency is in operation Q~lijrHi~~~es exist 
which, in ~he opinion. of the Governor, render th~ holding of 
·?1l~1ecd(Hi!a ffli~Hl~fi.ca'M~,''be1f~rl~Cf .. blf·tl1~IGd-Wrnor for a period 
r."W.9(:'~ciJe_ 8nEf!ye'tl~ ~t"*'1fi~ ah\ilth IlI1~oase'~here a Pro-
~rrn ~~antati8b 'B~:T kM~r~~tic~') 'l~ "iIi'1 ~~ttOt1 Llnbt' l~xtet1ding beyond 
a period of; siX' Irrt&rtth~:.'ffi!r thl!·· '~lathatloi1' tuUi' ceased to 
i'.f -d;rp~,.;t,e:I";rl :1;·,1,;'1 ~:fl'Willl,,1 ",l.! (.» ":1)(::'\ ... '-: : '\ 
Provided further that a member eledtedl:flo !Ifill" :a·' casual 
;':'lnH'~ ~~LhRl~, ~~,S~1f~~L~~~Je~~~~r. of the term of 
,!,(T;p11W~ ;q~rl~ rp~W9n Wr?P.;l,,~~,\~fP1~c;~·.':h. It! YIlt: h ,.( i 
'I1nl~) Yfn.l~J)~gtaPW(m.d.;.>lJ;: '(d ll'1.1JJ I; 1;;110:) .t'lIIln 
Of, -G'H~·-(ru?l<)bJlI)ljl·lhr?:t1(r' !'lnJ yd b'I}llrflIHP; ·'.!d, .. H 
(4) after the words "make ru~I\':1 :w:~~e .$R~¥;l first occur, 
i
'Y.~rds "with the approval of the Governor" shalt" be inserted, 
?·Il'CI.f \VH~'J:¥ii~¥d e~)W ~briH.'ltirll~1 theJ~r8s l4;lith like ap-
9lo"~ '/1't illa\1r~~ ,~~~ti~J "j~~ !q".; ,,' r,l . I:n'·~1":.,,,\!_,.iil':: 
. ],,!, .• i(!(ftr!'. w~:'" [,j:d \:' I'1q\, .,';-:,;q·ncJ" 

M 
(b) the second proviso shall be omitted. 
a. In paragraph 3 of the Sixth Schedule, in sub-paragraph (1) ,-
(t> in the proviso to clause (a), fur the words "Government 
of Assam", the words "Government of Assam or the Government 
of Meghalaya" shall be substituted; S 
(ii) for clause (i), the fO'llowing clause shall be substituted. 
namely:-
(i) "marriage and divorce;". 
4. In paragraph 4 of the Sixth Schedule, the following sub-paragraph 
shall be inserted at the end, namely: - 10 
'(5) On and from such date as the President may, after con-
sulting the Government of Assam or, as the case may be, the Gov-
ernment of Meghalaya, by notification appoint in this behalf, this 
paragraph shall have effect in relation· to such auton<1moUS district 
or region as may be specified in the notification, as if- 1 S 
(i) in sub-paragraph (1), fur the words "between the parties 
all of whom belong to Scheduled Tribes within such areas, other 
than suits and cases to which the provisions of sub-.paragraph 
(1) ofp,r~graph 5 of this Schedule apply,", the words "not 
being suits and cases of the nature referred to in sub-paragraph 20' 
(1) of paragraph S of this Schedule, which the-Governor may 
specify in this behalf," had been substituted; 
(ii) sub-paragraphs (2) and (3) had been omitted; 
(iii) in sub-paragraph (4)-
(It) for the words "A ReglonalCouncil or District C.oun- 25 
cil, as the case may be. may with the previous appro\Ta1 of 
the Governor make rules regulating", the words "The Gov-
ernor may make rules regulating" had been substituted; and 
(b) for clause (It), the following clause had been sub-
stituted, namely: - 30 
"(It) the constituti<tn of village councils and courtl, 
the powers to be exercised by them under this para-
graph and the courts to which appealsfrQm the decisions 
of village councils and courts shall liej"; 
(c) for clause (e). the following clause had been sub- 35 
stituted, namely:-
"(e) the transfer of appeals and other proce~ngs 
pending before the Regional (!f District Council or any 
court constituted by such Council immediately before 
the date appointed by the President under sub-para- 40 
graph (S) ;"; and 
(.;I) in clause (e), for the woros, brackets and figures 
"sub-paragraphs (1) and (2) ". the word, brackets ~d ~iur. 
"sub-paragraph (1)" had been substituted'. . 

39 
5. InparagrapJl' 5,of the Sixth Schedule, after sub-paragraph (3), the 
following sub-paragraph shall.be inserted, namely:-
"(4) On and from the date appointed by the President under 
sub-paragraph (5) of paragraph 4 in relation to any autonomous 
, district or autonomous region, nothing contained in this paragraph 
shall, in its application to that district or region, be deemed to autho-
rise the Governor to confer on the District Council or Regional 
Council or on courts constituted by the District Council any of the 
powers referred to in sub-paragraph (1) of this paragraph .... 
. 10 6. For paragraph 6 of the Sixth Schedule, the following paragraph 
shall be substituted, namely:-
"6. (1) The District Council for an autonomous district may estab- Powers 
Ush, construct, or manage primary schools, dispensaries, markets, ~ th~ 
1$ 
cattle pounds, ferries, fisheries, roads, road transport and waterways co~~~~~ to 
in the district and may. with the previous approval of the Governor, establish 
make regulations for the regulation and control thereof and, in parti- primary 
cular, may prescribe the language and the manner in which ,t>rimary schools, 
educatiO'Jl shall be imparted in the primary schools in the district. etc. 
30 
35 
(2) The Governor may, with the consent of any District Coun-
cil, entrust either conditionally or unconditionally to that Council or 
to its officers, functions in relation to agriculture, animal husbandry, 
community projects, co-operative societies, social welfare, village 
planning or any other Jl'l.8tter to which the executive power of the 
State of Asstm or Meghalaya, as the case may be, extends. 55. 
7. In paragraph 7 of the Sixth Schedule. for sub-paragraph (2), the 
following sub-paragraphs shall be substituted, namely:-
"(2) The Governor may make rules for the management of the 
District Fund, or, as the case may be, the Regional Fund and for the 
procedure to be followed in respect of payment of money into the 
said Fund, the withdrawal of moneys therefrom, the custody of 
moneys therein and any other matter connected with or ancillary to 
the matters aforesaid. 
(3) The accounts of the District Council or, as the ease may be, 
the Regional Council shall be kept in such form as the Comptroller 
and Auditor-General of India may, with the approval of the Presi~ 
dent, prescribe . 
. <') The Com.ptroller _ Auditor-General .... U caUse the ae:· 
eowlta of the Distriet and Regional Co1Uleils to be a~ted in such 
bUlber as he may think 6t, and the report" of the Comptroller .and 
Auditor-General relating to such accounts shaD be submitted to the 
Governor who shall anuel them to be laid hef8re the Council.". 
a In paragraph 8 01 the Sixth Schedule, in sub-paragraph (4), the fol-
loWing worda shall be inserted at the end, namely:-
lIand every such regulation shall be. submitted forthWith to the 
45 Governor and, unW auented to by him, aball have no effect.". 

Special 
provi-
sions as 
respects 
applica-
tion of 
laws in 
Megha-
laya. 
40 
9. After paragraph 12 of the Sixth Schedule, the folloWing plrag:r&i)h 
shall be inserted, namely:-
"12A. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in paragraph 12,-
(a) if any provision of a law made by a District or RegiOll&l 
Council in Meghalaya with respect to any of tbe matters sped- $ 
fied in clause (b) or clause (c) of sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 
3 of this Schedule is repugnant to any provision. of a law made by 
the Legislature of the State of Assam with rest>ect to any project 
declared by the Legislature of that State to be of State import-
ance, then, the law made by the District Council or,as the cue 10 
may be, the Regional Council, whether made before or af~er the 
law made by the Legislature of the State of Assam, shall, to the 
extent',of the repugnancy, be void and the law made by the 
Legislature of the State of Assam shall prevail; 
(b) if any provision of a law made by a District or Reponal I, 
Council in Meghalaya with respect to any of the matters speci-
fied in clause (b) or clause (c) (Jr clause (f> of sub-paragraph 
(1) of paragraph 3 of this Schedule is repugnant to any provi-
sion of a law made by the Legislature of Meghalaya with respect 
to that matter, then, the law made by the District Council or, as 20 
the case may be, the Regional Council, whether made before or 
after the law made by the Legislature (jf Meghalaya, shall, to 
the extent of repugnancy, be void and the law made by the 
Legislature of Meghaiaya shall prevail. 
(2) If it appears to two or more District Councils or Regional a$ 
Councils in MeghahiYa to be desirable that any 0.£ the matters with 
respect to which they have power to make laws under paragraph 3 
of this Schedule should be regulated by the Legislature of Meghalaya 
by law, and if resolutions to that effect are passed-by the said District 
Councils 'or Regional Councils, it shall be lawful for the'Legislature 50 
of Meghalaya to pass an Act regulating that matter accordingly. and 
any Act so passed shall apply to the autonoIDDUS districts or regions 
concerned, and to any other autonomous district or region the Di8-
triet or Regional Council whereof adopts it afterwards by resolution 
passed in this ~half. IS 
" 
(3) Any Act passed by the Legislature of Meghalaya under sub-
paragraph (2) of this paragraph may be amended or repealed by an 
Act of the Legislature of Meghalaya passed in like manner, but shall 
not, as respects any autonomous district or region to which it appUes, 
be amended or repealed by any law made by th. District. Qf Regional ., 
Council thereof. . 
(4) The Governor may, with respect to any Act of the Legialature 
of the State of Assam, and the President may, with respect to any 
Act of Parliament, by public notification direct, that it shall not 
apply to Meghalaya, or shaII apply thereto, or to any part thereof ., 
subject to such exceptions or modifications 8S he may specify in the 
notification, and any such direction may be so given 88 to have re-
trospective effect. 

(5) The provisions of clause (b) of sub-paragraph (1)' of para-
graph 12 shall not apply to Meghalaya.". 
10. In sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 15 of the Sixth Schedule, after 
the words "safety of India", the words "or is .1ikely to be prejudicial to 
5 public order" shall be inserted. 
11. Paragraph 16 of the Sixth Schedule shall be re-riumbered as sub-
paragraph (1) of that paragraph and to that paragraph as so re-number-
ed, the following sub-paragraphs shall be added, namely:-
"(2) If at any time the Governor is satisfied that a situation hal 
10 arisen in which the administration of an autonomous district or 
region cannot be carried on in accordance with the provisions of thi8 
Schedule, he may, by public notification, assume to himself all ell 
any of the functions or powers vested in or exercisable by the Dis-
trict Councilor, as the case may be, the Regional Council and declare 
IS that such functions or powers shall be exercisable by such person or 
authority as he may specify in this behalf, for a period Il9t exceeding 
six months: 
Provided that the Governor may by a further order or ordert 
extend the operation of the initial order by a period not exceeding 
30 six months on each occasion. 
(3) Every order made under sub-paragraph (2) of this paragraph 
with the reasons therefor shall be laid before the Legislature of tbe 
State and shall cease to operate at the expiration of thirty days from 
the· date on which the State Legislature first sits after the issue of the 
25 order, unless, before the expiry of that period it has been approved 
by the State Legislature.". 
12. After paragraph 20 of the Sixth Schedule, the foll~g paragrapli 
ahall be inserted, namely:-
'20A. (1) In this! Schedule,-
, 
30 (a) "Governor", in relation to Meghalaya, m~ans the. Gover-
Ror of Assam acting on the aid and advice of the ~cil of 
Ministers for Meghalaya, except in so far· as he is by or under 
this Schedule required to exercise his functions in his discretion or 
to exercise his powers under sub-paragraph (4) of paragraph 12A; 
35 (b) "Meghalaya" means the autonomous State formed wide~ 
article 244A. 
(2) Subject to any express provision made in this behalf, the 
provisions of this Schedule shall, in their application to Meghalaya, 
have effect-
(i) as if references to the Government of Assam, State of 
Assam, State and Legislature of the State were referenees re.-
pectively to the Government of Meghalaya, the autonomowt 
State of Meghalaya, Meghalaya and the Legislature of Megba-
laya; 
4' (ii) as if in paragraph 13, the words and ftgures "under artI-
cle 202" had been omitted.'. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Article 244A was added to the Constitution by the Constitution 
(Twenty-Second Amendment) Act, 1969 to enable Parliament to enact 
a law to give effect to the scheme for reorganisation of Assam by fonn-
ing within the State of Assam an autonomous State comprising (whether 
Wholly or in part) all or any of the tribal areas specified in Part A of 
the table appended to paragraph 20 of the Sixth Schedule. . The present 
Bill has been brought forward in pursuance of that article and seeks to 
establish an autonomous State called Meghalaya within the State of 
Assam. As envisaged in the reorganisation scheme, Meghalaya will com-
prise the areas now forming part of the United Khasi-J aintia Hills Dist-
rict as defined in the substantive part of paragraph 20 (2) of the Sixth 
Schedule and the Garo Hills District. The Bill also provides for separate 
options to the Mikir Hills autonomous district and the North Cachar 
Hills autonomous district to become part of Meghalaya. The legislative 
powers of Meghalaya have been set out in the Second Schedule to the 
Bill and subject to the 'Provisions of the Bill' the executive power of 
Meghalaya will extend to matters with respect 1:0' which the legislature 
of Meghalaya shall have power to make laws. The Bill makes detailed 
provisions regarding the constitution of the Legislative Assembly of 
Meghalaya, delimitation of constituencies, elections to the Assembly and 
its procedure, Council of Ministers for Meghalaya, administrative rela-
tions between the Governments of Assam and Meghalaya and between 
the Central Government and the Government of Meghalaya. Provision 
has also been made for transferring to Meghalaya such assets and liabi-
lities of the Assam Government in the Meghalaya area as are relatable 
to matters which fall within the purview of the autonomous State. 
2. Provision has also been made in the Bill for the constitution of a 
provisional Legislative Assembly for Meghalaya pending general elec-
tions to the Assembly. In order to dovetail the scheme of the Bill with 
the main provisions of the Constitution, the autonomous State will be 
treated as a State for certain prOvisions of the Constitution specified in 
. clause 67 of the BUl. 
3. As indicated in the reorganisatiQ'n scheme, the Fourth Schedule to 
the Bill contains provisions for the amendment of the Si¥th Schedule to 
the Constitution in order to improve the procedures of the District Coun-
cils and make them function effiCiently. 
4. The provisions of the Bill are further explained in the notes on 
clauses, wherever necessary. 
NEW l>BLm; Y. B. CHAV AN. 
Xhe 9th December, 1969. 

43 
Note, on. cZauae, 
Clawe 3.-This clause provides for the formation of an autoJ1()moUi 
State within the State of Assam to be known as Meghalaya. The United 
Khasi-Jaintia Hills district (which comprises two autonomous districts 
called United Khasi-Jaintia Hills autonomous district and Jowai autone> 
mous district) and the Garo Hills District as defined in paragraph 20 of 
the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution excluding part of the former 
transferred to the Mikir Hills autonomous district in 1951, will automati-
cally form part of Meghalaya. The part of Shillong Municipality which 
formed part of the Khasi State of Mylliem before the commencement of 
the Constitution and which now forms part of the United Khasi-Jaintia 
Hills autonomous district will be territorially part of Meghalaya but 
jurisdiction of Meghalaya in this area will be limited as provided in 
the proviso to clause 33(1). Rest of the Shil10ng Municipality and Can-
tonment which do not form part of the tribal areas will not form part of 
the autonomous State. 
The North Cachar Hills autonomous district and the Mikir Hills 
autonomous district have been provided with an option to join Megha-
laya. As soon as the proposed law is enacted, the District Councils of 
these two districts would be asked to indicate their choice and if the 
Council concerned expresses a desire by a two-thirds majority thntthe 
autonomous district shall form part of Meghalaya, the President wUl 
make a declaration to that effect and thereupon that district will also 
become a part of Meghalaya. 
2. Clauses 4 to 10.-These clauses define the extent of the executive 
power of Meghalaya and manner in which the power may be exercised. 
Provision has also been made for the constituti<1n of a Council of Minis-
ters which shall be collectively responsible to the Legislative Assembly 
of Meghalaya. Clause 8 contains a provision to enable tthe appointment. 
of an Advocate-General for Meghalaya as and when the Government of 
Meghalaya deems fit to do so. 
3. Clauses 11 to 17.-These clauses relate to the size of the Legislative 
Assembly of Meghalaya, delimitation of the Assembly constituencies and 
matters connected with elections to the Assembly. It has been provided 
that the number of elected members of the Assembly will be not less 
than 35 and not more than 55 so that the actual 'number could be deter-
mined in the light of the option to be exercised by the District Councils 
ot North Cachar Hills autonomous district and Mikir Hills autonomous 
district. Provision has also been made tor nominating not more than 
three persons to represent the interests of minority communities 1n 
Meghalaya if there is need for giving them representation in this malUler. 
The work of delimiting the constituencies is proposed to be entrusted 
to the Election Commission. Clause 17 provides for the Representation 
of the People Act, 1951, being applied in relation to the elections to the 
Legislative Assembly as they apply in relation to elections to 8 State 
Legislative Assembly. 
4. Clauses 18 to 49, and Second Schedule.-These clauses relate to dura-
tion of the Legislative Assembly, Speaker and Deputy Speaker, conduct 
of businesa powers and privileges of mf!mbers and their salaries and 

44 
allOWBllces, legislative powers and procedures, including procedure ba 
ftnancial matters. These provisions are generally modelled on the cor-
responding provisions of the Constitution relating to State Legislative 
Assemblies. 
ClaWd 28 in particular provides that an individual shall not simul-
taneously be the member of the Meghalaya Assembly and also of the 
Legislative Assembly of Assam or Parliament. 
Clause 33 defines the legislative powers of the legislature of Meghll-
lay.. These powers are enumerated in the Second Schedule to the Bill, 
which is divided into three parts, namely, Part A, Part B and Part c. 
Part A cantains the subjects in the State List in respect of which Megha-
laya will have exclusive legislative powers. Part B contains subjects 
tn the Concurrent List which even now come within the purview of the 
District Councils by virtue of paragraph 3 (1) of the Sixth Schedule to the 
Cbnstitution In respect of which similar exclusive powers will be avail-
able to, Meghalaya. Part C contains subjects which win be concurrent 
to A_am, and Me~alaya. 
Acoording to the reorganisation scheme Shillong will serve as the 
heaCiql1aiterS c'of'both Assam' and Meghalaya and Assam will have the 
sanl',' ~le~l~~ve' aria BCiministrative control over thei,Cantonmentand 
mun't~paf'a\t~:m'-bf''Shmong'9s at present; Under the Sixth Schedule t9, 
the I Je<'1nStlt6:tfCtit 'the 'Distrk!t;rCouncil,has cet'tain powers ,i,n respect of. 
that part of the Shillong Municipality, which fOl'ml;-}l)a.rt(of the, trlPal, 1 
areas.. The reorganisation scheme also provides that the District Coun-
eil '~;i1t~~an:flriife' td' 118ve'1hf!~e l'X'wers 'tmdWiILbe:uncier ,th.' co, n~rol, of, 
Me~a~@W;r"p'r6viS?to'dause '33(1), thetefore, ensures, thlJt the ,le~s]a~,. 
t1ve?;P'O~rl;' of M'~'ghalata "'Witliin r; the . 'Shil1ong M,uniclPal,ity shall" bf;,., CI 
lim1i~'d"(rOt~o's~ i 'o~~tbe 'District Cdumdl so that, !Msaro's, le~at\ve:, ap.d ' ... 
ad~~~~l~i~~;' ~~tr?I~: b~:~, ,th~' :~ht~l~ ,Mun~~ipal~~~j$" n~taffe~~, r ~', . 
Clause 34 of the Bill provides for exe~ptio~,o~t,r1,1~~q.~lpr~pJt:tte'!;'tr°~' :t' 
the taxes imposed by Meghalaya or by any authority within the autoh~ , 
mo_iS~'iilJld.,~l!Q, fAl;',tbl!iE1~el1lP?,qn ?f,pro~rti~~ o~.th7 :~ssam ~ov-, 
emtnen~,~ i simll~ ,.~~~io~ <;tIl. Ir~~ipl'<?~a~ b~si~, ,~CcdrCli~~ ,to" ,~~trY , 
51 tn\~nJ\~,~f.'the, ~on,d :~~hedul~, ,tc! ,th~ '13111, M~~ill11aya wt1l haw! 
powel'rtoJlevy.,ta~es., ~fr$icl~s, '~W~\T~r, ,in o;dier .t.? ia~oid ,aouble'tlf~a~ , 
tiOIUJIl·ItIe~le$ :~~~"iq. ~haJ~Y~, tr.ansit~pg tll~ough ~st ofAssllm'" ' 
and~!i1iae'''t1'BQ;,8 ~Qn) h~b~en made to exemt>t Stieh"vehicl~g: frOm ,I' 
, ". I ,I . t· f" ' , 'I '\" ,: f' I ' 
doub1efl'taxation., I',!! ··,:rr", "...., ':' ",', .'"'' 
, , , ' .' , I! I, "'" I :' '. '" 
(1"~f~.t ·t'!\ IlY '\~, ... I~J,r'· I'; , -, \'1 .;!-, "'., :' . " . 
etaUN8i3~r~ ,~6 spe11"O,ll,t ~~ ~e~~:o(C.~~tf~lartd,A:ssatn"lQws:.on:· , 
MeghaiaPlla~,in,(~ .wmc;urr~n.t fi~ld, ~~d t?e.ptocw,ure ~o~:enBcbn,g,.~j 
spebiai:llaw, in'tbi~ fielp JQr. Meg'ha1~J:~" . ,. . I.",,'" v 
npi.tr.tq."''1"."",q , .. I, ,!. I: li\ I '1'\ .. ;I~:· 
8JiCJGlLte, ,1O~i' cl$~~ .~pqw~r~,,~~i~,~etrl?r I t~, :rn-om~I~Qte 'O~ ,> 
n~;:.aW'iftg ,thEl.re~es,s I oft.h~ Megbataya A:ssemblY arid 1S ~noerally , 
modelled on article 213 of the Constitution. " ,. ,I' .. ,' >,1" I 
. I ( 'i , . 'j • 1 • ~ 

45 
Cl.ause 55 provid,es for .elac.4'kity ta,x and~les tax ~'n ,the ~g~aya 
area outside the ShillQ.Q.i .MloUlicipa.Jty bei"i ooHected by the Ga¥ere-
ment of Meghalaya while the rates of taxes are to be determined by the 
Allam leplaWtte. AtIsaft'l ,hat> als~got a fiTSt."mnt sa1es tax levy on 
Gertain lIaKury i1em6. As '5\lCh goods would SU'ft'er safes tax at th~ dis-
trilrution -eentr.es in tl:le ,,181M Uk~ Ga'11hatibefore they move into Megha-
Iwya Ior~tan 4isirihutien, the autOftal'R9Us State Win not be a1)1e to 
ooUect allY _lestax <>R Ugese goods. It has, therefore, been provided 
that a portion of such tax collected by Assam should be payable to 
MI!:,Q.alaya by assam. 
Cl.aue 56 pAWides f<>r the Central <levolutions '00' Assam under the 
FiGaace COlllmiS8iCHl~S recommendations being apportioned between 
A.Jeam and the auOOllomollS Stat~ in such propot'tion as the Central Gov-
ernment may determine. It has 8(')'t been possible to specify in the law 
th~ AlCtual propor.tion, because tne actual territorial extent of Meghalaya 
woWd be known only after the District Councils of North Cachu Hills 
autonoroous 4istrict and tbe Mikir Hills autonomous diitrict Mve exer-
wed. ~ qption. For the purpose of future awards of the Finance Com-
~n, ]l4eghalay.a would be treated as a separate State and the Finance 
ComlJ)issioo would recormnend the quantum of devolution separately for 
~m and Megb4!aya. The provision made in this clause will, there-
fore, Qply only SQ far as the devolutions based an the Fifth .Finance 
Commission's recommen4aUoIli are concerned. 
7. Clause 58 and Third Schedu.le.-This clause refers to apportionment 
Qf .usets and l,i.abilities. Detliiled provisions in this behalf have been 
i.ocorparflted in the Third Schedule to the' Bill. These generally follow 
tbe provi,iQns made in other State Reorganisation laws with the modi-
fic.ation tbat assets ~d liabilities to be transferred to Megbalaya would 
b~ tho.ie relatable to U1e legislative powers· proposed to be ronfel'red on 
the ~gislatllfe of tl1e autonomous State. 
8. Clauses 59 to 61.- These clauses re 'ate to administrative relations 
between Meghalaya and Assam and also Meghalaya and the Union. It 
haabeen provided that the autonomous State' shall comply with laws 
made by Parliament, the laws made by the legislature of A~sam and 
otper laws in force within its territory. If any executive action taken 
by Meghalaya impedes or prejudices the exercise of executive power of 
the Upion. the Government of India will have power to give directions 
tathe Meghalaya Government. Similarly, if the actions of Meghalaya 
Government impede the exercise of the exec\4tive power of the Govern-
ment ctf Assam, the Government of Asam will have powers to give direc-
tions. A provision has al$o ~en made in clause 61 for entrustment of 
executive fUl'\Ctions of the Government of Assam to Meghalaya G<>'vern-
ment and vice versa. 
9. Clause 62.-This clause makes a transitional provision for the set-
tin, up of a provisional Legi.slative Assembly pending the holding of 
the ftrat general eleetions to the Meghalaya Assembly in accordance with 
the proposed law. The members of the provisional auembJy wUl be 
elected by the member. of the District Councils on the basts at propor-
UoUl r.e.iel\tation ~ meam of the single transferrable voM. Elected 
members of eachl>iAtrict. Council will constitute an eJectQS!81 'IOlt.ge re-
turning a specified number of members to the Assembl:v. 

46 
10. Clauses 63 to 73.-These clauses contain miscellaneous provisions, 
the more important of which are explained below: - . 
Clause 63.-This clause makes a provision enabling the Central 
Ckrvernment to appoint a high level committee to advise the Govem-
ments of Assam and Meghalaya on matters of common interest with 
respect to Shillong and also such of the adjoining areas as may be 
treated as part of Shillong for this purpose by agreement between 
the two Governments. 
Clause 65.-This clause provides fer services of oftieers of Assam 
Cadre of the All-India Services and Class I Services of that State 
being made available to Meghalaya for specified periods and alloca-
tion of serving employees of Assam in lower cadres to Meghalaya 
for service under the autonomous State. 
Clause 67.-TO' the extent legislative and executive powers are 
entrusted to Meghalaya, it will have to function as a State under the 
Constitution. It was, therefore, provided in article 244A added to 
the Constitution by the Constitution (Twenty-Second Amendment) 
Act, 1969, that a parliamentary law under that article may provide 
that any referenc;~ to a State in any article in the Constitution shall 
be construed as including a reference to the autonomous State. This 
clause enumerates the various articles for the purposes of which the 
autonomous State will be treated as a State. 
Clause 68.-In the Meghalaya area not only the laws made by 
Parliament but also the laws made by Assam and Meghalaya would 
be in operation. This clause, therefore, provides that the executive 
power of the (;Qvernment of Assam in relation to Meghalaya under 
article 298 shall also be subject to legislation enacted by the legisla-
ture of Meghalaya and that the executive power of Meghalaya under 
the same article shall also be subject to legislation enacted by the 
legislature of Assam. 
Clause 69.-This clause provides for suspension of relevant pro-
visions of the proposed law in the event of President's rule in 
Meghalaya. 
Clause 70.-There are a number of Central laws particularly in 
the Concurrent field which require the State Governments to imple-
ment the laws. In actual working of the scheme at reorganisation 
it might become necessary to entrust functions under some of these 
laws to Mcghalaya Government to ensure smooth administration. 
This clause, therefore, contains an enabling provision for the Central 
Government themselves to take over the executive authority in 
Meghalaya area under any such law as may be notified so that where 
necessary the powers could be delegated to the Meghalaya Gctvern-
ment under article 258. 
11. Clause 74 and Fourth Schedule.-This clause read with the Fourth 
Schedule to the Bill makes eerta:n amendments in the Sixth Schedule to 
the Constitution. The important amendments to the Sixth Schedule pro-
posed in the Fourth Schedule to the Bill are as follows:-
Parag1'4ph 1.-A provision has been made in paragraph 1 of the 
Fourth Schedule to enable the Governor to alter th~ name of an auto-
nomous district by notiflcation. 

41 
Paragraph 2.-The maximum strength of the District Councils has 
been fixed at 30 out of whom the maximum number of nominat-
ed members would be 4. Provision has also been made for fuang a 
five-year t~rm for the DistrIct Counclls. At present, these provisions 
are contained in the rules of the District Councils concerned. 
The rule relating to delimitation of COHstltuencies, elecLons, etc., 
to the District Councils are at present made by the CouncIls them-
selves under paragraph ::! (I) 01 the Sixth Schedule. 1t is proposed 
that such rules should be made with the approval of the Governor. 
Paragraphs 4 and 5.-At present the village courts in the autonom-
ous districts have jurisdiction only in respect 01 SUlts and cases in 
which both the partles are members ot the Scheduled Ttibes 01 the 
autonomous distnct concerned. 'lne District Council or courts con-
stituted by the District Coullcil function as appellate court. More 
serious offences like those punishable with death or imprisonment for 
a term of 110t less than 5 years are outside the purview of these courts 
but the Governor is empowered, to confer juri::;dJi.:tion on these courts 
in regard to these matters as weB on the conditlOn that the Code of 
Criminal Procedure and the Code of Civil Procedure shall be followed 
in deciding such matters. This paragraph seeks to enable village level 
courts to function more or less like Nyaya Panchayats in the rest of 
the country subject to the procedural rules relating to these courts 
being made by the Assam Government or Meghalaya Government, 
as the case may be. It is intended that appeals from the village level 
courts should lie to regular courts. However, some preparatory work 
will be necessary to effect the change over and local conditions will 
have to be taken into account in fixing the time schedule for the 
change. It is, therefore, proposed to enforce these amendments from 
a date to be fixed in respect of each autonomous district. 
Paragraph 6.-This paragraph seeks to enable the Governor to 
entrust additional functions particularly in the field of local develop-
ment, to the District Councils and also make it clear that the District 
Council could set up its own road transport system. 
Paragraph 7.-This paragraph makes provisions for improving the 
financial and accounting procedures of the District Councils. 
Paragraph 9.-Under paragraph 12 of the Sixth Schedule the 
State laws relating to matters in respect of which the District Coun-
cils are empowered to legislate under paragraph 3 of the Sixth Sche-
dule do not automatically apply to the autonomous districts. There 
is also a provision which enables the Governor to apply the State and 
Parliamentary laws to the autonomous districts with modifications or 
not to apply such laws at all. Having regard to the provisions made 
in the Bill the scheme of that paragraph is sought to be applied to 
Meghalaya in a modified form by adding a new paragraph 12A in the 
Sixth Schedule. 
Paragraph H.-Situations may arise in which a District Council 
may not be able to function in accordance with the provisions of the 
Sixth Schedule. This paragraph, therefore, seeks to m18ke a provisfon 
to enable the Governor to take over any or all the functions of the 
District Council in such cases fOf a period not exceeding six months 

48 
"Mita power to extend. the period. from time to time. 1t has been pro-
vi.cied. that such orders shall be subject to approval by the Assam or 
MePlaya legislature, as the case may be, within 30 days from the 
date of its first session after the issue of the order. . 
Paragraph 12.-This paragraph provides that in So far as Megha-
laya is concerned, the Governor shall exercise his powers under the 
&ix.th Schedule on the advice of the Council of the Ministers of 
Megbalaya. 
12. Claus6 75.-Under section 21A of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 
193", the Reserve Bank can enter into agreement with the Government of 
a. State to transact Government business of that State. It may be neces-
suy for Meghalaya also to enter into similar agreemlent. The particular 
section of the Reserve Bank of India Act is, therefore, sought to be ampli-
fied by including therein a reference to the autonomous state of Megha-
lay.a. 
13: Cllluse 76.- This clause provid~s for representation of Megbtllaya 
in the Eastern Zonal Council: 

FINANCI'AL MEMORANDUM 
_ cl'auses-6'( 1') and' 11 (1) Of the lrtUprOvide' for a Coun"CU' of MinIsters 
Leiislafure for Meglfal'aya. Ci'auses 7(5), ~~5)' ar'la 32' tmt~ to p~-eenl 
o~. s-al'~t!~s. a~cr alloWal\ces t'o th~ Ministers; Sllealter and D~puty Spe~ 
and memoers of tlie :ugislati'Ve' ~ssefu'blY. eilaulte' 25n'r pr()~id~ for a 
sepa~lit~ secret'ariaI' staff' for t'h'e Legr~na'f1ve' A'sserhbly. THt! ex~'tfffure 
on such siilariesand -aIloWMfces aWd 6t'1l~r e)('peWt!tfui'e 0'( a~ i1\~~rittii 
nature'suen as' a'd'dni@al sraff for t'l1e'C6'UJ'\cU' of Min'is~s' WiU depend'ott 
tli"e' cfe'cisions tna"t'may be ta1t'eri by th~ ltf~Ha1a)ta Gt'lvE!tnmem *hen:' it 
comes into eXIstence or lti'Ws wh'i~h rriay Been'acfed by th~ Legistat\:freOf 
M"eghalaya. It is tYot' posS'ilfle to tfi'ake an e~t'ih1ate of su~ e'X})enttJtlli'e 
wfirch will' in' any case be met-from -the' Cor\~oln'!afetf FUl'l'd or MegtrM~ 
c'Ia'use 12'(1)' of'the BUl seeks to e'i'npower the ~ii!Ctt6tt C~slon to 
delitnif' the tiftI'itb'tiaI cbrtst'i.fuert~es- for elett'iohs' to tt\e LegfSlatWe As-
sembly ofM~ghatl:lya. Clat.l~ 1'2(2), provideIH'6t- appothtrlitelit1of nl)t morE! 
than five aSsO~iate members to as'S'ist the E1e~iOtt CotntnIsS'ion hi'delttritt-
ing toe constltueM.ci~, Cla:u~ 17 provides fot el~iorts to th~ ~st'a"-ve 
AssembTy oJ Megh'alilya betrtjt li~lti itl accordance with tHe p-rOVisiortt of 
Hie Retsre!!lehtatioh' 6f Hie f'~ple ~ct, 1951. Clause 62{1} proVitit:!lS for 
the setting up of a ProViSional Legislative ~erhbly, Th~ delimitation of 
cdl'lstituencies will involve an es:pe-nditure of about Rs. 25,000 on account 
of, travelling allowances and other incidental expenditure. The 'elections 
to the ProVisionlfl Legislative Assembly may involve an expenditure of 
about Rs. 3,000 on account of travelling allowances, etc .. of the mem1:iers 
of the-eiecrorei colleges. The expenditure on both these items which will 
be of a non-recu~irlg naturE!, will have to be met from the Consolidated 
Fund of India. The elections from territorial constituencies to the Megha-
laya Le-gislati.ve Kssembly may involVe a rioh-r~curiirlg ex~rtait\lre of 
about' Rs. z'liililis. As tHe ele<!tibrtS-woUld b~' held I after tHe autbrtmnobs 
S'taie of M'egllalaya comes intb existt!ri~e the ej(jjetiditut'e Will: hd~Mr, 
be met'from Uie- Conso1idated' Fund Of Me-ghalaya. ClausEf14(2) provtd9 
that the electoi"al roll of eacn 1tegh'alay<a cdtfStltueHey slilill~' ~b' much 
of the electoral roll of the Assam A'ssetntlly constifuertcy as' re!ate§ to tHe 
area of that constituency cov~re'cr' by thE! Meghalaya con~tittiet1cY. The 
electoral rolls for all Assam Assembly constituencies are under li!KtiSiOfl-at 
present and the revised rolls will be finally published in January, 1970, 
No additional expenditure will, therefore, be involved in the preparation 
of the electoral rolls of the Meghalaya Assembly constituencies. 
Clause 58 of the Bill along with the Third Schedule relates to the ap-
portionment of assets and liabilities of the State of Assam in so far as 
Meghalaya is concerned, The cash assets falling to the share of Megha-
laya will accrue to its Consolidated Fund and the liabilities to be assumed 
by Meghalaya will have to be met from that Fund. No expenditure on 
this account also will be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India. 

50 
Clause 63 provides for a Special Committee for Shillong being consti-
tuted fO'r advising the two Governments on matters of common interest 
with respect to Shillong. Expenditure, if any, in regard to this Commit-
tee will have to be met either by Government of Assam or partly by that 
Government and partly by Government of Meghalaya. Hence this provi-
sion also will involve no expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. 
Under clause 67 Meghalaya is proposed to be treated as a State for the 
purposes of articles 272, 275 and 282. By virtue of the order to be made 
under clause 56, a part of Assam's share of Union Duties of Excise under 
article 272 will have to be paid to Meghalaya out of the Consolidated Fund 
of India. Similarly, by virtue of the order under that clause, .a part of 
the grants-in-aid payable to Assam under article 275(1) will have to be 
paid to Meghalaya from the Consolidated Fund of India. The precise 
quantum of such devolution and grants to Meghalaya cannot, however, be 
estimated at this stage as the amount would depend on the areas which 
would ultimately form part of the autonomous State. Hence, provision 
has been made in clause 56 to determine by a Presidential order the pro-
portion in which the grants-in-aid and Central taxes payable to Assam 
are to be allocated between Assam and Meghalaya. Assam is also receiv-
ing plan grants and certain non-plan grants under article 282. So much 
of these grants as are relatable to subjects transferred to Meghalaya will 
have to be diverted to the autonomous State. The precise amount of such 
grants to Meghalaya cannot be estimated at this stage as this would depenQ 
on factors like the size of the plan for Meghalaya. However, to the extent 
resources are transferred from Assam to Meghalaya, there will be no extra 
expenditure from the Consolidaied Fund of India. 
Clause 76 provides for repre3entation being given to Meghalaya on the 
Eastern Zonal Council. This will involve some expenditure on the travel-
ling allowances of the members of the Council representing Meghalaya to 
attend meetings of the Council. The expenditure will, however, be met 
from the Consolidated Fund of Meghalaya and there will be no expendi-
ture on this account from the Consolidated Fund of India. 
Clause 67 provides for Meghalaya being treated as a State for purposes 
of articles 149, 150 and 151 of the Constitution and paragraph 7 of the 
Fourth Schedule. provides for the audit of the accounts of the District 
Councils by the Comptroller and Auditor·General. These arrangements 
may require the strengthening of the establishment of the office of the 
Accountant General, Assam and Nagaland, and the expenditure on this 
account is estimated at Rs. 30,000 per annum recurring and Rs. 5,000 non-
recurring. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATLON 
.-
Clause 9(3) of the Bill empowers the Governor to make rules for the 
more convenient transaction of business of the Government of Megha-
laya and for allocation among ministers of the said business. 
Clauses 7(5), 23(5) and 32 would enable the Governor to determine the 
salaries and allowances of Ministers, Speaker and Deputy Speaker and 
members of the Legislative As~embly until laws in that behalf are enacted. 
Clause 25 (3) of the Bill empowers the Governor to make, after consul-
tation with the Speaker of the Legislative Assembly, rules regulating the 
recruitment and conditions of service of persons appointed to the secre-
tarial staff of the Legislahre Assembly, pending enactment of a law on 
the subject. 
Clause 47 of the Bill empowers the Legislative Assembly of MeghalAya 
to make rules for regulating its procedure and conduct of business. It fur-
ther provides that till such rules are made, the rules of procedure and 
standing orders applicable to the Legislative Assembly of Assam shall ap-
ply to the Legislative Assemibly of Meghalaya subject to any modifications 
or adaptations which may be made by the Governor. 
Clause 54 provides for rules regarding the custody, etc., of the Consoli-
dated Fund and Contingency Fund of Meghalaya being made by the Gov-
ernor pending the enactment of legislation in this behalf. 
Clause 56 empowers the President to determine by order the propor-
tion in which the grants-in-aid under article 275(1) of the Constitution 
and taxes on income, duties of excise, estate duty, etc., shall be payable 
to the State of Assam and the autonomous State of Meghalaya. It is not 
possible to specify in the Bill the actual proportion because the actual ter-
ritorial extent of Meghalaya would be known only after the District Coun-
cils of North Cachar Hills autonomous district and the Mikir Hills auto-
nomous district have exerc :sed their option. The order of the President 
will however be laid before Parliament. 
Clause 66(2) empowers the appropriate Government to adapt existing 
laws in order to facilitate their application in relation to the autonomous 
State of Meghalaya. This power will be available for a period of two 
years from the appointed day. Clausl' 17 empowers the President to dir-
ect, after consultation with the Election Commission, thl' modifications 
Rubject to' which the Representation of the People Act. 1951, would apply 
to elections to the Legislative Assembly of Meghalaya. Clause 55(3) em-
powers the Central Government to direct that the laws with respect to 
tanf:'S on the consumption or sale of electricity and sale or purchase of goons 
shan have effect subject to speCified exceptions and modifications for the 
purpose of enabling the Government of Meghalaya to collect those taxe-;. 
The adaptations. exceptions and modifications referred to above cannot 
affect the ~ubstance of the enactments. 
51 

~,,,,,,. 
Clause 77 makes the usual provision regarding power to make rules. 
It empowers the Central Government to make rules to give effect to the 
provisions of the Bill. The rules will have to be laid before both Houses 
of Parliament. 
In the F~th Sched.W.e to.the Billl (wh.i.c.b ne~s .to ~9.~8, Sixth 
~~~edule to the Constitution), it is proposed to amend paragraph 2 of the 
S.l?'~h Schedule so as to provide that the rules relatmg to .lilnitlitWm of 
constituencies, el~ctions, etc., to the District CouncilB .which ar~ at prese.nt 
madE' by the CO'Uncils themselves, should be made with the approlVal Dt 
the .Go.vernor {P1¥~~ 2(iv)]. Lt is f~r~ proposed to ~e~ci para-
ar.aph .. ,Qf the Batk;l&be4ule to enal:l~ viUage level courts t9, fuq.ctton 
mar.c JJf less like NYJya Papr;:h~iYats in the r~s~ of th,eCQumry subj~t to 
tP..e 1-1' )<;e9~ral rules relating to these courts being made by the Assam 
~v.ern.m('~t or tpe Meghalaya Government, as the case ma~ be. It is in-
~~R--~I!d ~l: at appe~ls from the village level courts shoJIld lie to regW.ar 
.c;~ur~.s [p~rawaph 4(iii)]. It is also proposed to amend paragJ'apb ·7 f)/. 
the Sixth Schedule so as to take power for the Governor to make ruJ.w; 
for the management of the District Fund or the Regional Fund, PfOoedur~ 
for paiYment of ~oney into it, etc. [paragraph 7]. Jt i.~ a).~opropos~ to 
amend paragraph ~ pf the Si~~p. Sched~1,e to emppW.fff tp~ Pi~trict Council 
to make reguJations, with the p;evipus .approv~l of -~pe G()ve},'p.or, for tl}e 
replation of primary ~QOlij, d~p.eflSari~, et~'., ~,~"~p.Jish~d by thept 
[paragJ:aph.6]. 
It will be seen that the matters mentioned above are Metiers Qf. 1i114il 
or per,tain to prgcec4lfB aJld a~ §4~~ ~ 4e~~atiqn 9£ l~,@islJltive pgw-ers 
Is of a normal nature. 

~ 
EX'l'IlACTS raOM TBi: CONSil'tUflON OJ' hmu 
• • • 
SIXTH SCHEDULE 
[Articles 244(2) and 275(1)] 
• • 
ProrisioDS as to the AdministratiOD of Tribal Areal In Allam 
1. Autonomous districts and autonomous regions.-(1) •••• , .. 
, , 
• • • • • 
(3) The Governor may, by public notification,-
(a) include any area in Part A of the said table, 
(b) exclude any area from Part A of the said table, 
(c) create a new autonomous district, 
(d) increase the area of any autonomous district. 
(e) diminish the area of any autonomous diitrict. 
• 
• (J) unite ~o or more autonomous district.! or par1:l thereo1 
'0 as to form one autonomous district, 
~': (g) define the boundaries of any autonomous district: 
Provided that IlQ order shall be made by the Governor under clauel 
(:C), (JIi), (e) and (1) of this sub-paragraph except after .:onaideration 
of the report of a Commission appointed under sub-paragraph (1) of 
paragraph 14 of this Schedule. 
2. Constitution of District Councils and RePooal CounaiII.-(1) There 
shall be a. District Council for each autonomous district con&isting of not 
mIore than twenty-four members, of whom not lesa than three-lourtha 
shall be elected on the basis of adult suffrage. 
• • • • • • 
(6) The Governor shall make rules for the first constitution of Dis--
trict Councils and Regional Councils in consultation with. the exi.ting 
tribal Councils or other representative tribal organisations within the 
autonomous districts or regions concerned, and such rules shall pro~d. 
f " \ • ,\. '.',' '~",: 'j . ~ 
or- ,f ' ,';-1 "J I, 
• • • • • • 
," <e> the term of office of members ,of such Councils; 
• • • • • • 
(g) the procedure and the conduct of businesa in the Diatrict 
and Regional Councils; 
• • • • • • 
(7) The District or the Regional Council may after Its 8rst eonatitl1· 
tion make rules with regard to the matters specified in sub-paragraph, 
(0) of this paragraph and may also make rules regulating-
(4) the formation of subordinate local Councils or Boardt and 
their procedureJ and the conduct of their business; and 
(b) generally all matters relating to the transaction of bu.ttoeaa 
pertaining to the administration of the district or region, u the cue 
may be: 
S3 
I 

· .. ,,"! ,Il ." 
t~ 54 
t, If ..• 
Provided that until l'ules. arc made by the Dj/ilrict or the Regional 
Council under this sub-paragraph the rules made by the Governor under 
sub-paragraph (6) of this paragraph shall have effect in respect of elec-
tions to, the officers 1lM ~ ef, and the prc;>cedure and the conduct' of 
business in, each such Council: 
Provided fwthef ~at the D~puty COm1piS$io~ or tpe ~ub-piv~ional 
Officer .. as the cafe may be, of the North Cachar and Moor Iiillsshall be 
the Chairman ex-officio of the District Council in respect of the territo-
ries included in items 5 and 6 respectively of Part A of the table appended 
to praragraph 20 of this Schedule and shall have power for a period of 
six years after the first cc;>p.stitution of tbQ D*s.trict Council, subject to 
the control of the Governor, to annul or modify any resolution of deci-
sion of the District Council or to issue such instructions to the District 
Council, as he may consider appropriate, and the Distriet Council shall 
-Comply with ew!ry sueh instruction issued. 
3. Powers of the District CCMUKib and Regional Countils to mBke 
laws.-(1) The Regional Council for an autonomous region in respect of 
aJl areas within such region and the District Council fOr an autonomous 
Eli8tr'ictt iJ:lreepect of. allaI'eas within $e c;iistrict except those which are 
under th.e authority of Regional Councils, if any, wiUlip the ~c'~ ~hal1 
have power to make laws with respect to- . 
(a) the allotment, occupation or use, or the setting apart, of 
land, other than my land which is a reserved fores.t, for \he purpose 
of agriculture or grazing or for residential or other nonr-airicultural 
purposes or for any other purpose likely to promote the iDteHijts of 
the inhabitants of any village or town: 
Provided that nothing in such laws shall prevent the compulsory 
acquisition of any land, whether oceupied or unoccupied, for public 
purposes by the Govemment of Assam in accordance with the law 
for the time being in force authorWng, sucll 4lcquisition; 
(b) the managenlent of any forest not being a reserved forest; 
(c)' the use of any canal or water-course f(1C the purpose of agri-
culture; l \ 
(d) the regulation of the practic:e of·, jhum or other forms of 
_ shifting cultivation; 
(e) the establishment of village or town committees or councils 
and their powers; 
(f) any other matter relating to village or town administration, 
including village or town police and public health and sanitation; 
'" 
(g) the appOintment or succession of Chiefs or Headmen; 
(h) the inheritance of property; 
(0; mani~ie; 
''"7- .• .". 
(j) socia.! customs. 
'" " '" '" • 
4. Administration of justice in autoDOInIOus districts and autOnOlDOUI 
-,to .... -(l) The Regional CO\Ulcil for an autonolIJlOUS region in respect 

5S 
of 'areas within :such region and the Di~trict Council -for an a~OUb 
di!i»"i~ ~., ~~pectof areas \Vithin the district other than those which are 
under the authority of the RegIOnal Councils, if any, within the distriCt 
may 'constitute village' counCils or courts for the trial of sui ts and caseS . 
between the patties all of whom belong to SchedUled Tribes '~tb1n gUch 
areas~'other' than suits and cases to which the provisions of sUb.-patagtaph ' 
(1) of paragraphS of this Schedule apply, to the exclusion of any court to ' 
the Sfa'te,·and.may appoint suitable persons to be members of Stich village 
councils or presiding officers of such courts, and may also appoint such 
officers as may be necessary for the administration of the laws made 
under paragraph 3 of this Schedule. 
(2) NQt~ithstanding anything in this Constitution, the Regional 
Co~cil fQr an ilutonomous region or any court constituted in that behalf 
by the Regional Counc:il or, if in reipect of auy area wi~ an autono-
mous district there is no Regional Council, the 'District Council for' such 
district, or any court constituted in that behalf by the District Council, 
shall exercise the powers of a court of appeal in respect of all sUits and 
cases triable bY' a village council. or coart con'Stitutedunder ·sub .. pangraph 
(1) of this paragraph within such region or area, as the ease n1ay be~ btlWllt' 
than those to which the provisions of su't);.paragraph ~l)· of pat1lgtapH. Si- ~ 
of this Sch~dule apply, and no other court except the High Court and the 
Supreme Court shall have jurisdiction over such suits or cases. 
. ' .. 
: '(3) 'Phs High Caurt ,01. Assam shall have and, ~e~f.';ise ~, ~~c-
ti., qv_ the· suits .ad easel to whi.C:h the p~iOlW of Sl,tb-par.4Ph 
(a) of ibis-paragraph ~ly as the GoVerncH:' merr trom. time to tJme by 
order~: . 
4. A ~gional Council or District Council, as th~ case may be; may 
with the previous approval of the Governor make rules regulating-
.. (11)' th~aonstitutionof vm&ge< eOllrllO!l8> and' courts anel, thei powers 
. to bt!. exereiaed -b.Y. th~ under· tlns. ~apapb; 
- (b) the p!'OCedure to'be foll~ed b~ viHagecouncils or co~rll -
"~~q: the trial· of suitS antJ,cateB Under sub·paragraph (lJ of trus para~" 
'.'Mnh·, .... . . . . ~-"'f" , . 
~'-Ute- ~~to· be followed: by the ;Regional or District, 
Council or any court constituted' by suCh Cow.cit in· appeals: ad 
other proceedings under sub-paragraph (2) of this paragraph; 
(d) the enforcement of decisions and orders of such Councils and 
cour~i 
(e)att Clther. ancillary matters for the carrying out ottlle·~ . 
. ,vi.ions·of~agraph. (1) anQ;' (2) of, tiU.paragraplL 
• • • 
' . .' 
';i;~.~~o~"dreDiwiiict Couadl to ntabliah'priallri s .... -
. ~ ~i~on for an autoaomous: diatriet lnll)'! eatabli.8h, -c~ 
orinm.ap'~:.sehools;' clI8pe'mJariettj. markets, cattle ~da,. f~ 
fisheries, roads 8.nd waterways in the district and, in particuI8r, may 
prescribe :.the language- and the mamler in which ·primary edu'5.tion shall 
be imparted in the primary schools in the district. 

56 
'7 . .1>;ist:rict and Reaional f'uDcIs. .... - (1 ) ,II' • • 
. (2)' SUbject to the approval of the Governor, rules may' be madeb)' 
the District Council and by the Uegional Council for the manaiement 
of the District Fund or,as the case may be, the Regional P'Wid, and' the .. 
rules so made may prescribe-the procedure to be' followeCl fit reSpect -
of payment- of money into the said Fuhd, the withdrawal" of moMYs 
therefrom, the custOdy of moneys thereiu and aily other matter eonnected ' 
with or ancillary to the matters aforesaid. . 
8. Powers to Uses. and collect land revenUe and te impnee taua.-
(1) , • • • • • • 
(4) A Regional Council or District Council, as the case may be, may 
make regulations to provide for the levy and collection of any of the 
taxes specified in suJ:>-paragraphs (2) and (3) of this par~aph . 
• • • • • 
12. AppticaUon of Acts of Parliament aDd" of the ~".tun of tbiI 
State to autoDOlDA)US clistricts and autonomous repons.-(l) Notwith-
.tanding anything in this Constitution-
• • • • • • 
(b) the Governor may, by pUblic notification, direct that my Aci 
of Parliament or of the Legislature of the State to which the provi-
sions of clause (a) of this sub-paragraph do not apply shall notapp11 
. to an autonomous district or an autonomous region, or ahall apply to 
such district or region or any part thereof subject to IUcb __ ~oaa , 
or modifications as he may specify in the notification. 
• • • • • • 
13. Estimated receipts aDd expenditure pertai.DiDc to aut"llClllllAlUa en.. 
trieta to be shown .. .-.tel, in the allDual 6n aocial ltatemeDtr-The 
estimated recepits and ependiture pertaining to an autonomous dlItrict 
which are to be credited to, or is to be made from, the Consolidated FuDd 
of the State of Assam shall be first placed before the District Council for 
discussion and then after such discusalon be shown leparately m the 
annual financial statement of the State to be ,laid before the Leei8latur. 
of the State under article 202. 
• • • • • 
15. ADnulment or IRBpeusioD of acta and resolutiobs of DlstrIct and 
BePooal eowac:ils.-(l) if at any time the Governor is satlatied that an 
act Or resolution of a Di.ttict or a Regional Coundl is liltely to endangdt 
the safety of India, he may annul or suspend such act Or resolution and 
take such steps as he may consider necessary (inch.ldlng the suspension 
of the Council and the assumption to himself of all or, atly of the po~ 
vested in or exereisable by the Council) to prevent the COmmtss1OAot 
continuanee of such ~, or the giving of effect to such l'8Iolution . 
• • • • • 

Bank to 
tralll-
act 
Gov-
ern-
ment 
b~­
nessot 
States 
on 
agree_ 
ment. 
Com-
position 
otthe 
Coun-
cill. 
57 ... .,' . .• ,:,_......!... .... , .... .:t4!" :.: ~:, ';' '" , 
-
EXTRACT nOM THE RESERVE BANK OF INDIA ACT, 1934 
j, (201' 1934) 
• ... • ... 
2IA. (1) The Bank may by agreement with the Government of any 
State undertake-
(a) all its money, remittance, exchange and banking transac-
tions in India, including in particular, the deposit, free of interest, of 
all its cash balances with the Bank; and 
(b) the management of the public debt of, and the issue of any 
new loans by, that State. 
... • ... • 
EXTRACT FROM TH'I!l STATES REoRGANISATION ACT, 1956 
(37 OF 1956) 
... • • • 
, . 
16. (1) The Zonal Council for each zone shall consist of the following 
members, namely:-
• • ... ... • 
(d) in the case of the Eastern Zone, the person for the time being 
holding the office of the Adviser to the Governor of Assam for Tribal 
Areas. ' 
'. • .. 

., . 
~'" i 
LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
10 provide for the formation within the State of Assam of an autmiomous State to be 
moWQ II Mesbalaya and for maners connected therewith. 
(Shrt Y. B. C"--. 
M,.,." of H"",,:A/fGIrs) 