1
THE STREET CHILDREN (REHABILITA TION AND WELFARE)
BILL, 2014
By
SHRI RAKESH SINGH, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the rehabilitation and welfare measures to be undertaken by the
Union and the State Governments for the street children who subsist on
rag picking, begging, shoe polishing, working as potters or performing
acrobatics at road crossings or public places and for their
rehabilitation by taking their custody and providing
them due care, protection, education, vocational
training and for matters connected
therewith or incidental
thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fifth  Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Street Children (Rehabilitation and Welfare) Act, 2014.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the State Government,
and in other cases, the Central Government;
Bill No.  114 of  2014
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title
and extent.
Definitions.
5

2
(b) "child" means a boy or girl who is below the age of eighteen years;
(c) "children home" means an institution or home established or certified as
such by the appropriate Government for the purposes of this Act;
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(e) "street child" means a child who is an orphan or has been abandoned or is a
vagabond and who subsists on income earned by collecting and selling of waste
materials from garbage dumps or streets or other public places or begging or working
as a potter or vendor or shoe polisher and who lives on pavement or in a hutment or
slum or railway platform or bus stop or such other place.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, formulate a National Policy for
the rehabilitation and welfare of street children so as to secure them all rights of childhood
and make them responsible citizens.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision, the National
Policy referred to in sub-section (1) may include:—
(a) taking custody of every street child and provide him boarding, lodging
and other facilities in children home;
(b) taking of such measures, as may be necessary, to discourage street
children from returning to their earlier means of subsistence;
(c) provision of free educational facilities, vocational training and facilities
for developing moral values and other skills among street children to make them
self-dependent;
(d) provision of employment opportunities for street children after they
complete their education and vocational training;
(e) provision of annual grants-in-aid to such orphanages and non-
governmental organizations as are working for the welfare of street children; and
(f) such other measures as may be deemed necessary for carrying out the
purposes of this Act.
4. It shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to implement the National Policy
formulated under section 3.
5. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, by notification in the Official
Gazette, constitute a Fund to be known as the Street Children Welfare Fund with an initial
corpus of rupees two thousand crore to be provided by the Central Government by due
appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf.
(2) The Central Government and the State Governments shall contribute to the Fund
in such ratio as may be prescribed.
(3) Such other sums as may be received by way of donation, contribution or assistance
from individuals, organizations or otherwise shall also be credited to the Fund.
(4) The Fund shall be used for the welfare of the street children in such manner as may
be prescribed.
6. (1) The appropriate Government shall establish or cause to be established such
number of children homes as it may deem necessary for the purposes of this Act.
(2) The children homes established under sub-section (1) shall provide free boarding
and lodging and such other facilities to the street children as may be prescribed.
Constitution
of Street
Children
Welfare Fund.
National
Policy for
street
children.
Appropriate
Government
to
implement
the National
Policy.
Establishment
of children
homes.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
7. The appropriate Government shall—
(a) maintain a district-wise register of all street children;
(b) open sufficient number of schools and colleges for imparting education to
the street children and provide books, writing materials, clothes, uniforms and other
relevant articles free of cost;
(c) provide healthcare facilities free of cost to all street children;
(d) take custody of every street child in such manner as may be prescribed;
(e) send every street child taken into custody under this Act to a children home
or to a non-governmental organisation certified by the appropriate Government in
such manner as may be prescribed;
(f) provide vocational training and gainful employment to street children; and
(g) take such other measures as may be necessary for the rehabilitation and
welfare of street children.
8. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide adequate funds for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
9. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Penal Code, 1860 or any other
law for the time being in force, whoever—
(a) forces any child covered under this Act to beg, commit petty crime or
rag picking or any act which is injurious to the health of such child shall be punished
with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than four years but may extend to
seven years and also with which may extend to rupees five lakh;
(b) sexually exploits any child covered under this Act shall be punished with
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than ten years but may extend to life
imprisonment and also with fine which shall not be less than rupees five lakh but may
extend to rupees ten lakh; and
(c) having already been convicted of an offence under this Act or an abetment
of such offence is again convicted of any such offence or abetment shall be punished
with life imprisonment and also with fine which may extend to rupees ten lakh.
10. The provision of this Act and rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force.
11. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force regulating any of the matters dealt with in this Act.
12. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
(3) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before the State Legislature.
Welfare
measures for
the street
children.
Central
Government
to provide
adequate
funds.
Punishment.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Act not in
derogation of
any other law.
Power to
make rules.
45 of 1860.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
It has rightly been said that children are the future of any country because they grow
as the citizens of that country. It is, therefore, necessary to bring them up in a good atmosphere
by providing them all the necessities of life, good education and a joyful childhood. It is
equally important to note that most of the parents try their  best to give their children good
upbringing and provide them best facilities. But in our country, unfortunately, there are
millions of orphans, who are mostly homeless, abandoned, runaway, vagabond and destitute
who are generally known as street children and can be seen in most of the urban areas
loitering, collecting waste papers, plastic and metal scraps from the dumping pits and public
places for their subsistence. They can also be seen begging at the road crossings, near the
religious places, markets, bus stops and railway stations. Many a times they indulge in petty
crimes like stealings, pick-pocketing and snatching for their survival. They are exploited by
anti-social elements and even by the police. Such children become hardened criminals when
they grow up. The girl child in this category is often sexually exploited and ultimately pushed
into flesh trade. They fall prey to all kinds of dreaded diseases. Education is a day dream for
them and even two square meals a day is luxury for them. These children are thus most
vulnerable to abuses, exploitation and depravity.
Ours is a welfare State and thus it is duty of the State to ensure that these hapless,
homeless orphan and street children are protected against neglect, cruelty and exploitation
and they must enjoy childhood by bringing them into the national mainstream by giving
every opportunity and protection they deserve in order to fully develop their potentials.
They should be provided with good education, nutrition, healthcare and good atmosphere
which will enable them to grow as responsible citizens. The Government have to establish
children homes with all facilities for the street children. The NGOs too have to be encouraged
for the upliftment of orphans and street children. The provisions of the Bill will go a long way
in creating a better society and a strong nation.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RAKESH SINGH
July 24, 2014.
4

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 5 of the Bill provides for the constitution of a Street Children Welfare Fund with
an initial corpus of rupees two thousand crore to be provided by the Central Government.
Clause 6 provides for establishment of children homes for street children. Clause 7 provides
for welfare measures to be undertaken by the appropriate Government for the street children.
Clause 8 provides that the Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by
Parliament by law in this behalf, provide adequate funds for carrying out the purposes of this
Act. Although, the expenditure relating to States shall be borne out of the Consolidated
Funds of  the respective States, the Central Government shall bear the expenditure in providing
assistance to the State Governments for carrying out the purposes of the Act and for
implementing the provisions of the Act in Union territories. The Bill, therefore, if enacted,
would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. Though, at this stage, it is
difficult to assess the exact expenditure, it is estimated that a sum of rupees five thousand
crore would be involved as recurring expenditure per annum.
A sum of rupees ten thousand crore would also be involved as a non-recurring
expenditure.

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 12 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of detail only.
The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.
6

GMGIPMRND—2391LS(S3)—05.11.2014.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the rehabilitation and welfare measures to be undertaken by the Union and
the State Governments for the street children who subsist on rag picking, begging,
shoe polishing, working as potters or performing acrobatics at road crossings
or public places and for their rehabilitation by taking their custody and
providing them due care, protection, education, vocational training
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Rakesh Singh, M.P .)