LOK jABHA 
CORRIGENDA 
to 
THE S'liL- PR~SSION OF IMHOP..A!.. TRAFFIC IN WMhN AND GIRLS 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 1978 
,rIy belAs 1.'1 traduced in lQk Sabha 7 
1. Page 1, in the long Ti. tle,-
!Q..r.. If&lpression'' ~~ "Suppression". 
2. Page 2, line 6,-
for "Shedule" m.a4 "Schedule" 
3. Page 2, line 22,-
!Q1:. "insti tuti ,." ~ "i!1sti tution; '." 
4. Page 5, line 37,-
be:::,·~~e "six" omit "a" 
5, Pag p 6~ line 1,-
!ru:. "sub- sec ti l ~) •• Iltad "sub- section (2)" 
6. Pc'-~P 6, lines 43 8>nc; 44,-
for "in rted" t!:..1Jl "in serted" 
7. Page 7, against line 42, 
fly'::-. "30 of 1958. " 
8. Page 1 1 , line 8,-
for "Special Court" 
NEW DELHI; 
July 25'. 1978 
Sravana 3, 1900 (Saka) 
in the margin,-
~ "20 of 195'8." 
~ "court" 

104 of 1956. 
As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA ON 
,. JUlI97R 
Bill No. 114 of 1978 
THE SUPPRESSION OF IMMORAL TRAFFIC IN WOMEN 
AND GIRLS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1978 
A 
BILL 
to amend the Su.preBsion of Immoral Traffic in Women and Girls Act, 
1956. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-ninth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Suppression of Immoral Traffic in Short 
Women and Girls (Amendment) Act, 1978. title 
5 (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
2. In the Suppression of Immoral Traffic in Women and Girls Act, 
1956 (hereinafter referred to as the prinCipal Act), in secti~n 2,-
(a) in clause (a), after the word "room", in both the places 
10 where it occurs, the word ", conveyance" shall be inserted; 
(b) after clause (a), the following'-c1ause shall be inserted, 
namely:-
'(aa) IIcorrective institution" means an institution,. by 
whatever name called (being . an institution established or 
IS licensed as such under section 21), in which women and girls, 
who are. in need of correction, may be detained under this Act, 
and includes a shelter where female undertrials may be kept 
in pursuance of this Act;'; 
and com-
mence-
ment, 
Amend-
Ment Of 
section 2. 

Insertion 
of new 
section 
2A. 
Rule of 
construc-
tion re-
garding 
enact-
ments not 
extending 
to Jammu 
and Kash-
mir. 
Amend-
ment 01' 
.eotioD " 
2 
.~ I ~c'~",r dale (c), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:-
'(c) "magistrate" means a magistrate specified in the second 
column of the Schedule as being competent to exercise the 
powers conferred by the section in which the expression 5 
occurs and which is specified in u.c first column of the Shedule;'; 
(d) clause (e) shall be omitted; 
(e) for clauses (f) and (g), the following clauses shall be sub-
stituted, namely:-
'(1) "prostitution" means the act of a female offering her 10 
body for promiscuous sexual intercourse for hire, whether in 
money or in kind, and whether offered immediately or other-
wise, and the expression "prostitute" shall be construed accord-
ingly; 
(g) "protective home" means an institution, by whatever 1 S 
name called (being an institution established or licensed as 
such under section 21), in which women and girls, who are in 
need of care and protection, may be kept under this Act, but 
does not include-
(i) a shelter where female undertrials may be kept in 20 
pursuance of this Act, or 
(ii) a corrective institutic '1,', 
3. After section 2 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
inserted, namely:-
"2A. Any reference in this Act to a law which is not in force 25 
in the State of Jammu and Kashmir shall, in relation to that State, 
be construed as a reference to the corresponding law, if any. In 
force in that State. ". 
4. In section 4 of the principal Ad, for sub-section (2), the following 
fiub-sect~on shall be substituted, namely: - 30 
"(2) Where any person over the age of eighteen years is proved-
«(I.) to be living with, or to be habitually in the company of, 
a prostitute; or 
(b) W have exercised control, direction or inftue~ over the 
movements of a prostitute in such a manner as to show that such 35 
person is aiding, abetting or compelling her prostitution; or 
(c) to be acting as a tout or pimp on behalf of a prostitute, 
itiball be prell:lmed, until the contrary is prwed, that such person 
t. .lQlowlngly living on the earnings of pr"Jstltution of another person 
within the meaning of 8ub·section (n.". 40 

5 
S. In section '1 of the principal Aot,-
(a) for sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be tub-
stituted, namely:-
II (1) Any woman or girl, who carries on prostitution and 
the person with whom such prostitution is carried on, in any 
premises-
(a) which are within the area or areas, notified 
under sub-section (3), or 
(b) which are within a distance of two hundred met-
10 res of any place of, public religious worship, educational 
institution, hostel, hospital, nursing home or such other puo-
lic place of any kind as may be notified in this behalf by 
the Commissioner of Police or magistrate in the manner 
prescribed, 
15 shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to three months."; 
20 
25 
~o 
(b) after sub-section (2), the following sub-sections shall be in-
serted, namely:-
"(3) The State Government may, having regard to the 
kinds of persons frequenting any area or areas in the State, the 
nature and the density of population therein and other .relevant 
eonsiderations, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct 
that prostitution shall not be carried on in such area or areas 
as may be specified in the notification. 
(4) Where a notification is issued under sub-section (3) in 
respect of any area or areas, the State Government shall define 
the limits of such area or areas in the notification with reason-
able certainty. 
(5) No such notification shall be issued so as to have effect 
from a date earlier than the expiry of a period of ninety day. 
after the date on which it is issued.". 
6. In section 9 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the words 
"having the custody. charge or care of any woman or girl", the words 
"baving the custody, charge or care o,f, or a position of authority over 
35 any woman or girl" shall be substituted.' 
Amend_ 
ment ot 
lectioD 7. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 9. 

SubstItu-
tion of 
new sec-
tioU3 for 
sec-
tion 10. 
Release on 
probation 
of good 
conduct 
or after 
due 
admoni-
tion. 
4 
7. For section 10 of the principal Act, the following .ectiOlUJ shall be 
substituted, namely:-
"10. (1) A pe;son convicted for the first time of any offence under 
section 7 or section 8 may, having regard to his age, character, ante-
cedents and the circumstances in which the offence was committed, 5 
be released by the court before which he is convicted, on probation 
of good conduct,-
(a) in a case arising in an area where the Probation of 
Offenders Act, 1958, is in force, in the manner provided in 
section 4 of that Act; and 10 
(0) in any other case, in the manner provided in sub-
section (1) of section 360 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1973. 
(2) A person convicted for the first time of any offence under 
section 7 or section 8 may, having regard to his age, character, ante- IS 
cedents and the circumstances in which the offence was committed, 
also be released after due admonition,-
(a) in a case arising in an area, where the Probation of 
Offenders Act, 1958, is in force, in the manner provided in section 
3 of that Act; and 
(b) in any other case, in the manner provided in sub-
section (3) of section 360 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1973. 
(3) The provisions of sections 5 to 17 (both inclusive) of the Pro-
20 
20 of 1958. 
2 of 1974. 
20 of 1958. 
2 of 1974. 
bation of Offenders Act, 1958, shall apply to the cases referred to ill 25 20 of 1958. 
clause (a) of sub-section (1) and clause (a) of SUb-section (2). 
(4) The provisions of sub-sections (2) to (10) (both inclusive) 
of section 360 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, shall apply 
to the cases referred to in clause (b) of sub-section (1) and clause 
(b) of sub-section (2). 30 
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973, or any other law for the time being in force, no per-
son convicted of an offence under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) 
of section 3, or under section 4, section 5, section 6 or section 9 sball 
be released on probation or after due admonition. 35 
(6) NotWithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) or 
sub-section (2),' if the person convicted of an offence under section 
7 or section 8 for the first ·time is a woman or girl, she shall be 
dealt with under this section and no sentence of imprisonment 
shall be awarded to her unless the court is satisfted that, having 40 
regard to the circumstances of the case, including the nature of 
the offence and the character of the offender, it would not be 
desirable to deal with her under this section; and if the court passes 
any sentence of imprisonment on the offender on first conviction, it 
shall record its reasons for doing so. 45 
(7) For the purpose of satisfying itself whether or not it would be 
desirable to deal with such woman or girl under this section, the court 
shall call for a report from the probation officer appointed under 
2 of 1974. 
2 of 1974. 

10 of 1958. 
5 
10 
IS 
20 
JO of 1958. 
25 
2 of 1974. 
38 of 1963. 30 
35 
45 
5 
the Prqbation of Offenders Act, 1958, and shall consider his report 
if any, and any other information available to it relating to the 
character and physical and mental condition of the oftender. 
lOA. (1) Where-
(a) a female offender is found guilty of, an offence under 
section 7 or section 8, and is not released under sub-section (1) 
or sub-section (2) of section 10; and 
(b) the character, state of health and mental condition of 
the offender and the other circumstances of the case are such 
that it is expedient that she should be subject to detention for 
luch term and such instruction and discipline as are conducive 
to her correction, 
it shall be lawful for the court to pass, in lieu of a sentence of im-
prisonment, an order for detention in a corrective institution for 
such term, not being less than two years and not being more than 
five years, as the court thinks fit: • 
Provided that before passing such an order-
(i) tL.! court shall give an opportunity to the offender to be 
heard and shall also consider any representaticn which the 
offender may make to the court as to the suitability of· the case 
for treatment in such an institution, as also the report of the 
probation officer appointed under the Probation of Oifenders 
Act, 1958; and 
(ii) the court shall record that it is satisfied that the ctlarac-
ter, state of health and mental condition of the offender and the 
other circumstances of the case are such that the offender is 
likely to benefit by such instruction and discipline as aforesaid. 
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (3), the provisions 
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, relating to appeal, re-
ference and revision, and of the Limitation Act, 1963, as to the period 
within which an appeal shall be filed, shall apply in relation to an 
order of detention under sub-section (1) as if the order had been a 
sentence of imprisonment for the same period as the period for 
which the detention was ordered. 
(3) Subject to such rules as may be made in this behalf, the 
State Government or authority £uthorised in 'this behalf may, 
at any time after the expiration of a six months from the date of an 
order for detention in a corrective institution, if it is satisfied that 
there is a reasonable probability that the offender will lead a useful 
and industrious life, discharge her from such an institution, without 
condition or with such conditions as may be considered fit, and grant 
her a written licence in such form as may he prescribed. 
(4) The conditions on which an offender is discharged under 
sub-section (3), may include reqUirements relating to residence of 
the offender and supervision over the offender's activities and move-
ments.". 
8. In section 12 of the princip:ll Act, in sub-section (4), for the words 
5 of 1898. and figures "sections 112 to 126 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898", 
the words and figures "sections 111 to 123 of the Code of Criminal Pro-
2 of 1974. 50 cedure, 1973" shall be substituted. 
Detention 
in a 
correc_ 
tive in-
stitution. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 11. 

Amend-
ment of 
eectlon 13. 
Amend-
ment 0' 
section 14. 
Ametlt.-
ment ot 
.~ction . 15. 
6 
I. In section 13 of the principal Act, for sulHecti.i- (2), the following 
IUb-~tioll'S shall be substituted. namely:-
• .. (2) The special police officer shall not be below the rank of an 
Inspector of Police. 
(2A) The District Magistrate may, if he considers it necessary S 
or expedient so to do, confer upon any retired police or military 
officer all or any of the powers conferred by or under this Act on a 
special police officer, with respect to particular cases or classes of 
cases or to cases generally: 
Provided that no such power shall be conferred on-
(a) a retired police officer unless such officer, at the time 
of his retirement, was holding a post not below the rank of an 
Inspector; 
10 
(b) a retired military officer unless such officer, at the 
time of his retirement, was holding a post not below the rank of IS 
a commissioned officer/to 
• 
10. In section 14 of the principal Act,-
(a) in the opening paragraph, for the words and figures "the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898", the words and figures "the Code 5 of 1891. 
of Criminal Procedure, 1973" shall be substituted; 20 2 ot 19" 
(b) in clause (iii) of the proviso. for the word "inspector", the 
word "sub-Inspector" shall be substituted. 
11. In section 15 of the principal Act,-
(a) . in sub-section (2), the following proviso shall be inserted at 
the end, namely: - 25 
"Provided that the requirement as to the respectable 
inhabitants being from the locality in which the place to be 
searched is situate shall not apply to a woman required to attend 
and witness the search."; 
(b) for sub-section (4), the following sub-section shall be substi- 30 
tuted. naanely:-
II (4) The specit.l police officer entering any premises under 
sub-section (1) shall be entitled to remove therefrom-
(a) any woman. if in his opinion, she is carrying on, or 
is. being made to carry on, or attempts are being made to 
make her carryon, prostitution; or 3S 
(b) any girl, if in his opinion she is under the age of 
twenty-one years and is carrying on, or is being made to 
carryon, or attempts are being made to make her carry on, 
prostitution."; 40 
(c) in sub-section (5), for the words "the girl". the words COthe 
woman or girl" shall be substituted; 
(d) after sub-section (6), the following sub-section shan be in-
..crted, namely:-
II (7) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, 45 2 of 1974. 
thall, so far as may be, apply to any search under this section 88 
they apply to any search made under the authority of a warrant 
issued under section 94 of the said Code. 

30 of 1958. 
5 
7 
12. For sections 16 and 17 of the principal Act, the following sections SUbstl-
shall be substituted, namely: - tution Of 
new sec-
tions for 
sectiona 
16 and 17. 
"16. (1) Where ~ magistrate has reason to believe from Informa- Rescue of 
tion received from the police or from any other person authorised woman or 
by the State Government in this behalf or otherwise, that- girl. 
(a) a woman is being made to carry on prostitution in II 
brothel, or 
(b) a girl a·pparently under the age of twenty-one years is 
living, or is carrying on, or is being made to carryon, prostltu-
10 tion in a brothel, 
he may direct a police officer not below the rank of a sub-Inspector to 
enter such brothel, and to remove therefrom such woman or ,girl and 
produce her before him. 
(2) The police officer, after removing the woman 01'-' girl, shall 
IS forthwith produce her before the magistrate issuing the 'order. 
20 
17. (1) When the special police officer removing a woman or girl 
under sub-section (4) of seCtion 15 or a PQlice officer rescuing a 
wc,man or girl under sub-section (1) of section 16, is for any reason 
unable to produce her before the appropriate magistrate as 
required by sub-section (5) of section 15, or before the 
magistrate issuing the order under SUb-section (2) of section 16, 
he shall forthwith produce her before the nearest magistrate of 
any class, who shall pass such orders as he deems proper for 
her safe cusbdy until she is produced before the appropriate 
magistra,te, or, as the case may be, the magistrate issuing the order: 
Provided that no woman or girl shall be-
(i) detained in custody under 'this sub-section for a period 
exceeding ten days from the date of the order under this sub-
section; or 
30 (H), restored to or placed in the custody of a person wflo may 
3S 
exercise a harmful influence over her. 
(2) When the woman or girl is produced before the appropriate 
magistrate under sub-section (5) of section 15 or the magistrate under 
sub-section (2) of section 16. he shall, after giving her an opportunity 
of being heard, cause an inquiry to be made as to the correctness of 
the information re::eivej tmder sub-section (1) of section 16, the age, 
character and antecedents at the woman or girl and the suitability of 
her parents, guardian 'Jr husband· for taking charge of her and the 
nature of the influence which the conditions in her home are likely 
to have on her if she is sent home, and. for this purpose, he may direct 
a probation officer appointed under the Probation of Offenders Act, 
1958, to inquire into the above circumstances and int::> the perso-
nality of the woman or girl and the prospects of her rehabilitation. 
(3) The magistrate may. while an inquiry is made into a case 
45 under sub-section (2), pass such orders as he ..:!eems proper for the 
Interme-
diate cus· 
tody of 
women 
and girla 
removed 
under 
section 15 
or rescued 
under sec-
tion 16. 

Amend-
menlof 
section 18. 
Substitu-
tion of 
new 
~ection tor 
section 19. 
Applica-
tiontor 
being 
kept 
in a pro-
tective 
home 
or provid-
ed care 
and protec-
tion by 
court. 
r' " 8 
lafe custody of the woman or girl: 
Provided that no woman or girl shall be kept in custody for 
this purpose for a period exceeding three weeks from the date of 
such an order, and no woman or girl shall be kept in the custody 
of a person likely to have a harmful influe~ce over her. S 
(4) Where the magistrate is satisfied, after making an inquiry 
as required under sub-section (2) ,-
(a) that the information received is correct; and 
(b) that she is in need of care and protection, 
he may, subject to the ,provisions of sub-section (5), make an order 10 
that such woman or girl be detained for such period, being not less 
than one year and not more than three years, as may be specified in 
the order, in a protective home, or in such other custody as he shall, 
for reasons to be recorded in writing, consider suitable: 
Provided that such custody shall not be that of a person or body J S 
of persons of a religious persuasion different from that of the woman 
or girl, and that those entrusted with the custody of the woman or 
girl, including the persons in charge of a protective home, may be 
required to enter into a bond which may, where necessary and 
feasible, contain undertakings based on directions relating to the 20 
proper care, guardianship, education, training and medical and 
psychiatric treatment of the woman or girl as well as supervision by a 
person appointed by the court, which will be in force for a period 
not exceeding three years. 
(5) In discharging his functions under sub-section (2), a magis- 25 
trate may summon a panel of five respectable persons, three of 
whom shall, wherever practicable, be women, to assist him; and may 
for this purpose keep a list of experienced social welfare workers, 
particularly women social welfare workers, in the field of suppres-
sion of immoral traffic in women and girls. 30 
(6) An appeal against an order made under sub-section (4). 
shall lie to the Court of Session whose decision on such appeal shall 
be finaL". 
13. In section 18 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the 
words "two hundred Y:irds", the words "two hundred metres" shall be 3S 
substituted. 
14. For section 19 of the principal Act, the following section shall 
'-'e substituted, namely:-
"19. (1) A woman or girl who is carrying on, or is being made 
to carry on, prostitution, may make gn application, to the magistrate 40 
within the local limits of whose jurisdiction she is carrying on, 
or is being made to carry on, prostitUtion, for an order that she may 
be-
(a) kept in a protective home, or 
(b) provided care and protection by the court in the IftaIUMl' 4S 
specified in sub·section (3). 

10 of lit 18. 
5 
lQ 
9 
(2) The magistrate may, pending inquiry under sub-section (3), 
dir~t that the woman or girl be kept in such custody as he may 
consIder prop'er, having regard to the circumstances of the case. 
(3) If the magistrate, after hearing the applicant and making 
sueh inquiry as he may consider necessary, including an inquiry 
by a probation officer appointed under the Probation Of Oftenders 
Act, 19M, into the personality, conditions at home and prospects of 
rehabilitation of the applicant, is satisfied that an order should be 
made under this section, he shall, for reasons to be recorded. mab 
an order that the applicant be kept,-
(i) in a protective home. or 
(ii) in a eorrective institution, or 
(iii) under the supervision of a person .appointed by the 
magistrate, 
1$ for such period as may be speeUied in the order.". 
20 
30 
35 
40 
15. In section 21 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words "as many protective 
homes under this Act as it thinks fit and such homes'" the words 
"as many protective homes and corrective institutions under this 
Act as it thinks fit and such homes and institutions" 'shall be substi-
tuted; 
(b) in sub-sections (2), (7), (8) and (10), for the words "pro-
tective home", wherever they occur, the words "protective home or 
corrective institution" shall be substituted; 
(c) in sub-section (3) ,-
(i) in the &paning paragraph and in the ftrat proviso, for the 
words "protective· home", the WOl"ds "protective· home or "aorree-
'tive institution" shall be lubltituted; 
(ii) after th,e second proviso, the following pl'()viso shall be 
inserted, namely:-
• "Provided also that a person or authority maintaining 
any corrective institution at the commencement of the Sup-
pression of: Immoral Traffic in Women and Girls (Amend-
ment) Aot, 1978, shall be allowed a period of six months 
from such commencement to make an application for such 
licence." ; 
(d) after sub-section (9), the following sub-section shall be inser-
ted, namely:-
. "(9A) The State Government or an authority authorised ~Y 
it in this behalf may, subject to any rules that may be made 10 
Amend-
ment 
of sec-
tion 21. 

Amend-
ment of 
section 22. 
lnsertiotl 
of new 
sections 
22A 
and 22B. 
Power to 
establish 
Special 
Courts. 
10 
this behalf, transfer an inmate of a protective home to another 
protective home or to a corrective institution or ~n inmate 
of a corrective institution to another corrective institution or to a 
protective home, where such transfer is considered desirable 
having regard to the conduct of the person to be transferred. $. 
the kind of training to be imparted and other cireumstanees of 
the case: 
Provided that-
(a) no woman or girl who is transferred under this 
mb-section shall be required to stay in the home or institu- III 
tion to which she is transferred for a period longer than she 
was required to stay in the home or institution from which 
she was transferred; 
(b) reasons shall be recorded for every order of trans-
fer under this suh-section.". IS 
16. In section 22 of the principal Act, for the words, brackets, letter 
and figure "a Magistrate as defined in clause (c) of section 2", the words 
"a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of the first class" 
shall be substituted . 
.... 
1'7. After section 22 of the principal Act, the following sections shall 20 
be inserted, namely:-
'22A (1) If the State Government is satisfied that it is necessary 
for the purpose of providing for speedy trial of offences under this 
Act in any district or metropolitan area, it may, by notification in the 
Oftlcial Gazette and after consultation with the Hip Court, establish 2.5 
one or IJ1A)re Courts of Judicial Magistrates of the ftrst clus, or, al 
the case may be, Metropolitan Magistrates, in such district or metro-
politan area. 
(2) Unless otherwise directed by the High CO\lrt, a court estab-
.. lished under lII1b-section (1) shall exercise jurisdiction only in respect 30 
of cases under this Act. 
(3) Subject to the provisions of su1Hection (2), the jurisdiction 
and pcmrers of the presiding ofticer of a court established under sub-
section (1) in any district or metropolitan area shall extend through. 
out the district or the metropolitan area, as the case may be. 35 
(4)' Subject to the foregoing provisions of this section, a court 
established under sub-section '(1) in any district or metropolitan area 
shall be deemed to be a court established under sub-section (1) of 
secqon 11, or, as the case may be, sub-section (1) of section 16, of the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 and the provisions of that Code 40 2 of 1974. 
shall apply accwdingiy in relation to pch ,4:oUris. 
~ I 

~ of 1974. 
Ii 
Expla114tiOn.-In this section, "High Court" has the same mean-
ing as in clause (e) of, section 2 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1973. 
2 of 1974. S 
22B. Notwithstanding anything conta41ed in the Code of Crimi-
nal Procedure, 1973, the State Government may, if it considers it 
necessary so to do, direct that offences under this Act shall be tried 
in a summary way by a magistrate [including the presiding officer 
of a Special Court established. under sub-section (1) of section 22A] 
and the provisions of sections 262 to 265 (both inclusive) of the said 
Code, shall, as far as may be, apply to such trial:· JO 
Provided that in the case of any conviction in a summary trial 
under this seetion, it shall be lawf,ul for the magistrate to pass a 
sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding one yeaI': 
Provided further that when at the commencement of or in the , 
IS course of a summary trial under this section, it appears to the 
magistrate that the nature of the case is such that a sentence of 
imprisonment for a term exceeding one year may have to be passed 
or t~t it is, for any other reason, undesirable to try the case sum-
marily, the magistra~ shall, after hearing the parties, record an 
.z~ order to that effect and thereafter recall any witness, who may have. 
been examined and proceed to hear or rehear the case in the manner 
provided by the said Code.'. 
18. In section 23 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2) ,-
(a) in clause (b), after the words, brackets and figures "under 
sub-section (1) of section 10", the words "where the women or girls 
are without a home" shall be inserted; 
(b) after clause (b), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:-
"(bb) the discharge of an offender under sub-section (l) of 
3e section lOA from a corrective institution and the form of licence 
to be granted to such offender;"; 
40 
(c) for clause (c), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:- I 
"(c) the detention and keeping in protective homes or, as the 
case may be, in corrective institutions of women and girls under 
this Act and their maintenance;"; 
(d) for clause (g), the following clause shall be substituted, 
DaXDely:- I 
"(g) (i) the establishment, maintenance, management and 
superintendence of protective homes and corrective institutions 
under section 21 and the appointment, powers and duties of 
persons employed iri such homes or institutions; 
Power of 
court to 
try cases 
sum-
marily. 
Amend-
mento! 
JeCtlon 
23. 

(it) the form in which an application for a licence may be 
made and the particulars to be contained in such applicatiorl; 
(iii) the procedure for the issue or renewal of a licence, 
the time within which such licence shall be issued Olj renewed 5 
and the procedure to be followed in making a full and complete 
investigation in respect of an application for a licence; 
(iv) the form of a licence and the conditions to be specified 
therein; 
(v) the manner in which the accounts of a protective home 
and a corrective institution shall be maintained and audited; 10 
(vi) the maintenance of registers and statements by a 
licensee and the form of such regieters and statements; 
(vii) the care, treatment, maintenance, training, instruc-
tion, control and discipline of the inmates of protective homes ) 5 
and corrective institutions; 
(viii) the visits to and communication with such inmates; 
(ix) the temporary detention of women and girls sentenced 
to detention in protective homes or in corrective institutions until 
arrangements are made for sending them to such homes or.20 
Institutions; 
(.:r) the transfer of an inmate from-
(4) one protective home to another, or to a corrective 
inlUtution, 
(b) OD.e corrective institution to another or to a protec-
~~~ ~ 
under sub-section (9A) of section 21; 
(:ri) the transfer in pursuance of an order of the court from 
a protective home or a corrective institution to a prison of a 
woman or girl found to be incorrigible or exercising bad inftu-
ence upon other inmates of the protective home or the corrective 30 
institution and the period of her detention in such prison; 
(~i) the transfer to a protective home or corrective institu. 
tion of women or girls sentenced under section 7 or aeetion 8 
and the period of their detention in such home or institution: 
(:riii) the discharge of inmates from a protective home or 35 
correctiVe institution either absolutely or subject tG condlUoll8, 
and their arrest in the event of breach of such conditions; 
(xiv) the grant of permission to inmates to absent themselves 
for short periods; 
(.xv) the inspection of protective homes and corrective inst1~ 40 
tutions and other institutions in which women and girls rna, be 
kept, detained and maintained;". 

s 
10 
IS 
20 
it. in the principal Act, the following Schedule shall be inSerted at the iriaertiorl 
end, namely:- of new Schedule. 
Section 
7 (1) 
11 (4) 
12(4) 
15 (5) 
16 
13 
19 
20 
22B 
"THE SCHEDULE 
[See section 2 (c)] 
Magistrate competent to exercise the powers 
------------------
District Magistrate. 
Metropolitan Magistrate or Judicial Magistrate of the 
First Class. 
Metropolitan Magistrate or Judicial Magistrate of the 
First Class. 
Metropolitan Magistrate. Judicial MaJistrate of _the 
First Class, District Magistrate or Sub-Divisional 
Magistrate. 
Metropolitan Magistrate, Judicial Magistrate of the 
First Class, District Magistrate or Sub-Divisional 
Magistrate. 
District Magistrate or Sub-Divisional Magistrate. 
Metropolitan 
First Class, 
Magistrate. 
Magistrate, Judicial Magistrate of the 
District Magistrate or Sub-Divisional 
District Magistrate, Sub-Divisional Magistrate or any 
Executive Magistrate specially empowered by the· 
State Government. 
Metropolitan Magistrate or Judicial Magistrate of the 
First Class.", 
--_._--------------
2S 20. In section 18 of the Probation of Offenders Act, 1958, the words Amend-
mentof 
Act 
and figures "or the Suppression of Immoral Traffic in Women and Girls 
104 of 1958. Act, 1956" shall be omitted. 
20 of 
1958. 

ATATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Suppression of Immoral Traffic in Women and Girls Act, 1956, 
was enacted in pursuance of an International Convention signed at New 
York on 9th May, 1950. The Act came into force on 1st May, 1958. Its 
principal object is to prevent commercialisation -Of the vice and trafficking 
among women and girls. Experience gained in the implementation of the 
Act has brought to light certain inadequacies. It is proposed to amend the 
Act to make good these inadequacies. While fo;rmulating the amend-
ments, the recommendations made by an Expert Committee appointed 
by the Department of Social Welfare, toe Law Commission as contained 
in its Sixty-fourth Report and the Committee on the Status of Women 
.in India were also considered. The main amendments proposed are as 
follows:-
(i) It is proposed to empower the State Governments to declare 
certain a-reas, in the public interest, to be places where prostitution 
will be prohibited. While notifying such areas, due regard will be 
had to the kinds of persons frequenting such areas, the nature and 
density of populat:on in those areas and other relevant considerations. 
(ii) In order to have adequate man-power to deal with offences 
under the Act, it is proposed that the special police officers to be 
appointed under section 13 of the Act shall not be below the rank 
of an Inspector of Police. The existing provision provides for the 
appointment of police offi,cers not below the Tank of an Assistant 
Commissioner, a Superintendent of Police or Deputy Superintendent 
of Police as special police officers. An enabling provision is 
being made to empower the District Magistrates to appoint retired 
police qr military officers as Flpecial police officers with a view to 
mobilising additional man-power 'resources available in the com-
munity. 
(iii) In view of the practical difficulties in obtaining necessary 
co-operation from respectable local women, the provision requiring 
the presence of a woman witness of the locality during a search, is 
proposed to be modified to provide that the woman witness need not 
necessarily be of the locality in which the place to be searched is 
situated, 
(iv) Under section 10 of the Act, the provisions of section 562. of 
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, relating to probation and 
admonition are applicable to persons convicted of certain offences 
under the Act. The Probation of Offenders Act, 1958, which was 
enacted subsequently, expressly provides that nothing in that Act 
shall affect the provisions of the 1956 Act. As such, section 562 of 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, (corresponding provision of the 
1973 Code) continues to apply to offences under the 1956 Act. It 
is proposed to provide that in areas where the Probation of Offenders 

15 
Act is in force, that Act will apply to the offences under sections 7 
and 8 of the 1956 Act and where it is not in force, the provisions of 
the Code of Criminal Procedure would be applicable. But in the 
State of Jammu and Kashmtr, where both the Probation of Offenders 
Act, 1958, and the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, are not appli-
cable, it is proposed to provide for the application of the correspond-
ing law in force in that State. 
(v) The Act does not contain any provision for wmmary 
trial of cases apprehended under the Act, as a result; of 
which the disposal of cases often takes a long time. This lacuna 
leaves enough scope for unscrupulous elements involved in 
the profession of commercialised prostitution to manipulate material 
for delaying cases in Court to their advantage and defeating the pur-
pose of the Act. It is, therefore, proposed to add an enabling p"Ovt .. 
sion to provide for summary trial of cases under the Act. The pro-
posed provision will not, however, preclude the magistrate from 
adopting a regular procedure if it is considered necessary to do so in 
the interests of justice. 
(vi) It is proposed to include an enabling prOVISion for the 
setting up of Special Courts to deal with all or any of the offences 
under the Act. 
2. The other amendments proposed are minor and consequential ID 
nature. 
P. C. CHUNDD. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 27th April, 1978. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
~lause 17 of the Bill w hieh proposes to insert a new section 22A in the 
Suppression of Immoral Traffic in Women and Girls Act, 1956, empowers 
the State Governments, after consultation with the High Courts concerned, 
to establish one or more Courts of Judicial Magis~ates of the First-Class, 
or, as the ease may be, of Metropolitan Magistira!tes for the speedy trial oJ 
offences under the Act in any district or metropolitan area. Expenditure 
in respect of Special Courts if and when established fot the Union terri-
tories will be met from out of the Consolidated Fund of India. This ex-
penditure will be of a recurring nature only and is not likely to exceed 
Rs. 35,000 annually. 
2. The ~vis1ons ~of the Bill do not involve any expenditure o:f a nOQ-
recurring nature from·the ConsolidaWd Fund Qf Indi,. 
16 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 18 of the Bill seeks to amend section 23 of the Suppression of 
Immoral Traffic in Women and Girls Act, 1956 so as to empower the 
Central Government to make rules to provide for the matters now being 
included in the Act. These matters relate, among other things, to the 
discharge of an offender under sub-section (3) of new section lOA from 
a corrective institution and the form of licence to be granted to such 
offender and to provisions for the establishment, maintenance, manage-
ment and superintendence of corrective institutions and the detention 
and keeping in such corrective institutions of persons committing certain 
offences under the Act. The matters in relation to which rules may be 
made under this section are matters of detail or procedure and as such 
the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character. 
17 

DeJlnl-
tIons. 
Punish-
ment for 
living 
On the 
earnings 
of prosti-
tution. 
ANNEXURE 
ExTRACTS nOM 'l'HE SUPPRESSION OF IMMORAL TRAFFIC IN WOMb 
AND GDtLS ACt, 1956 
(104 ot" 1956) 
•• • • • • 
Z. In this Ac't:; ~less the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "brothel" includes any house. room, or place or any porlion 
of any house, rO<m1 or plnce, which is used for purposrea of prostitu-
tion for the gain of another person Or for the mutual gain of tWei or 
more prostitutes; 
• • • • 
(c) "Magistrate" means a District Magistrate, a Sub-Divisional 
Magistrate, a Presidency Magistrate, or a Magistrate Qf the first class 
specially empowered by the State Government, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, to exercise jurisdiction under this Act; 
• • • • -.. 
(e) "prostitute" means a female who offers her body for pro-
miscuous sexual intercourse for hire, whetHer in money qr in kind; 
(f) "prostitution" means the act of a female offering her body 
for promiscuous sexual intercourse for hire, whether in money or 
in kind; 
(g) IIprotective home" means an insititution, by whatever name 
called, in which women and girls may be kept in pursuance of this 
Act and includes-
(i) a shelter where female undertrials may be kept in pur-
suance of this Act; and 
(ii) a corrective inStitution in which women and girls rescU-
ed and detained under this Act may be imparted such training 
and instruction and subjected to such disciplinary and moral 
influences as are likely to conduce to their reformation and the 
prevention of offences under 'this Act; 
• • • • • 
4. (1) • • • • • 
(2) Where any person is proved-
(a) to be living with, or to be habitually in the company of, a 
prostitute; or ' 
(b) to have exercised control, direction or influence over the 
movements of a prostitute in such a manner as to show that such 
person is aiding. abetting or compelling her prostitution; or 

,. •.. 
5 ot 1898, 
i of 1898, 
5 of 1898. 
19 
(c) to be acting as. a tout or pimp on behalf of a pr08titUtt, 
it shall be presumed, until the contrary :s proved, that such person i~ 
knowingly living on the earnings of prostit\ltion of another person within 
the 'meaning ,of sub-section (1): 
Provided that no such presumption shall be. drawn in tht case of a 
son or daughter of a prostitute, if the son or daughter is below the age of 
eigh teen years. 
• • • • 
1~ (1) Any woman or girl who carries on prostitution, :md the person 
with whom such prostitution is carried on, in any premises which are 
within a distance of two hundred yards Qf any place of public religious 
worship, educational institution, hostel, hospital, nursing home or such 
otht!r public place of any kind as may be notified in this behalf by the 
Commissioner of Police or District Magjstrate in the manner prescribed., 
shall be punishable with impriso.nment for a term whic:-h may extend to 
three months. 
... ... ... • 
9. (1) Any person who having the custody, charge or care of any 
woman or girl, causes or aids or abets the seduction for prostitution of 
that woman or girl shall be punishable on first conviction with rigorouS! 
imprisonment for a tenn of not less than one year and not more than 
three years,· and also with fine whiCh may extend to one thousand rupees . 
... ... • • 
10. (1) (a) A person convicted for the first time of any Qffence under 
sub-section .. (2) of section 3, or under ~tion 4, section 5, section 7 or 
section 8 may, having regard to his age, character, antecedents and the 
circumst&l'lCes in which 'the offence was committed,' be releaSed by the 
~rt',beforewhioh he is convicted on probation of good conduct in the 
manner provided. in iub-section (0 of section 562 of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1898. " 
, (b) A personconvict$d for the flrst time of any offence under section 
7 or section 8 may, having regard ro. hi&. a,ge, character, antecedents and 
the circuD".stances in which the offence was committed, also be released 
with admonition in the manner provided for in sub-section (lA) of 
seetlon' '56! of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898. . 
(c) TheprovisiOJils of t;ub-section (2); sub-section (3) and sub-section 
(4) -of seC'tion 562 llnd section 563 and section 564 of the Code of Criminal 
ProteduTe, 1898; shall apply to eases -referred to in clause (a) and 
cllU!Ie (b). 
, . 
(2) Where a woman or girl is convicted of any offence under section 7 
qr section 8 and is not rel'Nlsed under clause (a) of sub-section (1) on 
probation of good cbnduct or under clause (b) of that sub-section with 
admonition,the court convicting the woman or girl may, having regard 
to the age, c~racter', antecede-nts of the wdman or girl and the circums-
tanctis in which the offence was corrlmitted, pass 'in lieu of the sentence of . .' ., , 
Prostitu-
tion in at 
in the vi· 
cinity of 
public 
ph'ce!J. 
Seduction 
of a wo-
man or 
Jlrl in 
custody. 
Probation 
of good 
conduct 
ane! de-
tention In 
protective 
home. 

Security 
fOr I('od 
behaviour 
from 
babitual 
offenders. 
Special 
police 
oftlcer 
and advi-
sory body. 
Otlence. 
to 
be cogni-
zable. 
imprisonnlent or fine, a sentence of detention in a protective home for A 
period of not ~s than two years and not more than five years. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Pro-
cedure, 1898, or any other law for the time being in force, no person COIl- • Of 1898. 
victed under sub-section (1) 01 section 3 or under section 6 or section 9 
shah be released on probation or with admonition. 
• • • • • 
12. (1) .' • • • • 
(4) When a Magistrate receives information from the police or other 4 
wise that any person within the local limits of his jurisdiction habitually 
commits, or attempts to commit, or abets the commission of, any offence 
under this Act, such Magistrate may require such person to show cause 
why he should not be ordered to execute a bond with sureties for his 
good behaviour for such period not exceeding three years as the Ma,is-
trate thinks fit and thereupon the provisions of sections 112 to 126 of the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, shall apply in such a case . 
• • • • • 
13. (1) • • • • • 
(2) The speCial poliCe ~mcer &hall not be below the rank of-
(a) an Assistant Commissioner of Police in the presidencJ 
towns of Madras and Calcutta; 
(b) a Superintendent of· Police in the presidency town of Bom-
bay; and 
(c) a Deputy Superintendent of Folice elsewhere . 
• • • • • 
14. NlJtwithstanding anything containc:..-d, in the Code of Criminal Pr0-
• Of 1891. 
cedure, 1898, any offence punishable under this Act shall be deemed to 5 of 1888 
be a cognizable offence within the meaning of that Code: 
Provided that, notwithstanding anything contained in that Code,-
(i) arrest without warrant may be made only by the special 
police officer or under his direction ol'guidance, or subject to his 
prior approval; 
(ii) when the special police officer requires any oftl.cer- subordi-
nate to him to arrest without warrant othCl'Wise than in his presence 
any person tor an offence under this Act, he shall give that 8ubordi-
nate officer an order in writing, specifying the person to be arrested 
and the offence foe which the arrest is being made; and the latter 
o,fficer before arresting the person shall infonn him of the substaRde 
of the order and, on being required by such person, show him the 
order; 
, (iii) any police officer not below the rank of inspector specially 
authQrlsed by the special police officer may, if he has reason to be-
lieve that on account of deh.lY involved in ol1taining the order of the 
spee[al police offtcer, any vduable evidence relating to any offence 
UIIder this Act is likely to he destroyed or concealed, or the person 

who has committed or is SllSpected to have committed the offence Ii 
likely to; elCam at' if the name and address of such a person is un-
known or there is reason to suspect that a false name or address has 
been given, arrest the person concerned withO\lC such order, but in 
such a case he shall report, as soon as may be, to the special police 
ofHcer the arrest and the circumstances in which the arrest was made. 
15. (1) • • • • • 
(2) Before making a search under sub-section (1), the special police 
ofIlcer shall call upon two or more respectable inhabitants (at least one of 
whom shall be a woman) of the locality in which the place to be search-
ed is situate, to attend and witness the search, and may issue an order 
in writing to them or any of them 80 to do. 
• • • • • 
(4) The special police officer entering any premises under sub-sectio) 
(1) shall be entitled to remove therefrom any girl, if in his opinion she is 
under the age of twenty-one years and is carrying on or is being made to 
carry on, or attempts are being made to make her carryon, prostfiution. 
(5) The special police ofticer, after removing the girl under sub-s~ 
tion (4) shall forthwith produce her before the appropriate Magistrate. 
• • • • • 
Search 
without 
warrant. 
16. (1) Where a Magistrate has reason to believe, from lnformatioD Rescue of 
received from the police or otherwise, that a girl apparently under the IirL 
age of twenty-one years, is living, or is carrying on, or is being made to 
carryon prostitution, in a brothel, he may direct the special police offi-
cer to enter such brothel, and to remove therefrom such girl and produce 
her before him. 
(2) The special police officer after removing the girl shall forthwith 
~roduce her before the Magistrate issuing the order. 
1'7. (1) When the special police officer removing a girl under sub-
section (4) of section IS or rescuing a girl under sub-section (1) of sec-
tien 16, fails to produce her immediately before the Magistrate as requir-
ed by sub-section (5) of section 15 or sub-section (2) of section 16, he 
shall forthwith produce her before the nearest Magistrate of any class, 
who shall pass such orders as he deems proper for her safe custody until 
she is produced before the appropriate Magistrate. 
(2) When the girl is produced before the appropriate Magistrate he 
shall, after giving the girl an opportunity of beiDg heard, cause an en-
quiry to be made as to the correctness of the information received under 
sub-section (1) of section 16 and the age of the girl and, if satisfied that 
the information received is correct and the girl is under the age of twenty-
one years, he may, subject to the provisions ot the next sub-section, make 
an order that such girl be detained for such period as may be specified in 
the order in a protective home or such other custody as he, for reasons 
to be recorded in writing, shall c..onsider suitable: 
Inter-
mediate 
custody 
ot girls 
removed 
under 
lect10n 
15 or 
rescued 
under 
section 
16. 

Closure of 
brothel anII 
evktlonof 
offenders 
from the 
premilel. 
Apptid. 
tion for 
bem, 
keptJaa 
protectt. 
home. 
Provided that such custody shall not be that of a person, Of body ot 
p.ersons, of a religious persuasion different from that·of the girl. 
(3) In discharging his functions under sub.section (2), a Magistrate 
q&a)' summon a panel of five respectable person!!, three of wholll .shall 
~berever practicable be women, to assist him; and may for this purpose 
keep a list of experienced social welfare workers, particularly women 
social weliare workers, in the field of suppression of immoraltrafttQ in 
women and girls. 
(4) Against every order under sub-section (2) a,n appeal Iihall lie, kI 
th~ Sessions Judge whosB Qecision on 'Such appeal shall be final. 
18. (1) A Magistrate may, on receipt of information from the police 
or otherwise, that any house, room, place or any portion thereof within 
a distance of two hundred yards of any public place referred to in sub-
lection (1) of section 7, is being run or uSeQ as a brothel by any person, 
or is being used by prOltitutesfor carrying on their trade, issue notice 
on the owner, lessor or landlord of such house, room, place or portion 
or the agent of the owner, lessor or landlord' or on the tenant, Jessee. 
occupier of, or any other person in charge of such house, room, place, 
or portion, to show cause within seven days of the receipt of the notice 
_)ly the saine should not be attached for improper user thereof; and if, 
a1ier hearing the person concerned, the Magistrate is satisfied that the 
house, room, place, or portion is being used as a brothel or for carrying 
on prostitution, then the Magistrate may pass orders-
, . ('4) directing eviction of the occupier within seven days of : the 
. passing of the order from the house, room, place, or portiOD; 
(1)>) directing that before letting it out during the period of ahe 
year immediately af.ter the passing of the order, the owner, leSSoJ; 
or lal'ldlord or the agent of the owner, lessor or landlord ~han 
obtain the previous approval 01 the Magistrate: . 
, Provided that, if the Magistrate finds that the: owner, lessor or land-
lord as well as the agent of the owner, lessor or landlbrd, was innocent 
of the improper user of the house, room, place or portion, he may cauae 
the sam~ to be restored to the owner, lessor or landlord, or the ,aa. of 
the 0VVli8l, lessor or landlord, with a direction that the house, rqam.,place 
or portion. shall no~ be leased out, or otherwise given po~s~ssifm of, :to Qr 
fOr the be~efit of the person who was allowing the irpprope.r user there~. 
• • • ., • / * 
'It. (n A 'woman or girl who is carrying on, oris being mad~ tocill'l'y 
on, prostitution. may make an application to the Magistrate within: the 
local limits of whose jurisdiction she is carrying on, or is being made to 
carry on, prostitution, for an order that she ·may be kept in a prot~tive 
_me. f· 
) .Jr 
.' (2) If after· hearing the applioant and making such ihquiryas he may 
acmsider necessary, the Magistrate is satisfied that an order 'should be 
mMie under this section, then, he shall make an order,for reasons to be 
1'eCbrded, that the applicant be kept in a protective homp. for such pcri6[1 
.. may be specified in the order, 
• • • • • 

21. (1) The State Government may in its discretion establish as man, 
protective homes under this Act as it thinks fit and such homes, when 
..tBblilhedi shall be maintained in such manner as may be prescribed. 
(2) No person or no authority other than the State Government shall, 
after the commencement of this Act, establish or maintain any protec-
tive' home except under and' in accordance with the conditions of, a licence 
issUed under this section by the Stat,e Government. ' ,<:: 
(3) Tb,e State ,Government may, on application made to it in this behalf 
by a'person or authority, issue to such person or authority a licence in 
the prescribed form ,for ~bli8hing and maintaining or as the ,cue may 
be, for maintaining a protective home and a licence so issued may contain 
such conditions as the State Government may think fit to impose in 
accordance with the rules made under this Act: 
Provided that any such condition may require that the management 
of '1Ibe protective 'home shall, wherever practicable, be entrusted to 
women: 
Provided further that a person or authority mainfaining any protec-
tive home at the commencement of this Act shall be allowed a period of 
six months from such commencement to make an application for such 
licence. 
• • • • • 
(7) Where any person or authority to whom a licence has been. 
granted under this Act or any agent or servant of such person or 
authority commits a breach of any of the conditions thereof or any of 
the provisions of this Act or of any of the rules made under this Act, 
or where the State Government is not satisfied with the condition, 
management or superiI;ltendence ot any protective hOllile, the State 
Government may, without prejudice to any other penalty which may 
have been incurred under this Act, for reasons to be recorded, revoke 
the licence by order in writing: 
Provided that no such order shall be made until an opportunity is 
given to the holder of the licence to show caUSe why the licence shall 
not be revoked. 
(8) Where a licence in respect of. a protectiVe home has been revoked 
Wlder the foregoing'sub-section such protective home shall ceaSe to func-
tion 'from the date of such revocation . 
• • • • 
, " (10) Whoever establishes or maintains a protectIve home except in 
'lc;cordance with the' provisions of this section, shall be punishable in 
the case of a first offence with fine which may extend to one thousand 
rupees and in the case of second or subsequent offence with imprison-
ment' for a 'term which may extend to one year, or with fine which 
may 'extend to' two thousand' rupees, or with both . 
. ' 22., No Court" inferior to that of a Magistrate as defined in clause (e) 
of section 2 shall try any offence under section 3, section 4, section 5, 
section 6, section 7 or section 8. 
PrtJtective 
homes~ , 
Trials. 

Power to 
make 
13. (1) • • • • • 
rules. (2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the fore-
lOing powers, such rules may provide for-
• • • • • 
(b) the placing in custody of women and girls released under 
sub-section (1) of section 10 or for whose safe custody orders have 
been passed under sub-section (1) of section 17 and their maintenance; 
(c) the detention and keeping in protective homes of women 
and girls under sub-section (2) of section 10, sub-section (2) of 
section 17 and section 19 and their maintenance; 
• • • • • 
(g) (i) the establishment, maintenance, management and super. 
tntendence of protective homes and the appointment, powers and 
duties of persons employed in such homes; 
(ii) the form in which an application for a licence may be made 
and the particulars to be contained in such application; 
(iii) the procedure for the issue or renewal of a licence, the time 
within which such licence shall be tBlued or renewed and the 
procedure to be followed in making a full and complete investi· 
gation in respect of an application for a licence; 
(iv) the form of a licence and the conditions to be specified 
therein; .. 
(v) the manner in which the accounts of a protective home "hlUl 
be maintained and audited; 
(vi) the maintenance of registers and statements by a licent~ 
and the form of such registers and statements; 
(vii) the care, treatment, maintenance, training, instruction, 
control and discipline of the inmates of protective homes; 
(viii) the visits to and communication with such inmates; 
(ix) the temporary detention of· women and girls sentenced fa 
detention in protective homes until arrangements are made for send· 
ing them to such homes; 
(x) the transfer of a woman or girl from one protective home 
to another; 
(xi) the transfer in pursuance of an order of the court from a 
protective home to a prison of a woman or girl found to be incorrigi-
ble or exercising bad infiuence upon other inmates of the protective 
home and the period of her detention in such prison; 
(xii) the transfer to a protective home of women or girls sen-
tenced under section 7 or section 8 and the period o~ their detention 
in such home; 
(xiii) the discharge of inmates from a protect;ve home either 
absolutely or subject to conditions, and their arrest in the event af 
breach of such conditions; 
(xiv) the grant of. permiSSion to inmates to absent themse'lves 
for short periods; 

(%t1) the inspection of protective homes and other institutlolll ID 
which women and girls may be kept, detained and maintained; 
• • • • • I •• 
• 
ExTRACT FROM THE PROBATION 01' OrrENDERS Ar:r, 1958 
(20 OF 1958) 
• • • • .. 
18. Nothing in this Act shall affect the provisions of section 31 of the 
8 of 1897. Reformatory Schools Act, 1897, or sub-section (2) of section 5 of the 
2 of 1947. Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947 or the Suppression of Immoral Trame 
104 of 1958. in Women and Girls Act, 1956, or of any law in force in any State relating 
to juvenile offenders or horstal schools. 
• • • • • 
Saving 
oioper •• 
tion of 
certain 
enact-
menta • 

~ .. f. 'f .. 
LOK SARnA 
A 
BILL 
to amend the Suppression of Immoral Traffic in Women and Girls Act, 
1956. 
(Shri Pratap Chandra ChUMe1"t. 
• . Minister of EducatiOn, 
~ Social Welfare and Culture), 