LOK SABHA 
CORHIGENDA 
to 
THE NORTH-EASTERN COUNCIL BILL, 1969 
(To be/As intr~d~ced in Lok Sabha) 
1. Page 2, line 16,-
for "sub-section" read "section" --
2. Page 3, line 44,-
after "Council" 
3. In the Docket page,-
insert " " , 
.f.Q.£ "setitng" read "setting" 
NEW DELHI; 
December 13. 1969 
Agrahayana-~~IB91 (Saka) 

ReJUla-
lion 1 of 
19M. 
Ae INTRODUCD> IN LOK SABRA ON 
'\ 50tC 
f i· . : .. am No. 115 of I'" 
THE NORTH-EASTERN COUNCIL BILL, 1969 
A 
BILL 
to pl'ovide for the setting up of a Council for the north·eastern Gr.eas oj 
India to be called the North~Eastern CounciL and for matters con-
nected therewith. 
BE it enacted by Parliatpcnt in the Twentieth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the North-Eastern Council Act, 1969. Short 
title lAd (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Centra] Government commeDe,-
5 may, by notification in the Oftlcial Gazette, appoint. ment. 
Z. In ¢is Act, unless the context otherwise requlres,-- Deftni~ 
(a) "Council" means the North-Eastern . Council 
under this Act; 
established Hons. 
(b) "Meghalaya" means the autonomous State known itS MeghB-
10 laya constituted under section 3 of the Assam Reorganisation (Megha· 
laya) Act, 1969: 
J5 
(c) "North-East Frontier Agency" has the meaning Ilssigned to 
it in the North-East Frontier Areas (Administration) Regulation, 
1954; and 
(d) "State" includes Meghalaya, the Union territories of Mani-
pur and Tripura and the North-East Frontier Agency. , J 

Ilatablish-
mentand 
Composi-
tion of 
the· North-
.... rn 
Council. 
Functiol1l 
of the 
Council. 
M •• tin,. 
of the 
Council. 
2 
3. There shall be a Council to be called the North-Eastern Council 
which shall consist of the following members, namely:--
(a) the Governor of Assam, who shall be the Chairman thereof; 
(b) the Chief Ministers of Assam and Meghnlaya; 
(c) a Minister each from the State of Assam and from Megha- 5 
laya to be nominated by the Governor on the recommendation of 
the Chief Minister concerned; 
(d) the Administrators 01 the Union territories of Manipur and 
Tripura: and 
(e) the Chief Ministers of Manipur and Tripura: 
Provided that if at any time the Government of Nagaland expresses 
its desire to be represented on the Council, the Chief Minister of that 
State and one other Minister to be nominated by the Governor shall also 
be members of the Council: 
10 
Provided further that if there is no Council of Ministers in any State IS 
referred to in this sub-section, the President may, if he deems it neces-
sary so to do, nominate not more than one person to represent the State 
on the Council for so long as there is no Council of Ministers in such 
State. 
4. (1) The Council shall be an advisory body and may discuss any 20 
matter in which some Or all of the States represented on the Council 
have·a comm()ft,·lnterest and advise the Government of each State ('on-
cerned as to the action to be taken on any such matter. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the pro-
visions of sub-section (1). the Council may- 3S 
(a) formulate for the States represented thereon a unified and 
co-ordinated regional plan in respect of such plan schemes for those 
States as are of common importance to the north-eastern areas of 
India, such as schemes relating to inter-State communications, com-
mon 'irrigation, POWeT and flood control projects. agricultural 30 
production to achieve regional food self-sufficiency find balanced 
industrial development of the region; 
(b) review from time to time the implementation of the ~cbe-. 
mes included in the regional plan and recommend measures for 
effecting co-ordination in implementation of the sl'hemes by the 3S 
Governments of the States concerned~ , 
(c) discuSf; and make recommendations with regard to-
(i) any otlier matter of common interest in the field of 
economic and social planning. and 
(ii) any matter concerning border disputes. linguistic minori- 40 
ties or inter-State transport . 
. 5. (1) The Council shall meet at such time as the Chairman of the 
CouncU,may. appoint in this behalf cmd shall. subject to the other pro-
visions of this section, observe such rules of prOCedllrf' in regard to trans-
action of business at its meetin~s as it may, with the ~pproval of the 45 
Central Government lay down from -time to tlm€'. 

3 
(2) The Chairman or in his absence any other member chosen by the 
members present from amongst themselves shall preside at a meeting of 
the Council. 
(.3) All questions at a meeting of the Council shall be decided. by a 
5 majority of votes of the members present and in the case of an equality 
of votes the Chairman, or, in his absence, any I.lther person presidini 
shall have a second or casting vote. 
(4) The proceedings of every meeting of the Council shall be for-
warded to the Central Government and also to the Government of each 
10 State represented on the Council. 
6. (1) The Council shall have the followin, persoras as Advisers to Advi.ers. 
assist the Council in tho performanc& of its duties. JWDely:-
15 
(a) one person nominated by the Planning Commission; and 
(b) one person nominated by the Ministry of the Central Govern-
ment dealing wi th Finance. 
(2) Every Adviser to the Council shall have the right to take part 
in the discussions of the Council but shall not have a right to vote at 
a meeting of the Council. 
7. (1) There shall be a Committee of the Council called the Co-ordina-
ao tion Committee consisting of-
(a) the Governor of Assam and the Chief Ministers of Aasam 
and Meghalaya; and 
(b) the Administrators and Chief Ministers of the Union terri-
tories of Manipur and Tripura: 
2S Provided that as and when the State of Nagaland is also represented 
on the Council, the Chief Minister of that State shall be a member of 
the CoInmittee. 
(2) The Governor of Assam shall be the Chairman of the Committee. 
(3) It shall be the duty of the Co-ordination Committee to review 
30 from time to time the measures taken by the States represeated·on the 
Council for the maintenance of security and public order therein and to 
recommend to the Governments of the States cODCernedfurlher, measure& 
necessary in this regard. 
(4) The Committee shall observe such rules of procedure in regard 
35 to transaction of bUSiness at its meetings as the, Council may, with the 
approval of the Central Government, lay down from time to time. 
8. (1) The COWlcil shall have n secretarial staff consisting of a Seere-
tary, a Planning Adviser and such other officers and employees as the 
Central Govenunent may by order determine. 
040 (2) The office of the Council shall be located at sum place as may be 
determined by the Council. 
(3) The administrative expenses of the said office, includin, the 
salaries and allowances payable to, or in respect of, members of the secre-
tarial staff of the Council shall be borne by the Central Government out 
45 of moneys provided by Parliament for the purpose. 
Coordina-
tion Com-
mittee. 
Oftlce 
and.taft 
ot the 
Council. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The North-Eastern Region of our country as a whole occupies an im-
portant and vital position which calls for an integrated and well co-ordi-
nated approach towards development as also security of the 'region. In 
order to further this basic objective, it is proposed to provide for the set-
ting up of a high level Council consisting of representatives of the States 
and other administrative units in the North-Eastern Region. The main 
task of the Council would be to identify development schemes which would 
be of importance to the region as a whole, review their implementation 
by the Governments of the participating units, and also recommend mea-
sures for effecting co-ordination. The Council would also make recommen-
dations regarding matters of common interest to them. It is also proposed 
to prO\'ide for the setting up of a committee of the Council which could 
review from time to time the measures taken by the States represented 
thereon for maintenance or security and public order in the region and 
recommend further measures necessary in this regard. 
2. The Bill seeks to. achieve the above objects. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 9th December, 1969. 
Y. B. CHAVAN. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF THE 
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. 24j19/68-SR, dated the 10th December, 1969 from 
Shri Y. B. Chavan, Minister of Home Affairs to the Secretary, Lok Sabha.] 
The President having been informed of the subject matter of the Bill 
to provide for the setting up of a Council for the north-eastern areas of 
India to be called the North-Eastern Council and for matters connected 
therewith, recommends the consideration of 1 he Bill in the Lok Sabha 
under article 117(3) of the Constitution. 

nNANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
The Bill provides for the formation of the North-Eastern Council and 
clause 8 provides for the secretarial staff for the Council consisting of a 
Secretary, a Planning Adviser and such other officers and employees as 
the Central Government may -by order determine. Sub-clause (3) of 
clause 8 provides that the administrative expenses of the office of the 
proposed North-Eastern Council including salaries and allowances paya-
ble to the members of the secretarial staff shall be borne by the Central 
Government out of moneys provided by Parliament for the purpose. It 
is proposed that the Secretary and the Planning Adviser should be senior 
officers. The Planning Adviser will have, to begin with, three experts 
and the necessary supporting staff. The office of the Secretary, at the 
initial stage, will have a junior officer and a small establishment to assist 
him. The size of the secretariat of the Council will have to be determined 
in the light of experience and the actual needs. The set up of the secre-
tariat as at present envisaged will involve approximately a recurring 
expenditure of Rs. 3,24,000 per annum and non-recurring expenditure of 
Rs. 57,000 on account of purchase of furniture. staff-car and office equip-
ment, etc. 
2. Clause 6 of the Bill provides that the proposed North-Eastern Coun-
cil shall have as advisers one person nominated by the Planning Com-
mission and another nominated by the Ministry of Finance. As the head-
quarters of the Council is expected to be at Shillong, the Advisers nomi-
nated under the clause will have to undertake journeys for attendIng 
meetings of the Council. The estimated expenditure on account of tra-
velling allowance of officers will be about -Rs. 8,000 per annum. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
! I. , 
Clause 5(1) of the Bill empowers the proposed North-Eastern Council 
to lay down with the approval of the Central Government the rules of 
procedure in regard to transaction of business at the meetings of the 
Council. Clause 7(4) of the Bill empowers the Council to lay down with 
the approval of the Central Government the rules of procedure which 
shall 'be obseJ.'I'Ved by the Co-ordination Committee of the Council in re-
gard to transaction of business at the meetings of the Committee. As the 
matters in respect of which the Council may lay down rules under the 
afore-mentioned provisions 0: the Bill are matters of procedure, the dele-
gation of le~il'lative power is of a normal character. 
6 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the setitng up of a Council for the north-eastern areas of India 
to be called the Nonh- Eastern Council and for matters lOnnectcd ~therewith. 
(Shri Y. B. Ch(lf)an, 
Minister of Home Affairs.) 