Bill No. 115-F of  2020
ORIGINAL
THE FACTORING REGULATION (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2021
(AS PASSED BY THE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT—
LOK SABHA ON 26TH JULY, 2021
RAJY A SABHA ON 29TH JULY, 2021)
ASSENTED  TO ON 7TH AUGUST, 2021
ACT  NO. 21 OF 2021

1
THE FACTORING REGULATION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2021
(AS PASSED BY THE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT)
A
BILL
to amend the Factoring Regulation Act, 2011.
    BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-second Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Factoring Regulation (Amendment) Act, 2021.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 2 of the Factoring Regulation Act, 2011 (hereinafter referred to as the
principal Act),—
(i) in clause (a), for the words commencing with "transfer by agreement" and
ending with "outside India", the words "transfer by agreement to a factor of an
undivided interest, in whole or in part, in the receivables of an assignor due from a
Short title and
commencement.
Amendment
of section 2.
12 of 2012.
Bill No. 115-F of  2020

2
debtor and includes such transfer where either the assignor or the debtor is situated or
established outside India" shall be substituted;
(ii) in clause (j),—
(A) in the opening portion, for the words commencing with "acquisition of
receivables" and ending with "any receivables but", the words "acquisition by
way of assignment of receivables of assignor for a consideration for the purpose
of collection of such receivables or for financing, whether by way of making
loans or advances or otherwise, against such assignment, but" shall be
substituted;
(B) in sub-clause (i), after the word "bank", the words "or a non-banking
financial company" shall be inserted;
(iii) for clause (p), the following clauses shall be substituted, namely:—
'(p) "receivables" means the money owed by a debtor and not yet paid to
the assignor for goods or services and includes payment of any sum, by whatever
name called, required to be paid for the toll or for the use of any infrastructure
facility or services;
(pa) "regulations" means regulations made by the Reserve Bank under
this Act;';
(iv) after clause (s), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
'(sa) "Trade Receivables Discounting System" means a payment system
authorised by the Reserve Bank under section 7 of the Payment and Settlement
Systems Act,2007 for the purpose of facilitating financing of trade
receivables;'.
3. In section 3 of the principal Act,—
(i) in sub-section (2), the proviso and the Explanation shall be omitted;
(ii) for sub-section (4), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
"(4) The Reserve Bank may grant the certificate of registration in such
manner as may be specified by regulations.".
4. In section 19 of the principal Act,—
(i) for sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
"(1) Every factor shall register the particulars of every transaction of
assignment of receivables in his favour with the Central Registry set-up under
section 20 of the Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and
Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002, within such time from the date of
such assignment, in such manner and subject to payment of such fee, as may be
prescribed.";
(ii) after sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
"(1A) Where any trade receivables are financed through a Trade
Receivables Discounting System, the particulars specified in sub-section ( 1)
and sub-section (3) shall be filed with the Central Registry on behalf of the factor
by the Trade Receivables Discounting System concerned, in such manner as
may be specified by regulations.".
5. After section 31 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:—
"31A. (1) The Reserve Bank may, by notification, make regulations consistent
with this Act to carry out the provisions of this Act.
51 of 2007.
Amendment
of section 3.
Amendment
of section 19.
54 of 2002.
Insertion of new
section 31A.
Power to
make
regulations.

3
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power,
such regulations may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the manner of granting certificate of registration under sub-section (4)
of section 3;
(b) the manner of filing of particulars of transactions with the Central
Registry on behalf of factors under sub-section (1A) of section 19;
(c) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, specified by
regulations.
(3) Every regulation shall, as soon as may be after it is made by the Reserve
Bank, be forwarded to the Central Government and that Central Government shall
cause a copy of the same to be laid before each House of Parliament, while it is in
session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in
two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in
making any modification in the regulation, or both Houses agree that the regulation
should not be made, the regulation shall, thereafter, have effect only in such modified
form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done
under that regulation.".
6. In section 32 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 2), in clause (a), for the words
"the form and manner", the words "the time within which, the form and manner" shall be
substituted.
Amendment of
section 32.

A
BILL
to amend the Factoring Regulation Act, 2011.
————
(As passed by the Houses of  Parliament)
MGIPMRND—723RS(S3)—17-08-2021.