THE FARMERS' RIGHT TO GUARANTEED REMUNERATIVE MINIMUM SUPPORT PRICES
FOR AGRICULTURAL COMMODITIES BILL, 2018
By
SHRI RAJU SHETTI, M.P .
——————
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
——————
CLAUSES
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. Short title, extent and commencement.
2. Definitions.
CHAPTER II
G
UARANTEED  R EMUNERATIVE M INIMUM  S UPPORT P RICES  FOR
ALL A GRICULTURAL  C OMMODITIES
3. Right of every farmer to guaranteed remunerative minimum support prices for all agricultural commodities.
4. Comprehensive estimation of cost of production of all agricultural commodities.
5. Determination of Guaranteed Remunerative Minimum Support Price.
6. Notification of guaranteed remunerative minimum support price.
7. State Government to notify bonus.
CHAPTER III
C
ENTRAL  F ARMERS ' AGRICULTURAL  C OSTS AND R EMUNERA TIVE P RICE
GUARANTEE  COMMISSION
8. Constitution of the Central Farmers' Agricultural Costs and Remunerative Price Guarantee Commission.
9. Term of the Central Commission and conditions of service of the members.
10. Powers and functions of the Central Commission.
11. Publication of all relevant information on website of the Central Commission.
12. Accounts and Audit.
CHAPTER IV
S
TATE F ARMERS ' AGRICULTURAL  C OSTS AND R EMUNERATIVE
PRICE G UARANTEE  COMMISSION
13. Constitution of State Farmers' Agricultural Costs and Remunerative Price Guarantee Commission.
14. Term of the State Commission and conditions of service of the members.
15. Powers and functions of the State Farmers' Agricultural Costs and Remunerative Price Guarantee Commission.
16. Constitution of State Compensation Fund.
CHAPTER V
I
MPLEMENTATION  OF G UARANTEED  R EMUNERATIVE M INIMUM  S UPPORT P RICES
17. Bar on auction or offer of price below guaranteed remunerative minimum support prices.
Bill No. 115  of  2018
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

18. Appropriate Government of open Procurement Centres.
19. Timely and effective market intervention by State Government.
20. Measures to regulate imports of agricultural commodities.
21. Measures to prevent distress sales.
22. Investments on Farmer Producer Organisations.
23. Measures to reduce and regulate input costs.
24. Designating and notifying the responsible public authorities.
25. Identification and extension of benefits to actual cultivators.
CHAPTER VI
O
FFENCES  AND P ENALTIES
26. Offences and Penalties.
CHAPTER VII
GRIEVANCE R EDRESSAL  AND C OMPENSATION
27. Provision of compulsory payment of compensation for not obtaining guaranteed remunerative minimum support
price.
28. Constitution of Taluka level Grievance Committee for payment of compensation to farmers.
CHAPTER VIII
OBLIGATIONS  OF C ENTRAL  AND S TATE G OVERNMENTS
29. Central Government to provide adequate funds.
30. State Governments to provide adequate funds.
CHAPTER IX
M
ISCELLANEOUS
31. Overriding effect of Act.
32. Members and staff of Commissions deemed to be public servants.
33. Power to remove difficulties.
34. Power to make rules.
(ii)
C
LAUSES

THE FARMERS’ RIGHT TO GUARANTEED REMUNERATIVE
MINIMUM SUPPORT PRICES FOR AGRICULTURAL
COMMODITIES BILL, 2018
By
SHRI RAJU SHETTI, M.P.
A
BILL
to confer a right on every farmer to guaranteed remunerative minimum support prices for
agricultural produce with minimum fifty percent. profit margin above comprehensive
cost of production upon sale of agricultural commodities and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
W
HEREAS safeguarding the right to livelihood is essential for the realization of right to
life guaranteed under article 21 of the Constitution;
AND WHEREAS article 38(2) of the Constitution provides that the State shall, in particular,
strive to minimize the inequalities in income and endeavour to eliminate inequalities in status,
facilities and opportunities not only amongst individuals but also amongst groups of people
residing in different areas or engaged in different vocations;
A
ND WHEREAS article 39(a) of the Constitution provides that the State shall direct its
policies towards securing that the citizens, men and women equally, have the right to an
adequate means of livelihood;
A
ND WHEREAS article 43 of the Constitution provides that the State shall endeavour to
secure, by suitable legislation or economic organization, or in any other way, to all workers,
Bill No. 115 of 2018
1
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
agricultural, industrial or otherwise, work, a living wage, conditions of work ensuring a
decent standard of life and full enjoyment of leisure, social and cultural opportunities;
AND WHEREAS farmers do not get adequate return of their investment and toil despite
good production, and therefore their condition is steadily deteriorating and leading to commit
suicide by tens of thousands of farmers every year;
A
ND WHEREAS consumer interests have been justifiably protected through National
Food Security Act 2013 and Essential Commodities Act 1955 so that adequate food is affordable
and available for needy citizens and shall continue to be so;
A
ND WHEREAS the input cost is increasing beyond the meager means of farmers;
AND WHEREAS the price realized by farmers for their agricultural commodities is not
providing sufficient returns in compare of the cost of production to provide income even to
sustain basic needs of the household;
A
ND WHEREAS The National Farmers Commission had recommended a principle for
remunerative prices to be fixed with a minimum profit margin of at least fifty per cent over and
above the comprehensive cost of production;
A
ND WHEREAS ensuring adequate returns in agriculture is essential to safeguarding the
food security of the nation, especially in the context of shrinking landholdings and decreasing
livelihood opportunities;
A
ND WHEREAS the Government is duty bound to take steps to prevent suicides by
farmers due to their pitiable economic condition;
AND WHEREAS social security is listed at entry 23 of List III (Concurrent List), the
subject of trade and commerce in, and the production, supply and distribution of food stuffs,
cattle fodder, raw cotton, raw jute at entry no. 33 in List III, the subject of price control is
listed at entry 34 in List III and any refund payable for difference between prices realized in
the market on production of receipts shall be paid from any Bank under Negotiable Instruments
Act, 1881 covered under Banking at entry 45 of List I;
A
ND WHEREAS for the above reasons, it is essential to provide farmers with a right to
guaranteed remunerative minimum support prices for all agricultural commodities;
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth year of the Republic of India, as follows:—
CHAPTER  I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Farmers’ Right to Guaranteed Remunerative Minimum
Support Prices for Agricultural Commodities Act, 2018.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government, may by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise require,—
(a) “agricultural commodity” means all cereals, all millets, all pulses, all oilseeds,
all fibre crops, all horticulture crops of fruits and vegetables, all spice crops, all tuber
crops, all medicinal plants, all varieties of milk, all minor forest produce, floriculture,
grass, fodder grass and tree produce, nursery produce, all plantation produce, all
animal products like meat and mutton, eggs and poultry, all fishery produce like fish
mussel, marine fish, freshwater aquatic produce, honey, silkworm cocoons, and all
such other primary produce and agricultural commodity with all its cognate expressions;
(b) “agricultural expert” includes a person by virtue of academic qualification or
with proven work record and having at least fifteen years practical or management
experience in agriculture-related sectors;
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Definitions.
5
10
15

3
(c) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State the Government of
that State, and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(d) “guaranteed remunerative minimum support price” means the price that
ensures a minimum fifty per cent. profit margin over and above the comprehensive
cost of production of a given agricultural commodity as determined under section 5
and notified under section 6, to which shall be added the bonus announced by the
State Government wherein the comprehensive cost of production at the State level is
covered with at least a fifty per cent.  profit margin over and above such cost of
production; and in the case of standing (plantation) crops, as specifically determined
by the Commission and guided by Schedule I to this Act;
(e) “Central Commission” means the Central Farmers’ Agricultural Costs and
Remunerative Price Guarantee Commission constituted under section 8;
(f) “cost of production” means the comprehensive cost as estimated under
section 4 and based on Schedule I;
(g) “farmer” means a person engaged in the economic and livelihood activity of
agriculture in terms of growing crops, or producing other primary agricultural
commodities with or without land ownership, and includes all agricultural operational
holders, cultivators, agriculture labourers, sharecroppers, tenants, poultry and livestock
rearers, fishers, beekeepers, pastoralists, non-corporate planters and planting labourers
as well as forest-produce-gatherers, farmers groups, producer cooperatives or self-
help Groups performing cultivation on collectively owned or leased-in land and also
includes women farmers.
(h) “Fund” means the State Compensation Fund maintained and administered
by the State Commission under section 16;
(i) “market” means regulated markets, systems of procurement of agricultural
commodities run by State procurement agencies, consumer or service cooperatives,
corporations as well as contract farming arrangements (formal or informal) that
different entities have, for procuring agricultural commodities from farmers, including
milk collection centers, and procurement centers opened by different public sector
agencies and other market yards run by Government agencies including Panchayats
and cooperatives and includes private markets;
(j) “member” means a member of the Commission (Central or State) and includes
the Chairperson;
(k) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(l) “State Commission” means the State Farmers’ Agricultural Costs and
Remunerative Price Guarantee Commission constituted under section 13; and
(m) "trader" means any individual, or any other entity including sole
proprietorship, a partnership firm, public sector or corporate entity that purchases
agricultural commodities from farmer directly.
CHAPTER II
G
UARANTEED REMUNERATIVE MINIMUM SUPPORT PRICE FOR ALL AGRICULTURAL COMMODITIES
3. Every farmer shall be entitled to a guaranteed remunerative minimum support price
against sale of any agricultural commodity.
Right of
every farmer
to guaranteed
remunerative
minimum
support prices
for
Agricultural
commodity.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

4
4. (1) The Central Government shall, through the Central Commission, institute
robust, comprehensive and accurate system for estimation of comprehensive cost of
production as defined in the Schedule for all agricultural commodities.
(2) The cost of estimation under sub-section (1) shall be comprehensive with all
paid-out costs as well as imputed costs including family labour at skilled wage rates as
those that pertain to the State or region, rental value of land, interest on assets and
remuneration calculated for managerial functions performed by the farm household, in
addition to depreciation of assets and other components as listed in Schedule I and shall
take into account the period of each crop into consideration:
Provided that agricultural commodities where the system of cost estimation is not
available, the Central Government shall institute such systems that require data collection
on a timely basis consisting of the actual average yield for the past five years, in a rolling
manner and the estimation (data, methodology, sampling and statistical analyses) shall be
periodically reviewed and implemented.
5. (1) The Central Commission shall determine the guaranteed remunerative minimum
support price for each agricultural commodity and recommended the same to the Government
as provided under section 10.
(2) The recommendation made by the Central Commission under sub-section (1) shall
be the basis for the Central Government to notify the guaranteed remunerative minimum
support price for each agricultural commodity.
6. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, but within one month after the
receipt of recommendation of the Central Commission, notify the guaranteed remunerative
minimum support price of all agricultural commodities.
(2) The guaranteed remunerative minimum support price of agricultural commodities
under sub-section (1) shall be notified by the Central Government on or before 28th day of
February every year for the ensuing kharif production season and on or before the last day
of July every year for the ensuing rabi production season, as the case may be.
7. The State Government shall, within fifteen days after receiving a recommendation
from State Commission, notify a bonus in addition to the guaranteed remunerative minimum
support price notified by the Central Government under section 5:
Provided that the additional cost of the bonus shall be borne by the State Government.
CHAPTER III
C
ENTRAL FARMERS' AGRICULTURAL COSTS AND REMUNERATIVE PRICE GUARANTEE COMMISSION
8. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
an autonomous body corporate to be known as the Central Farmers' Agricultural Costs and
Remunerative Price Guarantee Commission (hereinafter referred to as the Central
Commission) for the purpose of exercising the powers and performing the functions assigned
to it under this Act.
(2) The Central Commission shall consist of—
(a) a full time Chairperson, who shall be a farmer and well qualified and
experienced in agricultural economics and conversant with various agricultural
aspects; faculties;
(b) five representatives of farmers including representatives of Farmers
Organisations and persons, including women, with proven record of having worked
on farmers' issues and good knowledge of agricultural economy, representing, as far
as possible, from the different regions of the country—non-official members;
(c) three agricultural experts having requisite academic qualification in
Agricultural Economics or any faculty incidental thereto, and with at least fifteen
years of experience in the field of expertise—non-official members;
Comprehensive
estimation of
cost of
production of
all agricultural
commodities.
Notification
of guaranteed
remunerative
minimum
support
prices.
State
Government
to notify
bonus.
Constitution
of the Central
Farmers'
Agricultural
Costs and
Remunerative
Price
Guarantee
Commission.
Determination
of Guaranteed
Remunerative
Minimum
Support Price.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

5
(d) an official not below the rank of Joint Secretary to the Union Ministry of
Agriculture and Farmers Welfare, Department of Agriculture, Co-operation and Farmers
Welfare—member;
(e) an official not below the rank of Deputy Secretary to the Union Ministry of
Agriculture and Farmers Welfare, Department of Agriculture, Co-operation and Farmers
Welfare—member Secretary, to be appointed by the Central Government in such
manner as may be prescribed:
Provided that one of the non-official members shall be appointed as Vice-Chairperson
so that proceedings are not affected in the absence of the Chairperson for any reason to be
appointed by the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) The Chairperson and members of the Central Commission shall be nominated by
the President of India on the recommendation of a Selection Committee consisting of—
(i) the Prime Minister who shall be the Chairperson;
(ii) the Leader of Opposition in House of the People or the leader of the single
largest group or party in opposition in House of the People; and
(iii) the Union Minister for Agriculture and Farmers Welfare.
(4) The Selection Committee shall, while nominating the Chairperson or a Member, take
into consideration equitable regional representation from across the country, sectoral
representation (cultivation, plantation, livestock, fisheries, agricultural labour, forest-produce-
gathering), gender and social background on a rotational basis for representation of different
States every time the Commission is re-constituted or vacancies filled:
Provided that in case of member nominated under clauses (b) and (c) of sub-section (2),
the Selection Committee shall take into account the representation of the Scheduled Castes
and the Scheduled Tribes.
(5) The Central Government shall ensure that no member including the Chairperson
represents any conflict of interest in discharge of his functions.
(6) The Chairperson and the members of the Central Commission shall not be a sitting
Member of Parliament or a Member of State Legislature of any State or Union territory, as the
case may be, or hold any other office of profit.
(7) The Central Government shall appoint such number of staff members as may be
necessary to assist the Central Commission in such manner as may be prescribed.
(8) In the discharge of their duties, the member Secretary and other staff referred to in
sub-section (7) shall be subject to the administrative control of the Central Commission,
represented by Chairperson.
9. (1) The term of the Central Commission shall be five years:
Provided that the Central Government shall re-constitute the Central Commission at
least ten months prior to the end of the tenure of the existing Commission:
Provided further that any of the members of the existing Commission may be
re-nominated to the National Commission.
(2) The Chairperson and the non-official members shall not be removed from his office
except after due enquiry made by the sitting judge of the High Court of Delhi and recommended
as such to the President.
(3)  Any member may, by writing under his hand and addressed to the Central
Government, resign his office at any time.
Term of the
Central
Commission
and
conditions of
service of the
members.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

6
(4) Any vacancy arising by reason of resignation of any member of the Central
Commission under sub-section (3) shall be filled up within six months in accordance with the
provisions contained in section 7:
Provided that the person so appointed shall hold office only for the remaining period
of term of the person in whose place he is appointed.
(5) The Central Government may remove any member, if he,—
(a) is declared as undischarged insolvent;
(b) becomes incapable of continuing as such due to physical or mental disability;
(c) becomes of unsound mind and stands so declared by a court of competent
jurisdiction;
(d) has been convicted for an offence, which in the opinion of the Central
Government involves moral turpitude or financial irregularities;
(e) has, in the opinion of the Government, abused his official position so as to
render his continuance in office prejudicial to public interest.
(6) The Central Commission shall regulate its own procedure for the conduct of its
business with principles of participation, transparency and equity incorporated with periodic
consultations organized with representatives of State Commissions, State Governments and
farmer organisations across the country.
(7) The terms and conditions of service and the salary and allowances payable to the
Chairperson, non-official members and staff of the Central Commission shall be such as
may be prescribed.
10. (1) The Central Commission shall,—
(a) recommend guaranteed remunerative minimum support price to the Central
Government for all agricultural commodities having a profit margin of at least fifty
per cent. over and above the comprehensive cost of production based on Schedule I;
(b) recommend additional incentives on specified agricultural commodities for
fulfilling social or environmental policy imperatives:
Provided that the Central Commission may additionally take into consideration
the recommendations from the State Commissions while finalizing its recommendation
for additional incentives;
(c) recommend such measures that assure a remunerative and stable price
environment for farmers including improvements in the storage and marketing
infrastructure and procedures as well as adequate and appropriate support to producer
organisations;
(d) monitor the prices being realised by farmers for various agricultural
commodities all over the country and forward prompt advisiories to all concerned
agencies or departments for effective action to be taken;
(e) recommend to the Central Commission on all international trade agreements
which affect agriculture directly or indirectly and report to the Central Government for
the consideration of its recommendations; and
(f) recommend to the Central Government regulation of cost of agricultural inputs
including seeds, fertilisers, pesticides, electricity, diesel and farm equipment.
(2) The Central Commission shall submit the recommendations to the Central Government
for guaranteed remunerative minimum support price of all agricultural commodities for each
year before the 15th day of February for the upcoming kharif season of that year and before
the 15th day of July for the upcoming rabi season of that year.
11. (1) The Central Commission shall publish all relevant information including the
cost estimations, basis of guaranteed remunerative minimum support prices, market price
trends and ensuing action, recommendations, minutes of its sittings and any other material
on its website in such manner as may be prescribed.
Powers and
functions of
the Central
Commission.
Publication of
all relevant
information
on website of
the Central
Commission.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

7
(2) The Central Commission shall prepare an annual report of its functioning of that
year and shall submit to the Central Government in such form on or before such date as may
be prescribed.
(3) The Central Government shall, on receipt of the annual report under sub-section (2),
cause it to be laid before each House of the Parliament, as soon as may be, after the same is
received by it.
12. (1) The Central Commission shall maintain proper accounts and other Accounts
and relevant records and prepare annual statements of accounts in such form as may be
prescribed.
(2) The accounts of the Central Commission shall be audited annually and the audit
report shall be placed before each House of the Parliament, along with the Annual Report by
the Central Government.
CHAPTER IV
S
TATE FARMERS' AGRICULTURAL COSTS AND REMUNERATIVE PRICE GUARANTEE COMMISSION
13. (1) The State Government shall, within six months after the commencement of
this Act, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute an autonomous body corporate to
be known as the State Farmers' Agricultural Costs and Remunerative Price Guarantee
Commission (hereinafter referred as State Commission) for the purpose of exercising the
powers and performing the functions under this Act, and recommending and implementing
the guaranteed remunerative minimum support prices for all agricultural commodities in
the State.
(2) The State Commission shall consist of,—
(a) a full time Chairperson, who shall be a farmer and well qualified and
experienced in agricultural economics and conversant with various agricultural
faculties;
(b) five representatives of farmers including representatives of Farmers
Organisations and persons, including women, with proven record of having worked
on farmers' issues and good knowledge of agricultural economy, representing, as far
as possible, from the different regions of the State—non-official members;
(c) one agricultural expert or research scientist having requisite academic
qualifications in agricultures, Agricultural Economics or Agricultural Science, and
with at least fifteen years of experience in the field of expertise— non-official members;
(d) four officials each from the Department of Agriculture, Horticulture, Animal
Husbandry and Fisheries to be recommended by the Directors of the Department of
the State Government concerned—members;
(e) an official of Department of Agricultural Marketing or equivalent of the State
Government concerned — member Secretary,
to be appointed by the State Government in such manner as may be prescribed:
Provided that one of the non-official members shall be designated as Vice-Chairperson
so that proceedings are not affected in the absence of the Chairperson for any reason to be
appointed by the State Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) The Chairperson and members of the State Commission shall be nominated on the
recommendation of a Selection Committee consisting of—
(i) the Chief Minister who shall be the Chairperson;
(ii) the Leader of Opposition in the State Assembly or the leader of the single
largest group or party in opposition in the State Assembly; and
(iii) the Minister for Agriculture of the State Government concerned.
Accounts and
Audit.
Constitution
of State
Farmers'
Agricultural
Costs and
Remunerative
Price
Guarantee
Commission.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

8
(4) The Selection Committee shall, while nominating the Chairperson  or a Member,
take into consideration equitable regional representation from across the State, sectoral
representation, gender and social background on a rotational basis for representation of
different regions within a State every time the State Commission is re-constituted or vacancies
filled:
Provided that in case of member nominated under clauses (b) and (c) of sub-section (2),
the Selection Committee shall take into account the representation of the Scheduled Castes
and the Scheduled Tribes.
(5) The State Government shall ensure that no member including Chairperson
represents any conflict of interest in discharge of his functions.
(6) The State Government shall appoint such member of staff members as may be
necessary to assist the State Commission in such manner as may be prescribed.
(7)  In the discharge of their duties, the member Secretary and other staff referred to
in sub-section (6) shall be subject to the administrative control of the State Commission,
represented by the Chairperson.
14. (1) The term of the State Commission shall be five years:
Provided that the State Government shall re-constitute the State Commission at least
ten months prior to the end of the tenure of the existing Commission:
Provided further that the State Government may extend the term of the existing
Commission if it deems necessary.
(2) The Chairperson and the non-official members shall not be removed from his
office except after due enquiry made by the sitting judge of the High Court of the State
concerned and recommended as such to the State Government.
(3) Any member may, by writing under his hand and addressed to the State Government,
resign his office at any time.
(4) Any vacancy arising by reason of resignation of any member of the State
Commission under sub-section (3) above or otherwise shall be filled up in accordance with
the provisions contained in section 12:
Provided that the person so appointed shall hold office only for the remaining period
of term of the person in whose place he is appointed.
(5)  The State Government may remove any member, if he,—
(a) is declared as undischarged insolvent;
(b) becomes incapable of continuing as such due to physical or mental disability;
(c) becomes of unsound mind and stands so declared by a court of competent
jurisdiction;
(d) has been convicted for an offence, which in the opinion of the Central
Government involves moral turpitude or financial irregularities;
(e) has, in the opinion of the Government, abused his official position so as to
render his continuance in office prejudicial to public interest.
(6) The State Commission shall regulate its own procedure for the conduct of its
business based on principles of participation, transparency and equity and shall include
periodic consultations with representatives of farmer organisations from various regions of
the State representing different sectroal interests.
(7) The terms and conditions of  service and the salary and allowances payable to the
Chairperson, non-official members and staff of the State Commission shall be such as may
be prescribed.
Term of the
State
Commission
and
conditions of
service of the
members.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

9
(8) The headquarters of the State Commission shall be at the capital of the State
Government concerned.
(9) The Chairperson and the members of the State Commission shall not be a Member
of Parliament or Member of State Legislature of any State or Union territory, as the case may
be, or hold any office of profit.
15. (1) The State Commission shall,—
(a) recommend to the Central Commission the guaranteed remunerative minimum
support price of all agriculture commodities for the State for each year, having regard
to the factors mentioned in Schedule 1, ensuring that such recommendation is made
before the 31st day of January for the upcoming kharif season and before the 30th day
of June for the upcoming rabi season;
(b) recommend to the State Government higher prices that shall be fixed as the
State level guaranteed remunerative minimum support price including a bonus as
specified under section 7 and applicable only within that State, over and above the
guaranteed remunerative minimum support price notified by the Central Government
taking into account a minimum fifty per cent. profit margin over any higher cost of
production in the State , and other policy considerations of incentivizing particular
crops and commodities for balanced and sustainable agricultural growth;
(c) recommend guaranteed remunerative minimum support price for agricultural
commodities which have been left out by the Central Commission for any reason;
(d) monitor the price situation in various markets on a regular basis and to send
advisories based on such monitoring, for appropriate action to be taken, and oversee
the implementation of such advisories by the State Government for their efficacy;
(e) inquire into failures to discharge duties, on particular public servants and
authorities as well as contract farming cases and recommend penalties to be imposed
as per section 26;
(f) recommend to the Central Commission on matters related to the State;
(g) maintain a fund for paying compensation to farmers, as ordered by the Taluka
Level Committee for non-receipt of guaranteed remunerative minimum support prices
or delayed payment for sale of agricultural commodity as specified under section 27;
and
(h)  recommend to the State Government regulation of cost of all agricultural
inputs including seeds, fertilisers, pesticides, electricity, diesel and farm equipment.
(2) The State Commission shall publish all relevant information including its cost
estimations, basis for bonus recommendations, market price trends and ensuing action
and recommendations, inquiry reports as per sub-section (1) above, minutes of its meetings
or sittings and any other material on its website.
(3) The State Commission shall prepare a report of its functioning of that year under
this Act and the same shall be submitted to the State Government in such form on or before
such date as may be prescribed:
Provided that the annual report submitted to the State Government by the State
Commission shall be laid before each House of the State Legislature, as soon as may be, and
certainly in the ensuing Session of the Legislature, after the same is received by the State
Government.
(4) The State Commission shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records
and prepare annual statement of accounts in such form as may be prescribed:
Provided that the accounts of the State Commission shall be audited annually and the
audited report shall be placed before each House of the State Legislature, along with the
annual report.
Powers and
functions of
the State
Farmers'
Agricultural
Costs and
Remunerative
Price
Guarantee
Commission.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

10
16. (1) The State Commission shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
and maintain a State Compensation Fund consisting of allocations from the Central
Government and funds collected as penalties for offences punishable under this Act.
(2) The Funds shall be utilized for compensation payments to farmers as required and
as specified under section 27.
CHAPTER V
I
MPLEMENTATION OF GUARANTEED REMUNERATIVE MINIMUM SUPPORT PRICES
17. (1) It shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to ensure that all agricultural
markets including Agriculture Produce Market Committee establishment by the State
Government concerned, the auction or offer price for every agricultural commodity begin
with the guaranteed remunerative minimum support price as the floor price and no auction
shall be allowed below the said price.
(2) Any agreement entered into orally or by any other means, between purchaser/
traders or commission agents that directly or indirectly results in bid rigging or collusive
bidding, that limits, controls or attempts to control the sale or price of or trade in agriculture
commodities or provision of services in the market or outside market with intent to suppress
the prices, shall be presumed to have an appreciable adverse effect on guaranteed remunerative
minimum support price and shall be illegal and liable for penalties mentioned under section 25,
including cancellation of license by the concerned authorities on complaint by the aggrieved
farmers or public interest group or upon suo-motu monitoring, public interest groups and
surveillance by designated public authorities.
(3) Any trader, including a trader in any contract farming arrangement, purchasing any
commodity below the guaranteed remunerative minimum support price shall be liable for
penalties under section 25 including termination of his contract by the State Government's
designated authority upon due inquiry into any complaint by the aggrieved farmers.
(4) Any trader who abstains from purchasing any agricultural commodity with a view
to violate the rights conferred on farmers as per the provisions of this Act, especially during
the quarter succeeding the seasonal harvest of a given commodity shall be liable for penalties
under section 25 including cancellation of his license by the State Government:
Provided that  any trader may take resort to the grievance redressal mechanism
prescribed under section 27.
18. The appropriate Government shall—
(a) open adequate number of procurement centres for all agricultural commodities,
either directly, or through designated procurement agencies or through trader's bodies,
self help groups or Farmer Producer Organisations, in a localized manner as far as
possible, for procuring sufficient quantities for food security schemes and commodity
corporations at or above guaranteed remunerative minimum support price;
(b) provide adequate arrangements at least four weeks before the beginning of
the harvest of the particular crop including storage facilities and transportation
including weighing scales, gunny bags, testing and other required equipment for such
procurement operations;
(c) ensure instant and same-date payment directly to the farmer by the procurement
agency; and
(d) ensure sufficient publicity of the procurement centre operations within the
jurisdiction of such a centre.
19. The Central Government shall ensure implementation of Timely and Effective
Market Intervention Scheme by State Governments within two days of fall in market prices,
in all perishable and other notified agricultural commodities, including potatoes, onions,
tomatoes and plantation commodities and shall provide sufficient financial outlays to ensure
Constitution
of State
Compensation
Fund.
Bar on
auction or
offer of price
below
guaranteed
remunerative
minimum
support
prices.
Appropriate
Government
to open
Procurement
Centres.
Timely and
effective
market
intervention
by State
Government.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

11
purchases at guaranteed remunerative minimum support price and instant payments to the
farmers.
20. The Central Government shall—
(a) put into place measures to prevent import of subsidized agricultural
commodities from elsewhere, and by enhancing import duties and other measures; and
(b) ensure that the landing price of agricultural commodities from other countries
is at least equal to guaranteed remunerative minimum support price at any given point
of time.
21. The appropriate Government shall,—
(a) implement schemes effectively to prevent farmers from selling agricultural
commodities at low cost due to financial compulsion, including massive increase in
access to storage facilities to enable all farmers to store their produce and sell at a time
of remunerative prices;
(b) provide negotiable warehouse receipts to enable the farmers to access finance
of at least seventy-five per cent. of the value of the stored crop valued at guaranteed
remunerative minimum support price or market value whichever is higher; and
(c) make available adequate storage facilities and agro-processing facilities to
traders especially for perishable products to guard against withdrawal of buyers from
the market.
22. (1) The appropriate Government shall constitute a Fund to make investments in
organizing farmers into Farmers or Workers' producing Cooperative Societies, Farmer Producer
Organisations with sufficient infrastructure  and financial capital to run their market enterprises
including processed, value-added produce, in a tax free atmosphere:
Provided that additional incentives shall be provided to Women Farmers' Producer
Organisation.
23. The appropriate Government shall take all necessary measures to reduce the
cost of production by reducing the input costs through subsidies on inputs, like seed,
fertilizer, pesticide, electricity, diesel and farm equipment by promoting low-cost sustainable
methods of agriculture.
24. The appropriate Government shall designate and notify specific public authorities
at all levels from the block level, who shall be responsible for monitoring the prices paid by
traders, taking punitive action against those who contravenes the provision of this Act,
opening procurement centres taking up market intervention and payment of compensation
in time.
25. The State Governments shall implement effective mechanism for identifying the
actual cultivators including tenant farmers, sharecroppers, women farmers and adivasis, by
registering and issuing them a means of identification, and ensuring that they get the benefit
of guaranteed remunerative minimum support prices through procurement and market
intervention and other mechanisms specified in this Act.
CHAPTER VI
O
FFENCES AND PENALITIES
26. (1) Any trader, including a person engaged in a contract farming arrangement, who
contravenes the provision of section 17 shall be deemed to have committed a cognizable
offence and shall be punished with,—
(a) for first time offence, a penalty equal to twice the total deficit suffered by the
farmers on account of the violation by the trader and imprisonment for a term of three
months;
Measures to
regulate
imports of
agricultural
commodities.
Measures to
prevent
distress sales.
Investments
on Farmer
Producer
Organisations.
Measures to
reduce and
regulate input
costs.
Designating
and notifying
the
responsible
public
authorities.
Identification
and extension
of benefits to
actual
cultivators.
Offences and
Penalties.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

12
(b) for second time offence, a penalty equal to twice the total deficit suffered by
farmers on account of the violation by the trader, and imprisonment for a term of six
months; and
(c) for third time offence, a penalty equal to three times the total deficit suffered
by the farmers on account of the violation by the trader and imprisonment for a term of
one year as well as barring from any future trading for all non-Governmental traders.
(2) The public servants and authorities found guilty by the State Commission for not
discharging their duties diligently or fail to promptly initiate action against traders purchasing
below guaranteed remunerative minimum support price or effective market intervention or
fail to provide compensation as specified under section 23 read with section 14 without
reasonable cause or found to be willfully neglecting his duty, shall be liable to a penalty
equal to one month's salary, to be deducted from his salary and punished with imprisonment
for a term of six months.
CHAPTER VII
G
RIEV ANCE REDRESSAL AND COMPENSA TION
27. (1) Any farmer who is not paid by the trader the guaranteed remunerative minimum
support price for his sale of agricultural commodities shall be entitled to a compensation
payable from the Fund equal to the difference between the guaranteed remunerative minimum
support price and price obtained by the farmer.
(2) Any farmer who does not get instant and direct payment that fully covers the total
value of the agricultural commodity sold at guaranteed remunerative minimum support price
from any buyer including Government procurement agencies such farmer shall be entitled to
get for compensation fixed at fifteen per cent. on the total payment due from the buyer for
such delay every month.
28. (1) The State Commission shall constitute a three Member Grievance Redressal
Committee at Taluka level to redress complaints from farmers under sub-sections (1)
and (2) of section 27.
(2) The Grievance Redressal Committee shall consist of a Taluka level representative
each from the Department of Agriculture and Marketing of the State Government concerned
and a farmers' representative.
(3) The Grievance Redressal Committee shall follow a simple verification procedure as
prescribed.
(4) The Grievance Redressal Committee shall resolve each complaint within one month
from the date of receipt of the complaint.
(5) The Grievance Redressal Committee shall issue orders for payment of compensation
to the farmers from the State Compensation Fund constituted under section 15.
CHAPTER VIII
O
BLIGATIONS ON THE CENTRAL AND STATE GOVERNMENTS
29. (1) The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by
law in this behalf, reserve and spend adequate funds for a comprehensive assessment of
costs for all commodities including by instituting systems for collection of data for such
agricultural commodities for which such data systems do not exist at that point of time.
(2) The Central Government shall provide adequate financial outlays for the effective
functioning of the Central Commission including primary research and other such work
of the Commission, as well as for office, infrastructure and day to day functioning.
(3) The Central Government shall reserve adequate financial outlays to be transferred
to designated procurement agencies in time for procurement and market intervention
operations.
Provision of
compulsory
payment of
compensation
for not
obtaining
guaranteed
remunerative
minimum
support price.
Constitution
of Taluka
level
Grievance
redressal;
Committee
for payment
of
compensation
to farmers.
Central
Government
to provide
adequate
funds.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

13
(4) The adequacy and utilization of financial outlays may be reviewed by the Central
Commission on an annual basis, for lower or higher or similar outlays for the subsequent
budget to be utilised for payment of compensation to farmers through the State Commissions
and their State Compensation Fund.
30. The State Government shall reserve and provide adequate funds to the State
Commission for its efficent functioning and to meet the obligations of fixing any State level
guaranteed remunerative minimum support price over and above the Central Government's
notification of guaranteed remunerative minimum support price.
CHAPTER IX
M
ISCELLANEOUS
31. The provisions of this Act of any rule or order made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any law, or any instrument
having effect by virtue of any law other than this Act.
32. Every member of the Central and the State Commission and the member-Secretary
and other staff appointed under section 12 shall be deemed to be a public servant within the
meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
33. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order, as occasion requires, do anything not inconsistent with the
provisions of this Act, which appears to them to be necessary for the purposes of removing
the difficulty:
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid before each House of the
Parliament.
34. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Gazette, make rules for
the purpose of carrying in to effect the provisions of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period
of fourteen days which may be comprised in one session or in two successive sessions, and
if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive
sessions aforesaid both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule  or both the
Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in
such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so however that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
(3) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall laid, as soon as may
be after it is made, before the State Legislature.
State
Government
to provide
adequate
funds.
Overriding
effect of Act.
Members and
staff of
Commissions
deemed to be
public
servants.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
45 of 1860.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

14
SCHEDULE
(See section 4)
1. METHODOLOGY : Methodology adopted for cost estimation shall be cost-
accounting based, with opportunity costs fully included for various resources, capital items
and services, in addition to interest on fixed capital etc.
2. COST COMPONENTS: The cost components will cover both in cash and kind costs,
in addition to imputed value of some inputs, services and assets/resources, and all of them
shall be included in the Estimation of Comprehensive Cost of Production.
(a) Paid Out Costs
(i) Hired labour - human, animal, machinery;
(ii) Maintenance expenses on owned animals and machinery for the entire
year and not limited to only their utilization time;
(iii) Actual Expenses on material inputs such as seed (home grown and
purchased), fertilizer, manure (owned and purchased), pesticides including
insecticides and weedicies, irrigation;
(iv) Depreciation on implements and farm buildings (such as cattle sheds,
pump sheds, machine sheds, storage sheds, tractor etc.);
(v) Land revenue and other taxes;
(vi) Rent paid for leased-in land at actual rates;
(vii) Interest paid on credit borrowed;
(viii) Insurance premium paid;
(ix) Processing, Transport and Marketing costs (like cleaning, grading,
drying, packaging, marketing, transportation, time spend for all these post-harvest
activities, mandi taxes) etc.;
(x) Miscellaneous expenses.
(b) Imputed Costs
(i) Value of Family Labour - at currently prevalent skilled wage rates notified
by the government for that area, or market wage rates for skilled workers, whichever
is higher and with complete labour assessment for all days of family labour and
not just data pertaining to chosen agricultural operations;
(ii) Rent of owned land at prevailing market value without any ceilings of
fair rents applied as under any other legislation;
(iii) Interest on woned fixed capital at prevalent market value;
(iv) Interest on working capital, including the cost of borrowing (in terms
of time and paperwork), at actuals including from non-institutional sources -
such interest charges will be applied to the full life of crop season;
(v) Risk margin of ten per cent. over Cost of Cultivation per hectare;
(vi) Managerial cost, at ten per cent. of the Cost of Cultivation arrived at,
by using all the above cost components, with the methodology specified in
Projected Costs below.
(c) Projected Costs
In the context of time lags between data collection and estimation of
comprehensive cost of production for recommendations of guaranteed

15
remunerative minimum support price for a given season, it is mandated that
projected costs shall use a Composite Variable Input Index using rate of inflation
of different inputs with the same being applied to fixed costs also in addition to
applying it to the increase in the quantum of utilization of the input. Interest and
Depreciation on fixed capital should be projected using the rate of inflation in
construction material. Land rent should be projected by raising it by index number
(WPI) of agricultural commodities which is the main determinant of variation in
land rent.
In the case of plantation crops, separate procedures to be drawn up to apportion initial
costs over the plantation crop annual period, in addition to maintenance costs with built-in
losses.
3. YIELD DATA THAT IS TO BE USED FOR CONVERTING COST OF CULTIVATION
TO COST OF PRODUCTION: This shall be based on a reconciliation between crop cutting
experiments-based data from Departments of Agriculture/Horticulture and what is collected
from a sample set of farmers for Cost Estimations.
4. SAMPLE FOR DATA COLLECTION: Two villages from each selected block are to be
taken, with number of operational holdings selected from 3 size classes of less than 1 ha,
1-2 ha and more than 2 ha to be 3, 2 and 1 respectively (six sample units from each village). In
each State, two strata to be used for drawing sample—one, for major crops and another for
minor crops, to select blocks or tehsils, with the same approach to be extended to selection
of villages within selected block or tehsil. A minimum sample size of at least 500 operational
holdings is to be maintained State-wise.
5. A VERAGING OF COST AT THE NATIONAL LEVEL: The guiding principle for this
should be to strike a balance between efficiency consideration and maximum coverage of
farmers. Bulkline cost comprising seventy-five per cent. of farmers [(50+100)/2] shall be used
to arrive at Comprehensive Cost.
At the State Level:
(a) All the above shall be applicable to the State Level Cost Estimations too.
Averaging of Cost at the State Level shall be based on Bulkline Average from different
agro-ecological regions within the State;
(b) Guaranteed remunerative minimum support price Bonus shall be based on
ensuring that at least fifty per cent. of the State level average comprehensive cost of
production is covered, in addition to any other policy incentives that the State
Commission may provide.

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
More than fifty-five per cent. of India's population is principally dependent on
agriculture for their livelihood. The past two decades, since 1995, have recorded more than
3,00,000 cases of suicides by farmers. Indian Government data shows 12,602 farmers killed
themselves in 2015 alone, mostly owing to economic distress. Indebtedness was responsible
for 38.7 per cent. of suicides, while crop failures or the inability to sell produce lead to another
19.5 per cent. of suicides. More than forty-three per cent. of farmers who killed themselves in
2015 had small holdings.
Data reveals that very often, even the cost of production is not recovered by farmers
in realized prices, whereas the farm family has living expenses in addition to investments in
farming. At present, the Commission on Agricultural Costs and Prices, for determining the
Minimum Support Price (MSP), considers (1) Demand and supply; (2) Cost of Production;
(3) Price trends in the market, both domestic and international; (4) Inter crop price parity;
(5) Terms of trade between agriculture and non-agriculture; (6) Likely implication of MSP on
consumers of that product. Using these various parameters, MSP is often fixed even below
the cost of production, ignoring the right to life and livelihood of the producer.
Meanwhile, the food prices for consumers, especially those who are poor, have been
secured at affordable rates through at least two legislations in the country—the Food Security
Act, 2013 and the Essential Commodities Act, 1955. Therefore, there is every reason for price
determination for farmers to take the sole mandate of securing adequate net returns to a farmer,
over and above the comprehensive cost of production, rather than considering other parameters.
In view of the above, to uphold the right to life and livelihood of farmers, which are their
fundamental rights, it is proposed to constitute National and State Farmers Agricultural Costs
and Remunerative Price Guarantee Commissions which shall be autonomous body corporates,
which should, once appointed, not to be under the control of the Central or the State Government
and the determination of the comprehensive cost of production of the agriculture produce plus
at least fifty per cent. profit margin as a guaranteed remunerative minimum support prices of
each and every agricultural commodity by the Commission shall be final.
To confer such a right to guaranteed remunerative minimum support prices for sale of
all agricultural Commodities of all farmers, it is expedient to regulate the prices offered by
traders, and to lay down rules for public authorities for accountable functioning.
The Central Government takes decisions related to export and import of agricultural
commodities keeping in view various factors. It is proposed that before taking such decisions,
the Government should consult the Commission, and also take steps to ensure that the
landing price of any imported commodity is not below the guaranteed remunerative minimum
support prices fixed for that commodity within India at that point of time.
It is seen that to confer this legal right on all farmers to guaranteed remunerative
minimum support prices, a redressal and compensation mechanism is necessary for farmers
as well as traders.
It is felt that the right to guaranteed remunerative minimum support prices which
includes at least fifty per cent. profit margin over the comprehensive cost of production will
boost the morale of the farmer, who would be able to live comfortably, invest in his agricultural
enterprise thereby potentially increasing productivity and production to ensure national
food security be able to avoid falling into a debt trap.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RAJU SHETTI
April 6, 2018.
16

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for sufficient funds by the Central Government for robust,
accurate systems for cost estimations to be instituted for all agricultural commodities on a
timely basis. Clause 7 provides for  constitution of the Central Farmers' Agricultural Costs
and Remunerative Price Guarantee Commission. Clause 12 provides for constitution of the
State Farmers' Agricultural Costs and Remunerative Price Guarantee Commission. Clause 15
provides for constitution and maintenance of a State Compensation Fund consists of
allocations from the Central Government by the State Commission. Clause 18 provides that
the Central Government shall provide for implementation of timely and effective Market
Intervention Scheme by State Government within two days of fall in market prices, in all
perishable and other notified agricultural commodities, including potatoes, onions, tomatoes
and plantation commodities and shall provide sufficient financial outlays to ensure purchases
at guaranteed remunerative minimum support price and instant payments to the farmers.
Clause 21 provides that appropriate Government shall constitute a fund to make investments
in organizing farmers into Farmers or Workers' Producing Cooperative, and other Farmer
Producer Organisations, with sufficient infrastructure and financial capital to run their market
enterprises. Clause 22 provides that appropriate Government shall take all necessary measures
to reduce the cost of production by reducing the input costs through subsidies on inputs,
like seed, fertilizer, pesticide, electricity, diesel and farm equipment by promoting low-cost
sustainable methods of agriculture. Clause 27 provides for setting up of a three Member
Grievance Redressal Committee at Taluka level to redress complaints from farmers. Clause 29
provides that the Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by
law in this behalf, reserve and spend adequate funds for a comprehensive assessment of
costs for all commodities including by instituting systems for collection of data for such
agricultural commodities. Clause 30 provides that the State Governments shall reserve and
provide adequate outlays for the State Commission to function effectively and to meet the
obligations of fixing any State level guaranteed remunerative minimum support price over
and above the Central Government's notification of guaranteed remunerative minimum support
price. The Bill, therefore if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of
India. However at this stage it is not possible to estimate the exact amount which is likely to
be incurred towards recurring and non-recurring expenditure for the purpose.
17

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 34 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to make rules for carrying
out the purpose of this Act. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.
18

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to confer a right on farmers to guaranteed remunerative minimum support prices for agricultural
produce with minimum fifty per cent. Profit margin above comprehensive
cost of production upon sale of agricultural commodities and
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Raju Shetti, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—533LS(S-3)—10-07-2018.