BUI No. 115 of .,.,62 
THE TAXATION LAWS (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 1962 
(As INTRODUCBD IK LoIC 8ABBA 
ON 23RD NoVBMBlR, 1962) 

43 or 1961. 
BJlrNo liS or 1,62 
THE TAXATION LAWS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1962 
(As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABFiA) 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Incom~-tax Act, 191H and the WealthRta,r Act, 
1957 .• 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirteenth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be ca~led the Taxation Laws (Am~ndmellt) Act, Short title. 
1962. 
S 2. In section 2 of the Income-tax Act, 1961 (hereinafter referred to ?cnd,rJlent 
us the Income-tax Act), in clause (14), after sub-clause (h!), the follow- 0 sectlOD 2. 
ing sub-clause shall be inserted, namely:-
10 
"(iv) 6~ per cent. Gold Bonds, 1977 issued by the Central 
Government." . 
3. In section 88 of the Income-tax Act,-
(i) for sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be 
substituted, namely:-
"C 1) Subject to the provisions of this section, the assessee 
shall·be lmtitled to a deduction from the amount of income-
IS tax on his total income with which he is chargeable for any 
assessment year of an amount equal to the income-tax calcu-
lated at the average rate of income-tax on any sums paid by 
him m the previous year-
(i) as donations to the National Defenc~ Fund set up 
20 by the Central Government~ or 
(ii) .as donations to any other fund or any institution 
to which this section applies; or 
Amendment 
ohcction 88. 

Amendment 
of section 
193. 
Amendment 
of aec:tion S 
of Act 27 
of 19S7. 
2 
Wi) as donations to Government or to any local 
authority made on or after the 1st April, 1966, to be 
utilised for any charitable purpose:'; 
(ii) in sub-section (3), after the existing proviso, the following 
proviso shall bt: inserted, namely: - S 
"Provided further that where any sum paid during the 
previous )"ear includes any donation to the National Defence 
Fund set up by the Central Government the amount covered 
by that donation shall be excluded in calculating the limits 
specified in this sub-section."; 10 
(iii) in sU'l)-section (5), for the words "only to donations to an 
institution or fund established in India for a charitable purpose 
which", the following shall be substituted, namely: ---
"to donations to any institution or fund referred to in 
rlause (it) of sub-section (1), only if it is established in India IS 
fer a charitable purpose and if-it". 
4. To section 193 of the Income-tax Act, the following proviso shall 
be added, nameJy:-
"Provided that no tax shall be deducted from any interest 
payable on 4l per cent. National Defence Bonds, 1972 or 61 per 20 
cent. Gold Bonds, 1977, where any such Bonds are held by an 
indiVidual, not being a non-resident, and in the case of the Gold 
Bonds, the holder thereof makes a declaration in writing before 
the person responsible for paying the interest that the total 
nominal value Qf the Gold Bonds held by him including the Gold 25 
Bonds, if any, held on his behalf by any other person did not 
f;!xceed ten thousand rupees at any time during the period to 
which the interest relates.". 
5. In section 5 of the Wealth-tax Act, 1957,-
(i) 10 suL-section (1), after clause (xvi), the following clause . 30 shall be Inserted, namely:-
"(xvi") 61 per cent. Gold Bonds, 1977;"; 
(ii) in ~ub-section (2), for the word, brackets and figures 
"clause (xci)", the words, brackets and figures "clause (xvi) or 
clause (xvia)" shall be substituted. 3$ 

STA'l'J.:MENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
It has become necessary to make certain amendments to the 
Income-tax Act. 1961 and the Wealth-tax Act, 1957 in order to pr<?vide 
for (i) the p.xemption of 6A per cent. Gold Bonds, 1977 from tax on 
capital Rains E.nd wealth-tax, (ii) tax rebate on contributions made 
to the National Defence Fund, and (iii) a relaxation of the provisions 
regarding deduction of tax at source from the interest paid to indivi-
dual); resident in India of the National Defence Bond~ and the Gold 
Bonds. 
The Bill seeks to s~cure the above objectives. 
NEW DF.LHI; MORAR.TI DESAI. 
The 19th November. 1962. 
3 

Defillitions. 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 (43 or 1961>' 
* * * • 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
• * * • 
(14) "capital asset" means property of any kind held by an 
assessee, whether or not connected with his business or profes-
sion, but does not include-
(i) any stock-in-trade, consumable stores or raw 
materials held for the purposes of his business or profp.ssion; 
(ii) personal effects, that is to say, movable property 
(including weariilg apparel, jewellery and furniture) held 
for personal use by the assessee or any member of his family 
dependent on him; 
(iii) agricultural land in India; 
• * * • 
Donations 88. (1) iubject to the provision5 of this section, the assessee shall 
~~=:e~ be entitled to a deduction from the amount of income-tax on his tot.al 
income with which he is chargeable for any assessment year of an 
amount equal to the income-tax calculated at the ~verage rate of 
income-tax on any sums paid by him in the previous year as dona-
tions to any institution or fund to which this section applies or in 
respect of any sums paid by him on 01' after the IF,t day of April, 
1960, as donations to Government or to any local authority to be 
utilised for any charitable purpose . 
* • * • 
(3) No deduction shall be made under sub-section (1) in respect 
of any sums paid in excess of seven and a half per cent. of the 
assessee's total income as reduced by any portit)D thereof on which 
income-tax is not payable under any provision of this Act and by any 
amount in respect of which a deduction of income-tax have, been 
granted under any other provision of this Chaptl!r, or one hundred 
and fifty thousand rupees, whichever is less: 
Provided that in respect of any such sums paid during any 
previous year relevant to the assessment year com~encing on the 1st 
day of April, 1963 or any subsequent assessment year, this sub-section 
, 

5 
shall have effect as if for the words 'seven and a half per cent.' and 
the words 'one hundred and fifty thousand rupees', the words 'ten 
per cent.' and 'two hundred thousand rupees' has been, respectively, 
substituted. 
• • • • 
(5) This section applies only to donations to an institution or fund 
established in India for a charitable purpose which fulfils the follow-
ing conditions, namely:-
(i) if the institution or fund derives any income, such income 
would not be liable to inclusion in its total income under the pro-
visions of sections 11 and 12 or clause (22) of section 10; 
(ii) the instrument under which the institution or fund is 
constituted does not, or the rules governing the institution or the 
fund do not, contain any provision for the transfer or application 
at any time of the whole or any part of the income or assets of the 
institution or fund for any purpose other than a charitable pur-
pose; 
(iii) the institution or fund is not expressed to be for the 
benefit of any particular religious community or caste; 
(iv) the tnstitution or fund maintains regular accounts of its 
receipts and expenditure; and 
(v) the institution or fund is either constituted as a public . 
charitable trust 01' is registered under the Societies Registration 21 of 1860. 
Act, 1860, or under any law corresponding to that Act in force 
in any part of India or under section 25 of the Companies Act, 1 of 1956. 
1956, or is a university established by law, or is any other educa-
tional institution recognised by the Government or by a university 
established by law, or affiliated to any university established by 
law or is an institution financed wholly orl in part by the Govern-
ment or a local authority. 
Explanation 1.-An. institution or fund established for the benefit 
of scheduled castes, backward classes, scheduled tribes or of women 
and children shall not be deemed to be an institution or fund ex-
pressed to be for the benefit of a religious community or caste within 
the meaning of clause (iii) of this sub-section. 
Explanation 2.-For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared 
that a deduction to which the assessee is entitled in respect of any 
donation made to an institution or fund to which sub-section (5) 

Interest on 
securities. 
6 
applies shall not be affected merely by reason of the fact that subse-
quent to the donation any part of the income of the institution or 
fund has become chargeable to tax due to non-compliance with any 
of the provisions of section 11. 
• • • • 
193. The penon responsible for paying any income chargeable 
under the head "Interest on securities" shall, at the time of payment, 
deduct income-tax and super-tax at the rates in force on the amount 
of the interest payable. 
• • • • 
EXTRACT FROM THE WEALTH-TAX ACT, 1957 (27 OF 1957) 
• • • * 
Exemptions 5. (1) WeaHh-tax shall not be payable by an asse3see in respect 
in J'C!lpect of of the following assets, and such assets shall not be included in the certam 
assets. net wealth of the assessee-
* * * * 
(xvi) ten year treasury savings deposit certificates, fifteen 
year annuity certificates, deposits in post office savings banks, 
post office cash certificates, post office national savings certifi-
cates, post office national plan certificates and twelve year 
national plan savings certificates held by the assessee; 
• • • • 
(2) WeIth-tax shall not be payable by an assessee in respect of 
any deposit made by the assessee with the Government or in any 
security of the Government or of a local authority not specified in 
clause (m) of sub-section (1) which the Central Government may, 
by notification in the omclal Gazette, exempt from wealth-tax; but the 
value of any deposit' or security so exempted shall be included in com-
puting the net wealth of the assessee. 
• • • • • 

LOK SAOHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Income-tax Act, 1961 and the Wealth-
tax Act, 1957. 
The President has, in pursuance of clause (1) of article 117 and 
article 274 of the Constitution of India, recommended to 
Lok Sabha the introduction of the Bill. 
M. N.KAUL, 
Secretary. 
(Shri Morarji Desai, 
Minister of Finanee.) 