1
THE PROVISION OF SOCIAL SECURITY TO SENIOR CITIZENS
BILL, 2010
By
SHRI J.P . AGARWAL, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for social security to senior citizens and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Provision of Social Security to Senior Citizens Act,
2010.
(2) It extends to the whole of India execpt the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in other cases, the Central Government;
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
Bill No. 115 of 2010
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Definitions.
5

2
(b) “prescribed” means prescribed by ruels made under this Act;
(c) “senior citizen” means any person who has attained the age of sixty years;
and
(d) “social security” means provision of food and healthcare, establishment of
recreation centres and other amenities necessary for the welfare of senior citizens.
3. It shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to provide social security to all
senior citizens and to ensure their protection from exploitation and ill-treatment so as to
ensure a peaceful life for them.
4. Every senior citizen who is unable to maintain himself from his own earnings or
out of property owned by him, shall be paid monthly pension at such rate as may be prescribed
by the appropriate Government.
5. The appropriate Government shall provide the following facilities to the senior
citizens,—
(a) free medical and other healthcare facilities in all Government and private
hospitals including reimbursement of amount spent on medicines;
(b) interest free housing loan upto rupees one lakh;
(c) subsidy upto ninety per cent. for amount spent on travel by road or by
railways or by air; and
(d) free legal assistance.
6. The appropriate Government may establish and maintain old age homes at
accessible places in each district which shall have such facilities as may be prescribed for
senior citizens.
7. The appropriate Government shall take all measures to create awareness amongst
public about rights of senior citizens and give wide publicity to the provisions of this Act by
organizing seminars, symposia, lectures and conferences.
8. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by law by Parliament
in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the State Governments for carrying out the purposes
of this Act.
9. The provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force.
10. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force regulating any of the matters dealt with this Act.
11. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
(3) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before the State legislature.
Social security
to senior
citizens by the
appropriate
Government.
Payment of
pension to
senior
citizens.
Facilities to
be provided to
senior
citizens.
Establishment
of old age
homes.
Measures for
publicity,
awareness for
welfare of
senior citizens.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Act to have
over-riding
effect.
Act not in
derogation of
other laws.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Senior citizens are often neglected by the members of their own families. Their problems
have increased to such an extent that in the year 1991, the General Assembly of the
United Nations urged the Governments to formulate relevant policies in this regard. Hence,
this is very much necessary to provide social security to the senior citizens. There should be
provision for financial security, medical care and shelters for the senior citizens and they
should be given protection against ill-treatment and exploitation.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; J.P.  AGARW AL
August 17, 2010.

4
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for social security to senior citizens. Clause 4 provides for
the payment of pension to senior citizens who have no independent and adequate means of
livelihood. Clause 5 provides that free medical and other healthcare facilities, interest-free
housing loan, travel subsidy and free legal assistance may be provided to senior citizens.
Clause 6 provides for establishment of old age homes for senior citizens. Clause 7 provides
for measures for creating awareness among public about the rights of senior citizens.
Clause 8 provides for payment of adequate funds to the States for carrying out the purposes
of the Act. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India.
It cannot be estimated at this stage as to how many senior citizens will need assistance
from the Central Government. However, an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees
seven hundred crore is likely to be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of about rupees seven crore is also likely to be
involved.

5
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause11 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to make rules for carrying
out the provisions of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of detail only. Therefore, the
delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.

GMGIPMRND—4562LS(S3)—22-10-2010.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for social security to senior citizens and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
————
(Shri J.P. Agarwal, M.P.)