1
THE AIRLINES (PAYMENT OF COMPENSATION) BILL, 2011
By
SHRI M.K. RAGHAV AN, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for payment of compensation by airlines to passengers in case of delay or
cancellation of scheduled flights or in case of accidents during the carriage by air
resulting in death or bodily injuries to the passengers.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-second Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Airlines (Payment of Compensation) Act, 2011.
(2) It shall come into force at once.
2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "airlines" means any airline company registered with the Directorate General
of Civil Aviation (D.G.C.A.) in India and includes its Chairman and other members of
the Board of Directors of the company and Chief Operating Officer;
Bill No.  115  of  2011
Short title
and extent.
Definitions.5
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(b) "compensation" means and includes payment of money by airline companies
to the passengers in case of delay or cancellation of scheduled flights or accidents
occurring during the course of journey resulting in bodily injury or death of passengers;
and
(c) "prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. No airline shall cancel any of its scheduled flights except on such grounds as
mentioned in section 8.
4. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
every airline company,—
(i) in case of cancellation of flight or delay of more than five hours shall,—
(a) pay adequate compensation to the passengers at such rate as may be
prescribed;
(b) provide free lodging and boarding arrangements to all passengers till
alternate arrangements  are made for the transportation of  passengers to their
destination; and
(c) make alternate arrangements for transportation of passengers to
their destination.
(ii) in case of delay of more than thirty minutes and upto five hours, shall pay
compensation at such rate as may be prescribed.
5. The airline shall, in the event of an accident during the course of a journey or
during embarking or disembarking from the plane resulting in death or bodily injuries to
the passengers, be liable to pay compensation to such passengers or next of their kin in
case of death,  such amount and in such manner as may be prescribed:
Provided that the amount of compensation shall not vary in accordance with age or
economic status of the passenger but shall be the same:
Provided further that if any passenger opts to pay more premium as under section 6,
he shall be entitled to enhanced compensation.
6. Nothing in this Act shall prevent any airline company from,—
(a) charging of premium amount as part of airfare from any passenger for
insurance coverage; and
(b) entering into an agreement with an insurance company for providing
insurance coverage to the passengers.
7. The amount of compensation payable under the provisions of this Act shall be
payable within one month from the date of accident resulting in death or injury to the
passenger.
8. The airlines shall not be held responsible for payment of penalties to the passenger
in case of cancellation or delay of more than thirty minutes of a scheduled flight on account
of bad weather as certified by Airports Authority of India, and/or genuine technical problems.
Explanation.— For the purpose for this section, a certificate by the Authority of
the airport concerned that the weather was bad and not conducive to flying or there
are genuine technical problems in the aircraft which made the aircraft unfit for flying
shall be required.
Airline
companies not
to cancel their
flights.
Penalty in case
of cancellation
of flights.
Compensation
in case of death
or bodily
injuries.
Provision of
payment of
premium for
insurance
coverage.
Compensation
to be paid
within one
month from
the date of
accident.
Airlines not to
be held
responsible in
certain cases.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
9. (1) The Central Government may, by  notification, in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Power to
make rules.
5
10

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Airline industry has increased manifold in size and operations in the recent years, as a
result of reforms in the economy. Now, it has become possible for a common man to travel by
air. Several private and foreign companies have joined as new players in civil aviation sector
which once was the monopoly of our national carrier.
But, of late, there have been instances of unannounced delays, cancellations of
scheduled flights at the last moment by the airlines for extraneous reasons. Such delay or
cancellation results in loss of not only money and time of passengers but also causes mental
agony to the passengers particularly to aged passengers and children.
In such cases, the airlines should be made responsible for making alternate arrangements
for stay, transportation and for compensation in case there is no valid reason for such delay
or cancellation of the scheduled flight.
Another important aspect is compensation. While booking the ticket every passenger
is asked to pay premium for insurance coverage which airlines enter into an agreement with
insurance companies. But in the event of accidents resulting in injury or death of passengers,
the compensation is paid according to the income and status of the passengers. There is no
logic in paying different compensation when premium charged is the same. Moreover,
accidents, resulting in deaths or permanent disability, create havoc in the lives of families,
especially, if the passenger is the sole bread winner of the family and belongs to lower or
middle income group. However, if any passenger desires for wider risk coverage or higher
amount coverage he may opt for payment of higher premium of insurance policy.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; M.K. RAGHA VAN
November 9, 2011.
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for adequate compensation to the passengers in case of
cancellation or delay of flights. Clause 5 provides for compensation in case of death or
bodily injuries during the course of a journey. Clause 6 provides for enteringinto an agreement
with insurance company for providing insurance coverage to the passengers. The Bill,
therefore, if enacted will be applicable to national carrier also and as such will involve
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that an annual recurring
expenditure to the tune of rupees  three hundred crore is likely to be involved.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees two hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.
5

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
6

GMGIPMRND—2831LS—(S3)—02.12.2011.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for payment of compensation by airlines to passengers in case of delay or
cancellation of scheduled flights or in case of accidents during the carriage
by air resulting in death or bodily injuries to the passengers.
————
(Shri M.K. Raghavan, M.P.)