AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 115 of 2022
THE COMPULSORY MILITARY TRAINING BILL, 2022
By
SHRI BHOLA SINGH, M.P.
A
BILL
to make military training compulsory for all able-bodied citizens
and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India
as follows:—
1.(1) This Act may be called the Compulsory Military Training Act, 2022.
(2)It extends to the whole of India.
(3)It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may,
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government
of that State and in the case of a Union territory, the Central Government; and
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
5 Definitions.

2
Compulsory
military
training.
 5
 15
 20
 25
10Employment
to those who
have
undergone
military
training.
Power to
make rules.
(b) “person” means a citizen of India above the age of fourteen years but
less than fifty years.
3.(1) The Central Government shall provide military training to all able-
bodied persons for a period of not less than one year.
(2) The Central Government shall establish such number of institutions
and take such other necessary steps, as it may deem fit to give effect to the
provisions of sub-section (1).
(3) Every person who successfully completes training under sub-section (1)
shall be awarded a certificate to that effect by the Central Government.
4.The appropriate Government shall give preference to persons who have
successfully completed their military training in services under defence,
para-military forces and such other establishments and organisations, as it may
deem fit, for proper utilization of talent:
Provided that all such persons, who, after successful completion of their
military training remain unemployed, shall be given unemployment allowances at
such rate, as may be determined from time to time, by the Government till they
are gainfully employed.
5.(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after
it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period
of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session
or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification
in the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may
be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.

3
STA TEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Almost all developing countries, even those smaller in size, population and
resources than India, are providing compulsory military training to their citizens.
Providing compulsory military training to able-bodied citizens does not in any way
run counter to the ideal of international peace and harmony, which has been the
hallmark of India’s foreign policy since independence. Military training does not
necessarily encourage the pugnacity of individual or the belligerence of the nation-
States. On the contrary it inculcates qualities of discipline and sacrifice and fosters
in each individual the spirit of brotherhood and amity. A well integrated and a
coordinated programme of military training would be immensely beneficial to
channelise the vast energies of our youth and would lead to their all-round
development and enhancement of the welfare of the nation. People can defend and
safeguard their houses from robbery and dacoity which are increasing day by day.
Many innocent people are murdered in broad day light. With extremist activities on
the rise in the country and the Government being not able to provide adequate
protection to general public, self-defence becomes a must for every individual.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to provide for compulsory military training to all
able-bodied citizens.
Hence this Bill.
   NEW DELHI;   BHOLA SINGH
  4 April, 2022

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides that the Central Government shall provide
compulsory military training to all able-bodied persons for a period of not less than
one year and for the purpose shall establish such number of institutions and shall
take such other necessary steps, as it may deem fit. Clause 4 provides that persons
who have undergone military training and remain unemployed  shall  be  given
unemployment  allowance.  The  Central Government will have to incur expenditure
in respect of the Union territories for carrying out the provisions of the Bill. The
Central Government may also have to assist the State Governments for carrying out
the provisions of this Bill. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely to involve an annual recurring
expenditure of about rupees seven thousand crore per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one thousand crore is also likely
to be involved.
4

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGA TED LEGISLA TION
Clause 5 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for
carrying out the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of detail only
and as such the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.
5

LOK SABHA
A
BILL
to make military training compulsory for all able-bodied citizens
and for matters connected therewith
————
(Shri Bhola Singh, M.P .)