CliRRIGENDUJ\ 'At 9 
to 
THE ESSENTIML SERVICES M:,DJTENA'\CE yILL, 1981 
(l2..J>el's in.:t_rodu~g_ in _L.o.k S1~~)' 
Page 4, line 34,-
i£! "est ... blishments ll 
I'IEVv DELHI; 
ecptember 9:.. ~981 
hadra 18, 1903 {S~k;r 
redd "est ... blishment" 
-

f 1897. 
BJU No. 115 of 19&1 
THE ESSENTIAL S~RVICES MAINTENANCE BILL, l.981 
A 
BILL 
to provide JOT the maintenance of certain essential services and the 
normtll life of the community. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the ThIrty-second Year of the 
&public of India as f"llows:~ 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Essential Services Maintenanc:e 
Act, 1981. 
(2) It extf!nds to the whole of India! 
Provided that it shall nct apply to the State of Jammu and Kashmir 
in sO fat .as it relates to any essential service connected with mattera 
wit~ respect to which PArliament has no power to tnak' laws tor that 
State.· I 
to (3) Sections 8 anrt 9 shall come into force at once and the remaining 
provisions of this Act shall be deemed to have come into force on the 
26th day of July, 1981. 
(4) It shall cease to have effect on the expiry of four years from 
the date on which this Act receives the assent of the President except as 
15 respects ~gs done or omitted to be done before such cesser of opera-
tion of this Act, and section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897, shall 
apply upon such ceS8~r of operation of this Act as if it had then been 
repeaIett by a Central Act. 
Z. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
Short 
title, 
extent, 
commen~ 
cement 
and 
dUration. 
Deftni-
120 (a) "essential service" means- tiona. 
(i) any postal, telegraph or telephone service, includinr 
any service connected therewith; 
(it) ally railway service or any transport service for the 
carriage of passengers or goods by air or any other transport 

service for the carriage of passengers or goods by land or watet 
with respect to which Parliament has power to make laws; 
(iii) any service connected with the operation or mainte-
nance of aerodromes, or with the operation, repair or mainte-
nance of aircra'ft, or any service in the International Airports 5 
Authority of Indi:! constituted under section 3 of the Inter-
national Airports Authority Act, 1971; 43 of 1971. 
(iv) any service in, or in connection with the working of, 
any major port, inrluding any service connected with the load-
ing, 'Unloading, movement or storage of goods in any such port; 
(v) any service connected with the clearance of goods or 
passengers through the cpstoms or with the prevention of 
smuggling; 
10 
(vi) any service in any establishment of, or cOlUlected with, 
the armed forces of the Union or in any other establishments 15 
or installations connected with defence; ~-
(vii) any service in any establishment or undertakina deal-
ing with the production of goods required for any purpose 
connected with defence; 
,(viii) any service in any section of any inciustrial under- ~o 
taking pertaining to a scheduled industry on the working of 
which the safety o'f such undertalting or· the employees 
employed therein depends. 
Explanation.-For the pUrposes of this sub-clause, the ex-
pressions "industrial undertaking" and "schedUled industtY' 25 
shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in clauses 
(d) and (i) of section 3 of the Industries (Development and 
Regulation) Act, 19~1; ·.tW 
(iJ:) any service in, or in connection with, the working of 
any undertaking owned or controlled by the Central Govem- 30 
ment being an undertaking engaged in the purchase, procure-
ment, storage, supply or distribution of foodgrains; , 
(x) any service in, or in connection with the working of, 
any system of public conservancy, sanitation or water supply, 
hospitals or dispensaries, in any Union territory, cantonment S5 
area or undertaking owned or controlled by the Central Govern-
ment; 
(xi) any service in connection with or in. relation to bank· 
ing; 
(~i) any service .i.n any est~blish~e~to~ undertaking deal- 4D 
in~ ,with the productIon, supply or dlstnbutlOn of coal, power, 
st~ or fertilizers;' 
(xiii) any service in any oilfield 9r refinery or .inany estab-. 
lishment or undertaking dealing with the production, supply or 
distribution of petroleum and petroleum products; .45 
(xiv) any service in any mint or security press; 
(xv) any service in connection with elections to Parliament 
or to the Legislatures of the States; 
(xvi) any service in co~mection with the affairs of the Union, 
not being a service spe~ifled in any of the foregoingsub-clwses; 50 
. " I 
68 of 1951. 

14 of 1M7. 
.. 
r 
5 
8 
(~ii) any other service connected with matters with respect 
to which Parliament has power to make laws and which the 
Central Government being of opinion that strikes therein would 
prejudicially affect the maintenance of any public utility service, 
the public safety or the maintenance of supplies and services 
necessary for the life of the community or would result in the 
infliction of gr:ave hardship on the community, may, by noti-
fication in the Official Gazette, declare to be an essential 
service for the purposes of this Act; 
10 (b) .. strike" means the cessation of work by a body of persons 
while employed in any essential service acting in combination or a 
-concerted refusal or a refusal under a common unrlerstanding of 
any number of persons who are or have been so employed to conti-
nue to work or to accept work assigned, and includes-
15 (i) refusal to work overtime where such work is necessary 
!20 
for the maintenance of any essential service; 
(ii) any oth~r conduct which is likely to result in, or results 
in, cessation or substantial retardation of work in any essential 
service; 
(c) words and expressions uSE:d in sections 8 and 9 and not de-
fined, but rlefined in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, shall have 
the meanings respectively assigned to them in that Act. 
(2) Every notification issued under sub-clause (xvii) of clause (a) of 
sub-section (1) shall be laid before each House of Parliament imme-
gs diately after it is made 'if it is in session and on the first day of the 
commencement of the next session of the House if it is not in session, 
and shall cease to operate ('\1 the expiration of forty days from the date 
of its being so laid or from the re-assembly of Parliament, as the case 
may be, unless before the expiration of that period a resolution approv-
30 ing the issue o'f the notification is passed by both HO'Uses of Parliament. 
Explanation.-Where the Houses of Parliament are summoned to re- . 
assemble on different dates. the period of forty days shall be reckoned 
from the later of those dates. 
(3) Any reference in this Act to any law which is not in force in any 
35 area and to any authority under such law shall, in relation to that area, 
be construed as a reference to the corresponding law in force in that 
area and to the corresponding authority under such corresponding law. 
3. (1) If the Central Government is satisfied that in the public 
interest it is necessary or l'xpedient so to do, it'may, by general or 
40 special Order, prohibit strikes in any essential service specified in the 
Ortler. 
(2) An Order made under sub-section (1) shall be published in such 
manner as the Central Government considers best calculated to bring 
it to the notice of the persons affected by the Order. 
45 (3) An Order made under sub-seotion (1) shall be in force for six 
months. only, but the Central Government may, by a like Order,extend 
it for any period not exceeding six months if it is satisfied that in the 
public interest it is n~cessary or expedient So to do, 
Power to 
prohibit 
strikes in 
certain 
employ-
ments. 

t iIr () 
to) .. 1 
Dlamiasal 
of em-
ployees 
participat-
Ing in 
HIe .. r 
strikes. 
Penalty 
for 
illegal 
strikes. 
Penalty 
for 
instiga-
tion, etc. 
Penalty 
for giving 
financial 
aid to 
illegal 
strikes. 
Power to 
prohibit 
lock-oula 
in certain 
estal:!liah-
menta. 
(4), Upon tAe issue of :m Order under sub-section (1) ,-
(a) no person ~mployed in any essential service to which the 
OrdeI relates shall go or remain on strike; 
(b) any strike declared or commenced whether before or after 
the is.ue! of the Or~r, by ~rsons employed in any such service 5 
shall be illegal. 
4. Any person,-
(a) who commences a strike which is illegal under this Act or 
goes or remains on, 01' otherwise takes part in, any such strike; or 
. (b) who instigatea or incites oth~ persons to commence, or go 10 
or remain on, or otherwise take part in, any such strike, 
shall be liable to disciplinary action (including dismissal) in accordance 
with the same provisions as are applicable for the purpose of taking such 
disCiplinary action (including dismissal) on any other ground under the 
tenns anci conditions of service applicable to him in relation to his 15 
employment. 
5. Any person who commences a strike which is illegal under this 
Act or goes or remains (In, or otherwise takes part in, any such strike 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
six months. or with fine which may extend to one thC1USa~d rupees, or 20 
with both. 
6. Any person who instigates or incites other persons to take part in, 
or otherwise acts in furtherance of, a strike which is illegal under this 
Act shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend 
to one year, or with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees, or 25 
with both. 
7. Any person wao kn!lwingly expends or supplies any money in 
furtherance or sUppQrt of a strike which is illep! under this Act shall 
be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend· to one 
year, or with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees, or with 30 
both. 
8. (1). If the Central Government is satisfied that in the public in-
ter~st it is. n~~ss~ry Of, e~pedient so to do, it may, by general or special 
Order, prohibit lock-outs in any establishments pertaining to any essen-
tial service specified in the Order. 35 
(2) An Order made under sub-section (1) shall be publilhed in such 
manner as the Central Government considers best calculated to bring it 
to the notice of the persons affected by the Orner. 
(3) An Ord~r made 4nder sub-section (1) shall be in force for six 
months only, but the Central Government may, by a like Order, extend 4() 
it for any period not exce,==ding six months if it is satisfied that in the 
public interest it is necessary so to do. 
(4) Upon the issue of an Order under sub-section (1) ,-
(4) no employer in relation to an establishment to. which the 
Qreter applies sl\a~ co.mtqel\ce any lock-out; 

(b) any lock-out declared or commenced whether before or after 
the issue of the Order by any employer in relatic-n to an establish-
ment to which the Order applies shall be illegal. 
(5) Any employer in relation to an establishment who commences, 
5 cOlltinues or otherwise acts in furtherance o'f a lock-out which is:Ulegal 
u~der this section l shall be punishable with imprisonment for a 'term 
Which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to. one 
thousand rupees, or with both. 
I. (1) If the Central Government is satisfied that in the public interest 
10 it is. neoeesany or expedient so to do,it may, by g~pera.l ot: I\~"l Order, 
prohibit lay-oft, on any ground other than shO!'tage of power or 
natura] calamity, of any workman (other than a badli workman or a 
casual workman) whose name -is borne on the muster rolls of any estab-
lishment pertaining to any essential service specified in the Order. 
15 (2) An Order made under sub':seation (1) shall be published in such 
m~nner as the Central Government considers best calculated to bring 
it to the notice of the persons affected by the Order. 
(3) An Orcler made under sub-section (1) shall be in force for six 
. months only, but the Central Government may, .by a like Order, extend 
~o it for any period not exceeding six months if it is satisfied that in the· 
public interest it is necessary or expedient so to do. 
(4) Upon the issue of an Order under rub-section (1),-
(a) no employer in relation to an establishment to which the 
Order applies shall lay-off or continue the lay-off of any workman 
:25 (other than a badU workman or a casual workman) whose name is 
borne on the muster rolls of such establishment unless such lay-oft 
is due to shortage of power or to natural calamity an~ any laying-
off or continuation af laying-off shall, unless &"Uch laying-off or con-
tinuation of laying-off is due to shortage of power or to natural 
30 calamity, be illegal; 
(b) a workman whose laying-off is illegal under clause (a) 
'shall be entitled to all the benefits under any law for the time being 
in force as if he had not been laid-off. 
(5) Any employer in relation to an establishment who lays off or 
35 continues the laying-off (\f any workman shall, if such laying-01f or 
continuEltion of laying-off is illegal under this section be punishable 
with imprisonment for a term which may exteJtCl to six months, or with 
fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both. 
18. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal 
2 of 1974. 40 Procedure, 1973, any police officer may arrest without warrant any person 
wao is reasonably suspectecl of having committed any offence under this 
Aot. 
11. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Pro~ 
2 of 1974. cedure, 1973, all offences under this Act shall be tried in a S'Ummary way 
45 by any Metropolitan Magistrate, or any Judicial Magistrate of the First 
Class specially empowered in this behalf by the State Government and 
the provisions of sections 262 to 265 (both inclusive) of the sa.id Code 
shall, as far as may be, apply to such trial: 
Power to 
prohibit . 
lay ... in 
certain 
elIUlblIah-
meid8: 
Power to 
arrest 
without 
warrant. 
Offences 
to be 
tried 
summari~ 
ly. " 

, do> - e 
~"7 
Act to 
ovwrtdt 
other 
la".. 
AmeDCl-
ment 
of Act '1 
of 1_. 
Provided that in a case of conviction for any offence in a summary 
tria) under this section, it shall be lawful for ·the Magistrate to pass a 
sentence of imprisonment for any term for which such offence is 
punishable under this Act. 
12. The provisions of this Act and of any Order issued thereunder 5 
shall have effeet notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith con-
tained in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, or in any other law for the 16 of 1947, 
time being in force: 
11. During the continuance in force of this Act, the Essential Services 
Maintenance (Assam) Act, 1980, shall have effect as if.-
(a) in section 2,-
(1) in sub-section (1) ,-
(i) clause (a) had been omitted; 
(ii) for clause (b), the following clauses had been 
IO 
substituted, namely:- 15 
'(b) "essential service" means--
(i) any transport service for the carriage of 
paS/:lengers or goods, by land or water, with respect 
to which the Legislative Assembly of the State of 
Assam has power to make laws; 
(H) any service connected with the production, 
storage, supply or distribution, as the case may be, 
of gas or water; 
20 
(iii) any service connected with. the mainte-
nance of public health and sanitation, including 2S 
hospitals and. dispensaries; 
(iv) any public services and post'S in connec-
tion with the affairs of the State, and also persons 
appoi!lted to the secretarial staff of the Legislative 
Assembly of the State of Assam; 30 
(v) any other service or employment or class 
thereof, connected with matters with respect to 
which the Legislative Assembly of the State of 
Assam has power to make laws and which the 
State Government, being of opinion . that strikes 35 
therain would prejudicially affect the maintenance 
of any public utility service, the public safety or 
the maintenance of the supplies and services neces-
sary for the life of the community or would result 
in the :nftiction of grave hardship on the community, 40 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
declare to be an essential service for the purposes 
of this Act; 
(bb) "State Government" means the State Govern- 45 
ment of ASsaIni'; 

.',4 ... \. •.• 
, 
(2) in sub-section (2), for the words, brackets and Agurei 
"under sub-clause (xiv) ", the words, brackets wd ftgure "under 
sub-clause (v)" had been .substituted; 
(b) in sections 3 and 9, for the words "appropriate Gevern-
5 ment", wherever they occur, the words "State Government" had 
been substituted. 
of 1981. 14. (1) The Essential Services Maintenance Ordinance, 1981, is here-
by repealed. 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken 
10 under the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or taken 
under the corresponding provisions of this Act. 
Repeal 
and 
savin,. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
There have been certain disquieting trends likely to affect the mainte-
nance of essential services in some vital sectors of the economy. It was 
considered necessary that the essential services should be maintained if 
disruption o'f the normal life of the community and hardships to the 
common people were to be avoided. In the interest of the continuance of 
production essential for national security and defence as well as for the 
economy, it was felt that diEcipline and operational efficiency had to be 
maintained for the overall national good and public welfare. The Es-
sential Services Maintenance Ordinance. 1981 was accordingly promul-
gated by the President on the 26th July. 1981 to secure these objectives. 
-..... 
2. The Ordinance was an enabling measure and defined "essential 
service" which, inter aLia, included any service declared as such by noti-
fication by the Central Government. The Ordinance also authorised the 
Central Government to prohibit strikes in essential services, declared 
prohibited strikes to be illegal and provided for penalties for persons 
participating in such strikes as well as for persons instigating and ftnan· 
cing such strikes. The Ordinance also contained suitable proVisions for 
nmendment of the Essential Services Maintenance (Assam) Act, 1980, 
so as to exclude from the purview of that Act essential services relating 
to matters Which would be covered by the Orrlinance. 
3. The Bill seE!ks to replace the said Ordinance by a temporary Act 
Which will have operation only for a period of four years. In addition, 
it is considered desirable that, in the interest of maintenance of supplies 
and services essential for the community and for keeping the wheels of 
prodUcti()ll moVing, lock-outs and lay--of'fs should also be prohibited in 
essential services in the same manner as strikes. It is also proposed to 
1nclHde specifiCally certain other services in the definition of "essential 
service" as contained in the Bill. 
4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 8th September, 1981. ZAIL SINGH. 
r 8 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEG~SLATroN 
Item (a) of clause 2 (1) Of the Bill seeks to define "essential service". 
Sub-items (1) to (xvi) of this item enumerate certain essential services. 
As it is not possible. to enumerate all essential services,sub-ite"m (xvii) 
of this ,item empowers the Central Government to declare, by not.ifica-
tion in the Official Gazette, certain other services also to be essential 
services for the purposes of the proposed legislatiO'n. This sub-item 
clearly brings out the criteria on the basis of which any service may be 
declared thereunder to be an essential service. .Thus a service cann~t 
be' declared to be an essential service under the said sub-item (xvii); 
unless the service is connected with matters with. respect to which 
Parliament has power to make laws and unless the Central Government 
is of opinion that strikes therein would prejudicially affect the main-
tenanee of any public 'Utility service, the public safety or the mainte-
nance of supplies and services neceS'3ary for the life of the 'community 
or would result in the infliction of grave hardship on the community. 
Under clause 2 (2) of the Bill, any notification under the said sub-item 
(xvii) has to be laid before Parliament and it shall cease to operate 
after a period of forty days specified in that sub-clause unless it is, in 
the meanwhile, approved by both Houses of Parliament. In the· circum-
stances, the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character . 
• 
9 

Deftni~ 
tions. 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE ESSENTIAL SERVICES MAINTENANCE (AssAM) 
Acr, 1980 
(41 OF 1980) 
• • • * • 
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "appropriate Government" means--
(i) in relation to any service connected with matters 
relatable to any of the entries enumerated in List I in the 
Seventh Schedule to the Constitution, the Central Government; 
(ii) in relation to any service connected with matters 
relatable to any of the entries en'Umerated in List II in the 
Seventh Schedule to the Constitution, the State Government of 
Assam; and 
(iii) in relation to any service connected with matters 
relatable to any of the entries enumerated in List rn in the 
Seventh Schedule to the Constitution, the Central Government 
and the State Government of Assam; 
(b) "essential service" ,means-
(i) any postal, telegraph or telephone service; 
(ii) any railway service or any other transport service for 
the carriage of passengers or goods by land, water or air; 
(iii) any service connected with the loading and unloading 
of goods; 
(it') any service connected with the operation or mainte~ 
nance Of aerodromes or with the operation, repair or maintenance 
of aircraft; 
(1') any servi('e connected with the -clearance of goods or 
passengers through the customs or with the prevention 
of smuggling; 
(t)i) any service in any establishment of, or connected with. 
the armed forces (If the Union or in ,any other establishments 
or installations connected with defence; 
(vii) any service in any sedion of any industrial establish-
ment or undertaking on the working of which the safety of such 
establishment or undertaking or the employees employed there-
in depends; 
(viii) any service in,or in connection with, the working of 
anv undertaking owned or controlled by the Government being 
an undertaking enr,aged in the purchase, pft)curement, storage, 
supply or distrihution of foodgrains; 
10 

II 
(ix) any service in any system of publk conservancy or 
sanitation; 
(x) any service in connection with or in relation to 
banking; 
(xi) any servirc in any establishment or undertaking deal-
ing with the production, supply and distribution of coal; 
(xii) any 'ierviee in any oilfield or refinery or in any 
establishment or undertaking dealing with the production, 
supply or distribution of petroleum and petroleum products; 
(xiii) any aervice in connection with the affairs of the 
Union or the State of Assam not being a service specified in any 
of the foregoing sub-clauses; 
(xiv) any other service connected with matters with respect 
to which Parliamer:t or the Legislative Assembly of the State 
of Assam has power to make laws aOli. which the Central Govern· 
ment or the Government of Assam, as the case may be, 
being of opinion that strikes therein would prejudicially affect 
the maintenance of any public utility service, the public safety 
or the maintenance of S'Upplie~ and services necessary for the 
life of the community or would result in the inftiction of grave 
hardship on the ('ommunity, may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, declare to be an essential service for the purposes 01 
this Actj 
• • • • • 
(2) Every notification issued under sub-clause (xiv) of clause (b) of 
sub-section (1) shall be laid before each House of Parliament immediate-
ly after it is made if it is in session and on the first day of the commence-
. m6nt of the next session of the House if it is not in session, and shall 
ceac;e to operate at the expiration of forty days from the date of its being 
so laid or from the re-assembly of Parliament, as the case may be, unless 
bdore the expiration of th&1 period a resolution approving the issue of 
the notification is passed by both Houses of Parliament. 
Explanation.-Where the Ho~ses of Parliament are S'UJIlmoned to 
re-assemble on different dates, the period of forty days shall be reckoned 
from' the later of those dates . 
• • • • • 
3. (1) If the appropriate Government is satisfied that in the public 
interest it is necessary or expedient so to do, it may, by general or special 
Order, prohibit strikes in the f\tate of Assam in any essential service 
specified in the Order. 
(2) An Order made under sub-section (1) shall be published in such 
manner as the appropriate Government considers best calculated to 
bring it to the notice of the persons affected by the Order . 
• 
(3) An Order made under sub-section (1) shall be in force for six 
months only, but the appropriate Government may, by a like Order, 
Power to 
prohibit 
strikes in 
certain 
employ_ 
ments. 

Offences 
to be 
tried 
summari-
ly. 
extend it for any period not exceeding six months if it is satisfied that 
in the public interest it is necessary or expedient so to do . 
• • • • • 
U. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Pro-
. cedure, 1973, all offences under this Act shall be tried in a summary 2 of 1974. 
wr'ly by a Judicial Magistrate of the first class specially empowered in 
this behalf by the appropriate Government and the provisions of 
sections 262 to 265 (beth inclusive) of the said Code shall, as far as may 
be, apply to such trial: 
Provided that in a case of conviction for any offence in a summary 
trial 'Under this section, it shall be lawful for the Magistrate to pass a 
sentence of imprisonment fOf any term for which such offence is punish-
able under this Act. 
• • • • • 

Memorandum explaining the modifications contained in the Essential 
Services Maintenance Bill, 1981, which Beeks to repeal and replace the 
E8sential Services Maintenance Ordinance, 1981. 
Apart from changes of 3. fonnal, drafting or consequential nature, 
the Bill contains the following modifications:-
(1) Clause 1(4) of the Bill restricts the duration of the proposed 
legislation to a period of four years from the date on which it 
receives the assent of the President. 
(2) Clause 2 (1) (a) of the Bill which defines the expression 
"essential service" has been amplified to specifically include-
(a) service in any establishment or undertaking dealing 
with the production of goods required for any purpose connected. 
with defence, 
(b) water supply in any Union temtory or cantonment 
area, 
(c) service in any establishment or undertaking dealing 
with the production, wpply or distribution cit. coal, power, 
steel and fertilizers. 
(3) The Bill seeks to inclucle specific provisions regarding pro-
hibition of loek-outa and lay..ofts in euential lervfcM. 

LOK SABRA 
4 
Bn..L 
to provide for. the. maiJ'i.tenanceofcertain essential' services md° the 
normal life of the community. 
(Giani ZGil Si"l9h, Minister of Home Afcrir •. ) 