1
THE NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR FARMERS’ INCOME BILL, 2015
By
SHRI R. DHRUV ANARAYANA, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of a National Commission for Farmers' Income and for
matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1)  This Act may be called the National Commission for Farmers' Income Act, 2015.
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:—
(a) ‘Commission’ means the National Commission for Farmers' Income constituted
under Section 3;
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. 115 of  2015
Definitions.
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(b) 'farmer' means a person who owns land and cultivates or causes it to be
cultivated for agricultural or horticulture purposes and has no income from any source
other than agriculture or horticulture;
(c) 'member' means a Member of the Commission and includes the
Member-Secretary; and
(d) 'prescribed' means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
CHAPTER II
T
HE NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR FARMERS' INCOME
3. (1) The Central Government shall constitute a Commission to be known as the
National Commission for Farmers' Income to exercise the powers conferred on, and to
perform the functions assigned to it, under this Act.
(2) The Commission shall consist of—
(a) a Chairperson, committed to the cause of farmers livelihood, to be nominated
by the Central Government;
(b) five members to be nominated by the Central Government from amongst
persons of ability, integrity and standing who had had experience in agriculture,
social justice, law or legislation committed to ensuring the livelihood through growth
in income of farmers:
Provided that at least one member each shall be from amongst persons belonging
to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, respectively;
(c) A Member-Secretary to be nominated by the Central Government, who shall
be—
(i) an expert in the field of management, organizational structure on
agricultural issues, or
(ii) an officer who is a member of a civil service of the Union or of an All-
India Service or holds a civil post under the Union with appropriate experience.
4. (1) The Chairperson and every member shall hold office for such period, not exceeding
three years, as may be specified by the Central Government in this behalf.
(2) The Chairperson or a member (other than the Member-Secretary who is a member of
a Civil Service of the Union or of an All-India Service or holds a Civil post under the Union)
may, by writing and addressed to the Central Government, resign from the office of Chairperson
or, as the case may be, of the member at any time.
(3) The Central Government shall remove a person from the office of Chairperson or a
member referred to in sub-section (2) if that person—
(a) becomes an undercharged insolvent;
(b) gets convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for an offence which in the
opinion of the Central Government involves moral turpitude;
(c) becomes of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court;
(d) refuses to act or becomes incapable of acting;
(e) is without taking leave from the Commission, absent from three consecutive
meetings of the Commission; and
(f) in the opinion of the Central Government has so abused the position of
Chairperson or member so as to render his continuance detrimental to public interest:
Provided that no person shall be removed under this clause until that person has
been given an opportunity of being heard in the matter.
Constitution
of the
National
Commission
for Farmers'
Income.
Term of
Office and
conditions of
service of
Chairperson
and members.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(4) A vacancy caused under sub-section (3), shall be filled within one month from the
date on which the vacancy has been created.
(5) The salaries and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service
of the Chairperson and members shall be such as may be prescribed.
5. (1) The Central Government shall provide suitable officers and employees to the
Commission for its efficient performance under this Act.
(2) The salaries and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service
of officers and employees shall be such as may be prescribed.
6. The salaries and allowances payable to the Chairperson and the members and the
administrative expenses, including salaries, allowances and pensions payable to the officers
and other employees referred to in section 5, shall be paid out of the grants referred to in
sub-section (1) of section 11.
7. No Act or proceeding of the Commission shall not be questioned or shall be invalid
on the grounds merely of existence of any vacancy or defect in the constitution of the
Commission.
8. (1) The Commission may appoint Committees as may be necessary for dealing with
or studying issues that may be taken up by the Commission from time to time;
(2) The Commission may appoint Members, as it may deem fit, on such Committees
under this sub-section, provided that, the members of the Committee who are not members of
the Commission shall not have the right to vote on matters of the Commission;
(3) The allowances payable to members appointed to the Committees shall be such as
may be prescribed.
9. (1) The Commission or a Committee thereof shall meet as and when necessary and
shall meet at such time and place as the Chairperson may think fit.
(2) The Commission shall regulate its own procedure and the procedure of the
Committees thereof.
(3) All orders and decision of the Commission shall be authenticated by the
Member-Secretary.
CHAPTER III
F
UNCTIONS OF THE COMMISSION
10. (1) The Commission shall perform all or any of the following functions, namely—
(a) undertake annual income surveys of farmers across various categories,
including different crops and landholding sizes;
(b) make policy suggestions to ensure that minimum income accrues to farmers
across various categories;
(c) design periodically an income security framework for various categories of
farmers, inter-alia including market interventions, compensation, subsidies, reduction
in cost of production, mechanization, capacity building, credit enhancement,
strengthening supply chains or any other tool that the Commission deems fit;
(d) review, from time to time, various schemes of the Central Government
pertaining to agriculture and income of farmers;
(e) make recommendations to Central Government for effective implementation
of policies and schemes ensuring that the minimum income accrues to farmers.
Officers and
employees of
the
Commission.
Salaries and
allowances to
be paid out of
grants.
Vacancies not
to invalidate
proceedings of
the
Commission.
Committees
of the
Commission.
Procedure to
be regulated by
the
Government.
Functions of
the
Commission.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

4
(f) call for special studies and investigations into problems arising out of agrarian
distress, and make timely recommendations to the Central Government for appropriate
action.
(g) undertake promotional and educational research to ensure minimum incomes
for farming households, enhancement of income of farmers and productivity in
agriculture.
(h) take suo-moto notice of matters relating to—
(i) farmer distress and particularly, farmer suicides across the country;
(ii) non-implementation or poor implementation of policies or schemes of
farmers; and
(iii) non-compliance of policy decisions, guidelines and instructions taken
for farmers.
(i) evaluate the status of livelihood of farmers across various regions in the
country;
(j) make periodic reports to the Government on any matters pertaining to farmers;
and
(k) take up any other matter that may be referred to it by Central Government.
CHAPTER IV
F
INANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT
11. (1) The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by
law in this behalf provide to the Commission by way of grants such sums of money as the
Central Government may think fit for being utilized for the purpose of this Act.
(2) The Commission may spend such sums as it thinks fit for performing the fucntions
under this Act, and such sums shall be treated as expenditure payable out of grants under
sub-section (1).
12. (1) The Commission shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records and
prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be prescribed by Central
Government in consultation with Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
(2) The accounts of the Commission shall be audited by Comptroller and Auditor-
General of India at such intervals as may be specified by him and any expenditure incurred
in connection with such audit shall be payable to Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
(3) The accounts of the Commission, as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor-
General along with the audit report shall be forwarded annually to the Central Government by
the Commission.
13. The Commission shall prepare, in such form and at such time, for each financial
year, as may be prescribed, its annual report, giving a full account of its activities during the
financial year and forward a copy thereof to the Central Government.
14. The Central Government shall cause the annual report along with a memorandum
of actions taken on recommendations and reasons for non-acceptance of recommendations,
if any, of any such recommendations to be laid, as soon as may be, after the reports are
received, and the audit report before each House of Parliament.
CHAPTER V
M
ISCELLANEOUS
15. The Chairperson, the Members, Officers and the other employees of the Commission
shall be deemed to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal
Code.
Grants by
Central
Government.
Accounts and
Audit.
Annual
Report.
Annual report
and audit
report to be
laid before
Parliament.
Chairperson,
members and
staff of the
Commission
to be public
servants.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

5
16. The Central Government shall consult the Commission on all major policy matters
affecting farmers.
17. (1) The Central Government may by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely—
(a) salaries, allowances and terms and conditions of service of Chairperson and
members under sub-section (5) of section 4 and other employees and officers under
sub-section (2) of Section 5.
(b) allowances paid to members appointed to Committees under sub-section (3)
of section 8.
(c) other matters under sub-section 3 of section 4 on the basis of which the
Central Government can remove a Chairperson or member from the Commission.
(d) the form, and timeline as per which the annual statements of accounts shall
be maintained under section 12.
(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive session and if before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or successive sessions aforesaid
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule shall thereafter have effect only in
such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
Central
Government
to consult
Commission.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20

6
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Even today, the issue of suicides by farmers continues to plague our country. As per
the National Crime Records Bureau (NCRB), from 1995 to 2012, in a period of 18 years, 2.85
lakh farmers have committed suicide in India. In 2012 and 2013 alone, 13,754 and 11,772
farmers have committed suicide. High indebtedness and low agricultural  earnings have been
a prime cause of farmer suicides. As per the NSSO, 70th round survey (January 2013-December
2013), an average farm household earns less than rupees sixth thousand and five hundred
per month. Those with small and marginal land holdings are earning even lower income from
agriculture. To generate sufficient income, these farmers have to depend on alternative
employment for their livelihood. In addition to this, about 52% of agricultural households
across the country are estimated to be indebted, this percentage being as high as 92.9% in
State of Andhra Pradesh.
On account of such extreme farmer distress, the National Farmers Commission under
the Chairmanship of Prof. M.S. Swaminathan in its report had pointed out that "Success in
agricultural progress should be measured by the growth of farmers' incomes and not just by
production figures". As echoed by the Commission, for sustainability of agriculture, farmers'
income and livelihood must be the focal point of policy framing in agriculture.
In pursuance of this objective, the Bill seeks to establish a National Commission for
Farmers' Income. Among other things, the Commission shall undertake annual surveys and
studies to bridge the data gap that exists on farmers, income, survey and study farmers
income across crops, landholding sizes and regions and guide policies of the Government
towards ensuring minimum and fair income to the farmers.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; R. DHRUVANARAYANA
March 3, 2015.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for constitution of the National Commission for Farmers'
Income. Clause 6 provides for salaries and allowances to be paid to the Chairperson and
members of the Commission. Clause 8 provides for appointment of Committees to deal with
or study issues that may be taken by the Commission. Clause 9 provides for meetings of the
Commission and Committees. Clause 11 provides that the Central Government shall provide
funds to the Commission. Clause 12 provides for payment of expenditure incurred on audit of
the Commission.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund
of India. At this stage, it is not possible to give the exact amount to be incurred. However, it
is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about rupees five hundred crore will be involved
per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be involved.
7

MEMORA NDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 17 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules to carry out the
provisions of the Bill. Such rules may provide for matters, such as—
(a) salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of
service of, the Chairperson and members under sub-section (5) of section 4 of officers
and other employees under sub-section (2) of section 5;
(b) allowances for attending the meetings of the committee by the co-opted
persons under sub-section (3) of section 8;
(c) the form in which the annual statement of accounts shall be maintained under
sub-section (1) of section 12;
(d) the form in, and the time at, which the annual report shall be prepared under
section 13;
(e) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.
2. The matter in respect of which rules will be made are matters of procedural and
administrative detail and it is not practicable to provide them under the Bill itself. The delegation
of the legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.
8

LOK  SABHA
————————
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of a National Commission for Farmers' Income and for
matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Shri R. Dhruvanarayana, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—22LS(S3)—20-04-2015.