As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABRA ON 
Bill No. 115 of 1985 
THE ANDHRA PRADESH LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL 
(ABOLmON) BILL, 1985 
A 
BILL 
to provide jar the abolition at th.e Legislative CO'uncil of the State of 
Andhra Pradesh and JOT mJatters sUppZemental, incidental and cove-
quentiaZ thereto. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-sixth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. (1) This ACt may be called the Andhra Pradesh Legislative Council 
(Abolition) Act, 1985. 
5 (2) It shall come into force on s~ch date as the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
10 
15 
, 
Z. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "approPriate Govemment" means, as respects a law relating 
to a matter enumerated in List I in the Seventh Schedule to the 
Constitution, the Central Government, and as respects any other law, 
the State Government~ 
(b) "article" means an article of the Constitution; 
(c) "Council" means the Legislative Council of the State of 
Andhra Pradesh; 
(d) "law" includes any enactment, ordinance, regulation, order, 
bye-law, rUle, scheme, notification or other instrument having the 
force of law in the whole or any part of the State of Andhra Pradesh; 
(e) "Legislative Assembly" means' the Legislative Assembly of 
the State of ADdhra Praclelh. 
Short 
title 
and com-
.mence-
ment. 
Defini-
tions. 

Abolition 
of tile 
Cowx:il. 
Amelld-
lneDl .f 
Article. 
188. 
Amp 
menlof 
At.t 43· of 
19.50. 
Omisaion 
of Section 
3 of the 
LeJi,sla-
tive 
Councils 
Act, 1157. 
Provisio;l 
a.to 
pendinM 
Bills. 
Power to 
adapt 
laws. 
Puwel'\O 
cOIUltru(J 
lawlI. 
2 
3. (1) The Legislative Council of the State of ARdhra Pradesh is 
hereby aboliabeG. 
(2) On the abolition of the Council, every member thereof shall cease 
to be such member. 
4. In su.b-clause (a.) of clause (1) of article 168, the words "Andhra 5 
Pradesh," shan be omitted. 
5. In the Representation of the People Act, 1950,-
(eI) in the Third Schedule, entry No. 1 relating to Andlllra 
Pradesh shall be omitted; 
(b) in the Fourth Schedule, the heading "Andhra Pradesh" and 10 
the entries thereunder shall be omit1ed. 
6. Section 3 of the Legislative CoUncils Act, 1957, shall be omitted.. ... 
7. (I) A Bill pending in the Council immediately before the com~ 
:mencement qf thiJII Act which has been passed by the Legislative 
Asaembly shall lapse on the abolition of the Council. 15 
(2) A Bill pending in the Council immediately before the com-
mencement of this Act which has been passed by the Legislative 
AsIIembly shall not lapse on the abolition of the Council, but on such 
abolition shall be deemed to have been passed before such commence-
ment by both Houses of the Legislature of the State of Andhra Pradesh 2() 
in the form in which it was passed by the Legislative Assembly. 
(3) If a Bill which having been passed by the Legislative ASticmbly 
is, before the commencement of this Act, eithe.r rej,ected by the Council 
or pasted by the Council with amendments; the Legislative Assembly 
may, after such commencement, pass the Bill again with or without such 25 
amendments, if any, as have been made by the Council and the Bill so 
passed shall be deemed to be a Bill introduced in ancJ passed by the 
lA!gislative Assembly after' the commencement of this Act. 
37 .r 1950 • 
8. The appropriate Government may, before the expiration of one year 
from the commencement of this Act, by order, published in the Official 30 
Gazette,make such adaptations and modifications of any law made before 
such commencement whether by way of repeal o.r amendment as may 
be necessary or expedient in consequence of the abolition of the Council 
under settion 3, and thereupon every such law shall have effect subject to 
the adaptations and modifications so made. . 35 
t. Notwithstanding that no provision or insufficient provision has been 
made under- section 8 for the adaptation or modification of a law made 
before the commencement of this Act, any court, tribunal or authority 
required or empowered to enforce such law may construe the law in sucll 
mnnner, without affecting t.he su.bstance, as may be .necessnry or proper 41J 
on account of the abolition Of the Council in regard to the matter before 
the court, tribunal or authority. ' 

.___ _ ,-_ I{)K SAB1:LA .____ .____.- . 
.. :£ • 
maqlGENDA 
to 
(To le/,b,s in trpdUCOO in Ipk Sa)ha") , 
1. page 2, against line 12 in the marginal "1.c1ta.tion,-
~. "37 of 195Q," r..erui "37 of. 195·7." 
2.. page 2, line 14,-
a tar !'ha s II in ser t "no t" 
NBW DEIHl; 
May 1 ~ 1QSr; 
~sakfla23~-1907- {Sa ka) 
-'--
--..-~~ 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Under article 169 of the Constitution, Parliament may, by law, provide 
for the abolition of the Legislative Council of a State having such a 
Council, if the Legislative Assembly of the State passes a resolution to 
that etrect by a majQlity of the total membership of the Assembly and 
by a majority of not less than two-thirds of the me01bers of the Assembly 
present and voting. On the 24th March, 1983, the Legislative Assembly 
of the State of An~hra Pradesh passed a resolution in terms of article 
169 of U'ie Constitution for the abolition of the Legislative Council of that 
State. A like resolution was again paned. by the Legislative Assembly of 
the State on the 30th April, 1985. It is accordingly proposed. to abolish the 
Legislative Council of the State of Andhra Pradesh. 
2. The Bill seeks to give effect to this object and also provides for 
matters supplemental, incidental and cC?nsequential to such abolition. 
H. R. BHARDWAJ. 
NEW DELm; 
The 10th May, 1985. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the .appr.opriate Government .to :make 
such adaptations and modifications of any law macle~ore the .co~ce­
ment of the proposed legislation as may be necessary or e~nt In 
consequence of the abolition of the Legislative CouncU of tbe &tlJ;te of 
Andbra Pradesh. This power will .be available .only ·for a period of ODe 
year from the commencement of the propO.Sed legislation. The acjapta-
tions and modifications can be only BUC'h as are n.ec.ess.ary or ~nt 
in consequence of the aboli.tion of the Cguncil and caMot affe,ct the 
substance of the laws adapted or modified. 
2. The delegation of legislative power is of a normal character. 

ANNEXURE 
J!lnMcr ',..eM .,.. CCIIIM'Sft'1'UaOJf Of' IInIu. 
'" '" '" • • 
188. (1) For every State there shall be a Legislature which shall 
consist of the Governor, and 
Constitu-
Iioa . 
otLe,is-(a) in thf: States of Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, TAmil Nadu, Mllha- lr.urea in 
rashtra, Kamataka, and Uttar PNd_, two HOUH8; States .. 
'" '" • • 
ExTBAC1'S Fl10J.\( THE REPRB$ENTATION OF '!'HI PEoPLE ACT, 1950 
(43 OF 1950) 
'" • • 
THE THIRD SCHEDULE 
(See section 10) 
AlZoca.tion of seats in the Legisla.tive Councils 
• 
Nazne of State Total Number to be elected or nomlnau·d undn article 1'1I(S) 
number or Sub-clauR .. Sub-cla,ue ,,_boclau'l" SubOiladlll Sub-clauRf' -
leatl (a) (b) (e) (d) (e) 
.. 
I. Andhra Prad"lh go 8 
• • • 
& 
8 
• • 
'1 
, 
III 
._--_._---------------_. __ ._. 
THE FOURTH SCHEDULE 
[See section 27 (2) ] 
Local authorities for purposes Of elections to LegisZ4tive 
Councils 
AlmHRA PRADESH 
1. Municipalities. 
2. Zilla Parishads. 
3. Cantonment Boards. 
5. Panchayat Samities, 
• • '" 
5 
• • 

Croation 
of:! 
r.e,isla.. 
rive 
council 
tor 
Andhra 
Pradesh; 
8 
ExTMC'I FROM 'l'HZ LamSLATIVE COUNCILS ACT; 1957 
(37 or 1957) 
• • • • • 
3. (1) As from 8UCh date as the President may by order appoint, there 
shall be a Legislative Council for the State of Andhra Pradesh; and as 
• fnJm that date, in sub-clause (Go) of clause (1) of article 168 of the Con-
stitution, after the words "States of", the words "Andhra Pradesh" shall 
be inserted.. 
(2) In the said CoU1lC!U, there shal'l be 90 seats of which-
(a.) the numbeJw to be ftlIe4 by persons elected by the electorates 
referred to in sub-clauaes (A), (b) and (e) of'clause (3) of article 171 
'ahall be 31, 8 and 8 respectively; 
(b) the number to be filled by persons elected by the mem-
bers of the Legislative Assembly of Andhra Pradesh in accordance 
with the provisiOns of sub-elause (d) of the sadd clause shall be 31j 
and 
(c) the number to be filled by persons nominated by the Gover-
no.r of Andhra Pradesh in accordance with the provisions of sub-
clause (e) of that clause shall be 12. 
(3) As soon as may be after the commencement of this Act, the 
President, after consultation with the ElectiOn CommiSlion, 'shall by 
order, determine-
(a) the constituencies into which the State of Andhra Pradesh 
shall be divided for the purpose of elections to the said Council under 
each of the sub-clauses (a), (b) and (e) of clause (3) of article 171; 
(b) the extent of each constituency; and 
(e) the number of seats to be allotted to each constituency. 
(4) As soon as may be after. such determination, steps shall be taken 
to constitute the said Council in accordance with the provisions of this Act 
and. of the _In I fia:tion of the People Act, 1950, and the Representation 
of the People.Act, 1951. 
• • • • • 
43 of 1950. 
430f19!i). 

1.0R: SABa! 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the abolition of the Legillative Council of the State of 
Andhra Pradesh and for matters supplemental, incidental and 
consequential thereto. 
(Shri H. R. BhardWVlj, Minister 0/ State in the Miniltrtl of Law It Juatice.) 