Bill No. 115 of 2014
THE PROVISION OF COMMUNICATION FACILITIES IN EVERY
VILLAGE BILL, 2014
By
SHRI RAKESH SINGH, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the facilities of telephone and post and telegraph office in all the villages
of the country and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Provision of Communication Facilities in Every
Village Act, 2014.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, the words and expressions used
but not defined in this Act and defined in the Indian Post Office Act, 1898 and the Indian
Telegraph Act, 1885 shall have the meanings, respectively, assigned to them in these Acts.
T
O BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title
and extent.
Definition.
6 of 1898.
13 of 1885.
1
5

3. The Central Government shall provide in every village throughout the country, the
following facilities, namely:—
(i) a post and telegraph office; and
(ii) a public telephone connection with STD facility under the control of the
head of the Village Panchayat.
4. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act, shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Provision of
Communica-
tion facilities
in villages.
Power to
make rules.
2
5
10
15

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
In India, about seventy-five per cent. of the people still live in villages. There are a
number of villages in remote areas inhabited by tribals and backward classes. Even after
sixty-seven years of our independence, no significant development work has been done at
such places. There are no postal facilities available in these areas. There are no telephones
and the villages have virtually no communication links with the rest of the country. It takes
months for a letter to reach in these villages. Most of Villagers migrate to the cities for work
and remain cut-off from their families due to non-availability of modern means of
communication in their native villages. The postal, telephone and other communication
facilities have thus become necessary for every village. The villagers can deposit their money
in saving account of the post offices thereby making available a lot of money to the Government
for development works. The introduction of modern means of communication in every village
will be the first step towards taking the boon of modern science to the doorsteps of rural
India.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RAKESH SINGH
July 24, 2014.

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides that every village shall be provided with the facilities of a
post and telegraph office as well as a public telephone connection with STD by the
Central Government. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of about rupees two hundred crore per
annum will be involved as a recurring expenditure out of the Consolidated Fund of India.
A sum of rupees fifty lakh is also likely to be involved as a non-recurring expenditure.

5
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 4 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to the matters of detail only. The delegation of
legislative power is, therefore, a normal character.

GMGIPMRND—2471LS(S3)—05-11-2014.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the facilities of telephone and post and telegraph office in all the villages of
the country and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Rakesh Singh, M.P.)