THE  CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2009
BY
SHRI PRABODH PANDA, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixtieth Y ear of the Republic of  India as follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2009.
2. Article 253 of the Constitution shall be renumbered as clause (1) of that article, and
after clause (1) as so renumbered, the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
"(2) Every treaty, agreement or convention with any other country or countries
or any decision made at any international conference, association or other body, before
its implementation, shall be ratified by each House of Parliament, by a resolution, as
Short title.
Bill No. 115 of 2009
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Amendment
of article 253.
5

2
soon as may be, but not later than one hundred twenty days of the signing of such
treaty, agreement, convention or decision:
Provided that if any such treaty, agreement or convention with any other country
or countries or any decision made at any international conference, association or other
body is signed at a time when the House of the People is dissolved or the dissolution
of the House of the People takes place during the period of one hundred twenty days
referred to in this clause, and if a resolution approving the treaty, agreement, convention
or decision has been passed by the Council of States, but no resolution with respect to
such treaty, agreement, convention or decision has been passed by the House of the
People before the expiration of that period, the treaty, agreement, convention or decision
shall be required to be ratified by resolution by the House of the People within a period
of thirty days from the date on which the House of the People first sits after its
reconstitution.".
5
10

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Parliament is the supreme body in the Parliamentary Democracy that is established by
our Constitution. Parliamentary democracy is functioning successfully in our country since
it became a free nation. As in the Constituent Assembly, so also in the Parliament, different
political thoughts are reflected through its elected members.
Therefore, it is quite obvious that views of all the Members, belonging to different
political parties must be reflected on any important international agreement or treaty that the
Government enters into with any country or countries. The practice of ratification of
international treaty or agreement by the Parliament is prevalent in many other democracies of
the world including the United States and South Africa.
The proposed amendment will provide more transparency into the Government's
working and it is well known that transparency provides strength to democracy which the
Constitution of India aims to establish in its fullest meaning.
The Bill accordingly seeks to amend the Constitution.
N
EW DELHI; PRABODH  PANDA
November 5, 2009.
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA.
* * * * * * *
253. Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of this Chapter, Parliament
has power to make any law for the whole or any part of the territory of India for implementing
any treaty, agreement or convention with any other country or countries or any decision
made at any international conference, association or other body.
* * * * * * *
4
Legislation
for giving
effect to
international
agreements.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Prabodh Panda, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—4976LS(S5)—02.12.2009.