1
THE  SPORTS PERSONS (WELFARE) BILL, 2017
By
SHRI SHRIRANG APPA BARNE, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the welfare of sportspersons who have represented India in Olympic Games,
Asian Games, Commonwealth Games or in any other International Sports Events
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
        B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Sportspersons (Welfare) Act, 2017.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “Board” means the Sportspersons Welfare Board constituted under
section 4;
(b) “Fund” means the Sportspersons Welfare Fund constituted under section 6;
Short title
and
commencement.
Bill No. 115 of  2017
5 Definitions.
AS  INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(c) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(d) “sportsperson” means a sportsperson who has represented India in the
Olympics or Asian or Commonwealth Games or in any other International sports
event.
3. It shall be the duty of the Central Government to ensure welfare of the Sportspersons.
4. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
a Board to be known as Sportspersons Welfare Board for carrying out the purposes of this
Act.
(2) The Board shall consist of—
(a) Union Minister of Youth Affairs and Sports, as Chairperson ex-officio;
(b) two sportspersons to be appointed by the Central Government in such
manner as may be prescribed, member-secretaries;
(c) one member from Sports Authority of India, member; and
(d) one official of the Union Ministry of Y outh Affairs and Sports of the rank of
Joint Secretary and above, member;
(3) The Board shall meet atleast twice a month:
Provided that the Chairperson may call for a meeting at any time in consultation
with the member-secretaries as and when the circumstances warrant so.
(4) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms of conditions of members of
the Board shall be such as may be prescribed.
5. The Board shall—
(a) provide ground level training to every sportsperson;
(b) ensure timely utilization of allocated sports budget;
(c) provide relaxation to the sportspersons in rules related to passports;
(d) provide reservation in posts and services under the State for sportspersons;
(e) enforce the Model Sports Code as formulated by the Central Government;
(f) ensure exclusion of politics from the sports; and
(g) undertake such other welfare measures as it deems necessary.
6. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
a Fund to be known as the Sportspersons Welfare Fund for carrying out the purposes of
this Act.
(2) The Central Government and the State Governments shall contribute to the Fund
in such ratio as may be prescribed.
(3) Any sum received from individuals in the form of donations shall also be credited
to the Fund.
7. The Fund shall be utilised for—
(a) payment of rupees thirty-five thousand monthly pension to the
sportspersons;
(b) ensuring employment of the sportspersons;
(c) accommodation facility for sportspersons:
(d) free education facilities for the children of sportspersons;
(e
) free medical and health check up facilities for sportspersons;
Central
Government
to ensure
welfare of
sportspersons.
Constitution of
Sportspersons
Welfare Board.
Functions of
the Board.
Constitution
of the
Sportsperson
Welfare Fund.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Utilisation of
Fund.

3
(f) providing loan at zero rate of interest to a sportsperson willing to set up his
business to earn livelihood;
(g) free of cost Rail travel facility; and
(h) such other welfare measures, as may be prescribed.
8. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide adequate funds for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
9. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force regulating any of the matters dealt with in this Act.
10. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and, if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Act to
supplement
other laws.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS  AND REASONS
In the name of Indian sports, only cricket, tennis and badminton are being recognised
in the world. Cricket symbolises living in clover, elitism, name-fame and a secured future.
Cricketers are earning not only disproportionate amount of money but are also making their
ostensible presence in the cinematic world. Not just that, there is an avalanche of best jobs
and gainful employment in both public and private sector also. Tennis and Badminton are
also said to be the sports of making easy money. Big Multinational companies are competing
to offer them sponsorship. Huge amount of public funds are being spent on these sports to
provide them a fillip. On the other hand, in just opposite scenario, India fails to make progress
even in the sports like athletics. Our country is counted among the most unfit countries
vis-a-vis the other countries. Our country is unique and only one of its kind where people
tend to set up unauthorized colonies where the children are bereft of parks to play there. It is
poverty that keeps even talented children from making their career in sports for want of
requisite economic prosperity. If the funds allocated on sports budget are spent on talent
hunt besides setting up youth academics, the situation would definitely improve on the
ground. The Government of India ought to enhance the allocation of sports budget as the
facilities required for enabling the sportsperson to be the best ones invariably calls for huge
investment. The need is to provide the sportspersons with better facilities to encourage
them. The young players of the country should be given an opportunity to play against
foreign players in order that they may be able to further enrich their performance.
India spent rupees one hundred and twenty crore in the run up to the preparations for
Rio Olympics. The Olympics held once in four years accounted for just one hundred and
twenty crore rupees. Whereas as much as one hundred and twenty crore, one hundred and
seven crore, eighty six crore have been spent on Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore,
IGNOU and School of Planning and Architecture, respectively. This apart, more than rupees
five thousand six hundred and twenty one crore has been spent on forty Central Universities
of the country in a year. More than four thousand one hundred thirty five crore rupees has
been spent on twenty two Indian Institute of Technology’s (IITs) in a year. Not just that, it is
only in a year that a sum of rupees two thousand five hundred seventy seven crore and
rupees four hundred and sixty three crore have been spent on 31 National Institutes of
Technology’s (NITs) and Indian Institute of Managements (IIMs) in a year only.
Even today, Indian parents don’t go for so many options in terms of the career of their
children and wards. They don’t lend a serious thought to the options other than conventional
careers like medical and engineering. Children receive little motivation to pursue their career
in sports. In case the above things are given effect to by the Union Government, Indian
parents would love to witness their children graduating to be Olympians at the end of the
day.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SHRIRANG  APPA  BARNE
June 30, 2017.
4

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for Constitution of a Sportspersons Welfare Board. Clause 6
provides for constitution of Sportspersons Welfare Fund. Clause 8 makes it obligatory for
the Central Government to provide adequate funds for carrying out the purposes of the Bill.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated fund of India.
It is not possible to quantify the actual amount which may be involved at this stage but it is
estimated that a sum of rupees ten thousand crore may involve as recurring expenditure per
annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five thousand crore is also likely to be
involved.

6
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of this Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative powers is of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the welfare of sportspersons who have represented India in Olympic Games.
Asian Games, Commonwealth or in any other International Sports Events and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Shrirang Appa Barne, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—1044LS(S3)—19-07-2017.