‘AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

॥ 1 DEC 1999

BILL No. 116 of 1999.

THE FLOOD CONTROL BILL, 1999
By
‘Suri Vaiko, M.P.
A
BILL

for the setting up of a flood control Board to control floods and for
‘matters connected therewith.
| entry 56 of List Union List of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution
tof inter-State rivers and river valleys to the

ides for regulation and development
1t to which such regulation and development under the control of the Union is declared

by Parliament by law to be expedient in the public interest;
‘And whereas a lot of havoc is caused by floods every year in

to provide

almost all parts of the

‘And whereas it is essential to take effective measures for flood control;

Beit enacted by Parliament in the Fiftieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Flood Control Act, 1999.

(2) It shall come into force at once.

६ shall set up a Flood Control Board (hereinafter

2 The Central Government
to as the Board) with its head office at New Delhi.

Shorttitle and

Flood Control
Board.


Composition
of Board.

Functions of
Board.

Cost to be
bome by
Central and
State Govern-
ments.
Committee of
members of
Parliament.

Recommenda-
tions of the
Board.

Annual Report.

Power to make
“rules.

5

3. (1) The Board shall consist of a Chairman, who shall be an expert on flood ०
to be nominated by the Central Government, and a representative each from every St
Government and Union Territory, who shall also be experts on flood control measures 4
other.related aspects.

(2) The Chairman and the members of the Board shall be entitled to such
and allowances as may be prescribed.

(3) The Central Government shall make available suitable officers and st
may be required for efficient functioning of the Board.

4. The functions of the Board shall be—
(a) to identify the areas which are prone to floods;
(b) to suggest measures for flood control;

(c) to make a time bound plan for linking the rivers which are prone to 10
with the ones which are not so;

(d) to suggest measures for the development of land in areas which are pt
to floods;

(e) to deploy ways and means to facilitate forecast floods in any area andy
inhabitants in those areas to move out to safer places;

() advise the State Governments as to preventative and rehabilitation meas
during floods;

(g) advise the State Government for proper storage of rain wate
construction of dams.

5, The cost of taking up the flood control measures as suggested by the B
shall be borne by the Central Government and State Governments in such rat
may be determined by the Board.

6. There shall be constituted a Committee of members of Parliament to
the progress of flood control measures undertaken as suggested by the Bi

7. (1) The Board shall make recommendations to the Central Governme
flood contro! measures.

(2) It shall be the duty of the Central Government to implement the
mendations of the Board:

Provided that where it is felt necessary that any recommendation ¢
implemented due to any reason, the Central Government may, to be 160०६
writing, inform the Board accordingly.

8. The Board shall present a report to the Central Government every year ab
functioning and the Central Government shall lay on the table of both Houses of F
ment a copy of the report.

9, The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, mé
for carrying out the purposes of the Act.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

| is a land of many great rivers. The water resource of the country is not being
lly utilised. Every year there are floods which cause great loss of life and property.
Ihereas in some parts of the country there are floods, there is drought in other parts.
ntly in Orissa, due to floods there was heavy loss of life and property. Lakhs of
le were affected due to heavy floods. Orissa remained cut off from the rest of the

Id for a few days after floods.

The national resources are damaged by the floods. This problem needs to be ad-
to urgently.

The Bill seeks to provide for preventive and control measures of floods.

VAIKO


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 2 of the Bill provides for setting up of a Flood Control Board. |
provides for the composition of the Board. It further provides for salary and allowances
Chairman and members. Provision has also been made for officers and staff to assist the
Board. Clause 5 provides that the expenditure on flood control measures suggested by
Board shall be borne by the Central Government and State Governments. Clause 6 provi
for the constitution of a Committee of members of Parliament to monitor the progress 0
flood control measures suggested by the Board. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely to involve a recurri
expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore per annum. A non-recurring expenditure ०
about rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be involved. है



MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

| of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to frame rules for carrying
the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of detail only and as such the
egation of legislative power is of a normal character.



LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for the esting up of a flood control Board to control floods and for
connected therewith.

(Shri Vaiko, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—2043LS—1-12-99.