Bill No. 116-F of 2005
—— 4०)

THE PROTECTION OF WOMEN FROM
DOMESTIC VIOLENCE BILL, 2005

(As PASSED BY THE Houses 07 PARLIAMENT—
Lok SABHA ON 24rH Aucust, 2005
1२५४७ SABHA ON 29TH Aucust, 2005)



Bill No. 116-9 LEK ०२००05
E PROTECT o
THE PROTECTION OF WOMEN PROM DomEstic
ate 'STIC VIOLENCE

ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES

CHAPTERI

PRELIMINARY
CLAUSES

1. Short title, extent and commencement.
2. Definitions.

CHAPTER II
Domgstic VIOLENCE
3. Definition of domestic violence.

CHAPTER III
POWERS AND DUTIES OF PROTECTION OFFICERS, SERVICE PROVIDERS, ETC.

4, Information to Protection Officer and exclusion of liability of Informant.
5. Duties of police officers, service providers and Magistrate.
6. Duties of shelter. homes.
7. Duties of medical facilities.
8. Appointment of Protection Officers.
9, Duties and functions of Protection Officers.
10. Service providers.
11. Duties of Government.

CHAPTERIV

PROCEDURE FOR OBTAINING ORDERS OF RELIEFS

12, Application to Magistrate.

13. Service of notice.

14. Counselling.

15. Assistanée of welfare exper 3
16, Proceedings to be held in camerd.
‘17. Right to reside in a shared household.
18. Protection orders.

19, Residence orders.

20. Monetary reliefs.

21, Custody orders.

22. Compensation orders.

हि ders.
23. Power to grant interim and ex parle 7


Gi)

CLAUSES
24. Court to give copies of order free of cost.
25. Duration and alteration of orders.
26. Relief in other suits and legal proceedings.
27. Jurisdiction.
28. Procedure.
29. Appeal.
CHAPTER V
MISCELLANEOUS
30. Protection Officers and members of service providers to be public servants.
31. Penalty for breach of protection order by respondent.
32. Cognizance and proof.
33. Penalty for not discharging duty by Protection Officer.
34. Cognizance of offence committed by Protection Officer.
35. Protection of action taken in good faith.
36. Act not in derogation of any other law.
37.

Power of Central Government to make rules.


० Bill No. 116-F of 2005
THE PROTECTION OF WOMEN FROM DOME
ae BILL, 2005

(As PASSED BY THE Housgs oF PARLIAMENT)

STIC VIOLENCE

A
BILL

to provide for more effective protection of the rights of women guaranteed under
the Constitution who are victims of violence of any kind occurring within the
के family and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
es CHAPTERI
i PRELIMINARY

i

1) This Act may be called the Protection of Women from Domestic Violence — short title,
दि extent and
=

. commencement.
nds to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
| come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
eOfficial Gazette, appoint. = :
unless ‘the context otherwise requires,— : ae
jeved person” means any woman who is, or has been, in a domestic
th the resporident and who alleges to have been ae
violence by the respondent; 5

हे

Definitions,



2
(6) “child” means any person below the age of eighteen years and includes
any adopted, step of foster child;
(c) “compensation order” means an order granted in terms of section 22;

(d) “custody order” means an order granted in terms of section 21;

(e) “domestic incident
on receipt of a complaint of ;

(f) “domestic relationship” means a relationship between two persons who
live or have, at any point of time, lived together ina shared household, when they
are related by consanguinity, marriage, or through a relationship in the nature of
marriage, adoption or are family members living together as a joint family;

(g) “domestic violence” has the same meaning as assigned to it in section 3;

(A) “dowry” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in section 2 of the
Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961;

(i) “Magistrate” means the Judicial Magistrate of the first class, or as the
case may be, the Metropolitan Magistrate, exercising jurisdiction under the Code
of Criminal Procedure, 1973 in the area where the aggrieved person resides
temporarily or otherwise or the respondent resides or the domestic violence is
alleged to have taken place;

(j) “medical facility” means such facility as may be notified by the State
Government to be a medical facility for the purposes of this Act;

(& “monetary relief” means the compensation which the Magistrate may
order the respondent to pay to the aggrieved person, at any stage during the
hearing of an application seeking any relief under this Act, to meet the expenses
incurred and the losses suffered by the aggrieved person as a result of the
domestic violence;

(J “notification” means a notification published in the Official Gazette and
the expression “notified” shall be construed accordingly,

(m) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;

(n) “Protection Officer” means an officer appointed by the State Government
under sub-section (/) of section 8; :

(0) “protection order” means an order made in terms of section 18;

(p) “residence order” means an order granted in terms of sub-section (/) of
section 19;

(q) “respondent” means any adult male person who is, or has been, in a

domestic relationship with the aggrieved person and against whom the aggrieved
person has sought any relief under this Act: हु

report” means a report made in the prescribed form
domestic violence from an aggrieved person;

Provided that an aggrieved wife or female living in a relationship in the

nature of a marriage may also file a complaint against a relative of the husband or
the male partner;

ह (r) “service provider” means an entity registered under sub-section (7) of
section 10;

tive ७) “shared household” Means a household where the person aggrieved
with ie at any stage has lived in a domestic relationship either singly or along
either tino we and includes such a household whether owned or tenanted
by either of ther the aggrieved Person and the respondent, or owned or tenanted
or both jolath mip respect af which cither the aggrieved person or the respondent
a household whi hn y have any right, title, interest or equity and includes such

ich may belong to the joint family of which the respondent is a

member, irrespective of

n 1 | whether the respondent i ५

right, title or interest in the shared houssholds हा कलर 2 :
1: 3

(0) “shelter home”
G Means any shelter
‘Overnment to be a shelter home ‘or the छ

urposes of this Act.’ © aes

home as may be notified by the State.

28 of 196),

2 of 1974,



3
CHAPTER U

Domestic VIOLENCE

3. For the purposes of this Act.

कं » ANY act,
the respondent shall constitute dom ९

Omission or
dan com
estic ५1016 m

के Mission ४
nce in case it 07 conduct of Definition of

(a) harms or injures or endai tence Vi

Ngers the health

hether mental or physical, of th ji » safety, life, limb ० i ‘ese
_ » Of the aggrieved Person or tend. हे "well-being,
causing physical abuse, sexual abuse, verbal and जाल 125 and includes
abuse; oF ematio:

nal abuse and economic
(6) harasses, harms, ir
to coerce her or any other

njures or endangers th
ts the aggrieved Person with a view
any dowry or other Prope

Person related to her to
Meet any unlawh
rty or valuable security; or Y taiewfil demand fo

(c) has the effect of threat

‘ening the aggrieved
to her by any conduct mentione BB Person or ai

din clause (a) or clause (6); or
(4) otherwise injures or causes harm, whethe
है 'm, whet! i

: . ’ T physical or mental, to the

ny person related

Explanation I.—For the Purposes of this section,—

means any act or conduct which is of sucha
: nature a:
to cause bodily pain, harm, or danger to life, limb हि

n a , or health or impair the health or
development of the aggrieved person and in » criminal intimidation
and criminal force; है

(ii) “sexual abuse”

_( includes any conduct of a sexual nature that abuses,
humiliates, degrades or 0

therwise violates the dignity of woman;
(iii) “verbal and emotional abuse” includes—

मन (a) insults, ridicule, humiliation, name calling and insults or ridicule
specially with regard to not having a child or a male child; and

(2) repeated threats to cause physical pain to any person in whom the
aggrieved person 15 interested.

(iv) “economic abuse” includes—

(a) deprivation of all or any economic or financial resources to which
the aggrieved person is entitled under any law or custom whether payable ~
“ under an order of a court or otherwise or which the aggrieved person requires
out of necessity including, but not limited to, household necessities for the
aggrieved person and her children, if any, stridhan, property, jointly or
separately owned by the aggrieved person, payment of rental related to the
shared household and maintenance;

isposal of household effects, any alienation of assets whether
movatle 40058 cable, valuables, shares, securities, bonds and the te
other property in which the aggrieved person has an interest or is entit ‘
to use by virtue of the domestic relationship or which may Pe omer ly
required by the aggrieved person or her children or her stri an किक any
other property jointly or separately held by the aggrieved person;

- (c) prohibition or restriction to continued access to resources or
facilities which the aggrieved person is entitled to use or enjoy by vintwe 0
the domestic relationship including access to the shared household.

: Explanation I.—For the purpose of determining whether any act, bape
Commission or conduct of the respondent constitutes “domestic violence’ raat
Section, the overall facts and circumstances of the case shall be taken into consi न


Information
to Protection
Officer and
exclusion of
liability of
informant

Duties of
police
officers,
service
providers and
Magistrate.

Duties of shel-
ter homes.

Duties of medi-
cal facilities.

Appointment
of Protection
Officers.

Duties and
functions of
Protection
Officers.

4

CHAPTER III
POWERS AND DUTIES OF PROTRCTION OFFICERS, SERVICE PROVIDERS, ETC.

4, (1) Any person who has reason to believe that an act of domestic violence has
been, or is being, or is likely to be committed, may give information about it to the
concerned Protection Officer.

(2) No liability, civil or criminal, shall be incurred by any person for giving in good
faith of information for the purpose of sub-section (/).

5. A police officer, Protection Officer, service provider or Magistrate who has
received a complaint of domestic violence or is otherwise present at the Place of an
incident of domestic violence or when the incident of domestic violence is reported to
him, shall inform the aggrieved person—

(a) of her right to make an application for obtaining a relief by way of a
protection order, an order for monetary relief, a custody order, a residence order,
a compensation order or more than one such order under this Act,

(0) of the availability of services of service providers;
(c) of the availability of services of the Protection Officers;

(d) of her right to free legal services under the Legal Services Authorities
Act, 1987;

(e) of her right to file a complaint under section 498A of the Indian Penal
Code, wherever relevant:

Provided that nothing in this Act shall be construed in any manner as to relievea
police officer from his duty to proceed in accordance with law upon receipt of information

. as to the commission of a cognizable offence.

6. Ifan aggrieved person or on her behalf a Protection Officer or a service provider
requests the person in charge of a shelter home to provide shelter to her, such person

in charge of the shelter home shall provide shelter to the aggrieved person in the
shelter home.

7. If an aggrieved person or, on her behalf a Protection Officer or a service provider
requests the person in charge of a medical facility to provide any medical aid to her,

such person in charge of the medical facility shall provide medical aid to the aggrieved
person in the medical facility.

39 of

45 of 1860,

8. (/) The State Government shall, by notification, appoint such number of -

Protection Officers in each district as it may consider necessary and shall also notify

the area or areas within which a Protection Officer shall exercise the powers and perform

the duties conferred on him by or under this Act.

(2) The Protection Officers shall as far as possible be women and shall possess
such qualifications and experience as may be prescribed.

(3) The terms and conditions of service of the Protection Officer and the other

officers subordinate to him shall be such as may be prescribed.

9. (1) It shall be the duty of the Protection Officer—

(a) to assist the Magistrate in the discharge of his functions under this 8०५

such oe fo make a domestic incident report to the Magistrate, in such form and in

and fo ward “copie oe Prescribed, upon receipt of a complaint of domestic violence
u ies ther: A ficer i ३ i

within the local cof to the police officer in charge of the police station

bean 0०ग ae of whose jurisdiction domestic violence is alleged to have
ed and to the service providers in that area;



i oF

ast

|
4 7196:

prescribed to the Magistrate, if the aggrie
for issuance of a protection order; ved person so d

(वी to ensure that the aggrieved Person

is i
+1987 and mak Provided

legal aid
० es A. © avai e under the |,
1987 in which a complaint is to be made; 1406 free 9 nal

Fcost the Prescribed form

(g) to get the aggrieved person medi
_ (8) to | edicall i i
bodily injuries and forward a copy of the medical report at .
the Magistrate having jurisdiction in the area where the
alleged to have been taken place;

she has sustained
he police station and
domestic violence is

0) to ensure that the order for monetary relief under section 20 is complied
with anc executed, in accordance with the procedure Prescribed under the C
of Criminal Procedure, 1973; ® Code

(1) to perform such other duties as may be Prescribed.

(2) The Protection Officer shall be un
Magistrate, and shall perform the duties im;
Government by, or under, this Act.

der the control and supervision of the
posed on him by the Magistrate and the

10. (7) Subject to such rules as may be made in this behalf, any voluntary
association registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 ora company registered
under the Companies Act, 1956 or any other law for the time being in force with the
objective of protecting the rights and interests of women by any lawful means including
providing of legal aid, medical, financial or other assistance shall register itself with the
State Government as a service provider for the purposes of this Act.

(2) A service provider registered under sub-section (/) shall have the power to—

(a) record the domestic incident report in the prescribed form if the aggrieved
person so desires and forward a copy thereof to the Magistrate and the Protection
Officer having jurisdiction in the area where the domestic violence took place;

(8) get the aggrieved person medically examined and forward a copy of the
medical report to the Protection Officer and the police station within the local
limits of which the domestic violence took place;

(c) ensure that the aggrieved person is provided shelter in a shelter home, _
she so requires and forward a report of the lodging of the aggrieved person in the
shelter home to the police station within the local limits of which the domestic
violence took place.
oceeding shall lie against any service
who is, or who is deemed to be, acting
hich is in good faith done or intended
this Act towards

(3).No suit, prosecution or other legal pr
Provider or any member of the service Provider
or purporting to act under this Act, for anything w §
to be done in thé exercise of powers or discharge of functions under
the prevention of the commission of domestic violence.

11. The Central Government and every State Government, shall tak
fo ensure that—

6 all measures

Service
providers.

Duties of
Government.



Application
to Magistrate.

Service of
Rotice.

Counselling.

6

(a) the provisions of this Act are given wide publicity through public |
including the television, radio and the print media at regular intervals; पर

(b) the Central Government and State Government officers including the
police officers and the members of the judicial services are given periodic
sensitization and awareness training on the issues addressed by this Act;

(c) effective co-ordination between the services provided by concerned
Ministrics and Departments dealing with law, home affairs including law and
order, health and human resources to address issues of domestic violence is
established and periodical review of the same is conducted;

(d) protocols for the various Ministries concerned with the delivery of
services to women under this Act including the courts are prepared and put in
place.

CHAPTER IV
PROCEDURE FOR OBTAINING ORDERS OF RELIEFS

12. (7) An aggrieved person or a Protection Officer or any other person on behalf
of the aggrieved person may present an application to the Magistrate seeking one or
more reliefs under this Act: हि

Provided that before passing any order on such application, the Magistrate shall
take into consideration any domestic incident report received by him from the Protection
Officer or the service provider.

(2) The relief sought for under sub-section (J) may include a relief for issuance of
an order for payment of compensation or damages without prejudice to the right of
such person to institute a suit for compensation or damages for the injuries caused by
the acts of domestic violence committed by the respondent:

Provided that where a decree for any amount as compensation or damages has
been passed by any court in favour of the aggrieved person, the amount, if any, paid or
payable in pursuance of the order made by the Magistrate under this Act shall be set off
against the amount’ payable under such decree and the decree shall, notwithstanding
anything contained in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, or any other law for the time
being in force, be executable for the balance amount, if any, left after such set off.

(3) Every application under sub-section (7) shall be in such form and contain
such particulars as may be prescribed or as nearly as possible thereto.

(4) The Magistrate shall fix the first date of hearing, which shall not ordinarily be
beyond three days from the date of receipt of the application by the court.

(5) The Magistrate shall endeavour to dispose of every application made under
sub-section (/) within a period of sixty days from the date of its first hearing.

; 13. (7) Anotice of the date of hearing fixed under section 12 shall be given by the
Magistrate to the Protection Officer, who shall get it served by such means as may be
prescribed on the respondent, and on any other person, as directed by the Magistrate

within a maximum period of two days or such further reasonable time as may be allowed
by the Magistrate from the date of its receipt.

(Q)A declaration of service of notice made by the Protection Officer in such form
as may be prescribed shall be the proof that such notice was served upon the respondent
and on any other person as directed by the Magistrate unless the contrary is proved.
the en ) The Magistrate may, at any stage of the proceedings under this Act, direct

pondent or the aggrieved person, either singly or jointly, to undergo counselling

with any m i i ifi i
a 'y member of a service provider who possess such qualifications and experience
ounselling as may be prescribed,

2 हि हु .
xt ‘ 2) Where ie Magistrate has issued any direction under sub-section (7), he shall
ate of hearing of the case within a period not exceeding two months.

5 of 1908.



7

15. In any proceeding under this Act, the Ma;
such person, preferably a woman, whether relate
including a person engaged in promoting family we!
of assisting him in discharging his functions,

gistrate may secure the services of
d to the aggrieved person or not,
Ifare as he thinks fit, for the purpose

16. If the Magistrate considers that the cir
and if either party to the proceedings so desire:
er this Act in camera.

cumstances of the case so warrant
's, he may conduct the proceedin ;
und

17. (7) Notwithstanding anything contained in
force, evety woman in a domestic relationship sh
shared household, whether or not she has any righ

same.

any other law for the time being in
all have the right to reside in the
t, title or beneficial interest in the

(2) The aggrieved person shall not be evicted or ex
household or any part of it by the respondent save in accor
established by law.

cluded from the shared
dance with the procedure

18. The Magistrate may, after giving the aggrieved person and the respondent an
opportunity of being heard and on being prima facie satisfied that domestic violence
has taken place or is likely to take place, pass a protection order in favour of the
aggrieved person and prohibit the respondent from— :

(a) committing any act of domestic violence;
(5) aiding or abetting in the commission of acts of domestic violence;

(c) entering the place of employment of the aggrieved person or, if the
person aggrieved is a child, its school or any other place frequented by the
aggrieved person;

(d) attempting to communicate in any form, whatsoever, with the aggrieved
person, including personal, oral or written or electronic or telephonic contact;

(e) alienating any assets, operating bank lockers or bank accounts used or
held or enjoyed by both the parties, jointly by the aggrieved person and the
respondent or singly by the respondent, including her stridhan or any other
property held either jointly by the parties or separately by them without the leave
of the Magistrate;

(f) causing violence to the dependants, other relatives or any person who
give the aggrieved person assistance from domestic violence;

(g) committing any other act as specified in the protection order.

19. (7) While disposing of an application under sub-section (/) of section 12, the
Magistrate may, on being satisfied that domestic violence has taken place, pass a
residence order —
dent from dispossessing or in any other manner

e aggrieved person from the shared household,
has a legal or equitable interest in the shared

(a) restraining the respon
disturbing the possession of th
whether or not the respondent
household;

(6) directing the respondent to remove himself
ny of his relatives from entering any
the aggrieved person resides;

off the shared

from the shared household;

(c) restraining the respondent or al
portion of the shared household in which

(d) restraining the respondent from alienating or disposing
household or encumbering the same;

Assistance of
welfare ex.
pert.

Proceedings to
be held in
camera,

Right to reside
ina shared .
household

Protection
orders.

Residence
orders.



8

(e) restraining the respondent from renouncing his rights in the shared : e
household except with the leave of the Magistrate; or

(0) directing the respondent to secure same level of alternate accommodation
for the aggrieved person as enjoyed by her in the shared household or to pay rent
for the same, if the circumstances so require:

Provided that no order under clause (b) shall be passed against any person
who is a woman,

(2) The Magistrate may impose any additional conditions or pass any other
direction which he may deem reasonably necessary to protect or to provide for the
safety of the aggrieved person or any child of such aggrieved person.

(3) The Magistrate may require from the respondent to execute a bond, with or
without sureties, for preventing the commission of domestic violence.

(4) An order under sub-section (3) shall be deemed to be an order under Chapter
VIII of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 and shall be dealt with accordingly. 2 of 1974,

(5) While passing an order under sub-section (/), sub-section (2) or sub-section /
(3), the court may also pass an order directing the officer in charge of the nearest police
station to give protection to the aggrieved person or to assist her or the person making
an application on her behalf in the implementation of the order.

(6) While making an order under sub-section (/), the Magistrate may impose on
the respondent obligations relating to the discharge of rent and other payments, having
regard to the financial needs and resources of the parties.

(7) The Magistrate may direct the officer in-charge of the police station in whose
jurisdiction the Magistrate has been approached to assist in the implementation of the
protection order.

(8) The Magistrate may direct the respondent to return to the possession of the

aggrieved person her stridhan or any other property or valuable security to which she
is entitled to.

Monetary 20. (7) While disposing of an application under sub-section (7) of section 12, the
reliefs. Magistrate may direct the respondent to pay monetary relief to meet the expenses
incurred and losses suffered by the aggrieved person and any child of the aggrieved
person as a result of the domestic violence and such relief may include, but not limited
to,— हा
(a) the loss of earnings;
(b) the medical expenses; :
(c) the loss caused due to the destruction, damage or removal of any property
. from the control of the aggrieved person; and

: (4) the maintenance for the aggrieved person as well as her children, if any,
including an order under or in addition to an order of maintenance under section

ps of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 or any other law for the time being in 2 of 1974.
lorce.

(2) The monetary relief granted under this section shall be adequate, fair and

reasonable and consistent with the standard of livi i i i
of living to which t n is
accustomed, g he aggrieved perso

= monthly s Magistrate shall have the power to order an appropriate lump sum payment
require 'Y payments of maintenance, as the nature and circumstances of the case may

4)Tl i A
sub-section कक कर shall senda copy of the order for monetary relief made under
station within the 1 © parties to the application and to the in charge of the police
6 local limits of whose jurisdiction the respondent resides.


9
(5) The respondent shall pay the Moneta: .
within the period specified in the order under subsea
fi . SEC!
(6) Upon the failure on the Part of the res;
रथ i हे Pondent .
order under sub section (7), the Magistrate may direct the Payment in terms of the
respondent, 10 directly pay to the aggrieved Person employer or a debtor of the
ortion of the wages or salaries or de wn oF to deposit with the court a

bt due to
i हि OF acer
Which amount may be adjusted towards the monetary sci the credit of the Tespondent.
re >

ief payable by the Tespondent,

8ranted to i
ion (7), the aggrieved Person

to make
th

21. Notwithstanding anythin
force, the Magistrate may,

Person makin

specify, if necessary, the arrangements for visit

respondent:

Provided that if the Magistrate is inion that any visit 0
t of the opinion that ५ visi ond
may be harmful to the interests of the child or children, the Ma; भाग जज aac
को sisi, न gistrate shall refuse to

22. In addition to other reliefs as
may be granted under this Act. th i
: : * 7 ie M.
may on an application being made by the aggrieved Person, pass an order directing the
respondent to py compensation and damages for the injuries, including mental को पक
and emotional distress, caused by the acts of domestic vi i
lolence
respondent. committed by that

23. (7) In any proceeding before him under this Act, the Magistrate may pass
such interim order as he deems just and proper.

(2) If the Magistrate is satisfied that an application prima facie discloses that the
respondent is committing, or has committed an act of domestic violence or that there is
a likelihood that the respondent may commit an act of domestic violence, he may grant
an ex parte order on the basis of the affidavit in such form, as may be prescribed, of the
aggrieved person under section 18, section 19, section 20, section 21 or, as the case
may be, section 22 against the respondent. है

24. The Magistrate shall, in all cases where he has passed any order under this
Act, order that a copy of such order, shall be given free of cost, to the parties to the
application, the police officer in-charge of the police station in the jurisdiction of which
the Magistrate has been approached, and any service provider located within the local
limits of the jurisdiction of the court and if any service provider has registered a domestic
incident report, to that service provider.

25. (7) A protection order made under section 18 shall be in force till the aggrieved
person applies for discharge.

(2) If the Magistrate, on receipt ofan application from the aggrieved Person orthe
respondent, is satisfied that there is a change in the circumstances — alterat ions
modification or revocation of any order made under this Act, he may, for reasons to be
recorded in writing pass such order, as he may deem appropriate. हि

26. (7) Any relief available under sections 18, 19, 20, 21 and 22 may also te a
in any legal proceeding, before a civil court, family court or a cri हक cour, affecting
the aggrieved person and the respondent whether such proceeding i
or after the commencement of this Act. 7 ;

(2) Any relief referred to in sub-section (7) may be el a in addition 7 ana
along with any other relief that the seerieved person may see!

Proceeding before a civil or criminal court. : es ie

(3) In case any relief has been obtained by the aggrieved person in tals 8 .
other than a proceeding under this Act, she shall be bound to in

the grant of such relief.

Custody
orders,
Compensation
orders.
Power to
grant intenm
and ex parte
orders.

Court to give
copies of order
free of cost.

Duration and
alteration of
orders.

Relief in other
suits and legal
proceedings.



J

encanta nena

Procedure.

Appeal.

Protection
Officers and
members of
service
providers to
be public
servants.
Penalty for
breach of
protection
order by
respondent.

Cognizance
and proof.

10

27. (1) The court of Judicial Magistrate of the first class or the Metropolitan
Magistrate as the case may be, within the local limits of which—

(a) the person aggrieved permanently or temporarily resides or carries on
business or is employed; or

(b) the respondent resides or carries on business or is employed; or

(c) the cause of action has arisen,

shall be the competent court to grant a protection order and other orders under this Act
and to try offences under this Act.

(2) Any order made under this Act shall be enforceable throughout India.

28. (1) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, all proceedings under sections 12,
18, 19, 20, 21, 22 and 23 and Gffences under section 31 shall be governed by the provisions
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.

(2) Nothing in sub-section (7) shall prevent the court from laying down its own
procedure for disposal of an application under section 12 or under sub-section (2) of
section 23.

29. There shall lie an appeal to the Court of Session within thirty days from the
date on which the order made by the Magistrate is served on the aggrieved person or
the respondent, as the case may be, whichever is later.

CHAPTER V
MISCELLANEOUS

30. The Protection Officers and members of service providers, while acting or
purporting to act in pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act or any rules or
orders made thereunder shall be deemed to be public servants within the meaning of
section 21 of the Indian Penal Code.

31. (1) A breach of protection order, or of an interim protection order, by the
respondent shall be an offence under this Act and shall be punishable with imprisonment
of either description for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine which may
extend to twenty thousand rupees, or with both.

(2) The offence under sub-section (/) shall as far as practicable be tried by the
Magistrate who had passed the order, the breach of which has been alleged to have
been caused by the accused.

(3) While framing charges under sub-section (J), the Magistrate may also frame
charges under section 498A of the Indian Penal Code or any other provision of that

Code or the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961, as the case may be, if the facts disclose the
commission of an offence under those provisions.

32. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminat Procedure,

1273, the offence under sub-section (7) of section 31 shall be cognizable and non-
le.

(2) Upon the sole testimony of the aggrieved person,

the court may conclude that
an offence under sub-section (7) of section 31 has been ¢ y conclude

ommitted by the accused.

2 of 1974,

AS of 1860.

45 of 1860.
28 of 1961.

2 of 1974. *


11

33.,If any Protection Officer fails or refuse: i :
+ « 4 ses to dischar A न
the Magistrate in the protection order without any su Micient cours ae a directed by Penalty for
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one २ शा 84 ing donee
A wi

fine which may extend to twenty thousand rupecs, or with both. Protection
i Officer.
. No prosecution ‘
ffi a lose a complaint is Fe legal Proceeding shall lie against the Protection Cogni
Officer unies hori P ist led with the previous sanction of the State Governmer of offence,
or an officer authorised by it in this behalf. ent committed by
Protection
Officer.

35. No suit, prosecution or other legal i i है
Proceeding sha! j .
Officer for any damage caused or likely to be caused 0 आप cn neni Protection of
४ . is in good fai ti ke
done or intended to be done under this Act or any rule or order made thereunder a good fath "

36. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of the Act not in

provisions of any other law, for the time being in force. derogation of
any other law.

37. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for Carrying out Power of

the provisions of this Act. Central
Government

(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, © make rules.
such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—

(a)-the qualifications and experience which a Protection Officer shall possess
under sub-section (2) of section 8;

(6) the terms and conditions of service of the Protection Officers and the
other officers subordinate to him, under sub-section (3) of section 8;

(c) the form and manner in which a domestic incident report may be made
under clause (4) of sub-section (/) of section 9;

(d) the form and the manner in which an application for protection order may
be made to the Magistrate under clause (c) of sub-section (/) of section 9;

(e) the form in which a complaint is to be filed under clause (व) of
sub-section (/) of section 9;

(f) the other duties to be performed by the Protection Officer under clause @
of sub-section (/) of section 9;

(g) the rules regulating registration of service providers under sub-section
(7) of section 10;

(A) the form

seeking reliefs under this Act may be made and the p: t
application shall contain under sub-section (3) of that section;

nder sub-section (/) of section 13;

in which an application under sub-section (/) of section 12
है articulars which such

(i the means of serving notices ui

(/) the form of declaration of service of notice to be made by the Protection

Officer under sub-section (2) of section 13;
ions and experience in counselling which a member of the
possess under sub-section (/) of section 14;

it may be filed by the aggrieved person under

; (A) the qualificati

service provider shall

(0) the form in which an affidavi
sub-section (2) of section 23;

(m) any other matter which has to be, or may be, prescribed.



12

ule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if,
before the expiry of the session immediately following या or the successive
sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both
Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything
previously done under that rule.

(3) Every r

The above Bill has been passed by the Houses of Parliament.



A

Bu

to provide for more effective protection of the rights of women guaranteed
under the Constitution who are victims of violence of any kind occurring
within the family and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.

(As passed by the Houses of Parliament)

MGIPMRND—2942RS(S5)—02.09.2005,