LOK SABHA
COPJUGE~IDUiv',
to
THE ILL;::3:\I-NlI'~;E/l.;\JTS'(DETER.fiI\L':\.TIOt'JB'{ TRI8UN,\LS)
BILL. 1983
("[0be/Asir~troducedinLok..~)
P~gG8,line27,-


, I' " P ;;', t 1 , I., ' 
As INTRODUCED IN Lox: SABHA ON 
Bill No. 11. of 1983 
THE ILLEGAL MIGRANTS (DE'l'ERMINATION BY TRIBUNALS) 
BILL, 1983 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CRAPI'ER I 
PRELIMINARY 
CLAUSES 
1. Short title, extent and, commencement. 
2. Application .. 
3. Definitions and construction of re~rences. 
4. Overriding effect of the Act. 
CHAPTER II 
ESTABLISHMENT m' TRIBUNALS 
5. Establishment of Illegal jMigrants (Determination) Tribunals. 
6. Filling of vaca~cies. 
7. Staff of the Tribunals. 
8. References' or applic~tions to Tribunals. 
9. Powers of the Tribunal. 
10. Procedure with respect to references under ~b-se~on (1) of 
section 8. 
11. Procedure with respect to applications under sub-aeetion (2) of 
section 8. 
12. Determination of the question n to whether a person is an iJ1epl • migrant. 
13. Reference and application to be disposed' of within six montbl. 
14. Appeal. 
15. . Appellate Tribunal. 
16. Order of the Appellate Tribunal. 
17. Revision. 
(i) 

(ii) 
CHAPTER III 
. 
'PROYDIONS APIUCa-": TO ALL'1'RDn7lfAlS 
CLAUSIS 
18. Procedure. 
19. Proceeding before every Tribunal to be judicial proceeding tor 
certain purposes. 
CHAPTER IV 
20. Expulsion of illegal ~igrants. 
CHAPTER V 
MISCELLANJ!'DUS 
21. Delegation of powers. 
22. Power .to give effect to the orders, etc. 
23 .. Bar of jurisdiction of civil courts. 
24. Transitory provision. 
25. Penalties. 
26. Protection of action taken in good faith. 
27 .. Power to remove diffteulties. 
28. Power to make rules. 
29. Repeal and saving. 

Bill No. 118 of 1983 
THE IL.L.£GAL MIGRANTS (DETERMINATION BY TRmUNALS) 
BILL, 1983 
BILL 
to provide for the establilhment of Tribunals for the dcterminatibtt, in Cl 
fair manner, of the question whethtr a person is 411. alegat 7r'&lgrant 
to ~able the Central Government to e~l illegal migrant, frmn, 
I nelia and for m.4Uers connected tlte1"e1.Of.th Or ~l thereto. 
'. . WIIIBM . a sub&~tial nwnber of the foJeilI*& who mi.-.ted into 
~ IncUa .uOS& the herders of the easter~ ami ~tem retJons Of the 
country on and after the 25th day of March, 1971, have, by taldng 
Mlvaa..,. of the eircumstanees et euch mipatiOft ad their etJmJc 
5 similarities and other connections with the people of India and wIGlout 
having in their possession any lawful authority so to do, illegany 
remained in India; 
AIm WHUEA$ the continuance of su.ch foreigners in India is detri-
mental to the interests ot the pUblic of India; 
10 .AND WHEREAS on account of the number ot sum foreigners. and the· 
manner in which such foreigners have clandestinely heeD trying to 
pass off as citizens of India and all other relevant circumstances, it is 
necessary for the protection of the citiZens of India to make special pro-
visions for the detection of such foreigners in Assam and also in any other 

Applica-
tion. 
2 
part of India in which such foreigners may be found to have remained 
illegally; 
Bz it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-fourth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
CHAPTER I 
PRP·Tl\lJ!fARY 
1. (J) This Act may be called the Illegal Migrants (Determination by 
Tribun~) Act, 1983. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India. 
5 
(3) It ahall be dee~ed to have come into force in the State of Aaam 10 
on the 15th day of October, 1983 and in any other State on such date as 
the Central Government may; by notification in the otB9ia:l Gazette, 
appoint and cWrerent datel .may be appointed for di1!eteilt States and 
references in thia Act to the commencement of this Act shall' be 
construed in relation to any State as references to the date of commence-15 
ment of this Act in such State. 
2. Nothing in this Act shall apply tQ or in relation to-
(a.) any person who was in any State and who had been 
~xpelled from that State or India before the commencement of this 
Act in that State or in relation to whose expulsion from such State 20 
or India any order made before such commencement under any 
other law is in force; 
(b) any person detected as a foreigner at the time of his entry 
across any border of India; 
(c) any foreigner who, having entered into India under a valid 25 
passport or travel document, continued to remain therein after the 
expiry of the period for which he was authorised to remain in lndia 
under such .passport or travel document . 
• 3. (J)' In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(G~ "Appellate Tribunal" means an Appellate Tribunal estab- 10 
llshed by the Central Government under sub-seclion (J) of teCti0l115; 
(b) "fo~igner'J hu the .same meaning as in the Foreigners Act, 
.. 1946; 
(c) "illegal migrant" means a person in respect of whom each of 
the following conditions is satiBfted, namely: - 3,5 
(i) he has enterecI into India on or after the 2Mh day of 
March, 1971; , 
(ii) he is a foreigner; 
(iii) he has entered Into India without being in possession 
of a valid passport or other travel document or any other lawful fO 
'authority in that behalf; 
31 of 1&41. 

3 
(d) "notification" means a notification published in the Oftlcial 
Gazette; 
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this 
Act; 
5 (f) "Tribunal" means a Tribunal established by the Central 
Government under sub-section (1) of section 5. 
(2) Any reference in this Act to any law which is not in force in 
any area shall, in relation to that area, be cOlUltrued as a reference to 
the corresponding law, if any; in force in that area. 
10 .1. (1) The provisions of this Act or of any rule or order made 
thereunder shall have effect notwithstandini anything contained in the 
10 of 1950. Immigrants (Expulsion from Assam) Act, 1950 or any other enactment 
for the time being in force, or any rule or order made under any such 
enactment B:Od in force for the time being. 
15 (2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the 
proviSions of sub-section (1), nothing in the proviso to section 2 of the 
10 of lHO. Immigrants (ExpulSIOn from Assam) Act, 1950 shall apply to or in 
relation to an illegal migrant as defined in clause (c) of sub-section (1) 
of section 3. 
20 CHAPTER II 
ESTABLISHMENT OF TRIBUNALS 
5. (1) The CentrAl Government may, by notification, establish, fo~ 
the purposes of this Act, as many Illegal Migrants (Determination) 
Tribunals as it may deem necessary and specify the principal place o~ 
25 sitting of, and the territorial limits within which, each such Tribunal 
shall exercise its jurisdiction. 
(2)· No person shall be appointed as a member of any such Tribunal 
unless he is or has been a District Judge or an Additional District Judge 
in any State. 
30 (3) Each TrIbunal shall consist of three members. 
(4) On the establishment of a Tribunal, the Central Government shall 
appoint one of the members thereof as the Chairman of such Tribunal. 
(5) Each Tribunal shall sit in its principal place of sitting and in such 
other place or places as its Chairman may, from time to time, appoint. 
35 6. If, for any reason, any vaCAncy occurs in the office of the Chairman 
or any other member of a Tribunal, the Central Government may fill 
the vacancy by appointing any person who fulfils the qualifications 
specified in sub-section (2) of section 5, as the Chairman, or, as the case 
may be, member of such Tribunal. 
Overrld. 
inle1!ect 
Of the 
Act. 
Establish-
ment of 
Illegal 
Migrants 
(Determi. 
nation) 
Tribunais. 
Fillin,ot 
vacancies. 
40 7. The Central Government shall make available to ~very Tribunal Staff of 
such staft as may be necessary for the discharge of its functions under the 'l'ribu. 
this Act. nals. 

Referen-
etIII or 
appUea-
tiona to 
TribUDals. 
Powers of 
theTrl-
baaal. 
Procedure 
with res_ 
pect to 
references 
undefsub-
..... 
(Jt "1 
netimlB. 
4-
8. (l) It any question arises as to whether any person i8 or is nOi ali 
illegal migrant, the Central Government may, whether such question 
has arisen on a representation made by such person atainS't any order 
under the Foreigners Act, 1946 requiring him not to remain in I.DCIfa or 31 of IH6. 
to any other effect or has arisen in any other manner whatsoever, refer 5 
such question to a Tribunal for decision. 
(2) WiUiout prejudice to the power conferred on tne Central Govern-
ment. by sub-section (1), any person may make an ipplicaticm: to the 
Ti:lb1lD8l, for its decision, as to wbetber the perlOn whOle name and 
other particulars are given in the application, is or is not an ttt •• 1 10 
migrant:· . 
Provided that no such application shall be entertained by the Tribunal 
unless the person in relation to whom the application is made is found, 
or resides, at a place within three kilometres from the~ place of residence 
of the applicant. 15 
(3) Every application made under sub-section (2) shall be made in 
such form and in such manner as may be prescribed and shall be 
accompanied by affidavits sworn by not less than two persons residing 
within three kilometres of the area in which the person referred to in 
the application is. fO'LUld, ,or residing, corroborating the averments made 20 
in the application, and shall also be accompanied by such fee, being not 
less than twenty-five, and not more than one hundred, rupees, as may 
he prescribed. 
(4) Every reference under sub-section (1), and every application 
under suh-section (2), shall be made to the Tribunal within Ole terri- ~ 5 
torial limits of whose jurisdiction ·the place of residence of the pe1'IOIl 
named in such reference or application, a~ the case may be. is situated; 
Provided that where the person named in such reference or appli-
cation has no place of 11:!" .. ..teUC .. , the reference or application, as the case 
may be, shall be made to the Tribunal within the territorial lir;nita of 30 
whose jurisdiction sucil person is found. 
9. Every Trib·llnal w • ..Ili __ ... ole the same powers as are vested In a civil 
court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, while trying a suit, in 
respE!ct of the follo\ .• ug matters, namely:-
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of witnesses and 35 
examining them on oath; 
(b) discovery and productio~ of any document; 
(c) reception of evidence on affidavits; 
(d) requisitioning of public records from any court or office; 
(e) issuing of any commission for the ex8min.ation of witaeas .. 40 
]8. On receipt of a reference under sub-section (1) of sectIon 8, the 
Trtbuaal shall serve on the person named in such reference, a notice, 
accompanied by a copy of such reference, calling 'Upon him to make, 
within a period of thirty days !rom the date of receipt of such notice, 
.u~h repre.entation with regard to the averments made in the refe~~t 45 
and to produce such evidence as he may think fit in support 01 htl 
defence: 
5 of 1008. 

Provided that if the Tribunal is satisfied that the person aforesaid 
...... prevented by sufticient cause from making his representation and 
from producing evidence in support of his defence within the ·said period 
of thirty days, it may permit .him to make his representation and to 
5 produce evidence in support of his defence, within such further period, 
not exceeding thirty days, as it may, by order, specify. 
11. (1) On receipt of an application, under sub-section (2) of section 8, 
the TrIbunal :shall issue a notice, accompanied by a copy of the appli-
cation, to the prescribed authority calling upon it to furnish, after 
to making such inquiry as that authority may deem fit, a report to the 
Tribunal with regard to the 8,'crments made in the application. 
(~) If, on a consideration of the report made by the preacribed 
authority, the Tribunal is satisfied that-
(a) the person named in the application is not an illegal migrant 
15 or that the application is frivolous or vexatious, or has not been 
·made in good faith, the Tribunal shall, after giviri"g- the applicant an 
opportunity to be heard, reject the application; 
(b) there are reasonable grounds to believe that the person 
named in the· application is an illegal migrant, the Tril:runal ihall 
~o issue a notice accompanied by a copy Qf the application, to the penon 
named in the application, calling upon him to make, within thirty 
days from the date of receipt of the notice, such representation with 
regard to the averments made in the application and to produce such 
evidence as he may think fit in support of his defence: 
lie; Provided that if the Tribunal is satisfied that the person afore-
said was prevented by sufficient cause from making his representation 
and from· producing evidence in support of his defence within the 
said period of thirty days, it may permit him to make his representa-
tion and to produce evidence in support of his defence, within such 
SO further period, not exceeding thirty days, as it may,·by order, spectfy. 
~. (1) The Tribunal to which a reference has been made under sec-
tion 8, or to which an application has been ~de under that section, shall, 
after taking such evidence as may be addut:ed before it and after making 
such inquiry as it may think fit and after hearing such persons as it may 
35 deem appropriate, by order, decide the question as to whethetl the pe1'8OD. 
named in. such reference or. application, as the case may be, is or is not 
an .i11egal migrant: 
Provided that where for the determination of such question in any 
case the decision on any i~ue renders any decision on any other issue 
40 or issues unnecessary, the Tribunal may not decide such other isSue or 
issues. 
(2) Where the members of the Trib'Unal differ in their opinion o~ 
any. point, the decision on such point shall. be according to the opinion 
of the majority of such members. 
r: (3) The Tribunal shall send a copy of every order passed by it to 
4.) the ·pTescribed authority and to the parties to the rp.ference, or the appli-
cation, as the case may be. . 
p~. 
with ftI· 
PIIlttO 
appllca-
tlans 
under 
sub-
tee\ion 
(2) of 
aecUonl. 
Determi-
nation of 
the queI-
tionaato 
whether a 
penon is 
an i11eIal 
mlarant. 

Refereneo 
and appli-
cation to 
be dispos-
ed of 
within 
'six 
months. 
Appeal. 
~ppellate 
Tribunal. 
6 
(4) Evel'Y order passed under sub-section (1) shall, subject to the 
,'decision of the Appellate Tribunal, .be final and shall not he called in 
question in any court. 
13. :t:very reference made to a Tribunal under section 8 or application 
made to a Tribunal under that section shall' be inquired into as ex.pediti- 5 
ously as possible and every endeavO'ilr shall be made to conclude such 
. inquiry within a period of six months from the date of the service, on 
the person concerned, of a copy of such reference or application. 
14. The Central Government, or any. person, named in a reference 
or an applica~ion under section 8, or any applicant under sub-section (2) J 0 
of that section may, if it or he is not satisfted with any order made by a 
Tribunal under section 12, prefer an appeal to the Appellate Tribunal 
against such order. . . 
15. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, estabUsh for 
eaeh State in which this Act is in -force an Appellate Tribunal to be 15 
known as the Illegal Migrants (Determination) Appellate Tribunal for 
deciding appeals preferred under section 14 against, orders made by Tri· 
bunals in the State and specify the prindpal place of sitting of such 
Appellate TribulUll. 
(2) No per~on shall be appointed as a member.of an Appellate Trf· :10 , 
bunal unless he is or has been a Judg-e of a High Court. 
(.1) An Appellate Tribunal shall consist of as many members, not 
being less than three and more than six, as the Central Government may 
think fit. 
(4) The Central Government shall appoint one of the members of gs 
an Appellate Tribunal to be the President thereof. 
(5) An Appellate Tribunal shall sit in its principal place of litting 
or· any such other place or places as the President thereof may, from 
time to time, appoint. 
(6) The powet's and functions of an Appellate Tribunal Jn8y H 3 0 
exercised and discharged by benches constituted by Uie President ~ere-
of from amongst the members thereof and each bench shall consist of 
not les., than two members. 
(7) The Central Government shall make available to every AppeUate 
TribUDal su~h staff as may be necelS8ry for tbe discharge of it, function. 35 
under this Act. 
(8) Every memorandum of appeal to an Appellate Tribunal shall be 
made in such form. and in such manner as may be prescribed, and, in 
the case of an appeal preferred by an applicant under' 8ub-sectton (2) 
of section 8,' shall also be accompanied by such fee, not bemg 1888 thaD 40 
twenty.~ve and more than one hundred, rupees, as may be prescribed. 

lof1801. 
, 
7 
(9) Every appeal shall be preferred within thirty days from the 
elate on which the order sought to be ap~aled against was communicated 
to the appellant: 
Provided that the Appellate Tribunal may, if it is satisfied that the 
5 appellant was prevented by suffiCient cause from preferring the appeal 
within the said period, admit an appeal after the expiry of the aforesaid 
period of thirty days. 
(10) Every Appellate Tribunal shall have the same powers as are 
vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure 1908 while 
10 trying a S'Uit, in respect of the following matters, namely: ~ , 
(a) summoning and enforCing the attendance of witnesses and 
examining them on oath; 
(b) discovery and production of any document; 
(c) reception of evidence on aftldavits; 
15 (d) requisitioning of public records from any court or office; 
(e) issuing of any commission for the examination of witnesses. 
16. (1) The Appellate Tribunal may, after giving the parties to the 
appeal a reasonable opportunity of being heard, Pass such orders thereon 
as it may think fit, confirming, modifying or annulling the order appealed 
ao against or may remand the case to the Tribunal which had passed such 
order with such directions to that Tribunal as the Appellate Tribunal 
may think fit, for fresh determination after takinj additional evi~ence, 
if necessary. 
(2) Where an appeal had been heard by the Appellate TribWlal and 
125 the members thereof differ in their opinion on any point, the decision on 
such point shall, where there is a majority, be according to the opinion 
of such majority, and where there is no majority and the"members are 
equally divided in their opinion, they shall draw up a statement of the 
facts of the case and the point or points on which they durer in their 
80' opinion and make a reference of the point or points or of the appeal, as 
the case may be, to the President of s,:,ch Tribunal, and on receipt of 
such reference. the President of the Tribunal shall arrange for the hear-
ing of such point or points, or the appeal, by one or more of the members 
of the Appellate Tribunal, and such point or points, or the appeal, as 
85 the case may be, shall be decided according to the opinion of .the majority 
of, the members of the Appellate Tribunal, who have heard the appeal, 
including those who had first heard it. 
(3) The Appellate Tribunal shall send a copy of every order passed 
by it under sub-section (1) to the parties to the appeal"'ana to the Tri-
40 bunsl concerned. . 
(4) 9ubject to the provisions of section 17, e'Very order passed under 
lub-section (1), other than an order remanding the case, shall be ftnal 
and no order passed under that sub-section shall· be called in question 
in any court. . 
Order of 
the Appel· 
late Tri-
bunal. 

Procedure 
Proceedin. 
before 
every 
TnlJunal 
to be 
,udicial 
proceedinl 
for 
certain 
purpoaes. 
Expulsion 
of illepl 
mlgranta. 
8 
17. The High Court may call for the record of any case which has 
been decided by the ·Appellate Tribunal situate wit1iin"'tts meal jurisdic-
tion, and if such Appellate Tribunal appears-
(0) to have exercised a jurisdiction not vested in it bylaw, or 
(b) to have failed to exercise a jurisdiction 80 vested, or 5 
(c) to have acted in the exercise of its jurisdiction illegally or 
\lI,ith material irregularity, 
the High Court may make wch order in the case as it thinks fit: 
Provided that the High Court shall not, under this section, vary or 
reverse any order made or any order dec:iding an issue in the coune of 10 
a proceeding with respect to an appeal, except where-
(i) the order, if it had been made in favour of the party .pplying 
for revision, would have finally disposed of the proceeding, or 
(ii) the order, if allowed to stand, would occasion a failure of 
justice or cause irreparable injury to the party agarnst whom it was 15 
made. 
Explanation.-In this section, the expression "any case which has 
been decided" ·includes any order made or any order deciding an issue 
in the course of a proceeding with respect to any appe&1. 
CHAPTER III 
PRoVISIONS APPLICABLE TO ALL TRIBUNALS 
18. Subject to the provisions of this Act and the rules made there-
under, every Tribunal and every Appellate Tribunal shall have the 
power to regulate its own procedure in all matters arising oul of the 
exercise of its powers or for the discharge of its tunctions. 25 
II. Every proceeding before a Tribunal or the Appellate Tribunal 
shall be deemed to be judicial proceeding within the meaning of secticms 
193 and 228. and for the purposes of section 196 of the Indian Penal Code; -.s of 1880. 
and every such Tribunal or Appel~ate Tribunal, as the case maybe, shall 
be deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of section 195 and Chapter SO 
XXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973. S of 18'14. 
CHAPTER IV 
ENJ'O~ENT OF THE ORDERS MADE BY THE 'l'RIBUNAIB 
20. Where a person has been. determined by a Tribunal, or, u the 
case may be, by the Appellate Tribunal, to be an illegal migrant, the 35 
Central Government shall, by order served on such person, direct such 
person to remove himself from India within such time and by tueb route 
as may be specified in the order and may give such further dfreettcms 
in regard to hi'S removal from India as it may consider ·neeessary or 40 
t>xpedient. 

9 
CHAPTER V 
MISCELLANEOUS 
21. The Central Government may, by notification, direct that the 
powers and duties conferred or imposed on it by this Act, other than 
5 th~ powers conferred by section 28, and the powers conferred by this 
section, may, subject to such conditions as may be specified in the noti-
fication, be exercised or discharged also by-
(a) any officer subordinate to the Central Government; 
(b) any State Government or any officer subordinate to that 
10 Government. 
22. Any authority empowered by or in pursuance of the provisions 
of this Act to exercise any po~r, may, in addition to any other action 
expressly provided for in this Act, take, or cause to be taken, such steps, 
and use, or cause to be used, such force, as may in its opinion be reasOD-
15 ably necessary for the effective exercise of such power. 
23. Where a Tribunal or Appellate Tribunal has been established for 
any area for the purpose of determining whether a person is or is not 
f 
an illegal migrant, no civil court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any 
question relating to that matter in that area and no injunction or any 
flO other order in respect of any action taken by, or before, the Tribunal or 
Appellate Tribunal in respect of that matter shall be granted. or made by 
any civil court. 
Z4. Where in any suit or other legal proceeding pending, whether in 
a civil court or in any Tribuna1 established under any other law for the 
fl5 time being in force. immediately before the commencement of this Act, 
a question arises as to whether a person is or is not an illegal migrant, 
!luch court or Trihunal shall. without deciding such question. make an 
order transferring such suit or other legal proceeding f'o -me Tribunal 
under this Act within the territorial limits of whose jurisdiction sueh 
30 court or other Tribunal is situate and on such transfer such question 
shaD be dealt with by such Tribunal in accordance with the provisions 
. of this Act. 
25. Any person who,-
. 
(a) contravenes or attempts to contravene. or abets the contra. 
veption of, any order m~de under !;lection 20; or 
(b) fails to comply with any direction given by any su('h order; 
or 
(c) harbours any person who has contravened any order made 
under section 20 or has failer! to comply with any direction given by 
40 any such order, 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
three years and, shall also· be liable to fine. 
Dele,a. 
tiOil of 
powers. 
Power to 
give 
effect 
to the 
orden, 
etc. 
Bar of 
,urisdictiol 
of civU 
courll. 
Transitory 
provision. 
Penal". 

ProMct1on 
.taction 
taken in 
,004 
falth. 
Power to 
remove 
dUlkulU ... 
Power to 
make 
rul •. 
~ 
and 
• aviJll. 
10 
26. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedinl shall lie agaiDit any 
person for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be doae 
under this Act. 
27. (1) 1£ any difficulty arises in giving effect ~ the provisionJ of 
this Act the Central Government may, by order to be published in the 5 
Official Gazette, make such provisions, not inconsistent with the provi. 
sions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for remov-
ing the difficulty: 
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a 
period of two years from the commencement of this Act. 10 
(2) Every order made under uu. section shall, as soon as mayj be 
after it is made, be laid before each House of Parliament. 
28. (1) The Central ~mment may, by notification, make rules to 
carry out the provisions of this Act. 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the fore- 15 
going powers, such rules may provide for all or any of the following 
matters, namely:-
(a) the form and the manner in which an application may be 
made and the fee which shall accompany such application, as re-
quired by sub-section (3) of section 8; 110 
(b) the authority to be prescribed under section 11; 
(c) the form and the manner in which an appeal to the Appel-
late Tribunal may be preferred and the fee which shall accompany 
such appeal, as required by sub-section (8) of section 15; 
(d) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, pre&- ~5 
cribed. 
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall 
be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parlia-
ment, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may 
be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and 30 
if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or 
the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any 
modificatiOli in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be 
made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form 
or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modi- 35 
flc~tjon or annulment shall ~ without prejudice to the validity of any-. 
thing previously done under that rule. 
29. (1) The Illegal Migrants (Determination by Tribunals) Ordi-
nance, 1983, a hereby repealed. 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, BDything done or any aet:jon taken 40 
under tbe said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or tabD 
under the corresponding provisions of this Act. 
• of 1111 . 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The influx of foreigners who illegally migrated into India aeross the 
borders of the sensitive eastern and north-eastern regions of the country 
and remained in the country poses a threat to the integrity and security 
of the said region'S. A substantial number of such foreigners who 
migrated into India after the 25th day of March, 19'Tl, have, by taking 
advantage of the circumstances of such migration and their ethnic 
limilarities and other connections with the people of India, illegally 
remained in India without having in their posse.vsion lawful authority 
80 to do. The continuance of these persons in India has given rise to 
serious problems. The clandestine manner in which these persons have 
been trying to pass off as citizens of India has rendered their detection 
difficult. After taking into account the need for their speedy detection, 
the need for protection of genuine citizens of India and the interests 
of the general public, the President promulgated, on the IMh Oc";ober, 
1983, the megal Migrants (Determination by Tribunals) Ordinance, 
1983, to provide for the establishment of Tribunals. 
2. The Ordinance provided for the establishment of Tribunals for the 
determination, in a fair manner, of the· question whether a person 1. 
an illegal migrant. The definition of "illegal migrant'\ as provided in 
the urdlnance, recognised the 25th March, 1971, as the cut off date. The 
Ordinance also empowered the Central Government to make a refer- • 
ence to the Tribunal and also enabled private citizens to make applica-
tions to the Tribunal for determining the question whethe~ any per-
son is an illegal migrant as deflned in the Ordinance. The Ordinance 
also made suitable provisions for appeal, barring the j'lllisdiction of civil 
courts. and expulsion of persons found to be illegal migrants. 
3. The Bill seeks to replace the Ordinance. 
NEW D!:Lm; P. C. SETHI. 
The 9th Novembef', 1983. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE ] 17 ·OF 
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[CoPy of letter No. llOI2/129/83-NE. IV, dated the 12th November, 
J 983 from Shrl P. C. Sethi, Minister of Home Affairs to the Secretary, 
Lok Sabha.] . 
The President, having been infonned of the subject matter of th~ 
megal Migrants (Determination by Tribunals) Bill, 1983 recommends 
th., consideration of the :Rill in !.ok Sabha under nrticle 117 (3) nf the 
Constitution of India. 
n 
.' 

• 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Sub-clause (1) of clause & of the Bill provides tor the establishment 
of Illegal Migrants (Determination) Tribunals by the Central Govern-
ment for the purpose of determining the question as to whether a 
person is an illegal migrant. Cla.use 7 provides for the appointment of 
staff of the Tribunals. Sub-clause (1) of clause 15 provides tor the 
establishment of Illegal Migrants (Determination) Appellate Tribunal 
by the Central Government for the purpose of deciding appeals preferred 
against orders made by the Tribunals in the State. Sub:-clause (7) of 
that clause provides for the appointment of staff ot the Appellate 
Tribunal The above provisions, if enacted, would involve expenditure 
from the Consolidated Fund of India on the following itemsr namely:-
(a) recurring' expenditure on salaries and allowanees of the 
members of the Tribunals and the supp'orting staff and expensee on 
account of petrol, oil and lubricant for the conveyance. travelling 
allowances, I1mt for oMee and residential accommodation. Each 'l'rl~ 
bunal shall have three members. All the members of the Tribunal shall 
be either serving or retired District Judges or Additional District 
Judges; 
(b) non-recurring expenditure on account of furniture, oftlce' 
equipment and a car for each Tribunal; 
(c) recurring expenditure on salaries and allowances of the 
members of the Appellate Tribunal and the supporting statt. The 
Appellate Tribunal will have not less than three and more than 
six members, who shall be either serving or retired High Court 
Judges; 
(d) non-recurring expenditure on account of furniture offtce' 
equipment and ccnveyance of the Appellate Tribunal 
2. (I) The approximate recurring expenditure for setting up one 
Tribunal is estimated to be Rs. 3.03,120 per annum. This includes ex-
penditure on salaries of the members of the Tribunal. statt 'for the Tri-
bunal, office expenses, petrol, oil and lubricants, travelling allowanees. 
rent for office and residential accommodation. 
(ii) The approximat.e non-recurring expenditure for one Tribunal is 
estimated to be Rs. 1.20,.900 per annum. This includes expenditure on 
furniture. 'typewriter and car., As the establishment of twenty Tribu-
nals in the State of Assam has been notified, the expenditure on TrI-
bunals will be as follows:-
Returring 
Non-r~urrtng 
12 
B.s. 60,62,400 
Rs. 24.18,000 

I~ 
3. As the Bill seeks to provide that an Appellate Tribunal shall 
consist of a minimum of three members, recurring expenditure on 
account of salaries of the three members (including one Chairman) of 
the Appellate Tribunal, salaries of staff for the Appellate Tribunal, 
oftic.e expenses, petrol, oil and lubricants, travelling allowances, rent 
for office and residential accommodation, is estimated to be Rs. 3,61,320 
per annum. Non-recurring expenditure on account of furniture,'oftlce 
equipments and conveyances for the Appellate Tribunal is estimated to 
be Rs. 1,40,900 PEn" annum. On the assumption that one. Appellate 
Tribunal would be set up for the State of Assam, the expenditure on 
Appellate Tribunal will be asfolIows:-
Recurring 
Non-recurring 
Rs. 3,61,320 per annum 
Rs. '1,40,900 per annum 
4. The Bill, if enacted, is not likely to involve any other recurring 
or non-recurring expenditure. ' 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 28 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make 
rules for carrying out the provisions of the proposed legislation. The 
matters in respect of which such rules may be made are speclBed in that 
clause. They, inter alia., relate to the form and the manner in which an 
application may be made and the fee which shall accompany such 
application, the authority to be prescribed under clause 11 and the fonn 
and the manner in which an appeal to the Appellate Tribunal may be 
preferred and the fee which shall accompany such appeal. The matters 
with respect to which rules may be made are matters of procedure or 
detail. 
2. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a nonnal 
character. 
14 

M.El\40RANDUM INDICATING THE MODIFICATIONS WHICH Ad 
PROPOSED TO BE MADE BY THE BILL IN nm ll.LEGAL MIGRANTS 
(DETERMINATION BY TRIBUNALS) ORDINANCE, 1983 
In clause 13 a modification has been provided tliaflhe period of six 
months within which a reference made to the Tribunal shall be disposed 
of shall be ccmputed from the date on which a copy of the said reference 
is served on the person concerned for securing conformity with clause 10 
of the Bill which provides for serving of the copy of tlie reference itself. 
2. Sub-claUSt: (1) of clause 2.7 has been modified to include· a time 
limit beyond which it shall not be permissible to make any order for 
removing any difftc."Ulty. 
A 
• 

LUK SABHA 
.1 
• 
BILL 
. , . , rr 
to provide for the establi8hment of TribunU for the determination. 
in a fair manner. Of the question whether a penon ia an ille_ 
migrant to enable the Central Government to expel illegal migrants 
from India and for matters connected therewith or incidental 
thereto. 
(Shri P. C. Sethi, Mini,ter of 
Home Again.) 