1
THE ACID CONTROL, PREVENTION OF ACID ATTACKS AND
REHABILITATION OF ACID ATTACK VICTIMS BILL, 2014
By
SHRI BHARTRUHARI MAHTAB, M.P .
A
BILL
to provide for regulation of trade and business of acid, prevention of acid attacks and
rehabilitation of the victims of acid attacks and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fifth year of the Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER  I
PRELIMINARY
1. ( 1) This Act may be called the Acid Control, Prevention of Acid Attacks and
Rehabilitation of Acid Attack Victims Act, 2014.
(2) It extends to the Union territories only.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No.  116   of  2014
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "acid" means any acidic solution, the sale and distribution of which is
declared by the Central Government to be governed by or under the provisions of this
Act; and
(b) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
CHAPTER II
C
ONTROL OF SALE AND USE OF ACID
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, publish a
list of acids for the purpose of regulating the sale and distribution of acids.
(2) The Central Government shall prescribe the degree of concentration of acids to be
sold at retail outlets for different purposes.
(3) No acid of greater than prescribed concentration at the retail outlets shall be sold.
4.  (1) No person shall produce, import, store, sell or transport or otherwise engage in
trade or business of acid without obtaining a license from the competent authority to be
designated for the purpose by the Central Government for carrying on such business or
trade.
(2) Every person who is engaged in trade or business of acid shall—
(i) maintain record of the quantity of acid in his possession in such manner as
may be prescribed; and
(ii) maintain details such as name,  age, address, occupation of purchaser of acid
including quantity and purpose of purchasing the acid, in such manner as may be
prescribed.
CHAPTER III
R
EHABILITATION OF ACID ATTACK VICTIMS
5. (1) Every victim of acid attack shall be provided free medical treatment in Government
hospitals and designated private hospitals.
(2) The Central Government shall bear the entire cost of treatment.
Explanation.—For the purpose of this section, the expression 'medical treatment'
includes any surgery including plastic or cosmetic surgery that may be required to remove,
completely or partially, any bodily disfigurement caused by acid attack.
6. Where an acid attack has caused substantial bodily harm or disfigurement to such
an extent, as may by prescribed, to a victim, such victim shall be deemed as person with
disability for the purpose of availing benefits under the schemes meant for persons with
disability, including employment under the Central Government, autonomous bodies under
the Central Government and Central public sector undertakings.
7. Where an acid attack victim has suffered such bodily harm or disfigurement in an
acid attack as is likely to impair his chances of obtaining gainful employment or carrying
on any gainful occupation, the Central Government shall pay to such victim a monthly
allowance which shall not be less than four times the amount of old age pension payable in
the Union territory in which the victim resides.
CHAPTER IV
O
FFENCES AND PENALTIES
8. Whoever contravenes the provisions of sub-section ( 3)  of section 3 or section 4
shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years or with fine
which may extend to five lakh rupees or both.
Definitions.
Central
Government
to publish list
of acids.
Regulation of
trade or
business of
acid.
Treatment of
acid attack
victims.
Acid attack
victims to be
treated as
persons with
disability in
certain cases.
Allowance to
acid attack
victims.
Penalties.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
CHAPTER V
AMENDMENT OF THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860
9. In section 326B of the Indian Penal Code, 1860, for the words ‘‘seven years’’, the
words ‘‘imprisonment for life’’ shall be substituted.
CHAPTER VI
MISCELLANEOUS
10. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two years from
the date of commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid
before each House of Parliament.
11. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force or in any instrument having
effect by virtue of any law other than this Act.
12. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of the Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Amendment
of the Indian
Penal Code,
1860.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to make
rules.
45 of 1860.
5
10
15
20
25

4
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The growing incidents of acid attacks, especially on women, have become an area of
grave concern. Despite the recent amendment to the criminal laws making acid attack a
specific offence, the incidents of acid attacks have not shown any downward trend.
2. In order to check this growing menace, the Bill seeks to provide for—
(i) increasing the quantum of punishment to life imprisonment for throwing of
acid on any person by amending section 326B of the Indian Penal Code, 1860;
(ii) regulation of trade and business of acids;
(iii) free treatment of victims of acid attack;
(iv) payment of monthly allowance to certain victims of acid attacks; and
(v) treating certain victims of acid attack as persons with disability to enable
them to secure benefits under the schemes meant for persons with disability.
3. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
Hence this bill.
N
EW DELHI; BHARTRUHARI MAHTAB
August  5, 2014.

5
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 5 of the Bill seeks to provide for free medical treatment of victims of acid attack
at Government and designated private hospitals. Clause 6 provides for entitlement of
employment to the victims of acid attack. Clause 7 provides for payment of monthly allowance
to certain victims of acid attack whose chances of securing gainful employment or occupation
have been adversely affected as a result of acid attack.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund
of India. At this stage it is not possible to give an exact amount of expenditure involved as it
would depend upon the number of eligible victims of acid attack. However, it is estimated
that a recurring expenditure of rupees one crore is likely to be involved per annum.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.

6
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 12 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of  detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.

7
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.
(45 OF 1860)
*****
326B. Whoever throws or attempts to throw acid on any person or attempts to
administer acid to any person, or attempts to use any other means, with the intention of
causing permanent or partial damage or deformity or burns or maiming or disfigurement or
disability or grievous hurt to that person, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which shall not be less than five years but which may extend to seven
years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Explanation 1.— For the purposes of section 326A and this section, "acid" includes
any substance which has acidic or corrosive character or burning nature, that is capable of
causing bodily injury leading to scars or disfigurement or temporary or permanent disability.
Explanation 2.— For the purposes of section 326A and this section, permanent or
partial damage or deformity shall not be required to be irreversible.
*****
V oluntarily
throwing or
attempting to
throw acid.

GMGIPMRND—2464LS(S3)—05-11-2014.
LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for regulation of trade and business of acid, prevention of acid attacks and
rehabilitation of the victims of acid attacks and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab, M.P .)