1
THE INDIAN PENAL CODE (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2016
By
SHRI PRA VESH VERMA, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Indian Penal Code (Amendment) Act, 2016.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by  notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No. 116 of  2016
Short title and
commencement.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2.  After section 376E of the Indian Penal Code, 1860, the following section shall be
inserted, namely:—
"376F. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being
in force, whoever commits rape, his movable and immovable property shall be
confiscated and delivered to the victim of rape:
Provided that if the person convicted of committing the offence of rape is
married and has children, his movable and immovable property shall be distributed
equally between the victim of rape and the wife and children of the convicted.
Confiscation
of movable
and
immovable
properties of
the convicted
person.
Insertion of
New Section
376F.
5

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Incidents of rape have increased in the recent days. There has been considerable
delay in filing the cases and the final verdict. In the meanwhile, the victim is harassed not
only by the defense lawyers but also by the society. In case, she holds any job especially in
private sector, she is removed from the job and her situation becomes worse when there is no
one to take care of her and she is left to fend for herself. All these conditions force her to lead
a miserable life.
Therefore, it is proposed that apart from punishment provided under the Indian Penal
Code, the movable and immovable property of a person who commits rape shall be confiscated
and delivered to the victim. This will not only act as a deterrent but also, to some extent, help
the victim to come back from her agony and lead a dignified life. As the family of the convicted
person should also be taken care of, it is also proposed that where the person convicted of
an offence of rape is married and has children, his property shall be divided equally between
his family and victim of rape.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; PRA VESH VERMA
April 13,  2016.

ANNEXURE
INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860
(45 OF 1860)
* * * * * *
376(E) Punishment for repeat offenders.
Whoever has been previously convicted of an offence punishable under section 376
or section 376A or section 376D and is subsequently convicted of an offence punishable
under any of the said sections shall be punished with imprisonment for life which shall mean
imprisonment for the remainder of that person's natural life, or with death.
* * * * * *
4

GMGIPMRND—250LS(S3)—02.05.2016.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
————
(Shri Pravesh Verma, M.P.)