1
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
THE COMPULSORY VOTING BILL, 2017
By
SHRI SHRIRANG APPA BARNE, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory voting by the electorate in the country and for matters
connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Y ear of the Republic of  India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Compulsory V oting Act, 2017.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. It shall be compulsory for every voter who is eligible to vote at an election to
exercise his right to vote when called for by the Election Commission:
Bill No.  116 of  2017
Compulsory
V oting.
5

2
Provided that a voter may be exempted from exercising his right to vote—
(a) if he is physically incapacitated from an illness of a serious nature and
produces a medical certificate from a registered medical practitioner certifying such
incapacity; or
(b) if the election commission or such other authority as may be empowered by
the Election Commission, on receipt of a request either before or after the poll, from the
voter, is satisfied that there are genuine and bona fide grounds for such exemption; or
(c) if he belongs to armed forces including paramilitary forces and is on active
duty.
3. The Election Commission shall ensure protection and safety of all citizens who come
to polling booths to cast their votes.
4. The election commission shall send a list of names of all eligible voters, who have
not cast their votes, to Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be.
5. (1) There shall be set up adequate number of polling booths at convenient locations
in every constituency of the House of the People or Legislative Assembly, as the case may
be.
(2) The polling booths shall be set up in such a way—
(i) that number of voters for each booth remains same to the extent possible; and
(ii) that distance between one polling booth and another shall not exceed five
hundred meters:
Provided that in hilly regions and desert areas polling booths may be set
up according to geographical convenience and density of population.
6. There shall be made suitable arrangements enabling the persons deployed in
connection with the polling duty to cast their votes.
7. There shall be made separate arrangements in every polling booth for casting of
votes by senior citizens, physically challenged persons and pregnant women.
8. Any person, who fails to cast his vote shall be liable to—
(i) a fine of rupees two thousand; or
(ii) five days' imprisonment; or
(iii) forfeiture of his ration card, passport and Aadhaar card for at least 6 months;
and
(iv) be ineligible to get loan of any kind from any financial institution owned by
the Central Government or from private sector financial institution;
(v) be ineligible for entitlement to any government scheme announced by the
Central Government or the State Government from time to time:
Provided that if such person is an employee of the Union Government or
a State Government or a Union Territory Administration or any Public Sector
Undertaking owned or controlled by the Union Government or a State Government
or a Union Territory Administration or any private sector, such person shall also
be punished with—
(a) forfeiture of one month salary; and
(b) delay in promotion for a period of four years.
Protection and
safety for
voters at
polling booths.
Sending of list
of names of
voters not
casting their
votes to the
Government.
Adequate
number and
spacing of
polling booths.
Special
arrangements
for poll staff.
Special
arrangements
for senior
citizens, etc.
Punishment.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
9. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the proposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this act shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made before
each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for total period of thirty days which may be
comprises in the session or in two or more following the session or the successive session
aforesaid. Both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses
agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under
that rule.
Power to
make rules.
5
10

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Constitution has adopted the system of universal adult suffrage to secure political
justice. Right to vote is also provided in India under the Representation of People Act, 1951.
It provides that every person who is, for the time being entered in the electoral roll of the
constituency, shall be entitled to vote in that constituency. Since elections are the life blood
of democratic procedure, it is via the act of voting that democratic principles are protected.
Electoral systems are the main tools through which the notions of participation and
representation are transformed into reality. The main purpose of the electoral system is to
transform votes cast by electors into seats in the Parliament. Given that participation in
modern States is inter-linked with the notion of democracy, citizens' political engagement is
of great importance. Leaders are trying to legitimize their actions by creating a sense of
public involvement. Even though different States have different ways of elections and different
ways of attracting voters, this electoral deficit is a global phenomenon. So, we can say there
is a direct connection between democracy and compulsory voting. Compulsory voting is not
a new concept. Some of the countries that introduced mandatory voting laws were Belgium
in 1892, Argentina in 1914 and Australia in 1924. Countries that enforce compulsory voting
are Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bulgaria, Brazil, Chile, Cyprus, Ecuador, Fiji, Greece,
Lichtensteen, Mexico, Nauru, Peru, Singapore, Switzerland (One Canton only), Turkey and
Uruguay. Compulsory voting is a system in which electors are obliged to vote in elections or
attend a polling place on voting day.
Compulsory voting system confers a higher degree of political legitimacy because
they result in increased voter turnout. The victorious candidate represents a majority of the
population, not just the politically motivated individuals who would vote without compulsion.
Compulsory voting prevents disenfranchisement of the socially disadvantaged. In a
similar way that the secret ballot is designed to prevent interference with the votes actually
cast, compelling voters to the polls for an election reduces the impact that external factors
may have on an individual's capacity to vote such as the weather, transport, or restrictive
employers.
If everybody must vote, restrictions on voting are easily identified and steps are taken
to remove them.
Compulsory voting may encourage voters to research the candidates' political positions
more thoroughly. Since they are voting anyway, they may take more of an interest into the
nature of the politicians they may vote for, rather than simply opting out. This means
candidates need to appeal to a more general audience, rather than a small section of the
community.
Apart from the increased turnout as a value in itself, Arend Lijphart, a renowned
political scientist, lists other advantages to compulsory voting. Firstly, the increase in voting
participation may stimulate stronger participation and interest in other political activities.
Secondly, as smaller campaign funds are needed to goad voters to the polls, the role of
money in politics decreases.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW D ELHI; SHRIRANG APPA BARNE
June  30, 2017.
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 5 provides for setting up of adequate number of polling booths in every
constituency. Clauses 6 and 7 provide for special arrangements for persons deployed for poll
duty, senior citizens, physically challenged persons and pregnant women in order to enable
them to cast their votes. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of about
rupees seven thousand crore would be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five thousand crore is also likely to be
involved.
5

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of this Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
6

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory voting by the electorate in the country and for matters
connected therewith.
————
(Shri Shrirang Appa Barne, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—978LS(S3)—19-07-2017.