1
Bill No. 116 of  2015
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
THE PROHIBITION OF INTERFERENCE WITH THE FREEDOM OF
MATRIMONIAL ALLIANCES IN THE NAME OF HONOUR AND
TRADITION BILL, 2015
By
SHRI RABINDRA KUMAR JENA, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for, in the interests of protecting individual liberty and  preventing
victimisation, prohibition of unlawful assemblies and other conduct
interfering with the freedom of matrimonial alliances in the
name of honour and tradition and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Prohibiton of Interference with the Freedom of
Matrimonial Alliances in the Name of Honour and Tradition and Act, 2015.
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint:
Provided that different dates may be appointed for different States.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. (1) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that every person shall have a
right to marry or stay with a person of his choice.
(2) Any violation of the right referred to in sub-section (1) by any person or a group of
persons shall be an offence under this Act.
(3) No person or any group of persons shall gather, assemble or congregate at any time
with the view or intention of condemning any marriage, not prohibited by law, on the basis
that such marriage has dishonoured the caste or community tradition or brought disrepute to
all or any of the person forming part of the assembly or the family or the people of the locality
concerned.
(4) Such gathering or assembly or congregation shall be treated as unlawful and every
person convening or organizing such assembly and every member thereof participating
therein, directly or indirectly, shall be punished with imprisonment for a term of not less than
six months but which may extend to one year and shall also be liable to fine which may extend
upto ten thousand rupees.
Explanation.—In this section, the expression—
(i)  'marriage' shall include a proposed or intended marriage; and
(ii) 'gather', 'assemble' or 'congregate' shall include acting in concert through the
use of any technological means or mediums.
3.(1) The members of unlawful assembly referred in section 2, who, individually or
collectively, counsel, exhort or bring pressure, openly or  otherwise, upon any person or
persons to prevent or disapprove the marriage, which is objected to by the said members, or
to generate an environment of hostility towards the married couple or a couple who intends
to marry or either of them or their relatives or supporters shall be deemed to have acted in
endangerment of their liberty and such an act of endangerment shall be punished with
imprisonment for a period of not less than one year but which may extend upto two years and
shall also be liable to fine which may extend upto twenty thousand rupees.
(2) Any person, other than the members of unlawful assembly, who endangers the
liberty under sub-section (1) at the instance of any member of unlawful assembly or otherwise
shall be punished with imprisonment for a period of not less than one year but which may
extend upto two years and shall also be liable to fine which may extend upto twenty thousand
rupees.
Explanation.—In this section, the expression 'endangerment of liberty' shall include
the acts calculated to lead to social boycott or enforcement of social sanctions and in
particular the following acts,—
(i) bringing to bear pressure on the couple or their family or relatives to leave the
village or area of residence concerned;
(ii) indulging in any conduct which impedes or is likely to impede, access to
markets, community facilities, places of worship or any other necessities of life or
which imposes any social or economic sanction or social boycott on the couple or
their family or anyone associated with them;
(iii) divesting or dispossessing the couple or their family of any land or property
belonging to them;
(iv) declaring the couple, who have married or intend to lawfully marry, a brother
and sister, provided that they are not children from the same natural parent and such
marriages are reorganised by any law or custom for the time being in force;
(v) asking the couple who have married or intend to lawfully marry, or anyone
associated with them or harbouring them to pay a fine;
Declaration as
to rights of
persons.
Intent to
cause
endangerment
of liberty.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(vi) causing harm or injury to the couple or either of them or their families or
anyone connected with them for harbouring them; and
(vii) any other act of harassment whether physical or mental.
(3) If any person or a group of persons, who is or are members of the family of the
couple, who has married or intends to marry, or a person or persons acting in concert with, or,
at the behest of, a member of the family or a member of unlawful assembly, kills a woman of
the who has married or intends to marry, or kills the person whom the woman has married or
intends to marry or kills any person associating with couple or causes grievous hurt or any
form of injury or persecutes the couple or either of them for exercising the rights referred to
in section 2, or abets, participates or incites such an act of killing or causing grievous hurt or
any form of injury or persecution, shall be guilty of an offence of murder under the Indian
Penal Code, 1860.
4. Any member or members of an unlawful assembly or any other person acting at their
instance or otherwise who, indulges in criminal intimidation of the couple or either of them or
their relatives or supporters shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which shall not
be less than one year but may extend to three years and be liable to fine.
Explanation.—The expression 'criminal intimidation' includes repeated harassment of
the couple or either of them with a view to pressurising them not to meet or associate with
each other or live with each other or threatening the couple or either of them or their family or
anyone associated with them of retributive action of any kind whatsoever.
5. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force.
6. Where any person is prosecuted for an offence under this Act, the burden of
proving that he has not committed the offence shall be on the person being prosecuted.
7. (1) The District Magistrate or Sub-Divisional Magistrate shall receive any request
or information from any person or persons seeking protection from any assembly of persons
or from members of any family who are objecting or likely to object to any lawful marriage.
(2) Where the District Magistrate or Sub-Divisional Magistrate receives information
from any source that there is a likelihood of convening of an assembly openly or in secrecy
to condemn as objectionable any marriage, proposed or solemnized, he shall, by order prohibit
the convening of such assembly and doing of any act towards the commission of any
offence under this Act by any person in any area specified in the order.
(3) The District Magistrate or Sub-Divisional Magistrate may take such steps as may
be necessary to give effect to such order including giving appropriate directions to the
police authorities concerned.
(4) The District Magistrate or Sub-Divisional Magistrate shall also take such steps as
may be necessary to ensure the safety of the persons targeted pursuant to the illegal decision
taken by the unlawful assembly.
(5) Any two persons who intend to marry or associate with each other may declare
their age and willingness to marry or associate, orally or in writing, before any Government
official, who shall, on receipt of such information, inform the nearest Police Station.
(6) The District Magistrate or the Sub-Divisional Magistrate shall be in direct supervision
of the protection and safety of the persons concerned.
(7) Every village officer and such other officers as may be designated by the District
Magistrate in relation to any area shall, if he has reason to believe or has the knowledge that
any of the offences under this Act are likely to be or have been committed in the area, report
such fact to the nearest Police Station.
Criminal
intimidation.
Provisions of
this Act not
in derogation
of any other
law.
Burden of
Proof.
Power to
prohibit
certain acts
and authority
to take
preventive
measures.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
45 of 1860.

4
(8) Every official called upon to act in terms of the above provisions shall be accountable
for their lapses, omissions or failures and the State Government shall provide for and take
such action against them as may be deemed fit for their lapses, omissions or failures to act.
8. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, all
offences under this Act shall be triable by a Court of Sessions presided over by the District
and Session Judge or any other Sessions Court presided over by a Session Judge or an
Additional Sessions Judge in the district concerned, as may be specified by the High Court
by notification.
(2) The Court of Sessions so notified may take cognizance of any offence without the
accused being committed to it for trial upon receiving a complaint of facts which constitutes
such offence, or upon a police report of such facts.
9. (1) When trying any offence under this Act, the notified Court of Sessions may also
try any other offence with which the accused may, under the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973, be charged at the same trial if the offence is connected with such other offence.
(2) If, in the course of any trial of any offence under this Act, it is found that accused
person has committed any other offence under this Act or any other law, the notified Court
may convict such person also of such other offence and pass appropriate sentence authorized
by that law.
10. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, all
offences under this Act shall be cognizable, non- bailable and non-compoundable.
11. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days, which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of
no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Trial of
offences.
Power of
Special Court
with respect
to other
offences.
Offences to
be cognizable,
non-bailable
and non-
compoundable.
Power to
make rules.
2 of 1974.
2 of 1974.
5
10
15
20
25
30
2 of 1974.

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
There has been an increase number of crimes being incited by and committed by
certain groups of persons or certain individuals, in order to interfere with otherwise completely
lawful matrimonial alliances, in the name of protecting honour and tradition. These groups or
individuals often target 'sagotra', inter-caste and inter-religious alliances between consenting
adults as a part of their prejudiced agenda. There alliances are completely legal under various
Indian laws such as the Hindu Marriage Disabilities Removal Act, 1946 and the Special
Marriage Act, 1954. However, such acts of mental and physical violence are also in direct
violation of certain fundamental rights of citizens enshrined in the Constitution, such as the
Right to Life and Liberty which includes the right to bodily integrity, and the right to choose
whom to marry or associate with.
The general provisions of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 are invoked to book offenders
in honour killing cases which do not cover the entire gamut of illegal and criminal actions
perpetrated in the name of honour and tradition.
In August 2010, the National Commission for Women suggested a draft legislation to
amend section 300 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 with a view to include Honour Killing as
gruesome offence.
The Law Commission of India in its Report No. 242 has recommended legal measures
to nip the evil in the bud by preventing assemblies which take place to condemn such
alliances and to prescribe moiré severe punishment for violent acts of criminal intimidation or
acts imperilling the liberty of individual in the name of honour and tradition.
The increase in number of such crimes has been a matter of grave concern for the
society and requires to be addressed urgently.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to provide for protecting individual liberty and preventing
victimisation, prohibition of unlawful assemblies and other conduct interfering with the
freedom of matrimonial alliances in the name of honour and tradition.
N
EW DELHI ; RABINDRA KUMAR JENA
February 23, 2015.
5

GMGIPMRND—89LS(S-3)—20.04.2015.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for, in the interests of protecting individual liberty and  preventing
victimisation, prohibition of unlawful assemblies and other conduct
interfering with the freedom of matrimonial alliances in the
name of honour and tradition and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Rabindra Kumar Jena, M.P.)