33 of 1962. 
As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA ON 
Bill No. 116 of 1986 
TH~ ATOMIC ENERGY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1986 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Atomic Energy Act, 1962. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-seventh Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Atomic Energy (Amendment) Act, Short 
1986. title 
5 (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 21st day of 
Sep!ember, 1962. 
2. In section 6 of the Atomic Energy Act, 1962 (hereinafter referred 
to as the principal Act) ,-
(a) in sub-section (2),-
10 (i) for the words and figures "proposes to acquire it ,md 
upon the service of the notice and the payment of compensation 
in accordance with sEction 21", the words "proposes to compulso-
rily acquire it and upon the service of the notice" shall be 
substituted ; 
15 (ii) the proviso shall be omitted; 
to 
(b) after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be 
inserted, namely:-
"(3) Compensation in respect of acquisition under sub-
section (2) shall be paid in accordance with section 21 and in 
determlnlnr such eompensatlon reprd shall be had to the cost 
of productlOD of sueh mineral, eoneentrate or other material 
and 
commence_ 
ment. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 6. 

Inser-
tion of 
new 
section 
llA. 
Removal of 
do'lbts. 
2 
and such other factors as may be relevant, but no aCCOUDt shaD 
be taken of the value of urauium lu Its uaturaJ state coutalaed 
therein.". 
,. After section 11 of the principal Act, the following section shall 
be fnserted, namely: - 5 
"llA. For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the 
compulsory acquisition of any mineral, concentrate or other material 
under sub-section (2) of section 6, or of any substance, minerals, 
equipment or plant under sub-section (1) of section 11, shall not 
he deemed to be a sale for any purpose whatsoever.". 10 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to amend section 6 of the Atomic Energy 
Act, 1962 retrospectively so as to provide that payment of compensation ror 
compulsory acquisition of minerals, concentrates and other materials under 
that section should, instead of being a condition precedent to their acquisi-
tion, be a condition to be given effect to after such minerals, concentrates 
or other materials become the property of the Central Government, so as 
to repel any doubt that compulsory acquisition of such minerals, concen-
trates and other materials under that section will amount to sale. A new 
section llA is also proposed to be inserted retrospectively so as to make 
it clear beyond doubt that the compulsory acquisition under sections 6 
and 11 shall not be deemed to be a sale for any purpose whatsoever. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 30th October, 1986. K. R. NARAYANAN. 
3 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 2(b) of the Bill se::ks to insert n new sub-section (3) in section 
() of the principal Act so as to provide t~at th~ compensation for mineral, 
concentrate or other material becoming the property of the Central Gov-
ernment under ~ub-section (2) of section 6 shall be paid in accordance 
with the provisions of section 21. having regard to cert'lin factors specified 
therein. 
2. It is not possible to indicate with any degree of accuracy the e]l:pen-
diture to be incurred from the Coosolidated Fund of India for payment of 
compensation as it woU~d depend on the 81tEtnt to which the acquisition 
of the mineral, concentrate or oth~r material is nec~sary depending upon 
the programme for the atomic energy development in the country. Since 
the incidence of paym~nt of compensation under the proposed sub-section 
(3) and the existing provision in section 6 is the same, no additional 
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India is, therefore, anticipated . 
.. 

'. 
6. (1) • 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACT I'nOM: THE ATOMIC ENERGY ACT, 1962 
(33 01' 1962) 
• • 
• • • 
• 
• 
(2) The Central Government may serve notice on any person who 
has prod·uced any mineral, concentrate or other material referred to in 
sub-section (1) that the Central Government proposes to acquire it and 
uI-0n the service of the notice and the payment of compensation in 
accordance with section 21, the mineral, concentrate or other material 
shan br.~me the property of the Central Government and shall be 
delivered to the Central Government or as it may direct: 
Provided that in determining the compensation regard shall be had 
to the cost of production of such mineral, coocentrate or other material 
anti such other factors as may be relevant, but no account shall be 
taken of the value of uranium in its natural stat'.! contained therein . 
• • • • • 
Disposal' 
of 
uranium. 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Atomic Energy Act, 1962. 
(Shri K. R. Narayanan, 
Minister of State in the Ministry 
of Science & Technology & De-
partment of Ocean Development, 
Atomic Energy, Electronics and 
Space.) 