TIlE ASSAM RIFLES (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 19S8 
(As INTRODUCIID IN LoK SABRA) 

THE ASSAM RIFLES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1958 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOIe SABRA) 
A 
BILL 
!urih.,. to ameM the Assam Rifles Aot, 19'1. 
Ba it enacted by Parliament in the Ninth Year of the Republic of 
India u follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Assam Rifles (Amendment) Ad, Shott tide. 
lea. 
5 2. In clause (a.) of sub-section (1) of section 8 of the Assam AmcDdJQeDt 
Rifles Act, 1941 after the word "Commandant" the words "or an of MCtion I, , , AetSof 
Assistant Commandant" shall be inserted. 1941. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
While clause (4) of sub-section (1) of section 8 of the Assam 
Rifles Act, 1941 (5 of 1941), confers on a District Magistrate and a 
Commandant of the Assam Rifles powers to award imprisonment 
extending to twenty-eight days in respect of petty offences against 
discipline, it confers on an Assistant Commandant in similar cases 
powers of punishment extending to seven days. The relative status 
of the authorities no doubt varies, but the differentiation was made 
--..«1 tbe~· of the conditions previously obtaining in the 
administration of the North-Eastern Frontier Agency when a major 
ponton of the;.area:was .I)Ot,erjmjniBtttred.and the Auam Riftes out-
posts W1!re rarely situated beyond fifty miles from the plains and were 
easily accessible. 'lhe '11_1ty for emdaaing, equal powers on an 
Assistant Commandant was, therefore, not felt at that time. 
The position has now undergone a radical change and the outposts 
and wing headquarters.of theA.am. lWIee· ba\lleftOW :moved into the 
interior. For. some of the outpo~ts, the normaUine of communications 
is by air lift. Since the punishing power of an Assistant .Commandant 
is limited, a breach of discipline in remote outposts is dealt with at 
ipieseot.ettJaer by ,the .... rd Gfa light .puniahment ,within the powers 
of Assistant Commandant or by subjecting the otTender to a Mag 
llUlich to the headquarters for trial by a Commandant. In the former 
ease, a disproportionately ·light· punishment is apt to create 6 sense 
Gf laxity in tbe ranks of rlflemen and in the latter case, the efteetof 
the punishment is lost due to delayed award CIf 1!Ientenee. Moreover, 
in certain cases where witnesses have to be examined, they often 
refuse to go too fur from their homes. 
In the circumstances, it is necessary that Assistant Commandants 
should also have the same powers as Commandants. The Bill gives 
effect to this object. 
NEW DI:LHI; 
The 24th Septemb~, 1958. LAKSHMI N. MENON. 

.. M'K&X.UBI 
EXTRACTS FROM THE ASSAM Rm.Es ACT, 1941 (5 or 1941) 
• • • • • 
8. (1) A District Magistrate or a Commandant, or subject to MiDOJ' ollen-
the control of the Commandant, an Assistant Commandant, or :U~t. 
subject to the control of the Commandant an officer not below the 
rank of a Jamadar commanding.Jl.separate detachment or an outpost 
or in temporary command at the headquarters of a District during 
the absence of the District Magistrate, Commandant and Assistant 
Commandant, may, without a formal trial, a'Mll"d to any rifleman 
below the rank of a Naik, who is subject to his authority, any of the 
following punishments for the commission of any petty offence 
against discipline, which is not otherwise provided for in this Act, 
or which is not of a suftlciently serious nature to call for prosecution 
before a Criminal Court, that is to say,-
(a) imprisonment in tbe..Quarter Guard, or such other place 
as may be considered sw.table, wr a term whic:b may extend 
to twenty-eight days When' the order' is passed by a District 
Magistrate or a Commandant or to seven days when it is passed 
by any other officer; , 
(b) punishment drill, extra guard, fatigue or other duty, 
not exceeding twenty-eight days in duration, with or without 
confinement to lines; 
(c) forfeiture of pay and allowances for a period not exceed-
ing twenty-eight days, 
• • • • • 

LOKSABHA 
A 
BILL 
. Further to amelld the Assam Ri1les Act, I~l 
... 
(Shrimati Laluhmi N. MtftONt 
Deputy Minister of 
Exttmal A.ffair .. ) 