A3 INTRODUCED IN LoK SABRA ON 
2 1 NOV '997 
Bill No. 116 of 1987 
THE RAILWAY CLAIMS TRIBUNAL BILL, 1987 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CHAPTER I 
CLAUSES 
1. Short title, extent and commencement. 
2. Definitions. 
CHAPTER n • 
EsTABLISHMENT OF RAILWAY CLAIMs TRIBUNAL AND BENCHES THEREOF 
3. Establishment of Railway Claims TribUnal. 
4. Composition of Claims Tribunal and Benches thereof. 
5. Qualifications for appointment as Chairman, Vice-Chairman or 
other Member. 
6. Vice-Chairman to act as Chairman or to discharge his functions 
in certain circumstances. 
7. Term of office. 
S. Resignation and removal. 
9. Salaries and allowances and other terms and condi tions of 
service of Chairman, Vice-Chairman and other Members. 
1~ Provision as to the holding of offices by Chairman, Vice-Chair-
man, etc., on ceasing to be such Chairman or Vice-Chairman, 
etc. 
11. Financial and administrative powers of Chairman. , 
12. Staff of Claims Tribunal. 
CHAPTER m 
JURISDICTION, POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF CLAIMS TT!BUNAL 
13. Jurisdiction, powers and authority of Claims Tribunal. 
14. Distribution of business amongst Benches. 
15. Bar of jurisdiction. 
CHAPTER IV 
PROCEDlJRZ 
16. Application to Claims Tribunal. 
17. Limitation. . 

ii 
CLAUIU :j '1~.1 i 
18. Procedure and powerl of Claima Tribunal 
19. Right to legal representation and presentin. ofIlCKI. 
20. Power of Chairman to transfer cases from one Bench to uotblr. 
21. Decision to be by majority. 
22. Execution of orders of Claims Tribunal. 
CHAPTER V 
23. Appeals. 
CHAPTER VI 
MIsCELLANEOUS 
24. Transfer of pending cases. 
25. Proceedings before Claims Tribunal to be judicial proc:eed1np. 
• 26. Members and staff of Claims Tribunal to ~ public aervanta. 
27. Protection of action taken in good faith. 
28. Act to have overriding effect. 
29. Power to remove difficulties. 
30. Power to make rules. 
CHAPTER vn 
AMENDMENTS TO THE RAILWAYS ACT 
31. Amendment of section 3. 
32. Amendment of section 78A. 
33. Substitution of new section for section SO. 
34. Omission of sections 82B, 820 and 82F. 
35. Amendment of section 82C. 
36. Amendment of sections 82E, 82G and 82HH. 
37. Amendment of section 821. 
38. Amendment of section 82.1. 

Bill No, 116 of 1187 
THE RAILWAY CLAIMS TRIBUNAL BILL, 1987 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the jE!stablishment of a Railway Claims Tribunal for 
ift.qUiring into and determining claims against a railway adminil-
tratioft for loss, destruction, damage, deterioration or non-deli~ of 
cmimals or goods entrusted to be carried by railway or for the refund 
of fares or freight to it or for compensation for death or injury to 
pDB.enger. occurring as a result of railway accidents and for matter. 
connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
Ba it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-eighth Year of the Republic 
of India 88 follows:-
CHAPTER I 
PuLlMINARY 
1. (1) Tb.1a Act may be called the Railway Claims Tribunal Act, 1987. Short_ 
mat 
(I) It extends to the whole of India. and COlD-
mollClOlDCllL 
(.t) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Govemment 
may, by notUlcation, appoint. 
J. In this Aet, unless the context otherwise requires,-
l' (a, "applteation" means an applieation made under section 1.; 

Establish-
mentof 
Railway 
Claims 
Tribunal. 
Composi-
tioo of 
Claims 
Tribunal 
and Ben. . 
chea 
1hen!of. 
2 
(b) "appointed day" means the date with effect from which the 
Claims Tribunal is established under section 3; 
(c) ClBench" means a Bench of the Claims Tribunal; 
(d) "Chairman" means the Chairman of the Claims Tribunal; 
(e) "Claims Tribunal" means the Railway Claims Tribunal S 
established under section 3; 
(f) "Judicial Member" means a Member of the Claims Tribunal 
appointed as such under this Act, and includes the Chairman or a Vice-
Chairman who possesses any of the qualifications specified in sub-
section (3) of section 5; I 10 
(g) "Member" means a Member (whether Judicial o.r Techni-
cal) of the Claims Tribunal, and inclUdes the Chairman and Vice-
Chairman; 
(h) "notification" means a notification published in the Official 
Gazette; IS 
(i) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules; 
(j) "Railways Act" means the Indian Railways Act, 1890; 
(k) "rules" means rules made under this Act; 
(1) "Technical Member" means a Member of the Claims Tribunal 
who is not a Judicial Member, and includes the Chairman or a Vice- 20 
Chairman who possesses any of the qualifications specified in sub-
s'ection (4) of· section 5; 
• (m) "Vice-Chairman" means a Vice-Chairman Of the Claims 
Tribunal. 
Explanation.-References to the Vice-Chairman in this Act shall 25 
be construed as references to each of the Vice-Chairmen; 
(n) words and expressions used and not defined in this Act 
but defined in the Railwavs Act or the rules made thereunder shall 
have the m~anings respectively assigned to them in that Act or the 
said rules. 30 
CHAPTER IT 
EsTABLISHMENT OF RAn-WAY CLAIMS TRIBUNAL AND BENCHES THEREoF 
3. The Central Government s.hall, by notification, establish 8. Claims 
Tribunal, to be known as the Railway Claims Tribunal, to exercise the 
jurisdiction, powers and authority conferred on it by or under this Act. 35 
4. (1) The Claims Tribunal 811811 consist of 8 Chairman, four Vice-
Chairmen and such number of Judicial Members and Teehnical Mem-
bers as the Central Government may deem fit and, subject to the 4)ther 
pl'ovislons of this Ad. the juric;diction, powers and authority of the 
Claims Tribunal nlay be exeTcised by Benches thereof. 40 
(2) Subiect to the other provisions of this Act, a Bench shall ~on8tst 
of one Judicial Member and one Technical Member. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained In SUb-section (1). the Chair~ 
man- I 
(a) may, in addition to discharging the functions of the Judicial 45 
Member or the Technical Member of the Beneh:to wl1h:h he is' 
9 of 1190. 

3 
appointed, discharge the functions of the Judicial Member or, as the 
case may be, the Technical Member, of any other Bench; 
(b) may transfer a Vice-Chairman or other Member from one 
Bench to another Bench; 
5 (c) may authorIse the Vice-Chairman or the Judicial Member OT' 
the Technical Member appointed to one Bench to discharge also the 
furictions of the Vice-Chairman or, as the case may be, the Judicial 
Member or the Technical Member of another Bench. 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing provisions 
10 of this section, it sha~l be competent fOr the Chairman or any other 
Member authorised by the Chairman in this behalf to function a8 a 
Bench consisting of a single Member and exercise the jUrisdiction, powers 
and authority of the Claims Tribunal in respect of such classes of cases 
or such matters perta;ning to such c'asses of cases as the Chairman may, 
15 by general or special order, specify: 
Provided that if at any stage of the heating of any such case or 
matter, it appears to the Chairman Or such Member that the case or 
matter is of such a nature that it ought to be heard by a Bench consist-
ing of two Members. the case or matter may be transferred by the 
20 Chairman OT', as the case may be, referred to him for transfer, to such 
Bench as the Chairman may deem fit. 
(5) Subject to the othetr provisions of thio; Act, the Benches shall sit 
at such places as the CentrAl Govemment may, by notification, sperlfy. 
5. (1) A person shall not be quaHfied for appointment as the Chairman 
25 un less he- I QualJ&a. 
doDi for 
(a) is. or has been, a Jud~e of a High Court; or I appou. 
30 
35 
40 
(b) has, for at least two years, held the office of Vice-Chairman, meat u 
Cbairma.D, 
(2) A person shall not be qualified for a!)pointment as Vice--Chairman ~ 
unless he- ' 
(a) is, or has been. O.r is qualified to be. a Judge of a High Court; 
or 
(b) has been a memb~r of the Indian Lellal Service and has held 
a post in Grade I of that Service or any higher post for a least five 
years; or 
(c) has, for at least five years, held a civil juaicial post carrying 
a scale of pay' whirh is not less than tbat of ~ Joint Secretary to the 
Government of India; or. 
(d) has. 'for Rt least five vears. held a 'Dost under a railway 
administration carrying a scale of pfly which is not ]es~ than that of 
a Joint Secretary to the' Government of India and has Anequate know-
ledge of rulel> nnd nrocedure of. an(J experience in. chims and com-
mercial matters relating to railways; or 
(e) has. for a period of not less th~m three years, held office as a 
Ju6iicial Member or a Technical Member. 
or other 
Member. 
45 (.1) A person shall not be quaJifled for appointment as a Judicial 
Member unless he-- I' 
(a) is, or has bep.n, or is qllrtlifieri to be, a Jucige of a Hi.gh. Court; , 
or 

YIcc-Olafr.. 
man to 
act as 
Chairman 
or 10 d. 
charp hiI 
functiona 
in certain 
circum&-
taD.c:OI. 
Term 01. 
office. 
Iloaigna-
don and 
removal. 
4 
(b) has been a Member of the Indian Legal Service and has held 
a post in Grade I of that Service for at least three years; or 
(c) has, tor at least three years, held a civil judicial post carry. 
ing a scale of pay which is not less than that of a Joint Secretary 
to the Government of India. S 
(4) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a Technical 
Member unless he has, for at least three years, held a post under a 
railway administration carrying a scale of pay which· is not less than 
that of a Joint Secretary to the Govern~nt of India and has adequate 
knowledge of rules and procedure of, and experience in, claims and com- 10 
mercial matters relating to railways. 
(5) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (6), the Chairman, Vice-
Chairman and every other Member shall be appointed by the President. 
(6) No appointment of a person as the Chairman shall be made except 
after consultation with the Chief Justice of India. IS 
6. (1) In the event of the occurrence of any vacancy in the office of 
the Chairman by reason of his death, resignation or otherwise, such one 
of the Vice-Chairmen as the Central Government may. by notification, 
authorise in this behalf. shall act as the Chairman until the d~te on which 
a »ew Chairman, appointed in accordance with the provisions of this 20 
Act to fill such vacancy, enters upon his offtce. 
(Z) When the Chairman is unable to dischar~e his functions owing 
to absence, illness or any other cause. such one of the Vice-Chairmen as 
the Central Government may, by notification, authorise in this behalf, 
shall disc-harlte the functions of the Chairman until the date on which 25 
the Chairman resumes his duties. 
7. The Chairman. Vice-Chairman or other Member shall ho1d office 
as such for a term of five years from the date on which he enters upon his 
office or until he attains,- I 
(a) in the case of the Chairman, the age of sixty-five years; and 30 
(b) in the case of the Vice-Chairman or any other Member, the 
age of sixty-two years. 
whichever is earlier. 
8. (1) The Chairman. Vice-Chairman or other Member may. hy notice 
in writ1n~ under hi!'! hand addres!'!ed to the President. resilm hio:; offiee: . '35 
Provided that the Chai.rman. Vice-Chairman or other Mf'mbe~ o:;hall. 
unles!l he is permitt.ed by the President to relinQuish hi!'! office sooner, 
continue to hold offic-e until the expiry of three month!'! from the date 
of receipt vf such notice or until a person dl11v apooln+erl ::l.!'! his successor ~ 
enters Ul)on his offtce or until the expiry of his term of office. whichever 
is the earliest. I 
(2) The Chairman. Vice-Chairman or ::l.nV other Memher ~h~l' not be 
removed from his offtce except bv an order made bv the Pre"lf"ent on 
thp. ground of proved misbehaviour or incAPacitv after An innllirv m::l.de 
bv a Judrte of the Supreme C01lrt in which !'Iuch Ch:tirman. Vlce-Chafr- 45 
mAn or other Mf"mber hart been informe'l of the char!!p.s altainst 'him and 
p,iven a reasonable opoortunitv of being heard in respect of those (''har~es. 
(3) The Central Government may. by ruleR.. re~ulate the nrocedure 
fm th.. investigation of miO!behaviour or incaoacitv of the Chl'lirman, 
Vke-Chalrman or othf'r Mem btlr referred to in sub-!Ilection (2). SO 

5 
9. The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms an4 
conditions of service (includinJ: pensleD, gratuity and other retirement 
benefits) of, the Chairman, Vice·Chairman and other Members shall be 
such as may be prescribed: 
~ 
a.od allow-
ances and 
other 
cerms and 
5 Provided that neither the sabry and allowances nor the other terms conditioDi 
of aernce and conditions of service ~f the ellairman, Vice-Chairman ['01' other of Chair-
Member shall be varied to his disadvalltage after his appointment. man., Vice-
10. On ceasing to hold office-
10 
(a) the Chairman of the Claims Tribunal shall be ineligible for 
further employment either under the Government of India or under 
the Government of a State; 
• 15 
20 
(b) a Vice-Chairman shall, subject to the other provisions of 
this Act, be eligible for appointment as the Chairman of the Claims 
'l'ribunal, or as the chairman, vice-chairman or member of any other 
'l'ribunal established under any law for the time being in force, but 
not fol' any other employment either under the Government of India 
or under the Government of a State; 
(t) a Member (other than the Chairman or Vice-Chairman) shall, 
subject to the other provisions of this Act, be eligible for appointment 
as the Chairman or Vice-Chairman or.as the chairman, vice-chairman 
or mem~r of any other Tribunal established under any law for the 
time being in force, but not for any other employment either under 
the Government of India or under the Government of a State; 
(d) the Chairman, Vice-Chairman or other Member shall not 
25 apP,ear, act or plead before the Claims Tribunal . 
ExpZanation.-For the purposes of this section, employment under 
the Government of India or under the Government of a State includes 
employment under any local or other authority within the territory of 
India or under the control of the Government of India or under any 
30 corporation Or society owned or controlled by the Government. 
11. The Cllairrnan shall exercise such lmancial and administrative 
powers over the Benches as may be vested in him under the rules: 
Provided that the Chairman shall have authority to delegate such 
of his financial and administrative powers as he may think fit to the 
35 Vke·Chairman or any other officer of the Claims Tribunal, subject to the 
condition that the Vice-Chairman or such officer shall, while exercising 
such delegated powers, contii1~ to act under the direction, control and 
supervision of the Chairman. 
12. (1) The Central Government shall detennine the nature and 
40 categories of the officers and other employees required to assist the 
Claims Tribunal in the discharge of its functions and provide the Claima 
Tribunal with sLlch officers and other employees as it may think fit. 
(2) The omcers and other employees of the Claims Tribunal shall 
discharge their functilJns under the general superintendence of theChafr.. 
45 man. 
Chairman 
and 
other 
Members. 
Provi-
sioo as 
to the 
holding 
of omce. 
by Chair-
man, Vice-
Chairman, 
ele., on 
ceasing 
to be 
such Chair-
man or 
Vlco-Chair-
me.n, etc. 
Fina.oc:i&l 
and 
administra-
tive powera 
of Chair-
man. 

Jmilldictioll, 
POWCl'l 
and 
authority 
of Claiml 
TribUDal. 
Distribution 
o1busi.. 
!IleBS 
amonpt 
Benches. 
Bar of 
jurildic-
. tioa. 
Applica-
tion 
to Oaima 
Tn"bODal. 
6 
(3) The salaries ,and alJow8llces and cODditioD.s of service of the 
dlcera aad other employees of the ClabD. TriblUlal shall be such as 
DlaJ' be prescribed. 
CHAPTER III 
JURISDICTION, POWERS AND AUTHORO'Y OF CLAIMS TTIBUNAL 5 
13. (l) The Claims Tribunal shall exercise, on and from the appointed 
day, all such jurisdiction, powers and authority as were exercisable 
immediately befo~ that day by any civil court or a Claims Commissioner 
appointed. under the provisions of the Railways Act,-
(a) relating to the responsibility of the railway administrations 10 
as carriers under Chapter VII of the Railways Act in respect of 
claims for-
(i) compensation for loss, destruction, damage, deterioration 
or non-<ielivery of animals or goods entrusted to a railway 
administra~on for carriage by railway; 
(ii) compensation payable under section 82A of the Railways 
Act or the rules made thereunder; and 
I 
(b) in respect of the claims for refund of fares or part thereof 
or for refund of any freight paid in res~t of animals or goods en-
15 
trusted to a railway administration to be carried by railway. 20 
(2) The provisions of the Railways Act and the rules mad¢ there-
under shall, so far as may be, be applicable to the inquiring into or deter-
mining, any claims by the Claims Tribunal under this Act. 
14. (1) Where any Benches are constituted, the Central Government 
may, from time to time, by notification, make proviSiOns as to the distri- 25 
bution of the business of the Claims Tribunal amongst the Benches and 
specify the matters which may be dealt with by each Bench. 
(2) If any question arises as to whether any matter falls within the 
pUI'\Tiew of the bUSiness allocated to a Bench, the decision of the Chair-
man shall be final. 
Explanation.-For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that 
the expres!>ion • 'matters " includes an application under section 20. 
30 
15. On and from the appointed day, no court or other authority sha!l 
have, or be entitled to, exercise any jurisdiction, powers Or authority in 
I'Plation to the matters referred to in sub-section (1) of section 13. 35 
CHAPTER IV 
PBOCEDUllE 
18. (1) A person seeking any relief in respect of the matters referred 
to in sub-section (1) of section 13 may make an application to the Claims 
Tribunal. 40 
(2) Every application under sub-sedion (1) shall be in such form 
and be accompanied by such documents or other evidence and by such 
fee in respect of the filing of such application and by such other fees for 
the service or execution of processes as may be prescribed: 
• 

7 
Provided that no such fee shall be payable in respect of an applica-
tion under sub-clause (ii) of clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 13. 
17. (1) The Claims Tribunal shall not admit an application for any LimitatioD. 
5 
10 
claim,- I 
(a) umrer sub-clause (i) of clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 
13 unless th~ application is made within three years from the date on 
which the goods in question were entrusted. to the railway adminis-
tration for carriage by railway; 
(b) under sub-clause (ii) of clause (a) of sUb-section (1) of 
section 13 unless the appl.ication is made within one year of occur-
rence of the accident; 
(c) under clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 13 unless the 
application is made within three years from the date on which the 
fare or freight is paid to the railway administration: 
15 Provided that no application for any claim referred. to in sub-
clause (i) of clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 13 shall be pre-
ferred to the Claims Tribunal until the expiration of three months 
next after the date on which the intimation of the claim has been 
preferred under section 78B of the Railways Act. 
... 20 (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), an appli-
cation may be entertained after the period specified in sub-section (1) 
if the applicant satisfies the Claims Tribunal that he had sufficient cause 
for not making the application within such period. 
18. (1) The Claims Tribunal shall not be bound by the procedure laid 
S of 1908. down by the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, but shall be guided by the 
25 principles of natural justice and, subject to the other provisions of this 
Act and of any rules, the Claims Tribunal shall have powers to regulate 
its own procedure including the fixing of places and times of its en-
quiry. 
(2) The Claims Tribunal shall decide every application as expedi-
30 tiously as possible and ordinarily every application shalI be decided. on 
a perusal of documents, written representations and affidavits and after 
hearing such oral arguments as may be advanced.. 
(3) The Claims Tribunal shall have, for the purposes of discharging 
its functions under this Act, the same pow~rs as are vested in a civil 
S of 1908. 35 court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, while trying a suit, in res-
. pect of the following matters, namely:-
40 
1 of 1872. 
45 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and 
examining him on oath; 
, (b) requiring the discovery and production of documents; 
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits; 
(d) subject to the provisions of sections 123 and 124 of the Indian 
Evidence Act, 1872, requisitioning any public record or document or 
copy of such record or document from any otlice; 
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or docu-
ments; 
(I) reviewing its ·decisions; 
(g) dismissing an application for default or deciding it ~x paTte: 
(h) setting aside any order of dismissal of any application for 
default or any order passed by it ex parte; 
Procedure 
and 
powers of 
Claims 
TribuaaL 

1liaht to 
lepl rep-
reeenta-
1ation 
and pre-
eentlng 
omcen. 
Power of 
Chairman 
to trims-
fer cues 
from 
one 
Bench 
10 another. 
Decision 
to be bv 
majority. 
ExecutiOIl 
of orden. 
of Claima 
Tribunal 
Appeals. 
TraDlfer 
of pend-
ing cues. 
(i) any other matter which may be pl'escrlbed. 
19. (1) A person making an application to the Claims Tribunal may 
either appear in person or take the assistance Of a legal practitioner of 
his choice to present his case before the Claims Tribuna}. 
(2) A railway administration may authorise one or more legal 5 
practitioners or any of its officers to act as presenting officers and every 
person so authorised by it may present its case with respect to any 
application before the Claims Tribunal. 
20. On the application of any of the parties and after notice to the 
parties, and after hearing such of them as he may desire to be heard. 10 
or on his own motion without such notice, the Chairman may transfer 
any case pending before one Bench, for disposal, to any other Bench. 
21. If the Members of a Bench di.1fer in opinion on any point, they 
shall state the point or points on which they differ, and make a refer-
ence to the Chairman who shall either hear the point or points himself 15 
or .refer the case for hearing on such point or -points by one or more of 
the other Members and sucll point or points shall be decided according 
to the opinion of the majority of the Members who have heard the case, 
including those who first heard it. 
2%. (1) An order made by the Claims Tribunal under this Act shall 20 
be executable by the Claims Tribunal as a decree of civil court and, for 
this purpose, the Claims Tribunal shall have all the powers of a civil 
court. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the 
Claims Tribunal may transmit any order made by it to a civil court 25 
having local jurisdiction and such civil court shall execute the order 
as if it were a decree made by that court. 
CHAPI'ER V 
APPEALS 
23. (1) Save as provided in sub-section (2) and notwithstanding any- 30 
thing contai~ed in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 or in any other law, s of 1908. 
an appeal shall lie trom every order, not being an interlocutory order, 
of the Claims Tribunal, to the High Court having jurisdiction over the 
place where the bench is located. 
(2) No appeal shaH lie from an order passed by the Claims Tribunal 35 
with the consent of the parties. 
(3) Every appeal under this section shall be preferred within a period 
of ninety days from the date of the order appealed against. 
CHAPTER VI 
Mlsc:B:LI.ANJr.us 40 
24. (1) Every suit, claim or other legal proceeding (other than an 
appeal) pending before any. court or, Claims Commissioner other au-
thority immediately before the appointed day, being a suit, claim or pro-
ceeding the cause of action wher.eon it is based is such that it would have 
been, if it had arisen after the appointed day, within the jurisdiction of 4S 
the Claims Tribunal, shall stand transferred on that day to the Claims 
Tribunal. 

45 of 1860. 
• (2) Where any suit, claim or oth,er legal proceedin~ stands tnmsfer-
red from any court, Claims Commissioner or other authorhly to the Claims 
Tribunal under sub-section (1) ,- , 
'(a) the court, Claims Commissioner or other authority shall, as 
5 SOOl1 as may be after such transfer, forward the records of such suit, 
claim or other legal proceeding to the Claims Tribunal; 
(b) the Claims Tribunal may, on· receipt of such records, proceed 
to deal with such suit, claim or other legal proceeding, so far as may 
be, in the s~me manner· as an application, from the stage which was 
10 reached before $uch transfer or from any earlier stage or de novo 
as the Claims Tribunal may deem fit. 
25. All proceedings before the Claims Tribunal shall be deemed to be 
judi~ial proceedings within the meaning of sections.,~. 219, and 228 of 
the Indian Penal Code. . 
15 ~.6 .. The Chairman, Vice.Chairman and other Members and the officers 
45 of 1860. and other employees of the Claims Tribunal shall be deemed to be public 
servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code. 
2i1. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against 
the Central Government or against the Chairman, Vice-Chairman or 
20 other Member, or any other person authorised by the Chairman, Vice-
Chairman or other Member {or anything which is in good faith done 
o.r intended to be done' in pursuance of this Act or any rule or order 
made thereunder . 
. 28. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding .any-
25 thing inconsistent. therewith contained in any other law for the time 
being in force or in any instrument having effect by virtue of any law 
.pther than this Act. 
219. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official 
30 Gazette, make such provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of 
this Act, as appear to it to be necess~ry or' expedient for removing the 
diftlcul ty : 
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period 
of three years from the appointed day. 
35 (2) Every order made under this 'section shall, as soon as may be 
after it is made, be laid before each House of Parliament. 
30. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules to 
carry out the prOvisions of this Act. 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregOing powers, such 
40 rules may provide for all or any of the fol!owing matters, namely:-
(a) the procedure under sub-section (3) of section 8 fOr the 
investigation of misbehaviour or incapacity of the Chairman, Vice-
Chairman o.r other Member; 
t 
Proceed-
ings bo-
foro 
Claims 
Tribunal 
to be judi-
cial pro-
ceedings. 
Membeq 
and staff 
of Claim! 
Tribunal to 
be public 
servants. 
ProtecUoIl 
Of action 
taken in 
good 
faith. 
Act to 
have over-
riding 
effect . 
Power 
to remoWl 
difficultiea. 
Power to 
make 
rules. 

Amendment 
of sec-
tion 3. 
Amendment 
Of section 
7SA. . 
Substitu-
tion Df 
new leO-
tion for 
aectioG 80. 
10 
(b) salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and 
conditions of service (including pension, gratuity and other retire-
ment benefits) of, the Chairman, Vice-Chairman and other Members 
under section 9; I 
(c) the futancial and administrative powers which the Chairman 5 
may exercise over the Benches under section 11 j 
(d) the salaries and allowances and conditions of service of 
officers and other employees of the Claims T.ribunal under sub-section 
(3) of section 12; 
(e) the form of application, the documents and other evidence 10 
to be accompanied with such application and fee in respect of filing 
of such application and fee for the service or execution of processes 
under sub-section (2) of section 16; 
(J) the rules subject to which the Claims Tribunal shall have 
power to regulate its own procedure under sub-section (1) of 15 
section 18 and the additional matters in which the Claims Tribunal 
may exercise powers of civil court under clause (i) of sub-section (3) 
of that ¥Ction; 
(g) any other matter which 
prescribed. 
is ;required to be, or may be, 
I 
(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be 
after it is made, before each How;e of Parliament, while it is in session, 
for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session 
20 
or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
¥"ion immediately following the session or the successive sessions 25 
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modiflcation in the rule or 
both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall there-
after have ~1fect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the 
case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall 
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under 30 
that rule. 
CHAPTER WI 
AMENDMENTS TO THE RAILWAYS ACT 
31. In section 3 of the Railways Act, after clause (18), the following 
clause shall be inserted, namely: - 3S 
'(19) "Claims Tribunal" means the Railway Claims Tribunal 
established under section 3 of the Railway Claims Tribunal Act, 1987.'. 
32. In section 78A of the Railways Act, for the word "suit", the words 
"application befor~ the Claims Tribunal" shall be substituted. 
33. For section 80 of the Railways Act, the following section shall be 40 
substituted, namely: - ; 

11 
"80. An appllcation to the Claims Tribunal fo;: compensation 
for loss of the life of, or personal injury to, a passenger or for loss, 
destruction, damage, deterioration or non-delivery of animals or 
goods may bemade,-
S (a) if the passenger was, or the animals or goods were, 
booked from one station to another on the railway of the same 
railway administration, against that railway administration; 
(b) if the paB¥nger was, or the animals or goods were, 
booked through over the railway of two or more railway 
10 administrations, against the railway administration from which 
the passenger obtained his pass or purchased his ticket or to 
which the animals or goods were delivered for carriage, as t¥ 
case may be, or against the railway administration on whose 
railway the destination station lies, or the loss, injury, destruc-
t5 tion, damage or deterioration o~.". 
Application 
for com-
pensation. 
34. Sections 82B, 82D and 82F Of the Railways Act shall be omitted. Omission 
of sec-
tions 82B, 
82D and 
B2F. 
20 
315. In section 82C of the Railways Act,- Amendment 
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words "Claims Commissioner", 
the words "Claims Tribunal" shall be substituted; 
(b) sub-section (2) and the explanation thereto shall be omitted. 
36. In sections 82E, 82G and 82HH of the Railways Act, for the 
words "Claims Commissioner", wherever they occur, the words "Claims 
Tribunal" shall be substituted. 
of sec-
tion 82e. 
Amend-
ment 
of see-
tions 82E, 
820 and 
82HH. 
37. In section 821 of the Railways Act, for the words, figures and 
25 letters "sections 82A to 82HH", the words, figures and letters "sections 
82A, 82C, 82E arid 82G to 82HH" shall be substituted. 
AmcDdment 
of seo-
tion 821. 
30 
318. In section ·82J of the Railways Act,-
Amcnd-
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words, figures and letters "sections ment 01. 
82A to 82H inclusive", the words, figures and letters "sections 82A, section 
section 82C, section 82E, sections 82G and 82H" shall be substituted; 82.1. 
(b) in sub-section (2), clause (I) and clauses (iv) to (vi) shall 
be omitted. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The substantive liability Of the railway administration for loss. deII-
truction, damage, non-delivery or deterioration of goods entrusted to 
them for carriag,e, and for death or injury, or loss, etc., to a passen~r in 
a railway accident involving a passenger train is laid down in the Indian 
Railways Act, 1890. The consignorslconsignees and passengers or their 
representatives prefer claims for compensation against the, railway ad-
ministration. Those who claim compensation for loss of and damage to 
booked goods and are not satisfied with the decisions of the railway 
administration, file suits in the Courts of Law. Claims for compensation 
for q.eath of, or injury, or loss, etc,. to passengers in train accidents are 
at present settled by Claims Commissioners. 
2. As the litigation in the Courts of Law and before the Claims Com-
missioners is very protracted, it has been decided to set up a specialised 
Tribunal for speedy adjudication of such claims. The setting up of scch 
a Claims Tribunal with Benches in different parts of the country, and 
With judicial and technical members, will provide much relief to the 
rail-users by way of expeditious payment of compensation to the victims 
of rail.:.accidents and to those whose goods are lost or damaged in rail 
transit. The Claims Tribunal will also expedite settlement of disputes . 
regarding refund of fares and freight charges. It will reduce the burden 
on the various civil courts in the country, thereby giving them more 
time to decide other cases speedily. 
3. The Bill seeks to give effect to the above objectives. The Bill also 
inter alia provides for-
(a) the jurisdiction, powers and authority which may be 
exercised by the Claims Tribunal; 
(b) the procedure (including provision as to lirnifation) to be 
followed by the Claims Tribunal; 
(c) the exclusion of jurisdiction of all courts exercising ordinlUjr 
original civil jurisdiction relating to specified claims for compensa-
tion and refun4 against the railway administration; 
(d) the transfer to the Claims Tribunal of any suit or other 
proceeding, other than an appeal pending before anf court or other 
authority immediately before the establishment of such Claims 
Trib'mal as would have been within the jurisdiction of such Claims 
Tribunal if the cause of action on which such suits or proceedings 
are based had arisen after such establishment. 
NEW D!:Lm; MADHA VRAO SCINDIA. 
¥'J 
The 30th October, 1987. 
12 

Notes on clauses 
Clause 2.-This clause defines the various expressions occurring in 
the Bill. 
Clause 3.-This clause provides for the estabUsht¥nt of the Railway 
Claims Tribunal by the Central Government. 
Clause 4.-This clause provides for composition of the Claims Tri-
bunal and Benches thereof. Provision has, however, been made for en-
abling the Chairman or any other Member of the Claims Tribunal 
authorised by the Chairman in this behalf to function as a Bench con-
sisting of a single Member in resP;eCt of such class of cases or matters 
as the Charman mav, by order, specify. 
Clause 5.-This clause makes detai],ed provisions regarding the quali-
fica tons to be fulfilled for appointment as the Chairman, Vice_Chair-
or other Member. 
Clause 6.-This clause indicates the circumstances under which a 
Vice-Chairman may act as the Chairman or discharge the functions of 
the Chairman. 
Clause 7.-This clause fixes the tenure of the Chairman, Vice-Chair-
men and other Members subject to a maximum age limit. 
Clause S.-This clause details t~ procedure for resignation or removal 
of the Chairman, Vice-Chairmen and other Members. 
Clause 9.-This clause provides for framing of rules by the Central 
Government to regulate th,e salaries and allowances and other conditions 
of service of the Chairman, Vice-Chairman and other Members. 
Clause 10.-This clause provides for certain restrictions on the tur-
thp.r employment of the Chairman, Vice-Chairman and other Members 
on their ceasing to hold office with a provision for fUrther employment 
Of a Member as Vice-Chairman I Chairman and the further employment 
of a Vice-Chairman as Chairman. . 
Clause n.-This clause provides for framing of rules defining financial 
and adminIStrative powers of t~ Chairman, with provision to. enable 
the Chairman to delegate his powers to the Vice-Chairman or any officer 
of the Clalms Tribunal. 
Clause 12.-This clause prOVides that the Central Government shall 
provide the staff for the functioning of the Claims Tribunal. It em-
powers Central Government to frame rules for. regulating the l>alarics. 
allowances and other conditions of service of the staff. 
Clause l3.-This· clause defines the jurisdiction, powers and authority 
of the Claims Tribunal in regard to clalms in respect of matters specifi-
ed therem. 
Clause 14.-This clause empowers the Central Government to make 
provis:ons, by notification, as to the distribution of business of the 
Cla~ms 'I'ribunal amongst the Benches and specify the matters which 
may be. dealth with by each Bench. 
13 

14 
ClaU8e 15.-This clause provides for the exclusion of jurisdiction of 
all courts and authorities with regard to the matters mentioned in 
clause 13. 
Clause 16.-This clause provides for making an application and pay-
ment of fee to the Claims Tribunal by an aggrieved person covered by 
this Act. This also t>mpowers the Central Government to determine by 
rules the rate of fees. 
Clause 17.-This clause provides for limitation on admission of appli-
cations from the aggrieved persons by the Claims Trlbur..al. 
Clause lB.-This clause provides that the Claims Tribunal shall have 
the power to regulate its own procedure subject to the other provisons 
of this Act or of any rules made by the Central Government. It also 
invests the Claims Tribunal with various powers necessary for dis-
chargng its functIOns as are vested in a civil court. 
Claw;e }9.-ThlS clause provides for the aggrieved persons taking the 
assistance of a legal practitioner and the railway administration present .. 
jng its case through Its presenting officer Or legal practitioner. 
Clau:.e 20.-This clause defines the powers of the Chairman to transfer 
cases from one Bench to another Bench. 
Clause 21.-This clause provides for decision by the majority of the 
Claims Tribunal nnd also prescribes the procedure to be followed when 
there is no majority. 
Cla~ 22.-This clause indicates the man~er in which orders of the 
Claims Tribunal may be executed. 
Clause 23.- This clause provides for an appeal against an order of. 
the Claims Tlibunal to the High Court. 
Clause 24.-This clause provides for the transfer to the Claims Tri-
bunal of all cases relating to claims specified in clause 13, pending before 
courts or authonties except appeal cases. 
Clause 25.-This clause makes it clear that all proceedings before t~e 
Claims Tribunal shall be deemed to be judicial pro~eedings. 
Clause 26.-This clause makes it clear that Members and staff of the 
Claims Tnbunal shall be deemea to be public servants. 
Clau!le 27.-Th;s clause provides for protection of the Central 
Government or the Chairman, Vice-Chairmen or other Members 
in res~ of anything done in good faith in pursuance of this Act. 
Clause 28.-This clause is for giving overriding effect to the provisions 
of this legislation. 
Clause 29.-This claus:e empowers the Central Government to make 
suitable provisions for removing any difficulty in giving ~ect to the 
provisior.s of this legislation. 
Clause 3O.-This clause provides for the making of rules by the Central 
Government or the Chairman, Vice_Chairmen or other Membesrs 
for laying of rules. 
Clause 31 to 3o--.These clauses provide for certain consequential 
amendments to the Railways Act. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
T~ Railway Claims Tribunal Bill, 1987 provides for the adjudication 
of claims against the railway administration in relation to compensation 
for death or personal injury to a passenger or for loss, destruction, non-
delivery, etc., of good!! entrusted to a railway administration for carriage, 
and refund of fares and over-charges on freight. 
2. According to clause 4 of the Bill, the Claims Tribunal shall consist 
of a Chairman, four Vice-Chairmen and such number of Judicial and 
Technical Members as the ~ntral Government may deem fit. Clause 9 
provides that the salaries arid allowances payable to the Chairman, Vice-
Chairmen and other Members shall be such as may be prescribed by the 
Central Government. Clause 12 provides that the Ce<ltral Government 
shall determine the nature and categories of officers and other employees 
required to assist the Claims Tribunal in discharge of its functions and 
provide the Claims Tribunal With such officers and other employees as 
it may think fit. The salaries and allowances and conditions of service 
of the officers and other employees of the Claims Tribunal shall be 
prescribed by rules made by the Central Government. These are the 
provisions in the Bill which will have financial implications once it is 
enacted. ' 
3. To start with, it is proposed to set up 19 Benches at such 
places as may be specified by the Central Government. It has also 
been proposed that the Benches may .hold their sittings at different 
stations within their jurisdiction. The number of Benches required will 
be review~ from time to time on the basis of workload and experience 
gained. The immediate requirements of the post of Chairman, Vice-
Chairmen and Members for the proposed Claims Tribunal will be as 
indicated ¥aw:-
S1. No. N arne of the Post No. of the Posts Pay 
1. Chairman 1 Rs. 8,000 fixed 
2. Vice-Chairman 4 Rs. 7,300.-7,600 
3. Member 33 Rs. 7,300-7,600 
4. For their efficient functioning, the Claims Tribunal and Benches 
thereof will require adequate supporting staff. It is not possible to 
indicate precisely at this stage the exact number and the categories of 
staff required far different Benches of the Claims Tribunal. Expenditure 
will also be incurred on rent for hired accommodation, acquisition of 
furniture and fittings, office equipment like typewriters, almirahs, filing 
cabinets, duplicating machines, etc. On a r~>ugh estimate the recurring 
expenditure is expected to be of the order of Rs. 138 lakhs per year. 
This ~xpenditure will be partly met by some savings in litigation 
expenses, travelling e~penses, costs incurred on appointment of ad hoc 
15 

Claims Commissioners, etc. Some additional revenue will also aCC'l'Ue 
by way of fees payable by the claimants at the time of filing applica-
tions to the Claims Tribunal, as provided in clause 16 of the Bill. The net 
recurring expenditure is estimated at Rs. 23 lakbsper annum. To start 
with. ,the non_recurring expenditure is expected to be of the order of 
Rs. 40 lakhs. . 
5. It II\ay be stated that though the setting up of the Claims Tribunal 
involves additional expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India, the 
Claims Tribunal is expected to go a long way in reducing the burden 
on the courts and providing an exclusive and permanent forum for 
speedy disposal of claims of rail users against railway administration. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 29 empowers the Central Government to issue orders for 
removal of any difficulty which may arise in giving effect to- any pro-
vision of the Bill and further I?I'ovides that every order so made shall be 
laid before each HO\:lse of Parliament. 
2. Sub-clause (1) of clause 30 empowers the Central Government to 
make, by notification in the Official Gazette, rules to carry out the pro-
visions of the Bill. The matters in relation to which stich ru1:es are to 
be. made hav:e been specified in sub-clause (2) of that clause. Such 
matters inter alia include the salaries and allowances payable to, and 
other terms and conditions of service of, the Chairman, Vice-Chairmen 
and other Members, offiqers and other employees of the Claims Tribunal; 
the manner in which the procedure. of the Claims Tribunal shall be 
regulated; the financial and administrative powers which the Chairman 
shall exercise ov~r the Benches; the form of application to be made to 
the cla~ms Tribunal and the fee to be accompanied therewith and nddL 
tional matters in relation to which the Claims Tribunal may exercise 
the powers of a civl1 court. 
3. Sub-clause (3) of clause 30 provides for laying of the rules made 
by the Central Government before each House of Parliament. I 
4. The mattus in respect of which such orders and rules may be made 
are. ma!ters of ¥tail and procedure. The delegation of the legislative 
powers is, therefore, of a normal character. 
17 

• 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE INDIAN RAILWAYS ACT, 1890 
(9 OF 1890) 
• • • ,.. 
3. In this Act, unless there is something r~ugnant .in the subject or 
context,-
• • • • ,.. 
7SA. In any suit against a railway administration for compensation for 
any (le1ay, loss, destruction, daplage, deterioration, or non-delivery, the 
burden of proving-
(a) in the case of animals, the value thereo'f, or the higher value 
declared under section 77 A, and where the animal has been injured, 
the extent of the injury, or 
(b) in the case of anv parcel or package, the value of which has 
been declared under seciion 77B or any article mentioned in the 
Second Schedule not contained in any parcel or package, the value 
of which has been declared under that section, that the value so de-
clared is its true value, 
shall lie on the person claiming the compensation, but, subject to the 
other provisions contained in this Act, it shall not he necessary faT him 
to prove how the de!ay, loss. destruction, damage, deterioration or non-
delivery was caused. 
• • • • 
SO. A suit for compensation for .loss of the life of, or personal injury' 
to, a passenger or for loss, destruction, damage, deterioration or non-
delivery of an:mals or goods may be instituted.- ,... 
(a) if the passe·nger was, or the animals or goods were, booked 
from one station to another on the railway of the same railway 
administration. against that railway administration; 
(b) if the passenger was, or the animals or goods were, booked 
through over the railway of two or more railway administrations, 
arainst the railway administration from which the passenger 
obtained his pass or purchased his ticket or to which the animals or 
goods were delivered for carriage, as the case may be, or against the 
railway administration on whose railway the destination station lies, 
or the loss, injury, destruction, damage or deterioration occurred; 
and, in either case, the suit may be instituted in a court having juris-
diction over the place at which the passettger obtained his pass or pur-
chased his ticket or the animals or goods' were delivered for carriage, 
as the case may be, or over the place in which the destination statiOl', 
lies, D.r the loss, injury, destruction, damage qr deterioration occurred .. . • • * • • 
)8 
Dcfini... 
tions. 
Burden of 
proof in 
suits for 
oompema-
tion. 
Suits for 
compensa-
tion. 

Claims 
Commis.. 
Applica-
tion for 
compensa-
tion. 
Procedure 
and powers 
of Claims 
Commis-
sioners. 
Liability 
to pay 
compensa~ 
tion, etc .• 
to be 
decided by 
Oalms 
Commift" 
sionen. 
19 
828. The central Gov;ernment may, by notification in the Omcial 
Gazette, appoint any person to be a Claims Commissioner for such local 
area or for such accident or accidents as. may be specified in the notifi-
cation. 
82C. (1) An a~pliC'8tion for compensation under section 82A arising 
out of any accident of the nature specified therein may be made-
(a) by the person who has sustained the injury or suffered any 
loss, or 
(b) by any agent duly authorized by such person in this behalf, 
or 
(e) where such person is a minor, by his guardian, and 
(d) where death has resulted from the accident, by' any depen-
dant of the deceased. 
(2) No application for compensation under this section shall be 
entertained unless it is made -within three months of the occurrence of the 
accident, but the Claims Commissioner may on good cause shown allows 
a,ny application to be made at any time within one year of such 
occurrence. I 
• • • • • 
820. (1) In inquiring into and determining any claim for compensa-
tion payable under section 82A, the Claims Commissioner may, subject 
to any rules that may be made in this behalf, follow such summary 
procedure as he thinks fit. 
(2) The Claims Commissioner shall have all the po~rs of a civil 
court for the purpose of taking evidence on oath (which the Claims 
Commissioner is he.reby empowered to iI~pose) and of enforcing the 
attendance of witnesses and compelling the discovery and produc-
tion of documents and material objects and the Claims Commissioner 
shall be de:emed to be a civil court for all the purposes of section 195 and 
Chapter XXXV of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898. 5 of 1898. 
(3) Subject to any I1lles that may be made in this behalf, the Claims 
Commissioner may, for the purpose of determining any claim for com-
pensation, choose one or more persons possessing special knowledge 
of any matter relevant to the inquiry to assist him in holding the inquiry . 
• • • • • 
82F. (1) Any question as to the liability of the railway administ.ration 
to pay compensation under section 82A. or as to the amount thereof, or as 
to the pe.rson to whom such compensation is payable, shall be decided by 
the Claii-ns Commissioner. I • 
(2) Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Claims Commissioner 
refusing to grant compensation, or as to the amount of compensation 
granted to him, may prefer an appeal to the High Court having jurisdic-
tion in the place where the accident occu.rred: 

I 'of 1908. 
20 
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall be deemed to authorise 
the High Court to grant compensation in excess of the limit specified in 
section 82A. 
(3) The period of limitation for an appeal under this section shall be 
ninety days. 
(4) The provisions of section 5 of the Indian Limitation Act, 1908, 
shall be applicable to appeals under this section. 
(5) Subject to the decision of the High Court in cases in which an 
appeal is preferred under sub-section (1), the decision of the Claims 
Commissioner on any question referred to in sub-section (1) shall be final 
and shall not be called in question in any Court. 
82G. (1) A railway administration shall comply with an order for 
compensation, including an interim order for compensation und;er section 
82E forthwith by depositing the amount of the· compensation with the 
Claims Commissioner. . 
(2) Wher~ arty compensation has been deposited as required by sub-
section (1), the railway administration shall. notwithstanding anything in 
any other law for the time being in force. be discharged from all liability 
to any person whatsoever in res~ct of any compensation so deposited. 
(3) Any compensation deposited with the Claims Commissioner under 
section 82E or this section shall, with the least possible delay, be paid 
to the applicant for. compensation to whom it is payable. 
(4) Where there are more applications than one for compensation, the 
compensation may be apportioned amon.~st the applicants in 'such manner 
as the Claims CommissiO'ner thinb fit. or may be allotted to the applicant 
who in the opinion of theCJaims Commissioner is best entitled thereto: 
Provided that the Claims Coml'l"lssioner shan in any case i.n which he 
proposes to proceed under this sub-section require as a condition prece-
dent to the granting of compensation that the person to whom the com-
pensation is to be paid shall give to the Claims Commissioner a bond 
with one or two sureties, or othc:- sufficient security. for rendering an 
account of the compensation rerf'ived bv him and for indemnity of 
persons who may be entitled to t!1e whole or any part of th~ compen-
sation. 
(5) The Claims Commissioner may. on application made to him by 
petition and on cause shown to hi.., satisfact;on, and upon such terms as 
he thinks fit, assign the bond' Or other securitv rriven under sub-section 
(4) to' some proper person, and that person shall thereupon be entitled 
to sue thereon in his o\vn name as if it ·had been oriP,inally given. to him 
instead of to the Claims Commissioner. and to recover, ~s trustee for all 
persons interested, such ·amount as iYlay be recoverable thereunder. 
III III ... ... III 
82HH. (1) Where on ret:'eil"t of [In application under r.ub-section (2A) 
of section 82C and aftcr makin,g' such enquiry as it may deem fit, the 
railway administration is satisfied that circumstances exist which require 
relief to be afforded to an applicant for compensation immediately, it 
lIlay. pending determination af the actual amount of compensation pay. 
Recovery 
and pay-
ment of 
compen-
sation. 
Interim 
relief by 
railway 
administra-
tion. 

Bar or 
certain 
legal pro-
cecdiDp. 
Power to 
make rules. 
21 
able under section 82A, pay to any person who has sustained injury or 
suffered any loss, or where death has resulted froIl.l the accident, to any 
dependant of the deceased, such sum as it considers reasonable for afford-
ing such relief, so however, that the sum paid shall not exceed the 
amount of compensation payable at the rates prescribed under the rules 
made under section 82.1. 
(2) The railway administration shall, as soon as may be, after making 
an order regarding payment of interim relief under sub-section (1), send 
a copy thereof to the Claims Commissioner. . 
(3) Any sum paid by the railway administration under sub-section 
(1) shall be taken into account by the qaims Commissioner while deter-
mining the amount of compensation payable. 
821. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against 
any person for anything in good faith done or intended to be dOlle in 
pursuance of sections 8ZA to 82HH inclusive or of any .rules made under 
section 82J. 
8U. 0) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, make rules to carry out the objects of sections 82A to 82H 
inclusive. 
(2). In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the fore-
going power, such rules may provide for-
(i) the qualifications and conditions of service of Claims Com-
missioners; 
• • • • • 
(iv,) the manner in which claims for oompensation may be 
inquired into and, determined by the Claims Commissioner; 
(v) the matters in respect of which any person may be chosen to 
assist the Claims Commissioner under section 82D, and the functions 
exercisable by such person; . 
(vi.) generally for the effective exercis~ of any powers conferred 
on the Claims Commissioner. 
• '. • • • 

LOK SABRA 
A 
Bn.L 
to provide for the establishment of a Railway Claims Tribunal for inquir-
ing into and determining claims against a railway administration for 
loss, destruction, damage, deterioration or noo-delivery of animals or 
goods entJusted to it to- be carried by railway or for the refund of· 
fares or freight or for compensation for death or injury to passer. ... 
gers occurIingas a r~sult of railway accidents and for matters con-
nected therewith or incidental thereto. 
(Shri Madhavrao Scindia, 
Minister- of State of the 
Ministry of .R4iZwallB) 
• 