1
THE PROVISION OF FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE FOR DE-ADDICTION
CENTRES BILL, 2019
By
SHRI RA VNEET SINGH, M.P.
A
BILL
further to adequately fund de-addiction centres at all districts in the country and for
matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in  the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Provision of Financial Assistance for De-Addiction
Centres  Act, 2019.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "de-addiction centre" means any health establishment, meant for the treatment
of persons with drug addiction illness-established, owned, controlled or maintained
by the State Government, local authority, trust, co-operative society or any other
entity;
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Definitions.
Bill No. 116 of 2019
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(b) "doctor" means a medical practitioner registered with the Medical Council
of India;
(c) "drug addiction" means physical or psychological dependence on an
illegal substance;
(d) "facilities" means—
(i) low-cost medicines;
(ii) adequate number of psychiatrists and doctors;
(iii) diagnostics, x-ray, ultra sound, ECG and ECHO;
(iv) any other facilities for the prevention, detection and treatment of drug
addiction as prescribed;
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules and regulations made under this Act; and
(f) "psychiatrist" means a medical practitioner possessing a post-graduate degree
or diploma in psychiatry awarded by an university recognised by the University Grants
Commission established under the University Grants Commission Act, 1956 (3 of 1956),
or awarded or recognised by the National Board of Examinations and included in the
First Schedule to the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 (102 of 1956), or recognised by
the Medical Council of India, constituted under the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956.
3. (1) The Central Government shall provide adequate financial assistance of not less
than rupees five hundred crores every year for the purpose of assisting States in dealing
with problem of drug addiction.
(2) The Central Government shall ensure that adequate facilities at every de-addiction
centre are made available through regular inspection.
4. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of the Act.
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Central
Government
to provide
annual funds
to the States.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
According to the 2017 report by United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC),
255 million people worldwide use illicit drugs, of which 29.5 million suffered from drug use-
related disorders. In India, this figure is close to eight  lakh people. There is a big need for
financial and technical intervention by the Central Government in assisting the States in
tackling the increasingly wide-spread situation of drug addiction. The Central Government
must utilize its huge financial war chest in aiding the States to implement adequate facilities.
The State of Punjab along with other States have been suffering with this epidemic for an
inordinate amount of time. It is  high  time that the Centre and States Governments should
coordinate efficiently to reduce and eliminate  problem of drug addiction which has ruined
lakhs of families.
The Bill seeks to direct the Central Government to give to the States, at least a minimum
sum of  rupees five hundred crores for tackling the problem of drug addiction and also
authorize them to conduct inspections to ensure that adequate facilities are available at the
drug de-addiction centres.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RAVNEET SINGH
June 10, 2019.

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides that the Central Government shall provide adequate
financial assistance to State Governments for providing facilities such as an adequate number
of doctors and psychiatrists or low-cost medicines etc. to treat those who are addicted to
drugs as well as inspect those facilities. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that an annual recurring
expenditure of about rupees one thousand crore per annum will be involved from the
Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about one thousand crore is also likely to be involved.

5
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 4 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to adequately fund de-addiction centres at all districts in the country and for
matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Ravneet Singh, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—494LS(S3)—24-06-2019.