Bill No. 116 or 1,62 
THE MANIPUR (SALES OF MOTOR 
SPIRIT AND LUBRICANTS) TAXATION 
BILL, 1962 
(As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABRA 
ON 26m NOVEMBER, 1962) 
• 

THE MANIPUR (SALES OF MOTOR SPIRIT AND 
LUBRICANTS) TAXATION BILL, 1962 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CLAUSES 
1. Short title, 'extent and commencement. 
2. Definitions. 
3. Levy of tax. 
4. Taxing authorities. 
5. Registration of dealers. 
6. Cancellation of registration certificate. 
7. Returns. 
8. Assessment. 
9. Cancellation of assessment. 
10. Assessment and penalty in case of evasion by unregistered 
persons. 
11. Assessment and penalty in case of evasion by registered 
persons. 
12. Power to grant exemption from tax. 
13. Penalties. 
14. Appeal. 
15. Powers of revision of Commissioner. 
16. R~vision by the Chief Commissioner. 
17. Payment of tax, etc. 
18. Recoveries. 
19. Refunds. 
20. Maintenance of accounts .. 
21. Powers to order prodluction of accounts, etc. 
22. Power for entry. inspection, search and seizure. 
23. Offences and penalties. 
24. False statement in declaration. 
25. Search and seizure how made. 
(i) 

(ll) • 
26. Power of investigation. 
27. Punishment f01' vexations search or arrest. 
28. Things liable to confiscation. 
29. Power to compound offences. 
30. Cognizance of offence. 
31. Protection of persons acting in good faith and limitation of 
suits and proceedings. 
32. Delegation of Commissioner's powers. 
33. Computation of the period of Limitation. 
34. Information to be furnished reg8i1'ding change of business. 
35. Services of order, notices, etc. 
36. Power to make rules. 
37. Repeal. 

Bill No. 116 of 196z 
THE MANIPUR (SALES OF MOTOR SPIRIT AND 
LUBRICANTS ) TAXATION BilL, 1962 
(As INTRODUCED IN Lox SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
to consolidate and amend the law relating to the levy of a tu on 
sateB of motor spirit and lu.bricants in the Union territory 'Of 
Manipur. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirteenth Year of the Re-
pubUc of India as folloW8:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Manipur (Sales of 
Spirit and Lubricants) Taxation Act, 1962. 
Motor Shon title, extent and 
c:ommence-
ment. 
S (2) It extends to the whole of the Union territory of Manipur. 
10 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Chief Commis-
sioner may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "Chief Commissioner" means the Chief Commissioner 
of Manipur; 
(b) "Commissioner" means the Commissioner apPointed 
und'er section 4; 
(c) "crude oil" means petroleum in its natural state; 
Definitions. 

2 
Cd) "dealer" means any person who sells taxable goods 
manufactured, made or processed by him in, or brought by him 
into, the Union territory from any place outside that territory 
for the purpose of sale in that territory; 
EzpZanation: The manager or agent of a dealer who 5 
resides outside the Union territory and sells taxable goods 
brought by him into that territory from any place outside 
that territory, shall, in respect of such business, be a dealer 
for the purposes of this Act; 
(e) "lubricant" means any form of oil or other lubricating 10 
substance primarily used for lubricating the internal machinery 
or the external parts and fittings of motor vehicles, stationary 
internal combustion engines, steam turbines or engines, power 
pumps, refrigerators, dynamos and other machillery and shall 
include all fonns of greases, mineral jellies, spindle oils, cutting 1 S 
oils and hydraulic -brake fluids; 
(1) "motor spirit" means any substance which by itself or 
in admixture with other substances is ordinarily used directly 
or indirectly to provide reasonably efficient fuel for automotive 
or stationary internal combustion engines, and includes petrol, 20 
diesel oil and other internal combustion oils but does not include 
kerosene, furnace oil, coal or charcoal; 
(g) 'Iperson" includes a Department of Government and a 
Hindu Joint Family; 
(h) "petrol" means dangerous petroleum as deftDed in the 25 
Petroleum Act, 1934; 30 of 1934. 
(i) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this 
Act; 
(;) "sale" with all its grammatical variations and cognate 
expressions, means any transfer of property in gooda hy OIle 30 
person to another for cash or deferred payment or any other 
valuable coDJideratioll; 
(k) "taxable goods" means such goods as are specified in Bub. 
section (1) of section 3: 
(1) "Union territory" meaDS the Uaien temtory- of Manipur; 3S 

74 of 1956'. 
3 
3. (1) There shan be levied and collected from every dealer a tax Levy of tax. 
on all sales effected by him of the following goods at such rates as 
may be fixed by the Central Government, from time to time, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, not exceeding the rates specified 
5 below:-
Ie 
(i) motor spirit (except diesel oil and eight naye paise per 
internal combustion oils other litre. 
than petrol). 
(ii) lubricant. nine naye paise pel' 
litre. 
(iii) c:tiesel oil and internal combus- seven naye paise per 
tion oils other than petrol. litre. 
(iv) crude oil. one naya paisa per 
litre. 
,..~ 
15 (2) Every notificationtritder sub-section (1) shall also be pub-
lished in the Manipur Gazette. 
(3) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall be deemed to render any 
dealer liable to tax on the sale of taxable goods where such sale takes 
place:-
20 (i) outside the Union territory; 
(ii) in the course of the import into or export out of the 
territory of India; or 
(iii) in the course of the inter-State trade or commerce as laid 
down in section 3 of the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956. 
25 (4) For the purpose of sub-section (1) ~ any shortage in excess of 
one per cent. of the quantities 6f each consignment of motor spirit 
received into stock by a dealer for sale shall, unless the contrary is 
proved,be 'presumed to be due to sale. and the tax shall be levied 
and collected from the dealer accordingly. 
30 4. (1) The Chief Commissioner may, for carrying out the purposes Taxing 
of this Act, appoint a Commissioner of Taxes, and such other persons autboritica. 
to asaist him as he thinks 1it. 
(2) Persons appointed under sub-section (1) shall exercise such 
powers as may be conferred, and perform such duties as may be 
3.5 required, by or under this Act. 

Retlistration 
ofdellcra. 
4 
5. (1) Every dealer shall, within such time as may be prescribed 
for the purpose, make an application for registration under this Act 
to the Commissioner, and every such application shall contain such 
particulars and shall be accompanied by such fees as may be prescrib-
ed. 
(2) Where a dealer has more than one place of business whether 
in the same town or village or in different towns or villages, he shall 
apply for registration and obtain a separate registration certificate in 
respect of each such place of business. 
(3) If the Commissioner is satisfied that the application Is in con- 10 
formity with the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder, 
he shall register the applicant and grant him a certificate of registra-
tion in the prescribed form which shall specify the class or classes of 
goods in which the dealer carries on business, and such other particu-
lars as may be prescribl!d for the purposes of sub-section (1) of section 15 
3. ~ 
(4) A certificate of registration granted under this section may 
either on the application of the dealer to whom it has been granted, 
or, where no such application has been made, after due notice to 
the dealer, be amended by the Commissioner if he is satisfied that by 20 
reason of the dealer having changed the name, place or nature of his 
b~iness of the class or classes of goods in whieb he carries on busi-
n~ or for any other reason, the certificate of registration granted 
to him requires to be amended. 
(5) No dealer shall carry on business in taxable goods without, or 25 
otherwise than in accordance with the terms of, a certificate of 
registration. 
Clncellation 6. (1) The Commissioner may cancel any certificate of registration 
~ ~;: granted to a dealer, 1£-
c:acc. 
(4) he has ceased to carry on business; or 
(b) any tax payable under section 3 is not duly paid by 
him; or 
(c) there is any breach of any of the provisions of this Act, 
the rules made thereunder or the conditions subject to which the 
30 
registration certificate has been granted: or 35 
(d) Be has been convicted under the provisions of this Act; 

Provided, that no order shall be passed-
(i) under clause (a) unless the dealer was served with a 
notice, or 
(ii) under clause (b), clause (c) or clau~ (d), unless the 
S dealer was given a reasonable opportunity of being heard: 
Provided further, that such cancellation shall not absolve the 
dealer from his liability to pay tax and other dues under this Act, nor 
bar other action as may be taken against him under this Act. 
(2) The dealer shall not be entitled to any compensation, for any 
10 loss or daInage directly or indirectly suffered by him by reason of 
cancellation of the certificate under sub-section (1). 
'I. Every person registered under this Act shall submit such return Returns. 
or returns at such intervals and to such authOrity as may be prescrib-
ed. 
IS 8. (1) If the Commissioner is satisfied that a return furnished As8elllllCllt. 
under section 7 in respect of any period is correct and complete, he 
shall, by an order in writing, assess the tax payable by the dealer on 
the basis of such return. 
(2) If the Commissioner is not so satisfied he shall serve on the 
20 dealer a notice requiring him on the date, and at the hour and place 
specified therein, either to attend in person or to produce or cause to 
be produced any evidence on which he Inay rely in support of his 
return. 
(3) On the day specified in the notice under sub-section (2) or as 
2S soon thereafter as may be, the Commissioner, after hearing such 
evidence as he may require, shall, by an order in writing, assess the 
tax payable by the dealer. 
(4) If a dealer fails to make a return as required by section 7 or 
having made the return fails to comply with any of the terms of the 
~o notice under sub-section (2), the Commissioner shall, by order in 
writing assess to the best of his judgement the tax payable by the 
dealer: 
Provided that before making assessment the Commissioner may 
allow the dealer such further time as he thinks fit to make the return 
. ~S or comply with the terms of the notice issued under sub-section (2). 
9. Where a dealer, in the case of an assessment completed CanceUation 
under sub-section (4) of section 8 satisfies the Commissioner, ::~.-
within one month from the date of service of a nOltice of demand . 

6 
as herein after provided, that he was prevented by sufBcient cause 
from making the return required by section 7 or that he had not 
been served. with the notice under sUb-section (2) of section 8 or 
that he had not had a reasonable opportunity to comply, or was 
prevented by sufficient cause from complying with the terms of the 5 
notice, the CommiSSioner shall cancel the assessment and make a 
fresh assessment in accordance with the provisions of section 8. 
Assessment 10. If on infonnation or otherwise, the Commissioner is satisfied and penalt in that any person while being liable to pay tax under this Act has 
casc.01 failed to apply for registration and to pay the tax, he shall, after 10 
CVasion by •. th bl· f bein h d unrcgistered glvmg e person a reasona e opportunIty 0 g ear, assess, 
pera011l. to the best of his judgment, the amount of tax, if any, due from him 
AsacsllDellt 
1IIld penalty 
incase of 
cYasion by 
rCliltercd 
persons. 
Power to 
grant 
exemption 
from talC. 
Pcnalties. 
and the Commissioner may also direct that, in addition to the amount 
so assessed, a sum not exceeding that amount shall be recovered from 
the defaulter by way of penalty. 15 
11. If on information or otherwise, the Commissioner is satisfied 
that any person registered under this Act has not paid the amount 
of tax due from him or a part thereof for any period, he may pro-
ceed against such person in the manner laid down in section 10. 
1a. (1) If the Chief Commissioner is satisfied that it is neces- 20 
sary in the public interest so to do, he may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, exempt generally eilther absolutely or subject to 
such conditions as may be specified in the notification, any class of 
dealers from the payment of the whole or any part of tax, in respect 
of any taxable goods. 25 
(2) If the Chief Commissioner is satisfied that it is necessary in 
the public interest so to do, he may, by special order in each case, 
exempt any dealer from the payment of tax under circumstances of 
exceptional' nature to be stated in such ord~r, in respect of any 
taxable goods. 
13. (1) If the Commissioner, in the course of any proceedings 
under this Act, is satisfied that any dealer-
30 
(4) has, withoM reasonable cause, failed to furnish the 
return which he was required to furnish under section 7 or has, 
without reasonable cause, failed to furnish it within the time 35 
allowed and in the manner required. 01" 
(b) has, without reasonable cause, f.ailed to comply with a 
notice under sub-section (2) of section 8, or 

, 
(c) has concealed the particulars of his sales or deliberately 
furnished inc<>rreC't particulars of IlUch &eales, or 
(d) has evaded the liability to pay tax, 
the Commissioner may direct that such dealer shall, in addition to 
, any tax payable by him, pay, by way of penaly,-
10 
f" 
(i) in a case referred to in clause (a) or clause (b), a sum 
not exceeding one and a half times the tax; 
(ii) in a case referred to in clause (e), a sum.notezceeding 
one and a half times the amount of the tax which W'OUld have 
:. been 'avoided if the particulars of his ales· h'ad-been . aecepted 
as correct; 
(iii) in a case referred to in clause (d), a sum not exceed-
ing one and a half times the amount of the tax sought to be 
evaded by him. 
15 (2) No"order under 'eub-section U)·'mall··be made wUeg·the 
dealer W'8S given a reasonable' opporiuni,ty of· being,heard. 
14. (l}:Any dealer objecting to an . order of ualr menst or Appeal. 
;' ·penalty. passed under this· Act,. -may within thirty . days Hom' .the. date 
on which the order was served on him, appeal' to,4he>.pNIICribed 
20 authority against such assessment or penalty: 
Provided that the authority may admit the ·appeal after. the 
expi'raltion of tlrlrty days, if such authority is satisfted that for 
. '!'eUonS beyond"the control M'cthe appellent«· for.,anY' other sufB-
·'Cient·'Cause, the'appeal could· not be·,1Ued within~ time. 
25 (2) Any penson desirous of appeallng against an order of asseB6-
m.ent or penalty passed under this Act shall, pending the appeal, 
.1 'deposit' With the Commisaioner -the .. tax' demanded or ,the penalty 
levied: t "".41 
Provided that where in any particular case, the prercribed 
~o authority is of opinion that the deposit of tax demanded or penalty 
. levied will cause undue hardship to the appellant, it may in itr 
discretion dispense with such deposit either ul1C'O!1ditionally or 
subject to such conditions as it may deem fit. 
(3) Every, appeal under sub-section (1) shall be presented in the 
~5 prescribed form and shall be verified in the prescribed manner. 
(4) The prescribed authority shall fix a day and place for 
thearin'lr of'lthe appeal, and may from time to timeadjoum the 
~., hearing and make areause to· be made, sa.ch-'further inquiry IS it 
may deem necessary. 

8 
(5) In disposing of an appeal under sub-section (1), the pres-
cribed authority may:-
(a) confirm, reduce, enhance or annul the assessmen~, or 
(b) set aside the assessment and direct a fresh assessment 
after such inquiry as may be ordered, or 5 
(c) confinn, reduce or annul the order imposing a 
penalty. 
(6) Every order passed in appeal under this section shall, subject 
to the provisions of section 16, be final. 
:';'iaT! Ofo! 15. The Commissioner may, of his own moti'On or on application, 10 
CQIllIII.illio- call for and examine the records of any proceedings under this 
ncr. Act before any person appointed under section 4 to assist the Com-
missioner and revise after such inquiry as he may deem necessary 
any order passed. in such proceedings: 
Provided that no order prejudicial to a dealer shall be passed IS 
under this sub-6ection without giving him a reasonable opportUnity 
of 'being heard: 
Provided further that the Commissioner shall not revise any 
'Order under this section in any case-
(a) where an appeal against the order lies to the prescribed 20 
authority, the time within which such appeal can be made has 
not expired or the dealer has not waived his right to appeal to 
the prescribed authority; 
I' • (b) where the order is the subject of an appeal before the 
prescribed authority; 25 
(c) where the application is madJe by an aggrieved dealer 
for such revision unless the application is made within ninety 
days from the date on which the order was served on the appli-
cant; 
(d) where the order is sought to be revised by the Com mis- 30 
sioner of his own motion, if such order was made more than two 
years previously. . 
Revision by Ie .. (1) The Chief Commissioner may, 'On the application of a 
=! ·dealer aggrieved by any order passed! Wlder seemon 14 or section 15, 
PoDCl'. ann\ll or modify such order: 35 

.: 
PIrovided that no order enhancing any tax or penalty shall b4! 
passed under this section. 
(2) An application under sub-section (1) shall be made within 
ninety days from the date on which the order was served on the 
5 applicant: 
Provided that the Chief Commissioner may admit the application 
after the expiration of ninety days if he is satisfied that for reasons 
beyond the control of the applicant or for any other suftlcient cause, 
the application could not be filed within time. 
10 17. (1) Any sum due under this Act shall be payable within Paymcllt of 
thirty days of the date of service of the notice demanding the same. tax, et~. 
(2) If any person fails to pay the sum due within the time speci-
fied in sub-section (1), the Commissioner may impose a penalty not 
exceeding fifty per cent. of the sum demanded from him. 
IS 18. Any sum due under this Act shall ,be recoverable as an arrear Recoveries. 
of land revenue. 
19. The Commissioner shall, in the prescribed manner, refund to Refunds. 
a dealer any sum paid by such dea1'E!1r in excess of the sum due from 
him under this Act, either by cash payment or at the discretion of 
20 the Commissioner by set off against any other sum due from him. 
20. Every registered dealer on whom a notice has been served tl) Maintenance 
furnish return under the provisions of this Act, shall keep a true of accounts. 
account of taxable goods produced, made or processed by him or 
brought by him into the Union territory from any place outside that 
25 territory for the purpose of sale in that territory, and of sales. 
21. Subject to such conditions and restrictions as may be pres- Powers to 
cribed, the COmmissioner may, for the purposes of this Act, require ~ . 
any dealer to produce before him any accounts, registers, vouche.rs :f a=~:, 
or other documents relating to the production, making, processing, etc:. 
30 purchase or sale of taxable goods or matlers connected therewith. 
35 
22. The Commissioner may- Power for entry, 
(a) inspect at all reasonable time all accounts and vouchers iDe~ti~ 
relating to the stock, purchases, sales and deliveries of taxable :Tzure. 
goods kept by manufacturers, and dealers and the stock of 
taxable goods with them; 
(b) enter and search, at any time, by day or by night any 
buildihg, . vessel, vehicle or place in which he has reason to be-
lieve that any taxable goods liable to confiscation under this Act 
are kept or concealed; 

F_llllte-
ment in 
4eclaradoD. 
io c 
(c) aeize"any ·taxable' goodS 'or any other article Wlhich ·he 
has reason to believe is liable to confiscation under thil!" Act. 
23!-~ 
(a.) carries on business as a dealer and acts in contravention 
of any of the. provisions of this:Act; or S 
(b)fails,.without reasonable' cause,-to submit in due time any 
return . as required by or under the provisions of this Act, or 
submits false return; or 
(c) failS('1(hen required by or under i~ provisions of this 
Aet, to- keep'accounts''Or records'of sales; or 10 
(d) fails; when required: 'bY'orunder the provisions' of tlIis 
Act; to-produce any llccounts;evidence or documents or to furnish" 
any information; or . 
(e)· faUs or neglects to comply with any reqWrem.entunder 
the provisions of this Act; or IS' 
<f) .knowingly! produces false accounts, registers or docu .. 
mentlt ,or knowingly furnishes incorrect informationi or 
(g) fraudulently or -wilfully evades the payment of any tax 
due under this Act, or conceals his liability to such tax; or 
(h) faUs to pay within the time allowed any tax or penalty 20 
due from him; or 
(i) prevents or llbstructs inspection or entry by any ofBeer 
acting under the provisions of this Act; or 
(j) demands or charge~ from any purchaser sales-tax a8 such. 
at a rate higher than that payable under this Act; 2S 
shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to six 
monthS or with fine not exceeding one thousand rupees or with both 
and when the offence is a continuing one,·with a daily . fine' . not 
exceeding fifty rupees during the period of the continuance of the 
oifl!nee. - 30 
24. :Wlioever makes a statement in a verification or declaration ·in 
connection with any proceedings under this Act which'is- falae 'and 
which he, .either! knows or believes to be false or does not believe to 
be .true, shall be punishable with simple imprisorunent ·whicll' may 
exteod to six. monthS' or with fine which may extend to one. thousand JS 
rupees or with \ both. 

l 
I 
2$; ~e' provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, shaD S~rch an,d 
apply to any search or seizure made under this Act. ::l:.e how 
26. \,(1) Every officer, not below such rank as may be prescribed, Pow,er ~in, 
shall within the area for which he is appointed, have power to veatlptlon. 
S investigate all offences punishable under this Act .. 
(2) Every such officer shall in the conduct of such investigation 
exercise the powers conferred by the Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1898, upon an officer in charge of a poli~e station for the investigation 
of a cognizable offence. • 
• 
10 27, Any 'officer or person exercising powers under this Act, wh~ Punieb~nt 
for vexltlOUl 
(a.) without reasonable ground of suspicion, enters or .If:Rft)h or 
searches, or causes to be entered or searched, any building, arrest. 
vessel, vehicle. or plaee;or 
(b) vaxatiouslyor unnecessarily seizes the property of any 
IS person on the pretence of seizing or searching for anything liable 
to confiscation under this Act; or 
(c) vaxatiously and unnecessarily detains or searches any 
person; 
shall be punishable. with fiDe which may extend to five hundred. 
20 ~pees. 
ZS, Whenever an offence punishable under this Act is committed, Thinpliable 
the taxable· good. or any ·otberarticle in respect·of which the of!eDce t!> CODfiaca-
ted _~_11 be I' bl fi t' tlon.· has been commit .IIIUau la e to con sea IOn. 
29. (1) Subject to such conditions as may be precribed,. the Power to 
2S Commissioner may, either before or after the institution of criminal compound 
proceedings under this Act, accept from the person who has .commit- offeDCel. 
ted or is reasonably suspected of having committed an offence under 
35 
this Act or the rules made thereunder, by way of composition of such 
offence-
(a.) where the offence consists of the failure to pay. or the 
evasion of, any tax recoverable under this Act, in addition to the 
tax so recoverable, a sum of money not exceeding one thousand 
rupees or double the amount· of the, tax recoverable. whichever 
is greater, and 
(b) ,in any otheD case a sum of money not exceedinc one: 
thousand rupees in addition to the tax . recoverable.· 

ii 
(2) On the payment of such sum of money.and the tax, if my, 
payable under section 3 to the Commissioner, such person shall be 
discharged, the property seized, if any, shall be released and no fur-
ther proceedings shall be taken against such person or property in 
respect of. such offence. 5 
Coanizance 30. No court shall take cognizance of any offence under this Act, 
of offence. or under the rules made thereunder except with! the previous sanc-
tion of the Commissioner, and no court inferior to that of a Ma~strate 
of the first class shall try any such offence . 
• 
Protection of 31. (1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shan be 10 
pell!>", oodact- instituted. againSt any officer of the Government for anything dOlle m,ID,. . . 
faith and or mtended to beldone m good faith under thIS Act or the rules made 
li~\tation -of thereunder. suits and 
proceedin~~. 
Deleption 
ofCommis-
sioner's 
powers. 
(2) No suit shall be instituted against the Government and no suit, 
prosecution or other proceeding shall be instituted against any officer 15 
of the Government in respect of anything done or intended to be 
done, under this Act unless the suit, prosecution or other proceeding 
is instituted within four months from the date of the act complained 
of. 
32. Subject to such restrictions and conditions as may be prescrib- 20 
ed, the Commissioner may, by notification in the Ofticial Gazette, 
delegate any of his powers under this Act to any person appointed . 
under section 4 to assist him. 
C . 33. In computing the period of limitation prescribed for an appeal 
OfO:::~~~ or revision, the day on which the order complained of was served 25 
of limitation. and the time requisite for obtaining a certified copy of such order, 
Information 
to be fur-
nished ~re· 
gardin, 
change of 
business. 
shall be excluded. 
34. If any dealer -
(a) sells or otherwise disposes of his business or any part of 
his business or any place of business or effects or comes to know 30 
of any other change in the ownership of the business, or 
(ib) discontinues his business or changes his place of busi-
ness or opens a new place of business, or 
(c) changes the name or nature of hJs business, 
he shall within the prescribed time inform the Commissioner accord- 3S 
ingly, and if any such dealer dies, his legal representative shall in like 
manner inform the CommisSioner. 

13 
35. Any order passed or notice issued under this Act shall be Services of , o~r. 
served - • noUc:ea, etc:. 
(a) by tendering the order or notice or sending it by regis-
tered post to the dealer for whom it is intended or to his agent; 
S or 
(b) if the order or notice cannot be served r1n the manner 
provided in clause (a), by affixing it on the outer door or some 
other conspicuous part of the last known premises of the dealer. 
36. (1) The Chief Commissioner may, subject to the condition of:=r::lc. 
10 previous publication, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules . 
for carrying out the purposes of th~s Act. 
(2) In particular and writhout prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing powers, such rules may provide for-
(4) all matters expressly required or allowed by this Act 
IS to be prescribed; 
30 
(b) the recovery: of the tax leviable under this Act; 
(c) the circumstances and the manner in and the conditions 
under which refunds may be made and for the cancellation of 
erroneous refunds; 
(d) the maintenance of records and books and the sub-
mission of returns and the :form of such records, books and 
returns; 
(e) the authority to which appe~ against any order under 
this Act may be preferred and the fees to be charged in connec-
tion therewith; 
<I) applications for revisions under this Act and the fees to 
be chagred in connection therewith; 
(g) the issue of notices under this Act; 
(h) the fees, if any, for certificates granted. under this Act. 
30 (3) Rules made under this Act may provide that a breach of any 
of them shall be punishable with fine not exceeding one thousand 
ruPees or with imprisonment not exceeding three months or with 
both, and when. the offence is a continuing offence, with a daily fine 
which may extend to one hundred rupees for every day during 
3S which the offence continues. 
(4) Every rule made under this section shall be laid as soon as 
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament while it is 
in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised 
in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
40 expiry of the session in which it is so laid or the successive 
sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not 

14 .... 
. be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in.such modified 
fonn or be of no efl'ect, as the case may be; so however that any such 
. ·'·modffteation or annulment shall be without -prejudice to the validity 
of anything previOUSly done under that rule. 
Repeal of 
Aleam Act 
4 of 1939 II 
ntended to 
Manipur. 
37. The Assam Sales of Motor Spirit and Lubricanta I'axation Act, 5 
1939, as extended to Manipur shall stand repealed: 
Provided that such repeal shan not affect-
(4) the previous operation of the said Ac:t or anythmg duly 
done or suft'ered thereunder; or 
(b) any right, privilege, obligation or. liability acquired, 10 
accrued or incurred under the said Act; or 
(c) any penalty,· forfeiture or punishment incurred in res-
pect of any offence committed against the aid Act; or 
(d) any investigation, legal proceeding or remedy in respect 
of any such right, privilege, obligation, liability, penalty, for- 15 
feiture or punishment as aforesaid: 
Provided further that anything done or any adiontaken (includ-
ing any appointment or delegation made, notification, instruction or 
direction issued, certificate of registration granted) under· the Act 
hereby repealed shall be deemed to have been done or taken under 
the corresponding provision of this Act and shall continue to be in 20 
force accordingly unless and until superseded by anything done or 
any action' taken under this Act. 

STATEMENT OF OB.JBe'FS AND BEASONS 
In the Union tenit(,)ry of MWpur, tax on sales of 1J)0wr~rit 
~ lubricants. is levi~ under the Assam Sales 9f Motor Spirit and 
Lubricants, Taxation Act, 19.39 which was exteDded to Manipur by • 
r~l~tion of the fonper Manipur: Durbar. I.n ~am the 1939 Act 
has since been replaced by the Assam (Sales of Petrole~~· Petro-
leum products including Motor Spirit and Lubricants) Taxation Act, 
1955, which provides for higher rates of taxation in terms of metric 
measures and decunal coinage. 
The existing level of taxation is low in Manipur, and it is con-
sidered necessary to raise it suitably. It is also considered that having 
regard to the under-developed state of transport system in Manipur, 
the Ntes should be raised in stages. The draft Bill, which is based 
on the Assam (Sales of Petroleum and Petroleum products including 
Motor Spirit and Lubricants) Taxation. Act, 1955, therefore, specifies 
the maximum rates of taxation and confers on the Central Govern-
ment power to fix the actual rates subject to those maxima. Oppor-
tunity has also been taken to express the rates in terms of metric 
measures and decimal coinage. 
The Bill also provides for the repeal of the Act now in force in 
Manipur. " 
Nzw Da.m:; JAGJIVAN RAM. 
The 15th N~em.ber. 1962. 
1& ",. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM ....... '.~ 
This Bill seeks to replace the Assam Sales of Motor Spirit and 
Lubricants Taxation Act, 1939, as extended to Manipur. No new 
~penditure, apart from what has already 'been incurred on the 
administration of ,the existing law, is contemplated by reason merely 
of the passing of this legislation. 
1. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 3(J) of the Bill, which is based on the Assam (Sales of 
Petroleum and Petroleum products including Motor Spirit and 
Lubricants) Taxation Act, 1955, empowers the Central Government 
to fix the rates of tax from time to time by notification in the Official 
Gazette, subject to the condition that the rates so fixed do not exceed 
the limits specified in the clause. The rates specified in that clause 
as maxima are now in force in Assam, but having regard to the fact 
that the transport system in the Union territory of Manipur is still 
under-developed, it is considered that tQe ratelJ should be raised 
only in stagea. 
Clause 36 of the Bill confers on the Chief Commiaioner, Manipur, 
the power to make rules in respect. of matters specified in the clause; 
these matters are of a procedural and routine nature. Every rule 
made under this clause is required to be laid before each House of 
Parliament. 
The proposed delegation of legislative power i. of a normal 
character. 
, 
1'1 

LOK SABHA 
• to oonsolidate and amend the law relating to the levy ofa 
tax en sales of motor spirit and lubricants. in the Union 
territory of Manipur. t 
The President has, in pursuance of clauses (I) and (3) of article 
117. of the Constitution of India, recommended to Lok 
Sabha the introduction and consideration of the Bill. 
M.N. KAUL, 
Secretary. 
(ShrlJagjifJQ1l Ram, 
Minister of TrtWfJDrt 
tI1fd Commrmicatimu.) 