AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

17 dE

Bill No, 88 of 2004

THE BUY INDIAN BILL, 2004
By
‘Suri Suni. Kuan, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory buying of indigenous goods by Government establishments

and also for public works or industry being established or run with the aid or
assistance of public funds and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. (7) This Act may be called as the Buy Indian Act, 2004.
(2) Itextends to the whole of India.

5 (3) It shall apply to all projects, industrial or business enterprises set up or to be set up
with the grants or out of public fund.
(4) Itshall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.

2. Itis hereby declared that it is expedient in the public interest to help, promote and
10 consolidate the growth and development of indigenous industries and indigenous goods in
the context of the liberalized economic policy of the Government.

Short title,
extent,
application
and
commence-
ment

Declaration as
to expediency
of promotion
of indigenous

industries and

8००१४.


Definitions.

Compulsory
buying of
Indigenous
80०0६ by
Government
establishment
ete

Procurement
of input
‘material

Computsory
contractual
agreement

‘Termination
of contract in
case of
violation of
provisions of
the Act

2

3. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires: —

(a) “industrial establishment” means any premises including the precincts thereof
Where any systematic activity is carried on by owner, or through any agency, including
8 contractor or sub-contractor, for manufacture, production, supply or distribution of
Boods or services for sales or business or both with a motive to make any gain or profit
and includes all industrial undertakings;

(4) “ancillary industrial undertakings” means an industrial undertaking to be
regarded as an ancillary to industrial undertaking for the purposes of this Act;

(८) “goods” means goods as defined in the Sale of Goods Act, 1930 and includes
all materials articles, commodities and all other kinds of movable properties relating to
Industry or industrial undertaking including ancillary industrial undertaking with the
meaning of this Act;

(d) “indigenous goods” means and includes goods which are produced,
manufactured, grown, mined or processed in India but excludes the products produced
or manufactured out of raw materials imported into India,

(e) “owner” in relation to any industrial undertaking, means the person, who, or
the authority, which has the ultimate control over the affai of the undertaking, and,
where the said affairs are entrusted to a manager, managing director or managing
agent; such manager, managing director or managing agent shall be deemed to be the
owner of the undertaking.

(0 “public fund” means and includes all financial facilities, assistance or grant
by the Central or a State Government, its agencies, financial institutions or its
undertakings,

4. Every Government establishment, public works or industry being established or run
With the aid or assistance of public fund shall, forall its requirements, buy indigenous poods
unless the use of stich indigenous goods is :—

(i) to be made outside India;
(i/) not in public interest or detrimental to the project; and

(iti) not available indigenously in the spetified qualities or within required delivery
schedule,

5. Notwithstanding anything contained in any statute for the time being in force, or in
any contract, every industrial establishment or the Government Department while setting up
establishment or undertaking expansion work or running any industries including ancillary
industrial undertakings or executing any public work in India, with the aid of public funds,
subject to section 4 shall procure indigenous 80005 for the purpose of carrying out its trade
or manufacturing or any other activity for which the industry or the Government establishment
has been set up,

6. Every contract for construction, modification, modernization, installation, alteration,
repairs of any public works or industrial establishment being undertaken with the use of
public funds shall contain a provision providing that the contractor or sub-contractor or
executor or any other person responsible for carrying out such job shall for the performance
and execution of the job, use only indigenous goods subject to the conditions specified in
section 4.

7. (1) Itshall be obligatory on the part ‘of owner/occupier of the Industrial establishment
or Head of the Department concerned controlling such industrial undertaking or establishment
to ensure that the contractor or sub-contractor executing any job or work in any such
industrial establishment procures material or goods from the sources permissible under this
Act and the contractor shall give a declaration that he shall comply with the provisions laid
down in sections 4 and 5.

20

25

30

35

40

45


1956,

20

25

30

35

40

45

3

(2) If any contractor or sub-contractor procures any material or goods in violation of
this Act, the contract shall be immediately terminated irrespective of any provision contained
in the said contract and such termination of contract shall be at the risk and cost of the
contractor who shall be liable for all the consequences including the costs of completion of
the work/job.

8. (/) Every person undertaking execution of any contract or work or job requiring
procurement of goods, material input which are not indigenous goods shall make an application
to the head of the department, organization or agency, to that effect.

(2) The authority, to whom such application has been submitted, shall examine the
same and, if found essential for the completion or execution of the works, shall forward the
‘same to the Secretary of concerned department of Central Government or the State Government,
as the case may be, with its recommendations/comments for necessary clearance.

(3) The Secretary upon receipt of recommendation from the authority concerned shall
give his decision within fifteen days from the date of receipt of such recommendation.

9. (1) A person including an owner/occupier, head of an industrial establishment,
contractor, sub-contractor or agent of an industrial establishment who contravenes or attempts
to contravene or abets the contravention of the Act or rules made thereunder or any direction
issued by the Central Government or the financial institutions/Banks providing financial aid
or grant to any scheduled industries or group of scheduled industries, shall be punishable
with fine which may extend upto five times of the price difference between the indigenous
goods and the same procured or imported from outside India and in case of continuing
contraventions, with an additional fine which may extend upto two times of the fine imposed
as aforesaid for every fortnight during the continuance of the contravention.

(2) If the person contravening any of the provisions of the Act or the rules framed
thereunder or any direction issued by the Central Government or financial institutions or
banks providing financial aid is a company, every person, who at the time the offence was
committed, was incharge of and responsible to the company-for the conduct of the business
of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the contravention.

Explanation—For the purposes of this section— ~

(i)‘owner’ shall mean “directors” in relation to a company and partners in relation

to the firm;

(ii) “company” means a. body corporate duly incorporated under the Indian
Companies Act, 1956 and includes a partnership firm or other association of individuals.

10. If any person,

(a) when required by this Act or by any order or direction made under this Act or
rules framed thereunder to make any statement or furnish any information, deliberately
makes false statement or furnishes any false information or which he knows or has
reasonable cause to believe to be false or does not believe to be true; or

(6) makes any false statement or furnishes false information as aforesaid in any
of the records, accounts, returns or other documents which he is required by the Act
or the rules or any direétion of order under this Act or rules framed under this Act, to
maintain and furnish,

he shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to three months or with fine
which may extend to rupees fifteen thousand or with both.

11. No Court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under this Act except on
a report in writing of the facts constituting such offerice made’ by any interested person, or
a Government agency.

Procedure for
procurement
of non:
Indigenous
goods

Punishment
for contra
vention of
the
provisions of
the Act

Penalty for
false
statement,

Cognizance

> of offences, *


Burden of
proof in
certain cases.

Jurisdiction of
courts,

Power to
exempt in
special cases

Power to
make rules

4

12. Where any person is prosecuted for contravening any of the | ०
Actor rules framed under the Act the burden of proving his innocence shall lie on the
or instrument making such complaint.

13, No Court inferior to that a Presidency Magistrate or a Magistrate of First Cl
shall try any offence punishable under this Act.

14, If the Central Government is of the opinion, having regard to the amount of
public fund involved in the project or of the strategic importance, it may exempt, subject to
such conditions as it may think fit, to impose on any industrial undertaking or ancillary
industrial undertaking or factory or group of industrial undertakings, ancillary, industrial
undertakings, or factories as it may specify in the notification, from the operation of all or any
of the provisions of this Act or any rule or order made thereunder.

15, The Central Government, may by notification in official gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The object of the Bill is to encourage the growth and development of indigenous
industries by giving constructive preference in procurement of goods produced in india. In
view of the major changes introduced in the Indian economy and the liberalization of industries
and trade policies since July, 1991, the need is felt for giving encouragement to articles,
materials, supplies which have been mined, produced or manufactured within the country for
safeguarding and promoting the interest of domestic industries including domestic agricultural
products.

The leaders of our freedom struggle had started a swadeshi movement for economic
independence of the country. It is our national duty, too, to give protection to indigenous
goods. In the new economic scenario for a developing country like India, the Government's
role in infrastructure projects like power, road, national highway, ports, communication,
railways, bridges, defence activities, refineries etc. continues to be predominant. The public
procurement of raw materials and inputs for the purpose of various ongoing and new projects
plays a crucial role in generating a high demand for various industrial products in a country
like India which is at the threshold of take-off stage for all round economic development.

Itis the primary concem for a country, be it highly developed or developing, to see that
the domestic industries set up with the help of massive investment, manpower and technology
continue to receive positive support in the form of higher demand generation. In situations
where the inputs procured from the domestic sources satisfy all eligibility criteria like prices,
technical dimensions and delivery schedules and the funds for the same are being provided
from public resources or from borrowed fund by State or public agency, it can have a
preferential treatment for procurement from domestic sources. Such measure is compatible to
the provisions made in several countries.

It is expedient in the public interest to develop the indigenous industries without
affecting in any way the quality and other aspects of the overall development. As such an
‘Act to encourage the growth and development of indigenous industry including domestic
agricultural products needs to be enacted by Parliament in the fifty-fifth year of the Republic
of India.

New Deut; SUNIL KHAN.
August, 17,2004


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 15 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to the matters of detail only. The delegation of
legislative power, therefore, is of anormal character.


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for compulsory buying of indigenous goods by Government and
also for public works or industry being established or run with the aid or assistance of
public funds and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.

(Shri Sunil Khan, M.P.)

MGIPMRND—2833LS—22. 11.2004.