Bill Bo. 118 of 1_ 
THE PRESS AND REGISTRATION, OF BOOKS 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 1952 
(As INTRODUCBD IN THlII HOUBB 01' THE PJ:oPLBl 
• A: 
BILL 
fur,ther to amend the Press and Registration of Books Aot, 16167. 
HI!) it enacted by Parliament as follows:-
1. Sllort tltle.-This Act may be called the 'Press and ;Registration of 
Books (Amendment) Act, 1952. 
1. Amendment of 10D& t.lUe and pnambie, AC\ UV of 1887.-In the 
longtitlB of, and the preamble to, the Press and Uegistration of Books 5 
Act, 1867 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act) for the word "news-
papers", the words "printed papers" shall be substituted. 
3. Amendment of uctlo 1, Act XXV of ;1.867.-In section 1 of the principal 
Act,-
(a) in the definition of 'book', the words 'or lithographed' shall 
be omitted; 10 
(b) after the definition of 'newspaper', the following definitions 
shall be inserted, namely:-
• "paper" includes every document printed other t,huD a book; 
"printing" includes cyc.lostyJmg and IJpnntinng by litlro-
graphy .' . 1.') 
,. AmeDdlDent of section ,. Act XXV of 1887.-Section 4 of the 
principal Act shull be renumbered as sub-section '1) of that section und 
after sub-section (1) as so ren,umbered. the following Bub-section shall be 
inserted, llamely:-
"(2) As often as the place where a press is kept is changed a new 20 
declaration shall be necessary: 
Provided that wbQre the change is for a period not exoeeding sixty 
du)'s aud the place where the press is kept after the change is withiu 
the lO(JI~1 jurisdictiol1 of the magistrate referred to ill Bub-section (1), 
uo new deolaration shall be necessary if- 25 
{a) a statement. relating to the ohange is furnished to the said 
magistrate within twenty-four hours thereof; Bud 
(b) the keeper of the press continues to be the sBme.". 

5 
10 
15 
20 
30 
2 
S. Amendment of .ectton 6, Act DV of 1881.-In section 5 of the 
principal Act-
(1) in the· deolaration contained in rule (.9), for the words "and 
printed. or published, or printed and published", the words "ed to 
be printed or published or to be printed and published" shall be sub-
stituted.; 
(9) to rute (3), the following proviso shall be added, namel,.:-
.. Provided that where the change is for a period not exceed-
ing thirty days and the place of printing or publication after the 
ohange is witkin the local jurisdiction of the magistrate referred 
to in rule (2) no new declaration shall be necessary if ..... 
(a) a statement relating to the change is furnished to the 
said magistrate within twenty-four hours thereof, and. 
(b) the print~r or publisher or ~he printer and publisher 
of the newspaper oontinues to be the same."; 
(3) in rule (4), for the words "shall leave India", the worda 
"shall lenve India for a period exoeeding thirty days" shall be sub· 
stit,uted; , 
(4) after rule (4) and before the proviso to section IS, the follow. 
ing rules shall be inserted, namely:-
.. (5) Where a newspaper does not commence publication 
within three months of the declaration made in respeot thereof, 
the declaration shall be void, and a new declnration shall be 
necessary before the newspaper can be published. 
(6) Where a newspaper hos ceased publicat.ion for a period 
exceeding twelve months, every declaration made in respect 
thereof shall be void, and a new declaration shall be necessary 
before the newspaper can be republished. 
(7) Every existing deolaration in respeot of Q newspaper shall 
be cancelled before a new deolaration is made and subsoribed 
in respect of the same." 
8. AmeD4ment of lectlon 9, Act :XXV of 1887.---.1n section 9 of the 
principle Act, the words ., or lithographed" wherever they occur shall 
be omitted. 
35 7. Amendment of laction 18, Act mv of 1887.-ln sedion 18 of the 
principal Act. for the words "without making such a declaration as is 
requirtlrl by section 4 of this Act,", the words "in contt'avention of any 
of the provisioTls contained in scction 4 of this Act" shall be substitll~ed, 
8. Amendment of aectiOD 14, Act DV of 1887.-In scction 14 of the 
40 principal Act, for the words "any declaration" the words "any declaration 
or other statement" shall be substituted. 
9. Amendment of IIction 18, Act XXV of 1887.-In section 18 of thll 
principle Act, in item (12) of the particull1rB, for the words "or 
lithographE'd", the words .. ('.yclostyied or lithogra.phed" shRII be 
'I; RuhRtituted. 
10. InaerUon of DeW aection 22 in Act XXV of 1887.-After section :n 
of the principal Act, the following section sha.ll be inserted. namely:-
"~2. Eztcnt.-'J'his Aot extends to the whole of India except the 
Mtate of Jammu and Kashmir," 

8 
S'l'ATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
'l'he object of this amending Bill is to amend the Press and Registration 
of Books Act, 1807, 011 the basis partly of the recommendat·ions made by 
the Press Laws Enquiry Committee which had been set up by the Govern-
ment of India and partly on the basiB of the recommendatioDs made by . 
State Goyernments who have experienoed diffioulties in the working of the 
Act. 'l'he main amendments are as follows:-
(i) Temporary changes in the place of printing or publication may 
merely be notified to the mllgistrate within 24 hours Bnd if this is 
done no fresh deolaration is necessary so long as the keeper of the 
press or the publisher continues to be the same. 
(ii) A declaration which is not followed by publication of a news-
paper within three months becomes void. 
(iii) When a newspaper ceases publication for a period of twelve 
months or more the declaration becomes void. 
(iv) '!'he Act applies to all printed, cyclostyled, or lithographed 
matter including posterl. 
NBW DBLBr; 
Jt~ N. XATJU. 
The 9th NOf1ember, 1962. 

• 
ANNEXURE 
EXTBACTS FROII 'l'BEPRES8 ANI> UEUlMTRATION OF BOOKS ACT 1867 , 
(XXV OF 1867) 
Long title and prea1n.ble 
An Act for tile regulation 0/ PriKting-preRRCB and NeWBpape1'B, lor the pre. 
He1'11ation 0/ copies 0/ bo01" printed in India, and lor th, regiltrGtion 
of Ittlch bookB. 
WHERBAS it is expedient to provide for the regulation of printing.preues 
and of newspapers, for the preservation of copies of e"ery book printed or 
lithographed in India, and for the re,istrntion of such hooks; It is hereby 
enacted as follows:-
• • • • • 
Section 1 
1. IntezpretatiOD.~1IIuIe.-In thifi Act, unlels there shall be something 
repugnant in the subject or context.-
"Book" includes every volume, part or division of a volume, and 
pamphlet, in any language, and every IJheet of music, Ulap, chart or 
plan separately printed or lithographed: . 
• • • • • 
Section 'fj 
15. :a.ulel U to publica_ of D.eWipIpIn.-No newspaper shall be 
published in India, except in conformity .with the rules hereinafter laid 
doWID:1 
(1) Every copy of every such newspaper shall contain the name of the 
person who is the editor thereof printed clearly on suoh copy as t·he name 
of the editor of that newspaper: 
(9) The printer and the publisher of every suoh newspaper shall appear 
in person or by agent authorised in this behalf in accordance with rules made 
under section 20. before B District, Presidency or Sub.divisional Magistrate 
within whose loonl jurisdiotion suoh newspaper shall he printed or published, 
or such printer or publisher resides, and shall make and subscribe, in dupli-
caila, the following declaration: 
HI, A. B., decla.re that I am the printer (or publisher. or printer and 
publisher) of the newspaper entitled--and printed (or published. or 
printed and published, as the case may be) at--. " 
. :And the last blank in this form of decluration shRll be 'filled up with a 
true and precise account of the pre'mises where the printing or publication 
is conduotled: . 
(3) As often SA the place of printing or publica.tion is ohanged. 8 new 
rleel arAtion shall be necessary: 
(4) All often 8S the printf'r or the publisher who Rhflll have mAde such 
declaration all it aforesaid AhB111eave India. a new declaration from a printer 
or publishpr resident within the saili territories shall be necessary: 

5 
Provided that no person who has not 6.tto.ined majority in accordance 
with the provisions of the Indiun Majority Act, 1875 (IX of 1875) or of the 
law to which he is subjeot in respect of the attainment of majority, shall 
be permitted to make the u{'clarution proscribed by this seotion, nor shall 
any 8uoh person edit a newspaper. 
8eotion 9 
9. Ooplee or boob prlllted after commencement or Act to be de.uvere4 
gratis to Govel'I1ment.-Printed or lithographed copies of the whole of every 
book whioh shall be printed or lithogrpphed in India. after this Act shall 
come into force, toget.her with all maps, prints or other engravings belong-
ing thereto, finished and coJoured in the same manner a8 the beat copies 
of the same, shall, notwithstanding any agreement (if the . book be 
published) between the printer and publisher thereof, be delivered by the 
printer at such pJa.ce and to such officer as the State Governulenf; shall, 
by notifi08tion in the Official Gazette, from time to time direct, and free 
of expense to tire Government, as follows, that is to say:-
(a)..,in any case. within one cal~mdar month after the day on whioh 
any such book shall first be delivered oUt of the press/bne luch 
copy, f.ud 
(b)if within one ilQalendar year -ir0m such day, the State G'olJcmment 
sha.ll require the printer to deliver other suoh oopies not 
exceeding two in llumber, then within one caJendo.r month 
after the day on which any such requisition sholl be made by 
the State Government on the printer, another suoh copy, or 
two other such copies, as the State Government may direct, 
the copies so delivered being bound, sewed or stitched together and upon 
the best paper on which finy copies of the book shull be printed or litho. 
ppbed. 
The publisher or other person employing the printer shall, at a reason· 
able time before t.he expiration of the said month. supply him with all maps, 
prints a.nd engravingR finished and coloured liS aforesaid, whioh may be 
nece88ary to eIlOlbJe him to comply with the requirements uioresaid. 
Nothing in tho fo~mer part of this section sha.ll a.pply to- . 
(J) any second or subsequ(,lIt edition of II book in whioh edition no 
additions or alterations either in the letter-pre!':.~ or in the maps, book prints 
or other engravings bdongin~ to the hook hnve heen made, and a copy of t.he 
fint or some preoeding edition of whioh book hRS been delivered under this 
Act, or 
(ia, any newspaper puhlisherl in conformity with the rules laid down in 
Aoction 5 of this Actl. 
• • • • • 
8eotion 13 
18. Pel1&lty tor keepblg pl'8ll wtthoat maklDg deol&raUOIl requlnd ." 
ItCtiOl1 ',-Whoever ~ha.u )mep in his possession any suoh press AS afore-
said, without making such a df'clarntioll as is required by section 4 of this 
Act, shall, on conviction before a Magistrate, be punished by fine, not 
exceeding two thousand rupeell. or by simple imprisonment for a term not 
exoeeding six months, or by both. 

8 
Beotion 11-
1'. PuDllhmellt for mrJdllg fIIIe It&atemellt.-Any IJeson who shall, in 
mfJdng any declaration under the authority of this Act, make II. statement 
which is false, and whioh he either knows or believes to be false or does 
not believe to be true, shall, on conviotion before a Magistrate, be punished 
by fine not exceeding two thousand rupeea, and imprisonment for a, tenn 
not exceeding six months. 
• • • • • 
Bection 18 
18. ""aUoll of memol'lDcla of boob.-There shall be' kept at such 
office, and by such officer as the State Government shall appoint in thil 
beh&:lf, a book to be called 8 Catalogue of Books printed in India, wherein 
shall be ~stered a memorandum of every book which shall hRve been 
delivered pursuant to clause (a) of the first paragraph of section 9 of this 
Act. Such memorandum shall so far as may be practicable contain the 
following partieul&T8 (that is to say):-
• • • 
(19) whether the book is printed or lithographed: 
• • III • 

tloUBE OF THE PEOPLE 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Press and Registration 
of Books Act, 1867. 
(Skri Kailas Natk Katju, 
Minister for HfYme Affair8.) 
GIPD-LAD-87aP8-17.11·li2-1,liOO 