As ංඇඍඋඈൽඎർൾൽ ංඇ Lඈ඄ Sൺൻඁൺ
Short title and 
commencement.
5
Bill No. 116 of 2025
THE PROTECTION OF MEDICAL AND HEALTH SERVICE 
PROFESSIONALS FROM ASSAULT, CRIMINAL FORCE 
AND INTIMIDATION BILL, 2025
By
DR. PRASHANT YADAORAO PADOLE, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for protection of Medical and health service professionals against assault, use 
of criminal force and intimidation and for matters connected therewith 
or incidental thereto.
Bൾ it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Protection of Medical and Health Service Professionals 
from Assault, Criminal Force and Intimidation Act, 2025.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint.

2
Prohibition of 
assault, criminal 
force and 
intimidation. 
Punishment.
Definitions.
5
10
15
20
15 of 2020.
30
35
40
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “medical and health service institution” means an institution providing medical and 
health services to people in the recognized system of medicine under the control of the 
Central Government or a State Government or an undertaking of the Central 
Government or a State Government or under local bodies and includes an institution or clinical 
establishment or hospital, maternity home, medical laboratory, nursing home and 
physiotherapy establishments owned by a private individual or entity or trust, or society. 
(b) “medical and health service professional” in relation to medical and health service 
institution shall include:—
(i) registered medical practitioners;
(ii) qualified nurses;
(iii) qualified midwives; 
(iv) medical students; and
(v) nursing students.
(c) “medical student” means a student undergoing graduate or post graduate course in 
the recognized system of medicine from a recognized medical and health service college or 
institution;
(d) “nursing student” means a student undergoing diploma or degree courses in nursing 
midwifery from a recognized medical and health service college or institution;
(e) “recognized system of medicine” mean the following system of medicine namely:—
(i) modern scientific system of medicine (allopathic) within the meaning of the 
National Medical Commission Act, 2019;
(ii) homeopathic and biochemic System of medicine within the meaning of the 
National Commission for Homeopathy Act, 2020;
(iii) ayurvedic system, unani system and naturopathy system of medicines; and
 (iv) any other recognized system of treatment recognized as such under any law 
for the time being in force.
(f) “recognized medical practitioner” means a medical practitioner qualified in 
recognized system of medicine and is duly enrolled in the State Medical Register of such 
system of medicine and includes provisional registered medical practitioner.
(2) The words and expression used in this Act but not defined shall have the same 
meaning as assigned to them in the respective laws enacted by Parliament of India in that 
regard.
3. Any act of assault, criminal force and intimidation to a medical and health service 
professional during or incidental to the discharge of his lawful duties relating to medical and 
healthcare delivery within premises of any medical and service institution or in a mobile 
clinic or in an ambulance shall be deemed to be an offence punishable under this Act.
4. Whoever voluntarily commits any act in contravention of the provisions of section 3 
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not be less 
than one year but which may extend up to seven years and/or with fine which may extend 
up to fifty thousand rupees.
5. Any offence committed under this Act shall be a non-bailable offence.
6. No court inferior to that of a Court of Judicial Magistrate of the first class shall try 
any offence under this Act.
30 of 2019.
25
Offence to be 
non-bailable.
Cognizance of 
offence. 

3
Act to have 
overriding 
effect.
Act to 
supplement 
other laws.
Power to make 
rules.
5
10
15
20
25
3
7. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of the 
provisions of any other law for the time being in force.
8. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the 
Central Government may, by order published in the official Gazette, make such provisions 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to be necessary for removing 
the difficulty: 
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of a period 
of two years from the commencement of this Act. 
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of the Parliament.
9. The provisions of this Act and rules made thereunder shall have effect 
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time 
being in force.
10. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other 
law for the time being in force.
11. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules 
for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both the Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that 
the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form 
or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment 
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Act not in 
derogation to 
any other law.
Power to 
remove 
difficulties.

4
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
A Doctor is considered equivalent to God as provider of second life to the dying 
person, but he is also a human being. Many times the relatives, attendants or friends of a 
patient assault and/or use criminal force against medical and health service professionals 
for delay in attending patient or other petty reasons intimidate medical and health service 
professionals to face severe consequences, if they fail in curing the patient from illness. 
Every day such incidents of assault, using criminal force or intimidation against medical 
and health service professionals take place in many Government hospitals, private hospitals, 
clinics and nursing homes, etc.
At present there is no legislation to curb the acts of assault, use of criminal force 
or intimidation against medical and health service professionals in medical or service 
institutions, etc.
In the wake of repetitive incidents of assault, criminal force or intimidation against 
medical and health service professionals, it is the need of hour to enact a specific legislation 
for protection of medical and other healthcare service persons from any form of assault, 
criminal force or intimidation by any person and making such acts as a punishable offence, 
so as to create a deterrence among offenders.
 
Nൾඐ Dൾඅඁං;                                                                 PRASHANT YADAORAO PADOLE 
July 9, 2025.

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out 
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of 
legislative power is of a normal character.
5

LOK SABHA
A
BILL
to provide for protection of Medical and health service professionals against assault, use of 
criminal force and intimidation and for matters connected therewith 
or incidental thereto.
(Dr. Prashant Yadaorao Padole, M.P .)