As Intropucep IN Lok SABHA

26 JUL 2m

Bill No. 116 of 2000

THE CINEMATOGRAPH (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000
By
‘Suri Susopy Monte, MP.
A
BILL
Surther to amend the Cinematograph Act, 1952.

Bs it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (J) This Act may be called the Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 2000.

(2) It shall come into force at once.

2. In section 58 of the Cinematograph Act, 1952, the sub-section (2) shall be re-
5. numbered as sub-section (3) and before sub-section (3) as so re-numbered, the following
sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—

“(2) A film shall not be certified for public exhibition if it depicts scenes
involving:—

(0) wastage/damage to food items, edibles, fruits/vegetables, milk, etc.
10 (ii) loss of crops;
(iii) damage to or burning of public property;
(iv) tearing of currency notes, damage of books and stationery and;
(v) tearing and burning of clothes.”.

Short title and
commence-
ment,

Amendment
of Section 58.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

India is the largest film producer in the world. Some of the films depict scenes
involving damage to food items, public property, crops etc. India is a poor country. Crores
of people go without food every day. And in films food items in large quantities are
wasted/damaged just for the sake of fun for a few minutes. Such scenes should not be
allowed to be depicted in films.

Moreover, scenes depicting tearing of currency notes, etc. are disrespectful and in
bad taste.

Therefore, it is proposed to amend the Cinematograph Act, 1952 with a view to
provide for strict guidelines in case of certification of films.

New DeLat; SUBODH MOHITE
June 28, 2000.



ANNEXURE
Extract from the Cinematograph Act, 1952
(Act No. 37 oF 1952)

* * * * * *

SB (1) A film shall not be certified for Public exhibition if, in the opinion of the
authority competent to grant the certificate, the film or any Part of it is against the interests
of the sovereignty and integrity of India the security of the State, friendly relations with
foreign States, public order, decency or morality, or involves defamation or contempt of
court or is likely to incite the commission of any offence.

* * * * * *

Principles for
Buidance in
certifying
films.


LOK SABHA

A
BILL
further to amend the Cinematograph Act, 1952.

(Shri Subodh Mohite, M.P)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—1633LS—13-07-2000.