· -", 
HOUSE OF THB _PEOILE 
I I 
\ - " 
Corrigendum \ 
..... to 
I . 
THE INDIAN Iliaaa.unS' SHIPPING· (A.MEN~T)~,1952. 
(1) In pa,S"8 8, 11ne 4, .tor "Equm1pment" ..ti.a51 "Equipment" 
(2) In page 9, 11ne 10~' m "245C" ll..Wl "245CC" 
I 
NEW DELHI, M. Ii. KAUL, 
.9 5th December, 195a. SEC R\ ETA a y. 

BW :Ro. 117 of 1962. 
-.~-.. -----
THE INDIAN MERCHANT SHIPPING (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 1952 
(As INTRODUCED IN THE HOUSE OF THE PEOPLB) 
A 
BILL 
t9 enable effect to be given to an Interna.tional Convention for the Safety 
of Life at Sea." signed in London on the tenth day of .Tune, nineteen 
hundred and forty-eight, to ·amend the provisions of the IndiQ,ft, 
Merchant 8hipping Act, 1923 relating to life-saving appliances, wire-
leSR and radio navigational aids and to other matters affected by the 
said Convention. 
BE it enacted by Parliament as follows:-
1. Short tf.tle &114 oomm eDC8lDent.-(l) This Act. may be called the 
Indian Merchant Shipping (Amendment) Act, 1952. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Cent.ral Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 5 
2. Sub8titution of certain ezprtlllona for cwt&ID other ezpru8IoDI In 
Act XXI of 1918.-ln the Indian Merchant. Shipping Act, 1923 (herein-
after referred to IlS the principa.l Act), except as otherwise provided in 
this Act,~ 
(a) in Part V und in cluuse (f) of section 2M, for th,e words 'wire- 1 
less telegraphy inspectors' and 'wireless telegraphy inspector' wherever 0 
tht'l,Y occur, the words 'radin inspectors' and 'radio inspector' shall, 
respectively, be substituted; 
(b) In Part V,-
(i) for the words Ilnd figures 'International Convention res- 15 
pecting Load Lines, 1930' wherever they occur, the words 'Load 
Line Convention' shall be substituted; 
(ii) for the words and figures 'International Convention for 
the Safety of Life at Sea, 1929' or 'International Convention for 
the Safety, of Life at Sea signed in London ,on the 31st dB~ of 20 
1\1 Ry. Hl2U wherever they occur, the words Safety ConventlOn' 
shall be Rubs~ituted; . 
(iii) for the word 'wireless' wherever it occurs, the word 'radio' 
shall be subKtituteci; 
(iv) rliter thfl \\ oras 'telegraph' and 'telegraphy' wherever 2'" 
they occllr. the word!> . or ra.dio-telephone' and 'or radio-telephony' .) 
shall, respectively, be inserted. 

10 
I 
I. Amllldment of 1ICt.km i, Act XZI of 19i1.-1n section 2 of the 
principal Act, for dause (6), the following clause shaH be substituted, 
namely:-
"(6) 'p~8genger' meMS any person carried in a ship, except-
(~) a persou employed or engaged in any capacity on board 
the ship on the business of the ship; 
(b) 8 person on board the ship either in pursuance of the 
C?bligation laid upon the master to carry ship-wrecked, distressed 
or other persons, or by reason of any ciroumstanc,es which neither 
the master nor the charterer, if any, could have preveuted Or 
forestalled; and 
(c) a child under one year of age." 
,. OmJ.llton of lICtiOll 168A, Act XZI of 1na.-Section 148A Gf the 
principal Act shall be omitted. 
15 S. AmadJDlIlt of 88OtkIa. 1MA, Act XZI Of 1_.-1n section 145A of 
the principal Act, in Rub-scction (i8). for clauses (4) to (h), the fallowinl 
eJautes shall be substituted, namely:-
"(4) the closing and keeping closed the openings in steamers' 
hulls and in water-tight bulk-heads; 
(b) the securing of, and keepmg in place Ilnd inspeoting contri-
vanoes for closing any stich openings 8S aforesaid; 
(c) the operation of mechanisms of contrivances fer olosing any 
such openings as aforesaid and the drills in connection with the 
operation thereof; and 
(d) the entries ttl bE'! made in the Official Log Book or other 
reoord to be kept of any of the matters afol't!said.'· 
8. au'-Ututlon of ne. action far .ct.lon 218.& in Act Dl of 1_.--~'or 
section 218A of the principal Act, the following section shall be substi-
tuted, namely:-
30 "21SA. Definitions.-In this Part, unless the context otherwise 
requires,-
(a) 'country to which the Load Line Convention applies' 
means-
(i) Ii country the Government of which has been declared 
or is deemed to have been declared under section 218B to 
have liCCepted t.he Load Lint~ Convention and has not been 
so declared to have denounced that Convention; 
(ii) a ~ountry to which it hail been RO declared that the Load 
Line Convention has been applied under the provisions of 
article twenty-one thereof, not being a country to which it has 
been so declared that that Convention has cE!aaed to a.pply 
under the provisionS! of that article; 
(b) 'country to which the Safety Convention applies' means-
(I) a country the Government of wltich has been declared 
under section 218B to have accepted the Safety Convention 
and has 'not been 80 declared to have denounced that Conven-
tionj 
, (ii) a territory to which it has been 1'10 declared that the 
Safety Convention extends, not being a territory to which it 
has been so declared that that Convention has ceased to extend; , 

(c) 'Loud Line Convention' means the Conveution signed in 
London on the fifth day of July, nineteen hundred and thirty, for 
promoting safety of life and property at sea, &II amended from time 
to time; 5 
(d) 'Safety Convention' meuns the Convention for the Sa.fety 
of Lift' at Sea, sign~d in London on the tenth day of J IIlle, nineteen 
hundred Itl'ld forty eight, as amended from time to time." 
'1. 1uertl0ll of new I8CtiPD 213B in Act lCQ: of 1923.-After 
section 218A of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, 
namely : _ 10 
• "213H. (Jo1lntries to which Load Line Convention OT Safety Oon-
vention. appli6B.-(I) The Oentral Government, if satisfied,-
(a) that t.he Government of My oountry hilS accepted or 
denounoed the Load I .. ille Convention 01', as the CIlSe JTlay be, the 15 
Safety Convention; or 
(b) thttt the Load Lille Convention oJ', liS the elise may be, 
the Safety Convention extend~, 01' ha.s ceased to extend to any 
telTit-ory; 
may, by notification in the Official GazeUe, mllk.e a declaration to 20 
that effect. 
(2) Any declarKtion made by or on behalf of the Cent.ral Govern-
ment before the commenCPlnent of the Indinn M9rcbant Shipping 
(Amendment) Act, 1952, in allY form whatsoever, thut the Govern-
ment of (in~' country has accepted or denounced the Load Line Con- 25 
venti on or that the said ronvention extends or has ceased to extend 
to any territory sholl be det!med to have been made under sub-
flection (1). 
8. Amendment of .ctloDl 21' and 216, Act XXI of 1928.-1n sub-
section (1) of section 214 and in section 216 of the principal Aot, &fter the )0 
word 'lights' the words 'and shapes' sha~ be inserted. 
9. Amendment of .ectlon lilIA., Act XXI of 1923.-ln section 216A of 
the principal Act, after sub-seotion (I), the following sub-section shall be 
inserted, namely:-
"(lA) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provi-
sion, such rUles may provide for all or any of the following matters, )5 
rtamety:-
(n) the arranging of ships into classes, having regard to the 
services in which they are employed, to the nature and duration 
of the voyage and to the number of persons oarried; 
(h) the number, description and mode of construotion of the 40 
hoatll, life rafts, line throwing appliances, life-jackets and life-
huoys to be carried by ships according to the classes in which the 
shipI' 81'e arranged; 
((') the equipment to be carried by !lny such boats and rafts 
and the method to be provided to get the boats anq other life- 45 
sllving ftppliancea into the water, including oil for use in stormy 
weather; 
(d) the provision in ships of a proper supply of lights in-
extinguishable in water ·and fitted for attachment to life-buoys; 
(e) the quantity, quality anu description of buoyant apparatus 50 
to be carried on board ships either in addition to or in substitution 
for bOllts, life raft!!, life-jackets lind life-buoys; 

10 
115 
25 
4 
, (f) the position and mtlans of securing the boats, life rafts. 
life-jlickets, lifebuoyt: and buoyant apparatus; 
(g) tIl(' marking of hoats, life rafts, and buoyant apparatus 
80 as to !lbow their dimensions and the numher of persons 
authorised to be ca.rried on them; 
(h) the manning of lifeboats and the qualifications and certifi-
cates of life-boatmen; 
(i) the provision to be made for mustering the persons on 
board and for embarking t,hem in the boats (including provision 
for the lighting of, and the meuns of ingress and egress frOIl1, 
different parts of th~ ship); 
(i) the provision of suitable means situated outside the 
engine-room whereby any discharge of water into the boats can 
be prevented; 
(k) the assignment of specific duties to each member of the 
orew in case of ~meIJency; 
(l) the methods to be adopted and the appliances to be carried 
in ships for th~ prevention, de~ction and extinction of fire; 
(m) the prac'ice in ships of boat-'drills and fire-drills; 
(n) the provision in ships of meaus of making effective dis-
tress signals by day and by night; 
(0) the provision in ships, engaged 'on voyages in which pilots 
ar,e likely to be emba.rked of suitable pilot ladders, and of ropes, 
lights and other appliances designed to make the use of such 
ladders safe; and 
(p) the periodical examination of any appliances or equip-
ment required by any rules madEl under this Act to be carried by 
ship •. " 
10. SUblt1tuttoD of Dew sectiODl for sections 126 and 228 in Act XXI of 
30 19U.-For sections 225 and 226 and the heading thereto, the following 
40 
shall be substituted, namely: - . ' 
"Dangerous GoodR and Grain-CaTg088 . 
• 225. Carriage of dangerouR goodB.-(l) The Central Government 
may make rules for regulating in the interests of safety the carriage 
of dangerous goods in ships to which this section IIrpplies. 
(2) This section applies to-
(a) Indian ships; 
(b) other ships while they are within any port in Indio. or 
are embarking or disembo.rking passengers within the territorial 
waters of India, or are loading or discharging cargo or fuel within 
those waters. 
(8) If :lI1y of till' "Illes made in pursuance of this section is not 
complied with in relation to Imy ship, the owner or master of the ship 
shall ~ linble to a fine which may extend to three thousand rupees 
45 nnd the Hhip Hhun he dt>emed for the purpose of this Part to be an 
uusufe ship. , 
~6. Carria.gll of !/rain.-(l) Where grain is loaded on board any 
Indinn ship or in JolU}.·c\ within Rny port in Indio. on board liny ship, 
aU necessary Ilnd reasonable precautiolls shall be taken to prevent the 
grnfn from Hhifting: and if sl1ch precautions 8S aforesaid are not taken, 

5 
the owner or the master of the ship or any agent, of the owner who was 
obrged with the loading or with sending the ship to sea laden with 
pain shall be guilty of an offence under this sub..aection and the 
ship shall be deemed for the purposes of this Part to be unsafe by 
reason of improper loading. 5 
(2) Where any ship which is loaded with grain outside India 
without aU necessary and reasonable precautions hllvlDg been taken 
to prevent the grain from shifting, enters any port in India so laden, 
the owner or master of the ship shall be guilty of an offence under 
this sub-s,ection and the ship shall be deemed for the purposes of 10 
this Part t.o be unsafe by reason of improper loading: 
Provided that this sub-section shall not have effect if the ship 
would not have entered any such port but for. stress of weather or 
any other ciroumstance that neither the master nor the owner nor 
the charterer, if any, could have prevented or forestalled. 16 
(3) If any person commits an offence under sub-section (1) or sub-
section (2), he shall be liable to a fin,e which may extend to three 
thousand rupees. 
(4) On the arrival at a port in India from a port outside India 
of any ship carrying a cargo of grain, the master shall cause to be 20 
delivered at the port to such customs or "Other officer as may be speoified 
by the Central Government in this behalf, a notice stating-
(a) the draught of water and free-board of the said ship 
after the loading of the oargo was completed at the final port of 
loading; and 26 
(b) the following particulars of the grain carried, namely:-
(i) the kind of grain and quantity thereof stated in cubic 
feet, quarters, bushels or tons weight; '. 
(ii) the mode in which the grain is stowed: and 
(iii) the precautions taken to prevent the grain from 30 shifting; 
and if the master fails to deliver any notice required by this Bub-
section or if in any such notice he makes any statement that he knows 
to be, false in a material partioular or recklessly makes a statement that 
is false in a material particular. he shall be liable to II. fine which may 35 
extend to one thousand rupees. 
(5) Any person authorised in this behalf by general or special 
order of the Central Government. may, for seouring the observance of 
the provisions of this section, inspect a ship carrying ft, cargo of grain 
and the mode in which such cargo is stowed therein. 40 
(6) The Centred Go"ernment may, subject to the condition of 
previous publication, makp. rules in relation to the loading of ships 
generally or of ships of any cl88s specifying the precautions to be 
taken and when auch precautions have b,een prescribed, they shall 
he treated for the purposes of this section to be included in the expres- 45 
Bion .. neoessary and reasonable precautions". 

6 
(7) In this section, the expressiOll 'gl'll.iu' iuciudes wbeat, maize, 
OAts, rye, barley, rioe, pulseR and seeds, and the expression 'ship 
oalT)'ing a oargo of grain' mealls 1I ship carrying a quantity of grain 
exceeding one·third of the ship's registered tonnfl~f' reckoning one 
hundred cubic feet or two tons of weight of grain 8S equivalen!; to 
one ton of registered tonnage." 
11. Am8Jldmea.t of HCUoa. 121, Act XXI 01 1 •. -In sub-section (1) 
of section 227 of the principlI.l Aot. after the word 'submerge' the words 
'in 88lt water' shall be in.er~d. 
10 11. OmllllOll of .C_ 160, Act XXI of 1918. -Section 240 of the 
principal Act shull be omitted and for the heading above that seot·ion, 
the following heading shall be substituted. namely:-
"lnBtallation 0/ Radio-telegraphy, Radio-telephoflY afld Dif'8ction Finder.," 
18. Amendment of 88Ction 242, Act XXI Of 1 •. -For sub-seotion (1) 
15 of section 242 of the prinoipal Act. the following sub·section shall be 
substituted, namely:-
20 
25 
30 
"(I) ~very setA'going Indian ship, being a passenger steamer, and' 
every other sea·going· Indian ship of five hundred tons gross tonnage 
or upwards, shall, in accordance with tbe rules made under section 24~, 
b.e provided with a radio iqstallation and shall maintain a radio tele· 
graph service or a radio telephone service of the prescribed nature 
and shall be provided with KliCh certificated operators and watchers 
as muy be prescribed: . 
Provided that the Central Government may, -by notification in 
the Official Gazette. exempt from the obligation imposed by ~his 
section au~' !'hip or class of ships if it is of the opinion that having 
regnrq to t·hE' Ilntllre of th(~ voynl!t' ou which t,he ship 01' ships Bre 
engaged or other circumRtfinces of the cast'. the provision of a radio 
iustl.notion is unnecessary or \1n~eRsonublc, 
(lA) 'l'he radio installation required under the said rules to be 
provided for a I'll!lsenger steamer or for any other lIIhip of sixteen 
hundred tOllS gross tonnage or upwards shall be a radio telegraph 
installation; and that required to be provided for l1 ship of leA A than 
sixteen hundred tons gross tonnage, other than a passenger steamer 
shall b.e eithl'r a radio telegraph installation or a radio telephone 
inRtlllllltion at the option of the owner." 
U. AmeDdmeD.t oIl18CtlOD. IdA, Act XXI of 1918.-For lub-1Jection (1) 
of section 242A of the principal Act, the following Bub-section shall b. 
SUbstituted, numely: - ' 
"(1) On and after such date us the Central Government may, by 
llotification in th!! Official Gazette, appoint in this behalf every Indian 
ship of Rixtcen hUlldr'ed tons grORs tonnage or upwards shall be provided 
with a. radio direotion finder of the prescribed description." 
15. Amen4meDt oI.Hct.lon stlB, Act lCQ: of 1928.-In'seotion 242B, 
45 for th&o words 'wireles8 telegraph log' wherever, they oocUo', the words 
'rudio log' shull ~e substituted. 

7 
18. Subltl.tutlon of DeW l8Ct1oa for IICtloD M' iJl Act DI of lna.-For 
section 244 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted., 
namely:-
"244. Applioation oj thiB Part to BhipB other than Indian BhipB.-
'l'he provisions of this Part relating to radio-telegraphy, radio-telephony 6 
and direction finders shall a.pply to ships other than Indian ships while 
th~y are within any port in India in like manner as they apply to 
Indian ship •. " . 
17. IDIerttoa of new IeCtiOD WAA. 1D. Act XXI of 1928.-
After section 245A of the principal Act, the following shall be inserted. 10 
namely:-
"Stability Information 
245AA. Information about Rhip'B Btability.-(.Z) There shall be 
carried on board every Indian ship whose keel is laid aiter the com-
mencement of the Indian Merchant Shipping (Amendment) Act, 1952, 15 
such information in writing about the ship's stability as is necessary 
for the guidanc8 of the muster in loading and ballasting the ship. 
(2) 'l'he said information shall be in such form 88 may be approved 
by the Central Government (which may approve the provision of the 
information in the form of a diagram or drawing only) and' shall be 20 
based on the determiriation of the ship's stability by means of an 
inclining test of the ship: 
Provided that the Central Government may allow the information 
to btl based on a similar determination of the stability of a sister ship. 
(3) When any informAtion under this section is provided for any 25 
ship, the owntlr shall send a copy thereof to the Director-General of 
Shipping. . 
(.1) If /lny sllch ship proceeds or attempts to proceed to sea with-
out· such information as aforesaid on board, the owner or master of the 
ship shall be liabltl to a fine which mAy extend, to one thousand rupees. 30 
(5) !tis hereuy declared that for the purpose of section 118 (which 
requires documents raiating to na.vigatioll to he delivered by the 
·master of a ship to his successor) information under this section shall 
be deemed to be 9 document relating to the navigation of the ship." 
18. Om..,."; Of lecUOD 2"B, Act DI Of 1923.-Section 245B of the 36 
principal Act shall be omitted and for the beading ahove that section, 
the following heading shall be substitu~d, namely~-
"Safety tJeriijicate8, Safety Equipmen& Cef'tifioate8, Safety 
Radio-telegraph.y Gertijioatell, Safety Radio-telephony Certl'fi,oateR and 40 
Ezemption Certifioate,." . 
19. IDI8rtton of new lection 26100 in Act XXI Of 1928.-After section 
245U of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:-
"245CC. Safety Equillmellt CerUficateR fOf' RhipB not being 
paRBenger HhipR.-If the Central Government is satisfied in resppct. of 
any Indian ship, not being n passenger ship. that· it complies w;th the 45 
rilles for life-saving and fire tlxt-inguishing npplinnces 8pplicllbl(~ to the 
ship a.nd that she is properly provided with the lights, shapes and 
means of malting fog signals required by the collision regula.tions issued 
under the Merchant Shipping Acts or any other similar law for the 
time being in ro,rce. the Central Government shull. on the application 50 
of the owner, issue ill l'ellpect of the ship a certificate Rhowin~ that the 

10 
ship complies with such of the requirements of tbe Safet.y Convention 
relating to those matters 8S are applicable as aforesaid; and any certi-
ficate issued under this s,ection is hereafter in this part of this Act 
referred to as a Safety Equmipment Certificate." 
20 . .&mellClm.eDt 'of I8ction WD, .Act XXI of 1928.-In section 246D 
of the principal Act,....... 
(a) in sub-section (1), after th,e words "Safety Radio-telegraphy 
lJertificate" the words "or, as the cose may be, & Safety Radio-
telephony Certificate" shall be inserted; 
(b) in sub-section (B), after the words "Safety Radio-telegraphy 
Certificate" the words .. and the Safety Hadio-telephony Certificate .. 
shall be inserted. 
S1. Amendment of aectiOD SUI', .Act XXI of lna.-For sub-section!! 
(1) and (2) of sectioll 245F of the principal Act, the following sub-sectiolls 
16 shall be substituted, namely:-
20 
30 
.. (1) A Safety Certificate, Qualified f3a.fety Certificate, Safety 
Radio-telegraphy Certificate, Safety Radio-telephony Certi1icate or an 
.l!:xemption Certificate issued under section 245C, section 245D or 
section 245E, as the case may be, shall be in force for one year, and 
a Safety Equipment Certificate issued under section 245CC shall be 
in force for twenty-four months, from the 'date of its issue, or for 
such shorter period> as, may be specified in the Certificate: 
Provided that no such certificate shall remain in force after notice 
is given by the authority iSRuing the Certificate te) the owner or master 
of the ship in respect of which it has been issued that that authority 
has callcelled the c,ertificate. , 
(B) 'l'he Central Government or any person authorised by it in thi. 
behalf may grant an extension of any certificate issued under this 
Part in respect of an Indian ship for a period not exceeding one month 
from the date when the certificate would but for the extension, have 
expired, or, if the ship is absent from India on that date, for a period 
not exceeding five months from that date_ " 
22 . .Amendment of .. cUon U5G t .Act lOa of 1_.-In section 245G 
36 of the principal Act, in sub-section (I), for the words "or Sa.fety Radio-
telegraphy Certificate" the words "Safety Equipment Certificate, Safety 
Radio-telegraphy Certificate or Safety Radio-telephony Certificate" shall be 
substituted. 
•. .&meD4men, of section WE, .Act XXI of 1928.-In seotion 245H 
of the principal Act, in sub-section (.9)-
40 (i) for the figures '1600' the figures '500' shall be substituted; 
50 
(il) for clause (b), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:-
"(b) a Safety Equipment Certificate issued under section 
245CC and a Safety Radio-telegraphy Certificate or, as the case 
ma.y be, a Safety Radio·telephony Certificate issued under section 
245D;". 
H. Amendment of 1ICtl0ll W-I t .Act lOa Of 1928.-In -section 245-I 
of the principal Act- . 
(a) in sub-section (.9), for the figures '1600' the figures '500' shall 
be substituted; and 

9 
(b) in sub-section (3), for the words, 'passenger steamer' or 'steamer' 
wherever they occur, the word 'steamship'· shall be substituted. 
IS. Amcmdm,Dt of IICtioD UN, Act, XU Of 1923.-In· section 246J 
of the principal Act-
(a) in .sub-section ~1) for the words "Safety Radio-telegraphy 5 
Certificates" the words . Safety Equipment Certificates, Safety Radio-
telegraphy Certificates, Safety Radio-telephony Certificates" shall be 
substituted; 
(Il) in 'sub-section (2), after the figures and letter '2450' the word, 
figures a.nd letters "section 2450" shall be inserted; 10 
(0) ill sub-section (8)-
(i) after the figures and letter "245C" the figures and 
letters "245CC" shall be inserted; and 
(ii) for the words "or a Sllfety Radio-telegraphy Certificate" 
the words "a Safety Equipment Certificate, a Safety Radio- 15 
telegraphy Certificllte, or a Safety Uadio-telephony Certificate" 
shall be substituted . 
•. AmeBdment Of .actioD WK, Act XXI of 1918.-ln section 245K 
of the principal Act, after the figures and letter "2450" the figures and 
letters "245CC" shall be inserted. 20 
17. Amendm8lllt of I8CtioD IUL, Act XXI of 1918.-In section 245L 
of the principal Act, for the words • 'or a Safety Radio-telegraphy Certi-
ficate" the words "a Safety Equipment Certificu.te, a Safety Radio-
telegrllphy Certificate, or a Safety Radio-telephony Certificate" shall be 
substituted. 2.3 
IS. lDsertioD of DeVi sectiOD 2'5101 in Act XXI of 1923.-
In Part V of the principlll Act, after section 245M. the following 
section shall be inserted, namely:-
"245MM. Exemption of oertain IIhipB from 08rta.in provisions of 30 
. thiR Act.-( 1) Nothing in this Aot,- • 
(a) prohibiting a ship from proceeding to sea unless ther:e are 
in force in relation to the ship, or are produced, the appropriate 
certificates issued under this. Part or the. appropriate accept,ed 
. Safety Convention Certificates; 
(b) requiring infonnation about a ship's stability to be carried 35 
on board; 
(0) imposing a pennlty for the contravention of any rules re-
lat.ing t9 openings in ship's hulls a.nd watertight bulkheads; 
shall, unless in the case of information about a ship's stability, 1ihe 
Central Government otherwise orders, apply to any troopship, pleasure 40 
yacht or fishing vessel, or to any ship of less than five hundred tons 
gross tonnage other than a passenger steamer or to any ship not pro-
pelled by mechanical means. 
(2) Nothing in the preceding sub-seotion shall affeot the exemption 
conferred by section 4 of this Act. 43 

10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
10 
(8) Notwithstanding that any provISIon of this Aot is expressed 
to apply to ships not. r.egistered in Indiu while they are within any 
port in India, that provision 1;1In1\ not- apply to a ship that would 
not be within any such port but for stress of weather or any other 
circumstance that neither the Inaster nor the owner nor the charterer, 
if any, of the ship could he.v8 prevented or foreste.lled.'.' 
•. SubaUtatiOll. of Dew lectiOil for HctiOD SUP in Act XU of 1928.-}'or 
section 2451' of the principal Act, the following section shall be 8ub8titu.d, 
namely:-
"245P. Ubliga.tion to Tender aRBiatance on Tecei"ing signal 0/ dis-
treBB.-(l) 'fbe Master of an Indian ship on reoeiving at· sea a signal 
of distress or information from any source that a vessel or aircr&ft is 
in distress sball proceed with all speed to the assistance of the persons 
in distress (informing them if possible that he is doing so) unless he 
is unabl.s or in the special circumstances of the case considers it, un-
reasonable or unnecessary to do so or unless he is released from suob 
obligation under the provisions of sub-section (3) or8ub-8ection (4) of 
this section. 
(2) Where the master of any ship in distress has r.equisitioned 
• any Indian ship that hilS auswered hi .. call, it shall be the duty of 
the master of the requisitioned ship to comply with the requisition 
by continuing to proceed with all speed to the 8ssistance of the persons 
in distress. 
(8) The master shall be released from the obligation imposed by 
sub-Ilection (1) of tJ.:iI section 8S soon as he is informed of the requisi-
tion of olle or more ships other than his own and that the requisition 
is being complied with by the ship or ships requisitioned. 
(~) The ma!l~r shall be released from the obligation imposed by 
sub-section (1) and if his ship has been requisitioned, from th~ obliga-
tion imposed by sub·section (2), if he is informed by the peraens in 
distres!! or by the master of any ship that has reached the persons in 
distresN that Bssistanc.e is no longer required. 
(!j).1f the m8llter of an Indian ship on receiving at see. a signal 
of distl'ess or information from any source the.t a vessel or aircraft 
is in distress is unable or in the special circumstances of the case con-
siders it· unreasona~l~ or Wlnecessary to go to the' assistance of the 
persons in dist~ss, he shall forthwith cause II. statement to be entered 
in the official log book or, if there is no officinl log book, cause other 
record to be kept of his reasons for not going to the 88sistance of 
those persons and if he fails to do so, he shall be liable to a fine which 
ma.y extend to one thousand rupees. 
(6) The master of every Indian ship for which an offici aT log is 
required shall enter or cause to be entered in the official log book every 
!ligonl of distress or message that a vessel, aircraft or person is in 
distress at sea. 
(7) Any mastflr. fltHing to comply with the provisions of sub· 
section (1) or sub-section (2) shall be liable to imprisonment for " 
term which may extend to Rix months, or to II. fine which may extend 
to one thousand rupees, or to both," 

11 
30. AJDeDdment of eecllon 2890, Act XXI oJ 1ell.-In section 289C 
of the principal Act, after the worct 'unnecessary' the words 'or ought to 
be dispensed with' shall b.e inserted. I 
81. 'l'I&DIltioaal provIaioDa.-Without prejudice to the provil§ions of 
section 24 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 (X of 1897)- . o. 
(a) any rules made under any provision of Part V of the prinoipal 
Act shaU, until revoked, have elf.ect Q8 if they had been made under 
the corresponding provisions of that Part as amended by this Aot; 
( b) any certificate in force in respeot of any ship at, the commence-
ment of this Act shall continue in force until the' date shown on the 10 
certificate subject, however, to the cQncQllation of the certificate under 
the principa.l Act, and section 245H of the principal Act shall have 
effect, accordingly; 
(0) nothing in section 245H of the principal Act sha.ll prohibit -
a ship from proceeding to sea without a Safety Equipment Certificate 15 
until aftt~r expiration of twenty-four months from the date of the 
commencement of this Act, nor 6: I:lhip of less than sixteen hundred 
tons gross tonnage from proceeding to sea without a Safety Radio-
telegraphy ,Certifica.te or a Safety Radio-telephony Certificate or an 
Exemption Certifioate, until after the expiration of one ;}ear from that 20. 
date; 
(d) sub-section (2) of section 245F of the principal Act as 
amended by tnis Act shall apply to any such certificate as is men-
tioned in clause (b) issued before the commencem.ent of this Act as it 
applies to any such certificate issued after the commencement of this 25 
Act. 

12 
STATEMENT OF GBJECTS AND REASONS 
An International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea was signed in 
London in 19'J9 for promoting safety of life a,t sea.. Several maritime 
countries, inoluding' India, . were Ii: party to that Convention. One of the 
. requirements of the Convention was that Contracting Governments should 
promullate all r~gul8tions and take all other steps which might be necessary 
to give the Convention full Bnd oomplete effect. The Indian Merchant 
Shipping (Second Amendment) Aot, 1938 (XXV of 1988) amending the 
Indian Merchant Shipping Act, 1928, W&fl accordingly enaoted to give effeot 
to the provisions of the Convention. 
In the light of the experienoe gr,ined in the working of the Convention 
during World War II, a Conferenoe was held in London in 1948 for the pur-
pose of drawing up another Interuational Convention (hereinafter called the 
Safety Convention, 1948) ti9 replaoe the Safety Convention of 1929. The 
Safety Convention, 1948, al80 oontains a. provision for the enactment and 
promulgation by Contraoting Governments of laws and regulations t() give 
effect to its provisions. Most of the maritime countries have already accept-
ed this Convention which will come into force on the 19th November, 1952. 
It has been decided that in the interests of Indian Shipping, India should 
also fall in line with the ot.her countries and ratify the Safety Convention, 
]948. The object. of this Bill is to take power to bring the requirements of 
the 1948 Convention into force in relation to Indian ships and foreign 
shipping in Indi&!. 
O. V. ALAGESAN 
NEW DlILBl; 
7'he 8rd November, 195~. 

,18 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THI': INDIAN MERCHANT SHIPPING ACT, 1928 (iX.XI OF 1928) 
'II 
* * * 
Bection 2 (1) (6) 
2. Uejinitionll.-(l) In this Act, unleBB there is anything repugnant in 
the subject 0::" context,-
• * • • 
(6) "passenger" includes &I1y person carried in a ship other than 
th!3 master llnd crew and the owner, his family and servants but does 
not include any persons on board the ship either in pursuance of the 
obIigatil'n laid upon the master to carry shipwrecked, distressed or 
oth~r persoL1s, or by reason of any circumstance which neither the 
master nor the owner could have prevented or forestalled; 
• * * * 
'Bection 14.M 
143A. Prohibition of ca.rriage of da.ng,eroull 04rgo.-(1) No steam-ship 
fOl' which a certificate of survey is required by this Part shail carry &1 
baUas't or as cargo any goods which by reason of their nature, quantity or 
mode of 'Stowage are either singly or collectively liable toO endanger the 
lives of the passengers or the safety of the ship. 
(2) The Central Government may, subject to the condition of previous 
publioation, make rules determining what goods are to be considered 
dangerous goods anci prescribing the precautions which must be taken in 
the poc:kage and stowage thereof. 
(3) If goods ale carried in :lIly ste&m.ship in contravention of the 
provisions of this section or of the rules made thereunder, the owner or 
maste~' F;hall fol' each offence be liable to a fine whioh may extend to three 
thousand rupees nnd t,he steam-shill shall be deemed for the purpose of 
section 232 to 1.)1' unsofe by reason of improper loading. 
'II 
* • • 
Bection 145A (9) 
145A. Power of Central Government to make rulu bIB to 8afety of. life.-
* * • * 
(g) In pnrticular, Hnd without prejudice to the generality of the fore-
going power, lIuch rules may regulate-
\(l) tntl u., .... 1'01 of hillgt.u dout·s, portable plates, Ride Rcuttles, 
gangway cargo and coaling ports nnd other openings; 
(b) the methods to be adopted ond t·he appliances to be oarried 
for the prevention, detection and extinction of fire; 
(c) the rrovision of meUIlF; of making signals of distress and the 
8uppl~' of li~ht8 inextinguishahle in water Rnd fitted for attachment 
to life-buoys; 
(d) the provision of honts. life-boats, life-raftR and buoyant 
appl\Tntus. their equipment, and the specificutions with which they 
shall comply, and the markinfo! of these so as to show the dimensions 
thereof !lnu the number of persons t,hat may be carried thereon; 

ii' 
(e) the. manning of boat" and life-boats and the qualifioations 
and oertifi,cates of life-bont men; 
({) the provision .w he mad.e for mustering the passengers and 
cl'fJ'~ ~nd for embru:kjll~ them m the boats and life-boats (including 
provISion IlS to the llghtmg of, tlDd as to the means of ingress to Ilnd' 
egress from, different parts of the ship); , 
(g) the proctising of boat drills; &nd 
I 
. (h) the assignment of speoific duties to eaoh member of the orew 
In thl:! event of an emergency, 
• * * • 
'Section 213(A) 
218A. Definition.-ln this Part the expressions "Country to whioh the 
Jnternational Convention respecting Load-lineR, wao, applies" and "Coun-
try to which the lnternational Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea, 
1929, applies" mean-
(I) &: ('ouutry which has been declared by Order in Council made 
by His Majesty under section 65 or section 37 of the Me.chant 
shipping (Safety and Load-Line Conventions) Act. 1932, to have rati-
fied or Rcceded to the Convention specified in the expression and has 
not beel! so declared to have denounced the Convention; 
(ii) any colony or overseas territory of, or any protectorate or 
territory under suzerainty or maudr.te of, a country 80 declared, in 
resp3Ct of which declaration under the said section of the said Aot 
has been mnde that the Convention, specifipd in the expression has 
been applied to ~:Ilch colony, territory ()r protectorate, a.nd no derol>trl\-
tion has been made that t,he s&~d Convention has ceased to apply . 
• * • • 
Section 214(1) 
214. Appointment Of inllpectorll of lights and fog-signal8.-(1) The 
Central Government may appoint persons to inspect, ill any port, ships 
to which the regulations for prevent,jng collisions at sea, issued under the 
provisions of the Merchant, Shipping Acts. or any other similar law for the 
time being in force, may uppl~', for the purpose of seeing thlilt such ships 
are properly provided with lights Hnd with the meaDS of making fog-
signals, in PU1'8UtlllCe of such regulations or law, 
, * * 
Section 216 
216. Ski1) not to be cleared by CUlltom8-collectoT till inspector ceni/ie8 
it is properly 1,r()vided with lights, etc.-Every notice 80 given shall be 
communicated in such manner 88 the Central Government may direct to 
the CU8tomFl-collector at any port fTom which such ship may seek to clear; 
a.nd to no Customs-collector to whom such communica.tion is m&ue shall 
gra.nt such ship 8. port:c]earance or allow her to proceed to sea without B 
certificate under the hand of some person appointed as afore91'1id, to the 
effeGt that the Aliicl ship is properly provided with lights Rnd with the 
means of mc.king fog-signals in pursuance of the said relulatioDs or law • 
• * • • 

15 
SectionB 225 alld 226 
Grain CargoeB 
225. Stowulle (lj cargo of grain, etc.-Ko cargo of which more· than 
one-third (loosists of tiny kind of grain. corn, rice, paddy, pulse, seeds. 
nuts or Illltkernels (hereirHlft,er referred to as gruin-cargo) shall be cal'ried 
on board u'tly British or foreign ship unless the same be contained in bals, 
sacks or bal1'e!!!, 01' liecured from shifting by b081'd~ or bulkheads or 
otherwise. 
226. Penalty for im.proper Btowage of Buch cargo.-If the owner or 
master of tiny ship. or any agent of sllch owner who is charged with the 
londing of such ship 01' the sending her to sea. knowingly. allows any grain-
C&l"I"O or p!.irt of It grain.cargo to be shipped therein for carriage oontrary 
to the provisiolls of the last foregoing section, he shall be liable to a fine 
which may extend to three thommnd rupees. 
Section ~g7(1) 
227. Sul'·I/I.crHioll of lIub-diviBion load-lines in calle of Britillh pa8senger 
8teamer regiRtered ill I-ndia •. -(l) Where-
(a) a British paisenger steamer regjijtered in India has been 
marked with sub-divh'ion lorld-lines, that is to say, load-lines indicating 
the depth to which the steamer may be loa.ded having regard to the 
extent to which she is suh-divided and to the space for the time being 
ullotted to pussengers. and 
(b) t1te apporpriRte Ii'ub-division loa.d-line, that is to say, the sub-
division load-line appropriate to the space for the time being a.llotted 
to passeDgers on the steamer, is lower t.han the load-line indicating 
the IlIHximum depth to which the steamer is for the time being en-
titled under the provisions of this Part to be loaded, 
the steamfll' shnll not be flO lORded as to submerge the appropriate sub-
division load line Oil each side of the steamer when the steamer has no list . 
... * ... 
Section 240 
InstalZation of Wireles8 Telegraphy 
• 
240. Commencement.-The provisions of this Part in regard to the 
insw.llntion of wireless telegraphy on ships registered in India sha.ll come 
into force on such date 8S the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, direct . 
• * • • • • 
Seotion 242(1) 
242. Wirele8B telegraph.y requirem.entR.-.(1) Every sea-going British 
ship ·registered in India, being a passenger steamer or a ship of sixteen 
hundred tons gross tonnage or upwards shall be provided with a wireless 
telegraph installation of thi prescribed description, and shall maintain a 
wirflless telegraph service of the prescribfld nature, and shall be proVided 
with such certified operators lind watchers as may be prescribed: 
Provided that the Central Government may, by notification in the 
OfticinJ Gazette, exempt from the obligations iinpo~ed by this section, any 
ships or classes of ships if it is of opinion ~hat, having regard to the nature 

16 
of tht' voyages on which the ships are engaged, or other circumstances of 
the case, the provision of a wireless telegra.ph insta.llation is unneoessary 
or unreasonable . 
• • • 
Section .e4SA(1) 
242A. Wireless direction-finding apparatus:-(l) On and after suoh 
date as the Central Government may, by notifioation in the Official 
Gazette, appoint in this behalf every British ship registered in India being 
a. passenger steamer of 5,000 tons gross tonnage or upwards, shall be 
provided with a wireless direction-finding apparatus of the prescribed 
description . 
• '" • • 
Section 242(B) 
242B. Wirele8s telegraph log.-(l) Every ship compulsorily equipped 
under the provisions of section 242 with a wireless telegraph installation 
ahll11 mllintain in the wireless teJegnph room a wireless telegraph log in 
which shall be entered such particulars relating to the operation of the wire-
less telegraph installation and foB to the maintenance of the wireless tele-
l1'a.ph service as may be prescribed. 
(2) The provisions of section 122 shall a.pply to .. the wireless telegraph 
log kept under this section as if it were an official log-book. 
• • • • 
Section 244 
244. Applica,tion to ships other than Britillh ships registered in InditJ,.-
The provisions of this Part relating to wirelesp telegraphy shall, 8S from 
n date three months after the coming into force of those provisions apply 
to ships other than British ships registered in Indio while they are within 
filly port in India in !ike manner lUI they apply to British ships registe.red 
i:J India. 
• '" '" '" 
Section f!45B 
Safety Certificates. Radio-telegraphy (Jertificates and Exemption 
Certificates 
245B. OpeJation of proviSions rdating to Safety CertificateB and 
Exemption Oertifir,ates.-The provisions of this Part relating to Sa.fety 
CertificateR. QUfllified Sf\fet;:v CertificateI'. Eafet;v Radio-telegraphy Certi-
ficates and Exemption Certificates, that is to say, the provjsions of 
section 245C to section 24.'5M inclusive, shall hnve effect only from such 
date as the Central Govemment may, by notification in the Official 
G'8zette. appoint in this behalf. 
'" • '" • 
Section 24.5D(l) and (~) 
245D. Safety nadio-telegraphy (Jertifina.tes.-(l) The o,,'ner or muster 
of any BritiRh ~hip regist,ered in .I~dif\ which.is not Q par;senge~ stea~er 
but whir-II is required by the provIsion", of sectIOn 242 to be prOVIded With 
a wi.reless telegraphy instollat·ion ·and which is intended to ply on voyages 
from or to any place in India to or fmm a.ny place outside India shall, if 

17 
the Central GovernWE!Dt is S"tl.tis:fi.ed that the ship 'C6DIpli'es with all the 
provisions '88 to wireless telegraphy applicable to· Buch ship under this 
Part, receive a certificate to b'e called '8 S'afety Radio-teleg.mpby Certifi-
cate, to be prepared Md 'delivered through sucb officer '8S the Central 
Government mlly ap.point in tms behalf. 
(.\?) l'he Safety Badio-telegraphy Certificate shall be in the ptesc'tibed 
form and shall state that ~he ship complies in respect of wireless telegraphy 
installation with the requirements of the International Convention for the 
l:Jafety of Life at Sea, signed in London on the &1st day of May, 1929. 
lit .. * * 
Section 84.'iF(1) and (~) 
~45.l<'. Duration of CertiJi.oateB.-.(l) A Safety Certificate, Quaimed 
fjul'et.v t't·l't.ticnte, Rl\fet~· Badio-telegraphy Certificate or Exemptloll ('er-
tifioate issued under the provisionS' of section 246C, 245D, or 245E, shall 
not remliin in force fOl more than one year from the date of its issue, nor 
after notioe is given by the authority issuing it to the owner or ma.ter 
of the ship in :respect of whioh it ha.s been issued, that that authority has 
cancel1~d the ·certificate. 
(2) If the ship in !,espect of which any such certificate has been iSlBued 
is absent from India at the date when the certificate eXpiles, Ute 
authority ifl8uing the certificate, or any person authorised by that authority 
for the purpose, may, if it appears proper and l'888onable so to do, gra.nt 
such exten&ion of the Certificate a8 will allow the ship to return to India, 
but no such extension shall have effect for more than five months from the 
said date. 
• • • • 
Section 94oG(1) 
245G. lR8ue of (Jertijica1:e to Rhips of foreign r.ollntricB.-(l) The 
Central Government ma.y, at the request of the Government of , country 
to which the International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea. 1929, 
applies, cause a Safet~' Certifioate or Safety Radio-telegraphy Certificate 
to be issued in.l'e8peot of a ship of thabcountry if it is satisfied in like 
nlanner as in the oaare of a British ship registerpd in Jndia that slIch a 
certificate nan prope.ly be issued, and. where a certifioate is issued at 
suoh a request, it shall oontain a statement that it. has been SGiBBDed. 
• • • • Section 24oH(S) 
24iiH. l'rohibition OI~ proce'eding to Bea without certifirate.-
• * • • • 
. (9) No. sea-going British ship n>gistRred ;11 1 pdin heing R ~hip of 1,600 
t,ions A'ross tonnage or IlpWllr~1'I other than a passenger steamer shall pro. 
ceed on a voyage frtlm any place in India to any plaoe outside India. unless 
there is in force i~ respect of the ship-
• • • • • 
(b) & Safety Radio-telegraphy Certificate issued under section 
245D, or 
• • • • 
Sedion 2451(2) and (8) 
241H. Recognition of certificates iSBued outside Inilia.-
• • .. • • 
(2) The master of every ship not registered· in India being a passenger 
steamer or being n ship of 1,600 tons grOBs tonnage or upwards belonging 

18 
~ a counil'y to which the International Convention for the Safety of Life 
at Sea, 1929, appbes, shall produce a valid Safety Convention qertificate 
to the offioer of Customs from whom a clearance for the ship is demanded 
in respect of a voyage from a plaoe in India to a place outside India, and 
a olearanoe shall not be granted' and the ship may be detained until suoh 
a certificate is 80 produoed. 
(3) Where a valid Safety Conv,ention Certificate is produced in respect 
of a passenger steamer not registered in India the steamer shall not be 
deemed to be unsafe for th,e purposes of section 238 of this Act by reason 
of the defective condition 'Of her hull, equipments or maohinery unless it 
appears that the steamer COllnot proceed to sea without danger to the pas-
sengers or crew owing to the fact that the actual condition of the ship 
does not correspond substantially with the particulars stated in the 
certifica~. 
Section 245J 
245J. Power of Central Governme~'t to make rolel as to oertiji.cat6l.-
(1) 'I'he Ventral (Jovenlment may, subject to the condition of previous 
publication, mak~ rules to carry out the purposes of the provisions of this 
Part relating to Safety Certificates, Qualified Ssfety Certificates, Safety 
Radio-telegraphy Certificates and Exemption Certificates. 
(2) In pricular and without prejudice to the g~ner8lity of the, fore-
going power, such rules may preacribe the form of the certificates referred 
to in sub-sections (2) and (8) of section 2400. sub-section (2) of seotion 
mD, and section 245E. the charging of fees for the grant of such oerti-
ficates, the amount of such fees, and the manner in which they shall be 
recoverable. • 
(8) The Central ()qvornment may de1epte to any person the functions 
assigned to the Central GovQrnment by .etiions 245C, 245D and 245G 
of granting a Safety Certificate, a Qualified Safety Certificat~ or a Safety 
Radio-telegraphy Certificate in respect of any Ihlps or classes of ships. 
Seotion 245K 
'." ,;w6K. Application of 11IctiOnB 189. 189.04, 140 a.nd 142' of Act to certi-
~.;"";'The provisions of sections 189. 189A, 140. and 1~ of this Act 
. ~;.apply to and in- relatioD to every certifteate issued by the Central 
GovernmeDt under sections 246C. 245D and 245E in the lame manDer 88 
they apply to and in relation to a certificate of survey. 
Section S46L 
245L. l •• ue by Foreign Got)lImment of certijioatll to .hip. regilltered 
in lndia..-The Central Government may requellt the' Government of a 
country to which the International Convention for the Safety of Life at 
Sea, 1929, applies, to issue a Safety Certificaf;t or a Safety Radio-telegraph, 
Certificate in respect of a British ship register~d in India and a certificate 
issued in pursuance cf such a request and containing a statement that it. 
has been 80 issued shall have etlect for the purpos~s of tliis Aot 8S if it 
lIad 'been issued by the Central Govemment . 
• • • • 
Section e45P 
24&P. Ubligation to rettdllr aslliltanoe on receiving .ignal of diBtre8l.-
(I) The master of a British ship registered in India. on receiving a signal 

lY 
of distress by wireless telegraphy from any other ship shall proceed with 
all spe,ed to the 68sistance of the persons in distress, unless he is unable 
or, in the special airoumst.ances of the 088e considers it unreasollllble or 
unnecessary to do so, or unless he receives information that his assistante 
is no longer required. , . 
(2) If the master is unable or in the special circumstances of the case 
considers it -.:lreasonable or unnecessary to proceed to the assistance of 
th,e persons in distress, he shall forthwith send a message by wireless 
telegraphy informing the master of the ship in distress accordingly, Bnd 
shall enter in the official log-book his reasons for not going to the assistance 
of those persolls. 
(3) Ally master failing to comply with the provisions of sub-section 
(1) shall be liable to imprisonment for a term which may extend to six 
months, or to a fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or to both. 
(4) Any master failing to comply with the provisions of sub-section (2) 
shall be liable to a fine which may extend· to one thousand rupees . 
• * • • 
Section 2890 
289<":. Power to ezempt 8hips from provi8ions of thi8 Act and the 
Merchant Shipping Act8.-Notwit,hstanding anything contained in this 
Act or t.he Merchant Shipping Acts, the Central Government may, upon 
such conditions, if any, as it may think fit to impose, exempt any ship 
[rom any speoified requirement contained in, or prescribed in pursuance 
t)f, this Act or the Merchant Shipping Acts, or dispense with th~ observance 
of any such requirement, in the C8se of any ship if it is satisfied that that 
requirement hal bee~ Iilubstantially complied with or that compliance with 
the requirement, is unneoessary in the oircumstances of the case . 
• • '. 

HOUSE OF THE PEOPLE 
BILL 
to enable effect to be given to an Internationai Convertti<m 
for the Safety of Life at Sea, signed in London on the 
tenth :day of June, nineteen hUndred and forty eight, to 
i.me~ tli~ .pro~~~ o~ ~he Indj~h Merch~nt Shipping A~t 
1923 relatlllg to hfe-saVlng appha.nces, Wlreless and radio 
navigational aids arid to"otller matters affected by the said 
Convention."" 
-
(Shri o. V. Alagesan, 
Deputy Minister for Tran8port.) 
GIPD-LAD-1!91 P 8-11.1.11.112-1,500. 