AS INTRODUCED IN Lox SABHA

79 apo 27M

Bill No. 58 of 2000
—————

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000
By
Suri Vuay Gort, MP.
A.
BILL .
further to amend the Constitution of India.
itenacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows: —
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2000,

2. In Part XII of the Constitution, after Chapter If, the following Chapter and articles
under shall be inserted, namely:—

Cuavrer ILA —InrerNat Auprr
“293A. (1) Every Ministry and department of the Union shall make provision for
audit of the Ministry or the departments, as the case may be, to keep a check on its

and expenditure and also prepare a report on the financial Position of the organisation
ed,

Short title,

Amendment of
Part XT,

Internal Audit.


‘Submission of
feport to the
Comptroller and
Auditor General
of India.

293B. The Teports so prepared under article 293A shall be forwarded to the Comptroller
and Auditor General of India.".



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The Comptroller and Auditor General of India causes the audit and accounts of the
Union and of the States. However, since the work involved will be of a huge volume, it will 3
not be physically possible for the Comptroller and Auditor General of India or his office to,
verify each and every item of expenditure or income of a particular organisation. At the
most, Comptroller and Auditor General of India can verify the accounts at a random basis
and as a result some of the items might miss verification, ‘Therefore, a correct picture of the
financial position of a State Government or an organisation under it cannot be given by the
Comptroller and Auditor General of India. Therefore, it is proposed to make financial audit
compulsory in each Ministry and department of the Union and of every State Government so
as to enable checking of each item of the income and expenditure and also to present a true
and complete picture of the financial affairs of the Government. Accordingly, it is proposed
to amend the Constitution of India.

Hence this Bill.

New DEuH; VIJAY GOEL
March 16, 2000.

ee


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

further to amend the Constitution of India.

(Shri Vijay Goel, MP)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—4549LS—31 03,2000.

Att ..«.