8W No. "1 of IUL {j§l 
THE HIMACHAL PRADESH LEGIS-
LATIVE ASSEMBLY (CONSTITUTION 
AND PROCEEDINGS) VALIDATION 
BILL, 1958 
(As INTRODUCBD IN LoK SABRA) 

Bm No. ~17 of Itf8. 
THE HIMACHAL PRADESH LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY 
(CONSTITUTION AND PROCEEDINGS) VALIDATION 
BILL, 1958 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
to validate the constitlution and proceedings of the Legislative 
Assembly of the New Sta.te of Himachal Pradesh formed under 
the Himachal Pradesh a.nd Bilaspur (New State) Act, 1954 .. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Ninth Year of the Republic: 
of India as follows: - ,. 
1. This Act may be called the Himacbal Pradesh Legislative Shorttit-le~. 
Assembly (Constitution and Proceedings) Validation Act, 1958. 
S 2. In this Act, "new Legislative Assembly" means the body of Definition: 
persons deemed under clause (a) of section 3 to have been the' 
duly constituted Legislative Assembly of the New State of Hima-
chal Pradesh. ' 
3· Notwithstanding anything contained in any law or in any VaUdadoD.of . the conlu-10 Judgment, decree or order of any C'ourt,- tution and 
2.0 
(a) the body of persons summoned to meet from time to ~~n,. 
time as the Himachal Pradesh Legislative Assembly (Himachal Legfalatlve 
Pradesh Vidhan Sabha) during the period commencing on the ~h:~Y 
1st day of July, 1954, and ending with the 31st day of October, State ofl 
1956, by the Lieutenant-Governor of Himachal Pradesh in the =~ 
exercise or purported exercise of the powers conferred on him 
by section 9 of the Government of Part C States Act, 1951, 
shall be deemed for all purposes to have been the duly consti-
tuted Legislative Assembly of the new State of Himachal 
Pradesh formed under section 3 of the Himachal Pradesh and 
Bilaspur (New State) Act, 1954; 

2 
(b) the persons who sat or voted or otherwise took part 
in the proceedings of the new Legislative Assembly shall be 
deemed to have been entitled so to do as members; 
(c) the persons who functioned as the Speaker and the 
Deputy Speaker of the new Legislative Assembly shall be , 
deemed to have been duly chosen as the Speaker and the 
Deputy Speaker respectively; 
and accordtngly-
(i) any Bill passed by the new Legislative Assembly 
(whether the Btll was introduced in the new Legislative AB- 10 
sembly or was introduced in the Legislative Assembly of Htmn-
chal Pradesh functioning immediately before the 1st day of 
July, 1954) and assented to by the President shall be deemed 
to have been validly enacted and to have the force of law; 
(ii) any grant made, resolution passed or adopted, proceed- IS 
tng taken or any other thing done by or before the new Legis-
lative Assembly shall be deemed to have been made, passed, 
adopted, taken or done in accordance with law. 
Court Dot to 4. No court shall question any Act passed, or any grent, resolu-
:=t!OD of tion, proceeding or thing made, passed, adopted, taken or done, by 20 
~Dp or befor~ the new Legislative Assembly merely on the ground that 
~b.tive the new Legislative Assembly had not been. duly constituted o~ on 
Aaaembly on the ground that a person who was not entitled so to do preSided 
~~~:rc:~ over, sat or voted or otherwise took part in the proceedings of the 25 
In constl- new Legislative Assembly. 
tutlon, etc. 
Repeal. 5. The Himachal Pradesh Legislative Assembly (Constitution 
and Proceedings) Validation Ordinance, 1958, is hereby repealed. 7 of 1958. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
In the case of Vinod Kumar Vs. the State of Himachal Pradesh 
decided on the 10th October, 1958, the Supreme Court held that the 
Legislative Assembly of the State of Himachal Pradesh which was 
formed under the Himachal Pradesh and Bilaspur (New State) Act, 
1954, had not been duly constituted and that accordingly the Hima-
chal Pradesh Abolition of Big Landed Estates and Land Reforms 
Act, 1954, passed by that Assembly could not be regarded as a piece 
of vaIidlyenacted legislation. This judgment would have the 
effect of rendering invalid a large number of enactments passed by 
the Himachal Pradesh Legislative Assembly during the period from 
the 1st July, 1954, to the 31st October, 1956, when the new State of 
Himachal Pradesh was in existence. To meet the situation most 
expeditiously an Ordinance called the Himachal Pradesh Legisla-
'tive Assembly (Constitution and Proceedings) Validation Ordinance, 
1958, was promulgated by the President on the 21st October, 1958, 
validating the constitution and proceedings of the body which pur-
ported to act as the Himachal Pradesh Legislative Assembly during 
that period. The present Bill seeks to replace that Ordinance. 
G. B. PANT. 
NEW DEllI; 
The 13th November, 1958. 
3 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to validate the constitution and proceedings of the Legis1ative 
Assembly of the new State of Himachal Pradesh forme« 
under the Himachal Pradesh and Bilaspur (New State) Act, 
1954· 
(Shri Govind BaJlabh Pant, 
Minister of Home Affairs.) 