57 of 1955. 
As INTRODUBED IN LOK SABRA ON 
I. ~ UOY I'~t: 
Bill No. 117 of 1986 
THE CITIZENSHIP (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1986 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Citizenship Act, 1955. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-seventh Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, Short 
] 900. tiUe ana 
5 (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
2. In section 3 of the Citizenship Act, 1955 (hereinafter referred to 
as the principal Act), for sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall 
be substituted, namely:-
10 "(1) Except as provided in sub-section (2), every person born 
15 
in India,-
(a) on or after the 26th day of January, 1950, but before 
the commencement of the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 1986; 
(b) on or after such commencement and either of whose 
parents is a citizen of India at the tune of his birth, 
shall be a citizen of India by birth.". 
com-
mence_ 
mcnt. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 3 

Amend_ 
ment of 
section 
5. 
Amend-
ment of 
Third 
Schedule. 
2 
3. In section 5 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1),-
(I) in clause (4), for the words "six months", the words "five 
years" shall be substituted; 
. (ii) for clause (c), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:- 5 
"(c) persons who are, or have been, married to citizens of 
India and are ordinarily resident in India and have been so 
resident for five years immediately before making an appllcation 
for registration;"; 
(iii) in the Explanation., the words "or any of his grand~ 10 
parents," shall be omitted. 
4. In the Third Schedule to the principal Act,-
(i) in clause (d), for the words "seven years" and "four 
years" the words "twelve years·' and "nine years" shall, respectively, 
be substituted; 
(ii) in the proviso, in clause (ii) , for the words "eight years" 
the words "thirteen years" shall be substituted. 
15 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
A lal'ge number of persons of Indian origin have entered the territory 
of India from Bangladesh, Sri Lanka and some African countries and 
they an! residing in India, Government has taken a serious view of 
the entry of persons clandestinely irito India anc! with a view to making 
the provisions of the Citizenship Act relating to the grant of Indian 
citizenship more stringent it is proposed inter alia to make the following 
changes in the Citizenship Act, 1955, namely:-
(i) under the ~xisting provisions, ever,y person bprn in Indta 
on or after the 26th day of January, 1950, shall be a citizen of India 
by birth. With a view to preventing automatic acquisition of citi-
zenship of India by birth, it is proposed to amend the Act to provide 
that every person born in India after the commencement of the 
amending Act will become a citizen of India by birth only if at the 
time of his birth either of his parents is a citizen of India; 
(ii) under the Act, certain categories of persons may apply for 
citizenship by registration. One such category is those persons of 
Indian origin who are ordinarily resident in India and have been 
so resident for six months immediately before making an applica-
tion for registration. Another category is women who are, or have 
been, married to citizens of India. These provisions are proposed 
to be made more stringent by providing that a person would be 
eligible for citizenship by registration only if he is ordinarilY'resHent 
in India and have been so resident for five years immediately before 
making an application for registration. It is also proposed to change 
the word "women" by "persons" in the latter category so that the 
eligibility of citizenship through marriage to citizens of India now 
admissible to women only is extended to men also. 
(iii) under the Act, a person who is not a citizen of a Common-
wealth country referred to in the First Schedule to the Act may 
apply for the grant of a certificate of naturalization if he has resided 
in India for the period 6f at least five years. It is proposed to 
increase this period to ten years. 
2. The Bill seeks to achieve the aforesaid objects. 
NEW DELm; BUTA SINGH. 
The 16th Octob~r, 1986. ' 
3 

Citiz~n­
ship by 
birth. 
Citizen-
ship by 
regis-
tration. 
• 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE CITIZENSHIP AtcT, 1955 
(57 OF 1955) 
• • • 
3. (1) Except as provided in sub-section (2) of this section, every 
person born in India on or after the 26th January, 1950, shall be a citizen 
of India by birth. 
• • • • • 
5. (1) Subject to the provisions of this section and such conditions 
and restrictions as may be prescribed, the prescribed authority may, on 
application made in this behalf, register as a citizen of India any person 
who is not already such citizen by virtue of the Constitution or by 
virtue of any of the other provisions of this Act and belongs to any of 
the following categories:-
(a) persons of Indian origin who are ordinarily resident in 
India and have been so reeident for six months immediately before 
making an application for registration; 
• • • • • 
(c) women who are, or have been, married to citizens of India; 
e. • • • • 
Provided that in prescribing the conditions and restrictions subject 
to which persons of any such country may be registered as citizens of 
India under this clause, the Central Government shall have due regard 
to the conditions subject to which citizens of India may, by law or 
practice of that country, become citizens of that country by registration. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this sub-section, a person shall be 
deemed to be of Indian origin if he, or either of h!s parents, or any of 
his grand-parents, was born in undivided India . 
• • e e • 
THE THIRD SCHEDULE 
[See section 6 (1)] 
QUALIFICATIONS FOR NA~ISATION 
The qualifications fOr naturalisation of a person who is not a citizen 
or a country specmea m tne .It irst Schedule are:-
,.. • • • • 

5 
(d) that during the seven years immediately preceding the 
said period of twelve months, he has either resided in India or been 
in the service of a Government in India, or partly the one and 
partly the other, for periods amounting in the aggregate to not 
less than four years; 
* * * * • 
Provided that the Central Government may, if in the special circum-
,;tances of any particular case it thinks fit,-
• .. * * * 
(ii) allow periods of residence or service earlier than eight years 
before the date of the application to be reckoned in computing the 
aggregate mentioned in clause (d) ·.above. 

LOKSABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Citizenship Act, 1955. 
(Shri Bu.ta Singh, Minister of Home AtJa.irs) 