AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

49 AUG 2005

Bill No. 117 of 2005
RESIST WSCC SRB ECR, ARTA 27227 न]

THE AGRICULTURAL INSURANCE SCHEME BILL, 2005
By
- SHRI BALASAHEB VIKHE PatiL, M.P.
A
BILL

to provide for compulsory insurance of crops and livestock of the farmers and for
matiers connected therewith.

BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-sixth Year of the Republic of India

as follows:— |
1. (7) This Act may be called the Agricultural Insurance Scheme Act, 2005... Short title,
extent and
(2) It extends to the whole of India. commence-
| . ment.
5 (3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— Definitions.

(a) ‘agriculture’ includes the livestock reared by the farmers;

(b) ‘appropriate Government’ means the State Government or the Central
Government, as the case may be;

10 (c) ‘crop’ means all agricultural crops and includes commercial crops;


2

(d) insurance company’ means any public sector General Insurance Company
authorised for the purpose of agricultural insurance:

(e) ‘livestock’ means all animals and birds reared by the farmers for domestic or
agricultural or commercial purposes;

(f) ‘natural calamity' means drought, floods, cyclone, storm and heavy rains;
(g) ‘prescribed’ means prescribed by rules made under the Act; and

(h) 'scheme' means Agricultural Insurance Scheme framed under section 3.

Agricultural 3. (7) The Central Government shall formulate a scheme to be known as
iets Agricultural Insurance Scheme in the interests of the farmers.
cneme. ह

(2) The scheme shall provide for—
(i) the terms and conditions of the insurance scheme: |
(ii) the premium to be paid by the farmers for the insurance of their crops;

(iii) the compensation to be paid in case the farmer has to sell his crop below the
minimum support price fixed by the Central Government;

(iv) the mechanism to assess the losses suffered by the farmers due to a natural
calamity; and |

(v) the mode of payment to the farmers for the insurance on account of losses
suffered due to a national calamity.

(3) The insurance scheme shall be applicable to all farmers and all crops.

Scheme to be 4. (1) The insurance scheme shall be operated by the Central Government through an
मिलता वि hy insurance company. |

public sector

General (2) It shall be the responsibility of the insurance company to pay the insurance amount
Cais to every farmer for the loss of crops and livestock suffered by him due to any natural calamity,

Premium. 3. (7) The premium in respect of insurance shall be borne by the appropriate
Government in such proportion as may be prescribed.

(2) Each farmer shall contribute such amount towards the premium as may be
prescribed.

Power to make _ 6. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
rules. ‘carrying out the provisions of this Act.



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

It has been a common phenomenon that the standing crops are destroyed by the natural
calamities every year and the farmers always suffer heavily. In most parts of the country,
drought has also affected the crops and livestock. The frequent loss of crops suffered by the
farmers has rendered them helpless and has even forced them to commit suicide. Due to the
loss of crops and livestock, farmers are not in a position to repay their loans to money
lenders.

In the last few years, heavy rains have damaged the crops and livestock in several
parts of the country, Drought was also experienced in several other States which resulted in
heavy loss to farmers. Farmers have not only been victimised by natural calamities but also
by the Government by way of not procuring surplus crops from them. It is, therefore, necessary
to enact a legislation for providing Agricultural Insurance Scheme so that farmers can be
compensated for loss of their crops and livestock due to natural calamities.

Hence this Bill.

NEw DELHI; ? _ BALASAHEB VIKHE PATIL
July 26, 2005.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 3 of the Bill provides for formulation of an Agricultural Insurance Scheme.
Clause 5 provides that the premium in respect of insurance shall also be borne by the
appropriate Government in such proportion as may be prescribed. The Bill, therefore, if
enacted, is likely to involve a recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore from
the Consolidated Fund of India per annum. | |

No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be incurred. |



MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 6 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying cut
the purposes of the Bill. As the matters of which rules are to be made will relate to detail
only, the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.


_ LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for compulsory insurance of crops and livestock of the farmers and for

(Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil, M.P)
MGIPMRND—2483LS(S$3)—17-06-2005