1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016
By
SHRI PRAVESH VERMA, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2016.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In article 243D of the Constitution,—
(i) in clause ( 3), for the words "Not less than one-third", the words "Not less
than one-half" shall be substituted; and
(ii) in clause (4), in the second proviso, for the words "not less than one-third",
the words "not less than one-half" shall be substituted.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 117 of  2016
Amendment
of article
243D.
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
At present one third of the total number of seats are reserved for women in every
Panchayat, which is not adequate. The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Constitution with
a view to increase the number of seats reserved for women from existing 'one-third' to 'one-
half' to ensure increased participation of women in Panchayats.
It has been observed that wherever a woman is the Chairperson of a Panchayat,
development works are taking place at a good pace. But this provision is also inadequate to
empower women. The Bill, therefore, also proposes that not less than one-half of the total
number of offices of Chairpersons in the Panchayats at each level shall be reserved for
women.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; PRAVESH VERMA
April 13, 2016.

3
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * * * * * * *
243D. (1)* * * * * * * * * *
(2) Not less than one-third of the total number of seats reserved under clause (1) shall
be reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes or, as the case may be, the
Scheduled Tribes.
(3) Not less than one-third (including the number of seats reserved for women
belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes) of the total number of seats
to be filled by direct election in every Panchayat shall be reserved for women and such
seats may be allotted by rotation to different constituencies in a Panchayat.
(4) The offices of the Chairpersons in the Panchayats at the village or any other level
shall be reserved for the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and women in such
manner as the Legislature of a State may, by law, provide:
Provided that the number of offices of Chairpersons reserved for the Scheduled
Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in the Panchayats at each level in any State shall bear, as
nearly as may be, the same proportion to the total number of such offices in the Panchayats
at each level as the population of the Scheduled Castes in the State or of the Scheduled
Tribes in the State bears to the total population of the State:
Provided also that not less than one-third of the total number of offices of Chairpersons
in the Panchayats at each level shall be reserved for women:
* * * * * * * * * *
Reservation of
Seats.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Pravesh Verma, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—210LS(S3)—02-05-2016.