     AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
                                                              Bill No. 117 of 2021
THE PROTECTION OF PLANTS V ARIETIES AND FARMERS’
RIGHTS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2021
By
SHRI THOMAS CHAZHIKADAN, M.P.
A
BILL
 to amend the Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’
Rights Act, 2001.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-second Year of the Republic
of India as follows:–
1. (1)This Act may be called the Protection of Plants Varieties and
Farmers’ rights (Amendment) Act, 2021.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.   After section 39 of the Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’
Rights Act, 2001, the following section shall be inserted, namely:–
“39A. (1) It shall be the responsibility of every breeder of a variety
registered under this Act to issue a crop card to the farmer or the group of
farmers at the time of selling propagating material of registered variety which
Short title
and
commencement.5
10
Insertion ofnew section39A.
Crop Card.
53 of 2001.

5
10
15
20
2
shall be deemed to be a guarantee card for the farmers to avail compensation
in case of failure of the registered variety to provide expected performance
under given conditions.
(2) The crop card issued under sub-section (1) shall contain,–
(a) the expected performance and given conditions at which the
performance may be attained with signature and seal of the breeder which
shall be printed on the packaging of the propagating material of the registered
variety; and
(b) details of the district authority establish under sub-section (3) to
be approached for availing compensation in case the propagating material of
the registered variety fails to give expected performance under given
conditions.
(3) The Authority established under section 3 shall establish district
authority to entertain and dispose of claim of compensation by farmers
arising out of unexpected performance of variety sold by breeder to
a farmer or a group of farmers.
(4) The Authority established under section 3 shall frame guidelines  for
deciding amount of compensation payable to the farmer or group of farmers
by the district authority in case of failure of the registered variety to provide
expected performance under given conditions.
(5) The district authority established under sub-section (3) shall take into
consideration  all relevant factors to determine amount of compensation and
pass a reasoned order.
(6) The district authority established under sub-section (3) shall dispose
of the claim of compensation filed by a farmer or group of farmers within
a period of three months from the date of receipt of application for
compensation as per the procedure prescribed under this Act.”.
25

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Protection of Plant Variety and Farmers Rights Act, 2001
(popularly known as PPVFR Act) aims to establish an effective system for
protection and development of new plant varieties, protect farmers’ rights
by facilitating the growth of the seed industry and the availability of the
high quality seed and planting material to the farmers.
The Act requires the breeders to provide information about the
registered variety’s “expected performance” while selling the propagating
material to a farmer, a group of  farmers or any organisation of farmers. In
case the material does not perform accordingly, farmers can claim
compensation. The purpose of this provision is to prevent companies from
making false or exaggerated claims to farmers about the variety’s
performance. Here, the breeders also have to reveal the “given circumstances”
under which the expected performance can be achieved.
The issues with this provision for compensation to farmers are
manifold. First, the breeders have to disclose the “expected performance” of
the material. There is nothing about the way in which the information has to
be disclosed to the farmers. Second, the breeders have also to disclose the
“given circumstances” under which the “expected performance” can be
achieved by the farmers. Moreover, no time-frame has been prescribed for
the authority to take a decision on the claim. Otherwise, it may take several
years for the decision to come.
Though the Act provides for compensation to farmers under
section 39(2), these requirements of “expected performance”, “given
circumstances”, unguided discretion with the authority and lack of awareness
present a legislative vacuum, specifically with reference to realization of
farmers’ rights.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the parent Act with a view to
provide that every breeder shall issue a crop card while selling propagating
material of registered variety to a farmer or a group of farmers or an
organisation of farmers so that farmers can claim compensation if the
registered variety of propagating material fails to provide expected
performance under given conditions.
   NEW DELHI;       THOMAS CHAZHIKADAN
July 5, 2021.
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill vide proposed section 39A provides for
establishing district authority to entertain and dispose of claim for
compensation by farmers against breeder registered variety of propagating
material fails to give expected performance in given conditions.
          The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involved expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of
rupees fifty crore will be involved as recurring expenditure per annum from
the Consolidated Fund of India.
         A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five crore is also likely to
be involved.
4

ANNEXURE
THE EXTRACT FROM THE PROTECTION OF PLANT VARIETIES AND FARMERS’
RIGHTS ACT, 2001
(53 of 2001)
*                  *                  *                *                  *
39. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act,—
(i) a farmer who has bred or developed a new variety shall be
entitled for registration and other protection in like manner as a
breeder of a variety under this Act;
(ii) the farmers’ variety shall be entitled for registration if the
application contains declarations as specified in clause (h) of
sub-section (1) of section 18;
(iii) a farmer who is engaged in the conservation of genetic
resources of land races and wild relatives of economic plants and
their improvement through selection and preservation shall be
entitled in the prescribed manner for recognition and reward from
the Gene Fund:
Provided that material so selected and preserved has been
used as donors of genes in varieties registrable under this Act;
(iv) a farmer shall be deemed to be entitled to save, use, sow
resow, exchange, share or sell his farm produce including seed of a
variety protected under this Act in the same manner as he was
entitled before the coming into force of this Act:
Provided that the farmer shall not be entitled to sell branded
seed of a variety protected under this Act.
Explanation.—For the purpose of clause (iv), “branded seed” means
any seed put in a package or any other container and labelled in a manner
indicating that such seed is of a variety protected under this Act.
(2) Where any propagating material of a variety registered under this
Act has been sold to a farmer or a group of farmers or any organisation of
farmers, the breeder of such variety shall disclose to the farmer or the group
of farmers or the organisation of farmers, as the case may be, the expected
performance under given conditions, and if such propagating material fails to
provide such performance under such given conditions, the farmer or the
group of farmers or the organisation of farmers, the case may be, may claim
compensation in the  prescribed manner before the Authority and the Authority
after giving notice to the breeder of the variety and after providing him an
opportunity to file opposition in the prescribed manner and after hearing the
parties, may direct the breeder of the variety to pay such compensation as it
deems fit, to the farmer or the group of farmers or the organisation of farmers,
as the case may be.
Farmers’rights.
*                  *                  *                *                  *
5

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
 to amend the Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’
Rights Act, 2001.
————
(Shri Thomas Chazhikadan, M.P .)