1
THE VICTIMS OF TERRORISM (PROVISION OF COMPENSATION
AND WELFARE MEASURES) BILL, 2012
By
SHRI CHANDRAKANT KHAIRE, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for payment of compensation to and provision of certain welfare
measures for the victims of terror attacks.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-third Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Victims of Terrorism (Provision of Compensation and
Welfare Measures) Act, 2012.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(b) “terror attack” means an attack by a terrorist group operating within or from
outside the country.
Short title and
extent.
Bill No. 117 of  2012
Definitions.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
3. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
the Central Government shall pay compensation to and take the following welfare measures
for the victims of terror attack in the following manner:—
(i) in case of loss of life,
(a) an ex gratia grant to the next of kin of the deceased which shall not be
less than five lakh rupees;
(b) financial assistance at such rate, as may be prescribed, to the next of
kin of the deceased; and
(c) preference in Central Government jobs to the next of kin of the
deceased;
(ii) in case of serious injury leading to incapacitation,—
(a) medical treatment free of cost till full recovery; and
(b) payment of an ex gratia amount to the victim, which shall not be less
than three lakh rupees;
(iii) in case of minor injuries payment of an ex gratia amount, which shall not
be less than one lakh rupees; and
(iv) in case of damage to the dwelling unit as a result of torching or bombing,
repair of the dwelling unit, if  viable or construction of a new dwelling unit.
4. The provisions of this Act and rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force.
5. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force.
6. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days, which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Compensation
to the victims
of terror
attack.
Overriding
effect of the
Act.
Act not in
derogation of
any other law
for the time
being in
force.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The incidents of terror attacks are increasing in many parts of the country. Hundreds
of innocent persons are being killed in such terrorist attacks. Their lives are shattered as they
become permanently disabled or die during such attacks. The condition of deceased families
is miserable as adequate compensation has not been  provided to them by the Government.
Therefore, it is necessary that the Central Government should come forward to pay
compensation and provide certain other measures for the welfare of victims of terror attacks.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; CHANDRAKANT  KHAIRE
August 7, 2012.

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for compensation to the victims or dependants of persons
killed or injured during terror attacks. It also provides for construction of new dwelling units
in case dwelling units are damaged in the terror attacks. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will
involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that an annual
recurring expenditure of about rupees one thousand crore is likely to be involved.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.
4

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 6 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of detail only.
The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.
5

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for payment of compensation to and provision of certain welfare
measures for the victims of terror attacks.
————
(Shri Chandrakant Khaire, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—3132LS(S3)—16.11.2012.