As INTRODUCED IN Lox SABHA

17 DEC 1399

BILL No. 117 of 1999.

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1999
By
‘Sut RAGHUVANSH Prasab SINGH, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
Beit enacted by Parliament in the Fiftieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—

1. (J) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 1999. Short title.
2. In article 51A of the Constitution, after clause (j), the following clause shall be Amendment
added, namely:— of article 514.

“(eto get one’s name entered in electoral rolls compulsorily on acquiring
prescribed eligibility and to cast his vote at elections to the House of the
People, Legislative Assemblies of States and local bodies.”.



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Democracy means the rule of the electorate but it has been observed that |
percentage of the votes cast in all the elections held so far has been below 50. In some
constituencies, it is a bit higher but most of the voters don’t exercise their franchise or
remain indifferent. This is not a sign of a deeply ingrained democracy. Some of the voters
find their names missing from electoral rolls. Therefore, if an entry to that effect is added _
to the article 51A of the Constitution pertaining to the fundamental duties, common man
will be encouraged to take interest in getting their names entered in the electoral rolls and
exercising their franchise. This will go a long way in strengthening our democracy.

Hence this Bill.

New Dewi; RAGHUVANSH PRASAD 5
November 16, 1999.


ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * * *
[PART IVA
FUNDAMENTAL DUTIES
51A. Fundamental duties—It shall be the duty of every citizen of India—

(a) to abide by the Constitution and respect-its ideals and institutions, the
National Flag and the National Anthem;

(b) to cherish and follow the noble ideals which inspired our national struggle
for freedom;

(c) to uphold and protect the sovereignty, unity and integrity of India;..

(d) to defend the country and render national service when called upon to do
50;

(e) to promote harmony and the spirit of common brotherhood amongst all the
people of India transcending religious, linguistic and regional or sectional diversities;
to renounce practices derogatory 10 the dignity of women;

(f) to value and preserve the rich heritage of our composite culture;

(g) to protect and improve the natural environment including forests, lakes,
rivers and wild life, and to have compassion for living creatures;

(h) to develop the scientific temper, humanism and the spirit of inquiry and
reform;

(i) to safeguard public property and to abjure violence;

-(j) to strive towards excellence in all spheres of individual and collective activity
so that the nation constantly rises to higher levels of endeavour and achievement.]

* * * * * *