As inTRoDUCED IN Lox SABHA

8810 om

Bill No. 117 of 2000
THE RELIGIOUS PLACES (REMOVAL OF RESTRICTION ON
FREEDOM OF RELIGION) BILL, 2000
By
Suri G.M. Banawatta, MP.
A
BILL

10 provide for removal of undue restrictions as regards public religious buildings and
places leading 10 inhibition of the freedom of religion.

Bg it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:—

1. (/) This Act may be called the Religious Places (Removal of Restriction on Freedom
of Religion) Act, 2000.

(2) It shall come into force at once,
5 2, The laws specified in the Schedule hereto annexed shall stand repealed.
THE SCHEDULE
(See Section 2)
1. The Rajasthan Religious Buildings and Places Act, 1954

2. The Madhya Pradesh Sarvajanik Dharmik Bhavan Tatha Sthan Viniyaman
10 Adhiniyam, 1984.

Short title and
commencement.

Repeal

certain laws,

of


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Article 25 of the Constitution of India Provides, inter-alia, that all Persons are entitled
freely to profess, Practise and propagate teligion. Article 26 guarantees every religious
denomination the Tight to manage religious affairs,

The two local legislative enactments mentioned in the Schedule to the Bill have
placed undue restriction on the religious rights, These enactments also over-ride the
Provisions of several Central Acts like the Wakf Act, Religious Endowment Acts, Criminal
Procedure Code and others passed by the Parliament in its collective wisdom. The Acts
mentioned in the Schedule ride rough-shod over the Public policy as contained in the
Central legislations as also in the provisions of the Constitution, and which public policy
is the delicate, sensitive basis of the national unity of our multiple society.

There is no dearth of | laws, including the Religious Institutions (Prevention of Misuse)
Act, 1988, to deal with misuse of religious places.

The Parliament is competent to legislate on the subject of religious freedom under
entry 97 of List-I of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution of India. Similarly, under
entries 1 and 28 of List-IT of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution, Parliament is
further competent to legislate on the subject of the Bill,

‘The Bill is intended to repeal the Acts specified in the Schedule.

New Det, G.M. BANATWALLA
15th May, 2000,


LOK SABHA

A

BILL

to provide for removal of undue restrictions as regards public religious buildings
and places leading to inhibition of the freedom of religion,

(Shri G.M. Banatwalla, 01.7.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—1656LS—17-07-2000.