AS ංඇඍඋඈൽඎർൾൽ ංඇ Lඈ඄ Sൺൻඁൺ
Short title and 
commencement.
5
Bill No. 118 of 2025
THE MENTAL HEALTHCARE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2025
By
SHRI BALWANT BASWANT WANKHADE, M.P.
A
BILL
to amend the Mental Healthcare Act, 2017.
Bൾ it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Mental Healthcare (Amendment) Act, 2025. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. After section 31 of the Mental Healthcare Act, 2017, the following section shall be 
inserted, namely:— 
“31A. (1) The appropriate Government shall, 
(a) conduct mental healthcare awareness programmes in educational 
institutions and private coaching centres under its jurisdiction;
(b) ensure that every student, enrolled in an educational institution and private 
coaching centres for more than six months period of time, undertake mental 
healthcare sessions compulsorily; and
Insertion of new 
section 31A.
Appropriate 
Government to 
take measures 
in Educational 
Institutions 
and Private 
Coaching 
Centres 
for mental 
healthcare.
10
10 of 2017.

2
5
10
15
(c) ensure that all the teachers, prior to their appointment,  undergo mental 
healthcare training and also undergo annual mental healthcare training thereafter, 
organized by the appropriate Government and issue certificate on completion of 
said programme to the teacher:
Provided that if a teacher fails to complete the training programme, he shall 
complete the training within six months of his joining.
(2) The appropriate Government shall prepare an annual report containing the activities 
undertaken under sub-section (1) and submit the same to the Central Authority, or the 
State Authority of State Legislature, as the case may be.
Explanation: For the purpose of this section,—
(a) “educational institution” means a primary or a middle or a secondary or a senior 
secondary school or a University or a College imparting education to children by whatever 
name called; and
(b) “private coaching centre” mean any institute or establishment imparting education 
for admission into any professional course including medical or engineering or technical 
or for appearing for any examination conducted by appropriate Government for securing 
employment. 

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The alarming rise in student suicides in India, which has surged by four per cent. annually 
over the past decade, surpassing the national average, demands urgent attention. According 
to a report by the National Crime Records Bureau (NCRB), student suicides increased from 
6,654 in 2012 to over 13,000 in 2022. Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu, and Madhya Pradesh 
contribute to a third of these tragic cases. This increase highlights the growing mental health 
crisis among students, exacerbated by competitive academic environments, particularly in 
coaching centers like Kota.
Despite the Mental Healthcare Act of 2017 decriminalizing suicide attempts, 
underreporting remains a significant issue, especially in rural areas. The need is to address 
these concerns by creating a robust mental health support system in educational institutions. 
By ensuring mandatory mental health training for teachers in educational institutions, we 
aim to foster a supportive student environment.
The Bill intends to integrate mental health awareness into coaching centers, where 
academic pressure is intense. Regular reporting will help maintain oversight, and the 
structured mental health framework will safeguard the well-being of students.
With a fifty per cent. increase in male student suicides and a staggering 61per cent. 
increase in female student suicides over the last decade, this Bill is crucial in addressing 
this epidemic. It ensures that mental health is not overlooked in educational settings but is 
actively integrated into the holistic development of students.
Hence this Bill.
 
Nൾඐ Dൾඅඁං;                                                                  BALWANT BASWANT WANKHADE 
July 9, 2025.

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill vide proposed insertion section 31A provides for conduct of mental 
health awareness programmes in educational institutions and private coaching centres by 
appropriate Government. It also provides for mental health training of teachers teaching 
in these institutions. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the 
Consolidated Fund of India. At this juncture, it is difficult to estimate the actual expenditure 
likely to be involved. However, it is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about rupees  
Three hundred and sixty two crore per annum would be involved from the Consolidated 
Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees One hundred and eighty seven crore is also 
likely to be involved.

LOK SABHA
A
BILL
to amend the Mental Healthcare Act, 2017.
(Shri Balwant Baswant Wankhade, M.P .)