AS INTRODUCED IN L OK S ABHA
Bill No. 118 of 2022
THE  NA TIONAL AUTHORITY FOR REHABILITA TION AND
WELFARE OF PERSONS LIVING AROUND
RAILWAY TRACKS BILL, 2022
By
DR. ALOK K UMAR S UMAN, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for establishment of an Authority for rehabilitation and welfare of persons living
around railway tracks and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India
as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the National Authority for Rehabilitation and
Welfare of Persons Living around Railway Tracks Act, 2022.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force at once.
5
Short title,
extent  and
commencement.

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) ‘‘around railway tracks’’ means the land area extending upto twenty-five
meters on both sides of the railway tracks and includes land of such villages
which are close to the site of railway tracks;
(b) ‘‘Authority’’ means the National Authority for Rehabilitation and Welfare
of Persons Living around Railway Tracks established under section 3; and
(c) ‘‘prescribed’’ means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification, in the Official Gazette,
establish an authority to be known as the National Authority for Rehabilitation and
Welfare of Persons Living around Railway Tracks for carrying out the purposes of
this Act.
(2) The Authority shall consist of,—
(a) the Union Minister of Railways — Chairperson, ex-officio;
(b) twenty-eight members representing each of the States to be nominated
by the Central Government in consultation with the concerned State
Governments;
(c) twelve members representing the persons living around railway tracks
for a period of not less than ten years, to be appointed by the Central Government
in such manner as may be prescribed;
(3) The headquarters of the Authority shall be at New Delhi.
(4) The Authority shall establish its offices in the capital city of every State and
Union territory.
(5) The Central Government shall provide such number of officers and other
employees to the Authority, as may be necessary, for carrying out the purposes of
this Act.
(6) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of
service of members, officers and employees of the Authority shall be such as may be
prescribed.
4. (1) The Authority shall formulate a policy to provide for such measures, as
may be necessary, for the rehabilitation and welfare of persons living around railway
tracks.
(2) The Authority shall provide to the persons living around railway tracks such
facilities, free of cost, namely:—
(i) dwelling units at alternate sites, in case their land is acquired by the
Central Government;
(ii) free educational facilities to the dependent children;
(iii) drinking water and sanitation facilities; and
(iv) healthcare facilities.
5. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament
by law in this behalf, provide requisite funds to the Authority for carrying out the
purposes of this Act.
Definitions.
Functions of
the Authority.
15
20
25
30
35
40
5
10
Establishment
of the
National
Authority for
Rehabilitation
and Welfare of
Persons Living
around
Railway
Tracks.
2
Central
Government to
provide funds.

5
10
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Power to
make rules.15
20
3
6. The Authority shall prepare once in every calender year in such form and at
such time as may be prescribed, an annual report giving a true and full account of its
activities during the previous year and copies thereof shall be forwarded to the
President of India who shall cause the same to be laid before each House of Parliament.
7. Notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law
for the time being in force, the provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in
derogation of any other law for the time being in force.
8.  If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such order or give
such directions, not inconsistent with the provisions contained in this Act, as appears
to it to be necessary or expedient for the removal of such difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after two years for the
commencement of this Act.
9.  (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2)  Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if,
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive
sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both
the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have
effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be, so, however,
that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of
anything previously done under that rule.
Overriding
effect of the
Act.
Annual report.

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Several persons come to big cities in search of livelihood as scant opportunities
exist in their native villages. They are force to stay back in the big cities and most of
them have to live around the railway tracks as they do not have the means to afford
the expenses of living in big cities and they also have a burden on their shoulders to
send some money out of their earnings to their families back home. In such a scenario,
they are force to live in subhuman conditions. Due to lack of civil amenities like
latrines, they are force to defecate in the open in all types of weather, i.e., scorching
heat or rain. They do not have access to drinking water and have to travel a long
distance to fetch water for daily needs. Moreover, they have to live in deprivation of
educational facilities for their children and healthcare centres for their families. Since
ours is a welfare state, it is the duty of the Government to take care of its citizens who
are not in a position to take care of themselves. Thus, there is a dire need to protect
and rehabilitate the affected persons living around railway tracks.
Hence this Bill.
NEW DELHI; ALOK KUMAR SUMAN
18 November, 2021.
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of the National Authority for 
the rehabilitation and welfare of persons living around railway tracks. It further provides 
for salary and allowances payable to the members, officers and  employees of the 
National Authority. Clause 4 provides for certain welfare measures to the people living 
around railway tracks. Clause 5 provides for payment of funds to the Authority by the 
Central Government. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the 
Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of 
about rupees three thousand crore will be involved.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees two thousand crore is also likely 
to be involved.
5

 MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGA TED  LEGISLA TIION
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to frame rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of detail only. The delegation
of legislative power is of a normal character.
6

LOK SABHA
—————
A
BILL
to provide for establishment of an Authority for rehabilitation and welfare of
persons living around railway tracks and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto
—————
(Dr . Alok Kumar Suman, M.P.)