L0K SABHA 
CQRRI GENDA 
to 
"TH E TEXT! LE UNfJ"":iR 'L"l.K IN CE ('llil:IN G I)' T]R 0 F' tt~NJ;' GEHEN T) 
BILL, 1983 
(In be/As introduced in 10K 8abha) 
1. Page 3, line f. ,-
!Ql:. "oppoin ted" ~ "appointed n 
2. Page 3, line 16,-
" " 
.... ' ~ "ararngement" ~ "arrangement" 
3. PafP. 5, line 2,-
fiu:.. "textxile" I:.ruid "textile" 
NEW DEIHl; 

As INTRODUCED IN LOK BABKA ON 
~. .~ r 
BiD No. 118 of 1983. 
! 
nlE TEXTILE UNDERTAKINGS (TAKING OVER OF MANAGEMENT) 
BILL, 1983 
A 
BILL 
to provide lor the It/king over in the public interest of the mDnagement of the 
textile undertakings of the companies specified in the Fir~ Schedule pending 
national/sation of such undertakings and for matters connected therewith 
or incidental thereto. 
WHEREAS bv reason of mismanaJtcment of the affairs of the textHc under-
takings specified in the First Schedule,. their financial condition became wholly 
unsatisfactory even before the commencement in Jpnuary 1982 of the textile 
strike in Bombay and their financial condition has thereafter further dcterio-
5 rated; 
. AND WHEREAS cer~ain public financial instill'ltions havc advanced Jarge 
s~ms' of money to the companies owning the said undertakings with a view to 
making the said undertakings vj~lblc; 
A~ID WHEREAS further "investment of very large sums of money is neces-
sary for reorganising and rehnbilitating the said undertakings and thereby to 
JO 'pro~ect the interests of the workmen empJoyed therein and to augment the 
production and distribution at fair prices of different varieties of cloth and 
yarn so as to 9ubscrve the interests ~r the general public; 
AND WHEREAS acquisition by the Central Government of the said under.-
J5 takings is necessary to enryble it to invest such large sums of money; 

Short 
title and 
. com-
mence-
ment .. 
Defini-
tions. 
Manage-
ment of 
certain 
textile 
under-
takings 
to vest in 
the Cen-
tralGov-
~rnment. 
• 
AND WHEREAS, pending the acquisition of the said undertakings, 
expedient in the public interest to take over the management of the 
undertakings; 
it is 
said 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thiny-fourth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:-
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Textile ·Undertakings (Taking Over 
of Mauagement) Act, 1983 . 
(2) It shall be deemed to have CODle into force on the 18th day of October, J 0 
198:\. 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
• (a) "appointed. day" means the date on which this Act comes into 
force; , 
,t 
(b) "Custodian" means the person appointed under section 4 to take 15 
over the. management of the undertakings; 
(c) "notification" means a notification published in the Official 
Gazctte; .! 
(d) "textile u'ndertaking" or "the textile undertaking" means an under-
taking specified in the second column of the First Schedule; 
(e) "textile company" means a company (being a company as defined 
in the Companies Act, 1956) specified in the third column of the First 
Schedule, as owning the undertaking speci~ed in the corresponding entry 
in the second column of that Schedule; 
20 
1 of 1958. 
(I) words and expressions used herein and not defined but defined in 5 
the Companies Act, 1956, shall have the meanings respectively assigned 2 1 of 1958. 
to them in that Act. 1 ., • , 
.-' ..... J " 
, ..... ___ I 
CHAPTER 11 
, 
TAKING OVER OF TIlE MANAGEMENT OF CERTAIN.TEXTILE UNDERTAKINGS 
3. (1) On and from the appointed day, the management of all the textile . 
undertakings shall "e~t in the (~entral Government. 30 
(2) The textile undertaking shall he deemed to include all assets, rights,.lease-
holds, powers, authorities and privileges of the textile company in relation to tftc 
said textile undertak ing Hnd all. property, movablc. and immovable, including 
lands. huildil)gs. worksho[>s, projects, stores, spares, instruments, machinery, 35 
equipment, automobiles rind other vehicles, and goods under production or in 
transit, cash balances, reserve fund, investments and rooklets and all other rights 
and interests in or arising oOt of such property as were, immediately before the 
appointed day, in the ownership, possession, power or control of the tl!xtile' 
company whether within or outside India and all books of actount, re~ister" and 0 
.all other documents of whatev'cr nature relating thereto. • 4 

3 
(3) Any contract, whether express or implied, (,f other arrangement, in so 
far as it relates to the management of the business and affairs of the textile un-
dertaking and in (orce! immediately before the appointed day, or any order made 
by any court in so 'far as it relates to the'management of the business and affairs 
5 01 the textile undc{taking and. in force immediately before the appointed day 
shall be deemed to have terminated on the oppointed day. 
(4) All persons in charge of the management, including persons holding 
otlices as directors, managers or any other managerial personnel, of the textile 
company in relation to the textile undertaking, immediately before the appointcd 
10 day, shall be deemed to have vacated their offices as such on the appointed day. 
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time b~ing 
In force no person in respe<:.t of whom any contract of management or other 
arrangement is terminated by reason of the provisions contained in sub-section 
0), or who ceases to hold any office by reason of the provL"ions contained in 
15 ~ub-section (4), shall be entitled to claim any compensation for the premature 
telmination of the contract of management or other ararngement or for the Joss 
of office, as the case may' be. • 
(6) Notwithstanding any judgment, decree or orde! of any court, tribunal 
Or . other authority or anything contained in any other law (other than this 
20 Act) for the time being in force, every receiver or other person in whose 
. possession or custody or under whose control the textile undertaking or any part 
thereof may be immediately before the appointed day, sball, on the commence~ 
ment of this Act, deliver the possession of the said undertaking or such 
part thereof, as the case may be, to the Custodian, or where no Custodian has 
25 been appointed, to such other person as the Centr~l Government may direct. 
(7) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that any liability incurred 
by a textile company in relation to the textile undertaking before the appointed 
day shall be' enforceable against the concerned textile company and not against . 
the Central Government or the Custodian. 
so 4. (1) The Central Government may, as soon as it is convenient administra-
tively so to do, appoint any person or body of persons (including a Government 
company, whether in existence at the commencement of this Act or incor-
porated thereafter) as a Custodian of the textile' undertaking for the purpose of 
c8uying on the management of such undertaking and the Custodian so appointed 
35 shall carry on the management of the textile u.ndertaking for and on behalf of the 
Central Government. 
(2) On the appointment of a Custodian under sub-section (1), the manage-
ment of the textile undertaking shall vest in such Custodian and all persons in 
<.:harge of the management of such undertaking immediately before such appoint-
40 luent shall cease to be in charge of such management and shall be bound to deliver 
such management to the Custodian. 
(3) The Central Government may, by notification, authorise the Custodian 
to appoint any person (including a Governmeftt company, whether in existence 
at the commencement of this Act or incorporated thereafter) as the Additional 
45 Custodian of the textile undertaking. 
(4) The Additional Custodian shall assist the Custodian in the exercise of 
his or its powers and duties under this Act and shall function under the 
direction, supervision and control of the Custodian; and the Custodian may 
Custodian 
of the 
textile 
under-
takings. 

4 
dclt:gate to the Additional Custodian all or such of his or its powers as be or 
it nUlY think fit. 
(5) Subject to any general or special direction given or condition imposed 
. by the Custodian, any person authorised by· the Custodian to exercise any 
power may ex.ercise that power in the same manner and with the same effect 5 
as if it had been conferred on that person directly by this Act and not by way 
of authorisation. 
(6) The Central Government may iSSUe sucb directions (including direc-
tions . as to initiating, defending or continuing any legal pt'oceedings before any 
court, tribunal or other authority) to the Custodian as to his or its powers 10 
and du~ies 'as tbI? Ccntral Government deems to be desirable in the circum-
stances of the case, and the Custodian may also apply to the Central Govern-
merit at aily time for instructions as to the manner in which he or it shall 
conduct the managemeat of the textile undertaking or in relation to any other 
matter arising in the course of sucb management. 15 
(7) Subject to the other provisions of this Act and the control of 
the Central Government, ~he Custodian shall be entitled, notwithstanding any-
tiling contained .in the . Companies Act, 1956, to exercise aU the powers, in 1 of 1" 
rl!lation to the textile undertaking, of the Board of Directors of the textile 
company (including the power to dispose of any properties or assets of tbe 20 
textile company) whether such powers are derived from the Com.p8Dies Act, 
1956, or from the memorandum. and articles of association of the concerned 
textile company or from any other source. 
(8) Every person having possession, custody or conl!ol of ·any property 
forming part of the ~xtile undertaking shall deliver forthwith such property 
to the Custodian or to any officer or other employee .. of the Oeatr81 ~emment 25 
or the CUstodian, as may be authorised by the Central Gevemmeat or tbe 
Custodian in this behalf: 
(9) Any pers~ who, on the appointed day, has in bis posseSllion or UDder 
his control any boob,· papers or other documents relating to the textile under- 3~ 
taking the management of which has vested in tbe Ceotral Government under 
this Act, sball, notwitbstanding anything contained in any other law 
for the time being in force, be liable to acco~ for me books, pape1'8 and other 
documents (including sucb minutes. books, cheque boob, JetteR, memoranda, 
notes or otber communications) to the Custodian anc:It shall deliver them up to 35 
the Custodian or to any such person (being an officer or other employee of· the 
Central Government or the Custodian) as may be authorised by the Central 
Government CJC the Custodian in this behalf. 
(10) Every person in charge of the management of any textile undertakina 
immediately before the appointed day shall, witbin ten days from that day or 40 
within sucb further period as the Central Government may allow in this behalf, 
furnish to the Custodian a complete inventory of aU the properties and assets 
(including particulars of book debts and investments and belongings) forming 
part of the undertaking immediately before the appointed day and of all the 
liabilities and obligations of·the textile company in relation to the under- 45 
taking, subsisting immediately before that day, and also of all agree-
ments entered into by such textile company in relation to the under-
taking and in force immediately befpre that day. 

5 
(11) The Custodian aDd the Addi.tional Custodian shall receive from the 
tunus of the texlxile undertakings such remuneration as the Central Government 
may fix. 
s. (l) Every textile compouy shall be given by tile ee....... GoVenillle1K 
5 a • ..aoaot, ill calli, IIIId .. *J'8te spedhd .. sub sedlDa (2), fer tile vest. 
inti in it, under sectioa 3, of. tile _ .... of die .. ~ 01 
the company. 
(1) For every month during which the management of the textile under-
takiog remains vested in the Central Government un~er this Act, the amount, 
10 referred to in sub-section (1), shall be computed-
15 
lZO 
(;) for a spinning unit, at the rate of fifly paise per 1,000 spindles 
or any part thereof; 
(ii) for a weaving unit, at the rate of one rupee per 100 looms or 
any part thereof;. 
(iii) for a composite unit with or: witilout dye-house at the rate o~ 
. fifty paise per 1,000 spindles or any part thereof plus one rupee per 100 .. 
looms plus one paisa per 10,000 metres of cloth processed in the dye-
hOUSe based on the average monthly J>roduction during the period of three 
years immediately preceding the apporn.ted day; -
(iv) for a wholly processing unit (being a unit which does not have 
any spindle. or loom),· oile paisa per one thousand square metres or any 
part Utereof of the average of the total quantity of textiles pcooessed 
during the period of ~cc years immediately preceding the appointed day 
in such uniL 
CHAPTER III 
POWER TO PROVIDE RELIEF TO THE TEXTILE UNDERTAKINGS 
6. (1) The Central Government may, if satisfied,' in relation to any of the 
textile undertakings or any ~ thereof, the manaje8lent of which bas vested! 
ID it under this Act, that i~ is necessary so to do in the interests of the 
30 general .publi~ with a view to preventing any fall in the volume of production 
of such undertaking, by notification, declare that-
S5 
.5 
(a) all or any of the enactments specified in the Second Scpedule 
shall not apply or shall apply with such adaptations, whether by way of 
modificatioD, addition or omisaion (which does not, however, affect' the 
policy of the said enactments) to s~h undertaking as may be specified! 
in such notification, or 
(b) the operation of all or any of the contracts, assurances of 
:property, agreements, settlements, awards, standing orders or other instru-
ments in force (to which such textile undertaking or the textile c0m-
pany owning such undertaking is a partY or which may be applicable to 
such textile undertaking or textile company) immediately before the 
date of issue of the notification shall remain suspended or that aU or any 
of the rights, privileges, obligations and liabilities accruing or arising 
thereunder before the said date, shall remain suspended or shall be en-
forceable subject to such adaptations and in such . manner as may be 
specified in tbe notification. 
Payment 
of 
amount. 
Power 
ot the 
Central 
Govern-
mentto 
makecer-
tain dec-
larati~ 
in rela-
tion to 
certain .. '. 
textile" .. 
under-
takin,.. 

Act to 
have 
over-
ridiDa 
effect. 
• 
Applica-
tion of' 
Act 1 of 
1 ... 
6 
. 
(2) The notification made under sub-section (1) shall remain in force,· in tho 
first instance, for a period of one year but the duration of such notification may 
be extended from time to time by a further notification by a period not exceeding 
one year at a ~me: . 
Provided that no such notification sball, in any case, remain in force after 5 
the expiry of three years from the c~mencement of this Act. 
(3) Any notification made under sub-section (1) shall have effect n9jwitb-
standing anything to the contrary contained in any other law, agreement or 
instrument or any decree or order of a coun, tribunal, officer or other authority 
or in any submission, settlement or standing order. 10 
. 
( 4) Where by virtue of a notification under clause (b) of sub-section (1), 
any right, privilege, obligation or liability remains suspendod or is enforceable 
subject to the adaptations and in the manner specified in the ndtificati·on,. all 
proceedings'relating thereto pending bcfo.re any court, tribunal, officer or other 
authority shall .accordingly remain stayed or be subject to such adaptations, as l!i 
the case may be; so however, on the notification ceasing to' have effect-
(a) such right, privilege, obligation or liability shall be enforceable as 
if the notification had never been made; . 
• (b) any proceeding so remaining staYed shall be proceeded with sub-
ject to the provisions of any law which may be then in force, from the stage 211 
which had been reached when the· proceeding became stayed. . 
(5)' In computing the period of limitation for the enforcement of any right, 
privilege, obligation or liability referred to in clause (b) of sub-section (1), the 
period during which, it or the remedy fat the enforcement thereof remained sus-
pended shall ~ excluded. • 25 
CHAPTER IV 
M1SCELLANEOUS 
7. The provisions of this Act or any notification, order or rule made 
thereunder shall have effect notwjthstandinl' anything inconsistent therewith con-
tained in any law (other than this Act) or in any instrument having effect by 3(1 
virtue of any law other than this· Act or in any 4ecrce or order of any court .. 
8. (1) So long as ,the management of the textile undertaking of a textile 
comp~ remains vested in the Central Government under this 'Act, notwith-
standing anything contained in the Companies Act, 1956 or in the memo-
randum or articles of association of such company,-. 35 
(a) it shall not be lawful for the shareholders of the textile company 
or any other person to nominate or appoint any person to be a Director of 
such textile company in relation to such undertaking; 
(b) no resolution affecting (whether directly or indirectly) such un-
dertaking which is passed at any meeting of the shareholders of the textile 40 
company on: or after the appointed day shalt be given effect to unless ap-
proved by the Central Government; 
(e) no proceeding for the windirig up of the' textile company or for: 
the appointment of a liquidator or re'ceiver in respect thereof shall lie in 
any court except with the consent of the Central Government. 45 

1 of 1956. 
7 ". 
(2) ~u~ject to the provISIons contained in sub-section (1), and to tbe 
othe~ ~rovJslons. c~nt~incd in this Act and subject to such othcr exceptions,. 
r~9tnctlOns and lImItatIOns, if any, as the Central Government may by notifica-
tIOn, speci~y in this behalf, the Companies' Act, 1956, shall conti~ue to apply 
5 to the textile compaIties in the same manner as it applied thereto before tbe 
appointed day. 
9.' In computing the period of limitation prescribed by any law for the 
time being in 'force for any suit or application against any persOn by any of the 
texti~e companies in respect of any matter arising out of any traDS~ction in 
10 relatIon to its textile undertaking, the time during which this Act remains' 
in force shall, be excluded. 
10. (1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the 
Central Government Or the Custodian or the Additional Custodian or any offi-
cer or other employee of the Central Government or the Custodian for anY'" 
15 thin, which is in gooa faith done Of intended to be done under this Act. 
(2) No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the CeB1ral Gov-
ernment or the 'Custodian or the Additional Custodian Or "any of the officers or 
other employees of the Central Government or the Custodian for any damage 
caused or likely to 'be cause" by anything which is in good faith done or in-
20 tended to be' done under this Act. 
11. (J) If the Central Government is satisfied. after such inquiry as it 
may think proper, that any contract or agreement entered into at any time 
within three years' immediately preceding the appointed day between any d. 
. the textile companies or manal:!inl! or other director of any such textile com-; 
25 pany and any other person in relation to any service, sale or supply to, or by. 
its textile undertakinlZ and in force immediately before the appointed day, has 
been entered into in bad faith. or is detrimental to the interests of the textile 
tindertaking of the concerned textile company. it may make. within one hun-
dred and eighty days· from the appointed day, an order cancelling or 
30 varying (either unconditionally or subject to such conditions as it may 
think fit to· impose) such contract or agreement and thereafter the eon-
tract or agreement shall have eft'ect accordingly: 
Provided tha't no contract or allreement shall be cancelled or varied ex:· 
cept after giving to the parties to the contract or agreement a reasonable op-
35 portunity of being heard. 
(2) Any person aggri~ved by an order made under sub-section (1) may 
make an application to the principal civil court of original juri~iction within 
the local limhs of whose jurisdiction the registered offiCe of the concerned 
textile cOI,llpany is situated ,for the variation or reversal of such order and 
40 thereupon such court may confirm, modify Or reverse such order. 
12. Any transfer of property. movable or immovable. or any delivery of 
good); made by or on behalf of an~ of the textile c?mp:lni.es· (no~ being a 
transfer or delivery made in the ordmary course of Its busmess or 10 favouf 
of a purchaser for valuable consideration and in good faith), if made within 
45 a period of six months immediately precedin!!: the appointed day. shall be 
void agaimt the Central Government or the Custodian, ~s the c;a!;e may be, 
Exclusion 
of period 
of opera-
tion of 
this Act 
from 
limita-
tion. 
Protection 
of action 
taken in 
good 
faith. 
Contracts, 
etc., in 
bad faith 
maybe 
cancelled 
or varied. 
Avoid-
ance of 
voluntary 
trans-
fers. 

Powertu 
terminate 
contracbl 
of em-
~ ployment. 
P~na1tiea. 
Offences 
})yearn-
pames. 
8 
13. If the Custodian is of opinion that any contract of employment entered 
into by any textile company Or managing or other director of the company 
in relation ,to its textile undertaking at any time before; 'the appointed day is 
unduly onerous, hc or it may, by. giving to the employee one month's notice 
in writing or salary or wages ,for one month in lieu thereof, terminate such 5 
contract of employment. 
14. (1) Any person, who-
(a) having' in his possession or custody or under his control any 
property fonning part of any of the textile undertakings, wrongfuny 
withholds such property from the Custodian or any person authorised 10 
under this Act, or 
(b) wrongfully obtains possession of any such property, or 
• 
(c) wilfully retains any property forming part of such textile under-
taking or removes or destroys it, Or 
(d) wilfully withholds from~ or fails to deliver to. the Custodian or· 15 
any perSon authorised Wldcr this Act, any books, papers or other 
documents relating to such textile undertaking which may be in his pos-
session, power or custody or under his control, or ' . 
(e) fails, without any reasonable eXcuse, to furnish information ~ 
particulars as provided in section 4. 
shall be· punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two 
years, or with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupe'es. Or with both. 
(2) No court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable under this 
section except with the prevfous sanction of the Central Government or an 
Sto 
officer authorige~ by that Government in this behalf. 25 
IS. (1) Where an offence under this Act has been comiriitted by a 
company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was in 
charge of, and wa'l responsible to, the company for the conduct of the busi-
ness of the company 8!; well as the company, shall be deemed to be 
guilty of the offence and shall be lia'b1e to be proceeded' against and 
punished accordingly: ... 30 
. . 
provided that nothing contained in this sub1ection shall render any sucll 
person liable to any punishment, if he proves that the offence was committed 
without his knowledge and tha~ he had exercised all due diligence to prevent 
the commission of' such offence. 
(2) Notwithstanding lIl)1hing contained in sub-section (1). where an offen- 35 
ce under this Act has been .committed by a company and it is pro\(edthatthe 
offence has been committed with the consent or connivance of. or is attributable 
'to, any neglect on the part of any director, manager, secretary or other (Jfticer 
of the company, such directOr, manager, lIecretary or Qtber oftice.r shatt be 
deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against 
and punished accordingly. 40 
Explanmion.-For'the purposes of this ~ection.-
(a) "company" means. any body corporate and includes a firm or 
other association of individuals; and 
(b) "director". in rel~tlOJ1 to a finn! means a partner in the ftrm. 45 

.. 
10 of 1983. 
9 
16. (J). The Central ~Cftt mar, by notification, 
carrying out the provisions of this Act. 
make: rules for Power to 
make 
rules. 
(2) Every rule made by the Centra! Government under this Act shall 
be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament 
5 while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised! 
in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, befOre the expiry 
of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions 
aforesaid. both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both 
Heuses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have 
10 t"fl'C(.1 only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, how-
ever, that any such modification or annulment shalt be without prejudice to the 
validity of anything previously done' under that rule. 
15 
17. (J) The Textile Undertakings 
nance, t 983. is hereby repealed. 
(Taking Over of Management) Ordi-
(2) Notwithstandin~ ~uch repeal. anything done or any action taken 
under the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or taken under 
the corresponding provisions of this Act. 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
[St't' section 2 (d) and (t')J 
- ---'--"-"--.- _. __ .. _._._._._------ - ----
I Elnll:mtont' Sninnin..; nn.' 
Wl"avirut Mill •• Elphinslolw ~ 
Roa". Bomb:l)". 
Nam" or th .. ow~r 
Th.. Ell'hinstonl' SpInning aJl(l \\'I'pv:,,1!' ]I.,rWr ron. 
Vd .. KalWUli f:luamberll. 3!1. Ra~ii Dhai Kamani 
l\hrg. B'lmbaY·:18. • 
2.1 !I P:nlay MiII~. lO/IT. Dr. S.S .• 
R:to Roacl. B'lmbar· 
TI... Finlay Mills I.Ic1.. Cbartc,..d Bank B'lilrling. 
Port. B'lIIlb.'l.)"·23' 
:1 
30 4 
5 
6 
35 
7 
40 8 
9 
4.1) If) 
II 
50 
III 
13 
('.olcl Mflh'l" Mills, D,d<\!I8b,.b TI,,,, O ... 1d Mflhur Mills 1.1" .• Cbarlt'r"d Bank Build· 
Pb'\lke R'l.'l.cl. Dach!', B')mbay.· illg'. Port, BombaY·!!'3· 
lam M"nufactll"i!Ul' Milb, 
Lalb:lug. Pa~I. B'lmbay. 
Kohinoor Mills (~n. I). 
Nftitraum CrO!ls R'll\cl. D:t.hr. 
Bomba~·. • 
lCohinoor Mills (NO.2). • 
Naijt&um CrQll.~ Roan. DacJmr, 
Bombay. 
1C0hinoor Mills (No. <t), J.~cly '. 
.Tam'lhl"c!ii Roa". D"1chr: 
B'lmbay. • 
~"w City of Rombny Mllnu· 
faetltring Milll, G~. Tuka.'am ' 
B. Kadam Marg. Btlmbay. 
Poclar Mml, N.M. JOIhi 
Marg, Bomba}'. . 
Po(lar Mill, (Prncl'~S Hnll~r). 
Ganl)llt Rao Kadam Marg. 
Bombay .. ~ 
~h~ Madhu~uc\an Mitl~. Pmn· 
d\trang' Blldhkar Marg. 
Bombay. 
Sh.-f'.e Sitaram M:l\s. ~.M. 
JOIhi Marg. Jhmbay. 
Tata Mitis. Dr. i\mbec\kar 
Road, D'.dar, Bombay. 
Th" .Tam. M"ntuacturinlt 'r:.,. I.>cl.. r.'dbaug. PaI'f'I, 
B')mmY·12. 
TIl" K'll,i'n'lr Mills C.,. r.'rI .• K,itli,.k HOIl'''. Charan· 
.iit Rai Marg (HOml' Strt'l't). FOrt. Bomba}·.I. 
The Kohinoor MiII~ Co. I.td .. K;u:,.k Homt'. Charan-
jit Rai Marg (Hom- Stl'l"l"I). Port. BombaY-I: 
~ Kohinoor Mill, Co. I.hl.. Killiclr HomC' Clutran-
Jit Rai Marg (Horne St~t). Fort. BombaY-I • 
Th,. N,.w City or Bombav ManUrlO.cturinJ\' Ce>. Ltd. 
63. Tukaram Bhisaji Kadam Path, BombaY·33· 
~ Poctar MiJI, Ltc! .. Portar Chamh"r~, S),('cl Abdulla 
Brelvi R')8d. Fort, B'Jmbayo I. 
Th~ Podar MiII~ T.td .• Ptldl'r Chl!mb«-r~. S}T.l Abdulla 
Brclvi Road, Fort. Bombay·1. 
Sh.-r.e Mllclhu.udan Mills I.!(!.. 31. Chowringhec 
Rna". Calcutta-I/}. 
Sill"'''' Silaram Mills I.lc1.. X. ~{. Joshi Marg. 
B'JmbaY'I I. 
Th~ Tata Mills J.td .• Bomhw Hou.~. 114, Homi Mody 
Street, Fort. BombaY·2!2. 
.----------------------
Repeal 
and 
• saving. 

.. 
10 
THE SECOND SCHEDULB 
( See section 6 ) 
1. The Industrial Employment (Standing Ordc"rs) Act, 1946. 
2. The Industrial Disputes Act, 1947. 
3. Thc Minimum Wages Act, 1948. 
20 of 1948 
14 Of 1947. 
11 of 1848. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Textile Undertakings (Taking Over of Management) Ordinance, 
1983 was promulgated by the President on 18th October, 1983 to vest in 
the Central Government the management of thirteen textile undertak-
ings, pending their nationalisation. By reason of mismanagement of 
the affairs of these undertakings, their financial condition which 
became wholly unsatisfactory even before the commencement in 
January, 1982 of the textile strike in Bombay further deteriorated 
thereafter. Certain public financial institutions had, with a view to 
making the said undertakings viable, advanced large sums of money t.o 
the companies owning these undertakings. Further investment of very 
large sums of money was found to be necessary for reorganising and 
rehabilitating the said undertakings and thereby to protect the interests 
of the workmen employed therein and ,to augment the producti'Jn and 
distribution at fair prices of different varieties of cloth and yarn so as to 
subserve the interests of the general public. Government considered 
the nationalisation of the said undertakings to be necessary to enable it 
to ir.vest such large sums of money and safeguard other interests. Once 
the basic decision of nationalisation was taken, a genuine apprehension 
arOSe in Government's mind that unless the management of the COD-
cerned undertakings was taken over on immediate basis, there might 
be large iicale frittering away of assets which would be detrimental to 
the public interest. It thus became urgently necessary for Government 
to take over management of the undertakings in the public interest 
As Parliament was not in session at that time and every day~s delay 
could have had serious repercussions, the afore-mentioned Ordinance 
w~ promulgated. 
2. The Bill seeks to replace the said Ordinance. 
NE.W DE.LHI; 
The 12th November, 1983. 
VISHWANATH PRATAP SINGH. 
¥ 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF 
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. 7 (5) 183-CP, dated the 15th No~mber, 1983 from 
Shri Vishwanath Pratap Singh, Minister of Commerce ,to the SecretarY, 
Lok Sabha.] 
The President having been informed of the subject matter of the 
Textile Undertakings (Taking ,Over of Management) Bill, 1983, recom-
mends under clause (1) of article 117 of the Constitution of India, the 
introduction of the said Bill in Lok' Sabha and also recommends under 
clause (3) of article 117, the consideration of the Bill by Lok Sabha. 
11 

trhcfer the Textile trildettakih~ (Tilklnga\r~" of Manal*tnent) Bill, 
l~;powerS are stnight by the' Central Gov.enunent foreorttlnl.'dnl to 
mit\"ate 13 te)rtn~ un"der'tatdrtgs the trr8l'ia'g'etnettt of WMdi -;JIIfs taken oVC'r 
uitder" tlre~le ~ntt~ngs (1'atihg' over of Martagt!tAent) 
Otdina'nce; 1983; pendtng their nathmaltsatfon. 
2. Clause 5 of the Bill provides for the owner of every textile 'UDder-
taking, being, given by the Central Government an amount in cash, for 
the, vesting in it the management of the tex.tile undertaking cOllcemecl. 
However, the amount so payable is not lik-ely. to' exceed RI. "30.000 pel' 
annum. 
~i; Money will haV'@ tb' be provided to theE mills fot their working 
capital as wel1 as tnodernisation. The ir!l1tIediate, r8q'l1irernent 01. funds 
for working capital for these mills bas been e'stimated at' about Rs. 15 
crares but the requirements under thisl'ieBd'in respect of thesubsequem 
phas~s of running the "units w~ibe kno~ only after watebtng the actual 
tempo of prod-action in the undertakings as and 'When it picks up. As 
regards . the modemJsation reqniIimlents, it has been estimated that the 
fwtds required for not only repl~nt or r'e1'iovation of existing ma· 
chinery, etc., but alSo adoption of mon!' adva1'lced t'eehnGton in spinning, 
weaving and processing will tie about Its. 148 ctore spread oVel"a pertod 
of four years commencing front 1984-8'S: 
4: As mentioned in the long title of the Bill; the managewumt of! 
these ~lls is to be taken fiver peiI'IttIng thetr liattoftaUsaUen. '!'lie 
amounts to be so paid have yet to be assessed. 
5. The mills whose ma-nllgemellt has been taken Over reqUire fnodt"r-
nisation befe-re ~y can become financially viable. During the initial 
period till the modernisation programme is completed, the Uild~rtak1ngs 
are liable to incur losses, which may have to be recouped by tlie" GOVern,;. 
ment. The exact quantum of losses eaDftOt be estimated at pn!Sent. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 16 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make 
rules to carry O'ut the provisions of the Bill. Such power would enable 
the Centrr-t Government to ~ake rules with regard to matters at pro-
cedure and administrative detail, wAieh is not practicable to provide for 
in the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of 
a normal character. 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the taking over in the public interest ot the JIl8IIaIeIIleIlt 
ot the textile undertaldnp ot the companies lpecifled In the Firat 
Schedule pending nationalisation of .ueh undertakinp· and for 
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
(Shn VuhwGuth l'nltap Smgh, 
.IIiniBter of Comtrraere«) 