;

CLAUSES

a No. 118-F of 1967

BIHAR AND UTTAR PRADESH (ALTERATION
OF BOUNDARIES) BILL, 1968

ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES

PART I
PRELIMINARY
Short title.
Definitions.
PART IT

TRANSFER OF TERRITORIES
Transfer of territories.
Amendment of First Schedule to the Constitution.
PART पा
REPRESENTATION IN THE LEGISLATURES
Construction of Delimitation Orders.
Provision as to sitting members.
PART IV
Hicu Courts

Extension of jurisdiction of, and transfer of proceedings to,
High Court at Patna.

Extension of jurisdiction of, and transfer of proceedings to,
High Court at Allahabad.

Right to appear in any proceedings transferred under sec-
tion 7 or section 8.

Interpretation. pet

PART V ;

AUTHORISATION OF EXPENDITURE

Appropriation of moneys for expenditure in transferred
Tritories under existing appropriation Acts.

Reports relating to accounts of Bihar and Uttar Pradesh

ay
(i

2.4


CLAUSES
13.
14.
15.
16.
as
18.
19.
20.
21५
22.
23.

24.

25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.

Gi)
PART VI
AppoRTIONMENT OF AgseTS AND LIABILITIES

Land and goods.

Arrears of taxes.

Right to recover Joans and advances.

Refund of taxes collected in excess.

Deposits.

Contracts.

Liability in respect. of actionable wrong:

Liability as guarantor of co-operative societies.

Ttems in suspense.

Apportionment of assets or liabilities by agreement.

Power of Central Government to order allocation or adjust-
ment in certain cases.

Expenditure to be charged on the Consolidated Fund.

PART VII
LEGAL AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

State Financial Corporations and State Electricity Boards.

Territorial extent of laws.

Power to adapt laws.

Power to construe laws.

Legal proceedings.

Transfer of pending proceedings.

Right of pleaders to practise in certain courts.

Construction of boundary pillars, etc.

Validity of demarcation done before commencement of Act

Effect of provisions inconsistent with other laws.

Power to remove difficulties.

Power to make rules.

THE SCHEDULE.


Bill No. 118-F of 1967

THE BIHAR AND UTTAR PRADESH J (ALTERATION
OF BOUNDARIES) BILL, 1968
(As PASSED BY THE HousEs OF PARLIAMENT)

A
BILL

ation of boundaries ०
and for matters connected t.

the Nineteenth Year of the

to provide for the alter f the States of
herewith.

Bihar and Uttar Prades.

Bg it enacted by Parliament in
Republic of India as follows:—

PART I
PRELIMINARY
alled the Bihar and Uttar Pradesh (Altera- Short-
title.

1, This Act may be ९;

tion of Boundaries) Act, 1968.
otherwise requires;— Defini-

the day which the Central tions.
the Official Gazette,

4

2. In this Act, unless the context
means

(a) “appointed day”
tification in

Government may, by 70
appoint;

———— —Ss—sY-7\Y



2 : om

(b) “assembly constituency”, “council constituency” anq
“parliamentary constituency” have the same meanings ag in the

43 of 1950, Representation of the People Act, 1950;

(c) “deep stream”, in relation to the river Ganga or the
river Ghaghra, means the deep stream thereof as verified and
agreed upon by the State Governments of Bihar and Uttar Pras
desh after the 30th day of September of the year preceding the
year in which the appointed day falls and before the 1st day

of January of the year in which the appointed day falls and
in default of agreement between the State Governments, ag
determined by such authority as may

be specified by the Cen-
tral Government;

(d) “fixed boundary”
under the provisions of s|
to the river Ganga or th

means the boundary line demarcated
ub-section (2) of section 3 in relation
e river Ghaghra, as the case may be;

(e) “law” includes any enactment, ordinance, regulation,
order, bye-law, Tule, scheme, notification
having the force

or other instrument
of law in the whole or in any part of the State
of Bihar or Uttar Pradesh;

(f) “notified order” means an order published in the Ofi-
cial Gazette;

(9) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under
this Act;

(h) “sitting member”, in relation to either House of Parlia-
ment or of the Legislature

mediately before the appointed d.

@ “transferreg territories”

= amd ze ee to the State of Bihar, the territories
‘ansferr: y this Act from that Stat of

Uttar Prades ere ate to the State

PART II
TRANSFER OF TERRITORIES
As from the appointed day, —

(०) there shal} be added to the State of Bihar—

of terzi- 3. (1)
tories,


3

(i) all the territories of Ballia district of the State of
Uttar Pradesh lying between the fixed boundary and the
deep stream of the river Ghaghra, and

(ii) all the territories of tha

t district lying between the
fixed boundary and the deep str

eam of the river Ganga,
and the said territories shall thereu

pon cease to form part of
the State of Uttar Pradesh; and

(b) there shall be added to the State of Uttar Pradesh—

(i) all the territories of Saran district of the State of
Bihar lying between the fixed boundary and the deep stream
of the river Ghaghra, and

(it) all the territories of Shahabad district of the State

of Bihar lying between the fixed boundary and the deep
stream of the river Ganga,

and the said territories shall thereu

pon cease to form part of the
State of Bihar.

(2) The fixed boundary in relation to each of the rivers Ganga
and Ghaghra shall be demarcated by an authority appointed in this
behalf by the Central Government so as to be generally in confor-

mity with the boundary line described in the Schedule in relation
to that river:

Provided that in the process of such demarcation, the said autho-
rity shall have power to rationalise to the extent considered neces-
Sary by him, the boundary alignment between the high banks of

the river Ganga or the river Ghaghra. as the case may be, and in
Particular shall try—

(a) to ensure, as far as possible. the stability of the boun-
dary pillars and the recognition of the boundary alignment both
during the dry and flood seasons; and

__ (0) to avoid, as far as possible, the splitting up of the exist-
Mg abadis.

(3) For the purposes of such demarcation,—

1... (00 the decision of the said authority on 08008 Pr
ing to the interpretation of any part of the description ० है
boundary given in the Schedule (including the Soe
of the relevant record referred to in the Explanatory Note to the
Schedule) Shall be final;

(७) the Said authority shall have power to determine the

10४0० of the points at which the boundary pillars shall be



Amend-
ment of
First
Schedule
to the
Constitu.
tion,

4

constructed and to specify the State Government which shal]
be responsible for the construction and maintenance of the
boundary pillars at such points according to such Specifications
as that authority may indicate (the pillars of the same specifi.
cations being apportioned, as far as practicable equally between
the two State Governments), the decision of the said authority
in regard to these matters being final;

(c) it shall be lawful for the said authority and for any
Person specified by such authority to enter upon and survey
any area in the vicinity of the boundary line and to do all other
acts as may be necessary.

(4) The authority referred to in sub

-section (2) shall also prepare
a map of the transferred territories sh

owing—

(a) the deep stream of the river Ghaghra or the river Ganga,
as the case may be, and the fixed boundary in relation to that
६ ३५-५४ अल

(b) the names and boundaries of the villages in the trans-
ferred territories, as indicated by the State Government having
Jurisdiction over the territories before their transfer, with re-
ference to the revenue records of that Government in force
immediately before the Preparation of such map,

and forward such map to the Central Government who shall cause
it to be published in the transferred territories in such manner as
it thinks fit.

(5) As from the appointed day, the State Government of Bihar
or Uttar Pradesh shall, by order in the Official Gazette, provide for
the administration of the territories transferred to that State under
sub-section (1) by including them or any part of them in such dis-

trict, sub-division, police-station or other administrative unit as may
be specified in the order.

4. As from the appointed day, in the First Schedule to the Con
stitution, under the heading “I. THE STATES”

4 nt
(a) for the entry against “3. Bihar’, the following sh@
be substituted, namely: —

“The territories which immediately before the commen
cement of this Constitution were either comprised me
Province of Bihar or were being administered as ee
formed part of that Province and the territories SP Bihat

in clause (@) of sub-section (1) of section 3 of the


5
and Uttar Pradesh (Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1968,
but excluding the territories specified in sub-section (1) of
section 3 of the Bihar and West Bengal (Transfer of Terri-
tories) Act, 1956, and the territories specified in clause (b)
of sub-section (7) of section 3 of the first mentioned Act.”;

(0) for the entry against “13. Uttar Pradesh”, the follow-

ing shall be substituted, namely: —

“The territories which immediately before the com-
mencement of this Constitution were either comprised in
the Province known as the United Provinces or were being
administered as if they formed part of that Province and
the territories specified in clause (b) of sub-section (1) of
section 3 of the Bihar and Uttar Pradesh (Alteration of
Boundaries) Act, 1968, but excluding the territories speci-
fied in clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 3 of that

Act.”_
PART III

REPRESENTATION IN THE LEGISLATURES
any reference in any order relat- Construc-

assembly con- tion of

5. As from the appointed day,
Delimita-

ing to delimitation of parliamentary constituencies,
Stituencies or council constituencies— tion

Orders.
(a) (i) to the State of Bihar, shall be construed as includ- =
ing the territories transferred to that State from the State of
Uttar Pradesh under clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 3,
but excluding the territories transferred from the State of Bihar
to the State of Uttar Pradesh under clause (b) of that sub-
section;

(ii) to any district, sub-division, police-station or other
administrative unit in the State of Bihar, shall be construed as
including that part of the territories, if any, transferred to that
State, which is included in that district, sub-division, police-
Station or other administrative unit by order made under sub-
Section (5) of section 3;

_ _ (b) 6) to the State of Uttar Pradesh, shall be construed as
sliding the territories transferred to that State from the
ate of Bihar under clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 3,
at excluding the territories transferred from the State of
ar Pradesh to the State of Bihar under clause (a) of that
*ub-section;


Provision
as to
sitting
membere

Extension
of juris-
diction of,
and trans-
fer of
proceed.
ings to,
High
Court at
Patna,

6

(i) to any district, sub-division, police-station or other ad.
ministrative unit in the State of Uttar Pradesh, shall be con.
strued as including that part of the territories, if any, tr; 4
red to that State, which is included in that district, sub-division,
police-station or other administrative unit by order made under
sub-section (5) of section 3.

6. (1) Every sitting member of the House of the People represen.
ting any parliamentary constituency the extent of which has been
altered by virtue of the provisions of this Act shall, notwithstanding
such alteration, be deemed, as from the appointed day, to have been
elected to that House by that constituency as so altered,

(2) Every sitting member of the Legislative Assembly of the
State of Bihar or Uttar Pradesh representing any assembly consti-
tuency the extent of which has been altered by virtue of the provi-
sions of this Act shall, notwithstanding such alteration, be deemed,
as from the appointed day, to have been elected to the said Legis-
lative Assembly by that co

mstituency as so altered,
(3) Every sitting member of the Legislative Council of Bihar or
Uttar Pradesh representing any council constituency the extent of

which has been altered by virtue of the provisions of this Act, shall,

notwithstanding such alteration, be deemed, as from the appointed
day, to have been elected to the

said Legislative Council by that con-
Stituency as so altered.

PART IV

Hicu Courts
- (7) Except as hereinafter provided—

(a) the jurisdiction of the High Court at Patna shall, as
from the appointed day, extend to the territories transferred by
this Act from the State of Uttar Pradesh to the State of Bihar;
and

(b) the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad _ shall, 8४
from that day, have no jurisdiction in respect of the said tervl
tories,

(2) Such proceedings pending in the High Court of Judicature
at Allahabad immediately before the appointed day as are certified
by the Chief Justice of that High Court, having regard to the place
of accrual of the cause of action and other circumstances, to be कर
ceedings which ought to be heard and decided by the High ९०
at Patna shall, as 90900 as may be after such certification, be transfert
ed to the High Court at Patna.



“i

(3) Notwithstanding anything Contained in sub-sectiong (/) and
(2), but save as hereinafter provided, the High Court of Judicature
at Allahabad shall have, and the High Court at Patna shall not have
jurisdiction to entertain, hear or dispose of appeals, applications for
leave to appeal to the Supreme Court, applications for review and
other proceedings, where any such Proceedings seek any relief in
respect of any order Passed by the High Court of Judicature at
Allahabad before the appointed day:

Provided that if, after such proceedings have been entertained
by the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad, it appears to the
Chief Justice of that High Court that they ought to be transferred
to the High Court at Patna, he shall order that they shall be so
transferred and such proceedings shall thereupon be transferred
accordingly,

(4) Any order made by the High Court of Judicature at
Allahabad—

(a) before the appointed day in any proceedings transferred
to the High Court at Patna by virtue of sub-section (2), or

(9) in any Proceedings with respect to which the High
Court of Judicature at Allahabad retains jurisdiction by virtue

of sub-section (3),

“shall, for all purposes, have effect not only as an order of the High
Court of Judicature at Allahabad, but also as an order made by the
High Court at Patna.

(5) Subject to any rule made or direction given by the High
Court ४६ Patna, any such person who immediately before the appoint-
ed day is an advocate entitled to practise in the High Cour! of Judi-
cature at Allahabad as may be specified in this behalf by the Chief
Justice of the High Court at Patna having regard to the transfer of
territories from the State of Uttar Pradesh to the State of Bihar, shall
be recognised as an advocate entitled to practise in the High Court at
Patna.

8. (1) Except as hereinafter provided—

(०) the jurisdiction of the High Court of मम
Allahabad shall, as from the appointed day, extend tg ba the
tories transferred by this Act from the State of Bihar to
State of Uttar Pradesh; and

at

(b) the High Court at Patna shall, as from that day, have no
Jurisdiction in respect of the said territories.

Extension
of juris-
diction of,
and trans-
fer of
proceed-
ings to,
High
Court at

Allahabad,


8

in the High Court at Patna immé-
as are certified by the Chief Justice
of that High Court, having regard to the place of accrual of the cause
of action and other circumstances, to be proceedings which ought to
be heard and decided by the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad
shall, as soon as may be after such certification, be transferred to the
High Court of Judicature at Allahabad.

(2) Such proceedings pending
diately before the appointed day

(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (1) and
(2), but save as hereinafter provided, the High Court at Patna shall
have, and the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad shall not have,
jurisdiction to entertain, hear or dispose of appeals, applications for
Jeave to appeal to the Supreme Court, applications for review and
other proceedings, where any such proceedings seek any relief in
respect of any order passed by the High Court at Patna before the
appointed, day:

Provided that if, after such proceedings have been entertained
by the High Court at Patna, it appears to the Chief Justice of that
High Court that they ought to be transferred to the High Court of
Judicature at Allahabad, he shall order that they shall be so trans-
ferred and such proceedings shall thereupon be transferred
accordingly.

(4) Any order made by the High Court at Patna—

(a) before the appointed day in any proceedings transferred

to the High Court of Judicature at’ Al Hehe ५
section (2), or re at’ Allahabad by’ virtue of sub

(b) in any proceedin: i F \
हू gs with respect to which the High
ourt at Patna retains jurisdiction by virtue of sub-section (3).

hi
shall, for all purposes, have effect not only as an order of the High

Court at Patna, but al
a 2] 80 as an order made by the High Court of Judi

5) Subj a
Td of ee a made or direction giyen by the High
before the appointed d ahabad, any such person who iramediatel
High Court sf Petne area ye 02808 Sntitled to practiae ७ iy
Justice of the High ae wy be Specified in this behalf by the chief
to the transfer of ter ourt of Judicature at Allahabad having 7९४४
Uttar Pradesh, pa edged from the State of Bihar to the State ९
tise in the High Court of Teta बाप aniiied ० OO
ad,



9

9. Any person who immediate :
advocate entitled to practise in रत, ता si न ae High
Court of Judicature at Allahabad and was suthenaed tae 7 ee
any Proceedings transferred under section 7 or section 8 aha ea
the right to appear in the High Court to which the proceedings h: a
been transferred, in relation to those proceedings, so

10. For the purposes of sections 7 and 8,—

हे (a) proceedings shall be deemed to be pending in the High
ourt at Patna or the High Court of Judicature at Allahahad
until that Court has disposed of all issues between the parties,
including any issue with respect to the taxation of the costs of
the proceedings and shall include appeals, applications for leave
to appeal to the Supreme Court, applications for review, petitions
for revision and petitions for writs;

(b) references to the High Court at Patna or the High Court
of Judicature at Allahabad shall be construed as including refe-
rences to a Judge or division court thereof, and references to an
order made by a court or a Judge shall ke construed as including
references to a sentence, judgment or decree passed or made by

that court or Judge.
PART V
AUTHORISATION OF EXPENDITURE

11. (1) As from the appointed day, any Act passed by the Legis-
lature of the State of Bihar or Uttar Pradesh before that day for the
appropriation of any moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of Ms
State to meet any expenditure in respect of any part of the odie
year in which the appointed day falls shall have effect also in rela-
tion to the territories transferred to that State by the provisions of
Part II and it shall be lawful for the State Government to spend any
amount in those territories out of the amount authorised by such Act

to be expended for any service in that State.
after the

(2) The Governor of Bihar or of Uttar Pradesh ey see
appointed day, authorise such expenditure from the Cons ine
Fund of the State as he deems necessary for any purpose or service
in the territories transferred to that State for a period of ua more
than six months beginning with the appointed day pending the sane
tion of such expenditure by the Legislature of the State.
fe) Auditor-General of India
ean on ah Constitution relating to

referre¢l to in clause (2) of article j i
the accwunts of the State of Bihar or Uttar Pradesh in respect of any

Right to
appear in
any pro-
ceedings
transfer-
red under
section 7
or section
8,

Interpre-
tation.

Appro-
priation of
moneys
for ex-
penditure
in trans-
ferred
territories
under
existing
appro-
priation
Acts.

Reports
relating to
accounts



of Bihar
and Uttar
Pradesh.

Land and
goods.

Arrears
of taxes.

Right to
recover
loans and
advances.

Refund
of taxes
collected
in excess,

Deposits.

Contracts

10

pmitted to the Governor
‘i snted day shall be su

Peak rotates ‘of Bhat and Uttar Pradesh who shall cause
of each 0:

them to be laid before the Legislature of the State.
PART VI
ApporTIONMENT 07 ASSETS AND LIABILITIES

13. (1) Subject to the other provisions of this Part, eet ae and
all stores, articles and other goods belonging to the State of ihe or
Uttar Pradesh in the transferred territories shall, as from the appoin-
ted day, pass to the State to which the territories are transferred.

(2) In this section, the expression “land” includes immovable
property of every kind and any rights in or over such property.

14. The right of Bihar or Uttar Pradesh to recover arrears of any
tax or duty on property situate in the transferred territories. inclu-
ding land revenue. or to recover arrears of any other tax or duty
in any case where the place of assessment of that tax or duty

is in the transferred territories shall .belong to the State to which
the territories are transferred.

15. The right to recover any loans or advances made before the
appointed day by Bihar or Uttar Pradesh to any local body, society
agriculturist, or other person in the transferred territories shall be-
long to the State to which the territories are transferred.

16. The liability of Bihar or Uttar er:
duty on property situate in the transferred territories, including land
revenue, collected in excess shall be the liability of th atk t
which the territories are transferred, and the liabilit: ae ate oa
Uttar Pradesh to refund any other tax or duty हवा 4 दर ihar or
in any case where the place of assessment of the t, a3 ra ae
the transferred territories shall also be the liabilit Bs कान
which the territories are transferred, 8 2 aoe, State to

‘adesh to refund any tax or

17. The lability of Bihar or Uttar Pr,
deposit or local fund deposit made in th
as from the appointed day, be the
territories are transferred,

adesh in reg

n the transfer
] iability

pect of any civil
ted territories shall,
of the State to which the

18 (1) Where, before the appointed day
Uttar Pradesh has made any contract in the :
power for any purposes of the State, th

to have heen made in the exercise

the State of Bihar or
exercise of its executive
: at contract shall be deemed
of the executive power—



Ir Soul

(a) if such purposes are, as from that day, purposes rela-
table exclusively to the transferred territories, of the State to
which the territories are transferred; and

(b) in any other case, of the State which made the con-
tract,

and all rights and liabilities which have accrued, or may accrue,
under any such contract shall, to the extent to which they are rights
or liabilities of the State which made the contract, be rights or lia-
bilities of the State specified in clause (a) or clause (9) above,

(2) For the purposes of this Section, there shall be deemed to pe
included in the liabilities which have accrued or may accrue under
any contract—

(a) any liability to satisfy an order or award made by any
court or other tribunal in proceedings relating to the contract;
and

(b) any liability in respect of expenses incurred in or in con-
nection with any such proceedings.

(3) This section shall have effect subject to the other provisions
of this Part relating to the apportionment of liabilities in respect of
loans, guarantees and other financial obligations.

19. Where, immediately before the appointed day, the State of
Bihar or Uttar Pradesh is subject to any liability in respect of an
actionable wrong, other than breach of contract, that liability shall,—

(a) if the cause of action arose wholly within the trans-
ferred territories, be a liability of the State to which the terri-
tories are transferred; and

(b) in any other case, continue to be a liability of the State
which, immediately before that day, was subject to such liability.

20, Where, immediately before the appointed day, the State of
Bihar or Uttar Pradesh is liable as guarantor in respect of any liabi-
lity of a registered co-operative society, that liability shall,—

(a) if the area of the society’s operations is limited to the
transferred territories, be a liability of the State to which the
territories are transferred; and

(०) in any other case, continue to he a liability of the State
which, immediately before that day, was subject to such liability.

21. If any item in suspense is ultimately found to affect an 8852:
or lability of the nature referred to in any of the foregoing provi-

“lons of this Part, it shall be dealt with in accordance with that pro-
Vision,

Liabili-
ty in
Tespect
of ac-
tionable
wrong.

Liabi-
lity as
guaran-
tor of
co-ope-
rative
SOcie-
ties.

Items
in sus-
Penge,



Appor-
tionment
of assets
or liabi-
lities by
agree-
ment.

Power of
central
Govern-

~ ment to
order
allocation
or adjust-
ment in
certain
cases,

Expendi-
ture to be
charged
on the
Consoli-
dated
Fund,

State
Financia)
Corpora-
tions and
State
Electri-
city
Boards,

Territoria
extent of
laws,

12

nc Uttar : agree that a
of Bihar and one
coe a a sare particular asset or ar chee ० ४९ ae
benefit or burden 6: min a-manner other than t i 'P 2 iS ior का
tiyned between then ns of this Part, then, notwithstan ing anythin
ne foregoing Be vie ही or burden of that asset or liability sh all
i herein, :
लत in the manner agreed upon
(१

st

visions of this Part, either
28, Where, by virtue of eae की palo entitled to any pro.
of the States of मत ecomes subject to°atly 1 तप
pees biter on a reference made within a period of
he years from the appointed day by either of the mare ee ag
nion that it is just and equitable that that property or : en
should be transferred to, or shared with, the other State or that a
cantribution towards that liability should be made by the other State,
the said property or benefits shall be allocated in such manner bet-
ween the two States, or the other State shall make to the State sub-
ject to the liability such contribution in respect thereof, as the Cen-

tral Government may, after consultation with the two State Govern-
ments, by order determine,

24. All sums payable by either Bihar or Uttar Pradesh to the
other State by virtue of the provision:

3 of this Part shall be charged
on the Consolidated Fund of the State by which such sums are
payable. ~

“PART VII

LecaL anp MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
25. As from the appointed day—

Piva Diets Corporations constituted under the State
ch rporations Act, 1 है Fi
Uttar Pradesh, anq 951, for the States of Bihar and

(b) the State Electricit
a Y Boards constituted under the
lectricity (Supply) Act, 1948, for the saiq States
shall be deemed to have 9, i
1 een |
their areas 58 altered by th oe :

ee or those States with
© provisions of sec

tion 3.
26. The Provisions

effected any chan i i he users iy 008
; J ge in the territorie, i

Immediately i 5 118 :
torial aed 2 the appointed day extends है a ant ON

Pradesh पा 8 Aa Sy State of as ae

Twis rovi i
की कप _ Competent authority. 2 by f competent मर tue
ries within that’ State fore ih pin day.
te the appoi "

of section 3 shall not

he construe,

immedi itely he



13

27. For the purpose of facilitatin, 8 the a Leal

in rélation ‘to’ the State of Bihar ‘or Uttar मा । i ae
Government may, before the expiration of one 6४४ है, "he
appointed day, by order make such adaptations and 21001 767
of the law, whether by way of Tepeal or amendment as ma; 6
necessary or expedient, and thereupon every such law shall hie
effect subject to the adaptations or modifications so made until
altered, repealed or amended by a competent Legislature or other
competent authority.

Explanation—In this section, the expression “appropriate
Government” means as respects any law relating to a matter enu-
merated in the Union List, the Central Govetnment, and as res-
pects any other law, the State Government,

28. Notwithstanding that no provision or insufficient provision
has been made for the adaptation of a law made before the
appointed day, any court, tribunal or authority, required or em-
powered to enforce such law may, for the purpose of facilitating
its application in relation to the State of Bihar or Uttar Pradesh,
construe the law in such manner, without affecting . the substance,
as may be necessary or proper in regard to the matter before the
court, tribunal or authority.

29. Where, immediately before the appointed day, the State of
Bihar or Uttar Pradesh is a party to any legal proceedings wiih
Tespect to any property, rights or liabilities transferred to the
other State under this Act, the other State shall be deemed to be
substituted for the State from which such property rights or liabi-
lities are transferred as a party to those proceedings, or added as
3 party thereto, as the case may be, and the proceedings may conti-
nue accordingly. : गे

30. (1) Every proceeding pending immediately ee
*Ppointed day before a court (other than a High Court), eH the
euthority or officer in any area which on that day falls wi i
State of Bihar or Uttar Pradesh shall, if it is a proceeding 7९४६8 re
“xclusively to any part of the territories which as from that pa

© territories of the other State, stand transferred to the cor
Ponding court, tribunal, authority or officer in the other State.

i ld
@) If any question arises as to whether any proceeding sho

हे to the

gmt er arsenal eed ©
fel 16 TA an 60126 7 e ar

B Court having jurisdiction in respect 20100 or before whom,

Court, tribu ‘ ; for
z nal, authority or officer befor ; pny
a Proceeding is pendind on the appointed day, is functioning,
the decision of that High Court shall be final.

adapt
laws,

Power to
construe
laws,

Legal
proceed-
ings.

Transfer
of pend-
ing pro-

ceedings.


(3) In this section —

(a) “proceeding” includes any suit, casé or appeal; and

(b) “corresponding court, tribunal, authority or officer”
in

a State means—

(i) the court, tribunal, authority or officer in which
or before whom, the proceeding would have lain if the
proceeding had been instituted after the appointed day, or

(it) in case of doubt, such court, tribunal, authority or
officer in that State as may be determined after the
appointed day by the Government of that State, or before
the appointed day by the Government of the other State
to be the corresponding court, tribunal, authority or आल,

Right of 31. Any person who, immediately before the appointed day, is
Sante enrolled as a pleader entitled to practise in any subordinate courts
tied in the transferred territories shall, for a period of six months from
certain that day, continue to be entitled to practise in those courts, notwith-
courts, standing that the whole or any part of the territories within tne
jurisdicion of those courts has been transferred to another State.

Construc- 32. (1) It shall be lawful for the State Government which is

a responsible for the construction of any boundary pillar under sub-

sie section (3) of section 3 to cause such pillar to be constructed and

eines maintained and no suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall
lie against the State Government or any of its officers for anything
in good faith done or intended to be done under this section.

(2) The boundary pillars shall be inspected jointly by the
officers of the State Governments of Bihar and Uttar Pradesh i
accordance with such rules as the Central Government may make

in this behalf.

(3) Whoever wilfully removes or injures any boundary pillar
shall be punishable with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.

(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Crim! F
nal Procedure, 1898, an offence under sub-section (3) may he 6४
inquired into and tried by a court in either of the States of Bihat

and Uttar Pradesh.


15

33, All things done, and all steps taken, before the commence- Validity
ment of this Act in connection with the demarcation of the fixed of demar-
boundary in relation to the river Ganga or the river Ghaghra, as C#tion
the case may be, shall, in so far as they are in conformity with ae
the provisions of sub-sections (2) and (3) of section 3, be deemed 722

to have been done in accordance with law. mence-
ment of

Act.

34. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding Effect of
any law, custom or usage which is inconsistent therewith, मल
tent with
other
laws.

35. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of PoW®r 10
this Act, the President may, by notified order, do anything, not ae
inconsistent with such provisions which appears to him to be ties
necessary or expedient for the purpose of removing the difficulty.

Power to

36. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the mace
Official Gazette, make rules to give effect to the provisions of this rules,
Act. Perea ee 1611 Ee eae!

(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament while
it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be com-
prised in one session or in two successive sessions, and if before
the expiry of the session in which it is so laid or the session imme-
diately following, both Houses agree in making any modification
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be rade,
the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or

be of no effect, as the case may be, so, however, that any such

modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the vali-
dity of anything previously done under that rule.

THE SCHEDULE
[See section 3(2)]
ExpianatTory Nore
The village boundaries and names mentioned in this Schedule
have reference to boundaries and names as ane ai ee a
Ve i 0) aran
large scale surveys covering relevant eal ee ee UH

districts of the State of Bihar and Ballia di a al
Pradesh, conducted by the Survey of India during the period 1881-85,

and where such sheets are not available as shown in any other re-
Cord which the State Governments of Bihar and Uttar Pradesh
agree to be relevant within one month from the commencement of


16

this Act, or in default of such agreement, which the authority re.
ferred to in sub-section (2) of section 3 may determine to be the
relevant record.

The Ganga and Ghaghra rivers and their high banks where-ey
mentioned in this Schedule have reference to the geographical Tiver
or high bank positions, as the case may be, as shown in the survey
records mentioned in the foregoing paragraph.

Ganga Sector

The boundary in this sector shall commence from a point (ap-
proximate Latitude 25° 44 10”, Longitude 84° 36 06”) on the existing
fixed boundary between Bihar and Uttar Pradesh, lying between
Shitab Diara (Bihar), Mahazi Kondarha (Uttar Pradesh) and Kha-
waspur (till now in Uttar Pradesh) and located about half mile
roughly south-west of the present “abadi” site of Babudera village
(near Daljitola). Accordingly, the portion of the present alignment
of the above mentioned existing fixed boundary between this point
and the present Ganga river will cease to be the boundary between
the States of Bihar and Uttar Pradesh.

2. From this point, the boundary shall run in straight lines within
the high banks of the Ganga, connecting successively points (ap-
proximate Latitude 25° 44’ 12”, Longitude 84° 33’ 44”), and (approxi-
mate Latitude 25° 44 06”, Longitude 84° 33’ 46”), placing villages
Mahazi Kondarha and Kondarha completely in Uttar Pradesh and
village Khawaspur completely in Bihar. From this point, the bound-
ary shall run along the common boundaries of villages Mohanpur end
Mandrauli Kans or Tirbhuani, placing them completely in Uttar Pra-
desh, and Khawaspur, Padumanian, Sohra, Inglis Arazi appg. to
Balua Nargada, Piparpati and Salempur Diara Mamluk Sarkar vil-
lages placing them completely in Bihar, till it goes to a point (appro-
ximate Latitude 25° 43° 35”, Longitude 84° 39? 32”) on the high bank
of the Ganga. From this point, the boundary shall run in straight
lines within the high banks of the Ganga, connecting points (ap-
proximate Latitude 25° 43” 2077 Longitude 84° 39 12”), (approximate
Latitude 25° 40/ 56”, Longitude 84° 31’ 52”), and (approximate Lati-
tude 25° 40’ 30”, Longitude 84° 31’ 20”), so as to place villages Raghu-
nathpur, Dewakar Dehari, Kewatia, Narainpur, Singhai, Dharampur,
Dokti and Mahazi Dokti completely in Uttar Pradesh and villages
Salempur Diara Mamluk Sarkar, Salempur Parsa and Tek Sema?
completely in Bihar,

3. The boundar:

y will then follow the common boundaries of vil-
lages Mahazi Dokt

i, Arazi Zabti, Mahazi Naubarar No, 49, Naubarar



17 5 =

Bandobasti No. 48, Tika Semaria and Ni i ; हर
completely in Uttar Pradesh and समिट, Ae eee.
Harnarain and Bara Singha Buzurg, keeping these villages ea
ly in Bihar, till the boundary reaches point (approximate Latitude
25° 417 17", Longitude 84° 28721”) at the north-west corner of vil-
lage Bara Singha Buzurg and located within the high banks of Ganga
river. From this point, the boundary shall run in a straight line to
another point (approximate Latitude 25° 41’ 35”, Longitude 84° 29” 05”)
on the high bank of the Ganga, placing village Nardara in Uttar
Pradesh and villages Parsotimpur Babhnauli and Bahoranpur Chak-
ki completely in Bihar. Thence the boundary shall follow the com-
mon boundaries of villages Nardara, Nipanian, Patkhauli, Uchitpur,
Bahuara, Udhopur, Nauranga and Bhagwanpur keeping these villages
completely in Uttar Pradesh, and villages Pipra Ganesh Damodarpur
and Jewainian keeping these villages completely in Bihar, till the
boundary reaches point (approximate Latitude 25° 41’ 34”, Longitude
84° 25 45”) within the high banks of the Ganga. From this point,
the boundary shall proceed along the common boundary of village
Bhagwanpur and village Bahoranpur, keeping the latter village
completely in Bihar, till the boundary reaches point (approximate
Latitude 25° 41°54”, Longitude 84° 25’02”) at the north-west corner
of village Bahoranpur.

4. Thence the boundary shall run in straight lines within the high
barks of the Ganga connecting successively points (approximate
Latitude 25° 417 55”, Longitude 84° 24’33”) and (approximate Lati-
tude 25° 42’33”, Longitude 84° 24’11”) so as to place village ee
Tanga completely in Uttar Pradesh and villages Nauranga Chakki
and Sonbarsa on the other hand completely in Bihar. From this
Point, the boundary shall follow the common boundaries of re
Nauranga, Bhual Chhapra, Pandepur, Rampur and Hei ris
keeping these villages completely in Uttar Prades 7 wears
Nauranga Chak, Shiupur and Bariarpur, keeping these vi Bae ee
vletely in Bihar, till the boundary reaches point (app

Bae ; e
हु 22 थे ० 93’ 11”). within the high banks 0
Latitude 25° 43’ 55”, Longitude 84° 23 ) WO ता the ween

the Ganga. From this point the boundary 3 k of the Ganga
boundary of Udai Chhapra up to the high ban el 1 Chhapra
and then follow the common boundaries of eae on Portion,
Tola Bari Babu, Kaulapat Chhapra Urf Dubey ee ae Durjanpur
Pachrukhia, Tulapur Arazi Mafi Khedan 22 की रे and villages
keeping these villages completely in Uttar ie es and village
lapur and Sughar Chhapra, keeping these v! nee reaches
Urjanpur Chak completely in Bihar, till the He 84% 29 41”) on
® Point (approximate Latitude 25° 447 12”, Longitude ae run in
the Deh bank (of Ganea’ river, 116 boundary shall Me “ee Res
Straight lines connecting successively points (approximate La



18

0D: i ० 99’ 38”) and (approximate Latitude 25°
i हा ee eas bee 04”) and shall then continue along the
ee ankery of villages Durjanpur and Dee placing
them in Uttar Pradesh, and village Shukulpura or ee 'प Chhapra,
placing this village in Bihar, till the boundary reac es Ses (ap-
proximate Latitude 25° 44’ 33”, Longitude 84° 22 00”), south of the
north-west corner of village Shukulpura and located on the high

bank of the river.

5. Thence the boundary shall run straight to point (approximate
Latitude 25° 44’ 35”, Longitude 84° 20’ 58”) at the south-east: corner
of Gaighat village and located within the high banks of Ganga river
so as to place villages Dangrabad and Bigahi completely in Uttar
Pradesh and village Naini Jor completely in Bihar and then run in
a straight line till point (approximate Latitude 25° 44°37”, Longitude
847 20’ 50”) at the south-west corner of village Gaighat, placing this
village in Uttar Pradesh. From this point, the boundary shall run in
straight lines within the high banks of the Ganga, connecting succes-
sively points (approximate Latitude 25° 44’ 37”, Longitude 84° 20’ 18”),
(approximate Latitude 25° 43’ 52”, Longitude 84° 19’ 49”), (approxi-
mate Latitude 25° 42’ 29”, Longitude 84° 19’ 54”), (approximate Lati-
title 25° 40° 14”, Longitude 84° 19 35”), and (approximate Latitude
25° 40' 04”, Longitude 84° 19’ 17”), so as to place villages Baghaunch,
Pokhra, Babubel, Haldi, Rikni Chhapra, Hansnagar and Jauhi com-
pletely in Uttar Pradesh and villages Naini Jor, Mahuar and Baha-
eam in Bihar. Thence the boundary shall follow
in Uttar Prad. ae sundaries oe village Jauhi placing this village
see ee & lesh and villages Bisupur and Jagdishpur on the other

Bee g these two villages in Bihar, till the boundary reaches
point (approximate Latitude 25° 39’ 54” lk ‘ ढक :
this point, the bound, h a ongitude 84° 18" 21”). From ५
the Ganga to a FIR 27220 straight within the high banks of
84° 17' 43”) near the es Latitude 25° 39° 39”, Longitude |
at the sharp bend of the high ba fone at elaee See
TJauhi in Uttar Pradesh and aa of the Ganga so as to place villag?
The boundary shall then seen Pandepur and Hirdahi in Bihar
Sapahi up to a point ea ollow the northern boundary of villag?
84° 16°38”) at the Pproximate Latitude 25° 39°35”, Longitude

vi north- धर \
bai completely in sp corner of this village, placing this

Latitude 25° 39’ 49” : s ssively points (approximate
ee 20100 Li 16° 35"), Reais Latitude
40’ 08”, Longitude 84° 49% sae 0”), (approximate Latitude 20)
Longitude 34° 19 01”) a 28”), (approximate Latitude 25° 42’ 00",

) and (approximate Latitude 95° 43°03”, Longi-



19

de ee 10’ 35”), placing villages Jauhi, Shiupur Diar Gangbarar and
Shiupur Diar completely in Uttar Pradesh and villages Mannipur,
Shiupur Diar Chakki, Paranpur, Pharhada, Kharha Tanr Estate
No. 1 Taufir, Gangauli Estate No. 1 Taufir, Dubha Estate No. 1 Taufir,

Rajapur and Diara Partappur completely in Bihar.

7, Then the alignment of the boundary from this point to point
(approximate Latitude 25° 43’ 24”, Longitude 84° 07" 52") will be such
as to place villages Shiupur Diar, Shiurampur, Dhamauli, Kasimpur,
Wazirapur, Bhikhampura, Turk Ballia, Shahpur Dighwara, Sobhapur
and Bijaipur in Uttar Pradesh and villages Diara Partappur, Bhirgu
Ashram, Diara Jagdishpur and Parsanpah in Bihar.

8. The boundary shall then run in straight lines within the high
banks of the Ganga joining points (approximate Latitude 25° 43’ 16”,
Longitude 84° 06” 25”), (approximate Latitude 25° 42’ 48”, Longitude
84° 05’ 28”), (approximate Latitude 25° 417 40”, Longitude 84° 04
37”), (approximate Latitude 25° 39’ 06”, Longitude 84° 05’ 14”), (ap-
proximate Latitude 25° 38’ 10”, Longitude 84° 04’ 59”), (approximate
Latitude 25° 37 33”, Longitude 84° 02’ 47”) and (approximate Lati-
tude 25° 36’ 52”, Longitude 84° 01’ 10”) consecutively, placing villages
Maldepur, Pars: Patti or Chakia, Haibatpur or Begpur, Taranpur.
Bansthana, Pandepur appg. to Ismaila, Hasanpur appé. to Takar-
sand, Anjorpur, Kot, Arazi Diara (appg. to Kot), Naubarar of Shah-
pur of 1873, Naubarar of Shahpur of 1880, Naubarar
of Kulharia 1880, Naubarar of Palia 1881, Naubarar of Sar-
Wanpur 1881, Naubarar of Rai Kishun Patti 1881, Naubarar of Bel-
Sipah 1881, Gangbarar of Sheopur and Gangbarar of Sital Patti com-
Pletely in Uttar Pradesh and villages Parsanpah, Sultanhi, Dilia
ig No. 1 Taufir, Parnahi Kalan, Parnahi Khurd, Umarpur Diara,
Aged or Barkagaon, Nagpura, Padampur, Desar Buzurg, Mis-

, Umarpur Diara, Majharia and Arjunpur completely in Bihar.

eee the boundary will run in straight lines within the high
ee the Ganga, joining successively points (approximate Lati-
5° 33 34°09", Longitude 83° 57729”) and (approximate Latitude
%f the ag , Longitude 83° 55’ 51”). The e trijunction
Pissed of districts Ballia an

"ct Shahabad of Bihar.

10, The
we boundary described above, shall be a ९

last point is th
d Ghazipur of Uttar Pradesh

ontinuous line

Ghaghra Sector
e from a point (807
xisting

Th

e@ |
Mos POUNdary ; है
*xim; dary in this sector shall commence

* Matitude 25° 467 21”, Longitude 84° 37’ 15”) on the ९


20 |
fixed boundary between Shitab Diara in Bihar and Jazirg No. 36 in
Uttar Pradesh, located at a distance

of about 1 mile north-east Of the
present village Naukatola,

2. From this point, the boundary shall run in straight lines
the high banks of Ghaghra river, connecting
(approximate Latitude 25° 46" 18”, Longitude 84° 37’ 36”)
mate Latitude 25° 49’ 29”,

Longitude 84° 37 36”),
Latitude 25° 49° 99”, Longitude 84° 35’
49 55”, Longitude 84९ 34’

Longitude 84° 33’

within

(approxi.

(approximate
04”) , (approximate Latitude 25:

19”) and (approximate Latitude 25° 59° 317,

Diara, Diara
ia, Bhadpa Buzurg, Manjhan

j / Diara Manjhi and Mahazi Dumri
tn Bihar and villag i

completely in
Uttar Pradesh. Thence the boundary shall follow the common
boundary between village Mahazi Chand Diara or Dumaria, keeping
this village completely in Bihar, and villages Chand Diara and
Mahazi Adhsijhua, keeping these villages completely in Uttar Pra-
desh, till the boundary reaches point (approximate Latitude 25° 51
31”. Longitude 84९ 39” 82”) on the high ba’

nk of the Ghaghra,
3. Thence the boundar

banks of the Gha
Latitude 25° 51’

25° 52” 33”, Longitude 84° 397 04”
Longitude 84° 30! 47”

y shall run in Straight lines within the high
ghra, connecting successively points (approximate
33”, Longitude 84° 39’ 39”), (approximate Latitude
), (approximate Latitude 95° 52’ 16”,
) and (approximate Latitude Latitude 25° 59 08”,
Longitude 94° 29 34”) so as to Place villages Jazira Harf Be
(East), Dumri. Babhnauli or Babhauli, Jazira Harf Be (West), and
Domaigarh completely in Bihar and villages Mahazi Adhsijhua and
Gopalnagar completely in Uttar Pradesh. The boundary shall then
follow the common boundaries between villages Matiar Diara,
Mahazi N: aubarar Bashishtnagar, Naubarar Ramnagar, Gopalpur and
Ramnagar, Shumali, keeping these villages completely in Bihar, and
villages Gopalnagar, Bashishtnagar, Ramnagar Janubi, Asmanpur,
Chattur Bhojpur, Gobindpur, Alagdiari, Zamin Gangbarari Patti
Mashrik and Jazira Di:

ara Rampur, keeping these villages completely
in Uttar Pradesh, till the boundar

y Teaches point (approximate Lati-
tude 25° 55’ 49", Longitude 84° 24° 46”) on the high bank of Ghaghra
river.

4. From this point, the boundary shall run in straight lines wee
the high banks of Ghaghra river, connecting successively Ra
(approximate Latitude 25° 56” 05”. Longitude 84° 23’ 16”), (apenas
mate Latitude 25° 57° 27", Longitude 84% 91’ 21”), (approximate wa
tude 25° 56” 36", Longitude 84" 18° 50”), (approximate Latitude



3i

66° 397, Longitude 84° 17’ 55”), (approximate Latitude 95° 57° 28°,
Longitude 84° 17’ 02”), (approximate Latitude 25° 58 30”, Longitude
84° 14’ 49”) and (approximate Latitude 25° 58° 38”, Longitude g4° 14
46”), so as to place villages Siswan, Gangapur, Bhagar Nizamat,
Kachnar and Sisai Diara, Gabhirar, Diara Gabhirar Mamluk Sarkar,
Kaunsar Patti Jujhar, Diara Kaunsar Patti Purab, Diara Kaunsar
Patti Jujhar, Diara Kaunsar Patti Pachhim, Diara Narhan Mamluk
Sarkar and Narhan Badlu Mohkam Patti Kakuliat completely in
Bihar and villages Jazira Diara Rampur, Diara Bhagar, Diara Nau-
barar Lakhmi Rai Madho Rai, Diara Lakhmi Rai Madho Rai, Chhap
Dhanantar, Marwatia Naubarar and Chakkj Diara Sultanpur com-
pletely in Uttar Pradesh.

5. Then the boundary shall follow the common boundaries bet-
ween villages Narhan Badlu Mohkam Patti Kakuliat, Diara Bhao
Singhpur, Diara Kakuliat or Patti Kakuliat, Adampur, Patar and
Diara Naubarar Bandobasti Patar, keeping these villages completely
in Bihar and village Adampur Chakki, keeping this village ecmplete-
ly in Uttar Pradesh, till the boundary reaches point (approximate
Latitude 25° 59’ 24”, Longitude 84° 12’ 12”) on the high bank of
Ghaghra river. From this point, the boundary shall run in straight
lines within the high banks of Ghaghra river, connecting succes-
sively points (approximate Latitude 25° 59’ 15”, Longitude 84°
17 53”) and (approximate Latitude 25° 59’ 35”, Longitude 84°
117 16”) so as to Place village Diara Naubarar Bandobasti Patar com-
pletely in Bihar and villages Kakarghatta, Gondauli ang Sangapur
completely in Uttar Pradesh. Thence the boundary shall run straight
to point (approximate Latitude 25° 59 38”, Longitude 84° 11’ 08”)
approximately following the northern boundary of village Bikram-
Pur, placing this village in Uttar Pradesh.

6. From this point, the boundary shall run straight within the
high banks of Ghaghra river to point (approximate Latitude 25
8" 39”, Longitude 84° 10’ 46”) so as to place village Diara Naubarar
Bandobasti Patar completely in Bihar and village Ailasgarh Some
Pletely in Uttar Pradesh. The alignment thence to point (approxi-
Mate Latitude 26° 017 27”, Longitude 84° 10°11”) will be such

at village Diara Maniar Tukra I shall be placed in Bihar and vil-
lage Mahazi Maniar Tukra II shall be placed in Uttar Pradesh.

7. From thereon, the boundary shall run in straight lines within
high banks of Ghaghra river, connecting successively points
Pproximate Latitude 26° 03’ 07", Longitude 84° 08’ 21”),
“PProximate Latitude 26° 04’ 29”, Longitude 84° 07 26”),
“PProximate Latitude 26° 057 34”, Longitude 84" 06° 22°), (approxt:

the


22

thate Latitude 26- 06° 00”, Longitude 84 08 277) and (approx:
mate Latitude 26° 06’ 00”, Longitude 84° 08 27) so as to place
villages Kasaila Pachbimia, Diara Kashidat, Diara Harna ‘Tand,
Darauli, Doba Karwan, Karamha, Amarpur, Keontallia and Dumar-
har Khurd completely in Bihar and villages Dewarah Mahazi Kashi-
dat, Dewarah Harnatar, Dewarah Darauli, Dewarah Karmaha,
Dewarah Amarpur, Sisotar and Lilkar completely in Uttar Pradesh.

The last point is the trijunction of the boundaries of districts Saran
of Bihar and Ballia and Deoria of Uttar Pradesh.

8. The boundary described above, shall be a continuous line.