AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

१0

Bill No. 118 of 2000
——_

THE INDIAN MEDICINES DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION
BILL, 2000
By
‘Sari Susopx Montre, M.P.
A
BILL

to establish an Indian Medicine Development Corporation to promote the development of
Indian system of medicine and for matters connected therewith.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

4, () This Act may be called the Indian Medicine Development Corporation Act,
2000.

(ii) It shall come into force at once.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:—

(i) "Corporation" means the Indian Medicine Development Corporation set up
under section 3;

(ii) "Indian System of medicine" means and includes Ayurvedi, Unani,
Naturopathy, Siddha, Homeopathy, Electropathy, and such other system as may be
recognised as Indian System of medicine;

(iii) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act,

Shorttitle and
‘ment.

Definitions.


Paid up capital
of the Corpora
tion,

Functions of the
Board of Direc:
tor:

Qualification fy
appomtnnont

Removal from
oltice.

2

3. (/)The Central Government shall establish a Corporation to be known as
“Indian Medicine Development Corporation" with its keadquarters at Nagpur.

(2) The Corporation may set up offices and branches at any other place as the
Corporation may deem fit.

4. (1) The paid up capital of the Corporation shail he rupees ten thousand crore,

(2) The Cemtral Government may from time to time increase the paid np capital of
the Corperation to such extent and in such manner as the Government may determine.

(3) Such capital may be provided by the Central Government from time to time
after due appropriation made by Parliament by law for the purpose and subject to such
terms and conditions as may be determined by that Government.

5. (1) The general superintendence, direction and management of the affair and
business of the Corporation shail vest in a Board of Directors and the Board of Directors

may exercise all such powers and perform such Zunctions as may he exercised of performed
by the Corporation under this Act.

(2) The Board of Directors, in discharging its functions, shail act on business principles,
having regard to the iuterests of the Corporation and shal! be guided by such instructions on
questions of policy as may be given in writing (o it by the Central Government,

(3) If any doubt arises as to whether a question is or is not a question of policy, the
decision of the Central Government thereon shall be final,

6. (/) The Board shall consist of:

(0) a Chairman who shall be an expert in Indian system of medicine;
(i) five members to represent each system of medicine;

(iii) one member to represent environment and forests to be aopointed by the
Central Government.

(2) The Chairman and other members of the Board shail constitute the Board |
Directors and hold office for a term of five years from the date of their appointment.

(3) The Central Government shall appoint one person among the Board of Directors
as the Managing Director.

(4) The Chairman and other members shall te entitled to such salasies and allowances
‘as may be prescribed,

7, (1) A person shail be disqualified for being appointed as, and for being, a Chairman
cov Director of the Board:--

(a) if he is, or at any time has been adjudicated insolvent or has suspended
payment of his debis or has compounded with his creditors; or

(5) if he is of unsound mind and has been so declared by « competent court; or

(©) if he is or has been convicted of any uffence which in the opinion of the
Central Government involves moral turpitude; or

id) if he has been removed or dismissed from service of the Government or @
corperation owned or conirolled by the Government: or

(e) except in the case of the Chairman or the Managing Director, if he is a
salaried official of the Government or a Corporation owned or controlled by the
Government.

8. (J) The Ceniral Government may, at any time, after consultation with the Board,
remove the Managing Director from the office afier giving him a reasonable opportunity
of showing cause against the proposed removal.

20

3!


35

45

2
(2) The Board of Directors may remove any director from office who—

(a) is or has become subject to any of the disquatifications mentioned in
section 7; or

(6) is absent, without leave of the Board of Directors from more than three
consecutive meetings thereof without sufficient cause, in the opinion of the Board.
to exonerate his absence.

(3) The Chairman or a Director of the Board may resign his office by giving notice
thereof in writing to the Central Government and on such resignation being accepted, he
shall be deemed to have vacated his office.

9. (1) The Board of Directors of the Corporation shall meet at such time and place
and shall observe such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its
meetings including the quont:n at meetings, as may be provided by regulations made by
the Corporation under this Act.

(2) The Chairman of the Board, if for any reason is unable to attend any meeting,

any other director elected by the directors present at the meeting shall preside over such
meeting.

(3) All questions which come up before any meeting of the Board shall be decided
by a majority of the votes of the directors present and voting, and in the event of an
equality of votes, the Chairman, or in his absence the person presiding over the meeting
shall have and exercise a second or casting vote.

10. (7) The Central Government may, in consultation with the Board by notification
in the Official Gazette, constitute one or more Advisory Committees consisting of such
persons and on such terms and conditions as may be prescribed.

(2) It shall be the duty of the Advisory Committee so constituted to advise the
Central Government or the Corporation in regard to any matter connected with the purpose
of this Act in respect of which its advice is sought by the Central Government, ण by the
Corporation, as the case may be.

(3) The expenses in relation to the Advisory Committees shall be met by the
Corporation

11, (7) The Central Government shall, except in the case of initial constitution of
the Board, after consultation with the Corporation, appoint a person to be the Secretary of
the Corporation.

(2) Subject to such rules as may be made by the Centrai Government in this behalf,
the Corporation inay appoint such other officers and employees os it may consider necessary
for the efficient performance of its functions.

(3) The method of appointment, conditions of service and the scales of pay of the
officers and other employees of the Corporation shall:—

(a) in respect of the Secretary, be such as may be prescribed by the Central
Government;

(b) in respect of the officers and employees, be such as may be determined by
regulations made by the Corporation under this Act.

12. The Corporation shall perform the following functions, namely:—

(i) to identify and locate herbal plants which are necessary for manufacture of
medicine;

(ii) to protect herbal plants area;

(iii) to manufacture and process Indian system of medicine;

(iv) to distribute and set up outlets for selling Indian system of medicine;

Meeting of the
Board of Direc-
tors.

Advisory Com-
mittee

Secretary and
other officers.

Funetions.


4

(¥) to extend financial and
in Indian system of medicine:

‘echnical assistance to persons involved in research

(vi) to export medicines based on Indian system; and

(vii) to advocate the extensive use of Indian system of medicine,
Acquisition of 13. The Corporation may request any State Government to vest in it any forest area 5 |
area containing = ie
ert plac or other area containing herbal plants at an agreed price,

Maintenance of 14. The Corporation shall maintain correct accounts of its income and expenditure
accounts. in such form and in such manner as may be prescribed.

Audit 15. (1) The accounts of the Corporation shall be audited by auditors who are qualified
as auditors of companies under the law for the time being in force relating to companies, I
and the auditors shall be appointed by the Corporation with the previous . of the
Central Government and they shail receive such remunerations from the Corporation as
the Central Government may prescribe.

(2) Every auditor while performing his duties shall have at all reasonable times
access to the books, accounts and other documents of the Corporation and may for the 1:
Purpose of the audit, call for such explanation and information as he may require or may
examine any principal or other officer of the Corporation,
(3) The auditors shall submit their report together with an audited copy of the accounts
of the Corporation and shall also forward a copy thereof to the Central Government.
Investigation by 16. The Corporation shall, at intervals of five years, cause an investigation to be
‘heactuaries. made by the actuaries into the financial condition including the valuation of its assets and
liabilities and submit the report of the actuaries to the Central Government.
Annual Report 17. The Corporation shall, as soon as may be, after the end of each financial year
tetheCentral prepare and submit to the Central Government in such form and in such manner, as may
3७ ibe reached? a Teport giving an account of its activities during the previous financial
Year, and an account of the activities, if any, which are likely to be undertaken by the
Corporation in the current and the immediately following financial year.
Reports tobe 18. The Central Government shall cause the report of the auditors under section 15,
ed pee both the report of the actuaries under section 16 and the report giving an account of the activities
ताक Of the Corporation under section 17 to be laid before both the Houses of Parliament, as
soon as may be, after each such Teport is received by the Central Government.
Indemnificating 19. (1) The Chairman and every Director of the Board shall be indemnified by the
of act, Corporation against all losses and expenses incurred by him in, or in relation to, the
Gischarge of his duties except such as are caused by his own wilful act or default.
(2) Any Director of the Board shall not be responsible for the acts of any ather
Director or of any other officer or other employee of the Corporation, or for any loss or
EXPenses caused to the corporation form the insufficiency or deficiency of value of or title
10 any property or security acquired or taken on behalf of the Corporation or the insolvency
or wrongful act of any debtor or any person under obligation to the Corporation or anything
done in good faith in the execution of the duties of his office or in relation thereto,
Actdonein 20. No suit or prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against the Chairman
8००4 faith, or any director of the Board or any employee of the Corporation for anything which is, in
8004 faith, done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act.
Power to make 21. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
rules

rules to carry out the purpose of this Act.


15

20

25

5

(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power,
provided for the following matters, namely:—

uch rules may

(a) the term of office of and the manner of filling casual vacancies among, and
the other terms and conditions of appointment of the directors of the Corporation;

(b) the composition of Advisory Committees and the terms and conditions of
service of members thereof;

(c) the additional functions which the Corporation may perform;

(d) the remuneration of fees payable to the members of the Board of Directors
‘and the term of office of, and the manaer of filling casual vacancies among such
members;

(e) the manner in which the Corporation may invest its funds;

(0 the form of the annual statement of accounts and the balance sheet to be
prepared by the Corporation; and

(g) any other matter which has to be or may be prescribed.

(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this section, and any
modification thereto shall be laid as soon as may be, after it is made, before each House of
Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised
in one session or in two successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session in
Which it is so laid or the session immediately following, both Houses agree that the rule
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under the rule

22. The Corporation may, subject to the condition of previous publication and with
the previous approval of the Central Government, by notification in the Gazette of India,
make regulations not inconsistent with this Act and the rules made thereunder to provide
for all matters for which provision is necessary or expedient for the purpose of giving
effect to the provisions of this Act.

Power tomake
regulations.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

In the ancient times, India has been the leader in the medicines. Several systems,
mostly indigenous, were used tc’ cure diseases. Many herbal plants were used for
manufacture of medicines. Later allopathy system of medicine came into being. Allopathy
system being mostly of chemicals has its own effect while temporarily curing diseases,

While Indian system of medicine provides permanent relief, allopathy system
provides only temporary relief. Moreover, allopathy system has its own side effects which
spoil the body system. Further the system is costlier also and poor people cannot afferd to
use this system.

India has immense resources of herbal plants. They have not been properly explored
and exploited. It is a sad commentary that many American and European countries have
obtained patent in respect of herbal plants available in our country only. These herbals
can cure even serious diseases if properly processed.

India has signed several patent agreements by which our country will have to obtain
Patent rights to manufacture even ordinary medicines. Therefore, there is every possibility
that prices of medicines will shoot up after some years,

India has to wake up from deep slumber. If corrective measures are not taken
immediately, other countries will obtain patent rights in respect of our herbals and we
may have to pay a huge price for obtaining manufacturing and processing rights.

Moreover, there is a huge potential for export of Indian system of medicines.

Therefore, it is proposed to establish a Corporation exclusively to promote and develop
Indian system of medicines.

New Deu; SUBODH MOHITE
July 28, 2000.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 3 provides for establishment of an Indian Medicine Development Corporation
and its offices and branches.

Clause 4 of the Bill provides for an initial paid up capital of rupees ten thousand
crore for the proposed Indian Medicine Development Cozporation.

The Bill further provides fcr appointment of Chairman, Board of Directors,
_ Managing Director, Secretary and other officers.

‘The Bill, therefore, if enacted will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund
of India. ¥

It is likely to incur an expenditure to the tune of about rupees five hundred crore
per annum,

A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees eleven thousand crore will also be
involved.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 21 of the Bill empowers the Central
out the purposes of the Bill. Clause 22 em
the rules will relate to matters of detail
normal character, +

Government to make rules for carrying
powers the Corporation to frame regulations. As
only, the delegation of legislative power is of a



LOK SABHA

A
BILL

10 establish an Indian Medicine Development Corporation to promote the development of
Indian system of medicine and for matters connected therewith,

(Shri Subodh Mohite, M.P)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—1674LS—18.07.2000.