As INTRODUCED IN Log SABHA 
Bill No. 118 of 1982 
THE AMRITSAR OIL WORKS (A2QUISITION AND TRANSFER OF 
UNDERTAKINGS) BILL, 1982 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CHAPTER I 
Plu!:uMmARY 
CLAUSF.s 
1. Short titlt:. 
2. Definitions. 
CHAPTER II 
ACQVISITlON AND TRANSFER OF AMRrrSAR OIL WORKS 
3. Transfer to, and vesting in, the Central Government uf Amritsar 
Oil Works. 
4. General effect of vesting. 
5. Power of Central Government to direct vesting of the Amritsar 
Oil Works in a Government company. 
6. The Amritsar Sugar Mills Company to be liable for certain prior 
liabilities. 
CHAPTER III 
PAYMENT OF AMOUNT 
7. Payment of amount. 
CHAPTER IV 
MANAGEMENT, ETC., OF AMRITSAR On. WORKS 
8. Management, etc., of Amritsar Oil Works. 
9. Duty of pt'l'sons in charge of management of Amritsar Oil Works 
to deliver assets, etc. 
10. Duty of persons to account for assets, etc. 
11. Duty of Amritsar Sugar Mills Company to furnish particulars. 
CHAPTER V 
PROVISJONS RELATING TO EMPLOYEES OF AMRITSAR OIL WORKS 
12. Continuance of employeeS. 
13. Provident fund and other funds. 

.. ~ ... ii 
CHAPTER VI 
COMMISSIONER OF PAYMENTS 
CLAUSES 
14. Appointment of Commissioner of Payments. 
15. Payment by the Central Government to the Commissioner. 
16. Priority in relation to claims. 
17. CJaims to be made to the Commissioner. 
18. Proof of claims. 
19. Disbursement of money by the Commissioner to claimants. 
20. Undishursed or unclaimed amount to be deposited to the general 
revenue account. 
CHAPTER VII 
MISCELLANEOUS 
21. Act to have overriding effect. 
22. Contracts to cease to have effect unless ratified by the Central 
Government Or Government company. 
23. Penalties. 
24. Offences by companies. 
25. Protection of action taken in good faith. 
26. Delegation of powers. 
27. Power to make rules. 
28. Power to remove difficulties. 

· . Bdl No. 118 of 1982 
THE AMRITSAR OIL WORKS (ACQUISI'llUN AND TRANSF'ER OF 
UNDERTAKINGS) BILL, 1982 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the acquisition and transfer Of the right, titZe and interest 
Of the undertakings of the AmTitsar Sugar Mills Company in reZa.tion 
to the' Amritsar Oil Works with a view to sustaining and strength-
ening the nucleus of public owned Or controlled units required for 
ensuring supply of wholesome vanaspati and refined edible oiLs to 
the public at Teasonable prices and thereby to give effect to the policy 
of the Siate towards securing the principles specified in clauses (b) 
and (c) of artic,le 39 of the Constitution. 
WHEREAS the Amr~tsar Sugar Mills Company has through lts under-
takings, namely the factory known as the Amritsar Oil Works, Amritsar 
been engaged in the manufacture and production of certain commoditjes, 
namely, vanaspati and refined edible oHs, which are essential to the 
5 needs of the community; 
.AND WHEREAS the management of the said Amritsar Oil Works was 
taken over by the Central Government under the Industries (Develop-
65 of 1951. ment and Regulation) Act, 1951; 
AND WHEREAS it is necessary to acqUire the undertakings of the 
10 Amritsar Sugar Mills Company in relation to the said Amritsar Oil 
Works for sustaining and strengthening the nucleus of public owned 
or controlled units required for ensuring supply of wholesome vanaspati 
and refined edible oils to the public at reasonable prices; 
AND WHEREAS such acquisition is for giving effect to the policy of the 
15 State towards securing the principles specified in clauses (b) and (c) of 
article 39 of the Constitution; 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-third Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
CHAPTER I 
20 PRELIMINARY 
1. This Act may be called the Amritsar Oil Works (Acquisition and Short 
Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1982. tItle. 

Deflni-
tiona. 
Transfer 
to, and 
vesting 
in, the 
Central 
Govern-
ment of 
Amrltsar 
Ou 
Worka. 
General 
effect 
of 
vesting. 
2 
Z. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "Amritsar Oil Works" means the undertakings of the Amrit-
sar Sugar Mills Company which are engaged in the manufacture, 
production and marketing of vanaspati and refined edible oils; 
(b) "Amritsar Sugar Mills Company" means the Amritssr Sugar 5 
Mills Company Limited, Amritsar, a company within the meaning of 
the Companies Act, 1956, and having its registered office at P.O. Rayon I of 1956. 
Mills, Chheharta, Amritsar, in the State of Punjab; 
(c) "appointed day" means the date of commencement of this 
Act; 
(d) "Commissioner" means the Commissioner of Payments 10 
appointed under section 14; 
(e) "date of taking over" means the date on which the manage-
ment of the Amritsar Oil Works of the Amritsar Sugar Mills Com-
pany was taken over by the Board Of Management by virtue of the 
Order of the Government of India in the late Ministry of Industrial 15 
Development, No. S.O. 542 (E) I 18AAI IDRAj 74, dated the 13th Sep- f 
tember, 1974, made under sub-section (1) of section 18AA of the 
Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951; 65 of leL 
(f) "notification" means a notification published in the Official 
Gazette; 20 
(g) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this 
Act; 
(h) "specified date", in relation to any provision of this Act, 
means such date as the Central Government may, by notifi-
cation, specify for the purpose of that provision and different dates 25 
may be specified for different provisions of this Act; 
(i) "the Government company" means the Government com-
pany in WhlCh the Amritsar Oil Works are directed to vest under 
sub-section (1) of section 5; 
(j) words and expressions used herein and not defined but 30 
defined in the Companies Act, 1956, have the meanings, respectively, I 01.1_ 
assigned to them in that Act. 
CHAPTER II 
ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF A.MRrrs.I.R OIL WORKS 
3. On the appOinted day, the Amritsar Oil Works and the right, title 
and interest of the Amritsar Sugar Mills Company in relation to the 35 
Amritsar Oil Works shall, by virtue of this Act, stand transferred to, and 
shall vest in, the Central Government. 
4. (1) The Amritsar Oil Works shall be deemed to include all assets, 
rights, lease-holds, powers, authorities and privileges and. all pro. 40 
perty, movab1e arid immovable, including lands, buildings workshops, 
stores, instruments, machinery and equipment, cash balances, cash in 
hand, reserve funds, investments and book debts pertaining to the Amrft-
Bar Oil Works, and all other rights and interests in, or arising out of, 
such property as were immediately before the appointed day in the 45 

oWnership, possession, power or control of the .hnritsar Sugar Mills 
Company, in relation to the Amritsar Oil Works, whether within or 
outside India, and all books of account, registers and other documents 
of whatever nature relating thereto. 
5 (2) All properties as aforesaid which have vested in the Central Gov-
ernment under section 3 shall, by force of such vesting, be freed and 
discharged from any trust, obligation, mortgage, charge, lien and all other 
incumbrances affecting them, and any attachment, injunction or decree or 
order of any court or other authority, restricting the use of such properties 
10 in any manner or appointing any receiver in respect of the whole or any 
part of such properties shall be deemed to have been withdrawn. 
(3) Every mortgagee of any property which has vested under this Act 
in the Central Government and every person holding any charge, lien 
or other interest in, or in relation to, any such property shall give, within 
15 such time and in such manner as may be prescribed, an intimation to the 
Commissioner of such mortgage, charge, lien or other interest. 
(4) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the mortgagee 
of any property referred to in sub-section (3) or any other person hold-
ing any charge, lien or other interest in, or in relation to, any such pro-
20 perty shall be entitled to claim, in accordance with lils rights and inte-
rests, payment of the mortgage money or other dues, in whole or in part, 
out of amounts specified in section 7, but no such mortgage, charge, lien 
or other interest shall be enforceable against any property which has 
vested in the Central Government. 
25 (5) Any licence or other instrument granted to the Amritsar Sugar 
Mills Company in relation to the Amritsar Oil Works which has vested 
in the Central Government under section 3 at any time before the 
appointed day and in force immediately before that day shall continue 
to be in force on and after such day in accordance with its tenor in 
30 relation to, and for the purposes of, the Amritsar Oil Works, and, on and 
from the date of vesting of the Amritsar Oil Works under section 5 in 
a Government company, that Government company shall be deemed to 
be substituted in such licence or other instrument as if such licence or 
other instrument had been granted to that Government company and 
35 that Government company shall hold it for the remainder of the period 
for which the Amritsar Sugar Mills Company to which it was granted 
would have held it under the terms thereof. 
(6) If, on the appointed day, any suit, appeal or other proceeding of 
whatever nature instituted or preferred by or against the Amritsar Sugar 
40 Mills Company in relation to the Amritsar Oil Works, is pending, the 
same shall not abate, be discontinued or be, in any way, prejudicially 
affected by reason of the transfer of the Amritsar Oil Works or of any-
thing contained in this Act, but the suit, appeal or other proceeding may 
be continued, prosecuted or enforced by Or against the Central Govern-
45 ment or where the Amritsar Oil Works are directed to vest in a Govern-
ment company under section 5, by or against the Government company. 

Power of 
Central 
Govern-
ment to 
direct 
vesting 
of the 
Amritsar 
Oil 
Works 
In a 
Govern-
ment 
Company. 
The 
Amritsar 
Sugar 
Mills 
Company 
to be 
liable for 
certain 
prior 
liabilities. 
4 
5. (1) Notwithstanding anything contaihed in sections 3 and 4, the 
Central Government may, if it is satisfied that a Government company 
is willing to comply, or has complied, with such terms and conditions as 
that Government may think fit to impose, 'direct, by notification, that the 
Amritsar Oil W·.:>rks and the r:ght, title and interest of the Amritsar Sugar 5 
Mills Company 1n relation to the Amritsar Oil Works which have vested 
in the Central Government under section 3, shall, instead of continuing 
to vest in the Central Government, vest in that Government company 
either on the date of the notification or on such earlier or IRter date 
(not being a date earlier than the appointed day) as may be specified 10 
in the notification. 
(2) Where the right, title and interest in relation to the Amritsar 
Oil Works vest in a Government company under sub-section (1), the 
Government company shall, on and from the date of such vesting, be 
deemed to have become the owner of the Amritsar Oil Works and all the IS 
rights and liab:Iities of the Central Government in relation to the 
Amritsar Oil Works shall, on and from the date of such vesting, be 
deemed to have been the rights and liabilities, respectively, of the 
Government company. 
6. (1) Every liability, other than the liability specified unaer' sub- 20 
section (2), of the Amritsar Sugar Mills Company in /felation to the 
Amritsar Oil Works in respect of any period prior to the appomted day 
shall be the liability of the Amritsar Sugar Mills Company and shall be 
enforceable against it and not against the Central Government or where 
the Amritsar on Works ve9t in a Government company, against the 25 
Government company. 
(2) Any liability in respect of the amount advanced after the date of 
taking over to the Amritsar Sugar Mills Company in relation to the 
Amritsar Oil Works together with interest due thereon and the wages, 
salaTies and other dues of persons employed in the Amritsar Oil Works 30 
in respect of any period after the date of taking over shall, on and from 
the appointed day, be the liability of the Central Government and 
shall be discharged by the Central Government or, for and on behalf 
of that Government, by the Government company as and when repay-
ment of such amount becomes due or as and when such wages, salaries 35 
and other dues become due and payable. 
(3) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that,-
(a) save as otherwise expressly provided in this section or in 
any other section of this Act, no liability, other than the 
liability specified in sub-section (2), of the Amritsar Sugar Mills 40 
Company in Il'elation to the Amritsar Oil Works in respect of a 
period prior to the appointed day shall be enforceable against the 
Central Government or the Government company, as the case may 
be; 
(b) no award, decree or order of any court, tribunal or other 45 
authority in relation to the Amritsar Oil Works, passed after the 
appointed day, in respect of any matter, claim (Jr dispute 'in relation 
to any matter, not being a matter referred to in S'Ub-section (2), 
which arose before that date sh8ll be enforceable against the Central 50 
Government or the Government company, as the case may be; 

(c) no liability incurred by the Amritsar Sugar Mills 
Company before the appointed day, for the contravention, in 
relation to the Amritsar Oil Works, of any provision of law for the 
time being in force, shall be enforceable against the Central Govern-
5 ment or the Government company, as the case may be. 
CHAPTER III 
PAYMENT OF AMOUN'f 
7. (1) For the trans£er to, and vesting in, the Central Government, 
under section 3 of the Amritsar Oil Works and the right, title and interest 
10 of the Amritsar Sugar Mills Company in re!ntion to that Works, there 
shall be given by the Central Government to the Amritsar Sur.:-ar Mills 
COInyJ1n:v, in cash and in the manner specified in Chapter VI, an amOUlDt 
equal to a sum of sixty-four lakhs, forty-eight thousand, nine hundred 
and forty-four rupees and sixty-fh'e paise. 
'5 . (2) In addition to the amount specified in 8ub-section (1), there shall 
also be given to the Amritsar Sugar Mills Company by the Central 
Government an amount calcu~ated at the Tate of ten tholls~nd rupees 
per annum for the deprivntion of the Amritsar Sug-aT Milt'S Compll'Dy of 
the management of its Amritsar Oil Works for the period commencing 
20 on the date of taking over and ending with the appointed day. 
(3) The amount specified in sub-&edion (1) and the, amount 
calculated in accordance with the provisions of suh-s-c-cHon (2) shall 
carry s!mple interest at the rate of four per cent. per annum for the 
period commencing on the ~appointed dav and endin~ on the date on 
25 which payment of such amount is m~de by th,1'> Central Government 
to the Cmnmissioner. 
CHAPTER IV 
MANAGEMENT, ETC., OF AMRITSAR OIL WORKS 
8. (1) On the appointed day, the general superintendence, direction. 
30 control and management of the affairs and business of the Amritsar Oil 
Works shall,-
(a) where a direction has been made by the Central Govern-
ment under sub-section (1) of section 5, vest in the Government 
company specified in such direction; or 
35 (0) where no such direction has been made by the Central 
Government, vest in one or more Custodians appointed by the 
Central Government 'Under sub-section (2), 
and thereupon the Government· company so specifierl or the Custodian 
or' Custodians so apPOinted, as the case may be, shall be entitled to 
40 exercise, to the exclusion of all other per~ons, all such powers and do 
all such thinp:s as the Amritsar SU,Q;ar Mills Company is authorised to 
exercise and do in relation to its Amritsar Oil Works, 
Payment 
of 
amount. 
Manage-
ment, 
etc., of 
Amritsar 
Oil 
Works. 

Duty of 
persons 
in 
charge 
of 
manage-
ment of 
Amritsar 
Oil 
Works 
to 
deliver 
assets, etc. 
Duty of 
persons 
to account 
for assets, 
etc. 
Duty of 
Amritsar 
Sugar 
Mills 
Company 
to 
furnish 
particu-
lan. 
(2) The Central Government may appoint one or more individuals 
or a Government company as the Custodian or Custodians of the 
Amritsar Oil Works in relation to which no direction has been made 
by it under &"Ub-section (1) of section 5. 
(3) The Custodian or Custodians so appointed shall receive, from 
the funds of the Amritsar Oil Works, such remuneration as the Central 5 
Government may fix and shall hold office during the pleasure of the 
Central Government. 
(4) The Custodian or Custodians of the Amritsar Oil Works shall 
maintain an account of the Amritsar Oil Works in such form and manner 10 
and under such conditions as may be prescribed and the provisions of 
the Companies Act, 1956, shall apply to the audit of the accounts so 1 of 1956. 
maintained as they apply to the audit of the accounts of a company. 
9. On the vesting in the Central Government or a Government 
company of the Amritsar Oil Works, all persons in charge of the 15 
management of the Amritsar Oil Works immediately before the date of 
such vestin~, shall be bound to deliver to the Central Government or 
the Government company or to such person or body of persons as the 
Central Government or the Government company may specify in this 
behalf. all assets, books of accC1llnt. re~sters or other documents in their 20 
custody relating to the Amritsar Oil Works. 
10. (1) Every person who has, on the appointed. day, in his possession 
or under his control any assets, books, documents or other }'apers 
relating to the Amritsar Oil Works which has vested in the Central 
Government or a Government company under this Act, and which 25 
belong to the Amritsar Sugar Mills Company or would have so belonged 
if the Amritsar Oil Works had not vested in the Central Government or 
the Government companv. shall be liable to account for the said assets, 
books, documents and other papers to the Central Government or the 
Government company, as the casP. may be. and shall deliver them up to 30 
the Central Government (')r thp f;overnment coml'any or to such person 
01' bodv of peTRons as the Central Government Or the Government 
company may specify in this behalf. 
(2) The Central Government mav take or cause to be taken all 
necessary steps for seculJ'in~ posses~ion of the Amritsar Oil Works which 35 
has vested in it under section 3. 
11. The Amritsar Sugar MillR Com'Oanv shall, within such period 8S 
the Central Government may allow in this behalf. furnish to that 
("'..o,'ernment a complete inventory of all its Pl'OpPTtiP.!I and assets as on 
the ~mpointed ~av, T'I~T'1:";ninlt to the Amritsllr Oil Wal'ks wftfeh has 4.0 
vestert in thf! Central Government und ... ,. ser,tll'lO 3. and fo," th's l'ul'pose 
the Centr~l Gnv,.mment 0'" the Government. comn'lnv RhaD afford the 
Amritsar Sugar Mills CompRny all reasonable facilities. 

... 7 
CHAPTER V 
PaOYISIONS IELATlXG TO DlPIDYWI'a OF A.Jo;rI!$AR OIL Wmum 
12. (1) Every person who has been, immediately before the appointed ~e 
day, employed by flC Amritsar Sugar Mills Company in connection of 
5 with the Amritsar Oil Works shall, bec:ome.- employ-
10 
(4) on and from the appointed day, an employee of the Central 
Government; and 
(b) where the Amritsar Oil Works is directed, under sub-
section (1) of section 5, to vest in a Government company, an 
employee of that company on and from the date of such vesting, 
and shall hold office or service under the Central Government or the 
Government company, as the case may be, wit.b. the same rights and 
privileges .as to. pension, gratuity and other like matters as would have 
been~ admiss'ible to him if there had been no such vesting and shaU 
i 5 continue to. do so unless and until his employment under the ~entral 
'Government or the Government company, as the case may be, is duly 
terminated or until his remuneration or other conditions of service are 
dUly altered by. the Central Government or the Government company, 
al the ease may be. . 
gO '(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Dilputa 
14 of 1947. Act, 1947, or in any other law for the time baing in foree, the 1:raDder 
of the serviCes of any .officer or other person employed in the Amritsar 
On Works to the Central Government or the Government company 
shall not entitle such officer or other employee to any compensation 
. '. 
SIS under this Act or any other law for the time being in force and no such 
claim shall be entertained by any court, tribunal or other authority. 
13. (1) Where the AmritslH" Sugar Mills Company has established • 
provident fund, superannuation fund, welfare fund or other fund for 
the beneftt of .persons employed in the Amritsar Oil Works, the mODies 
30 relatable to the officers and other employees, whoJe 88rYices have 
become transferred by or under this Act to the Cqtral Government or 
the Government company shall, out of the moniet standing, on the 
appointed day, to the credit of such provident fund, superannuation 
fund, welfare. fund or other funds, stand transferrecl to, and veat in, 
3S .the. Central Government or the Government compaq,., as the ease may 
be. 
,- . (2) The-. monies. which stand transferred under sub-"seetion (1) to 
t~e Central Government or the Government company, u the cue may 
~. shall be dealt with py that Government or the Government company 
40 In SUch manner. as may be prescribed. 
CHAPTER Vl 
COMMISSIONDt or PAnDITS 
.. -.14 (I) TIle Ceo*,-' Govel'llment .haD, for the JMII\N*B 01 .......... 
.the_ .... ts pajable under section 'I to the Amrltaar &apr lillie Com-
'5 ':~"" ..". notUlcM1oJlJ appoint a Commillioner of PIIJIDdCs. 
ee •. 
Provi-
denlt fund 
and.,. ' 
other 
tuDela. 
ApPOhlt-
ment. of 
Commis-
s~ 
of PQ'-
men"-

.... 
Payment 
by tJhe 
Central 
Govern-
ment to 
the 
Commis-
lsioner. 
Priority 
in .... relatil)n 
'~ 
ela.imt ..... 
. , ...... ' 
• 
(2) The Central Government may. appoint such otbeir perIOns • It 
may think fit to assist the Commissioner and thereupon the CommJs. 
sioner 1IUtj. athorise' ODe or ~ ef 81leh peIIIClItB illIG!.: -..wdM all 
or any of the powers exercisable by him under this Act, and d.itrenat 
p8ri0hs:ibAly' be authoriSed to _~ di1ferent' pOWttts.' 5 
(3) Any person authorised by the Commissioner to exerelse .-ny of 
the powers exercisable by the Commissioner may exercise those powers 
in' the snme manrier and with the same effect as if they have been 
conferred on that person directly by this Act and not by way of 
authorisation. J 0 
(4) The salaries and allowances of the Commissioner and other 
pel'8ODS appointed u'nde, this section shall be defrayed out of tile 0f6t01i. 
dated FuBd of Indit 
• 
. 15. (1) The C'entral Government shall, within thirty days f.r&m·the 
sp~ifie'd date, pay, in cash, to the Comniissioner, for payment to· fIi~ 15 
Amrlisar Sugar Mills Company, an amount equal to the amotint 'P*tttfd 
in section 7. 
(2) A deposit aceount shall be opened by the Central Governmeat 
in favO'Ur of the Commissioner in the Public Account of India, and . .,~ 
amount paid under this Act to the Commissioner shall be deposited by 2Q 
kim to' the credit of the said deposit accOunt, and therea~r th~ aaid 
~t, aedOunt . allaH be operated by the Coriunf8Sioner. 
(3)' Interest accruIng on the amount staIid1iig to the credit of' tAe 
deposit account referred to in sub-section (2) shall enure to the beJldt 
of the Amrltsar Sugar Mills Company. 
18. (1) Every secured debt due from the Amritsar Sugar Mills Com-
pany. shall have priority aver all other debts and shall ber paid in ackbrd-
ance with the rights ~nd interests of the seC'Ured creditors: 
Provided that where the secured debts are due to different creditors 
bY. ·reason Of the hypothecation of different assets to them, such debt. 30 
flhall1ie ~a.jd in full in accordance with the rights and iriterests of suoh 
eriditoi's. . 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for . the 
time beiftg hi force, there shall be paid in priority to all other· uns!Cur!d 
debts,- 35 
(a) all revenues, taxes, cesseS, rateS and any other dues payable 
immediately before the appointed day, ,to the Central Govermnent, 
" State Governments, Ideal authorities and State Eleetlliclty :Boards 111 
relation to the Amritsar Oil WerkS, as the ease may be: 
(b) all amounts due in. respect of any compensation or llabU1.ty 40 
for compensation .under the Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923, in 8 of 1_ 
respect of. the death or disablement of any employee of the Amritsar 
5'Iig$- ''Mills Company in relation to the Amritsar Oil WO~I, tHilest 
.•.... th';::·~id'·:eofupani. has, under BUcha contract With !niUl'ftS'''s tlJ 
mentioned' 'lh"·ieclien 14 of ·the said Act, rights ciipllb1e ot· bMftt e 
tranifelTed to, and vested in, the workmen; 

9 
(0) . all sums deducted by .the.~ S_"Car ,M.mlt(~. 
Umb the salary.Gr w.ages ()f ,any ,employee of ,~tIbe .AJpQtfal" .\S~ 
Mills Company in relation to the Amritsar Oil Wotks ,for ~t :~ 
.lmy . prov~dI;lnt fund or any other fund e.stablishedfor tbe welfare 
5 :of • the employees but not deposited to thE' credit of such funds. . 
'.(8) . ,The debts specified insub-eection (2) eha.llll'ank .eq~yalllAA& 
themselves and be paid in full, unles.s the b.~ of 'tbe ~tleJt· 
at~r ,~t~ .the ~bilities referred to in sub-se¢,i,Q)1 .(1) .is J~l1mc*t 
toJMet ; them, in which c~e they shall a.l;>a,te in eqqal p~~portion,s. ~~;' 
10 b . aid d' 1 .. . . . 
I e .11. ,,secor mg y. . ~. -A..J,: 
17. Every person having a claim,against theAmritsar Sugar Mills 
CcNDpaAy in relation to!.tbe Aroxitsar OilWor~ksaR.al1 ~~ch cWm 
b.re the. Commis.ioner with,ip. J.birty 9a.ys~om .the ~ifi~d ~~: 
Provided. that if the Commissioner is satiBfted that the c;laimant Was 
15 "'Preven~d'-by sufficient cause from preferring the -claim within th& .. said· 
period· of . thi·rty days,' he mayentertam the claim within a further 
period ·Gf thirty days, but not thereafter . 
. . 11. .(1) . T~ ~o.mmissioner s~al1 fix a date on or be~ore wl:rlch every. 
.cl.i.iDlant shall 1Ue the proof of his. claim . failing ,which . he wijl ~e. 
20 e~ded from the .benefit of the disbursements m(lde Q)', ~e<:c:.,m­
missioner. 
(Z) Not less than fourteen days' notice of the date so fixed shall be 
giv~n by advertis~ment in one issue of any daily ~wspaper iU 'the 
~~glish language having circulation in the major. p~ of the country 
25 and in· one issue of any daily newspaper in such regional languaJe as 
the Commissioner may consider suitable, and every such notice- shall 
call upon the claimant to file the proof of his claim with the Com-
nPssioner within the period specified in the advertisement. 
; .(3) Every claimant who. fails to file the :proof. of ,his ~Un ;>v,i~ 
30 the period specified by .t~ .. CqlIlm~sioner shall be .exolud.ed ~m.·.~he. 
disbursements made by the Commissioner. 
(4) The Commissioner shall, after such investigation as may, in his 
opinion, be necessary and after. ,giviBg \the;Amritsar Sugar Mills Company 
an,{iPp~~y ofi~fu~g,t~e claUp.;;and,~~~ Si~JP.e .. ;c;1~t, a 
3"~Z~~ QP'po;t~ty of~ng ~ard,. by. 0~4er, in'''!'~i,~t\,~ 
~ ~l1e ~Jl~.in :~hole or in part. 
.' (5) The;~ioner shall have the power to regulate biB oWn 
procedure in all matters arising out of the discharge of his 1uneti9Jii, 
iZ)d~dUlg .theplace or pl~c::es at \Y'hich he will hold his.s~ttiIlgs .. ~ s~ll, 
4O.f4»r. tbe,purp.oseof malcingany investiga ti9n under this Act, have ~he.,~~!Jle .. 
po.Vl~sas, ~~e vest~ In a civil court under the Code of Ci~ Pr~cedu~, 
I of 1908. 19()8, .while trying a suit, .in ~pec,:t. of the foll:owing matte!ll, naplely::-
(a) the summoning a~d enforcing the attendance Df.;any ,wit~SB 
aIld.e)l:ami~g .~,on oath; 
45' .(.0) ·,the ,discovery and production of any documellt or oU1er 
:lPatel'jal ob~t produc;ible as evidence; 
(c) . the reception of evidence' on. aftldavita; 
(d) the issuing of any commission for the examination of 
witnesses. 
50 (6) Any investigation before the Commissioner shall be deemed to be 
a judicial proceeding within the meaning of sections 193 and 228 of the 
Claims 
to be 
ma4e 
to the 
Com~J4-
sion~:r. 
Proof ot 
clail'Dl. 

Dlabune-
ment .. of 
~ 
bytbe 
Commis. 
8ioner to 
clai-
manti. 
Undia-
buned or 
unclaimed 
amount 
to be 
deposited 
to the 
Jenera! 
revenue 
account. 
Act to 
have 
o~ 
ridinJ 
effect. 
Contract. 
to 
ceue 
to 
have 
effect! 
UDl~ 
~ed 
bytbe 
Central 
Govern-
ment or 
Gaven&-
mas ti 
C'QIIlP&IlJ' • 
10 
Ind:iaD Penal Code and th& Comm.j~cmer shall be, deemed tQ be a civil 4& of 1880-
cOUrt ·for the purpoIe of section 1~ and CbapterXXVI ot the Code of 
0rimiDal· Procecl\n, 1973. . 2 of 1974. 
(7) A claimant, who is dissatisfied with the decision of the Commis-
sioner, may prefer an appeal &pinat the decision to the principal civil 5 
CGUrt of original jurisdiction within the local limits of whose jurisdiction 
the Anuitsar 00 Works is situate<i: 
Pl'dvided that where a person who is a Judge of a High Court is' 
appOlI1ted to be the Commissioner, such appeal shall lie to the High 
Court of Punjab and Haryana and such appeal shall be heard and dia~ 10 
posed of by not leas than two Judi,es of that High Court. 
It. Where, alter meetine the c1aitns admitted by him of secured 
creditors, and unsecured creditors lulvine priority under sub-section (Z) 
of . section 16, the total amount of the claims of other unsec'..tred credi-
tors admitted by the Commissioner does not exceed the balance of the 15 
amount left after meeting the liabilities referred to in sub-sections (1) 
and (2) of section 16, every admitted claim of such other unsecured 
creditors, shall rank equally amons themselves and be paid in full, and 
the balance, if any, ahall be paid to the Amritsar Sugar Mills Company; _ 
but where such amount is insufticient to meet in full the total amount '20 
of suCh admitted ciahns, all such claims shall abate in equal proportions 
and be paid accordingly. 
20. Any money paid to the Commissioner which remainsundisbui-sed 
or Unclaimed on the date immediately preceding the date on which the 
oftlce of the Commissioner is finally wound up, shall be . paid by the.2 5 
Commissioner, before his oftice is finally wound up to the generall'evenue 
accouut of the Central Government; bl1t a claim to any money so tra~ 
£erred may be preferred to the Central Government by the person 
entitled to such payment and shall be dealt with as if such transfer had 
not'" been made, and the orcisr, if any, for payment of the claim being 3 
tteated as an order far the !'efund of the revenue. 
CHAPTER VII 
MmcaJ.AlfIIlO.l)'S 
,.; ZI. The provisions of th1s Act shall have efrect notwithstanding any-
tbmg inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time 5S 
being in force or in any instrument having effect by virtue of any ·law, 
other than this Act, or in any decree or order of any court, tribunal or 
other authority. 
, 22. Every contract, entered into by the Amritsar S'ugar Mills Company 
in relation to the Amritsar Oil Works which has vested in the Central 40, 
Government under section 3, tor any service, sale or supply 'and in force 
immediately before the appointed day, shall, on and from the expiry 
of a period of thirty days from the appoInted day, cease to have effect 
unless such contract is, before the expiry of that period, ratified, in 
writing, by the Central Government or the Government company and 45,:-
in ratifying such contract the Central Government or the Government 
company may make such alteration or modilieation therein as it may 
tlilitk' fit: 
. . 

5 
15 
20 
...... - ......... " ... '.-" ... :' .. 
l " ~'. ' '~.,. 11 
, Provi4~ that the Cen~rat Gqvernment or the Government company 
slallU ~t :::omit t~ ratify aCQDu-aet 8lldsball not m.u any alteration or 
m~~tionin 'a ~ontract-
(a) unless it is satisfied that such contract is unduly onerpus or 
has been entered into in bad faith or is detrimental to the interest 
'of the Central Govemment or the Government company; and 
(b) except after giving the parties to the contract a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard and except after recording in writing its 
reasons for refusal to ratify the contract or for making any alteration 
or modification therein. 
13. Any person who,-
(s) having in his possession, custody or control any property 
forming part of the Amritsar Oil Works, wrongfully withholds such 
property from the Central Government or the Government company; 
or 
(b) wrongfully obtains posSession of, or retains, any property 
forming part of, the Amritsar Oil Works; or 
(c) wilfully withholds or fails to furnish. to the Central Govern-
ment Or, the Government company or any person or body of pers~ns 
specified by that Government or the Government company, as the 
case may be, any document relating to the Amritsar Oil Works which 
may be in his possession, cus~y or control; or 
(d) wilfully fails to deliver to the Central Government any 
inventory of property and asset forming part of the Amritsar Oil 
Works; or 
(e) fails to deliver to t~ Central Government or the Govern-
ment company or any person or body of persons specified by that 
Government or the Government company, any assets, books of 
account, registers or other documents in his possession, custody or 
. control relating to theAmritsar Oil W91'ks; Or 
. (j) wropgfUlly removes or destroys any property forming part 
.', 'Of 'the -Anl1'itsar OU'Workaor prefers any claim under this Act which 
;' he knows' or has reason to believe to be false Or grossly inaccurate, 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
35 two years, or with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees, or 
with both. . 
24. (1) Where an ottenca under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was 
in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct of 
40 the business of the company, sa well as the company, shall be deemed 
'. to ,be guilty of the offence and 'shall be liable to be proceeded against 
arid puriished accordmgly: . 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any 
such person liable to any punishment, if he proves that the offence 
45 was committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised all due 
1.,.~QUjgencete"preveDt the c:ommiasion of such offence. 
Penal-
ties. 
Offence, 
by 
com-
panies. 

... 
Protection 
of action 
taken 
in good 
faith. 
Delega-
tion of 
powers. 
Power to 
make 
rules. 
lt' 
(2) NotWithstaiiding :'&nythin!lr :contamad 'In' 'sub4eetiGb (:J:), ..... 
any often:ce dnder Ulti,ACtlhu','bMnt~ bY',,"llompany'.utl:tt:ta 
proved that the offence has been committed withthe'ccmsent 'at' "'CGI1-
nivance of, or is attributable to JUly n~glect.entbe part ot,any.director, 
manager, secretary or other officer of the c~y, ,such "director, 5 
manager, secretary or other .officer shall be deemed to he . jplilty .:of I that , 
offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accord~ 
in!i1Y· . 
E:rpla71ation . ....:..For the purposes of' this section,-
(a) "company" means any body corporate : and inc1u_ .'a ftrm 10 
or other association of individuals; and 
(b) "director", in relation to a firm, means~t'1'9.rtaer(in'the Arm. 
25. (1) No suit, prosecutign or,otherl~..p:tOceeding.shaU lie against 
the Central' Government or any officer of that Govenunent- or, the ,Gov-
ernment company or other person author.ised ,by that ,Gover.amant or 15 
the Government company for anything which is in good faith doAt! or 
intended to be done under this Act. 
(2) No suit or other leg&l,.~~8ba1l lieragainst.·the .GenUa! 
Government or any of its ofticers Or other employees or the Government 
company or any ofticer or, o1lber:.person authori8ed by that company for 20 
any damage caused. or likely to ·beea.uaeid:by[aa,tbing.wIUCh· il in'lgood 
faith done or intended to bed01!le under'tbis1Act. 
26. (1) The Centl'alGownunent may,'by·notiftcaticm, direct that all 
or any of the powers exercisable by it under this Act, ,other than the 
powers conferred by sections 2'7 and' 28,' may' also be· exercised: by such 25 
person 'or persons as 'may be'spec'tfled in the' notifteation. 
(2) Whenever any delegation of power is made under sub-section 
(1) " the person to whom'such 'power' has' been"delegated 'shaTI 'act under 
the' direction, control'mid supervision of "the &mtral Government. 
"27. (1) TheCentr81 Government m~y, i)y.,notificatiotl,..make tule& for SO 
carrying out the provisions of this 'Act. 
'(~) In' partieUl8r, and -without p~judice to the aener8l.\tyof .the Jore-
go1t1g powers, such rules ~ provide isJr ,aU or.any. of the. follQwing 
matters, namely:-
(a) the time within which, and the. manner in which,.an jnti~)35 
reation reterred to in sUb-section (3) of section 4 shall be given; 
(b) the form and manner in which, and. the conciWoua, \UUler 
which, the Custodian ,or Custodians s1i8J.I,maintain, accounts .. as 
required by sub-section (4) of section. 8; 
(c) the tn8l1ller in Which" the monies in ~y provident:tund,or.40 
otherfurtd, r'eferred' to"in' sub-sel:t1on (2) of, seCtion 13 shill ,be 
dealt with; 
(d) any other matter which is requir~d' to be, or may be" :pre. 
ctlbed. 
, :' '. ", .. 
(3) Every rule made~Dy.~.ee*al.:~~:iitJe-lAl:i)...u.'1t5 
be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parlia-

. .1D8I1i. while;ii is.in aeaaiondar ill total period of thirty· days which may 
~ ·campm.f.iDtoIm S!I!8IiOIb Gr'·in.: two, or more auaeessiV8 sessions.~· if, 
baiera. tna: expir.y at the: S1II8ion: immediately· following the session or 
the: 8uceusive sessiona afoDeS8td:, both Houses agree in making any modifi-
5 cmtion, in. the. ru.le OJ!" both. Houses: agree that. the rule should not be made, 
tile rule·thali 1Ibernfter have eft'ect only in such modified fonn or be 
e1uo:'e1fectt, as tbec:ase ID1I¥ ~ so, however, that any such modiftcation 
or annulment shall be without prejlldice to the validity of anything pre-
viousliy done 11Ddar that rule. 
10 21. It any. difficulty arises; in givm, effect to the provisions of this Act, 
the Central Government may, .~ order, not inconsistent with the pro-
~siooa of tru.. Acrt, remove the.' dlftlculty: 
Pmvided that no such order shall be J;D&de. after the expiry o~ a l'eriod 
of two years from the appointed day. 
Power 
to 
remove 
difftcul-
ties. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Amritsar Sugar Mills Company Limited is a public limited 
company incorporated in 1924 with ita head office at A.mritsa4'. It hu 
two units, viz., the Amritsar Oil Works, Amritsar and the Anu·~tsar Sugar 
Mills at Rohankalan, Uttat Pradesh. The company was not being 
rnana~~d in a manner befitting its size and position. This led to gross. 
mismanagement and grave financial irregularities in its working. As a 
result, the Amritsar Oil Works remained closed for nearly 18 months. 
The management of the Amritsar Oil Works, one 'of the two units of the 
company was, therefore, taken over in September, 1974 by the Central 
Government under section IBM of the Industries (Development and 
Regulation) Act, 1951. The Amritsar Sugar Mills at Rohankalan had· 
initially been taken over for management by the Government of Uttar 
Pradesh under the Defence of India Rules. Later, on the expiry of the 
Defence of India Rules, it was taken over by the Government of Uttar 
Pradesh under the Uttar Pradesh Zamindar1 Abolition and Land Reforms 
Act. Since then the unit is being managed by a receiver appointed by 
the Government of Uttar Pradesh. 
2. The Amritsar Oil Works along with the Ganesh Flour Mills Com-
pany Limited, an undertaking also managed by the Central Government 
under section 18AA of the Industries (Development and Regulation) 
Act, 1951, have been refining crude rapeseed oil imported from abroad 
for supply to the public distribution system all over the country. It has 
also been producing wholesome vanaspati for sale at reasonable prices 
in the open market. The unit has, thus, been playing an important role 
in the supply of commodities essential to the needs of the common man. 
It is intended further to extend the role of this unit by means of expan-
sion of its production capacity and diversification of its production 
function as a part of the nucleus of the instrumentalities under the public 
sector so as to provide Government a commanding role in the regulation 
of the e<lihle oil economy. Certain schemes for this purpose are under 
preparation. 
3. The Amritsar Oil Works had a negative networth at the time of its 
take-over in September, 1974· and on its own it was not in a position to 
raise the necessary funds and provide the managerial inputs to bring it 
back to running condition. Under the management of the Government, 
financial loan was provided by the Industrial Reconstruction Corporation 
of India and guarantee for working capital was provided by the State 
Bank of India. Besides this, considerable managerial and technical inputs 
have been provided to bring the Amritsar Oil Works to its current 
healthy situation. In order to enable it to play the role envisaged for it 
under Government's policy for regulating the edible oil economy, it is 
necessary to make further investments for modernisation of its machinery 
and diversification of its activities. It is felt that further investments for 
such purposes should be preceded by some arrangement which ensures 
continuity of management of the Amritsar Oil Works under the Central 
Government. It is, therefore, proposed to acquire the undertakings of 
the Amritsar Sugar Mills Company Ltd. in relation to the Amritsar Oil 
Works. 
4. The BUl seeks to achieve the above obiects. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 30th September, 1982. BHAGWAT JHA AZAP. 

PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF THE 
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
(Copy of letter No. 18 (10) /82-EOP, dated the 30th September, 1982 
from Shri Bhagwat Jha Azad, Minister of Civil Aviation and Civil 
Supplies to the Secretary, Lok Babha.) 
The President having been informed of the subject matter of the 
Amritsar Oil Works (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Bill, 
1982, recommended to Lok Sabha under Article 117(1) of the Constitu-
tion of India the introducti·on of the Bill and its consideration under 
Article 117 (3) . 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the acquisition of the Amritsaj- Oil
Works, an undertaking of the Amritsar Sugar Mills Company Limited
bythe Central Government. Sub-clause (1) of clause 7 provides for the
payment in cash and in the manner specified in Chapter VI of the Bill,
of an amount of Rs. 64,4'8,944.65(Rupees sixty-four lakhs forty-eight
thousand nine hundred forty-four and paise sixty-five only) for vesting
in the Central Government, the right, title and interest of the Amritsar
Sugar Mills Company in relation to the Amritsar Oil Works.
2.Sub-clause (2) of clause 7 of the Bill provides for payment of a
further amount in cash, in consideration for the deprivation of the
Amritsar Sugar Mills Company of the management of its Amritsar Oil
Works, calculated at the rate of Rs. 10,000(Rupees ten thousand only) per
annum, for the period, commencing on the date on which the manage-
ment of the Amritsar Oil Works was taken over by the Central Govern-
ment and ending on the appointed day. It is estimated that this amount
will be of the order of Rs. ~1,000 (Rupees eighty-one thousand only).
3. Sub-clause (3) of clause 7 of the Bill provides for payment of
simple interest at the rate of 4 per cent. per annum in respect of the
amounts payable under sub-clauses (1) and (2) of clause 7, for the
period commencing on the appointed day and ending on the date on
which the payment of the amount is made by the Central Government
to the Commissioner of Payments. It is estimated that this amount is
likely to be of the order of Rs. 22,000 (Rupees twenty-two thousand
only) per month.
4.Clause 14 of the Bill provides for the appointment of a Commis-
sioner or Payments by the Central Government with adequate staff to
assist him for the purpose of disbursing the amounts payable to the
Amritsar Sugar Mills Company. The salary and allowances of the
Commissioner of Payments and his staff and the expenditure on office
and establishment will be defrayed out of the Consolidated Fund of
India. The estimated expenditure on this account is likely to be of the
order of Rs. 15,000(Rupees fi..fteenthousand only) per month.
5. The Bill, if enacted, is not likely to involve any other recurring or
non-recurring expenditure.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 27 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make
rules to carry out the provisions of the Act. The matters in respect of
which rules may be made, interalia)relate to the time within which, and
the manner in which, an intimation regarding any mortgage, charge, lien,
etc., on the property which has vested in the Central Government may
be given to the Commissioner of Payments, the form and manner in
which, and the condition under which, account shall be maintained by
the Custodian and such other matters as are required to be specified by
rules.
2.The matters in respect of which rules may be made are matters of
procedure or administrative detail. The delegation of legislative power
is, thus, normal in character. ~


LOK SABHA 
.: 
BILL 
to provide for the acquisition and transfer of the right, title and interest 
of the undertakings of the Amritsar Sugar Mills Company in rela-
tion to the Amritsar Oil Works with a view to sustaining and 
strengthening the nucleus of public owned or controlled units 
required for ensuring supply of wholesome vanaspati and refined 
edible oils to the public at reasonable prices and thereby to give 
effect to the policy of the State towards securing the principlf's 
specified in clauses (b) and (e) of article 39 of the Constitution. 
(Shri Bha.gwa.t Jha. Aza.d, 
Minister of Civil Aviation and 
Civil Su.pplies,) 