THE FARMERS' FREEDOM FROM INDEBTEDNESS BILL, 2018
By
SHRI RAJU SHETTI, M.P.
——————
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
——————
CLAUSES
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. Short title, extent and commencement.
2. Definitions.
CHAPTER II
ONE TIME  I MMEDIATE L OAN W AIVER
3. Right of farmer to receive one-time immediate and complete loan waiver.
CHAPTER III
RIGHT TO ACCESS  INSTITUTIONAL  CREDIT
4. Right of every farmer to access institutional credit.
CHAPTER IV
DEBT R ELIEF FOR F ARMERS  AFFECTED  BY D ISTRESS  AND D ISASTERS
5. Debt Relief for Farmers affected by Distress and Natural Disasters.
CHAPTER V
NATIONAL F ARMERS ’ DISTRESS  AND D ISASTER  R ELIEF  C OMMISSION
6. Constitution of the National Commission.
7. Terms of the Commission.
8. Resignation of member.
9. Vacancies of membership.
10. Removal of a member.
11. National Commission to regulate its own procedure.
12. Power and functions of the National Commission.
13. Central Government to notify distress affected area or distress affected crop.
14. Provisions for orders for relief to distress affected farmers.
15. Power of a Civil Court.
16. Sittings of the Commission.
17. Bar and Injunction on proceedings against a distress affected farmer.
A
S INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 118 of  2018

18. Transparent functioning and Annual Report to be laid before the Parliament.
19. Accounts and Audit.
CHAPTER VI
STATE F ARMERS ’ DISTRESS  AND DISASTER  RELIEF  COMMISSION
20. Constitution of State Farmers’ Distress and Disaster Relief Commission.
21. Terms of the State Commission.
22. Powers and functions of the State Commission.
23. State Government to notify distress affected area or distress affected crop.
24. Sittings of the State Commission.
25. Provisions for Orders from State Commission for relief to distress affected
farmers.
26. Bar and Injunction on proceedings against a distress affected farmer, as per
State Commission recommendations.
27. Transparent functioning and Annual report to be laid before the State Legislative
Assembly.
28. Accounts and Audit related to State Commission.
CHAPTER VII
O
BLIGATIONS  OF C ENTRAL  GOVERNMENT
29. Central Government to constitute a Fund to waive off loan, etc.
30. Exemption from attachment of property and prohibition of penal interest and
excessive cumulative interest.
31. Reform of Priority Lending Norms and ensuring compliance.
32. Effective disaster relief and crop insurance.
33. Promotion of low cost ecological agriculture.
CHAPTER VIII
M
ISCELLANEOUS
34. Overriding effect of Act.
35. Bar of jurisdiction of Civil Court.
36. Members and Staff of Commissions deemed Public Servants.
37. Protection of action taken in good faith.
38. Power to remove difficulties.
39. Power to make rules.
(ii)
C
LAUSES

1
THE FARMERS' FREEDOM FROM INDEBTEDNESS BILL, 2018
By
SHRI RAJU SHETTI,  M.P.
A
BILL
to confer a right on indebted farmers to obtain an immediate one-time complete waiver of
outstanding loan; right to obtain institutional credit; protection of debt traped
farmers suffering from natural disasters or distress  and constitution of a National
Farmers' Distress and Disaster Relief Commission and State Farmers' Distress and
Disaster Relief Commissions with power to pass awards and recommend appropriate
measures for the relief to farmers in distress and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
W
HEREAS the nation is indebted to farmers for ensuring food security and food
sovereignty for the nation;
AND WHEREAS thousands of farmers are committing suicide every year across the
nation due to agrarian distress and related indebtedness adding up to more than three lakh
farmers suicide in the past twenty years;
A
ND WHEREAS the Government is obligated to prevent farmer suicides and distress
under article 21 of the Constitution, particularly as the causes of farmers suicide are related
to Government policies;
Bill  No. 118 of  2018
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
AND WHEREAS  safeguarding the right to livelihood is an essential part of the right to life
under Article 21 of the Constitution;
AND WHEREAS  farm commodity prices have been kept low as a policy measure with
several regulations on marketing, and the recommendation of the National Farmers'
Commission to fix the minimum support prices with at least fifty per cent. profit margin over
and above the comprehensive cost of cultivation has not been implemented for the past
twelve years, thus adversely affecting farmers' net returns from agriculture reflected in official
surveys with a vast majority of farmers having negative net returns, thereby debts being
accumulated by farmers;
A
ND WHEREAS  the successive Governments have not effectively fulfilled their
responsibilities to provide comprehensive institutional credit facilities, to provide due
recognition and full inclusion to many categories of cultivators including landless and lessee
cultivators, women farmers and tribal farmers, to execute effective risk insurance and disaster
relief measures, to keep input prices in check, to create large scale shift from high external
input agriculture to sustainable agriculture, and to build infrastructure, all of which have in
turn resulted in losses for farmers leading to debt;
A
ND WHEREAS many districts in the country are afflicted by severe distress due to the
agrarian crisis, and it ruined many farmers financially and led to suicides;
AND WHEREAS several suits and other proceedings have been filed in courts, tribunals
and before other authorities for the recovery of debts accrued from farmers, accompanied by
harassment and defamation in public by creditors;
A
ND WHEREAS it is expedient to provide relief to the farmers who are in distress due to
indebtedness by providing a one-time immediate and complete loan waiver to all farmers;
AND WHEREAS it is necessary to reform the institutional credit support system to prevent
a future debt trap for the farmers, by providing access to institutional credit as a right to all
categories of farmers, and by providing protection from debt trap to farmers suffering from
losses due to disasters and distress;
A
ND WHEREAS the Supreme Court has provided guidance for harmonisation of entry 45
of List I of the Seventh Schedule (Union List) and entry 30 of List II of the Seventh Schedule
(State List);
A
ND WHEREAS the conditions of agrarian crisis and indebtedness of farmers as well as
increasing incidence of natural calamities due to climate change are common in various
States across the nation and require to be addressed at the National level, with resource
support from the Centre and implementation at both the national and State levels.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth year of the Republic of India, as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Farmers' Freedom from Indebtedness Act, 2018.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force within one month from the date of assent by the President.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "agriculture" includes cultivation of seasonal and annual crops, horticulture,
farming and growing of medicinal plants, crops and intercrops, plantation crops like
coconut, arecanut, vanilla and pepper, tuber crops like tapioca, fruits, vegetables, milk
production, gathering of minor forest produce, fishing, production of flowers, grass,
fodder grass and trees or any kind of cultivation of soil, raising nursery, breeding and
keeping of livestock including fish and mussels, bees, silkworm, poultry, duck, cattle
or pigs or any other primary production activity;
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Definitions.
5
10

3
(b) "agricultural commodity" means all cereals, millets, pulses, oilseeds, fibre
crops, horticulture crops of fruits and vegetables, plantation crops, spice crops, tuber
crops, medicinal plants, all varieties of milk, minor forest produce, flowers, grass,
fodder grass and tree produce, nursery produce, all livestock and animal products like
meat, eggs and poultry, honey, silkworm cocoons, all fishery produce like fish mussel,
marine fish and freshwater aquatic produce, and all such other primary produce and
agricultural commodity with all its cognate expressions;
(c) "agricultural expert" includes a person with at least fifteen years of experience
of policy making or management or field work in agriculture-related sectors including
rural banking services for agriculture;
(d) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(e) "debt" means any liability, including that incurred for agricultural production,
including purchase and rearing of cattle and other livestock improvement of production
infrastructure and services (cattleshed, pump house, farm machinery and equipment,
processing and value addition), basic needs of the household like survival, health and
education, whether secured or unsecured, due from a farmer, whether payable under a
contract or under a decree or order of any Court or Tribunal or otherwise, and includes
any sum payable to—
(i) an institutional creditor; or
(ii) a private creditor,
but does not include any loan amount taken by the farmer for commercial purposes or
luxury other than agricultural and allied purposes;
(f) "district" means a revenue district;
(g) "distress affected area" means revenue district or districts or part thereof in
any State or several States or the entire country as declared by the Government under
sections 8 and 19 on the recommendations of the National Commission or a State
Commission for the purpose of this Act, where farmers are affected by acute distress
due to reasons as the case may be, including natural calamities, failure of crop due to
extensive pest or disease attack, widespread supply of adulterated or spurious inputs,
extensive destruction by wild animals, price crash and such other reasons;
(h) "distress affected crop" means any crop or crops of any State or the entire
country, as declared by the Government under sections 9 and 20 on the recommendation
of the National Commission or a State Commission, as the case may be, for the purpose
of this Act including natural calamities, destruction by wild animals, price crash, failure
of crop due to reasons including natural calamities, failure of crop due to extensive
pest or disease attack, widespread supply of adulterated or spurious inputs, extensive
destruction by wild animals, price crash, and such other reasons;
(i) "distress affected farmer" means a farmer declared as such by the Commission
(National or State) or any farmer who is practicing agriculture in a distress affected area
as declared by the Commission or who is cultivating a distress affected crop as declared
by Commission;
(j) "farmer" means a person actively engaged in the economic and/or livelihood
activity of growing crops or producing other primary agricultural commodities with or
without land ownership, including all agricultural operational holders, cultivators,
sharecroppers, tenants, lessee cultivators, adivasi farmers, tribal farmers, agricultural
labourers, poultry and livestock rearers, fisherpeople, beekeepers, pastoralists, non-
corporate planters of plantation crops and planting labourers, forest-gatherers, women
farmers and self-help groups doing-cultivation on collectively owned or leased-in
land;
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

4
(k) "financial institution" means any financial institution constituted by or under
any Central Act or State Act for the time being in force and registered with the
Government, including non-banking financial institution;
(l) "institutional creditor" means Scheduled Banks in the public and private
sector, Regional Rural Banks, Co-operative Societies, Non-Banking Financial
Companies, Micro-Finance Institutions and includes the State Bank of India or any
Subsidiary Bank within the meaning of clause ( k)  of section 2 of the State Bank of
India (Subsidiary Bank) Act, 1959 or any other Scheduled Bank;
(m) "interest" means any amount payable in excess of the principal amount
borrowed or pecuniary obligation incurred by whatsoever name such amount may be
called, whether the same is expressly mentioned or not in the document or contract, if
any;
(n) "member" means a member of the National Commission or a State Commission
and includes the Chairperson;
(o) "National Commission" means the National Farmers' Distress and Disaster
Relief Commission constituted under section 6;
(p) "penal interest" means any amount payable in excess of interest on a debt;
(q) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules under this Act;
(r) "principal amount" means the amount originally advanced together with the
amount, if any, as has been subsequently advanced, notwithstanding any stipulation
to treat any interest as capital and notwithstanding that the debt has been renewed,
whether by the same farmer or by his heirs, assignees or legal representatives or by
any other person acting on his behalf or in his interest; and whether in favour of the
some creditor or his heirs, assignees or legal representatives or any other person
acting on his behalf or in his interest, and whether in favour of the same creditor or his
heirs assignees or legal representatives or of any other person acting on his behalf or
in his interest;
(s) "private creditor" means any person engaged in lending money, whether
under a licence or not or providing credit in the form of inputs and implements, and
includes his heirs, legal representatives, assignees, and any other person as may be
notified by the Government;
(t) "production loan" means short term loan borrowed for meaning the running
or routine costs of producing an agricultural commodity;
(u) "Secretary" means the Secretary to the National Commission or State
Commission appointed under section 6 or section 17, as the case may be; and
(v) "State Commission" means the State Farmers' Distress and Disaster Relief
Commission constituted under section 16.
CHAPTER II
O
NE-TIME IMMEDIATE LOAN WAIVER
3. (1) Every farmer, including distress affected farmer shall be entitled to an immediate
and unconditional waiver of the entire amount of outstanding institutional debt as defined in
section 2 (e), as on 1st of April, 2018;
(2) Every farmer after repayment of debt who have repaid debt from the financial year
preceding the cut-off period in sub-section (1) shall have his accounts credited with the
amount of scale of finance for the crop grown and interest paid within three months of the
commencement of this Act;
(3) The loan waiver shall be implemented in a single installment by the Government
within three months of the commencement of this Act;
(4) The Central Government shall ensure that all farmers get fresh loans to every
farmer in the ensuing season without any impact of the implementation of loan waiver;
(5) The Central Government shall, after due  appropriation made by Parliament by
law in this behalf, provide sufficient funds to the State Governments to implement waiver of
loans from Cooperative Banks;
Right of
farmer to
receive one-
time
immediate
and complete
loan waiver.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

5
(6) All private debts of farmers, shall stand null and void, as on date of waiver of
outstanding debt as mentioned under sub-section ( 1) and no proceeding or suit shall lie
against the farmer for the principal or interest:
Provided that a private creditor may file a claim for recovery from Government, of the
principal amount of such a loan after establishing the existence of the loan as per prescribed
procedure and subject to prescribed requirements and limits and there shall be no recovery
of debt from the farmer.
(7) The Central Government shall issue a notification for implementation of the
provisions sub-section (6) immediately after the commencement of this Act.
(8) The Central Government shall, within three months of the commencement of this
Act, take up special measures for providing relief on priority basis to farmer suicide
affected families, which shall include—
(a) complete waiver of outstanding loans;
(b) return of any land, equipment or other asset that may have been attached or
confiscated by any institutional or private creditor in lieu of debt; and
(c) appropriate livelihood support as per prescribed guidelines.
CHAPTER III
R
IGHT TO ACCESS INSTITUTIONAL CREDIT
4. (1) Every farmer including distress affected farmer shall be entitled to production
loans from institutional creditors at subsidized interest rates:
Provided that—
(a) production loans up to rupees three lakhs shall be available to the farmer at
zero interest rate and this limit be revised periodically;
(b) the amount of production loan for crop cultivation shall be as per prescribed
scale of finance for the crop being cultivated with a small consumption loan component.
(2) Every farmer including a lessee farmer, tenant farmer, share-croper, woman
farmer, tribal farmer or a farmer of such category engaged in cultivation of crops on an
extent of land but does not possessing the title for that land shall be registered and issued
a Kisan Credit Card, within six months from the commencement of this Act:
Provided that—
(a) the cultivator shall, without any collateral security other than hypothecation
of crop, be entitled to production loan as per sub-section (1); and
(b) the Kisan Credit Card shall be issued for a minimum period of five years and
may be renewed after five years or modified during the period of validity as per
prescribed procedure.
CHAPTER IV
D
EBIT RELIEF FOR FARMERS AFFECTED BY DISTRESS AND DISASTERS
5. When a natural disaster or calamity is declared by the Central Government, the
farmer shall be entitled to relief from repayment of the production loan to the extent of the
loss of crop or other production with fresh loans issued for the next season within one
month of declaration of such disaster or calamity:
Provided that—
(i) loans other than production loans shall be rescheduled for three years with
interest rates not exceeding two per cent.; and
(ii) loans shall be waived off in full in case of farmers who are affected by two
consecutive years of natural disaster.
Right to
every farmer
to access
institutional
credit.
Debt Relief
for Farmers
affected by
Distress and
Natural
Disasters.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

6
CHAPTER V
NATIONAL FARMERS' DISTRESS AND DISASTER RELIEF COMMISSION
6. (1) The Central Government shall, within six months after implementing loan
waiver under section 3, and within a maximum of twelve months from the commencement of
this Act. by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute a Commission to be known as the
National Farmers' Distress and Calamity Relief Commission, for exercising the powers
and performing the functions and responsibilities defined under section 8.
(2) The Commission shall consist of—
(a) an eminent agricultural scientist or retired Vice Chancellor of an Agricultural
University—Chairperson;
(b) Two agricultural experts including experts in rural banking for agriculture—
Members;
 (c) five representative of farmers, including leaders of farmers unions and
persons with a proven record of having worked on farmers' issues—Members; and
(d) a person with proven record of work with cooperative sector farmer producer
organisations or agricultural banking—member:
Provided that one of the members shall be designated as Vice Chairperson so that
proceedings are not affected in the absence of the Chairperson for any reason.
Provided further that at least one of the members nominated under clause (iii) and (iv)
shall be a woman.
(3)  The Chairperson and members shall be nominated by the President of India on the
recommendation of a Selection Committee after seeking applications from eligible candidates
wide publicity by the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers' Welfare.
(4)  The Selection Committee shall consist of—
(a) the Prime Minister of India who shall be the Chairperson,
(b) the Leader of Opposition in the House of People or the leader of the single
largest party or group in Opposition in the House of People; and
(c) the Union Minister for Agriculture and Farmers Welfare:
Provided further that a person shall be disqualified for appointment as a member if
he,—
(a) has been convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for an offence which
involves moral turpitude; or
(b)  is an undischarged insolvent; or
(c) is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court; or
(d) has been removed or dismissed from the service of the Government or a body
corporate owned or controlled by the Government; or
(e) has such financial or other interest, as is likely to affect prejudicially the
discharge of his functions as a member; or
(f) has such other disqualifications as may be prescribed by the Government.
(5) The Selection Committee shall, while nominating a member under clause (iii) and
(iv) of sub-section (2), take into consideration diversity in representation in terms of region,
gender and social background including Scheduled Castes and the Seheduled Tribes.
(6) The Central Government shall ensure that no member including Chairperson
represents any financial, commercial or other interest which may prejudicially affect the
discharge of his functions on the Commission:
Constitution
of the
National
Commission. 5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

7
Provided that no person associated with a farmers' organization may be disqualified on
that ground alone.
(7)   The Central Government shall, in addition to providing all infrastructure facilities
required including office space and other facilities appoint a Secretary and other staff as
may be necessary to assist the Commission in such manner as may be prescribed.
(8) In the discharge of their duties, the Secretary and other staff referred to in
sub-section (7) above shall be subject to the administrative control of the Chairperson.
(9) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of
Chairperson, member, secretary and staff of the National Commission shall be such as may
be prescribed.
7. (1) The term of the National Commission shall be five years:
Provided that, the Central Government shall re-constitute the National Commission
at least ten  months prior to the end of the tenure of the current Commission:
Provided further that the existing National Commission may continue to function
for upto one additional year if required till new Commission is constituted.
8. A member may, by writing under his hand and address to the Chairperson, resign
from his office at any time.
9. A vacancy arising by reason of resignation of any member of the National Commission
under sub-section ( 2) or otherwise shall be filled up in accordance with the provisions
contained in section 6:
Provided that the person so appointed shall hold office only for the remaining
period of term of the person, in whose place he is appointed;
10. The Central Government may remove any member, if he,—
(a) is declared as undischarged insolvent/debtor;
(b) becomes incapable of countinuing as such, due to physical or mental
disability;
(c) becomes of unsound mind and stands so declared by a court of competent
jurisdiction;
(d) has been convicted for an offence, which in the opinion of the Government
involves moral turpitude or financial irregularities;
(e) has, in the opinion of the Government, abused his/her official position so as
to render his continuance in office prejudicial to public interest:
Provided that the member prior to his removal may be given an opportunity of being
heard, before proceeding as such.
11. The National Commission shall regulate its own procedure for the conduct of its
business based on principles of participation, transparency, equity, promptness, dignity and
worth.
12. (1) The National Commission shall exercise powers specified in sub-section (2) in
those States where a State Commission under this Act or an equivalent Commission under an
existing State Debt Relief Act is not in operation, and for those distress and calamity situations
which affect two or more States and to make recommendations to the Central Government for
farmers' distress and disaster relief.
(2) The National Commission shall—
(a) recommend to the Central Government either suo motu or on an application
to declare a district or districts or part thereof as distress affected area, or to declare a
Terms of the
Commission.
Resignation
of member.
V acancies of
membership.
Removal of
a member.
National
Commission
to regulate
its own
procedure.
Power and
functions of
the National
Commission.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

8
crop or crops as distress affected crop, subsequent to which the Government is obligated
to provide debt relief to rlated farmers:
Provided that—
(i) the recommendation may be made after such enquiry as it may deem fit
including drawing upon required expertise from a committee of competent experts,
and subject to such general guidelines as may be prescribed by the Central
Government;
(ii) the commission shall submit its recommendations to the Central
Government within one month of taking suo motu notice or on application made
in this behalf; and
(iii) when the Central Government in any State declares certain regions,
districts or parts of district as affected by natural calamity or disaster, those
regions, districts or parts of district shall be considered as distress affected by
the Commission under this Act.
(b) declare a farmer as distress affected in all thos cases where individual farmers
have applied to the National Commission following the due procedure laid down and
subject to enquiry and norms as laid down, in those cases, where such farmers do not
have a State Commission to apply to:
Provided that the National Commission shall complete its inquiry within three
months after receipt of application in this behalf;
(c) issue orders as specified in section 14;
(d) exercise powers of Civil Court as specified under section 15;
(e) oversee the implementation of section 4 ensuring access to institutional
credit to all farmers and to redress grievances thereof based on applicaton by farmers
or any associations or organizations representing farmers, registered or unregistered;
(f) recommend to the Central Government the extent and the manner in which any
future debt relief may be granted to the farmers;
(g) recommend to the Central Government regarding the mechanisms for one
time debt-swapping of non-institutional loans of distressed farmers and oversee the
implementation of the same where State Commissions are not functional;
(h) recommend to the Central Government to take such action as may be necessary
to ensure that future credit requirements of the farmers are met through such agencies,
as may be prescribed;
(i) make periodical reports to the Central Government generally on any matter
pertaining to farmers indebtedness;
(j) refer any pertinent matters to State Commission for further inquiry and action
as well as to examine for consideration the recommendations given by the State
Commissions to the National Commission; and
(k) perform such other functions and exercise such other powers as may be
prescribed.
13. The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, but within a maximum time
period of fifteen days after the receipt of a recommendation under clause (a) of sub-section
(1) of section 8, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare an area or a crop as a distress
affected area or a distress affected crop, as the case may be:
Provided that all farmers practicing agriculture in a distress affected area or cultivating
the distress affected crop shall be considered as a distress affected farmers for the purposes
of this Act;
Central
Government
to notify
distress
affected area
or distress
affected
crop.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

9
14. (1) Any distress-affected farmer who has not received adequate relief under section 5
may file an application before the National Commission if a State Commission is not existing
or operational, in a manner and in the form as may be prescribed, to obtain an injunction on
further proceedings against himself by creditors until the adjudication is complete:
Provided that in all cases where State Commissions exists, the farmer shall file an
application before the State Commissions pertaining to his State.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or in any other law or contract or
decree or order of any court or Tribunal, the National Commission or any Bench thereof may
pass order to:
(a) obligate the Central Government to repay the debt of an individual distressed
farmer or all related farmers to crops or areas declared as distressed, against any
creditor (private or institutional) based on prescribed guidelines for extreme distress;
(b) reschedule short-term loans into medium term loans with zero interest rate,
and medium term loans into long term loans at a maximum of two per cent. interest rate,
in respect of the debts availed or by a farmer from institutional creditors if the indebted
farmer is found to be distressed or is related to a distressed crop or distressed area;
(c) provide necessary facilities for one time settlement of agriculture loans falling
under the category of non-performing assets, as per the guidelines issued by the
Reserve Bank of India, provided the farmer is ready for such settlement;
(d) declare as discharged from a loan, any farmers who has repaid the principal
amount taken by him;
(e) a farmer to discharge his debts in suitable small instalments on the principal
amount outstanding at the time of each payment, with the interest to be borne by the
Central Government.
15. (1) The National Commission shall, for the purpose of exercising the powers
conferred by or under this Act, have all the powers of a Civil Court while trying a suit under
the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), in respect of the following matters, namely:—
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him
on oath;
(b) ordering that no notices shall be issued, no coercive action or public shaming
shall be exerted against the distressed farmer in any manner;
(c) requiring the discovery and production of any documents;
(d) receiving evidence on affidavit;
(e) examination of witnesses;
(f) issuing commission for the examination of witnesses or for local investigation;
(g) inspecting any property or thing concerning which any decision has to be
taken;
(h) requisitioning of any public record or copy thereof from any court, authority
or office; and
(i) any other matter which may be prescribed.
(2) Every award passed by the National Commission under sub-section ( 2) of
section 14 shall be binding on the respondent.
(3) Every award of the Commission passed under sub-section (2) of section 14 shall be
executed under the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 as if it is decree of a Civil
Court and accordingly, title deeds or any other documents pertaining to the loan with the
creditor to be returned to the farmer, as the case may be, within the specified time:
Provisions
for orders
for relief to
distress
affected
farmers.
Powers of a
Civil Court.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

10
Provided that the awards of the Commission shall be executed within a time period of
thirty days or otherwise as specified in each award.
(4) Any farmer may obtain file for an Execution Decree from a Civil Court if the
respondent fails to adhere to the time limit.
16. (1) The National Commission shall hold its sittings at such places and at such
times as may be determined by it:
Provided that the National Commission may hold its sittings in the respective district(s)
declared as distress affected areas to consider matters relating to the distress affected areas;
(2) The quorum for the sitting of the National Commission shall be ordinarily five,
except as provided below in sub-section (3);
(3) The National Commission may in appropriate cases as it deems fit, hold sittings in
States or districts by constituting a Bench consisting of two or more members:
Provided that at least one member representing farmers in the National Commission
shall be included in the Bench so constituted:
Provided further that in case of the Bench constituted by the National Commission,
the quorum for the meeting of the Bench shall be the total number of members of that Bench
or two whichever is less.
17. (1) No suit for recovery of debt shall be instituted or application for execution of a
decree in respect of a debt shall be made against a distress affected farmer described under
sections 12 and 14, and no appeal, revision petition or application for review against any
decree or order in any such suit or application shall be presented or made against such
distressed farmer in any Civil Court or Tribunal or other authority, and such suits, applications,
appeals and petitions instituted or made against such farmer before the date of declaration of
a district or part thereof as a distress affected area and pending on such date shall stand
stayed, for such period as the Commission may recommend in that behalf;
(2) No notice shall be issued, and no coercive action or public shaming shall be exerted
against any distress affected farmer described under section 12 and section 14 for recovery
of debt.
18. (1) The National Commission shall publish all relevant information including
applications handled, awards passed, orders issued, minutes of its meetings or sittings, if
any and such other material on its website.
(2) The National Commission shall prepare a report of its function of that year under
this Act and the same shall be submitted to Central Government in such form on or before
such date as may be prescribed.
(3) The Annual Report submitted to the Central Government by the National
Commission under sub-section (2) above shall be laid before each House of the Parliament
as soon as may be, but not later than the immediately subsequent session of the Parliament
after the same is received by the Central Government.
19. (1) The National Commission shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant
records and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be prescribed.
(2) The accounts of the National Commission shall be audited annually and the audited
report shall be placed before each House of the Parliament.
CHAPTER VI
S
TATE FARMERS' DISTRESS AND DISASTER RELIEF COMMISSION
20. (1) Every State Government shall, within six months after implementing the
immediate and complete loan waiver under Section 3 but within a maximum period of twelve
months of the commencement of this Act, by notification in the Gazette, except in those
States where a State Farmers' Debt Relief Act or an equivalent Act by any other name is
operational at the commencement of this Act, under which such a Debt Relief Commission
Sittings of
the
Commission.
Bar and
Injunction on
proceedings
against a
distress
affected
farmer.
Transparent
functioning
and Annual
Report to be
laid before
the
Parliament.
Accounts and
Audit.
Constitution
of State
Farmers
Distress and
Disaster
Relief
Commission.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

11
or an equivalent institution has already been established, constitute a State Commission to
be known as the State Farmers' Distress and Disaster Relief Commission for the purpose
of exercising the powers and performing the functions under this Act.
(2) The State Commission shall consist of,—
(i) an eminent agricultural scientist or retired Vice Chancellor of an Agricultural
University—Chairperson;
(ii) two agricultural experts in rural banking for agriculture—members;
(iii) five representatives of farmers, including leaders of farmers unions and
persons with a proven record of having worked on farmers' issues—members; and
(iv) a person with having expertise in economic or co-operative sector—member,
(3) The Chairperson and members shall be nominated by the State Government on the
recommendation of a Selection Committee after seeking applications with wide publicity,
from eligible persons.
(4) The Selection Committee shall consist of—
(i) the Chief Minister of the State who shall be the Chairperson;
(ii) the Leader of Opposition in the State Assembly or the leader of the single
largest party or group in Opposition in the State Assembly; and
(iii) the Minister for Agriculture in the State Government:
Provided that—
(a) if an elected Government is not in place in the State, the Chairperson and
Members shall be nominated by the Governor of the State; and
(b) a person shall be disqualified for appointment as a member if he,—
(a) has been convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for an offence
which involves moral turpitude; or
(b) is an undischarged insolvent; or
(c) is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court; or
(d) has been removed or dismissed from the service of the Government or
a body corporate owned or controlled by the Government; or
(e) has such other disqualifications as may be prescribed by the
Government.
(5) The Selection Committee, while nominating a member under clause (ii), (iii) and (iv)
of sub-section (2), shall take into consideration diversity in representation in terms of region,
gender and social background including the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes.
(6) The State Government shall ensure that no member including Chairperson represents
any financial, commercial or other interest which may prejudicially affect the discharge of his
functions on the Commission:
Provided that no person associated with a farmer's organization may be disqualified on
that grounds alone.
(7) The State Government shall, in addition to provision of office facilities and
infrastructure for effective functioning appoint in Secretary and other staff as may be
necessary, to assist the State Commission in such manner as may be prescribed.
(8) In the discharge of their duties, the Secretary and other staff referred to in
sub-section (6) shall be subject to the administrative control of the Chairperson.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

12
21. (1) The term of the State Commission shall be five years:
Provided that, the State Government shall re-constitute the State Commission at least
ten months prior to the end of the tenure of the current State Commission:
Provided further that the existing State Commission may continue to function for upto
one additional year if required till new State Commission is appointed.
(2) A member may, by writing under his hand and address to the State Government
resign from his office at any time.
(3) A vacancy arising by reason of resignation of any member of the State Commission
under sub-section ( 2) or otherwise shall be filled up in accordance with the provisions
contained in section 20 of this Act:
Provided that the person so appointed shall hold office only for the remaining period
of term of the person, in whose place he is appointed.
(4) The State Government may remove any member, if he,—
(a) is declared as undischarged insolvent or debtor;
(b) becomes incapable of continuing as such, due to physical or mental disability;
(c) becomes of unsound mind and stands so declared by a court of competent
jurisdiction;
(d) has been convicted for an offence, which in the opinion of the State
Government involves moral turpitude or financial irregularities:
(e) has, in the opinion of the State Government, abused his/her official position
so as to render his continuance in office prejudicial to public interest:
Provided that the member prior to his removal may be given an opportunity of
being heard, before proceeding as such.
(5) The State Commission shall regulate its own procedure for the conduct of its
business based on principles of transparency, participation, equity, dignity and worth.
(6) The salary and allowances and the other conditions of service of Chairperson and
Members of the State Commission shall be, as may be prescribed.
22. (1) The State Commission shall—
(a) recommend to the State Government concerned either suo motu or on an
application to declare a district or districts or part thereof as distress affected area, or
to declare a crop or crops as distress affected crop, subsequent to which the State
Government is obligated to provide debt relief to related farmers as recommended by
the State Commission:
Provided that the State Commission shall make recommendation—
(i) the recommendation may be made after such enquiry as it may deem fit
including drawing upon required expertise from a committee of competent experts;
and subject to such general guidelines as may be prescribed.
(ii) the commission shall submit its recommendations to the Government
within one month of taking suo moto notice or on application;
(iii) when the Government in any State declares certain regions, districts
or parts of district as affected by natural calamity or disaster, those regions,
districts or parts of districts shall be considered as distress affected area by the
Commission under this Act;
(b) recommend, in the case of private loans, legal measures to the undertaken by
the State Government, to exonerate the farmers from such loans whereby the State
Government, as soon as possible, and upon the receipt of such a recommendation but
within one month, notifies such private loans to be null and void;
Terms of the
State
Commission.
Powers and
functions of
the State
Commission.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

13
(c) issue orders as specified under section 25;
(d) oversee the implementation of section 4 ensuring access to institutional
credit to all farmers, and to redress grievances thereof, based on application by farmers
or any associations or organizations representing farmers, registered or unregistered;
(e) oversee one time debt-swapping of private loans into institutional loans of
distressed farmers within the State;
(f) make periodical reports to the State Government generally on any matter
pertaining to farmer indebtedness;
(g) make specific recommendations to the National Commission to consider;
(h) recommend any other measures for survival of distressed farmers; and
(i) perform such other functions and exercise such other powers, as may be
prescribed.
(2) An Award passed by the State Commission under section 25 shall be binding on the
respondent.
(3) Every award by the State Commission shall be passed within six months of the time
of receipt of application from an indebted farmer, with the first screening of paperwork
happening within thirty days and first hearing happening within sixty days.
(4) Every award of the State Commission passed under section 22 shall be executed
under the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), as if it is a decree of a
Civil Court, and accordingly, title deeds or any other documents pertaining to the loan with
the creditor to be returned to the farmer, as the case may be within the specified time:
Provided that every award of the State Commission shall be executed within a specific
time period of thirty days or otherwise, as specified in each award:
Provided further that a farmer may obtain an Execution Decree from a Civil Court if the
respondent party does not comply to the time limit for the execution of the award.
(5) The State Commission shall, for the purpose of exercising the powers conferred by
or under this Act, have all the powers of a Civil Court while trying a suit under the Code of
Civil Procedure 1908 (5 of 1908) in respect of the following matters, namely:—
(a) summoning and enforcing attendance of any person and examining him on
oath;
(b) Ordering in that no notices shall be issued, no coercive action or public
shaming shall be exerted against the distressed farmer in any manner;
(c) requiring the discovery and production of any documents;
(d) receiving evidence on affidavit;
(e) examination of witnesses;
(f) issuing commission for the examination of witness or for local investigations;
(g) inspecting any property or thing concerning which any decision has to be
taken;
(h) requisitioning of any public record or copy thereof from any court, authority
or office; and
(i) any other matter which may be prescribed.
23.  The State Government concerned shall, as soon as may be, but within a maximum
time period of fifteen days after the receipt of a recommendation under clause ( a) of
sub-section (1) of section 22 notify in the Official Gazette, an area or a crop as a distress
State
Government
to notify
distress
affected area
or distress
affected crop.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

14
affected area or a distress affected crop, as the case may be and thereby initiate the debt relief
powers of the Commission:
Provided that all farmers practicing agriculture in a distress affected areas as declared
or cultivated the distress affected crop as declared, shall be considered distress affected
farmers under this Act.
24. (1) The State Commission shall hold its sittings at such places and at such times as
may be determined by it:
Provided that the State Commission shall hold its sittings in the respective district(s)
declared as distress affected areas to consider matters relating to the distress affected areas.
(2) The quorum for the sitting of the State Commission shall be five.
(3) The State Commission may in appropriate cases it deems fit, hold sittings in districts
by constituting a Bench consisting of two or more members:
Provided that at least one member representing the farmer in the State Commission
shall be included in the Bench so constituted:
Provided further that in case of the Bench constituted by the State Commission, the
quorum for the meeting of the Bench shall be the total number of members of that Bench or
two whichever is less.
25. (1) Every farmer from the State, who has not obtained adequate relief under
section 5 may, file an application before the State Commission, in a manner and in the form as
may be prescribed, to obtain an injunction on further proceedings against himself by creditors
until the adjudication is complete.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or in any other law or contract or
decree or order of any Court or Tribunal, the State Commission or any of its Benches thereof
may pass order to:—
(a) obligate the State Government to repay the entire debt of a distress affected
farmer so declared by the State Commission, against any creditor (private or
institutional);
(b) reschedule short-term loans into medium term loans with zero interest rate,
and medium term loans into long term loans at a maximum of two per cent interest rate,
in respect of the debts availed of by a farmer from institutional creditors;
(c) provide necessary facilities for one time settlement of agriculture loans falling
under the category of non-performing assets, as per the guidelines issued by the
Reserve Bank of India, provided the farmer is ready for such settlement;
(d) declare as discharged from a loan, any farmer who has repaid the principal
amount taken by him or her;
(e) allow a farmer to discharge his debts in suitable small installments on the
prinicipal amount outstanding at the time of each payment, with the interest to be
borne by the Government.
26. (1) No suit for recovery of debt shall be instituted, or application for execution of
decree in respect of a debt shall be made against a distress affected farmer described under
sections 20 and 22, and no appeal, revision petition or application for review against any
decree or order in any such suit or application shall be presented or made against a distressed
farmer in any Civil Court, or Tribunal or other authority, and such suits, applications, appeals
and petitions instituted or made against such a farmer before the date of declaration of a
district or part thereof as a distress affected area and pending on such date shall stand
stayed, for such period as the State Commission may recommend in that behalf;
(2) No notices shall be issued, and no coercive action or defamation in public shall be
exerted against a distress affected farmer described under section 19 and section 22, for
recovery of debt.
Sittings of
the State
Commission.
Provisions
for Orders
from State
Commission
for relief to
distress
affected
farmers.
Bar and
Injunction on
proceedings
against a
distress
affected
farmer, as
per State
Commission
recommendations.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

15
27. (1) The State Commission shall publish all relevant information including the
applications received, Awards passed, minutes of its meetings or sittings, if any, and such
other material on its website.
(2) The State Commission shall prepare a report of its function of that year under this
Act and shall submit the same to State Government in such form on or before such date as
may be prescribed.
(3) The Annual Report submitted to the State Government by the State Commission
under sub-section (2) shall be laid before the State Legislative Assembly as soon as may be,
after the same is received by the State Government.
28. (1) The State Commission shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records
and prepare an annual statement of accounts, in such form as may be prescribed.
(2) The accounts of the State Commission shall be audited annually and the audit
report shall be placed before the Legislative Assembly.
CHAPTER VII
O
BLIGATIONS OF CENTRAL GOVERNMENT
29. (1) The Central Government shall reserve and spend adequate financial outlays in
the Union Budget as required under this Act for the immediate one-time loan waiver on an
annual basis to implement the award passed and orders issued by the Commission.
(2) The financial outlay under sub-section (1) shall also be utilised for—
(a) relief and rehabilitation of families where a farmer suicide has taken place
in the last five years from the commencement of this Act; and
(b) a part of the outlay shall be set aside as a Credite Guarantee Fund for lessee
cultivators to build confidence among institutional creditors to lend to lessee cultivators
for re-financing of institutional crditors during continuous natural disasters.
30. (1) The Central Government shall notify—
(a) certain categories of property related to certain loans to be exempted from attachment
or auctioning for non-payment of debt; and
(b) prohibition of penal interest on crop loans and cumulative interest on any
agricultural loan from exceeding the principal of the loan, whether from an institutional or
private creditor.
31. The Central Government shall reform the priority sector lending norms ensuring
that the bank credit under priority sector lending reaches small and marginal farmers and real
farmers including women farmers, tenants, sharecroppers and adivasi farmers, ensure that its
compliance is addressed by the Reserve Bank of India, NABARD and other apex institutions
with re-financing schemes to such compliance.
32. (1) The Central Government shall implement adeaquate and effective disaster
relief and insurance for all crops, live stock and allied sectors, to ensure that in years of
disaster including drought, floods, cyclones, unseasonal rainfall, hailstorms and pest
outbreaks, and destruction by wild animals etc., the farmers do not accumulate debt.
(2) The insurance premium in respect of the crop insurance scheme mentioned
under sub-section (1) shall be borne by the appropriate Government.
33. The Central Government shall establish and promote on a large scale low-cost
ecological agriculture as a measure to reduce indebtedness amongst farmers.
Transparent
functioning
and Annual
report to be
laid before
the State
Legislature.
Accounts and
Audit related
to State
Commission.
Central
Government
to constitute
a Fund for
the purpose
of waiving
off loan, etc.
Exemption
from
attachment
of property
and
prohibition of
penal interest
and excessive
cumulative
interest.
Reform of
Priority
Lending
Norms and
ensuring
compliance.
Effective
disaster relief
and crop
insurance.
Promotion of
low cost
ecological
agriculture.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

16
CHAPTER VIII
MISCELLANEOUS
34. The provisions of this Act or any rule or order made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any law, other than this Act,
or any instrument having effect by virtue of any law other than this Act.
35. No civil courts shall have jurisdiction to settle, decide or deal with any question or
to determine any matter which is by or under the Act or the rule made thereunder are required
to be settled, decided or dealt with or to be determined by the National or State Commissions;
36. Every Member, secretary and other staff of the Commission (National as well as
State) shall be deemed to be a Public Servant within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian
Penal Code 1860.
37. No suit or legal proceeding shall lie against any member of the Commission or
Secretary or other officers for anything which is done or purported to be done in good faith
under this Act.
38. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the
Government may, by order as occasion requires, do anything not inconsistent with the
provisions of this Act, which appears to them to be necessary for the purpose of removing
the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of two years from the date of
commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid before each House of Parliament.
39. (1) The appropriate Government may, notification in the Gazette, make rules for the
purpose of carrying in to effect the provisions of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period
of fourteen days which may be comprised in one session or in two successive sessions, and
if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive
sessions aforesaid both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the
Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in
such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so however that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
(3) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall laid, as soon as may
be after it is made, before the State Legislature.
Overriding
effect of Act.
Bar of
jurisdiction of
Civil Court.
Members and
Staff of
Commissions
deemed Public
Servants.
Protection of
action taken
in good faith.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The nation is indebted to farmers for the food security and sovereignty functions that
they contribute. In spite of their contribution, thousands of farmers are committing suicide
every year and millions of farmers are in distress due to indebtedness.  The Government is
obligated to prevent farmer's suicides and distress, especially because their causes are
related to Government policies.
Prices of farm commodities have been kept low as a policy measure and the
recommendation of the National Farmers Commission to fix Minimum Support Prices with at
least fifty per cent. returns on the comprehensive cost of production has not been implemented
for the past twelve years, thus adversely affecting farmers' returns and building up
indebtedness.
The Governments have not fulfilled their responsibilities to provide comprehensive
institutional credit facilities, provide recognition and full inclusion to many categories of
farmers including tenant farmers, women farmers and adivasi farmers, execute effective risk
insurance and disaster relief measures, keep input prices in check and effectively promote
low cost sustainable agriculture and to build infrastructure. These failures on the part of the
Government have resulted in huge losses to farmers, leading to a debt trap, with both
institutional and private creditors. In the context of frequent occurrence of natural calamities
and climate change, farmers need automatic protection from the debt trap during disasters.
In has been held that the Right to Life guaranteed under article 21 of the Constitution
includes the right to live with human dignity and the right to livelihood. Thus, the Government
is obligated to ensure a life of dignity and freedom from indebtedness to farmers who are in
debt due to no fault of theirs and for reasons not under their control.
In order to provide relief to the farmers who are in distress due to indebtedness, the Bill
provides an immediate and complete loan waiver. To prevent farmers from being pushed back
into indebtedness, there is need to provide systemic changes in all farmers into the fold of
institutional credit with zero interest rate, and for substantive debt relief in the case of
disasters. The Reserve Bank of India and NABARD shall be mandated to ensure compliance.
Farmers' Distress and Disaster Relief Commissions shall be constituted at the national
and State levels with power to pro-actively recommend relief measures in distress affected
areas and distress affected crops, and pass awards for the redressal of the grievances of
indebted farmers in various ways. The Bill also obligates suggests the Government to institute
effective disaster relief and crop insurance and promotion of low-cost ecological agriculture,
and furthermore, seeks to provide special support to families affected by a farmer suicide.
As the root causes of indebtedness and the increasing incidence of natural disasters
due to climate change are common in various States across the country, there is a need for a
Central legislation to address the problem and to provide the necessary relief and institutional
framework for protection of farmers from indebtedness. In view of the guidelines by the
Supreme Court for harmonization of Entry 45 of the Union List and Entry 30 of the State List,
the Bill provides a national framework with the cooperation of State Governments, for the
implementation of distress relief at the national and State level, with adequate resource
support from the Central Government.
Hence, this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RAJU SHETTI
April 6, 2018.
17

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill inter alia provides for sufficient funds by the Central Government
for immediate one-time loan waiver.
Clause 4 of the Bill inter alia provides for sufficient funds by the Central Government
for bringing all farmers into the fold to institutional credit for production loans at zero per
cent interest rate, and for reschedule, relief of waivers at the time of disasters.
Clause 5 provides for constitution of the National Farmers' Distress and Disaster Relief
Commission and ensuing expenditure.
Clause 26 provides for adequate financial outlays for implementing the awards and
orders issued by the Commission (National and State), for relief and rehabilitation of farm
suicide families, and a Credit Guarantee Fund that addresses the inclusion of lessee/tenant
farmers into institutional credit.
Clause 30 provides for implementation of adequate and effective disaster relief and
crop insurance schemes.
Clause 31 provides for establishment and promotion of low cost ecological agriculture
on a large scale.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of
India. However, it is not possible at this stage as to the exact amount which is likely to be
incurred towards recurring and non-recurring expenditure for the purpose.
18

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 39 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to make rules for carrying
out the purpose of this Act. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.
19

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to confer a right on indebted farmers to obtain an immediate one-time complete waiver of
outstanding loan; right to obtain institutional credit; protection of debt traped farmers
suffering from natural disasters or distress and constitution of a National Farmers'
Distress and Disaster Relief Commission and State Farmers'
Distress and Disaster Relief Commissions with power
to  pass awards and recommend appropriate
measures for the relief to farmers in
distress and for matters connected
therewith or incidental
thereto.
————
(Shri Raju Shetti, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—539LS(S3)—11-07-2018.