8W No. 118 of I".a 
THE DELHI MOTER VEHICLES 
TAXATION BILL, 1962 
(As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA 
OR 3RD DBCEMBEJl, 1962) 

Bill No. 118 of 19" 
TIm DELHI MOTOR VEHICLES TAXATION BILL, 1962 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
to lm~e a t~ on mDtor vehicles in the Union territory of Delhi. 
and for other matters connected therewith. 
Bz it enacted by Parliament in the Thirteenth Year of the Re-
public of India as follows: - i I 
. 1. (1) This Act may be called the Delhi Motor Vehicles Taxation Shon title. 
Act 1962. extent and , cumme:lC»-
, (2) It extends to the whole of the Union territory of Delhi. ment. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Chief Commis-
Iloner may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
J. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "Chief Commissioner" means the Chief Commissioner 
10 of Delhi; 
(b) "Delhitt means tl1e Union territory of Delhi; 
(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this 
Act; . 
(d) "quarter" means a period of three months commencing 
IS on the first day of April, the first day of July. the first day of 
October or the first day of January in each year: 
(e) "registered owner" means the person in whose name a 
motor vehicle is registered under the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939; 
(f) "tax" means the tax levied under this Act; 
Definjtion .. 

(g) "taxation authority" means any person or authority 
appointed by the Chief Commissioner by notification in the 
Official Gazette to exercise the powers and perform the duties 
conferred or imposed upon a taxation authority by or under 
this Act; , 
(h) ''token'' means a ticket to be displayed on a motor 
vehicle as an indication that the tax has been duly paid or 
that no tax is payable; , 
(i) "year" means the financial year; 
(;) all words and expressions used, but not defined in this to 
Act, and defined in the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939, shall have the 
meanings respectively assigned to them in that Act. 
LeVJ of UK. 3. Subject to the other provisions of this Act, on and from the 
commencement of this Act, there shall be levied and collected· on all 
motor vehicles used or kept for use in Delhi, a tax at the rate speci- I' 
tied in Schedule I. ! I 
Declaration 4. (l) Every registered owner or person having possession or 
::nror tax. control of a motor vehicle used or kept for UJe in Delhi shall fill up 
and sign a declaration in the prescribed form stating the prescribed 
particulars and shall deliver the same to the taxation authority 20 
within the prescribed time. i 
(2) The tax to which a registered owner or person baving pos-
session or control of a motor vehicle appears by such declaration 
to be liable under section 3 shall be paid by him,-
(a) for a year at the rate specified in Schedule I (herein- 2S 
after referred to as the annual rete); or 
(b) for one or more quarters, at one fourth of the annual 
rate for each quarter; or 
(e) once in two months or monthly, in equal instabnents., 
at one-sixth or one-twelfth, as the ease may be, of the annual 30 
rate: 
PrOvided that any broken period in a month shall, for the purpose 
of .levying the tax be considered as a full month. 
(3) The tax shall be paid within such time and in such manner 
as may be prescribed.! ! 
(4JIn calculating the tax dUe for any period less than'0D8.:year, 
fraction of a rupee shall. be .counted as· 'a zupM. 

s 
10 
· 5. ('l) When a person pays the amount 'of tax leviable' under sec- IBlUe of 
tion 3in respect' of any motor vehicle or proves to the satisfaction toten. 
ot the taxation authority that no sueh tax is payable in respect of 
such vehicle, the taxation authority shall,-
(a) issue to such person a token in the prescribed form 
specifying therein the period for which such tax has been paid 
or that, no such tax is payable, and I 
(b) specify in the certificate of regiStration granted in res-
pect of the vehicle under the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939, Or in 
the case of- vehicles not registered under that Act, in acertift-
cate in such 'form as may be prescribed, that the tax has been 
paid for the period speCified under clause' (a) or that no tax is 
payable in respect of that vehicle, as -the case may be. 
(2) No motor vehicle liable to tax under this Act shall be used 
IS or kept for use in Delhi unless the registered owner or the person 
having possession or control of such vehicle has obtained a valid 
token in respect of that vehicle, and tbat token is displayed on the 
vehicle in theprescrlbed manner. 
6. (1) When a motor vehicle used or kept for use in Delhi is Additional 
20 't.~red or is proposed to be used in such manner as to render the declaration. 
registered owner or the person who has possession or control of 
such vehicle liable to the payment of additional tax under section 
7, c;uch owner or person shall ftll up, sign and deliver in the manner 
provided in sub-section (2), an additional declaration and shall, 
2S along with such additional d~claration, (accompanied by the certt-
'ft.cateof registration in respect of such motor vehicle), pay to the 
taxation authority an additional tax payable under that section 
which he appears by such additional'declaration to be liabl~ to pay 
in respect of such vehicle. 
30 (2) The additional declaration shall be in the prescribed form 
containing the prescribed particulars and shall be delivered to the 
taxation authority after being duly filled up and signed wtthin the 
orescribed time. The additional declaration shall indicate clearly 
" so the nature of alteration made in the motor vehicle or, as the 
35 ~:tse may be, the altered use to which the vehicle is proposed to be 
. put. I I 
'(3) On receipt of the additional tax under sub-secticn (1), the 
taX'ltion authority shall issue to the registered owner or the person 
,vhn has' poISflIISion or control of the vehicle, a fresh token in place 
40 'of the original token and shall cause an entry of such payment to 
:l)e' .. de m'the certiftcate, of reststratton. 

Liability for 
AdditioDal 
taK. 
.. 
7. When any motor vthicle in respect of which a tax tor aD1 
}J~flod 18 payaole or has been paid, is altered during such perilJd, 
or proposed to be used durmg such penod in such manner as to 
Ci:lU .. ~ tlle vehicle to become a vehJ.cle in respect. of which a higher 
rate of tax is payable, the registered owner or the person who has S 
possession or control of the vehlcle, shall, in addition to the tax, 
i1 any, due from him for that period!, be liable to pay for the un-
expired portion of such period since the vehicle is alten!d or pro-
. pused to be used, an additional tax of a sum equal to the difference 
between the amount of tax payable for such unexpired portion at 10 
the higher rate and the rate at which the tax was payable or paid 
,before the alteration or use of the vehicle for that portion; and until 
such additional tax has been paid, the taxation authority shall not 
grant a tresh token in :respect of the vehicle so altered or proposed to 
be so used. I IS 
, ... _.11 .......... 
Explanation.-In calculating the unexpired PQrtion under thiI 
sectlon any broken period in a month shall be considered as i. full 
month. 
Production 8. Every registered owner or person having possession or control 
of ~ertificate of a motor vehicle shall, at the time of making payment of the tax, 30 
of msura!Jce b f h . th"t lid ' " f . ~!'Oauce e ore t e taxatlon au orl y a va certificate 0 UlSurance 
III respect of the vehicle complying with the requirements of Chapter 
VIII of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939. .. of I,,,. 
Liability to 9. (1) If the tax leviable in respect of any motor vehicle remains 
pay arrears unpaid by any person liable for payment thereof and such person as 
~~=no:ec- before having paid the tax has transferred the ownership of such 
ceeding t) vehicle or OOS ceased to be in possession or control of such vehicle. 
!~~p~:::;'_ the person to whom the ownership of the vehicle has been transferred 
lion or or the person who has possession or control of such vehicle Ihall be 
:~~~l of liable to pay the said tax to the taxation authority. ~ 
vehicles. 
Ref:.lDd of 
to. 
(2) Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to affect 
the liability to pay the said tax of the person who bas transferred 
the ownership or has ceased to be in possession or control of luch 
vehicle. • I 
10. (1) When any person who has paid the tax in respect of a 3' 
motor vehicle produces before the taxation authority a certiftcat, . 
signed by the registering authority stating that the tax token and 
the certificate of registration issued in respect of such vehicle my. 
been surrendered on the date specified by the registering authorit1 
in his certificatl:!, such person shall, on an application made in ,that 40 
behalf to the taxation authority and subject to such conditions u 
may ,be prescribed, be entltJ.ed to a refUDd for each complete mon&b 

$ 
of the period for which IUch tax haa been paid and which is unexpi-
red on the date on which the tax token and the certificate of 
registration were surrendered, of an amoWlt equal to one-twelfth of 
the annual tax payable in respect of such vehicle. 
S (2) When any person has paid the tax in respect of a motor vehi-
cle and the vehicle is removed outside Delhi before the expiry of 
the period for which the tax has been paid and taxed in another 
State, such person shall, on an application made in that behaU to the 
taxation authority and subject to such conditions as may be pres-
10 cribed, be entitled to a refWld for each complete month of the period 
for which such tax has been paid and during which the vehicle wu 
removed from Delhi, of an amount equal to one-twelfth of the an-
nual tax payable in respect of such vehicle. 
11. When any registered owner or any person who hY' possession ~b:t~:y-
IS or control of any motor vehicle used or kept for use in Delhi is in t~dnot 
default in making a payment of the tax the taxation authority may pal . 
direct that, in addition to the amount of arrears, a sum not exceed-
ing the annual tax payable in respect of such vehicle shall be re-
covered from him by way of penalty: 
30 Provided that before giving any such direction the registered 
owner or such person shall be given a reasonable opportunity of 
being heard. 
2 1 An " Arrears of 1 . () Y tax due and not paId as prOVIded for by or under tax and . 
this Act and any sum directed to be recovered by way of penalty pena'ty re-. coverable 2S under section 11 shan be recoverable in the same manner as an u a rara of 
arrear of land revenue. land reve-. nue. 
(2) The motor vehicle in respect of which the tax is due or in 
respect of which any sum bas been directed to be recovered as 
penalty under section 11, or its accessories may be distrained and 
30 sold in pursuance of this section whether or not such vehicle or 
accessories is or are in the possession or control of the person liable 
to pay the tax or penalty. 
13. (1) Where the registered owner or the person having posses- Excalptlon. 
sion or control of a motor vehicle is an agriculturist and that motor 
3S vehicle has been designed for Ilgricultural operations and is used 
solely for such operations in relation to his own land then, that 
vehicle shall be exempt from the payment of the tax. 
l.'xplanation..-For the purposes of this sub-section the expresslo1'1 
"agricultural operations" includes,- . 
(i) tilling, sowing, harvesting, crushing of any agricultural 
produce.or any other similar operation earned out for the purpose 
CIt 8.fricu1tlni 

Rcd·'ctiNl 
of tax in 
c:asea of 
certain 
motor 
vehicles. 
6 
(ii) -transport of manure, seeds, insecticides and Other like 
articles required for ~ork in the land from the market to the 
laD.d; aad· 
(iii) transport of any agricultural produce from the land or 
the place of storage or from the place of storage to the market. .s 
(2) When the registered owner or the person having possession to 
control of a motor vehicle has given previous intimation in writing to 
the taxation authority that the motor vehicle would not be used in any 
public. place for a particular period, being not less than one 1llODth, 
and. deposits the certificate of registration of such motor vehicle with 10 
the taxationauthorlty and obtains an aclmowledgment therefor from 
that authority, he shall be exempt from the payment of the t&xfor 
that period. 
(3) Where the Chief Commissioner is of opinion that it is neces-
sary or expedient in the public interest so to do. he may. by notift- IS 
cation in the Official Gazette. and subject to such conditions as he 
may specify in the notification. exempt either totaLy or partially any 
class of motor vehicles other than those falling under sub-section (1) 
or any motor vehicles belonging to any class of. persons from the 
payment of the tax. 20 
14. Where the registered owner of a motor vehicle used or kept for 
use in Delhi is a co-operative society registered under any law relating 
. to -.operative eocieties for the time being in force. the tax payable in 
respecL 01 that motor vehicle shall be one half of the rates specified in 
Schedule I, if the taxation authority is satisfied; after such enquiry U 25 
it deems fit. that.-
(i) the co-operative society is solely engaged in the bUliness 
of transport of goods or passengers or both from one place . to 
. another in motor vehicles; 
(ii) at least seventy-five per cent. ot the members of the co- 30 
operative society are its employees; 
(iii) at least fifty per cent. of the members of the co-opera-
tive society are not related to each other; and 
(iv) the motor vehicle Is used or kept for use exc1U11ve1y 
for the purpose of the co-operative society. 35 
E~lanation..-For the purposes of this section a member .han ~be 
deemed. to be related to any other member if that member·is the hus-
band. wife. brother or sister or any lineal uceIldant ar deaceDdant of 
that other member. 

15. ·Where in respect of a motor vehicle the tax payable under the Effect (If f 
law relating to taxation on motor vehicles in force in any State has:: ~e.;~~~r 
been paid in that State for any period and that motor vehicle is States with respect to 
brought into Delhi for use during that period, then,- motor 
vehicles 
S : (i} no tax under this Act shall be payable in·respect of that ~rought . • IDto DelhI. motor vehicle; and 
(ii) the token issued in that State in respect of that motor 
vehicle shall be deemed to be a token issued uncler thlsAct, 
fC1r such period or for a period of ninety days from the date on Which 
10 the motor vehicle is brought into Delhi, whichever is shorter: 
Provided that the registered owner or the person having posses-
sion or control of the motor vehicle complies with the provisions .of 
sub-section (1) of section 4. 
16. (1) Any person who is aggrieved by any order or direction of Appeal. 
15 the taxation authority may flle an appeal before such person or autho-
rity, in such manner, within such time and on payment of such feeS, 
as may be prescribed. 
(2) The appeal shall be heard and decided in such manner as may 
be prescribed. 
20 (3) Every decision on such appeal shall be final and shall not be 
2S 
called in question in any court of law. 
17; Any police officer in uniform, not below the rank of Sub-In- Powers of 
spector or any other oftlcer prescribed in this behalf may- police ufli-cers and 
(a) enter' at any time between sunrise and sunset any premi- otbe ofli-
sel where he has reason to believe that a motor vehicle is kept, cera. 
or, 
(b) require the driver of any motor vehicle in any public 
place to stop such vehicle and cause it to remain stationary so 
long as may reasonably be necessary, 
30 for the purpose of satisfying himself that the amount of the tax in 
respect of such vehicle. has been paid.· 
II. Whoever- Penalty for 
incomplete 
(a) delivers in respect of a motor vehicle a declaration or ad- and 11ntr:'e • 
ditional declaration wherein the particulars required by or under ~~Iaradonl·· 
this Act to be therein set forth are not fully and truly stated, or 
(b) obstructs any ofBcerin the exercise of the powers CQDoo 
ferred by clause (a) of section 17 or falls to stop the motor vehic:&. 

• 
when requlred to do so by such offtcer under clause (b) .t that 
seetion, 
shall on eonvictlon be punishable-
(t) with ftne whkh may extend to a sum equal to the annual 
tax payable in respect of such vehicle; and , 
(ii) in the event of such person having been previously 
convicted of an offence under this section, with fine which may 
extend to a sum equal to twice the annual tax payable in respect 
of such vehicle. 
Otb. penal- 1.. Whoever eontravenes any of the provisions of this Act or the 10 
liea. rules made thereunder other than those punishable under section 18 
shall on conviction be punishable with fine which may extend to one 
hundred rupees and In the f'vent of such person having been pre-
viously convicted of an offence under this section, with ftne which 
Utdlzatloa 
of the pro-
ccede of 
taX. 
TItat of 
oft'eacea. 
may extend to two hundred rupees. IS 
ZOo The proceeds of the tax collected under this Act (which sh.1I 
form part of the Consolidated Funds of India) reduced hy the cost of 
eolleetlon as determined by the Central Government shaU, If Par-
liament by appropriation made by flaw In this bebaH so provides, be 
pald,- ao 
(i) to the Munlelpal Corporation of Delhi estabU",hed UDder 
section 3 of the Deihl MUDicipal Corporation Ad, 1957, and 66 of 1957. 
(ti) the New Delhi Manlclpal Committee established under 
aertion 11 of the Punjab Munleipal Ad, 1911, as exteDded to Punjab Act 
Delhi, :as J of 1911. 
for the perfonnance of their respective functions under the safd 
Acts and the payment shall be made in such proportion as may be 
prescribed. 
21. No court inferior to that of a magistrate of the second elus 
shall try an offence punishable under this Act. 
30 
ZZ. No prosecution, suit or other proceedings shall Ue aptnst"the 
::,~:nfi'" taxation authority or any other authority for anything In good faith 
.al. done or intended to be done under this Act. 
13. (1) The Chief Commissioner may, subject to the condition of 
Power to previous publication, inake rules for carrying out the purpo.es of this !Ie 
make ruin. Ad. .,,, 

5 
10 
15 
20 
II; 
(.2) In parUculu: aDd: wUh01it prejudice to the aeaerality- of the 
foregoiAe provision, the Chief Commissioner may make rulaI fQl' all 
or any of the following matters, namely:-
(4) the· time within, which and the manner in which, the 
tax shall be paid; 
(b) the form of declaration and additional declaration, par-
tieulars to be stated therein and the time within which the 
declaration or additional declaration shall be delivered ftnder 
section 4 or seet~on 6, as the case may be; 
(c) the form of the tax token and the manner in which the 
tax token shall be displayed. in the motor vehicle under sec-
tion 5; 
(d) the conditions subject to wh~ch refund of tax may be 
allowed under section 10; 
(e) the authority ·before which, the manner in which, the 
time within which and! the fee on payment of which, an appeal 
may be filed and the manner in which such appeal shall be heard 
and decided under section 16; 
(f) the issue of duplicate tokens and of certified copies of 
the records of the taxation authority and the fees chargeable 
therefor; 
(g) any other matter which is to be, QI'may be, prescribed. 
(3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid as soon as 
may be after it is made before each House of Parliament while it is 
25 in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised 
in one session or in two successive sessions, and if before the expiry 
of the session in which it is so laid or the session immediately 
following, both Houses agree in making any mJCiification in the rule 
or both Houses agree that the rule should n:.>t be made, the rule 
30 shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no 
effect, as the case may be; so however that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything 
previously done under tha't rule. 
24. (1) On and from the commencement of this Act, the Acts Repeal. 
35 specified in Schedule II shall stand repealed. 
(2) The repeal of the said Acts by sub-section (1) shall not 
affect,-
(0) the previous operation of the said Acts or anything duly 
done or suffered thereunder; or 
(b) any right, privilege, obligation or right conferred, 
accrued or incurred under any of the said Acts; or 

10 
(c) any penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred in res-· 
pect of any offence committed against any of the said Acts: 
(d) any investigation, legal proceeding or remedy in res-· 
pect of any such right, privilege, obligation, liability, penalty, 
forfeiture or punishment as aforesaid; S 
and any such investigation, legal proceeding or remedy may be 
instituted, continued or enforced and any such penalty, forfeiture or 
punishment may be imposed as if the said Acts had not been re-
pealed. 
(i) every. declaration delivered under that Act in respect 10 
of any motor vehicle shall be deemed to be a declaration deli- Punjab ACI 
Act, 1924, as extended to Delhi,- 4 of 1934· 
(i) every declaration delivered under that Act in respect 
of any motor vehicle shall be deemed to 'be a declaration deli-
vered under this Act; and IS 
(ii) every token issued under that Act and valid imme-
diately before the commencement of this Act, shall continue to 
be valid after such commencement for the unexpired portion of 
the period for which it has been issued. 
Amen~ment 25. In the Delhi Municipal Corporation Act, 1957, for section 184,20 
~~~~6 the following section shall be substituted, namely:-
of 19S7J 
Central 
Government 
to pay pro-
ceed. of 
cntcrtain-
mcntand 
betting taxes 
[0 Corpora-
tion. 
"lS4. The proceeds of the entertainment and bettinl taxes 
collected in Delhi under the provisions of the U.P. Entertain-
ment and Betting Tax Act, 1937, as extenclecl to Delhi (whieh 
shall form part of the Consolidated Fund of India) reduced by 25 
the cost of collection as determined by .the Central Government 
shall, if Parliament by app~priatioD made by law in this behalf 
so provides, be paid to the Corporation fOr the performance of its 
functions under this Ad.". 
SCHEDULE I 
(See section 3) 
Description oj motor vehicles 
PART A.-Motor vehicles fitted solely wit neu-
matic tyres-
I. Motor cycles and tricycles (including motor 
scooters and cycles with attachment for 
propelling the same by mechanised power)-
Annual rate oj Tax 
Rs. 
(a) Motor cycles,' scooters (Flat rate) . 32/-
U.P. Act B 
of 1937. 

II 
D"cri~ticm D./ Motor Annual rat' D./ tax 
ehicw 
Ra. 
(lJ) Scootrettes auto cycles (Flat rate) 16/-
S (c) Tricycles (Flat rate) 40/-
(d) Motor cycles or tricycles used for drawing 
a trailer or side car in addition to above 
rates 12/-
II. Motor vehicles the registered unladen weight 
10 of which does not exceed 250 kilogrammes, 
adapted and used for invalids 8/-
Ill. Motor vehicles (including tricycles) used for 
the transport or haulage of goods or 
materials-
IS (a) Vehicles the registered laden weight of 
which does not exceed one tonne . 140/-
(6) Vehicles the registered laden weight of 
which exceeds one tonne but does not 
exceed 2 tonnes 200/-
20 (c) Vehicles the registered laden weight of 
which exceeds 2 tonnes but does not ex-
ceed 4 tonnes 300 
Cd) Vehicles the registered laden weight of 
which exceeds 4 tonnes but does not ex-
25 ceed 6 tonnes 400/-
ee) Vehicles the registered laden weight of 
which exceeds 6 tonnes but does not ex-
ceed 8 tonnes 500/-
(f) Vehicles the registered laden weight of 
30 which exceeds 8 tonnes but does not 
exceed 9 tonnes- . 600/-
(,) Vehicles the registered laden weight of 
which exceeds 9 tonnes but does not 
exceed 10 tonnes 700/-
35 (h) Vehicles the registered laden weight of 
100/- for exceeds 10 tonnes every 
tonne or part 
(i) Additional tax payable' in respect of such thereof: 
vehicles used for drawing trailers- . 
(1) For each trailer the registered laden 
weight of which does not .. exceed 2 
100/-40 tonnes 
~) For each trailer the registered laden 
weight of which exceeds 2 tonnes. • 200/-
Provided that two or more vehicles shall 
4S not be chargeable under this clause in respect 
of the same trailer. 

- .---. ---------
IV. 
DtlcrifJtiM D/ Motor 
V,hicles 
Motor vehicles (including tricycles) plying 
for hire and used for the transport of 
passengers-
(d)" Tram cars. 
(6) Vehicles licensed to carry in all not 
more than 2 passengers (excluding 
driver) 
(c) Vebicles licensed to carry in all more than 
two but not more than four passengers 
(excluding driver and conductor) 
(4) Vehicles licensed to carry in all not more 
than 6 passengers (excluding driver and 
conductor) 
(,) Vehicles licensed to ~ in all not more 
than 18 passengers (~xcluding driver and 
conductor) 
(j) Vehicles licensed to carry more than 18 
passengers (excluding driver and con-
ductor). . . . . . . 
V. Motor Vehicles owned by Airline Companies or 
~orations for carrying Passengers and 
(a) Vehicles the seating capacity of which 
docs not exceed 4 (excluding driver) . 
(6) Vehicles the seating capacity of which 
exceeds four but docs not exceed six 
(excluding driver) . ". . . 
(c) Vehicles the seating capacity of which 
exceeds six but does not exceed 18 (ex-
cluding driver) . . . . . 
(d) Vehicles the "seating capacity of which 
RI. 
s 
100/-
80/- 10 
160/-
JOO/-
400/-
20 
The rates specified in 
(,) above plrn Rs. 
60/- for every pas-
senger in addition 25 
to 18 passengers 
which the vehicle is 
so Hc:ensed to carry 
lubject to a mal-
mum of Ra. 2200/-30 
per 1IIUlum. 
160/- 35 
300/-
400/-
exceeds 18. The rate specified in 
(c) above pi", Ra. 45 
6of- for every per-
son in addition to 
6 persons subject 
to a maximum of 
Rs. 2200/- per aII- 50 
nam. 

13 
AfUlual rail 0/ tlU 
---- _. __ .... _-------------
VI. Break-down vans used fur towing disabled Rs. 
vehicles 200/-
VII. Motor -vekicles other than t~08e liable to tax 
, under the foregoing provisions of this Sche-
dule-
(a) Vehicles the registered unladen weight of 
which does not exceed 1000 ldlegmms . 80,'-
10 (b) Vehicles the registered unladen weight of 
. which exceeds 1000 kilQgrBlll8 hut does 
not exceed ISO:> kilograms _ 100/-
(c) Vehicles the registered unladen weight of 
which exceeds I SOO kilograms but does 
not exceed 2000 kilograms 140/-
IS Cd) Vehicles the registered unladen weight of 
which exceeds 2000 kilograms. 
(e) Additional tax payahle in respect of such 
vehicles used for drawing trailers. 
(i) for each trailer th: registered unladen 
weight of whi:~l does not exceed I 
tonne . 
The rate specified in 
(c) above plus Rs. 
100/- for every ad-
ditional 1000 kilo-
grams or part there-
of in addition to 
2000 kilograms. 
(it) For each trailer the registered unla-
den weight of which exceeds I tonne. 80/-
Provided that two or more vehicles shall not 
30 be chargeable under this clause in respect of the same 
trailer. 
\ 
\ 
PART B.-Motor vehicles other thin those fitted solelY The rates shown in 
with pneumatic tyrell. Pan A pl,. SO per 
cent. thereof. 
35 NOTII I.-When tax it paid fOl' the whole year at a time •• 
rebate of 10 per cent. of the fate. .peclfied in thi, 
Schedule 'hall be .nowed. 
N0TII2.-The l'eIl,tered 'Inlden weicht of • motor vehicle 
,hall be u ,pecified in the cenlficate of retiatration. 

14 
SCHEDULE IT 
[See section 24(1)] 
1. The Punjab Motor Vehicles Taxation Act, 1924 (Punjab Act 
4 of 1924) as e~endedi to Delhi. 
2. The Punjab Motor Vehicles Taxation (Amendment) Act" 
1940 (Punjab Act 2 of 1940) as extended to ~lhi. 
3. The Punjab Motor Vehicles Taxation (Delhi Amendment) 
Act, 1954 (6 of 1954). 
4. The Punjab Motor Vehicles Taxation (Delhi Amendment) 
Act, 1955 (2 of 1956). 
5. The Punjab Motor Vehicles Taxation (Delhi Amendment) 
Act, 1956 (10 of 1956). 
10 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Tax on motor vehicles is now being levied in Delhi under the 
Punjab Motor Vehicles Taxation Act, 1924, as extended to Delhi in 
1933. The rates of tax on motor vehicles in :the State of Punjab 
were increased in 1954 and again in 1956, but there has been no 
increase in such 1"aOOs in Delhi since 1933. The rates of tax in Delhi, 
particularly in the case of transport vehicles are also lower than the 
rates obtaining in some ather states. The proceeds of tax collected 
in Delhi are 'being utilised by the Municipal Corporation of Delhi 
and the New Delhi Municipal Committ-ee and they are spent for the 
performance of their functions. As the demand on the resources of the 
Municipal Corporation of Delhi and the New Delhi Municipal Com-
mittee for the performance of their functions are increasing it is 
consid~red necessary to raise the rates of tax on motor vehicles in 
Delhi sudtably. 
2. The tax, at present, is levied on the basis of unladen weight 
in the case of motor cycles and goodS vehicles and on the basis of 
seating capacity in the case of private cars. It is proposed to revise 
the basis of the levy of tax on the lines recommended by the Motor 
Vehicles Taxation Inquiry Committee; that is to say on the basis of 
regist'ered laden weight in the case of a goods vehicle, unladen weight 
in the case of a car and a fiat rate calculated on the basis of unladen 
weight in the case of motor cycles, etc. 
3. The Bill seeks to achieve the ahow objects. The notes on 
clauses explain the more important proviSions of the Bill. 
JAGJIV AN RAM. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 20th November, 1962. 

Clause 3.-l)'nder the clause, tax on motor vehicles 18 to be levied 
at the rate specified in Schedule I. 
Clause 4.-At present the minimum period for which tax may be 
paid is three months. Th'is causes incoI'lvenience to the .owner or 
person in possession of the motor vehicle in cues where the motor 
vehicle is kept in Delhi for a period less than three montba. lD 
order to minimise the inconvenience the clause provides alae fol' the 
payment of tax once in two months or .JIlOI1thly. 
Clause 5.-The clause provicies for the issue of a token specifying 
the period far which tnt" tax has been. paid or that no tax is payable. 
Cla.uaes 6 cmd 7.-Under these clauses additional tax is payable 
with respect to a motor vehicle which has been altered or is propoled 
to be used for a different purpose during any period for whlch tax 
has been paid or is payable for that motor vehicle. 
Clause B.-Tile clause provides for the production of a valid cer-
tiicate of imIuraDee in respect of the vehicle for which the tax is to 
be paid, at the time of payment of tax. 
Clause 9.-Under the clause where the ownership or po8IIession of 
a motor vehicle is transferred during any period for which tax for 
that motor vehicle has nol been paid, the transferer and the trans-
feree are jointly and severally liabh! for the arrears. 
Clauae IO.-The clause provides for the refund of tax under the 
circumstances mentioned thtlrein. 
CJG.ue ll.-Defalillters of payment of tax are liable to pay; in 
addition to the amount of arrears, a sum not exceedingtbe annual 
tax for the motor vehicle as penalty. 
Clause 12..-.The clause provides for the recovery of penalty and 
arrears of tax as arrears of land revenue. 
Clause 13.-Motor vehicles design.ecl for agricultural operations 
and used solely for such operations are exempt from the payment of 
tax. The Chief Commissioner is empowered to exempt in the public 
interest either totally or partially any class of motor vehicles or any 
motor vehicle belonging to any class of persons from the payment of. 
tax. 
16 

17 
Clause 14.-Tbe clause provides for a reduction of tax with res-
pect to motor vehicles owned by a transport co-operative society, if 
that society satisfies the conditions specified therein. 
Clause 15.-Where in respect of a motor vehicle tax has been paid 
in any State for any period and that motor vehicle is brought into 
Delhi for use during that period, no tax shall be payable in respect of 
that vehicle for such period 01" for a period of ninety days from the 
date on which the vehicle is brought into Delhi, whichever is sho~r. 
Clame 16.-The clause provides for an appeal from any order or 
direction of the taxation authority. 
Clause 20.-The clause provides for the payment of the proceeds 
of the tax, reduced by the cost of collection, to the Municipal Cor-
poration of Delhi and the New Delhi Municipal Committee for the 
performance of their respectiw functions under the Delhi Municipal 
CorporatiOll Act, 1957 and the Punjab Municipal Act, 1911. 
Clawe 25.-The clause provides for the amendment of section 184 
of the Delhi Municipal Corporation Act, 1957 which is only conse-
quential to clause 20. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
The Bill seeks to replace the Punjab Motor Vehicle Taxation Act, 
1924 as applicable to the Union territory of Delhi. No new expendi-
ture apart from what is already being incurred on the administra-
tion of the existing law is contemplated by reason merely of the 
passing of this legislation. 
. 2. Clause 20 of the Bill provides for the payment of the proceeds 
of the tax, reduced by the cost of collection to the Municipal Cor-
poration of Delhi and the New Delhi Municipal Committee for the 
performance of their respective functions under the Delhi Municipal 
Corporation Act, 1957 and th.e Punjab Municipal Act, 1911. 
18 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 23 of the Bill empowE'rs the Chief Commission~ to make 
rules for canying out the purposes of the Act. The matters in res-
pect of which rules may be made are specified in s1:lb-clause (2) 
These matters are of routine nature and the delegation of legislative 
power is of a normal character. 
19 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACT FROM THE DELHI MUNICIPAL CORPORATION ACT, 1957 
(66 of 1957) 
• • • • 
Ta:z:es em mot07' "ehicles and tues on entertainment and betting 
CeGoDvtral t 184. The proceeds of the tax on motor vehicles collected in Delhi ernmen. . 
to pay under the PunJab Motor Vehicles TaxatIon Act, 1924, as extended to 
proc:ceds of Delhi and the proceeds of the entertainmnt and ·betting taxes collect-
~hldes tax ed in Delhi under the provisions of the U.P. Entertainment and 
a~d enter-- Betting Tax Act, 1937, as extended thereto (both of which shall form 
t aiDment • . 
'. 01 part of the ConsolIdated Fund of indIa) reduced by the cost of 
~cs to. collection as determined by the Central Government shall, if Parlia-
orporauon. ment by appropriation made by law in this behalf so provides, be 
paid to the Corporation for the performance of its functions under 
this Act. 
• • • • 

t 
LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
... 
to impose a tax on motor vehicles in the Union territory of 
Delhi and for other matters connected tlJ.erewith. 
The President has, in pursuance of clauses (I) and (3) of article 
117 of the Constitution of India, recommended to Lok 
Sabha the introduction and consideration of the Bill. 
M.N. KAUL, 
Secretary. 
, . 
(Shri Jagjivan Ram, 
Minister of Transport 
and Communications.) 