5

AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
2 । z fi
» AUG 2005

25 Aue

Bill No. 118 of 2005

THE POPULATION CONTROL BILL, 2005

By
SHRIMATI DAGGUBATI PURANDESWARI, M.P.
A
BILL

to provide for measures and methods to control population and for matters connected
| therewith or incidental thereto.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (/) This Act may be called the Population Control Act, 2005.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notifica-
tion in the Official Gazette, appoint. |
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—

“(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in other cases, the Central Government;

(6) “hospital” means and includes every dispensary or clinic or medical college
providing medical services run by the appropriate Government or local authority or

Short title
and com-
mencement.

Definitions.


Small family
norm.

Amendment
of the
Representa-
tion of the
People Act,
1951.

Disincentives
for not
adopting
small family
norm.

Scheme for ४

small family
norm and
incentives.

Maternity
benefits.

_ cooperative society or social organisation which engages qualified medical practitioner;

(c) “local authority" means Municipal Corporation, Municipal Councils, Zila
Parishads, Blocks, Panchayats or any other authority established by law; and

(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by the rules made under this Act. » a

3. No person shall procreate more than two living children after a period of one year 5
from the date. of the commencement of this Act.

4. After section 8A of the Representation of the People Act, 1951, the following section |
shall be inserted, namely:—

"8B. (/) A person shall be disqualified if he procreates more than two children:

Provided that the person shall not be disqualified if he, within a period of one 10
year from the date of commencement of the Population Control Act, 2005, procreates
another living child and thereby the number of living children of that person increases

to more than two.

(2) The disqualification referred to in sub-section (/) shall not apply in case of |
persons having more than two children on the date of commencement of the Popula- 15
tion Control Act, 2005.".

5. Any person who, after a period of one year from the date of the commencement of
this Act, procreates more than two living children,—

(a) shall not be eligible for allotment of any house or land in any housing scheme
launched by the appropriate Government; 20

(b) shall not be eligible to become a member of any cooperative society under
the Cooperative Societies Act, 1912, for the purpose of acquisition of a house or plot
of land for construction of house;

(c) shall not be eligible to avail of any loan or facility of any other kind from any
Government or private financial institution under the control of the appropriate
Government;

(d) shall not be eligible to avail of the facility of the public distribution system,
and

(e) shall not be eligible for appointment in any establishment, office or public
sector undertaking under the control of the Central Government.

6. (1) The appropriate Government shall frame a scheme for promoting small family
norm and provide following facilities to those couples who voluntarily undergo sterilisation
after two living children,—

(a) payment of such cash rewards as may be prescribed; and

(b) free education to children of such parents in schools, colleges including 3
medical and technical institutions.

(2) The appropriate Government shall take suitable steps to encourage media, non-
governmental organisations, women organisations and Panchayat institutions to promote
small family norm among public in rural areas and to guide married couples in use of
preventive methods of birth control and provide them with suitable birth control devices free
of cost. |

7. (1) The maternity benefits provided to a married couple by the appropriate Govem-
ment shall be restricted to first two children.

(2) Every hospital shall maintain a record of births with all necessary details and
produce the same on demand by the appropriate Government.


15

8. (/) Any employee of the Central Government or an employee of a public sector
undertaking or an establishment under the control of the Central Government who procre-
ates more than two living children, shall not be entitled to any increment or promotion in
service.

(2) The leave travel concession facility or any other facility as may be extended by the
Central Government from time to time to its employees shall be restricted to only first two
children.

9. Any employee of the Central Government or an employee of a public sector under-
taking or an establishment under the control of the Central Government, who voluntarily
undergoes sterilisation after having two or less than two living children shall be given an
incentive equivalent to his one month's basic salary and preference in promotion.

10. The provisions of this Act shall not apply to persons who are having more than two
living children on the date of commencement of this Act.

11. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by law by Parlia-
ment, provide adequate funds for the implementation of this Act.

12. The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the provisions of this Act.

Disincentives
to Govern-
ment
employees.

‘Incentives to
Government
employees.

Provisions of
this Act not to
apply to those
persons who
have more
than two
children on
the date of
commence-
ment of this
Act.

Central
Government to
provide funds
for the imple-
mentation of
the Act.

Power to
make rules.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The rate of population growth in the country has assumed alarming proportions. |

During the last five decades, the population of the country has increased by three times. The
average increase in population is over one crore and fifty lakh per year.

This tremendous increase in population engulfs all the benefits of development in the
country. Therefore, elementary essential services and basic facilities have not reached the
majority of pupulation in the country.

Crores of people are living in sub human conditions in slums. Due to poor conditions,
the diseases spread and ultimately affect the health of the people. The problem of the
increasing population creates the problem of unemployment. The number of the unemployed
persons in the country, as registered with the Employment Exchanges, runs into many lakhs.
Moreover, the crimes like robberies and extortions, are increasing because the young
unemployed persons take to crime to feed themselves

The unprecedented increase in pupulation has added to the problem of unauthorized
constructions in cities because there is acute shortage of dwelling units and the result is that
the number of unauthorized constructions has overtaken the authorized ones. Unauthorized
constructions has also led to corruption at all levels. If the population keeps on increasing,
many of our cities will become unliveable

Merely making people self-conscious about the need to have a small family has not
produced the desired results of restricting the population growth. Hence, it has become
imperative that a scheme of incentives and disincentives be formulated to restrict the population
growth.

The Bill seeks to achieve the above objective.

New DELHI; DAGGUBATI PURANDESWARI
July 26, 2005.

|


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 6 of the Bill provides that certain schemes and facilities are to be given to those
couples who have two children. Clause 9 provides for one month's basic pay as an incentive
to those who undergo sterilisation after two or less than two living children. Clause 11
provides that Government would provide funds after due appropriation by Parliament, for
implementation of the provisions of the Bill. The Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure from
the Consolidated Fund of India. The State Governments will also incur expenditure from their
"respective Consolidated Funds although the Central Government will have to extend financial
assistance to State Governments and also implement the provisions in Union territories. It is
estimated that a sum of rupees fifty crore may be involved as recurring expenditure per
annum from the Consolidated Fund of India.

No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.


-MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 12 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the provisions of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for measures and methods to control population and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto. |

(Shrimati Daggubati Purandeswari, M.P.)

MGIPMRND—2399LS (S-4)—17.08.2005.