1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2014
By
SHRI KIRTI AZAD, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fifth  Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2014.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No. 118 of  2014
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title and
commencement.

2
Insertion of
new article
371K.
2.  After article 371-J of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely:—
 "371K. (1) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the President may,
by order made with respect to the State of Bihar, provide for any special responsibility
of the Governor for—
(a) establishment of a separate development board for Mithilanchal region
with the provision that a report on the working of the board will be placed each
year before  the State legislature;
(b) equitable allocation of funds for developmental expenditure over the
said region, subject to the requirements of the State as a whole; and
(c) equitable opportunities and facilities for the people belonging to the
said region, in matters of public employment, education and vocational training,
subject to the requirements of the State as a whole.
(2) An order made under sub-clause (c) of clause (1) may provide for—
(a) reservation of a proportion of seats in educational and vocational training
institutions in the Mithilanchal region for students who belong to that region by birth
or by domicile; and
(b) identification of posts or classes of posts under the State Government and in
any body or organisation under the control of the State Government in the Mithilanchal
region and reservation of a proportion of such posts for persons who belong to that
region by birth or by domicile and for appointment thereto by direct recruitment or by
promotion or in any other manner as may be specified in the order.".
5
10
15
20
Special
provisions with
respect to the
State of Bihar.

3
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Mithilanchal region of North Bihar has faced economic, legislative and political
barriers since the inception of independent India. It continues to lag behind on several key
developmental parameters due to inefficiency in policy implementation on the one hand and
limited framework of development schemes or plans relating to industry, agriculture and
education on the other. The Mithilanchal area of the State of Bihar consist's of the districts
of Vaishali, Muzzaffarpur, Sitamarhi, Shivhar, Betiah, Motihari, Darbhanga, Madhubani,
Smastipur, Munger, Begusarai, Khagaria, Jamui, Lakhisarai, Sheikhpura, Saharsa, Supaul,
Madhepura, Purnia, Katihar, Araria, Kishanganj, Bhagalpur and Banka.
The need of the hour is to accelerate development of the backward region of the State
and to reduce inter-district and inter-regional disparities in the State. Also an institutional
mechanism for equitable allocation of funds to meet the developmental needs of the region,
as well as to provide employment and develop the human resources by providing for local
cadres in service is required to be established.
It is accordingly proposed to insert a new article 371K in the Constitution to provide
for —
(a) establishment of a separate Development Board for the Mithilanchal region;
(b) equitable allocation of funds for development of the region subject to the
requirements of the State as a whole;
(c) reservation in public employment through the Constitution of local cadres for
domiciles of the region; and
(d) reservation in educational and vocational training institutions for domiciles of the
region.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW  DELHI; KIRTI  AZAD
August 6, 2014.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides for constitution of the special Development Board for the
Mithilanchal region of the State of Bihar. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely to involve a recurring expenditure
of about rupees ten crore per annum on account of salaries and other administrative expenses
of the Board.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five crore is also likely to be involved.
4

GMGIPMRND—2463LS(S-3)—05.11.2014.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Kirti Azad, M.P.)