1
Short title
and
commencement.
Bill No. 118 of  2015
THE  BHAGWAN BUDDHA CENTRAL HOMOEOPATHY
UNIVERSITY BILL, 2015
By
SHRI PANKAJ CHAUDHARY, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of a University at Maharajganj in the State of
Uttar Pradesh for promotion of Homoeopathy and encouraging
research in Homoeopathy.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Bhagwan Buddha Central Homoeopathy University
Act, 2015.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this act unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "Academic Council" means the Academic Council of the University;
(b) "Board" means the Board of Management of the University;
(c) "Chancellor" means the Chancellor of the University;
(d) "Faculty" means Faculty of the University;
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Definitions.
5
10

2
Establishment
of the
Bhagwan
Buddha
Central
Homoeopathy
University.
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(f) "Registrar" means the Registrar of the University;
(g) "Syllabus Committee" means Syllabus Committee of the University;
(h) "University" means the Bhagwan Buddha Central Homoeopathy University
established under this Act; and
(i) "Vice-Chancellor" means the Vice-Chancellor of the University.
3. (1) There shall be established a University by the name of the Bhagwan Buddha
Central Homoeopathy University.
(2) The headquarter of the University shall be at Maharajganj in the State of Uttar
Pradesh and it may also establish campuses at such other places within its jurisdiction as
it may deem fit.
(3) The University shall be a body corporate having perpetual succession and a common
seal and shall sue and be sued by the said name.
4. the Objects of the University shall be—.
(a) to impart education in Homoeopathy;
(b) to promote research in Homoeopathy and treat patients; and
(c) to provide maximum benefits of Homoeopathy at national and international
educational institutions in collaboration with the Institute of Homoeopathic System of
Medicines.
5. (1) The University shall have the following powers, namely:—
(i) to impart education in Homoeopathy;
(ii) to make provisions for conduct of research in Homoeopathy;
(iii) to grant, subject to such conditions as it may determine, diplomas or
certificates to, and confer degrees or other academic distinctions on the basis of
examination, evaluation or any other method of testing, on persons, and to withdraw
any such diplomas, certificates, degrees or other academic distinction for good and
sufficient cause;
(iv) to establish and maintain colleges relating to Homoeopathy;
(v) to establish and maintain such campuses, special centres, specialized
laboratories, libraries, museums and other units relating to Homoeopathy;
(vi) to create teaching, research and extension education posts and to make
appointments thereto;
(vii) to create administrative, ministerial and other posts and to make
appointments thereto;
(viii) to institute and award fellowships, scholarships, studentships, medal and
prizes;
(ix) to determine criteria of admisssion to the University which may include
examination, evaluation or any other method of testing;
(x) to provide and maintain residential accommodation for students and
employees;
(xi) to lay down conditions of service of all categories of employees, including
their code of conduct;
Objects of the
University.
Powers of the
University.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40

3
Jurisdiction.
(xii) to regulate and enforce discipline among the students and the employees
and to take such disciplinary measures in this regard as it may deem necessary;
(xiii) to fix, demand and receive such fees and other charges as may be prescribed;
(xiv) to borrow, with the approval of the Central Government on the security of
its property, money for the purposes of the University; and
(xv) to receive benefactions, donations and gifts and to acquire, hold, manage
and dispose of any property, movable or immovable including trust and endowment
properties for its purposes.
6. (1) The jurisdiction and responsibility of the University with respect to teaching,
research and programmes of extension education at the University level, in the field of
Homoeopathy, shall extend to the whole of India.
(2)  The University shall be open to persons of either sex and of whatever caste, creed,
race or class, and it shall not be lawful for the University to adopt or impose on any person
any test whatsoever of religious belief or profession in order to entitle him to be appointed as
a teacher of the University or to hold any other office therein or to be admitted as a student
in the University or to graduate threat or to enjoy or exercise any privilege thereof:
Provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent the University from
making special provisions for the employment or admission of women, persons with disabilities
or of persons belonging to the weaker sections of the society and, in particular, the Scheduled
Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and the other socially and educationally backward classes of
citizens.
7. (1) The President of India shall be the Chancellor of the University.
(2) The Chancellor shall have the right to cause an inspection to be made, by such
person or persons as he may direct, of the University, its buildings, laboratories, libraries,
museums, workshops and equipments, and of any institution or college and also of the
examination, instruction and other work conducted or done by the University, and to cause
an inquiry to be made in like manner in respect of any matter connected with the administration
and finances of the University.
(3) The Chancellor shall, in every case, give notice to the University of his intention to
cause an inspection or inquiry to be made and the University shall, on receipt of such notice,
have the right to make, within thirty days from the date of receipt  of the notice or such other
period as the Chancellor may determine, such representation to him as it may consider
necessary.
(4) After considering the representation, if any, made by the University, the Chancellor
may cause to be made such inspection or inquiry as is referred to in sub-section (2).
(5) Where an inspection or inquiry has been caused to be made by the Chancellor, the
University shall be entitled to appoint a representative who shall have the right to appear in
person and to be heard on such inspection or inquiry.
8. The following shall be the officers of the University, namely:—
(1) the Chancellor;
(2) the Vice-Chancellor;
(3) the Deans;
(4) the Directors;
(5) the Registrar;
(6) the Finance Comptroller;
(7) The University Librarian;
(8) such other officers as may be prescribed by the Statutes.
The
Chancellor.
Officers of
the
University.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
9. (1) The Vice-Chancellor shall be appointed by the Chancellor in such manner as may
be prescribed.
(2) The Vice-Chancellor shall be the principal executive and academic officer of the
University and shall exercise general supervision and control over the affairs of the University
and give effect to the decisions of all the authorities of the University.
(3) The Vice-Chancellor, if he is of the opinion that any decision of any authority of the
University is beyond the powers of the authority conferred by the provisions of this act or
that any decision taken is not in the interest of the University, may ask the authority concerned
to review its decision within thirty days of such decision and if the authority refuses to
review the decision either in whole or in part or no decision is taken by it within the said
period of thirty days, the matter shall be referred to the Chancellor whose decision thereon
shall be final.
(4) The V ice-Chancellor shall exercise such other powers and perform such other
duties as may be prescribed.
10. Every Dean and every Director shall be appointed in such manner and shall exercise
such powers and perform such duties as may be prescribed.
11. (1) The Registrar shall be appointed in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The Registrar shall have the power to enter into agreements, sign documents and
authenticate records on behalf of the University and shall exercise such powers and perform
such duties as may be prescribed.
12. The Comptroller of Accounts shall be appointed in such manner and shall exercise
such powers and perform such duties as may be prescribed by the statutes.
13. The manner of appointment and powers and duties of other officers of the
University shall be such as may be prescribed.
14. The following shall be the authorities of the University, namely:—
(1) the Board of Management;
(2) the Academic Council;
(3) the Research Council;
(4) the Extensive Education Council;
(5) the Finance Committee;
(6) the Faculties and Board of Studies; and
(7) such other authorities as may be prescribed by the Statutes.
15. The provisions of the Central Universities Act, 2009 shall, with such exceptions,
adoptions and modifications, as may be considered necessary, apply to the Bhagwan Buddha
Central Homoeopathy University Act, 2015.
16. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulties:
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of three
years from the commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament.
The Vice-
Chancellor.
Deans and
Directors.
Registrar.
The
Comptroller
of Accounts.
Other
officers.
Authorities of
the
University.
Application
of the Central
Universities
Act, 2009.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40

5
17. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Power to
make rules.
5
10

6
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Homeopathy is an important medical system that has no side effects. In India,
Homeopathic medicines are used by a large number of persons to treat their ailments.
Homeopathic medicines are not only effective in curing ailments but are also cheap and
affordable. However, the system has not been given due importance in order to make it more
popular. The Bill seeks to establish a University to be known as the Bhagwan Buddha
Central Homeopathic University at Maharajganj in the State of Uttar Pradesh for development
of Homeopathy and promotion of research in the field of Homeopathy.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; PANKAJ CHAUDHARY
February 18, 2015.

7
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of the Bhagwan Buddha Central
Homoeopathy University in the State of Uttar Pradesh with headquarter at Maharajganj.
Clause 8 provides for appointment of officers of the University. Clause 14 provides for
certain authorities of the University. The Bill, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of rupees
one hundred crore would be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 17 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the provisions of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
8

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of a University at Maharajganj in the State of
Uttar Pradesh for the promotion of Homoeopathy and encouraging
research in Homoeopathy.
————
(Shri Pankaj Chaudhary, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—24LS(S3)—20-04-2015.