, 
or 
HOUSE OF THE PEOPLE. 
CORRIGiNDUM 
to 
THE INJUJ'1RIA.L FI~NCE CORPOli;'TION lAMElmililENT) . .' . BI LL, . 1 952 • . 
• 
In page 4, line 41, after "of' " insert "section 
\ 
In page 7. l.ine 30, after "anci " insert "to".-
+n page 9; l~~ }9J ~ofore "at the end" inse!l 
commas 
• 
zg of". 
inveJ"ted 
NEW DELHI t M. N. KAUL. 
Th~ 11th November, 1952. ,S E C R " TAR .~. 

Iff 
Bm .0. =--.of 1961 
THE INDUSTRIAL FINANCE CORPORATION 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 1962 
(As INTROOUCED IN THB HousB or TBB PBOPLB) 
E·ILL 
Further to amend the lndu.trial Finanoe Oorporation Aot, 1948. 
BE it enacted by Parliament as follows:-
1. Sbclrt tltte.-This Act may be caJled the Industrial Finance 
Corporation (Amendment) Act, 1952. 
2. Amendment of section 2, .Act XV or 1M8.-1n cla\lse (0) of 
section 2 of the Industrial Finance Corporation Act, 1948 (hereinafter I) 
,referred to as the principal Act), after the words "or prooessing of 
goods" the words "or in shipping" shall be inserted. 
3. Amendment of 18cf40n 10, .Act XV Of llK1.-Section 10 of the 
principal Act sha.ll be re-numbered as sub· section (1) of that section, 
and-
(4) in sub-section (1) as so re.numbered,-
(i) in cla.use (a.) for the word "three" the word "four" shall 
be substituted; . 
(ii) after olause (f.), the following clause shall be inserted, 
10 
namely: - 16 
"(g) One Deputy Manll8ip.~ Director appointed by the 
Corporation .• , 
. 
(b) after sub-section (l) ae ~Q rtI~lmmbered, the ~~~~win~ ~tll~-
section shall be inse!'ted, Il~!!!~J1 i =' . 
"(.g) The !)-:;'puty Managing Director shall have the righ't . .eo 
to, attend any meeting of the BOQ,rd or of the Executive Com. 
,:uttee and take part in its discu8siollsbut shall not have the 
rIght to vot~ at an,}' such mE:l"ltitlg : 
'Providl'd thnt when the Mnnaging Director is for any 
reason. unab~e to attend any such meeting. the, Deputy 52 
Managmg DIrector shall ha.ve the right to vote for him at 
that meeting." . 

6 
10 
20 
25 
30 
35 
Z 
i. ,mandlll8Jlt 01 section U, Act XV Of 19i5.-In section 11 of the 
principal Act,-
(I) in Bub'section (1) for the words "the Central Govern· 
ment" the words "tlhe authority appointing him" shall be subst.i. 
tuiled, 
(ii) in _he third proviso to sub·section (.8), after the words 
.. Provided further t.ha t " the word .. such" shall be inserted; 
(ill) in sub·seotion (4). after the words "the Managing 
Director" the words •• and the Deputy Managing Director" shall 
be inserted. 
5. AmendmeDt of lectlon 12, Act XV of IM8.-In section 12 of 
the prinoipal Act,-
(a) lor cl&ulle (a)1 the following clause shall be ~ubstituted, 
namely:-
"(a) except in the case of the Managing Director or the 
Deputy Managing Director, is a salaried official of the Corpora-
tion; or" 
(ii) in clause (b), after the word "payment" the words 
"of his debte" shall be U1serted. 
6. 8ubatttution of new I18Ctlon for .ctlan 18 in Act XV of 19M.-
For sect.ion 18 of the principal Act, the .following section shall be 
substituted, namely:-
"18. Removal of Director from offioe.-(l) The Central Gov· 
ernment may at any time remove the Managing Director from 
oftice after giving him 0. reaaDna.ble DppDrtunity .of shDwing ca.use 
&ga.inst the action proposed to be taken in regard to him: 
Provided tha.t such power shall not be exercised unless the 
Board at a meeting specially convened fDr the purpose recom-
mends the' rem .oval .of the Managing Director by not less than 
two-ibirds of the Directors present and voting. 
(.8) The Board may remove from .office any Director who-
(a) is, or has become, subject to any of the disquaWica.· 
tions mentioned in section 12; Dr 
(b) without excuse sufficient in the DpiniDn Dr the Board 
to exonerate it, is absent without lea.ve of tdte Board from 
mDre than three consecutive meetings .of the BDard." 
7. InMrt.ton of new section 18A in Act XV of 1968.-Mter section 
18 .of the principal Act, the following sectlion shall be inserted, na.mely:-
"18A. Casual vacancy of Managing DirBctcn-.-If the 
Managing Director is by infirmity or otherwise rendered inca.p· 
able of carrying out his duties or is absent on leave Or otherwisll 
in circumsta.nooR not involving the vacation of his a.ppointment, 
the Cent1ra.1 Government· may, after consideration of the recom' 
mendation of the Board, appoint another person to act in his 
pla.ce." 
8. Amendment of sectton 14, Act XV GIl .1HB.-In section 14 .of the 
principal Act. for the words "Ruch officers" the words "a Deputy 
Mana.ging Director and such other officers" shan be substituted. 

3 
9. Amendment of sectlOll 17, Act XV of IM8.-In sub-section (3) 
of section 17 of the principal Act,-
(I) after the words "as the case may be, 
brackets and figures .. subject to the provisions 
o..f eectwn 10" shall be inserted; 
shall" the words 
of sub-section (9) IS 
(ii) ufter the words •• the Chairman' , the words • • or in his 
absence, any other person presiding" shall be inserted. 
10. AmeJ1dmellt of sectloD 19, Act XV 0.1 1HS.-'fo section 19 of 
the principal Act, the words "or in consultation with the Reserve 
Bank, with a scheduled bank or a State Co-opera.tive Ba.nk" shaH be 10 
added. 
11 • .Amendment of I8CtioD 21, Act XV of 1948.-After sub_section 
(2) of section 21 of the principal Act. the following sub-section sha.ll be 
inserted, namely:- . 
"(3) The Corporation may, for the purpose of carrying out its 15 
I functions under th!R Actl, borrow money from the Reserve Bank-
(a) against securities of the Central Government or of any 
State Government. repaya.ble .on demand or on the expiry of 
fixed periods not exceeding ninety da.ys from the date on 20 
which the money is so borrowed; or 
(b) against bonds and debentures issued by the Corpora-
tion under Bub-section (1) or Blainst such other security 88 may 
be required by thE' Reserve Bank maturing and l1!pa.yable 
within 0. period not exceeding eighteen months from the date 2lS 
on whi~h the money is so borrowed: 
Provided that the amount borrowed bv the Corporation under 
(clause (b) shall not at a.ny time exceed three crores of Tupees ill the 
aggregate. '~ 
12. Amendment of .ctlon 28. Act XV of 1945.-1n section 23 of 30 
the principa.l Act.-
(I) after clause (0) of sub-section (1), the following clause 
shall be inserted, namely:-
"(co) acting h'B agent for the Central Government or, 
with its approval. for the Iuternationa.! Bank for RecoDf~truc­
tion and Develop~ent in the transaction of any business with 35 
an industrial concern in respect of 10Ms or a.4vances granted, 
or debentures subscribed, by either of them." 
(ilJ in sUb-section (2), for the words, brackets ancI letterR 
"Rub-clauses (a) and (0 )" the words, br&<"kets letters and figure 
"('lltllSeS (a) and (6) of sub-section (l)" shall be substituted. 40 
18. Amendment of 88ctlon 2'. Act XV of IMS.-In section 24 of 
the principal Act. for tlie words . 'for an a.mount equivalent in the 
aggrega.te to more than ten per cent. of the paid up share capita.l of 

the Corporation but in no cose ex~eeding fifty lakhs of rupees", the 
fol1owing shall be substitutp,d, namely:-
"for an amount exceeding one crore of rupees in the aggregate: 
o Provided tha.t the aforesaid )imit of one orore of rupees sha.ll not 
apply to any such arrangement when any loans. advances or debentures 
are, on the recommendation of the Corporation, guarantleed by the 
Central Government as to the repayment of the principal and the 
payment of the interest." 
U. Amendment of aection iii, Act XV of IMS.-To sub-section (9) 
10 of section 25 of the principal Act, the words "or in any instrument 
relating to the industrial concern" shall be added. 
15. Am8llclment of lect10D IS, Act XV 01 UNIi.-In section 26 of 
the principal Act, after clause (b), the following clause shaU be insert-
ed, namely:-
15 .. (c) grant any loan or advance on the seourity of its own 
shares." 
18. Sub.tttllltiou 01' n8W .ction for section 27·ID Act XV of 1MS.-
For section 27 of the principal Act, the following section sha.ll be substi-
tuted, namely:-
20 "27. Loans in foreign currsncy.-(l) Notwithstanding any-
thing contained in the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 194:7 
(VII of 1947) or in any other enactlment for the time being in foroe 
relating to foreign exchange, the Corporation may, for the purpose 
of grantmg loans or adva.nces to industrial concerns, ·borrow. with 
the previous consent of the Central Government, foreign currency 
from the InternationaJ Bank for ReconstrucUion and Development 
or otherwise. 
(.~) The Central Government may, where necessary. guarantee 
all loans taken by the Corporation under sub-section (1) as to the 
30 repayment of the prillcipal and the payment of the interest .. 
35 
(3) All loans and advances to industrial concerns out of 
foreign currency borrowed under sub-section (1) shall be granted in 
Indian currency and shall be repayable by such concerns in the 
Indian currency. 
(4) Any loss or profit accruing to the Corporation in connection 
with any borrowing of foreign cl1r.!'eney under sub-section (1) or its 
repayment on account of an'y fluctua.tions in the rates of exchange 
shall be re-imburrsed by, or [lAid to, the Central Government, as 
the case may be." 
40 17. Amendment of section 28, Act XV of lKS.-After suh·sect.!on (8) 
of the principa.l .Act. the fol~lowing sub-section shRIl be inserted, namely:-
45 
"(8A) Where the management of an industrial conoern is 
taken over by the Corporation or any property is sold or realised 
by it under the provisions of sub-section (1), all costs, charges and 
expenses properly inourred by it 88 incidental to slloh management. 
8ale or realisation sha.1l be recoverable from the industrial conoern 

and the money which is received by it from such man88ement 
sale or realisation Ihall, in the ablenoe 01 any contract to the con-
tary, be held by it in trust to be applied, firstly, in payment of 
such costs, cha.rges and expenFies and, secondly, in discharge of. 
the debt due to the Corporuti6n, and the residue of the money • 
so received shall be paid to the person entitled thereto." 
18 Amendm.&Dt of Retlon 19, Act XV of IHS.-In section 29 of the 
principal Act,-
(i) for the words beginning with the words "Notwithstanding any 
agreement to the contrary" and ending with the words •. its liabilities 10 
to the Corporatio[l", the following shall b.e substituted, namely:-
·'Notwithstanding anything in any agreement to the oontrary, 
the Corporation may, by notice in writing, require any industrial 
concern to which it has granted any loan or advance to discharge 
forthwith in full its liabilities to the Corporation,-" 16 
(ii) in clause (d), for the words beginning with the words "or 
depreciates in value" and ending with the words "is not given" the 
following shall be substituted, namely:-
,. or depr~ciates in value to such an ext.ent that, in the opinion 
of the Board, further security to the satisfaction of the Board 20 
should be given and suoh security is not given;" 
(iii) in olause (6), for the words "machi~ry or o£her ~quipment" 
the words "any machinery, plant or other equipment" shall be sub-
stituted. 
(iv) in clause (f), the words "in the opinion of the Board" shall 21 
be omitted. 
19. Amendment or .ctlOID 80, Act :xv of IM8.~In se9tion 80 of the 
principal Act,- . 
(i) in sub-section (1), for the words beginning with the words 
"Where by reason of the hreach" and eniling witb the words "to 30 
repay sllch loan or adva.noe", the following shall be substituted, 
namely:-
"Wher.e a.n industrial conoern, in breach of any agreetnA!JntJ, 
makes any default in repayment of My loan or advance or any 
instalment thereof or otherwise fails to oompl) with the terms of 36 
its agreement with the Corporation or where th,e Corporation 
requires an industrial concern to make immediate repaymentJ of 
any Joan or advance under section 29 and the industrial conoern 
fails to make such repayment. then without prejudioe to the 
provisions of section 69 of the tra.nsfer of Propetty Aot 1882 (IV 4t 
of 1882),"; , 
(it) for sub-section (18), the following sub-section shalJ be sub-
stituted, nnmely:-
"(1.9) The functions of R. Dilltrict Judge under this sectri.OIl 
shall, in a presidency town, be exeroised by the High Court." 46 
H. Insertion of DeW nctlOlll8 BOA to SOl: III Act XV of IMl.-After 
section 30 of the principal Aot, the following sections shan be inserted. 
namely:-
"SOA. Powe, of OO'l'pomtion to tJ1'7'oint di,ect"" of lin induBtrie&l 
conce", when management i8 ta1cen nv"".-(l) When the managemel1f1 50 

5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
8 
of an industrial concern is taken over by the Corporation, the Corpora-
tion may, by order notified in the Official Gazette, appoint as many 
persons as it thiIlks fit to be th,e directors of that industrial concern. 
(2) 'l'he power to appoirU direotors under this section includes 
the power to appoint any individual, firm or company to be the 
managing agents of the industrial conoern on such terms and condi-
tions 88 the Corporation may think fit. 
BOB. Eff80t of notified ord8r appointing diT80toT8.-On the issue 
of a notified order under section 80A,-
(a)' all persoBB holding office as directors of the industrial 
conoern immediately before the issue of the notified ord,er shall 
be deemed to have vacated their offices as suoh; 
(b) any oontract of management b,etween ~e industrial 
ooncern and any managing agent thereof holding oftice as such 
immediately before the issue of the notified order shall be deemed 
to have tetminaied; 
(0) the managing agent, if any, appointed under s,eotion BOA 
shall be, deemed to have been duly appointed in pursuance of 
the Indian Companies Act, 1918 (VII of 1918) and the memo-
randum and articles of association of the industrial 00Ii~ and 
the provisions' of the said Act and of the memorandum and 
art,icles shall, subject to the other provisions contained in tbia 
Act, apply accordingly, but no such managing agent shall be re-
moved from offioe exoept with the p~vious consent of the 
Corporation; 
,.., ,.,.. 4Ireotiore appointed under section BOA shall take suoh 
steps 88 may be neoessary to take into their custody or under 
·t-h,eir control all the property, ~ects and actionable olaims to 
which the industrial concern is, or appears to be, entitled, and 
all the property and effects of the industrial concern shall be 
deemed to be in the custody of th,e directors as from the date 
of the notified order; 
(e) the directors appointed under section BOA shall be, for 
all purposes, the directors of the industrial cono,ern duly con-
stituted Wlder the Indian Companies Act, 1918 (VII of 1918) and 
shall alone be entitled to exercise all the powers of the direotors 
of the industrial oonoern, whether suoh powers are derived from 
the said Aot or from the memorandum or articles of association 
of the industrial concern or from any other source. 
soc. PoweT8 and dutieB of diTeotoTB.-(l) Subject to the control 
of the Corporation, the directors appointed Wlder section 80A shall 
take such steps as may be necessary for the purpose of efficiently 
managing the business of the industrial concern anp shall exercise 
such powers ~d have such duties as may be prescribed. 
(2) Without prejudice to the gener$olity of the powers vested in 
them under sub-section (1), the directors appointed under section 80A 
mllY, with the previous approval of the Corporation, make an applica-
tion to a Court for the purpose of cancelling Dr varying any contract or 
agreement entered into, at any time before the issue of the notified 
order under section BOA, between the industrial concern and Ilny 

v 
other person and the Court may, if satisfied after due inquiry that 
suell contract or agreement 1100 been entered into in bad faith and is 
detrimental to the interests of the industrial concern, make an order 
cancelling or varying (either unconditionally or subject ~ suoh oondi- IS 
tiona as it may think fit to impose) that oontraot or agreement and 
the contract or agreement shall have e1lect accordingly. 
SOD. No right to oom~n.sation fOT termination of cont1'CJOt of 
managing agentB.-(l) Notwithsta.ilding anything con1l&ined in any law 
for th~ time being in force, no managing agent of an industrial CODcem 
shall be entitled to My oompensation for the loss of offioe or for the 10 
premature termination under this Aot of any contra.c~ of management 
entered into by him with such oonoern. 
(2) Nothing contained in sub-seotion (1) shall affect the right of 
any such managing agent to recover from the industrial conCern 
moneys recoverable otherwise than by way of suoh compensation. 15 
aOK Applioation of Act VII of 1913.-:(1) Where the ma.nag~­
ment of an industrial concern, being a company as defined in the 
Indian Companies· Aot, 1918 (VII 9f 1918), is taken over by the 
Corporation, then, notwithstanding anything oontained in the said 
Aot or in the memorandum or artioles of association of suoh conoem,- 20 
(a) it shall not be lawful for the shareholders of suoh concern 
or any other person to nominate or appoint any person to be a 
director of the concern; 
(b) no resolution passed at any meeting of the shareholders 
of such concern shall be IVv8n e1lect to unless approved by the 25 
Corporation; 
. (c) no proceeding for the winding up of such ooncern or for 
the appointment of a receiver in respeot thereof shall lie in any 
oourt, exoept with the oonsent of the Corpomtion. 
(2) Subjeot to the provisions oontained in Bub-section (1) and the 30 
other provision's contained in this Aot and subjeot to such other 
exceptions, restrictions and lbnitations, if any, as the Central Govern-
ment may, by notifioation in the Official Gazette, speoify in this 
behalf, the Indian Companies Aot, 1918 (VII' of 1918) shall continUA 
to apply to suoh concern in the same manner as it applied thereto 35 
before the issue of the notified order under section aOA." 
21. Amendment or aectton 82, Act XV of IM8.-In the first proviso 
to sub·section (2) of. section 82 of the prinoipal Act, after the words, 
brackets and figures ., given in pursuance of sub-section (9:) of section 21" 
the words. brackets and figures "or sub·section (2) of section 27" shull be 40 
mserted. 
22. Inl81't1on of new lectlon alA In Act xv of ·lMS.-After Rection 
82 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:-
"S2A. Sp6cial T686",6 fund.--:(l) All dividends accruing on the 
. shares of the Corporation held by the Central Government and the .4:5 
Reserve Bank shall, instead of b~ing. paid ~ them, be credited to B 
special reserve fund until the aggregate of the Rums standing in the 
reserve fund established under sub-section (1) of section 82 and the 
special reserve fund exceeds fifty lakhs of rupees. . 

8 
(~) No shareholder of the Corporation other than the OentJral 
Government or the Reserve Bank shall have any claim to the special 
reserve fund referred to in sub-section (1)." 
!S. Amendment 01 IICtiOll 88, .Act, XV 01 UK8.-In sub-section 
5 (1) of section 38 of the principal Act, for the word "two" the word "three" 
shall be substituted. 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
24. Amendmeat 01 MOtion H, ,~ xv or IM8.-In section 84 of the 
principal Act.-
(i) for sub-section (1), the following sub·section shall be substi· 
tuted, namely:-
., (1) The atTair~ of the C:>rporlltion shall be I\lIdit'ed by not 
less than two auditors duly qualified to act as auditors ot 
companies und"r lIuh'lIection (1) of section 144 of the Indiall 
Companies Act, 1918 (VII of 1918), one of whom shall be 
appointed by the Central Government in consultation with' the 
eomptroller and Auditor·General of India and the other elected in 
the prescribed manner by the parties mentioned in sub·section (8) 
of section 4, and such remuneratIOn as the Central Govtlrnmant 
may fix shall be paid to the auditors by the Corporation. 
(ii) in sub·section (4), after the words "The Central Government 
may" the words "in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor· 
General of India" shall btl inserted; 
(iii) after sub-section (4), the following sub· sections shall be m· 
setted, namely:-
.. (5) The Corporation shall send a copy of every report of the 
auditors to the Comptroller and Auditor·General of India at least 
one month before it is placed before the shareholders. 
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in the preceding sub· 
sections, the Comptroller and Auditor·General of India may, either 
of his own motion or on a request receiv~d in this behalf from the 
Central Government, undertake sUl}h audit and at such times RS 
he moy consider neceseBry: 
Provided that where the Central Government is required to 
make any payment on account of the guarantee given by it under 
section 5 or lIub·section (2) of lIection 27, a8 the case may be, such 
audit shall be undertaken by the Comptroller and Auditor-General 
of India. 
(7) Every audit report under sub·section (6) Rhall be forwarded 
to the Centra! Government and the Government shall CMlle' the 
,8ame to be laid before both Houses. of Parliament. ". 
2&. Amendment 01 IICtton SIS, Ac\ XV or lSK8.-In section 85 of the 
principal Aot,-' 
(i) in suh-Rection (2), for the words "8 olassification" th,e words ". I 
statement showipg the oluai!caticm'! IbaIl be lubstituted; 
(it) in sub-section (8), for the word "two" the word "three" sbaD 
be substituted. 

'9 
lB. Amendment. of lect.1011 88, Act XV of 1968.-1n sub-section (.2) of 
section 88 of the principal Act, for the words "or servant" the words "or 
other employee" shall be substituted. 
~. AmeIldmmt of &Bction 39, Act:xv Of 1948.-111 section 30 of the 
principal Act, for the words "or servant" the words "or other employee" IS 
shall be substituted. 
28. Amelidment of McttOn ~, Act. XV of 1948.-In the first proviso to 
section 40 of the principal Act,--
(i) after the words, brackets and figures "in pursuance of sub-
section (2) of section 21" the words, brackets and figures "or sub- 10 
section (2) of section 27" shun be inserted; 
(ii) after the words "debentures or bonds" the words, brackets and 
figures "or on foreign currency borrowed under sub-section (1) of 
section 27" shall be inserted. 
•• InIertton of new HCUOn 41A III Act XV of 1M8.-After section 41 15· 
of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:-
""IA. Effect of Act on other lawB.-The provisions of this Act and 
of any rules or orders made thereunder shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time 
bejng in force or in the memorandum or articles of association of an 20 
industrial concern or in any other instrument having effect by virtue 
of any la.w other than this Act, but save as aforesaid the provisions 
of this Act shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of, any other 
la.w for the time being applicable to an industrial concern." 
80. AmendmeDt of section 43, Act XV of 1948.-In section 43 of the 25 
principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1), after the words "with this Act" the wordd 
"and the rules made thereunder" shall be inserted; 
(b) in sub-section (.2),-
(I) in clause (1c), for the words "officers and servants and 30 
agents" the words II offic('rs, other employees, advisers and agents" 
shall be substituted; 
(ii) for clause (m), the following clause shall be !;lUbstituted, 
namely:-
"(m) the taking over of the management of .any indus- 36 
trial conC'em on a breach of its agreement with the Corpora-
tion and the powers Rnd duties of directors under section BOC;"; 
(iiI) in clause (n), for the words "ad hoc" the word "advisory" 
shall be substituted and the word "and at the end shall be 
omitted; , 40 
(i,,) after clause (n), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:-
"(nn) the election of an auditor under sub-section (1) 
of section 84". 
11. AmeDdmeDt of the Schedule, .4ct XV or 1968. In the Schednle U, 
the principAl Act, the word "Signature",' where it O<'-ours for the second 45 
time, and t.he word "Designation" shall be omitted. 

10 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The sha,z:es of the Industrial !<'in&1loe Corporation are gUar&nteed by the 
C~ntral Uovernment under section 5 &1ld the bonds and debentures iasued 
by it are simil.arly guar&1lteed under seotion 21 of the Industrial Fina.nce 
Corporation Act. There is, however, no provision in the Act for the 
Central Uovernment to guarant,ee foreign loans although under section 27, 
of the Aot the Corporation may raise loa.nS" in foreign ourrency. To 
augment the resources of the Corporation to meet the heavy dema.nd on 
i', n~gotiatioD.l with ~9 International Bank for Reconstruotion and De-
velopment have been ooncluded for a loan subject' to a guara.ntee being 
given by the Central Government. The Act is being amended to authorise 
the Central Gov:ernment to guarantee the loan. The amendment will he 
only permissive in ch&racter and it will not be mandatory for Government 
to guarantee all such foreign loans. 
l'he following am.endmente have been considered nec,essary with a View 
to strengthening the finanoial position of the Corporation and to widening 
i*s scope as suggested by the International Bank for Reconstruction a.nd 
Development: -
(i) amendment of section 2(0) to make shipping oompa.ni,es eligi-
ble for loans from the Corporation;, 
(ii) amendment of seotion 24 to raise the maximum limit of loan 
to a single industrial ooncern and to empower the Corporation to grant 
loans for a.ny amount, if such loahs are, guaranteed by Government i 
(iii) a new section is added to provide for-.. Special Res,erve Fund 
being built up as speedily 88 possible. 
The opportunity to amend the Aot is also being utilised to oarry oufl 
certain further amendments· to improv.e the operation of the Act and to 
bring it in line with the State Fmanoial Corporations Aot, 1961. In parti-
oular provision has been made for associat.ing the Comptroller and auditor-
General of India closely with the audit of the acoounts of the Corporation. 
C. D. DESHMUKH. 
NEW DBLIIIi 
The 4th November, 1952. 

n 
Not68 on ol(l.U'61 
UtaUBB 2.-l:)hipping companies are not at present; eligible for gran. of 
inanciaJ. 8.8sistance by the Corporation and the intention is to make them 
,0 eligiblQ. 
Ula'UB/l8.-.In view of Government's responsibility on account of the 
~ua.rantees given by the Government in terms of the Aot and alao to enable 
proper representation being given to all interests, provision is b~ing made 
for the nomination of four Direotors instead of three 88 at present. The 
Deputy Managing Director of the Corporation will b,e inoluded in the Board 
of Directors of the Corporation withou~ voting rights. 
UlaUBe 6.-At present there is no provision for the removal of the 
M Imaging Direotor and under seotion 9 of the Aot onoe a Managing 
Director is appoint,ed, he will continue in offioe for 4 years unless he be-
comes subject to any of the disqualifioations mentioned in section 12. It 
is conceivable that a situation might arise when a Managing Director 
may have to be removed. This power is 'being taken on the analogy of 
the power vested in Government under the Reserve Bank Aot ~ remove 
the Governor. 
ClaUB/l 7.-Provision is being made for filling up of casual vacanoy of 
Managing Director. 
ClauBe lO.-The Corporation is now entitled to keep their oash balanoes 
in deposit with the Reserve Bank or the Imperial Bank only. IfJ is con-
sidered desirable that the Corporation should also be authorised to keep 
their balances in d,eposit with a Soheduled Bank or a State Co-operative 
Bank in consultation with the Reserve Ba.nk. 
ClauBe ll.--The Corporation will be authorised to borrow from the 
Heserve Bank for short periods, not exceeding Q() days in order to avoid 
the necessity for the sale of seourities in the Corporation's investment port .. 
folio when it is not convenient to do so. The Corporation is, similarly, 
being authorised to borrow from the Reserve Bank for periods not ex-
ceedings 18 months, pending floatation of their own bonds on t,hc market. 
UlauBII l2.-It is desirable that the agenoy of the Corporation should be 
available to the Central Gov.ernment or the International Bank for B.e-
construction and Development for the purpose of sup,ervision, recovery, eto. 
of loans or advances granted by either of them to industrial oonoerns in 
India. 
Clau,e 18.-'l'he present limit of Rs. 50 lakhs whioh tb.e Corporation 
m~y grant to a single concern has been found to be i~adequate and is beinjl 
ra.sed to Rs. 1 crore. No such limit is considered necessary in the caSA 
of lOaDS and advances granted by the Corporation in tespect of which thA ' 
repayment of the principal and the payment of interest arA' guaranteed by 
the Central Government on the reoommendation of the Corporation. 
Clauses 14. 16, 18, 19, 25. 26 and i7.-Amendments follow the 
provisions in the I:)tate Financial Corporation Aot, 1951. 
(}lause 16.~l:)ection 27 of the Act does not at present provide for the 
guaranteeing by the Central Government of borrowings by the Corporation 
in foreign currency though section 21 provides that borrowings in Indian 
currency by means of bonds and debentllres are to be so guaranteed. The 
provision to guarantee foreign currency borrowings will be only pennissive 

l2 
and actual guarantee will be given by the Government only when necessary. 
As the Corporation is liable to innome-tax and its profits in excess of 
5 per cent. will BOcrue to Government. it is proposed to ex,empt the 
Corporation from exohange loss and the profit and lOBS on exchange arising 
out of foreign borrowings will be on Government BOcount. 
Cllaul8 17.-13pecifio provision is being made to make it clear that the 
expenses of management incurred by the Uorporo.tion in respect of any 
industrial conoern ta.ken o~er by the Corporation wiUbe the liability of 
the industrial concern. It is also being provided how monies realised by 
the Uorporation while managing an industrial concern taken over by them 
Ibould be applied. 
etAulJ' MO.-Detailed provisicm ia being made in regard to the variOUA 
rights and powers of the Corporation in r~sp.ect of industrial concerns tibe 
management of which has been taken over by the Corporation. 
CtaUIJe8 21 "nd 28.-Consequential to clause 16. 
()lau8e 22.-'1'he new section intends to cr.eat. a special reserve fund 
with a view to strengthening the financial position of the Corporation. A. 
the Corporation is liable to income-tax and its shareholders are also entitled 
to So guaranteed minimum dividend. it cannot in the normal way build 
up an adequate reserve speedily. 
mau86 24.-'fhe amendment is intended to bring section 84 in line witb 
the Htate }4'inancial Corporation Aot. 1961 with a view to associating th" 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India more closely with the audit of 
the affairs of the Corporation. 
(Jlau'6 29.-The new section is intended to override the application of 
the provisions of other statutes to the extent they are inconsistent with 
the provisions of this Act; but the other provisions in those laws shall 
continue to apply. 

13 
A.NNEXURE 
~XTBACTS FROM THE INDUSTRIAL FINANCE CORPORATION ACT, 1948 (XV or 
1948). .' 
• • • • • 
I. Interprttatioll.-In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in 
~e subject or ~ontext.-
• • • • • 
(0) "industrial conoern" means any publio limited company or 
oo-operative society incorporated by a Central Act or, an act of the 
legislature of a State or under any law for the time being in force and 
registered in India and engaged in the manuf80ture or processing of 
goods or in mining or in the generation or distribution of eleotricity or any 
other form of power; 
• • • • • 
10. Board of Dlreetol'l.-The Board of Directors shall (!onsist of the 
following, namely:-
(a) three Directors nominated by the Central Government; 
• • • • • • 
11. Term Of oIBce and retirement of Dlrector •. -{l) A nominated 
Director shall hold office during the pleasure of the Central Government. 
(2) An elected Director shall hold offioe for four years: 
Provided that one out of the two directors elected to represent the 
shareholders referred to in each of the clauses (0). (d) and (e) of section 10 
shall retire at the 'end of two years aft~r the first, eleotrion; the directors so 
to retire shall be determined by lot: 
Provided further that au elected Director shall be required to continue 
in his office until his suocessor has been eleo~: 
Provided further that a Direotor shall be eligible for re-election for not 
more than two full consecutive terms after the rotation of elected Direotors 
h88 be~un. ' 
• • • • • 
(4) Directors other than the Managi.ng Director and not being servants 
of the Govehnnent, shall be paid such fees for attending meetings of the 
Board and if they are members thereof,. of the Executive Committee, as 
may be prescribed . 
... ... ... ... ... 
12. DlsquaUflc&t101l.-No pel'l'Jon shall be a Director who-
(a) is a salaried official of the Corporation other than a Managing 
Director; or 
(b) is, or at any time has been. adjudicated insolvent or has sus-
pended payment or has compounded with his oreditora; or 
• • ... • • 
18. DIrector's abeence from three COll8ecutlve meetlng •. -A perRon 
shaH cease to be B Director if he absents himself froln three consecutive 
meetings of the Board without leave of absence. . ... ' ~ 

14 
U. Appolntmellt of oftictll, adw81'I, etc.-The Corporation may 
appoint such officers, advisers and employees as it considers necessary for 
the efficient performance of ita funo~ioD8. 
• • • • • 
17. Meeting. of Board and Oommittee.-
• • • • • 
(8) At a meeting of the Board or of the Exeoutiv,e Committee, eaoh 
Director or member of the Committee, as the oase may be, shall have 
one vote, and in the eV,ent of an equality of votes, the Chairman shall have 
a second or casting vote. 
• • • • • 
19. Depoatt ACC01lD.tB.-Tbe Corporation may open Deposit Acc'ounts 
with the Reserve Bank ,or with any agency of the Reserve Bank oth~ 
than 8 Government treasury. 
• • • • • 
28. BU8ln818 which the Oorporation may traDACt.-
• • • • • 
(2) No accommodation shall be given under sub-clauses (a) and (6), 
unless it is secured by a sufficient pledge, mortgage, hypothecation or 
assignment of Government or other seourities, stocks, shares or secured 
debentures, bullion, movable or immovable property or other tangible 
assets in the manner presoribed by regulations. 
it. Limit of accommodat.1olL.-The Corporation shall not enter into all;V 
arrangement under clauses (a) and (e) of sub-seotion (1) of seotion 28 with 
a single industrial concern for an amount equivalent in the aggregate to 
more than ten p,er cent. of the pa.id up share oapite.l of the Corporation 
but in no case exceeding fifty lakhs of .rupees. 
25. Power fjo impose copd1tiOll8 for accommodation. 
• • ... • • 
(2) Where one of the conditions imposed is that a Director shall be 
appointed by the Corporation on the Board of Directors of the industrial 
concern to protect the interests of the Corporation, such oondition shall 
be valid notwithsta.nding anything oontained in the Indian Companies Aot, 
1913 (VII of 1918), or any other law for the time being in foroe. 
28. Prohibited buI1D8II.-The Corporation shall not-
(a) accept deposits except as provided by this Aot; 
(b) subscribe directly to the shares or stock of any oompany 
having limited liability: 
Provided that nothing in clause (b) shall affect the right of the Corpora-
t,ion to acquire any shares, bonds or debentur,es of a company having 
limited liability in fulfilment of any underwriting agreement entered into 
by the Corporation. 
~. Loans in fOl'81gD. currency.-(l) The Corporation _may, for the pur-
pose of making loans or advances to industrial concerns requiring to be 

15 
financed in foreign ourrency, borrow, with the previous oonsen1; of ~e 
Centra.L Government, such currency through the International Bank for 
Reconstruction and Development or otherwis~, and may pledge, mortgage, 
hypothecate or assiiD·-t;o the said Bank or other foreign lender all or any 
part of the security taken by the Corporation from the industrial concerns 
for the loana or advances granted in foreign currency. 
(2) All loans and ~adva.noes made to industrial concerns in foreign 
currency shall be repaid in the ourrency in which they are mad~ or ita 
equivalent in Indian currency at the rate o~ exchange prevailing at the 
time of repayment. 
28. Bights of Oorporatlon In cue of default.-{l) Where any industrial 
concern which is under a liability to the Corporation under an agreement 
makes any default in repayment' or otherwise fails to comply with the terms 
of its agreement with the Corporation, the Corporation shall have the right 
to take over the management of the concern, as well as the right to sell 
and realise the property pl~dged, mortgaged, hypotheoated or assigned to 
the Corporation. 
• • • • • 
29. Power to call lor repayment before agreed period.-Notwithstanding 
any agreement to the conC;rary, the Corporation may by notice require any 
industrial conoern, to which ifl has granted any loan or advance, forthwith 
to discharge in full its liabilities to the Corporation-
• • • • • 
(d) if the propert~ pledged, mortgaged, hypotheoated or assigned 
to the Corporation as security for the loan or advance is not insured 
aud kept insured by the industrial concern to the satisfaotion of the 
Corporation; or depreciates in value. in the opinion of the Board, by 
more than twenty per cent., and further security to the sutislactioJ) 
of the Board is not given; or 
(8) if, without the permission of the Board, machinery or other 
equipment, whether forming patil of the security or otherwise, is 
removed from the premises of the industrial concern without being 
replaced; or 
(f) if for any reason it is necessary in the opinion of the Board to 
protect the interests of the Corporation. 
80. Spectal provlslons for enforcement of claims by the OorporattoD.-
(1) Wher:e by reason of the breach of any condition of an agreement between 
the Corporation and an industrial concern the Corporation beoomes entitled 
to call for the immediate payment of any loan or advance granted by it, 
before thE! due date or where the due date has expired, and the industrial 
concern fails to repa:v sllch lonn or advance, any officer of the Corporation 
genern.lly or especially authorised by the Board in this behalf may apply 
to the District Judge within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the 
industrial concern carries on the whole or a substantial part of its business 
for one or more of the following reliefs, namely:-
• • • • • 

16 
(18) The functions of a District Judge under this s~tion s~all, in • 
Presidency. town, be exercised by the Chief Judge of the Small Causa 
Cow1l. ' 
• • • • • 
n. DiIpoIaI of PraAtL-
· . ~ . . 
(B) After making provision for bad and doubtful debts, depreciation of 
usets and all oth,er 1II&tters whioh are usually provided for by bankers, 
the Corporation may out of ita net annual profits deolare a dividend: 
Provided that for 80 long as the reserve fund is less than the paid up 
share capital of the Corporation and until there has been r~paid to the 
Central Uovernment such sums, if any, as that Government may have 
paid under the guarantee given in pursuanoe of seotion 5 or under any 
guarantee given in pursuanoe of sub·seCtion (9) of section 21, the rate of 
such dividend shall not. exceed the rate guaranteed by the Central Govern-
ment under sect,ion 5: !i 
• • • • • 
88. General meetbll8.-(I) A general meeting (hereinafter referred to 
as the annual general meeting) shall be held annually at a plao,e in India 
where there is an office of the Corporation within two months from the 
date on which the annual aooounts of the Corporation are closed; and a 
general meeting may be cOllveucd by tht:! Bourd lit uny other time. 
, . • • • • ... '.l 
M . .A.udit.--(I) The affairs of the Corporation Khall be audited by not 
less than two auditors qualified under section 1« of the Indian Companie. 
Act, 1918 (VII of 1(18), to act 88 auditors of companies who shall be 
appointed by the Central Government on such remuneration a. th,e Central 
Uovemment may fix. and such remuneration ahall be paid by the Corpora.. 
tion. 
• • • • • 
(4) 'l'he Central Government may at any ,time issue dir,eotions to the 
auditors requiring them to report to it upon the adequacy of measures 
taken by the Corporation for the protection of its shareholders and oreditors 
or upon the sufficiency of their procedure in auditing th~ atJairs of the 
Corporation, and may at any time. enlarge or extend the soop,e of the 
audit or direct that a different procedure in audit be adopted or direot that 
any other examination be made by, ~h~ D\lditora if in its opinjQQ th~ publio 
interest so requires.· -
•. Bet.1U'D8,-
· . . . , 
(2) 'l'he Corporation shall furnish in the pretloribed fonn to the Central 
Government Bud to the Itellerve Bank at least once in every year or as 
frequently Be the Central Government or the lUIserve Bank nlRY rf'ql1ire a, 
classification of its loans and investments and of loans gu8.ra~teed by it 
and underwriting agreements entered into by it. 
(8) 'l'he Corporation shall furnish to the Central Government and the 
R.eserve B,mk within two months of the close of the finanoial yea.r a state-
ment in the prescribed fonn of its assets and liabilities as at the olose of 
that year togetbe~ with a profit and loss account for the year and a report 

1'7 
, , 
of the working of. the CorporAtion dUrlbg'.ne yiar. and copies of the said 
statement. aooount and r,epoit, ~~l·b" publiahed in the offioial Gazette 
and shall be laid before the ParliariieIit 
• . " ' .. • 
'88. Id'~' or' Dacfoiit.- .................. 
.' . " fI' , . 
(2) 'A Dlr80tqr IfluIll uot ,~ responsible for aily other DireoClor or for 
any ottioer or servant of. t·he Corpora.tion or for any loss or expense r,esulting 
to the Corporation by'the insUffioiency or defioiency of valuEr of, or title to, all,.' property fir secUrity aoqun"d or' take?'l on behalf of ~Q CorpotatiOn~ 
or' by the' w~g:fUJ t.e'Ii of .nr person,' undEir ,obliga~on to, the porpoia~on, 
or &>1' M:iYthi'ii~ cbie' iii gOO(r fSith'· io" the' execution of, ,the duties' of' his 
ottioe or in rele.tioti I thereto: ' 
'.: 'DtlCb;tittil··Of·d.ilt7~ aDd lec:recy.-Every Director, auditor, officer 
or servant of the Corporation shall, b,efore entering upqJlpjll! ~q~i~s •. 1I1,oe 
a deolaration of fidelity and ~e~recy in the form set out~in the' Schedule . 
••• ................... I ... • .. ' \ ',. , \': . 
~. ProvilloD rela~ ,~~come-tu and • .,...tu.-For the purposes 
of·the-Indian -InOOIti~~1:~"~c~~ 1922 (XI of 1922), the Corporation shall be 
deemed to be a. oompany within the meaning of that..AAt.&nc1.ahaU.blJ· • 
liable to income-tax and super-tax acoordingly on its income. profits and 
gains: .. ---- .. 
Provided that any sum paid by the Central Government lInder the 
guarantee gi.ven in pursuanoe of section 5 or under any guarantee given in 
pursuance of sub-section (2) of section 21 shall not be treated as the inoome. 
profits and gains of the Corporation. and any interest on debentures or 
bonds paid by the Corpora.tion out of such sum shall not be treated as 
expenditure incurred by it:-
• • • • • 
'8. Power Of Board to make regu1atJon.-(l) The Board may, after 
consultation with the Reserve Bank and with the previous sanction of tho 
Central Government, make regulations not inconsistent with this Ac~ to 
provide for all matters for which provision is necessary or expedi,ent for 
the purpose of giving effect to the provisions of this Act. 
(2) In particular and without prejudioe to the generality of the fore-, 
going power, such r:egulations may provide for-
• • • • • 
(k) the duties and conduct of officers and servants and agents. 
of the Corporation i 
• • • • • 
(m) taking over the management of and managing an industrial' 
concern committing a breach of its agreement with the Corporation; 
(n) a.ppointment of ad hoo committees for technical and otb..-
advice for purposes of this Act; a,nd 
• • • • .. 

18 
THE 8CHEPULE 
(See section 89) 
Deol(lr(ltion of. FideUty (Ina B60r60'll 
I ....................... , do declare that I will faithfulfly. truly 'and to the 
best of my judgment, skill and ability. execute and p.erform the duties 
required of me as a Director. officer, employee or auditor (ai the case may 
be) of the Industrial Finance Corporation of India and which properly 
l'.eJate to any office or position in the said Corpora.tion held by me. 
I further declare tha.t I will not communicate or allow to be communi-
.cated to any person not· legally entitled thereto any information relating 
to the affairs of the Corporation nor will I allow soy such person to inspeci 
or have 8Coe .. to any boob or dooum,ente belonging to or in the possession 
'of the Corporation and relating to the business of the Corporation. 
Big"Gt.r •...••..•.................•. 
Signed before me, 
Big1IGtuN ..•••.••••••......•• , •••••• 
I) •• ;"..tio.,., .........•........... 
p.te .......................... . 

HOUSE OF THE PEOPLE 
A. 
BILL 
further to amend the Industrial Finance Corpora.tion Aot,19l8 .. 
The President has in pursuance of clause (1) 
of article 117 of the Constitution of India, 
recommended to the House of t he People the 
introduction of the Bill. 
M.N.KAUL, 
Secretary. 
(8lwi o. D. Delilllmu'/c1t" 
M iniBter Jor Fi'IUJnce.) 
GIPD-LAD-882 P.8.-I-11.152-1,15150 