1
Short title, and
commencement.
THE WATER CONSERV ATION AUTHORITY OF INDIA BILL, 2017
By
DR. MANOJ RAJORIA, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of a Water Conservation Authority for the conservation
of water of the rivers, ground and rainwater through traditional means of ponds, wells,
canals, trenches, etc. and by building reservoirs, bunds and check dams, reviving
dried rivers, making trenches in riverbeds, building recharge shafts, deepening
and widening canals and ponds, building permanent water conservation
structures by means of rainwater harvesting to recharge the groundwater,
encouraging people to participate in water conservation movement and
plantation of trees in a big way and for matters connected therewith
or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the water Conservation Authority of India Act, 2017.
(2) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise, requires,—
(a) ‘‘appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
Bill No. 118 of  2017
Definitions.5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(b) “Authority” means the Water Conservation Authority of India established
under section 3; and
(c) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) The Central Government, shall as soon as may be, but within one year of the
commencement of this Act, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish a Water
Conservation Authority of India for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) The Authority shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid having perpetual
succession and common seal with power to acquire, hold and dispose off property, both
movable and immovable and to contract and shall by the said name sue and be sued.
(3) The headquarters of the Authority shall be at Karauli in the State of Rajasthan
and the Authority may with the prior approval of the Central Government, establish offices
at such other places in the country as it may deem necessary for carrying out the purposes
of this Act.
(4) The Authority shall consist of:—
(a) the Union Minister of Water Resources, who shall be the Chairperson
ex-officio;
(b) a Deputy Chairperson to be appointed by the Central Government having
the background or specialisation in water conservation and such other qualification
as may be prescribed;
(c) five members of Parliament of whom three shall be from House of the
People and two from the Council of States to be nominated by the Presiding Officer
of the respective House, members;
(d) four members to be appointed by the Central Government to represent the
Union Ministries of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare, Finance, Drinking Water
and Sanitation, and Rural Development, respectively, members; and
(e) not more than four members to be appointed by the Central Government, in
consultation with the Governments of the States representing Governments of the
States, in the alphabetical order, and it shall be ensured that all the States get
represented in the Authority, by rotation.
(5) The salaries and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service
of the Deputy Chairperson and other members of the Authority shall be such, as may be
prescribed.
(6) The Authority shall have a Secretariat with such number of officers and staff
headed by a Secretary who shall be the Member Secretary of the Authority, with such
terms and conditions of service, as may be prescribed, from time to time.
(7) The Authority shall observe such procedure in the transaction of its business, as
may be prescribed.
4. (1) The Authority shall formulate and execute a comprehensive action plan for the
conservation of water of rivers, ground and rainwater throughout the country and perform
such other functions relating to water conservation as may be assigned to it by the Central
Government, from time to time.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-section (1) the action
plan for the conservation of water may also include,—
(a) building adequate number of reservoirs at conspicuous places in different
parts of the country, particularly in desert and drought prone areas;
(b) reviving all the dried rivers and make trenches in all the river basins;
(c) constructing bunds and check dams on river beds;
Establishment
of the Water
Conservation
Authority of
India.
Functions of
the Authority.
5
10
15
25
30
35
40
45
20

3
(d) works relating to deepening and widening canals and ponds;
(e) building recharge shafts and construction of sufficient number of trenches
at appropriate places;
(f) building permanent water conservation structures and provision for recyling
of wastewater;
(g) desiltation of existing reservoirs, ponds, canals and such other water bodies;
(h) recharging shafts for dried up borewells, village ponds and hollows;
(i) reviving all the lost ponds and lakes;
(j) encouraging people to participate in water conservation in particular school
children and villagers to build water conservation structures;
(k) advising the appropriate Government to make rain water harvesting
compulsory in all Government buildings, public parks and places, households and
establishments and educate the masses about rainwater harvesting;
(l) advising the appropriate Government to diversify water guzzling crops;
(m) giving wide publicity through radio, videos, pamphlets, booklets, hoardings,
and through print and electronic media the importance of water conservation;
(n) encouraging tree plantation as a movement; and
(o) such other functions as may be deemed necessary for carrying out the
purposes of this Act.
5. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the Authority every year for carrying out the
purposes of this Act.
6. The Authority shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records and
prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be prescribed and the accounts
shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India at such intervals as may be
specified by him.
7. The Authority shall for each financial year prepare in such form as may be prescribed,
its annual report giving a full account of its activities during the previous financial year and
submit a copy thereof to the Central Government.
 8. The Central Government shall cause the annual Report and the audit report, together
with a memorandum of action taken thereon, of the Authority to be laid before each House
of Parliament.
9. The provision of this Act and rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force.
10. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any
other law for the time being in force.
11. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Annual report.
Annual
Report and
audit report
to be laid
before
Parliament.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Act to
supplement
other laws.
Power to make
rules.
Maintenance
of accounts
and records.
5
10
15
25
30
35
40
20

4
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
5

5
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The State of Rajasthan is one of the States gripped in water crisis having 19 out of the
33 disricts being famine affected. The rainfall deficit in the districts of Dholpur, Karauli,
Bharatpur, Sawaimadhopur and other districts of the State of Rajasthan has worsened the
situation of water crisis. Similarly, the Marathwada and Madhya Maharashtra in the State of
Maharashtra, various parts of Karnataka, Bundelkhand and some other parts of the country
recently faced worst crisis of water shortage and some parts had even to rush drinking
water through trains from other parts of the country to quench the thirst of the people and
livestock. This grim situation has taught the people the importance of water and
consequences of wasting it and importance of saving it. In coming years, water shortage
will be major challenge. But today most of the rainwater and water of the river goes waste in
the Oceans. Groundwater resources have been used for all kinds of purposes from agriculture
through tubewells in farming areas to cities where groundwater is increasingly being used
as the primary water source through borewells, handpumps, well etc. In farm sector water
guzzling crops such as sugarcane, paddy, etc. are being cited for receding levels of
groundwater. In fact the unregulated usage of groundwater has led to massive exploitation
of this precious resource.
So there is urgent need for water conservation in the country. The rainwater has to be
conserved through rainwater harvesting and other means. Similar action has to be taken for
the conservation of river water. For this purpose, it is felt that National Authority for the
conservation of water be established to concentrate on this vital requirement of life and
through conservation, problem of water scarcity and shortage can certainly be brought
down if not eliminated.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; MANOJ  RAJORIA
July  4,  2017.

6
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of Water Conservation Authority
of India. Clause 5 makes it obligatory for the Central Government to provide adequate funds
to the Authority every year. The Bill if, enacted will involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of one lakh crore rupees may involve as recurring
expenditure per annum from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non recurring expenditure to the tune of five lakh crore rupees for creating the
assets may also involve.

7
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of details only, the delegation of
legislative power is of normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of a Water Conservation Authority for the conservation
of water of the rivers, ground and rainwater through traditional means of ponds, wells,
canals, trenches, etc. and by building reservoirs, bunds and check dams, reviving
dried rivers, making trenches in riverbeds, building recharge shafts, deepening
and widening canals and ponds, building permanent water conservation
structures by means of rainwater harvesting to recharge the groundwater,
encouraging people to participate in water conservation movement and
plantation of trees in a big way and for matters connected therewith
or incidental thereto.
————
(Dr. Manoj Rajoria, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—983LS(S3)—19-07-2017.