.. --. ,., 
LOK S&BH:l. 
'~ 
COHRIGE1D ,I. 
-
" 
to 
THE BEEDI ...oRKER3 1,-!ELF:Jill CESS (.U~D.·1El';T) BILL, 1,11 
(To be/.~s introduced in 10k Sabha) 
1 ~ Page 3, line '5,-
1Qr. "of 197f,lI nlad "197'" 
2. Page 3, line 21,-
UU:. "then" I:itad "than" 
3· Page 4, line 1, -
!Q.z: "FIN .. l.N CE" 
NEW DELHI; 
September 1Q, 19'1 __ 
Bhadra 19, 1<)03 (3ak a) 
~ "FINA,NCI,,\L" 
-,-_ ... .., 

.'. 
As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA ON 
1 " SfP '~8 Ii 
Bill No. 118 of 1981 
THE BEEDI WORKERS WELFARE CESS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1981 
A 
BILL 
to amend the Beedi WOTkers Welfare Cess Act, 1976. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-second Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
L (1) This Act may be called the Beedi Workers Wel.fare Cess 
(Amendment) Ad, 1981. 
5 (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
Short: 
title 
and com-
menlCe-
ment. 
56 of 1976. 2. In the Beedi Workers Welfare Cess Act, 1976 (hereinafter referred Amend. 
1 of 1944. 
to as the principal Act), in the long title, for the words "tobacco issued ment of 
for the manufacture of beedi". the words "manufactured beedis" shall be long title. 
10 SUbstituted. 
3. In section 2 of the principal '11ct, after clause (b), the following 
clause shall be inserted, namely:-
.. (c) words and expressions used but not defined in this Act and 
rlefined in the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944, shall have the 
meanings respectively assigned to th~ in that Act." 
Amend-
ment cJf 
section 2 . 

FINANCE MEMORANDUM 
Existing section 3 of the Beedi Workers Welfare Cess Act, 1976 
which provides for the levy of a duty of exci~e by way of cess on tobacco 
issued for manufacture of beedis, is proposed to be substituted by clause 
4 of the Bill by a new section providing for levy of a duty of excise by 
way of cess on manufactured. beedis. This cess on manufactureti beedis 
will have to be collected from all over India by the Central Excise De-
partment which will have to be suitably augmented for the purpose. A 
collection charge of one per cent. is proposed to be paid to the Central 
Excise Department. For the present the rate of cess is proposed to be 
fixed at the minimum i.e. ten paise per thousand manufactured beedis 
and on this basis, tqe estimated total collection of cess per year is likely 
to be between Rs. 2.5 crores and Rs. 3.00 crores and the collection charges 
that would be payable will be between Rs. 2.5 lakhs and Rs. 3.00 lakhs. 
The provisions of the Bill do not involve any other expenditure, whether 
of a recurring or non-recurring nature. 
2. It may incidentally be mentioned that section 3 of the Beedi Wor-
kers Welfare Fund Act, 1976 envisages that the proceeds of the afore-
mentioned cess shall, after rteducting the cost of collection and after due 
appropriation made by Parliament by law in that behalf, be credited to 
the Beeni Workers Welfare Fund under lhat Act. The 'Beedi Workers 
Welfare Fund Act is complimentary to the Beem Workers Welfare Cess 
Act and the machinery under the Beedi Workers Welfare Funli Act is, 
as provided in section 8 of that Act, to be utilised for the purposes of 
the Beedi Workers Welfare Cess Act also. 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE BEEDI WORKERS WELFARE CESS ACT, 1976 
(56 OF 1976) 
An Act to provide for the levy and .collection, by way of cess, a duty 
of excise on tobacco issued for the manufacture of beedi. 
• • • • • 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
• • • • • 
3. (1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by 
notifi.cation in the Official Gazette, appoint, there shall be levieo. and 
collected by way of cess for the purposes of the Beedi Workers Welfare 
Fund Act, 1976, on so much of the tobacco as is issued to any person 
from a warehouse for any purpose in connection with the manufacture 
of beedi, a duty of excise at such rate not exceeding one rupee per kilo-
gram on such tobacco as the Central Government may, from time to 
time, fix by notification in the Official Gazette. 
Explanation.-In . this sub-section, "warehouse" means any place or 
premises appointed or licensed under rule 140 of the Central Excise Rules, 
1944, made under the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944. 
(2) The o.uty of excise levied under sub-section (1) shall be in addi-
tion to any .cess or duty leviable on tobacco under any other law for the 
time being in force. 
• • • • • 
7. (1) • • • • • 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the fore-
going power, such rules may provide for-
(4) the assessment and collection of the duty of excise levied 
UIl'der section 3; 
• • • • • 
• 
Defini-
tions. 
Levy and 
coUection 
of cess on 
tobacco 
issued 
for manu-
facture 
of beedi. 
Power to 
make 
-rule •. 

LOK SABHA 
BILL 
to amend the Beedi Workers Welfare Cess' Act, 1976. 
~ 
(Shri Narayan Datt Tiwari, Mi7lA8ter of Ind"!LStry and Labour.) 