As INTRODUCED IN LoK SARMA ON 
4,l, 
) ,j~J . + ... -~ .----~ 
Bill No. 118 01 1185 
mE TERR.ORIST AND DlSRUPTJVE ACTIVIT1ES (PREVENTION) 
BILL, 1985 
A 
HILL 
to 17UIke spec1il.l provisions for .the prevention of. and for coping with. 
terrorf.8t and disru.ptt1'e adi.~B and for matt~3 cormedted there. 
with or inctdento.l thereto. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the l'hlrty-sixtb Year Of &be Republic Gf 
India as. follows:-
PART 1 • 
PaELlMINA\{Y 
5 1. (1) This Act IDJy be cafied the Terrorist and Disruptive Activities 
10 
(Prevention) ACi, 191(5. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India, and it ·applies al!fO-
(0) to citizens of India outside India: 
(b) to person.c; in the service of the Government, wherever ·they may 
be; and 
(e) to persons on ships and aircraft registered in Inc.lia. wherever tbey 
. may be: 
Provided that ~o much of this Act as relates to terrorist acts shall not apply 
to the State of Jammu :lnd Kashmir. 
'5 (3) It shall come into forQC on such date as the Central GovOl1DDOll1' may, 
20 
by notJfication in the Official GazctJte, appoint and shall remain in force for a period 
. of two years from the date of its oommencement, but its expiry under the opera. 
rioD of this stJb..section shall not aff~ . 
. (a) the prov.ious operation of,. or anything duJy done or suffered under, 
thi'l Act. or any rule mede thereunder "'r any order made under any such 
rule,or 
Short 
title. 
extent, 
applica_ 
lion, 
commence. 
ment. 
duration 
and 
savin,s . 
• 

• 
De8Di.. 
dons. 
PluJiib.ment 
for 
ten'Orist 
acta. 
,2 
(b) any risht, privilege, obligation or liability acquired, accrued or 
inCurred under Itibis Act or any rule made thereunder or any order made 
under any such ~, or , 
(c) any penalty, forfeiture or punisbinent incurred in respect of any 
offence under this Act or any contravention of any rule made under this 5 
Act or of any order made under any s..uoh rule, or 
(d) any investigation, Jegalproceeding or remedy in respect of any 
such right, privilege, obligation, liability. penalty,. forfeiture or punishment 
as aforesaid, . 
and any such· investigation,' legal proceeding' or 'remedy .may be' instituted, con- 10 
tinued or enfon:ed and any such penalty, . forleitllre or puniShment may be 
imposed as if this Act bad not! expired. 
" , " 
Z. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) '~" means the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973; 20f 1974. 
(b) "Designated Court" means a Designated Court constituted under '5 
section 7; 
(c) "dismptive activity' has the meaning. assigned to it 'in sectI.i.on 4, 
and the eXPression "disruptionist" shall be 't'IOll'itrued a~ingly; 
(d) "H~b Court"', in relation to a Designated Court, means the High 
i Court wihin the- territorial limits of whose jurisdiction such Designated Court '~o 
is propoSed to be, or is, com1ituted; 
(e) ., Public Prosecutor" means a Public Prosecutor or an Additional 
Public Prosocutor or a Special Public Prosecutor appointed under section II, 
.' ,and includes any person acting Ullder the directions of the, Public ~tor; 
• J •• • (f> ''terrOrist act" has the meaning assigned to i~ in sub-section (J) 25 
Of section 3 and the expression "terrorist" shall· be- construed accordingly: ' 
(g) words IU1:d expressions used but not defined: in this Aot. and ddlned 
in the Code- shaIi have the meanings respectively assigned to them in the 
Code. • ' 
(2) Any reference in tbls Act to any enactment or any provision thereof 30 
shall, in relation to an area in which such enactment or such provision is not 
in foroe, be construed as a referem:e to the corre~ponding law or the relevant . 
proVision of the corresp0nd4ng 1~, if any, in force in that area. 
PART IT 
PuNISHMENTS FOR, AND MEASURES FOR COPING WITH, TERRORIST 35 
AND DISRUPTIVE ACTIVITIES 
3. (1) Whoever with intent to overawe the Government as by law established . 
,or to strike teTTQr, in the people or any section. of the people or to 
alienate any section cf the people or to adversely affect the ~ny 8IPoogst 
~fferCDt. &eeU0D5 of the people does any act or thing by using bombs, 40 
dynaJDi.t.e or ~e"plosive substances or inf1emmable substances or fire-arms 
,)(" other .lethal weap<ln!l or poisons or noxioUs gases or other chemicals or any , ' 
other substances (whether biological or otherwi'se) of a hazardous na~ in such 
a.m,nnoras to cause, or as is likely to cause, death of, 'or injuries to, any penon 
Pr ,~ or. damage to. ,or destruction of, property 'Or ~ of any sUpplies 45 
or sorvices ~1l1 fo the nfe of the comm.Unity, commits a·terrorist act. 

'3 
(2) Whoever commits a terrorist act sball,-
. (;) if sudt act has resulted in the deadl of any penon, be punisfwble 
with deatil; ., 
(il) in any other case, be puWsbable with'imprisonment for a term 
5 which shall not be lessilianfive yean but which may extend to term of life 
and sba1I. also be liable to fine. 
(3) Whoevor c..oosp:res or attempts to commit, or advocates, abets, advises or 
;ncites or knowingly faCllitll;tes the commission of, a terrorist ,act arany ect pre-
PI'J'atory to ,a terrorist act, shall be pun.iBhable with ~sonment for a term which 
10 shalnot be less than three ye;ars but whioh may exrend to term of. life and shall 
nisobe liable to fine. . 
4~ (I) Whoever commits or conspires or attempts to commit Or abets, advo-
rates, advises, incites 'If knowingly facilitates the commission of, any disruptive 
activity or any act preparatory to a disruptive actiVity shall be puriisbable wiJth 
15 imprisonment for a tern? which shall not be less than three yew'S but which may 
extend to term of life and shell also be Hable to fine. 
(2) For the purposes of mb-section (1), "disruptive activity" means any 
action taken, whether by act or by speech or song or ballad or verse or words or 
by any book,pamphlet, paper,. writing, record, tape video C8S1Ctte, drawing, 
20 painting, representation. or in any other mann~ wbatsoever,- . 
30 
(i) which questions, disrupts or is intended to disrupt, whether directly 
or indireotly, the sovereignty and territoria:1 integrity af. India; or 
(ii) which is interuted to bring about or suppotts any claim, wbetJlet 
directly or indiret.11y, for the cession of any part of India or the secession of 
any part of India from the Union. 
El1planation.-For the pmposes of this sub-5ection,-
(a) "oession" includes d1e adn;lissiOD of Ilny claim of any foreign 
country to any part of .India, and 
(b) "secession" iooludes tJbe assertion c:-.f any claim to determine 
whether a paItOf India will remain within the Union. 
(3) Willhout prejudiCe to ItIhe generality of the provisions of sub-section (2), 
it V: hereby declared that any action taken, ~hether by act or by speech or song 
or ballad or vel1'C or words or by any book, pamphlet, paper, writing, record, 
tape videocassett'e, drawing, painting, representation or in any other manner 
S5..vhetsoe~ which- . 
. < 
(a) advocates, advises, suggests or incites; or 
(b) predicts, pcopheSies or pronoUnces or otherwise expresses, in such 
mannec . as to inC!te, advise, suggest or prompt, 
the killing or 1Ihe destruction of any, persons bound by oath under the ConititutiOD 
. to unhold thesevetcignty and integrity Of India ot any J!lIblic servants shall be 
·40 deemed to ~e a Jisruptive activi,ty within the ~ing of 'this section. . ' 
Punishment 
for 
diarup, 
tive 
activitiOI. 
S. (l) The Central Government m~, by notUication in tf1e 01fiCia1 Oazd.tC, Power 10 
make such rules as appear to i~ neocssary or expedient fOr the prevention of, make 
. and fO[' coping with, terrorist acts and ~ve activities. l'UICI. 

4 
(2) Without. prejudice to the aencrality of thepowm ooufaortd by sub-
section (1), 1Iberulcs may provide for, and may empower any authority to make 
orden providiDl tor. Il'll or aa.y of the following matters with· mIpect to the puc-
.~mentioned in ·that sub-section, I1'Ilmely:-
(0) proventing or probibJling anything likely to fadlitatJe 1he oommission 5 
of terrorist aots 01 disruptive edivities Or prejudice thosucoenlul conduct 
of operations ag:lin<;t terrorists or disruptjoniets incIuding-
(i) COIJ¥l}UfliQa~·wirh persons (whether wjUlio or outside India) 
iDstipting or abeUina terrorist a£:ts or dilNptiYC aotiWios or IlIItisUDg 
i,n aay manner terrorist&. or disruptionists; 10 
(ii) aCquisition, possession or publication, without lawful autho-
rity or excuse of infonnatJion likely to as~lst terrorists or disruptioni&ts; 
<iii) ~ Or any ilBIi1Jtance, whether financial or otherwise, 
. 10 lelTOrist& Or disruptionittli; 
(b) preventing, with a· View to coping with terror~st, ~cts or 15 ' 
diBruptlve activities, the spreed without lawful authority or ex-
.WiO, eX. reports or 1.he ,prosecution of ,any purpose likely to cause. 
c:Usaffection or alarm or to prejudice maintenance of peaceful condi-
tions in any area or part of India or to promote feelings of ill-will, . 
enmity or hatred between. diilerent ~ of the peope of India; 20 
(c) l'cgulating the conduct of persons in respect of areas the 
control of whkh is considered necessary or expedient and the re-
moval of such persons from such areas; 
(<:I) requiring ~~y pel'lJOn or claSs of persons to comply with any 
scheme for the prevention of, or for' coping with, terr01ist acts or:25 
disruptive activities; 
(e) ensuring the safety of persons and property; 
(f) the demolition, destruction or rendering useless, in case of 
necessit.y, . of ar.y building or othe'r premises or anr "ther property; 
(R) prt'Ihibitir~ or regulatjng in any area traffic and the use of any 30' 
vehicles Or ve"" ... 15 orsignaJs or any apperatus whatsoever; 
(h), the control of movements within India of persons atriving 
in India from Gutside India; 
(i) prohibiting or regulating the use of postal. ... telcaraphic ex t.eJ. 
phonic ~rviccs" ind~ng t~ing possession of such services, and 35 
the delaymg, ,selzing. mtercepting or interrupting of pO:.itnl articles 
or. telegraphic ")r telephonic messages; 
(j) regulating the delivery, otherwise than by poatal or tele-
graphic service, of, postal articles and t~egrams; 
(k) regulatHt~ . supplies and ·servioes essential to the life of the 40 
community; 
. (I) tao ~uiIit4ODlng otservic.ec of ~ for maintaining sup-
pUeliaBd St'!"Vl<'eS enential to the life of the community; 

5 
10 
5 
, (m) the proVllllon, constructi<?n, . maintenance or alteration of 
buildings, premises or' other structur. or excavations required for . 
the conduct of operations against terrorists or disruptioiJists; 
. (n) prohj biting or reguiating the possession, use or disposal 
of--
. (i) explosives, . in1lammable substances, correstve and dan-
gerous articles, arms and ammunitions; 
(ii) v~hicles- and . vessels; , 
(iii) wireless telegraphic apparatus; 
(iv) photographic and signalling apparatus, of any means of 
recording l't communicating information; 
(n) pleventing the disclosure of official' secrets; 
(P) prohibiting or regulating meetings, assemblies, fairs and 
processions ; 
15 (q) pJ'("veuth'g or controlling any use of uniforms, ;hether offi-
cial or otherwise, flags, official decorations like 'medal~ badges and 
other insIgnia and anything similar thereto, where such. use is cal, 
culated tt) deceive; 
(r) ensuring the accuracy of any report or declal'lltion legally 
20 required of any person; 
(8) preventing anything likely to cauSe mtsapprehenslon jn res-
pect of the identity of any official person,.oflicial docum:ent or 'offi-
cial property or in respect of, the identity of any person,' document 
or property purported' to. be or resembling an official person, official 
document or official property; . . 
(t) the entry into, and search of, any place. whatsoever reason-
abJy suspe<'ted of being used for harbouring terrorists or cfisrup-. 
tionists or for manufacturing. or storing anything for use for' purpose 
of terrorist acts or disruptive activities. 
30 (3) The rules made under sub:.section (1) may ,further-
(a) provide for the arrest and trial of persons contravening any 
of the rules or any order issued. thereunder; 
(b) provide that any .. «)otraveotion of, or any attempt to contravene, 
or any abetment of. or eny attempt to abet. the contravention of any eX the 
35 proYirions of the rules or any orc:ler issued under any suchprovisioo; sIlalI 
be punishable with imprisonment fOr atenn wh~h ~y extend to seven years 
or for a tenn which may not be less than six months but whicb may extend 
to seven years or with fine or willi imprisonment' as aforesaid and fine;. 
(c) provide for the seizure, detention and forfeiture of any property in 
respect of whieh Aoh ~. attempt or abetment as is cefcr:red. to in 
clause (b) bas been com.nbUed and for the adjudication of. such aei&urc' and 
forfeiture, whether by any court or by any other authority; 

6 
(d) confer powers and impose duties as respectS aJ1jmatter upon the 
Central G<Mrnment or officers and a(Jt.borttiea of the Central· Govenrmeat 
or upOu anv State Government or officers and authoriti~ of the State 
Government;' . . 
(e) ~be the duties and pbwers Of public servants and other per- 5 
SODs as regarcJs prevCDting the CODtraveation Of, ~ securing the observance 
of, the rUies or any order made thereunder; 
, 
(I) provide for ,preventing contravention, obstroction and deception of, 
aDd <ijsobedience to, any person acring, and interference with any notice 
issued, in pursuance of the rules or any oMer made thereunder; 10 
(g) prohibit attempts by any penon to screen from puni&hmeDtany 
one, other th.:tn the husband or wife of such person, COIl'Invening any of the 
rules or any order made 1bereunder; . 
(h) empower or direct any authority to1Bke such action 'as may be' 
specified in the rules or as may seem ~o such authority necessary fot the pur- 15 
pose of ensuring ~e safety of persons and of property. , 
. 
6. (1) If any person contravenes, in any area nodfi.ed in this behalf by a State 
Government, any such provision of, or any such rule made under, the Arms Act, 
1959, the Explosives Act, 1884, the 'Explosive Substances Act, 1908, or the Inftam:. S4 of 1959. 
mabIe SUbstances Act, 1952, as may be notified in this behalf by ,the Centrm 4 of 104. 
GovernmeDt or by G State GoverdmeDt, be shaB, notwithstanding anything con- 20 5 of 1908. 
taincd in any ~ the aforeSaid Acts or the rules made tbereundcr, be punishab1e 20 of 1952, 
with impriJonment for a term which may extend to tea yean or, if his intention is 
. to aid any 1emXi.\t or disrupti~ With death or imp.risot:ueDt for' a term which 
'Shall DOt -be less thm three years but wbkb may extend to term of life, and shall 25 
also ,be liable !O fine. . 
(2) For Jte purposes of this section, any perscn who attempts to CODt:ravene 
or abets, or attempts to abet, or does .any act preparatory to the contravention of 
,jl11Y~on of any law, rule oronler shaUbe deemed to have cootravened that 
pr~. . 
PART III 
DESIGNATED CoUR.TS 
7. (1) The State Govenunea.t may for the whole or any part of the 
State iIConstitute one or more Designated Courts. 
. (2) A. Designated Co~ shall be presided over by. judge to' be 35 
,appointed by the State Govemmeht with the eoDeurrene~ of the Chief 
.J1istiee of the mp !Com1.' 
(3) '.l'b8 State Govemment may also appoint, with the e~eurreIlee 
of the CUef· .Justice of the Bia'h Court, addition.! judges to exercise 
jurisdietiOD in a Designated Court: .. . , . 
(4) A person shall not be quatifted for appeintmeat as a judge or an 49 
. '8dditloaal judge of a Desipated Court unte. he is, jmmediately before 
'SIKh appointment, a IleBsioDs judp or an aadUional ...,JOBI ju4lpi~ any 
State. . . 

7 
(5) For the removal of doulNs, itb ~. provtclecl ftIat the attaiD. 
~nt by .. a persoii appointed .. ,a judge or an additional judge of a Dee!g-
Dated. court ·of the age 01. superannuation under the rules applicable to 
Ilia in the Service to which he belongs, shaD Dot affect his continuance 
S 8Ssucb' judpOl' additional judee. 
(6) Where' aily additional judge' or additionai judges i!l or are appoint-
ed in a Desirnated Court, the judge of the Designated Court may, from 
time to tbne, by pneral or special order, in wrlting, provide for the dis .. 
tribution of business of the Designated Court among himsel{ud the 
10 additional judge or additional ~udges and also for the dispoSal of urgent 
business in the event of his absence. or the absence of any additional 
ju~e. 
8. A DesIgnated Court may, if it considers. it expedient or desirable so to do, 
sit for any of its prooeediogs at any place, ot-her than the ordinary ph.ce ot its 
,15 sitting, in the State in which it is constituted: 
Provided that if the Public Prosecutor certifies to :the I)esignated Court that it 
is in ·his opinion necessary for the protection Of the . accused . or any witness or 
~herwise expedient in the interests of jUSllice that the whole or any part of the trial 
should be held at some place other than. theordinal1y place r4 its sitting, the 
20 Designa~ Court may, after hearing the accused make an order to that effect 
unless, for reasons to be recorded in writing, the Designated Court thinks fit to 
make any other order. 
9. (1) Notwithstanding anythlngcontained in the Code, every 
,offence punishable under any provision of this Act or any rule made 
25 thereunder shall be triable only by the Designated. Court within whose local 
jurisdiction it was committed.. 
(2) The Centra,l Government may, if satisfied on the recommendation 
of the State Government or otherwise that it is necessary or expedient 
in the public interest so to do, transfer with the concurrence of the Chief 
30 Justice of India (such concurrence to be obtained on a motion moved 
in that behe.lf by the Attomey-General of I~dia) any case . pending be-
fort" a Designated Court in that State to a Designated Court in any other State. 
(3) Where the whole or any part of the area within the local limits 
of the jurisdiction of a l)esj.gnated Court has been declared to»e, or 
35 forms part of, any area which· has been declared to be a dist~'bed area 
under any enactment for the ti~ being in force making ,provision for . . 
the suppr~ion of disorder and restoration and mainterylcUlce of public 
order, and the Central Government is of opinion. whetD.~r on receipt of 
a report received from the Government of the State .in~hich such court 
40 is located or otherwise, that the situation prevailing in the State is not 
conducive to fair, impartial or speedy trial within the State, of offence'S 
under this Act or the rules made thereunder which such court is compa-
Place of 
sitting. 
Juris-
diction of 
Desie-
nated 
Courts. 

Power of 
Desig-
nated 
Courts 
with 
respect 
to other 
offences. 
Public 
Proaecu-
tors. 
B 
tent to try, the Central Government m~y, with the concu.rrence of the 
Chief Justice of India, specify, by noWlcation in the Oftlclal Guette, in 
relation to such court (hereafter in this aub-8ection refenoed to ash 
local court) a Designated Court outside the State (hereafter in thiB 
section referred to 1m the specified court), and tbereupon- 5 
(a) it shall not be competent, at ~y time during the t¥iod of 
operation of such notification, for such local court, to exercise any' 
jurisdiction jn respect of, or try, any offence under this Act or the 
rules thereunder; 
, , ,10 
(b) the jurisdiction' which would have been_ but for the issue 
of such notification,' exercisable by such local C'Ourt in respect ot 
such offences conunitted during the period of operation of such 
notification shall be exercisable by' the specified court; , 
(e) all cases relating to such offences pending immediately 
before the date of issue of such notification before such local court 15 
shall stand transferred on that date to the .pecified court; 
(d) all cues taken cognizance of by. or transferred to, the 
speCified court under clause (b) or clause. (c) shall be dealt with 
and tried in accordance' with this Act (wh~er during the period 
of operation of such notification or thereafter) as if such oft'ences 
had been committed within the local limits of the jurisdiction of the 
specified court or, as the case may be, transferred for trial to it 
'under sub-section (2) . 
ErplcmatiOn-A notification iSlmed under this section in relation to 
20 
, 25 any local court shall cease to operate on the date on' which the "Thole 
or, as the case may be; the aforementioned 'part Of the area within tlie 
local limits of its jurisdiction, ceases to be a disturbed area. 
10. (1) When trymg any OffellC;!1I D~signaled Court may .i1lso try any 
. 'Ither offence witi.'! which the accused may under the Code be cha'rged at the • . '. 30 
same trial of the nt'fclice is connected with such other offence. . 
(2) If, In the COl'lse of any trial under this Act of any offence, it is found l!bat 
tbe accused pcrsOfl h::~ committed any other offence' under this Act or any rule 
" thereunder or under any other i'aw. the Desipated CoUrt may convict such person. 
~ .,'1' .... other offence Rnd ,pass any ~ence authoriled by this Act or sUCh rule e8 . 35 
) 'l'Iiase Dlay he. !llUiCh other law, fontre punishment" thereof. 
'et~ every De~ated Court, the State Government shaD ap-
_..,.. ... _...:~o be the Public Prosecutor. and may ~t one 01' mere 
e Additional Public Prosecutor lOr Additional Public 
40 
Provided that . he State Government may also .. poiDt few any cue 
or elass of eases a s~cial Pub,ic ~oseeutor. 
\ 

9 
(~,.A("ptiInoD; .... 1I> be'eltpble to be a .. ointed· as a Public Prosecuter 
or aD Addjt~l Public Prosecutor er a Special Public Prosecutor under 
thill section only if he has been in practice as an Advocate for not less 
than lJeVell years ..or·has held any, post, for 'a period 0.( not less than seven 
5 years, UDder the Uu:on or Ii State, requiring special kn9w1edge of law. 
(3) Every person appointed as a Public Prosecutor or an Additional 
PuhUe PtdS8etlt~r or, a Special Public Prosecutor under this scetion shall 
be d~ tb be a 'Pidllic 'Pre!Jecutor within the meaning of clause (u) 
of II!IttiGilZ ef the Code, and the provisions of the Code shall have effed 
10 aeeordingly. 
12r (1) A Designated Court may take cognizance of any offence, 
without the accused being committed to it for trial, upon receiving a 
complaint of facts which constitute such offence or upon a poJ,ice report 
of such facts. 
15 (2) , Where an . offence 'triable by a Designated Court is punishable with 
imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years, or with fine or with 
botk, the D&signated Court may, notwithstanding anything contained in 
sub-section (1) of section 260 or section 262 of the Code, try the tlffence 
in a summary way in accordance with the procedure prescribed in the 
20 Code and the provisions of sections 263 to 265 of the Code. shall, so far 
gS may be, apply to such trial: 
Provided that when. in the course of a summary trial under this sub-
section, it appears to the DeSignated Court that the nature of the case is 
such that 'it is undesirable to try it in a summary way, the Designated 
25 Court shall recall any witnesses who may have been examined and pm-
ceed to re-heat: the Cl;lse in the manner proyided bv the provisions of tlie 
Code for the trial of such offence and the said provisions shall applv to and 
in relation to a Designated Court as they apply to and in relation .U: a 
Magistrate: 
go Provided further that in the case of any conviction in a sUMmary 
trial under this section, it shal~ be lawfUl for a Designated Court to pass 
a sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years. 
(3) A Designated Court may. with a view to obtaining the evidence of 
any person su.pposed to have been directly or in-directly concerned in, 
or privy to, an offence, tender a pardon to such person on condition of 
35 his making a full and true disclosure of the-whole circumstances within 
his knowledge relative to the offence and to every other persbn con~ 
c~rned· whether as principal or abettor in the commission thereof, and 
any pardon 'So tendered shall, for the purposes of section 308 of the 
Code, be deemed to have been tendered under s~ction 307 thereof. 
~ , 
(4) Subject. to the other provisions of this Act, -a Designated CoUtt 
Fball, for the purp~ of trial of ,any offence, have GIll the powers of a 
Court of Session and shall try such offen~e as if it were a Court of SP.ssion 
so far as may be in accordance with the procedure prescribed in the Code 
45 for the trial before a Court ~ Session; 
(5) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, every case trapsferred 
to a. Designated Court under sub-section (2) of section 9 shall be dealt 
with as if such case had been transferred under section 406 of the Code 
to such Designated Court. 
Proce-
dure 
and 
powers 
of 
Desig-
nated 
Courts. 

Protec-
tion of 
witnes-
sos. 
Trial by 
De9anaWd 
~urta 
to uve 
preee-
dence. 
Power to 
transfer 
cues 
to re,u-
Jar 
courts. 
AppeaL 
10 
13. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code, all proceed-
ings before a Designated Court shall be conducted in camera:. 
Provided that where the Public Prosecutor so applies, any proceed-
ings or part thereof may be held in open court. 
(2) A Designated Court may, on an application made by a witness in 5 
any proceedings before it or by the Public Prosecutor in relation to such 
witness or on its own motion, take such measures as it deems fit for 
keeping the identity and address of the witness secret. 
(3) Tn particular and without prejudice to the generality of the 
proviSions of sub-section (2), the measures which a Designated Court 10 
may take under that sub-section may include-
(a) the holding of the proceedings nt n protected place; 
(b) the avoiding of the mention of the names and addresses of 
the witnesses in its orders or judgments or in nny records of the 
case accessible to public; .. 15 
(c) the issuing of any directions for securing that the identity 
and addresses of the witnesses are not disclosed. 
(4) Any person who contravenes any direction issued under sub-
section (3) shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to one year and with fine which may extend to one thousand :lO 
rupees. 
14. The trial under this Act of any offence by a Designated Court shall 
have precedence over the trial of any other case against the accused in 
any other court (not being a Designated Court) and shall be concluded 
in preference to the trial of such other case and accordingly the trial li5 
of such other case shall remain in abeyance. 
15. Where after taking cognizance of any offence, a Designated Court 
is of opinion that the offence is not triable by it. it shall. notwithstand-
in~ that it has no jUrisdiction to try such. offence. transfer 
the case for trial of such offence to any court having jurisdiction 30 
under the Cod-e and the court to which the case is transferrea may 
pr .. eed with the trial of the offence as if it had taken cognizance of tlie 
o:fence. . .. 
16. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code, an appeal 
shall lie as a matter of right from any' judgment, sentence or order, not 85 
being an interlocutory order, of a Designated Court to the S'upreme Court 
both on facts and on law. I 
(2) Except as aforesaid, no appeal or revision shall lie to anv court 
from any judgment, sentence or order of a Designated Court. . 
(3) Every appeal under this. section sh~ll be preferred within a 40 
period of thirty days from the, date of the judgm~nt. sentp,n~e or order appealed frQm: '. . , . ", 

5 
II 
Provided that the Supreme Court may entertain an appeal after the 
expiry of the said period of thirty days if it is satisfied that the appellaRt 
had sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal within the period of 
thirty days. 
PART IV 
MISCELLANEOUS 
17. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code or any other 
law, every offence punishable under this Act or any rule made there-
under shall be deemed to be a cognizable offence within the meaning 
10 of clause (c) of section 2 of the Code and "cognizable case" as defined 
in that clause shall be construed accordingly. 
20 
(2) Section 167 of the Code shall apply in relation to a case invol-
ving an offence punishable under this Act or any rule made thereunder 
subject to the modifications that-
(a) the reference in sub-section (1) thereof to "Judicial Magis-
trate" shall be construed as a reference to "JUdicial Magistrate or 
Executive Magistrate"; 
(b) the references in sub-section (2) thereof to "fifteen days", 
"ninety days" and "sixty days", wherever they occur, shall be cons-
trued as references to "sixty days", "one year" and "one year", res-
pectively; and 
(c) sub-section (2A) thereof shall be deemea to have been" 
omitted. 
(3) Sections 366 to 371 and section 392 of the Code shall appJy in 
25 relation to a case involving an offence triable by a DeSignated Court 
subject to the modifications that the references to "Court of Session" and 
"High Court", wherever occurring therein, shall be construed as refer-
ences to "Designated Court" and "Supreme Court", respectively. 
(4) Nothing in section 438 of the Code shall apply in relation to any 
30 case involving the arrest of any person on an accusation 0i having com-
mitted an offence punishable under this Act or any rule made there-
under. 
(5) NotWithstanding anything contained in the Code, no person 
accused of an offence punishable under this Act or any rule made therc-
35 under shall, if in custOdY', be released on bail or on his own bond 
unless-
(4) the Public Prosecutor has been given an opportunity to 
. oppose the application for such release, and 
(b) where the Public Prosecutor opposes the application, the 
40 court is satisfied that there are reasonable grounds for believing that 
he is not guilty of such offence and that he is not likely to cQmmit 
any offence while on bail. 
(6) The limitations on granting 'of bail specified ·tn sub-section (5) 
are in addition to the limitations under the Code or any other law for the 
45 time being in force on granting of bail. 
Modified 
applica-
tion of 
certain 
provi-
sions of 
the 
Code. 

Com-
petence 
or Cen-
tral 
Govern-
ment to 
exercise 
powers 
of State 
Govern-
ment 
and dele. 
gation of 
powers. 
Power 
of the 
Supreme 
Court 
to make 
rules. 
Saving. 
Rules to 
be laid 
before 
Houses 
of Par-
liament. 
12 
18. (1) Any power exerci.sable by a State .GoVeJ.l!UDelnt uncler this 
Act may be exefcised by the Central Government wlUl the UJU' elect 
as if such powe,r had heen 'conferred cUrectly on the Ceatfal GoVemDl8Dt 
and had been delegated by that Government to such State Government. 
(2) The Central Government 'rpay, QY notification in the Oftkial 5 
Gazette, .direct that any power Or duty which by this Act or by any rule 
made under this Act is confer.red or imposed on the Central Government 
shall, in such circumstances and under S\1ch conditions, if any, as may 
be 'specified in the direction, be exercised or discharged also-
(a) by any ofJ\cer or authority subordinate to the Central 10 
Govemment, 0,1' 
(b) by any State Government or by any officer or a\1thority sub-
ordinate to the State Government, or . 
(c) Iby any other authority. 
(3) The State Government may, by notification in the Oftlejal 15 
Gazette, direct that any power which by this Act o.r by any il"Ule made 
under ihis Act is conferred or imposed on the State Government or which 
being by this Act or any such rUle conferred or imposed on the Central 
Government has been directed underlu~tion (2) to be exercised or 
discharged by the State Government shall, in such cil'C\llDltanelea and 20 
under such conditions, if any, as may be specified in the directlort,. be 
exercised or discharged by any officer or authority subofdinate to the 
State Government. 
19. The Supreme Court may, by notificl\tion in the ~ G .... , 
make such rules, if any, as it may deem. n~ssary for carrying out tlae 15 
provisions of this Act relating to Designated Courts. 
20. (1) Nothing in this Act shall affect the jurisdiction ex .. cfsUle 
by, or the procedure applicable to, any' court or other autBarity U1I¥ier 
any law relating to the naval, military or air forces or other armed. forces 
of the Union. 30 
(2) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared. that fOl' the 1»11'-
poses of any such law as is referred to in sub..section (1), a Deslln.w 
Court shall be deemed to be a court of ordinary criminal j1lJtfce • . 
21. Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall 
be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each Ho1188 of 'ParliA-
ment, while it is in session, for a total peried ·of thirty days whieh.may 35 
be comprised in one session or in two or m~ &uccesslve aessioas and 
if, before the' expiry of the session immediately following tJae .... or 
the successive sessions aforesaid, both HoUses agree in makine IUl1 modi-
fk\ltion in the rule or both Houses agree that the .ruleahoU;lci· not 'be 40 
made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modifted. tQrm 
or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any suc~ JDOdi-
fication or annulment shalL be without prejudice to the validity of any-
thing previously done under that .rule. 
..-.-~. 

1 of 18'12. 
U. The provisions of this Act or any rule made thereunder or any 
order made under any such rule shall have effect notwithstandfng any-
thing inconsistent therewith contained in any enactment oth~ than this 
Act or in any instrument having effect by virtue of any enactment other 
5 than Ithis Act. 
&3. Where an order purports to have been made. andaign«l by any 
authority in eJCerdse of any power confc\tr.ed. by or ~ this. Act, a 
Couft.lJbaU, w~ihin..tbe zneauing of the Indian. E~deD<le Act. 1872, pre8\1Im! 
that sWlb. order was so made by tbat authority .. 
10 ~. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall li& against the 
Central Government or a State Government or any oftlcer or authority 
ot .the Central Government or State Governm.ent or any other authority 
to whom powers have been deleiated under this Act for anything which 
is in good faith 40ne or intended to be done dn pursuance of this Act at' 
15 any rules made thereunder or any order issued under any such. ~le. 
Overrid-
ill, 
effect. 
Savin, 
as to 
orders. 
Protec-
tion of 
action 
tak~ 
under 
the Act. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Terrorists had been indulging in wanton killings, arson, looting of 
properties and other heinous crimes mostly in Punjab and Chandigarh. 
Since the 10th May, 1985, the terrorists have expanded their activities to 
other parts of the country, i.e., Delhi, Haryana, Uttar Pradesh and 
Rajasthan as a result of which several innocent lives have been lost and 
many suffered serious injuries. In planting of explosive devices in 
trains, buses and public places, the object to terrorise, to create fear and 
panic in the minds of citizens and to disrupt communal peace and har-
mony is clearly discernible. Thi~ is a new and overt phase of terrorism 
whic:h requires to be taken serious note of and dealt with effectively and 
expeditiously. The alanning increase in cHsru.ptive activities is also 
a matter of serious concern. 
2. The Bill seeks to make provision for combating the menace of 
terrorists and disruptionists. It seeks, inter alia, to-
(a) provide for deterrent punishments for terrorist acts and 
disruptive activities; 
(b) confer on the Central Government adequate powers to make 
such rules as may be necessary or expedient for the preVention of, 
and for coping with, terrorist acts and disruptive activities; and 
(c) provide for the constitution of Designated Courts for the 
speedy and expeditious trial of offeRees under the proposed legisla-
tion. 
3. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 
A. K. SEN. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 17th May, 1985. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 7 of the Bill provjdes for the constitution of Designated Courts 
by the State Governments and also for the appointments of the .r.udges 
and Additional Judges of those Courts. Clause 11 of the Bill provides 
for the appointments of the Public Prosecutors, Additional Public Prose-
cutors and Special Public Prosecutors by the State Governments. 
2. The expenditures towards setting up of the Designated Courts and 
towards salaries and allowances of the Judges, Public Prosecutors and 
staff will be defrayed out of the Consolidated Funds of the States. The 
eX'penditure towards setting up of the Designated Courts in the Union 
territories will be defrayed out of the Consolidated Fund of India. The 
likely expenditure for each Designated Court and on the salaries and 
allowances of the Judges, Public Prosecutors, Additional Public Prose-
cutors, staff, etc., over a period of six months is expected to be about 
rupees 3.57 lakhs, out of which rupees 1.72 lakhs will be of a recurring 
nature and rupees 1.85 lakhs of a non-recurring nature. As it is not 
possible at this stage to visualise the number of such Courts that may 
have to be established, it is not possible to gjve an estimate of the actual 
expenditure that may have to be incurred in this behalf. 
15 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 5 of the Bill seeks to empower the Central Government to 
make such rules as appear to it necessary or expedient for the preven-
tion of and for coping with terrorist and disruptive activities. The parti-
cular matters in respect of which such rules may be made have been 
specified in sub-clause (2) of the clause. The rule making power under 
the clause is of sufficient amplitude to enable the Central Government 
to provide for stringent punishment within the limits s'pecifit!d in sub-
clause (3) of clause 5 for contraventions of the rules and for other 
matters connected with such contraventions. The situations which arise 
as a result of terrorist and disruptive activities are of a very grave 
nature. Further, it is not possible to visualise the various types of 
situations which terrorists and disruptionists may create 
2. Sub-clause (2) of clause 18 of the Bill provides for the delegation 
by the Central Government of its powers and duties under the legisla-
tion to officers and the authorities subordinate to the Central Govern-
ment and to State Governments and officers or authorities subordinate 
to State Governments as also to other authorities. Sub-clause (3) of 
clause 18 seeks to confer power on a State Government to delegate the 
powers cQnferred on it by the legislation to its officers and authorities. 
The sub-clause also provides for sub-delegation by a State Government 
to its officers and authorities of the powers delegated to it by the Central 
Government. Provisions for delegation and sub-delegation on the lines 
provided in sub-clause (2) of clause 18 are necessary for securing effec-
tive administration of the legislation. 
3. Clause 19 of the Bill s':!eks to empower the Supreme Court to frame 
such rules, if any, as it may deem necessary for carrying out the purposes 
of the Bill relating to Designated Courts. The matters in respect of 
which the Supreme Court can make rules would relate to matters of 
detail or procedure. The power is sought to be conferred on the 
Supreme Court to enable it to provide for contingencies which it is not 
practicable to visualise and thereby secure the effective functioning of 
the Designated Court. 
4. In the context of the circumstances as explained above, the dele-
gation of legislative pnwer involved is of a normal character. 
16 

LOK SABHA 
.A 
BILL 
to make special provl.sions for the prevention of, ao,d for coping with, 
terrorist And disruptive activities. and for mattera connected therewith 
or incidental thereto. 
. , • 
I •• 