As INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

25 AUG 205

Bill No. 119 of 2005

THE NATIONAL SOCIAL SECURITY BILL, 2005
By
SHRI BALASAHEB VIKHE PatiL, M.P.
A
BILL

to provide for social security to the senior citizens, women, children and other
disadvuntaged sections of the society and for matters connected therewith
or incidental thereto.

WHEREAS article 38(1) of the Constitution directs the State to strive to promote the
welfare of the people by securing and protecting as effectively as it may, a social order in
which justice, social, economic and political, shall inform all the institution of the national
life;

WHEREAS article 38(2) of the Constitution provides that the State shall in particular
strive to minimize the inequalities in income and endeavour to eliminate inequalities in status,
facilities and opportunities, not only amongst individuals but also amongst groups of people
residing in different areas or engaged in different vocations; and

WHEREAS article 39 of the Constitution directs the State to secure right of an adequate
means of livelihood and equal distribution of material resources and the prevention of
concentration of wealth:

BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the National Social Security Act, 2005.

(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.

Short title,
extent and
commencement.


National
Social
Security
Authority.

Composition
of the
Authority.

Central
Government
to provide
secretarial
assistance to
Authority.

Functions of
the
Authority.

State Social
Security
Authority.

Duty of the
State Social
Security
Authority.

District Social
Security
Authority.

Functions of
the District
Authority.

District
Authority to
act in
coordination
with other
agencies.

2

(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint and different dates may be appointed for different States.

2. The Central Government shall constitute a National Social Security Authori
which shall be the apex body to frame policy guidelines on providing social security to
senior citizens, women, children and other disadvantaged sections of society.

3. The National Social Security Authority shall consist of a Chairman and ten oth
members who shall be appointed by the Central Government

4. The secretarial assistance to the Authority shall be provided by the Cent
Government in such manner, as may be prescribed

5. The National Social Security Authority shall, subject to the general directions of the
Central Government, perform the following functions, namely:—

(a) frame guidelines to ensure health and education of all children; -

(5) frame long term policy for providing pre and post-natal medical assistance to
the women in rural and slum areas |

(c) frame suitable schemes for proper bringing up of children and constructior
of community homes for children belonging to poor families and providing food and
education to them;

(d) frame schemes for providing assistance to landless labourers and है
affected by natural calamities and their dependants;

(e) frame schemes for individual and group insurance of poor persons;
(f) provide pension to senior citizens;
(g) provide unemployment allowance to unemployed youth;

(h) supervise the functions of State and District Authorities constituted under
sections 6 and 8, respectively; and

(i) frame the conditions of eligibility for availing of benefits under this Act.

6. Every State Government shall constitute a State Social Security Authority with the
same composition as that of the National Social Security Authority and expenditure of the
State Authority shall be met by the respective State Governments.

7. (1) It shall be the duty of the State Social Security Authority to give effect to th
policies and directions of the National Social Security Authority

(2) In the discharge of its functions under this Act, the State Social Security Authority
shall, wherever appropriate, act in coordination with other Governmental or non-Governmenta
agencies, or persons engaged in social service.

8. Every State Government shall constitute a District Social Security Authorit
which shall be headed by the District Magistrate and ten other members who shall be
nominated by the State Government in every district.

9. A District Social Security Authority shall perform such functions as may be delegated
to it from time to time by the State Social Security Authority.

10. In the discharge of its function under this Act, a District Social Security Authority
shall, wherever appropriate, act in coordination with other Governmental and no
Governmental agencies or persons engaged in social service


4
=

- 11. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by the Parliament

by law in this behalf, pay to the National Social Security Authority, by way of grants such

sums of money as it may think fit.

12. The National Social Security Authority shall establish a fund to be called the
National Social Security Fund.

13. (/) Every District Social Security Authority shall submit budgetary demands to
the National Social Security Authority through the State Authority concerned at the
beginning of each financial year for implementing the provisions of the Act.

(2) The National Social Security Authority shall release such amount to a District
Authority from the Nationai Social Security Fund after considering such aspects as it may
deem fit.

14. The National Social Security Authority, State Social Security Authority and the
District Social Security Authority, as the case may be, shall maintain proper accounts and
other relevant records and prepare an annual statement of accounts.

15. The Comptroller and Auditor General of India shall audit the accounts of the
National Social Security Authority, State Social Security Authority and District Social Security
Authority.

16. The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for carrying out the
provisions of this Act.

Central.
Government
to grant funds
to the
Authority.

National
Social
Security Fund.

District to
submit its
budgetary
demand to the
National
Social
Security
Authority.

Authorities to
maintain
proper
account.

Comptroller
and Auditor
General of
India to audit
the accounts.

Power to make
rules.

——— OO SC डेट:

f
|
||
|
॥|
i
॥॥
He
(NM
I nN
At
HM
Wi
॥॥॥॥
ii
KN
i
‘a
i
।
।
|
f
॥
\
}

———— न 3 कल


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

India is having a population of more than a billion people and a sizeable proportion of
our population is still living below the poverty line. The condition of those living marginally
above the poverty line is also not much better. But, at present, there is no specific law to
ensure social security to disadvantaged sections of the society viz. senior citizens, women,
children and unemployed persons. The Directive Principles of State Policy enshrined in the
Constitution directs the State to fulfil the above objectives. But no provision has been made.
for social security so far. Hence, it has become necessary to bring forward suitable legislation
to make provision for social security. |

The Bill seeks to achieve the above objective.

New DELHI; BALASAHEB VIKHE PATIL
July 26, 2005



FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 2 of the Bill provides for constitution of National Social Security Authority.
Clause 3 provides for composition of the Authority: Clause 4 provides secretarial assistance
to the authority Clauses 6 and 8 provide that every State Government shall constitute State
Social Security Authority and District Social Security Authority. Clause 11 of the Bill provides
that Central Government, after due appropriation by the Parliament, pay grants to the Authority.
Clause 12 provides for constitution of National Social Security Fund. Clause 13 provides that
grants would be made to the district authorities from the National Social Security Fund. The
Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. Expenditure in
respect of State Social Security Authorities and District Social Security Authorities shal] be
borne out of Consolidated Funds of the respective States.

It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of rupees two hundred crore is likely to be
involved from the Consolidated Fund of India. A non-recurring expenditure of rupees fifty
crore is also likely to be involved.



MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 16 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to frame rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power 15 of a normal character



LOK SABHA

A

BILL

f

to provide for social security to the senior citizens, women and children and othe
disadvantaged sections of the society and for matters connected therewith ०
incidental thereto. |

q
m4

r ५ es ७4 4 .

(Shri Balasaheb Vikke Patil, M.P.)

MGIPMRND—2548LS(S4)—18.08.2005.