As introduced in Lok Sabha
Bill No. 119 of 2022
THE MOTOR VEHICLES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022
By
Shri Jagdambika Pal, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988.
 B E it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India 
as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
 1.  ( 1) This Act may be cited as the Motor Vehicles (Amendment), 2022.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and 
commencement.
5

 2.  In section 2 of the Motor Vehicle Act, 1988 (hereinafter referred to as the 
principal Act),—
(a)  clause (1B) shall be remembered clause as (IC) and before the clause (IC) as 
so remembered, the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(1B) “aggressive driving behaviour” means unsafe driving performed 
deliberately with ill intent or disregard for safety including the following 
driving behaviours:
(i)  tailgating;
(ii)  speeding;
(iii)  erratic lane changes;
(iv)  honking;
(v)  cutting off other drivers;
(vi)  failing to signal;
(vii)  running on red lights;
(viii)   racing;
(ix)  failure to obey traffic lights;
(x)  shouting, yelling, or taking frustrations out on other drivers;
(xi)  bumping other vehicle on purpose;
(xii)  getting out of the vehicle or confronting other drivers; and
(xiii)  careless, negligent  driving, not follow traffic laws, endangering other 
drivers, pedestrians and properties;’’; and
(b)  after clause (37), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
 “(37A) “road rage” means aggressive driving behaviour stemming from a 
driver’s uncontrolled anger at the actions of another motorist including hitting  
vehicle running vehicles off the road pulling over, getting out and engaging 
in a physical confrontation; inciting passenger(s) to fight the other driver; 
using any weapon to inflict harm on another driver or vehicle and making a 
rude hand gesture behind the wheel.
 3. After Chapter VIII of the principal Act, the following Chapter and sections 
thereunder shall be inserted namely:—
CHAPTER VIII A
ROAD RAGE
 138A. Whoever, intentionally hits his vehicle with which of any other 
person or runs behind someone off the road or pulls over, gets out and engages 
in a physical confrontation or incites his passenger(s) to fight the other driver or 
uses any sort of weapon to inflict harm on another driver or vehicle, or makes a 
rude hand gesture behind the wheel, would be said to commit an offence of act 
of road rage.
 138B. Whoever commits the offence of road rage shall be punished with 
rigorous imprisonment for a term of two months, and shall also be liable to a fine 
which shall not be less than rupees five thousand.
 138C. Whoever commits an offence punishable under sections 182, 183, 184, 
185, 186, 190, 192, 192A, 194, 196, 197 and 201 for the first time or drives a 
motor vehicle in a manner which is dangerous to the public including aggressive 
Definitions.
Cost to be 
borne by 
Central 
and State 
Governments.
15
20
25
30
35
40
5
10
2
Insertion of new 
Chapter VIIIA.
Offence of Road 
Rage.
Punishment for 
the offence of 
road rage.
Aggravated act 
of Road Rage.
59 of 1988

driving behaviours, and thereafter involve in the act of road rage, shall be said to 
have committed an offence of aggravated act of road rage. 
 138D. Whoever commits the offence of aggravated act of road rage shall be 
punished for the first offence with the punishment mentioned under sub-section 
182, 183, 184, 185, 186, 190, 192, 192A, 194, 196, 197 and 201 and for subsequent 
offences with imprisonment for a term of six months, and shall also be liable to 
a fine which shall not be less than rupees ten thousand.
 138E. Whoever contravenes any provision of this Act or of any rule, 
regulation or notification made thereunder shall, if no penalty is provided for the 
offence be punishable for the first offence with fine which may extend to rupees 
one thousand  and for any second or subsequent offence with fine which may 
extend to rupees two thousand.
 138F. Whoever disobeys any direction lawfully given by any person or 
authority empowered under the Act to give such direction, or obstructs any person 
or authority in the discharge of any functions which such person or authority is 
required or empowered under this Act to discharge, shall, if no other penalty is 
provided for the offence shall be punishable with fine which shall not be less than 
rupees two thousand.
 138G. The Central Government and every State Government shall take 
all measures to ensure that,— 
(1) the provisions of this Chapter are given wide publicity through 
media including the television, radio and the print media at regular 
intervals to make the general public aware of the provisions of this 
Chapter; and
(2)	 the	 officers	of	the	Central	Government	and	the	State	Governments	
and other concerned persons (including the police officers) 
are imparted periodic training on the matters relating to the 
implementation of the provisions of this Chapter.
 138H. Where any person is convicted of any offence punishable under this 
Act, it shall be competent for the Court convicting such offender to cause the 
name and place of residence of such person to be published by the police in 
the local newspaper where such offence had taken place, together with the fact 
that such offender had been convicted of the offence under this Act and such 
other particulars as the Court may deem fit and appropriate, to be allowed to be 
published. Also, provided that no such publication shall be made until the appeal, 
if any, filed against such order is finally disposed of.
 138I. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by 
Parliament by law in this behalf, provide requisite funds for carrying out 
the purposes of this Chapter.
  4. In section 202 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the words and figures 
“under section 184”, the words and figures “under section 138C or section 184” shall 
be substituted. 
  5. In section 207 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the words and figures 
“section 39”, the words and figures “section 39 or section 138A or section 138C or 
section 138E” shall be substituted.
3
15
20
25
30
35
40
5
10
45
Punishment 
for the 
aggravated act 
of road rage.
General 
provision for 
punishment of 
offences.
Punishment 
for 
disobedience  
of orders,  
obstruction 
and 
 refusal of  
information.
Public 
awareness 
about the road 
rage.
Publication 
of fact of 
conviction.
Provision 
of Funds 
by Central 
Government.
Amendment 
of section 
202.
Amendment of 
section 207.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
 India is ranked second in the world  in terms of road links. At the same time, 
the number of road mishaps, road accidents, and road injury in India is also one of 
the highest in the world. Aggressive and negligent  driving  has  been  a  big  issue  
on  our  streets  for  some  time,  and  it  appears  to just be deteriorating and getting 
worse. With an increasing number of young people getting into the driver’s seat, most 
mishaps and accidents are caused because of an ineffective and reckless driving pattern. 
Sensation chasing, driving in anger, retaliation, weariness, and stress are some of the 
components which contribute to perilous driving and people get into circumstances 
that can be effortlessly and easily avoided. Many lives have been lost as a result of 
growing intolerance among road users, and this unwelcome hatred that people carry 
on the road is unquestionably a dreadful  flaw that  leads  to untimely deaths in great 
numbers. Incidents of shouting, yelling, rude behaviour, and  even violence are 
accounted for often on our  roads to  where it has  procured its name: road  rage. The 
instances  of  road  rage  are on  the rise and the numbers are increasing every year.
 Road rage is aggressive or angry behaviour exhibited by motorists. These 
behaviours include rude and verbal insults, physical threats or dangerous driving 
methods targeted at other drivers, pedestrians or cyclists in an effort to intimidate or 
release frustration. Road rage can lead to alterations, damage to property, assaults 
and collisions that result in serious physical injuries  or even death. Strategies include 
longhorn honks, swerving, tailgating, brake checking and attempting to fight. These 
practices incorporate impolite and verbal put-downs, actual dangers, or risky driving 
techniques designated toward another driver or non-drivers with an end goal to scare, 
terrify or release irritation and dissatisfaction. Such behaviour patterns can prompt 
quarrels can cause harm to property and person, whose outcome can result in serious 
physical and mental injuries or even death or demise. In a simple sense, when a driver 
enacts or commits some moving traffic offences to jeopardize the life of another person 
or property or attack with an engine vehicle or other risky weapon by the driver of one 
engine vehicle  on  the  driver  of  another  engine  vehicle  can  be  termed  as  road  
rage.  Road rage is characterized as the result of forceful and aggressive driving that 
emerges from conflicts with different drivers. Road rage is a criminal accusation in 
which the driver is at the fault. Road  rage is an extraordinary sight and it normally 
brings about a great deal of enmity and sometimes results in mishaps and wounds.
 Acts of Road rage has increased in general. It is time that we should come up 
and together find the solution for this uncontrolled behaviour. As road rage is not 
defined under Motor Vehicles Act, there are no explicit provisions making road range 
a punishable offence. In conclusion, India needs this legislation to criminalise the act 
of road  rage.
 The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 with a view to 
include ‘road rage’ as an offence punishable under the parent Act.
 Hence this Bill.
     N EW D ELHI;      JAGDAMBIKA PAL
19 February, 2 0 2 2 .                 
4

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
 Clause 3 of the Bill vide proposed section 138G provides for the Central 
Government and State Government to give wide publicity to the provision regarding 
road rage. It also vide proposed section 138I provides for the Central Government to 
provide adequate funds for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. The Bill, therefore, 
if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is 
estimated that a sum of rupees fifty crore would be involved as a recurring expenditure 
per annum. 
 No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be incurred.
5

6
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT  FROM THE MOTOR VEHICLES (AMENDMENT) ACT, 1988 
 *     *    *   *
 2. In this Act, unless context otherwise requires,—
 *        *    *   *
(1B) “area”, in relation to any provision of this Act, means such area as the 
State Government may, having regard to the requirements of that provision, specify 
by notification in the Official Gazette;]
(37) “registering authority” means an authority empowered to register motor 
vehicles under Chapter IV;
 *        *    *   *
 2 02. (1) A police officer in uniform may arrest without warrant any person who 
in his presence commits an offence punishable under section 184 or section 185 or 
section 197:  
Provided that any person so arrested in connection with an offence punishable 
under section 185 shall, within two hours of his arrest, be subjected to a medical 
examination referred to in sections 203 and 204 by a registered medical practitioner 
failing which he shall be released from custody. 
 [(2) A police officer in uniform may arrest without warrant any person, who has 
committed an offence under this Act, if such person refuses to give his name and 
address.] 
 ( 3)  A police officer arresting without warrant the driver of a motor vehicle shall 
if the circumstances so require take or cause to be taken any steps he may consider 
proper for the temporary disposal of the vehicle.
 *        *    *   *
 207. (1) Any police officer or other person authorised in this behalf by the State 
Government may, if he has reason to believe that a motor vehicle has been or is 
being used in contravention of the provisions of section 3 or section 4 or section 39 
or without the permit required by sub-section (1) of section 66 or in contravention of 
any condition of such permit relating to the route on which or the area in which or 
the purpose for which the vehicle may be used, seize and detain the vehicle, in the 
prescribed manner and for this purpose take or cause to be taken any steps he may 
consider proper for the temporary safe custody of the vehicle:
Provided that where any such officer or person has reason to believe that a 
motor vehicle has been or is being used in contravention of section 3 or section 4 
or without the permit required by sub-section (1) of section 66 he may, instead 
of seizing the vehicle, seize the certificate of registration of the vehicle and shall 
issue an acknowledgment in respect thereof. 
 (2) Where a motor vehicle has been seized and detained under sub-section (1), the 
owner or person in charge of the motor vehicle may apply to the transport authority 
or any officer authorised in this behalf by the State Government together with the 
relevant documents for the release of the vehicle and such authority or officer may, 
after verification of such documents, by order release the vehicle subject to such 
conditions as the authority or officer may deem fit to impose.
*      *    *   *
Definitions.
Power to 
arrest without 
warrant.
Power 
to detain 
vehicles 
used without 
certificate of 
registration 
permit, etc.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
 further to amend the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988.
————— 
(Shri Jagdambika Pal , M.P .) 