,,' t, 
As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABllA ('" 
Bill No. 119 of 1970 
THE COAL BEARING AREAS (ACQUISI TION AND 
DEVELOPMENT) (AMENDMENT AND VALI-
DA TION) BILL, 1970 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Coal Bearing Areas (Acquisition and Development) 
Act, 1957 and to validate certain acquisitio'/W of land or rights in ch-
over land under the said Act. 
BB it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty"fir&t Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
, 1. This Act may be called the Coal Bearing Areas (Acquisition and Short uUe. 
Development) (Amendment and Validation) Act, 1970. 
z. In section 8 of the Coal Bearing Areas (Acquisition and Develop- Amend-
20 of 1867. 5 ment) Act, 1957 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in sub- ment of 
section (2), for the word 'submit the case fOT the decision of the Cen- section 8. 
tral Government together with the record of the proceedings held by 
him and a report containing his recommendations on the objections", the 
10 words, brackets and figures "either make a report in respect of the !and 
which has been notified under sub-section (1) of section 7 or of rights 
in or over such land, or make different reports In respect of different 
parcels of such land or of rights in OT over such land, to the Central Gov-
ernment, containing his recommendations on the objections, together 
I, with the record of the proceedings held by him, for the decision of that 
Government" shall be substituted. 

Amend-
ment ot 
section 9. 
3. In section 9 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1) ,-
~ (i) after the words "made by it to that effect", the following 
shall be inserted, namely:-
", and different decorations may be made from time to s 
time in respect of different parcels of any land, or af rights 
in or over such land, covered by the same notification under 
sub-section (1) of section 7, irrespective of whether one 
report or different reports has or, have been made (wher-
ever required) under sub-section (2) of section 8"; 10 
(ii) for the words "Provided that, where the declaration", 
the following shall be substituted, namely:-
"Provided that no declaration in respect of any particular 
land, or rights in or over such land, covered by a' notification 
under sub-section (1) of section 7, issued after the com- IS 
mencement of the Coal Bearing Areas (Acquisition and 
Development) (Amendment and Validation) Act, 1970, shall 
be made after the expiry of three years from the date of the 
said notification: 
Provided further that, where a declaration"; 
(b) in sub-section (2), for the words "The declaration", the 
words "Every dec'lal'ation" shall be substituted. 
Amend- 4. In section 13 of the principal Act, after sub-section (5), the fol-
ment ot lowing sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-
section 13. 
Amend-
mentor 
section 14. 
II (5A) In determining the amount of compensation for any land 2$ 
acquired under section 9, any increase to the value of the other land 
of the person interested, likely to accrue from the use to which the 
land acquired will be put shall not be taken into consideration.", 
5. In section 14 of the principal Act, after su'b-section (7), the follow-
ing sub-section shall be inserted, namely: - 30 
"(8) The Tribunal, in the proceedings before it, shall have' aD 
the powers which a civil court has whUe tryfng a IIIlit under ttie Code 
of Civil Procedure, 1908, in respect of the following matters, nam.el1'!- • of 1808. 
(i) Eummoning and enforcing the attend8nee of any person 
and examining him on oath; 3' 
(ti) requiring the discovery and production of ally docu-
ment; 
(iii) reception of evidence on affidavits; 
(iv) requisitioning any public record from any court or 
Office; and 
(v) issuing commissions for ~xamination of wttnesses.". 

, , 
, I !~ .. , 
.. In section 17 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), for the second Amend .. 
proviso, the following provisos shall be substituted, namely: _ ment of 
section 17. 
"Provided further that every person who claims to be an in-
terested person (whether such person has been admitted to be in-
S terested or not) including the person referred to in the preceding 
prOVIJo .hall be entitled to prefer a claim for compensation before 
the Tribunal: 
Provided also that no pcr::;on who has received the amount other-
'wise than under protest shall be entitled to prefer any such claim 
10 before the Tribunal.". 
IS 
20 
35 
7. After section 18 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
inserted, namely:-
UJ8A. Notwithstanding anythine contained in this ACt, where 
IIi1Y land or any rights in or over lim.d belonging to a State Govern-
ment (dther than the ri,hts under a mining lease granted or deemed 
to have beeb. granted by the State Government to any person) vest 
In the Central Government under section 10 or in a Government 
Company under section U, the Central Government or the Com-
paD7, as the case may be, may pay to the State Government such 
sum of mone), as would have been payable ,as royalty by a lessee had 
IIICh land or ri,hts been under a minin, lease granted by the State 
GoVernDJ.ellt. " • 
Insertion 
of new 
sectioR 
18A. 
Payrrent 
to-State 
Govern-
ments in 
lieu of 
royalty. 
.. (1) Notwithitanding any judgment, decree or order of an~ court Validatio!l 
to the Qcmtrary,--' . • of certain 
(a) no acquisition of land or 'Of rights in or over land made or 
purporting to have been made under the principal Act before the 
c:ommenoement of this Act, and no action taken or thing done (in-
cluding any order made, agreement entered into or notification pub-
lished) in connection with such acquisition shall be deemed to be 
invalid or ever to have become invalid merely on the ground-
(i) that one or more competent authorities have performed 
the functions of competent authority under the principal Act in 
respect of the land covered by the same notificati'On under sub-
section (1) of section 7 of the principal Act; 
(ii) that one or more reports have been made under sub-
section (2) of section 8 of the principal Act, whether in respect 
of the entire land covered by the same notification under sub-
section (1) of section 7 of the principal Act or rights in or over 
such land, or in respect of different parcels of such land or of 
fi.ghts in or over such land; 
(iii) that one or more declarations have been made under 
section 9 of the principal Act in respect of different parcels of 
the land covered by the same notification under sub-section (1) 
of section 7 of the principal Act or in respect of rights in or 
over such land; 
acquisi-
tiolUl, 

(b) any acquisition in pursuance of any notification issued under 
sub-section (1) of section 7 of the principal Act before the com-
mencement of this Act may be made after such commencement and 
no such acquisition and no action taken or thing done (including any 
order made, agreement entered into or notification puWshed) whe- S 
ther before or after such commencement, in connection with such 
acqUisition shall be deemed to be invalid merely on the grounds re. 
ferred to in clause (a) or any of them. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (b) of suh-lection 
(1), no declaration under section 9 of the principal Act in respect of any 10 
land, or rights in or over such land, which has been notified before the 
commencement of this Act, under sub-section (1) of section 7 of the 
principal Act, shall be made after the expiry of two years from the com-
mencemen t of this Act. 
(3) Where acquisition of any particular land (not being acquisltiOll of 's 
richts in or over such land) covered by a notification under sub-sec:tioa 
(1) of section 7 of the principal Act, issued before the c:ommencement 
of this Act, is or has been made in p~uance of any declaration under 
section 9 of the principal Act, whether made before or after such com-
mencement, and such declaration is or has been made after the expiry 20 
'1[ three years from the date ,of issue of such notification, there shall be 
Illd simple interest, calculated lit the rate of six per centum per annum 
on tile market value of such land, as determined under SUb-seetiOD (5) 
01 sedion 13 of the principal Act, from the date of expiry of the sald 
period of three years to the date of tender of payment of compensation 25 
(.ayal.i;l~ FOI the acquisition of such land: 
Provided that no such interest shan be payable for any period during • which the proceedings for the acquisition of any land were held up on . 
account Q'f stay or injunction by order of· a court: 
Provided further that nothing in this sub-section shall apply to the 30 
acquisition of any land where the amount of compensation has been paid 
to the persons interested before the commencement of this Act. 

STATEMENr OF OBJECTS AND REASoNS 
The Coal B.earing Areas (Acquisition and Development) Act, 1957 (20 
~f 1957). (herem after referred to as the Coal Bearing Areas Act) provides 
~nter ~hq. for the acquisition by the Central Government of virgin lands, 
mcl1.lClilli. WldergroWld minerals, or rights in or over such lands. Under' 
t~e Expl.ana:cion to clause (a) of sub-section (.5) of section 13, which pro-
vIdes that the value of any minerals lying in the land will not be taken 
into consideration in determining the market value of any land, no com-
pensation is payable to the State Governments in respect of the under-
ground·minerals which also vest in the Central Government when the land 
is acquired by the Central Governmept. The State Governments have been 
representing from time to time that this results in their being deprived of 
large sums by way of revenue. The Central Government has considered 
the representations of the State Governments and ha::r decided that the 
State Governments should be paid purely on an ex-gratia basis such sums 
a$ they would have been entitled to receive by way of royalty, had mining 
leases been granted in respect of the areas acquired. It is now proposed 
to amend the Coal Bearing Areas Act to make such paym'ents obligatory. 
2. Sections 4 to 9 of the Coal Bearing Areas Act deal with the pr0ce-
dure for acquiring coal bearing areas ~der the Act. Briefly stated, the 
procedure envisages a preliminary notification respecting intention ot the 
Government to prospect for coal on land in any locality, a second notifi-
cation of the intention of the Government to acquire the Whole or any 
part of the land or any rights in or over the land after satisfying itself 
that coal is obtainable therein and a declaration, after considering objec-
tions to "the second notification, that the land or any rights in or over the 
land should be acquired. This procedure is for all material purposes similar 
to the procedure provided under the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, as it· 
stood before it was amended in 1967. The Supreme Court had, in State of 
Madhya Pradesh Vs. Vishnu. Prasad Sharma, AIR 1966 S.C. 1593, held that 
under the relevant proviSions of the Land Acquisition Act, it was not 
permissible for Government to acquire by stages any land in respect of 
which it had notified its intention to acquire. The Land Acquisition Act was 
am'ended,.in 1967 to overcome the effect of the decision of the Supreme 
Court and to render possible acquisition of land by stages as alSo to vali-
date such acquisitions made in the past. Under the Coal Bearing Areas Act 
also acquisition of land has been made by stages in several cases in the 
past and it woWd be convenient if Government has the pow~ to acqUire.· 
land by stages because that would 'enable Government to acquire only 
10 much of the land as it may be in a position to exploit without delay and 
leave the remaining land with the owner till such time as the Governnl'ent 
is iri a position to exploit the same. It is, therefore, proposed,to amend the 
Coal ,Bearing Areas Act on the same lines on which the Land Acquisition 
(Alnenc:tment and Validation) Act, 1967, amended the Land AcquisittaD 
Act 1894 and also to validate past acquisitions of land. , , 

6 
3. It is proposed to avail of the present opportunity to make certain 
crther amendments to remove lacunae disclosed during the actual workinl 
of the Coal Bearing Areas Act. These amendments are-
(a) for provicling (on the same lines as the sixth clause of section 
24 of the Land Acquisition Ad, 1894) that any inerease to the value 
of the other land of the owner likely to accrue from the use to which 
the land acquired will be put shall not be taken into consideration in 
881~ the compensation payable under aection 13 of the Act; 
(b) for investing the Tribunal, constituted under section 14 of the 
Act fOT' detemr.ining compensation payable in any cue, W'fth PflWei'B til 
• etril co'Dl'tin respect of matters like summoning and enforcmg·U. 
attendance of any person and examining on oath, etc.; and 
(c) for enabling every person who elaims to be. penon ~ 
In cempensation (not being a person who hu received tbealQllU,D&. 
othetwiae than Wlder protest), to prefer an application before the 
Tribunal. 
4. ThIe Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 
NEW Da;.m; 
TM ltth Awgast, 1970. 
PnStOEN'T'S RECOMMmDATION UNM!R ARTtCLE 117 OF THE 
CONSTITUTtON OF INDIA 
(C~y of lette!' No. C3-0(1) 17o..Pt., dated 'the 6th Nov8lllber r .l97t 1rma 
Shrt :Hititaj Sfngh Chanei'IuIfY, Minister &f State·in the MtaiatEy ofPeta. 
leUm Imd Che~. Mld Mines and Metals to the Seuetuy. Lok ~naa 
~ 
ThePftSd~ haviDe ee. lnfonned of t1ie aubj8ct matler of the But 
farther to ameaa Ule Coal Bearing Ar.eall . ,Acquisition and Developme~) 
Act,. 1967 Iud to 'falidate eutain acquiaitiona of land or r.i,glata in or over 
l8IIIJ 1U1derthe sakl Aet, ·:reeommeDds introduc.tiOll.of Ute BID. in t1ae Lok 
Sabha under clause (J)of article 117 and its consideratiol1 under claU8e 
(3) of article 117 of the Constitution. -

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 7 of the Coal Bearing Areas (Acquisition and Development) 
(Amendment and validation) Bill, 1970 envJsages payment 01 ~yalty to 
State Government concerned in respect of coal and other minerals re-
moved and despatched from areas not held under any third party rights 
acquired under the Coal Bearing Areas (Acquisition and Development) 
Act, 1957. The provision regarding payment of royalty will not in prac-
tice, involve any expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India as 
such expenditure would be met from its revenues by the National Coal 
Dwe10pnwnt Corporation to whom. the acqulr«l land iI tl'UlSferreci for 
explcttattoJl. 
2. CJauae 8 of the Bill also provides for certain procedural changes OIl 
the liDe. of the Land Acquisition (Amendment and Validation) Act, 196'1. 
In particular, in <:8181 of acquisition of land, where declaratian under aeo-
tim 9 il or hu been made after the expiry of three years from the date Gf 
issue of notification under sub-section (1) of section 7, provisioJl hal bean 
made for payment of simple interest at 6 per centum per annum on the 
market value of land acquired, calculated from the date of expiry of three 
years after the issue of notification to the date of tender of payment of 
compensation. The Bill, if enacted, will involve a non-recurring expendi-
ture from the Cmlsolidated Fund of India in respect of the payment of 
interest charges under clause 8 (3). Presently, there are three such cases 
in which intereSt to the extent of Rs. 2.23 lakhs will become payable. 
There are a few more cases which would involve inter.est payment but the 
amount cannot be worked out precisely as it would depend upon the 
aIZlOunt of compensation that may beceme payable under section 13 (5) 
of the principal Act. The compensation andlor interest will initially be 
paid frQ1!l th.e Consolidated Fund of India and later recovered from the 
National Coal Development CO'rporation to whom the land has beenlwill 
be transferred for exploitation. 
3. Apart from the above payments, the Bill does not involve anf other 
recurrini or non-recurring expenditure. 
7 

Objections 
to acqui8i-
UoD. 
Declaration 
of acquisi-
tion. 
Payment 
of com-
pensation. 
ANNEXURE 
,ExTRACTS nOM THE COAL BEARING AREAS (AcQUISITION ~ .. J 
DEvELoPMENT) Act, 1957 . 
(20 01' 1957) 
'" '" '" '" '" 
_' t .. 
8.(1) 
." 
..!"., • 
'" '" '" '" '" '" I:' 
(2) Every object1onunder sub-section (1) shall be made totb.e .COIEQro 
petent authority in writing, and the competent authority shallgi've,.~ 
objector an opportunity of being heard either in person or by a legal prac-
titioner and shall, after hearing all such objections and after making .wch 
further inquiry, if any, as he thinks necessary,'su.bmit,tbe caS'e·jor th* 
decision of the Central Government together with the record of, the: pro-
ceedings held by him aDd a report containing his recommendations on'the 
obj ectiOtlll; 
• • '" '" '" '" 
•• ,(1) When the Central Government is satisfied, after corisideriilg 
the. report, if any, made under section 8 that any land or any rights in or 
over such land should be acquir'ed, a declaration shall be made by it ~ 
that effect: . . 
Provided that, where the declaration relates to any land or' to . any 
rights ir. or over land belonging to a State Government which has .or have 
nqt been leased out, no, such declaration shall be rnade exc~t after.~ 
consultation with th'e State Government. . . 
(2) The declaration shall be published in the Offici~)i Gazette, :~d~ 
'" '" • • '" . 
a copy of every such declaration shall be sent to the State Government 
c6neerned.. 
• • • • • • • 
. I <~) • 
17. (1) • • • • III III 
(2) If the persons interested entitled thereto shall not consent to re-
ceive it or if there be any dispute as to the sufficiency of the amount of 
compensation or the title to receive it or he apportionment thereof, the 
Central Government shall deposit the amount of compensation with the 
Tribunal: 
Provided that any person admitted to be interested may receive such 
payment under protest as to the sufficiency of the amount: 
Provided further that no person who lias received the amount other-
wise than under protest shall be entitled to take any matter under this 
Act before the Tribunal. 
8 , ... 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Coal Bearing Areas (Acquisition and Development) Act, Jrfi' 
and to validate certain acquisitions of land or rights in or over land UDder the 
said Act. 
(Shn Nitiraj S'ngh Chaudhary, 
Minister of State in the Ministry 
of Petroleum and Chemicals, and 
Mines and Metals. 