1
THE COMPUTER TRAINING CENTRES (REGULATION) BILL, 2017
By
SHRI VISHNU DAYAL RAM, M.P.
A
BILL
to regulate the functioning of computer training centres and for matters connected
therewith or incidental therto.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Computer Training Centres (Regulation) Act, 2017.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. 119 of  2017
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in case of a State, the Government of that
State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) “computer centre” includes a centre in which computer courses or advance
courses in computer education are conducted for imparting training to persons already
knowing computer operations or where training is imparted to those who are aspiring
for jobs in computer or related industries; and
(c) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. On and from the date of commencement of this Act, no person shall run any
computer centre without prior registration with the appropriate Government.
4. The in-charge or the head of the affairs of a computer centre, whether set up prior
to or after the commencement of this Act, shall, within one month from the date of
commencement of this Act, apply to the appropriate Government, in such form and manner,
as may be prescribed, for registration of his computer centre.
5. The appropriate Government shall, on receipt of an application under section 4
cause it to be scrutinized as to the genuineness of the computer centre and shall carry out
such investigation as it may deem fit to ensure that the particulars furnished by the computer
centre for registration are in order and that the centre fulfils the conditions prescribed for
registration under the Act or rules made thereunder.
6. On being satisfied that the computer centre fulfils the prescribed conditions, the
appropriate Government shall issue a registration certificate in favour of that computer
centre for such period as it may deem fit.
7. The appropriate Government shall prescribe syllabus and fees to be charged for
each course imparted by a computer centre.
8. On receipt of a complaint regarding the improper functioning of a computer centre,
the appropriate Government shall cause the complaint to be investigated and a decision on
it shall be taken within one month from the date of receipt of such complaint.
9. If, on investigation, it is found that the complaint was in order, the appropriate
Government shall forthwith cancel the registration of the computer centre against which the
complaint was lodged.
10. Any person who violates the provisions of this Act shall be punished with
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three years and with fine which shall
not be less than rupees one lakh.
11. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Definitions.
Computer
centres not to
function
without
registration.
Computer
centres to
apply for
registration.
Scrutiny of an
application.
Issue of
registration
certificate.
Syllabus and
fees.
Complaint to
be investigated.
Punishment.
Power to
make rules.
Cancellation of
registration.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
A large number  of computer training centres are functioning in the country without
proper registration. These centres charge exorbitant fees from students. They  do not have
proper facilities or course content to impart quality training. There have been some instances
in which the institutes, after collecting huge amount of money from students, closed down
their operations without completing courses. Thus, students were left in the lurch. In order
to protect the interest of the student community, there is a need to regulate the functioning
of computer institutions in the country.
The Bill seeks to provide for due registration of all computer  training centres and also
provides for punishment to those who are running such training centres without proper
registration.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; VISHNU DAY AL RAM
June 29, 2017.
3

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
4

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to regulate the functioning of computer training centres and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram , M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—895LS(S3)—19-07-2017.