1
THE DEPOSIT INSURANCE AND CREDIT GUARANTEE
CORPORATION (AMENDMENT)  BILL,  2009
By
SHRIMATI  SUMITRA MAHAJAN,  M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Deposit Insurance and Credit Guarantee Corporation Act, 1961.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixtieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Deposit Insurance and Credit Guarantee Corporation
(Amendment) Act, 2009.
Short title.
Bill No. 119 of   2009
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In section 21 of the Deposit Insurance and Credit Guarantee Corporation Act, 1961,
after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
“(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or any other law for the
time being in force, a depositor shall have the first claim to recover the amount due to
him in respect of balance of  his deposit, and the liquidator shall not make any payment
to the Corporation under sub-section ( 2) until the claim of the depositor has been
settled.”.
47 of 1961. Amendment of
section 21.
5 5

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Section 21 of the Deposit Insurance and Credit Guarantee Corporation Act, 1961 has
an overriding effect on any other law for the time being in force and the recoveries and other
liquid funds available with the liquidator can be utilized by him only for the expenses incurred
by him before making any payment to the Corporation. The very purpose of constituting the
Corporation would be defeated if the depositors have no guarantee of return of their deposits
inspite of the insurance mechanism envisaged by the Act. Hence the hard earned money of
the depositors may not be fully returned. At present, depositor’s amount is insured only
upto rupees one lakh. It means that if a depositor has deposited more than one lakh rupees
in a bank, which is ordered to be wound up for any reason, he may not get back his full
deposited amount but get only one lakh rupees, under the provisions of the Act. Even if any
recovery is to be made by the Corporation on behalf of the defunct bank, the depositors do
not have a first claim on the money so recovered. It is the Corporation which has the first
claim under the Act. As a result of this provision, depositors are stranded with their life
savings gone.
It is, therefore, proposed to amend the Act so as to enable the liquidator to settle the
claims of the depositors as first claim before any payment under sub-section (2) of section 21
of the Act to any other person or agency or claimant is effected.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above object.
N
EW DELHI; SUMITRA MAHAJAN
November 9, 2009.

4
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE DEPOSIT INSURANCE AND CREDIT GUARANTEE CORPORA TION ACT, 1961.
(47 of 1961)
* * * * * *
21. (1) Where any amount has been paid under section 17 or section 18 or any provision
therefor has been made under section 20, the Corporation shall furnish to the liquidator or to
the insured bank or to the transferee bank, as the case may be, information as regards the
amount so paid or provided for.
(2) On receipt of the information under sub-section (1), notwithstanding anything to
the contrary contained in any other law for the time being in force,—
(a) the liquidator shall, within such time and in such manner as may be prescribed,
repay to the Corporation out of the amount, if any, payable by him in respect of any
deposit such sum or sums as make up the amount paid or provided for by the Corporation
in respect of that deposit;
(b) the insured bank or, as the case may be, the transferee bank shall, within such
time and in such manner as may be prescribed, repay to the Corporation out of the
amount, if any, to be paid or credited in respect of any deposit after the date of the
coming into force of the scheme referred to in section 18, such sum or sums as make up
the amount paid or provided for by the Corporation in respect of that deposit.
* * * * * *
Repayment of
the amount to
Corporation.

LOK   SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Deposit Insurance and Credit Guarantee Corporation Act, 1961.
————
(Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—5119LS(S5)—08-12-2009.