7 and ‘Transfer of Uri

As myrropuCcED IN Lox SaBHA ON

Bilf No. 119 of 1993
Fe 4 नम
SHE BANKING COMPANIES (ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER
OF UNDERTAKINGS) AMENDMENT BILL, 1993

A
BILL

sfer of

further to amend the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Tr

Undertakings) Act, v970 and the Banking Companies (Acquisition and

Transfer of Undertaleings) Act, 1980,
Bs it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-fourth Year of the
Republic of India as follows:—

CHAPTER I

PRELIMINARY
1. (7) This Act may be called the Banking Companies (Acquisition
dertakings) Amendment Act, 1998,

{2) Tt shall come into force on such date as the Central Government
nm in the Official Gazette, appoint; and different dates

may. by notifieatio:
ions of this Act.

may be appointed for different, provis

Short
title and
‘com-
mencé=
yoent,



2

COAPTER IT

es (A
iss (A

mes} Act, 1970

‘ION AND

C Amend- 2, In section 2 of the Banking Companie.
~ ment of
section 2,

(Acquisition and

eaiter in this Chapter refer- 5 Sof 1970
: ० .

(४) atter clause (f), the following clause shall be inserted,
namely:— bree 7

acer

‘G@ “prescribed” means prescribed by regulations made
under this Act:’; 40

(ii) after clause (h), the following clause shall be inserted,
हु namely;
“(i) words and expressions used herein. and not defined, eith-
. ev inthis Act or in ihe Banking Regulation Act, 1949 but defined 1061
oa in the Cornpanies Act, 1956 sha‘l have the meanings respectively 15 1949.
assigned to them in the Companies Act, 1956.”. 1 of 1986.

Substi- 3. In Chapter If of the Bank Nationalisation Act, for the heading
tutionof “Transfer of the Undertaking of Existing Banks”, the following heading

heading shall be substituted, namely:—
eat ot Chap-
a ter IL. TRANSFER OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF EXISTING BANKS 20
SHARE CAPITALS OF THE CORRESpONDING NEW BANKS” {|
Amend- 4. In section 3 of the Bank Nationalisation Act, for sub-section (2A) E
ment of and (3), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
section 3.

“2(A) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the authorised capi-
lal of every coxresponding new, bank shail be one thousand five 25
hundyved erores of rupees divided into one ‘hundred fifty créves
fully paid-ap shares of ten rupees each;

Provided that the Central Government may, after consultation
with the Reserve Bank and by nolificafios in the Official Gazette,
increase or reduce the authorised capital ag it thinks fit, so, how- 30
ever that affer such increase or reduction the autherised capital
shall not exceed three thousand crores, or be fess than one thou-
sand five hundred crores, of rnpees.

(28) Notwithstanding anything contained in suli-sece
tion (2), the paid-up capital of every corresponding mew bank esn- 35
stituted snder sub-section (1) may from time te time be increa: sd
by—

(4) sueh amounts as the Board of Divectors of the corres
eee ponding new bank may, after consuliation with tha Beserve
Bank and with the previews sanction of the Central Govern-
ment transfer from the reserve fund established by such bank
to stich ‘patdap capitals... 2. पु 4

40



oe on 3

(0), such amounts as the Central Government may, affer
consultation with the Reserve Bank, centyibute to such paidavp
capital; .

(c) such amounts as the Board of Directors of the corres-
.ponding new dank may, after consultation with the Resarve
Bank and with the previous sanction of the Central Govern-
ment, rate by public issue of shaves as may be ‘presevihed, sa
however, that the Cenizal Government shall at allrtimes, hold
है not less than fifty-one pex cout. of the paid-up capital of each
10 correspanding new bank.

(20) The entire paid-up capital of a corresponding new bank,
except the paid up capital raised by public issue under clause (¢) of
sub-section (2B), shall stand vested. in, and alfotted 10, the Central

Government, ।
15 (2D) The shares of every torresponding new ban’: not held by
the Central Government shall be freely transferable.

(@E) No shareholder of the corresponding new hank, other than
the Ceritral Government, shall be entitled to exercise voting rights in
respect of any shares held by him in excess of one per cent. of the

20 total voting rights of all the shareholders of the corresponding new
bank, se

(2F) Every corresponding new pank shall keep at its head office
a register, in one or more books of the shareholders (in this Act
referred to as the register) and shal} enter therein the follawing par-

25 ticulars: —

(i) the names, addresses and eceupations, if any, of the
shareholders and a statement of the shares held by each share-
holder, distingvishi-g each share hy its denoting number;

(i) the date on which each person js so entered as a share-

30 holder;
(Gis) the date on which any person ceases (0 be a shareholder;

and
(iv) such other particulars as may be prescribed.
(2G) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (QT)
35 it shall be lawful for every corresponding new bank to keep the
register in computer floppies or diskettes subiect to such safe~
guards as may be prescribed. :
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained! in the Indian Evi-
dence Act, 1872, 2 copy of. ov extract from, the register, certified to
40 be a true copy under the hard af an éficer of ihe corresponding new
lof 1872, bank authorised in this bebelf by it
be admissible in evidence.”

5. After section 3 of the Bank Netionalisation Act, the following

section shal} be inserted, aamely:—

QP) of

bet
z
8
io
3
2
Poa
&
2
=
हु

«QA, Notwithstanding a:
section 8. na notice of any trust, €

ered on the register, or be
2

shall be ox
ing new b

Inser=
tion of
new sec~
tion 3A.

Trust

not to
pe enter
ड् on the

register



Amend- 8. In section 9 of the Bank Netionalisation Act—
ment of ‘
tion 9. ay i पर 3 di 1,
secon (8) in sub-section (2), in clause (4), the words, “so however that

the paid-up capital of any such bank shall not be in excess of rupees
one thousand five hundred crores” shall be omitted;

(i) for sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be substi- 5
tuted, namely:-— i
“(3y Every Board of Directors of a erresponding new bank,
constituted under any scheme made under sub-section (1), shall
include—
हु (2) not more than two wholetime directors to be appoin- 10
ted by the Central Government after consultation with
the Reserve Bank;
(b) one director who is an official of the Central Gov-
ernment to be nominated by the Central Government;

:
:
§
4
:

(c) one director who is an officer of the Reserve Bank 15
to be nominated by the Central Government on the recom-
mendation of the Reserve Bank;

Explanation—For the purpose of this clause, ‘an
officer of the Reserve Bank” includes an officer of the
Reserve Bank who is deputed by that Bank under section 20
ae 540 0 of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 to any institU- 2 of 1934.
ve tion referred: to therein;
(8) jone director, from among such of the employees
‘ of the corresponding new bank who are workmen under
no clause (s) of section 2 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, 25 140¢
to be nominated by the Central Government in such manner 1947.
as may be specified in a scheme made under this section;

(e) one director, from among the employees of the
corresponding new bank, who are not workmen under
clause (s) of section 2 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, 30 14 0f
to be nominated by the Central Government after consul- 1947.
tation with the Reserve Bank:

(f) one director who is 8 Chartered Accountant, to be
nominated by the Central Government after consultation
with the Reserve Ban!

35

(g) subject to the provisions of clause (h),, not more than
six directors, to be nominated by the Central Government;
(h) where the capital issued under clause (¢) of sub-
section (2B) of section 3 is,— ‘
(6) not more than twenty per cent. of the -total 40
paid-up capital, not more than two directors,
(ii) more than twenty per cent. but not more than
forty per cent. of the total pait-up capital, not more
than four directors, \ हु

(i) more than forty per cent, of the total paid-up 45
capital, not more than six directors,



10

15

20

25

30

35

ny मु

to be elected by the shareholders, other than the Central Gov-
ernment, from amongst themselves:

1

Provided that on the assumystion of charge after election of
any such directors under this clause, equal number of directors
nominated under clause (g) shall retire in such manner as may
be specified in the statement. i

(3A) The directors to be nominated under clause (g) oF
to be elected under clause (४) of sub-clause (3) shall—

(A) have special knowledge or practical experience in

respect of one of more of the following matters, namely: —

(@ agricultural and rural economy,

(i) banking,

(iii) co-operation,

(iv) econornics,

(v) finance,

(vi) law,

(vii) gmali-scale industry,

(vit) any other matter the special knowledge of,
and practical experience in, which would, in the opinion
of the Reserve Bank, be useful to the corresponding new
bank; :

(B) represent the interests of deposilors; or
t the interests of farmets, workers and

(0) represen’
artisans.

(3B) Where the Reseive Bank is of the opinion that any director
of a corresponding new bank elected under clause (h) of sub-section.
(8) dees not fulfil the = ¥ ujrements of sub-section (3A), it

may, afler giving to suc director and the bank a reasonable

opportunity of being heard, by aa order remove stich director

and appoint a suitable person as @ member of the Board of

Directors in place £ the person 80 removed whereupon the
person 80 appoint 50 he deemed to have peen duly elected

by the shareholders of the corresponding new pank as a direc

tor.”.

7. In section 10 of the Bank Nationalisation Act—
6) in sub-section (7), for the words “shall transfer the balance

e Central Government”, the words, “may out of

of profits to th
jts net profits, declare a dividend and retain the surplus, if any,”

shall be substituted:

ub-section (7A), after the words “the C
“and to the Reserve Bank”, shall be inserted.

al Govern

(a) Ins
ment, the words

Amend-
ment of
section
10.



tnser-

tion of

new sec~
tion LOA.
Annual
General
Meeting.

Amend-
ment of
section
19.

§

in LO of the Bank Nationalisation Act, the following

1 xveferred to as an
y corresponding now hank whieh
fa 2 (0) of sub-section (2B) of section 5
ace of the head office of the pank in each year
Board of

“YOGA. Gn this A
annual 82
has issued capital

3 shall be held at the p
at such time as shall from tine to time be specified by

Directors:

Provided that such annual general meeting stall be held
before the expiry of six weeks from the date on which the balance-
sheet, together with the profit and loss account and auditors report

0
is, under sub-section (7A) of section 10 forwarded to the Central
Government or to the Reserve Bank, whichever date is earlier.

(2) The shares sIders presant at an annual general meeting shall
be entitled to discuss id ‘balance-sheet aid the pyofib and loss 15
account of the corresponding new bank made up to the previous
315६0 day of March, the report of the Board of Directors on the work-
ing and activities of the corresponding new bank for the period cov-
ered by the accounts and the auditor’s report on the balance-sheet

and accounts.”. 20

9. In section 19 of the Bank Nationalisation Act, in sub-section (2),

after clause (b), the following clauses: shall be inserted, namely:—

“(ba) the nature of shares of the corresponding new bank, the
manner in which avd the conditions subject to which shares may

be held and transferred and generally all :natters relating to the 25
rights and Cuties of shareholders;

(bb) the maintenance of register, and the particulars to be
entered in tho register in addition to those specified in sub-section
(2F) of section 3, the safeguards to be observed in the maintenance
of register on compvter floppies or -disketies, inspection and closure 30
of the register and ali other matters connected therewith;

- > (be). the manner, in which general meetings (Shall be convened,
the procedure to he followed thereat and the manner in which
voting rights may be exercised;

(pd) the hotding or meetings of shareholders and the business 38
to be transacted thereat;

(be) the manner in which notices may be served on behalf of
the corresponding new bank upon shareholders or other persons;
हि (bf) the manner in v ch the directors nominated under clanse
(9), of sub-section (3) of section 9 shall retire, Sag



40 of
1980,

10 of
1949.

log 1956,

7
CHAPTER वा

AMENDMENT TO THe BANKING CoMpANIES (AcQisaTion,
AND TRANSFeR OF UNDERTAKINGS) Act, 1986

10, In section 2 of the Benking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer
Sof Undertakings) Act, 1980 {hereafter in this Chapter referred to as
the Bank (Second) Nationalisation ले

{iy alter clause (d), the following clause shall be inserted,
namely:— H

‘(da) “prescribed” means prescribed by regulations made
10 under this Act;’;

(i) after clause (e), the foliowing clause shall be inserted,
namely;— i

“(f) words and expressions used herein and not defined

either in this Act or in’ the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 but

15 defined in the Companies Act, 1956 shall have the meanings
Tespectively assigned to them in the Companies Act, 1956.”.

11. In Chapier II of the Bank (Second) Nationalisation Act, for the
heading “TRANSFER oF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF EXISTING BANKS”. the follow~
ing heading shall be substituted, namely; —

20 “CRANSFER OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF EXISTING BANKS
AND SHARE CAPITALS OF THE CORRESPONDING NEW BANKS”

12. In section 3 of the Bank (Second) Nationalisation Aet, for sub-
sections (2A) and (3), the following sub-sections shall be substituted,
namely: — i
25 (2A), Subject to the provisions of this Act, the authorised

capital of every corresponding new hank shalf be one thousand
five hundred crores of rupees divided into.. one knn-
dred and fifty crores fully paid-up shares of ten rupees. each:

Provided, that the Central Government may, after consultation
30 with the Reserve Bank ang hy notification in the Oficial Gazette,
increase or reduce the authorised capital as it thinks fit, so how-
ever that after such inexease or veduetion, the authorised capital,
shall not exceed three thousand crores, or be Tess than one thoucand
five hundred crores, of rupees,

35 (2B) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2),
tha paid-up capital of every ertesponding new bank constituted
under sub-section (1) may from time te time he inereased, by—

(0) such srsounts as the Beard of Directors of the eorres-
ponding new bank may, after consultation with the Reserva
40 Bauk and with ths previous sanetion of the Central Gevarn-
ment transtk ‘om the reserve shed by snuck bank
te such paid-up capital;

Amend-
ment of
section 2,

Substi-
tution of
heading
of chap-
ter IT,

Amend.
ment of
section 3.



8
(b) such amounts ag the Central Government may, after
evasullatiog with the Reserve Bank, centribute fo such paid-up
enpital; Sg a4 ay Ree

(c), such amounts as the Board of ‘Directors of the corres:
ponding néw bank may, after consultation with the Reserve 5
Bank and with the previous sanction of the Central Govern.
ment, raise by public issue of shares as may be prescribed,
so however, that the Central Government shal] at all times,
hold not less than fifty-one per cent. of the paid-up capital of 10

each corresponding new bank!

(2C) The entire paid-up capital of a corresponding new bank,
except the paid up capital raised by public issue under clause (c)
of sub-section (2B), shall stand vested in, and allotted to, the Central

Government.

(2D) The shares of every corresponding new bank not held by 15
the Central Government shall be freely transferable,

(22) No shareholder of the corresponding new bank, other than.
the Central Government, shall be entitled to exercise voting rights
in respect of any shares held by him in excess of one per cent. of
the total voting rights of all the shareholders of the correspond. 20

ing new bank.

ing new bank shall keep at its head office

pooks, of the shareholders '(n this Act

itherein ithe following
25

(2F) Every correspond)

a register, in one or more

referred to as the register) and shall enter
particulars: —

(i) the names, addresses and occupations, if any, of the
shareholders and a statement of the shares held by each share-
holder, distinguishing each share by its denoting nurmber;

(ii) the date on which each person is so entered as 8 share-
i 30

share-

holder;

(iii) the date on which any person ceases to be a
holder; and ce .

(iv) such other particulars as may be prescribed.

(2G) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2F),
it shall be lawful for every, corresponding new bank to keep the
register in computer floppies or diskettes subject to such safeguards
as may be prescribed.

contained in the Indian Evidence
m, the register, certified to be a
fficer of the corresponding new 40
1 legal proceedings,

(3) Notwithstanding anything
Act, 1872, a copy of, or extract fro
trie copy under the hand of an 0
bank authorised in this behalf by it, shall, in 8:
pe admissible in evidence.”.

Log 1872:



10

15

20

25

2 of 1934

30
14 of 1947,

35

14 of 1947,

40

9

48. After section 3 of the Bank (Second) Nationalisation Act, the

following section shall be inserted namely:—

“8A. Notwithstanding anything contalned in sub-section (2F)
of section 3, no notice of any trust, express, implied or construc-
tive, shal] be entered on the register, or be receivable, by the corres-
ponding new bank.”. है

14, In section 9 of the Bank (Second) Nationatisation Act,—

(i) in sub-section, (2), in clause (a), the words “so however that
the paid-up capital of any such bank shall not be in excess of rupees
one thousand five hundred crores’ ’shall be omitted; *

(ii) for sub-section (3), the following sub-sedtion shall be subs-
dituted, namely: — हि

“(3) Every Board of Directors of a corresponding new
bank, constituted under any scheme made under su-section (1),
‘shall include— हु se

(4) not more than two whéle-time directors to be ap-
pointed by the Central Government after consultation with
the Reserve Bank;

(0) one director who is an official of the Central Gov-
ernment to be nominated: by. the Central Government;

(¢) one director who is an officer’ of the Reserve Bank
to be nominated by the Central Goverpment on the recom-
mendation of the Reserve Bank. ‘

Explanation—For the purpose of this clause, “an officer
of the Reserve Bahk” includes an officer of the Reserve Bank
who is. deputed by the Bank under section 54AA of the
Reserve Bank of India Act, 1984 to any: institution referred
to therein. cots

(व) one director, from among such of the employees of
the corresponding new bank ©. who are workmen under
clause (s) of section 2 of the Indystvial Disputes Act, 1947,
to be nominated by the Central Government in such manner
as may be specified in a scheme made under this section;

(e) one director, from among. the ernployees of _ the
corresponding new bank, who are not workmen under
clause (s) of section 2 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947,
to -be nominated by the Central Government after consul-
tation with the Reserve Bank; a

Gf} one divector who is a Chartered Accountant te be
norninated by the Central . Government after consultation
with the Reserve Bank; !

Insertion
of new
section 3A

Trust not
to be
entered
on the
vegister of

Amend,
ment of
section 9,



i
1
i
||
]
i
i

10

(q). subject 50 the provisions of clause (hj. not more than
aix divectors, to be nominated by the Centrai Government;

{hy} where the capitel issued under clause (c) of sub-
section (2B) of section 3 is,—

(8) not more than twenty per cent. of the tolel 5

paid-up capital, not more than two directors,
(i) more then twenty per cent. ‘but not more

than forty per cent. of the total paid-up eapital, not
more than four directors,

(ii) more than forty per cent, of the total paid- 16
up capital, not more than six directors,

to be elected by the shareholders other than the Central
Government, from amongst themselves:

Provided that on the assumption of charge after election of
any such directors under this clause, equal number of directors 15
nominated under clause (g) shall retire in such manner as may
be specified to the scheme.

(3A) The directors to be nominated under clause (9) or to
be elected under clause (h) of sub-section (3A) shall—

(A) have special knowledge. or practical experience in 20
respect of one or more of the following matters, namely:—

(i) agricultural and rural economty,

(ii) banking, : heen
(iii) co-operation, बन
(०) economics, जज 25
(v) finance, se जन
(vi) law, | oon
(vii) small-scale industry, न

(viti) any other matter the special knowledge of,
and practical experience in, which would, in the opinion 30
of the Reserve Bank, be useful to the corresponding
new bank;

(B) represent the interests of depositors; or

(C) represent the interests of farmers, workers and
artisans [ : . 35

(3B) Where the Reserve Bank is of the opnion that any”
director of a corresponding new bank elected under clause (h)
of sub-section (3) does not fulfil the requirements of sub-section
(3A), it may, after giving to such, director and the bank a rea-
sonable opportunity of being heard, by an ‘order remove such 40
such director and appoint a suitable person as a member of the
Board of Director in place of the person so removed whereupon
the person so appointed shall be deemed to have been duly elected
by the shareholders of the corresponding new bank as a director’.



10

20

25

1a

45, In section 10 of the Bank (Second) Nationalisation Act-—

(i) in sub-section (7), for the words “shall transfer the balance

of profits to the Central Government”, the words, “may, out of:

its net profits, declare a dividend and retain the surplus, if any”
shall be substituted;

(ii) im sub-section (7A), after the words “the Central Govern-
ment”, the words “and to the Reserve Bank” shali be inserted.

16, After section 10 of the Bank (Second) Nationalised Act. the

following section shall be inserted, namely :—

“10A. (1) A general meeting (in this Act referred to as an
annual general meeting) of every corresponding new bank which has
issued capital under clause (c) of sub-section (2B) of section 3 shall
pe held at the place of the ‘head office of the bank in each year at
such time as shall from time to time be specified by the Board of
Directots: ,

Provided that such annual general meeting shall be held before
the expiry of six weeks from the date.on which the Halance-sheet,
together with the profit and loss account and auditor’s report is,
under sub-section (7A) of section 10, forwarded to the Central Gov-

" ernment or to the Reserve Bank, whichever date is earlier. -

(2) The shareholders present at an annual general meeting
shall be entitled to discuss the balance sheet and the profit and loss
account of the corresponding new bank made up to the previous
31st day of March, the report of the Board of Directors on the work-
ing and activities of the corresponding new bank for the period
covered by the accounts and the aviditor’s report on the balance-
sheet and accounts.”,

47. In section 19 of the Bank (Second) Nationalisation Act, in sub-

section (2), after clause (b), the following clauses shall be inserted,

30 namely :—

40

45

"(ba) the nature of shares of the corresponding new bank,
the manner in which and the conditions subject to which shares
may be held and transferred and generally all matters relating to
the rights and duties of shareholders;

(bb) the maintenance of register, and the
entered in the fegister in addition to those specified in sub-section

particulars to be

(१४) of ection 3, the safeguards to be observed: in- the maintenance -

of register on computer floppies or diskettes, inspection and ckesure
of the register and all other matters connected therewith;

(be) the manner in which general meetings shall be convened,
the procedure to be followed, thereat and the manner in which voting
vights may be exercised; पर

(bd) the holding of meetings of sharehol
pe transacted thereat;

(be) the manner in whi
the corresponding new bank. upon shareholders
8 nominated under claise

ders and the business to
ch notices may be served on behalf of
or other persons;

(by) the manner in which the director:
(g) of sub-section (3} of section 9 shall retire,”

Amend-
ment of
section 10,

Insertion
of new
section 102
Annual
general
meeting.

Amend-
ment of
section 18,


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

om Following the recommendations of the Committee on the Financial
System (Narashimhan Committee), the Reserve Bank of India has Jaid
down certain norms for income recognition and provisioning and also

- for capital adequacy in relation to risk weighted assets of banks, These
norms have been designed to pitt the -financial uecounting standards of
Indian banks on a sound footing in line with current intermatie-
hal practice Following the introduction of these norms, all the corres-
Ponding new banks as defined in the Banking Companies (Acquisition
and Traasfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970 and the Banking Companies
(Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1989 (hereafter referred
to as the nationalised banks) as well as the State Bank of India will
have to build up their capital base substantially over the next three
years, - All the batiks hava to ensure that their total capital equal at
least 8 per cent of their risk weighted assets by 31st March, 1996
The banks having overseas operations will have to achieve this orm
by 31st March, 1994

a ५. ‘-2.-Achievement of the prescribed capital adequacy norm is essen-
- tial for the basic financial. health of the banking system. Tt is also
- essential for its international credibility as banks all over the- world
are adopting the norm laid down by the Committeg on’ Banking Regu-

- lations and Supervisory Practices set up by the Bank of International
Settlements °

3. At present the entire paid. up capital of the nationalised banks
stands vested in and allotted to the Central Government The Central
Government have been contributing to the paid up capital of ‘these
banks during the last few years. During the period 1985-1986 to 1992—
1983, “Government have contributed Rs. 4000 crores to the paid up
Capital’ of these banks. A’ sum! of Rs, 5700 crotes has beén provided in

“the’ current year’s budget. “Since resources of the Government are
limited and funds are required for other priority aréas, it will not be
possible for the Gevernment to contribute the substantial amounts
“now required by the nationalised banks for meeting: the new pruden.
tial “horms, Government have, thetefore, . decided that. the -nationa-
“lised banks which are in a position to.do so may be allowed to approach
the capital ‘*market’to” raise fresh - equity to-meet their shortfall in
-tapital. requirements. | The additional. capital thus mobilised , will help
the.banks -to expand. their lending Government, will,” however, con-
tinue to retain majority ownership and ,.therefore effective control in
the public sector banks. _

7 In order to give effect to the above decision, it has bécome neces-
sary,,to.amend the Banking Cornpanies (Acqijisition “and Transfer of
igs) Act, 1970 and the Banking Compaiies (Acquisition and



18

‘Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1980. The proposed amendments,inter-
alia, provide for the following:

(i) The Board of Directors of the nationalised banks may, afier
consultation with the Reserve Bank of India and with the previous
sanction of the Central Government, raise their paid up capital by
public issue of shares subject to the condition that the Central Gov-
ernment shali at all times hold not less than 51° per cent of the paid
up capital of the bank; पर

(ii) The authorised capital of every nationalised bank shall be
divided into 180 crores fully paid up shares-of Rs, 16|- each;

Gii) The Central Government may, after consultation with the
Réserve Bank of India and by notification in the Official Gazette,
increase or reduce the. authorised capital subject to the condition
that the authorised capital shall not exceed Rs. 3006 crores or he
less than Rs. 1500 crores;

(iv) The shares of a nationatised bank not held by the Central
Government shall be freely transferable;

(v) No shareholder other than the Centra] Government shall be
entitled to exercise voting rights in respect of any shares held’ by
him in excess of one per cent of the total voting rights of all the
shareholders of. the bank.

5, The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.

New Delhi; oe
The 25th November, 1993. MANMOHAN SINGH.

PRESIDENT’S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

[Copy of letter No. 1[5]92-BOI, dated 10 December, 1993 from Dr.
Abrar Ahmed, Minister of State in the Ministry of Finance to the Seere-
tary-General, Lok Sabha.]

The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the pro-
posed Bill further to amend the Banking Companies (Acquisition and
Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970 and the Banking Companies (Acqui-
sition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1980, recommends under clause
(1) of article 117 and clause (3) of article 117 of the Constitution of India
introduction and consideration of the above Bill in Lok Sabha.



FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Ciause 4 of the Bill inter alia contains provisions that the paid-up
capital of every corresponding new bank constituted under ihe Banking
Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970 may be
increased by such amounts as the Central Government may after consul-
tation with the Reserve Bank of India contribute to such capital. Similar
provisions relating to the corresponding new Banks constituted under the
Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1980
ate provided in clause 12 of the Bill. These provisions are already con-
tained in clause (b) of sub-section (2) of section 3 of bath the Acts, As
such no additional expenditure shall be incurred: out of the Consolidated
Fund of India on account of the proposed amendments.

2. Central Government “have been contributing to the paid-up capital
of the Corresponding new banks to increase their capital base. During
the period 1985-86 to 1992-93, the Central Government have contributed
Rs, 4,000 crores to the paid-up capital of the banks. A sum of Rs. 5,700
crores has been provided in the current year’s budget.

न gamameonct marae

3. The provisions of the Bill do not involve any other expenditure of 9
recurring or non-tecurring nature.



MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 4 of the Bill seeks to amend section 3 of the Banking Com.
panies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970 (5 of 1970)
by substituting sub-Sections (2A) to (2G) and (3) for sub-sections (2A)
and (3). Clause (c) of sub-section (2B) provides that the Board oi
Directors of the corresponding new banks may, after consultation with
the Reserve Bank and with the previous sanction of the Central Govern-
ment and subject; to the limitations stipulated therein raise the paid-up capi-
tal’ by public issue of shares in such manner as may be prescribed by
regulations. Clause (iv) of sub-section (2F) provides for prescribing by
regulations the particulars to be entered in the book of shareholders be-
sides those specified in clauses (i) to (ili) thereof.

2. Clause 6 of the Bill seeks to amend section 9 of the Act. Clause
(d) of sub-section (3) of section 9, as proposed to be inserted, empowers
the Central Government to lay down, under the scheme, the manner of
nofnination of one director representing the workimen-on the Board of
Directors of the corresponding new bank. The proviso. to clavise (h) of
sub-section (3) provides for specifying in the scheme, the manner of
retirement of directors nominated under clause (g).

3, Clause 9 the Bill provides for amending section 19 of the Act for
providing for new matters on which © regulations may. be made by the
Board of Directors of every corresponding new bank.

4, Clauses 12, 14 and 17 of the Bill seek to make corresponding
amendments in the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of
Undertakings) Act, 1980 (40 of 1980) 88 those mentioned in paragraphs
4, 2 and 3 respectively in respect of clauses 4, 6 and 9.

5. The matters in respect of which schemes may be made by the
Central Government after consultation with the Reserve Bank or the
matters in respect of which regulations may be made by the Board of
Directors of the corresponding new pank after consultation with the Re-
serve Bank and with the previous sanction of the Central Government
are matters of administrative detail] or procedure, The delegation of
legislative’ pawer is, therefore, of a normal character,

15



Definitioss.

Establish-
ment of
corres-
ponding
new
panks and
pusiness
thereof.

Power

of Cen.
tral Gov-
ernment
to

make
scheme.

ANNEXURE

EXTRACTS FROM THE BaNKING Companies (ACQUISITION AND "TRANSFER OF
‘Unpertacines). Aci, 1970 7

(5 or 1970)
* क्र * *
2, In this Act, unless.the context otherwise requires,—
के » Boe &
CHAPTER वा हु
CTRANSFER OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF EXISTING BANKS

3. a * : * * + e
+. (AY Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), the paid-

‘up capital.of every” corresponding new bank constituted under sub-section

(2) may from time to time be increased by-—

(a), such amounts as the Board of Directors of the corresponding
new, bank -may,- after, consultation with the. Reserve Bank and with
the previous sanction of the Central Government, transfer from the
reserve fund established by such bank to such capital;

है (9) such amounts as the Central Government may, in consulta-
tion with the Reserve Bank, contribute to such paid-up capital:

_ Provided that the paid-up capital of any. such bank shall in no case
be in excess of rupees one thousand five hundred crores.

(3) The entire capital of each corresponding new pank shall stand

vested in, and allotted to, the Central Government,

. * ‘t 3 ‘s
9. (1) * ह का * # *
(2) tn. particular, and without prejudice to the generality -of the
foregoing power, the ‘said scheme may provide * for all-or any, of. the
following matters, namely:-—
(०) the capital structure of the corresponding new hank, so
however that the paidup capital of any such bank shall not be in
excess of rupees fifteen crores;

क्र क्र * x €

(3) Every Board of Directors of a corresponding new bank, con-
stituted under any scheme made under sub-section (1), shall include—
(०) representatives of the employees, and of depositors, of such
bank, and

16 /



17

(8) such other persons as may represent the interests of each
of the following categories, namely, farmers, workers and artisans,
to be elected or nominated in such manner as may be specified in the

sebemes ee
* हा हि ह * *
CHAPTER V
MISCELLANEOUS
a. (72) * * * * *

(7) After making provision for bad and dowbtiul debts, depreciation
jn assets, contributions to staff and superannuation funds and all other
matters for which provision is necessary under any law, or which are
usually provided for by banking companies, a corresponding new bank
shall transfer the balance of profits to the Central Government.

(7A) Every corresponding new bank shall furnish to the Central Gov-
ernment the annual balance-sheet, the profit and loss. account, and the
anditor’s report and a report by its Board of directors on the working and
activities of the bank during the period covered by the accounts.

wy * | * * . *
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the
foregoing power, the regulations may provide for all or any of the follow-
ing matters, namely:—
- * + * a
ExraacTs PROM THE BaNKina Companies (ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF
Unpenrauines) Act, 1980
(40 of 1980)
4 4 * *
2, In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—

4 + * * *
CHAPTER II

SRANSFER OP THE UNDERTAKING OF EXISTING PANES

3, 2) * * के + *

(24) Notwithetanding anything contained in subsscion (2), © the
paid-up capital of every corresponding new bank constituted under sub-
section (7) may from time to time be increased by—

(a) such amounts as the Board of Directors of the corresponding
new bank may, after consultation with the Reserve Bank and with
the previous sanction of the Central Government transfer from the
reserve fond established by such bank to such paid up capital,

(9) such amounts as the Central Government may, in consulta-
tion with the Reserve Bank, contribute to such paid-up capital:

Provided that the paid-vp capital of any such bank shall in no case be
_ in excess of rupees one thousand five hundred crores.

Closure of
accounts
and dis-
posal of
profits,

Power to
make regu
lations.

Defina-
tions,

Establish
rnen{ of
corres

* ponding
new banks
and busi.
ness
thereof,



Power of
Central
Govern-
ment to
make
scheme.

and
disposal

make
regula-
tions.

Closure of
~ accounts

of profits,

Power to

1

ch corcesponding new hank Shall stand
Central Government.

(3)The entire capital
yested in, and allotted to, the

(4 Every corresponding new bank shall be a body corporate will
perpeitial succession and 8 conuvon seal with power, subject to the pr
visions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of property, and te con
tract, and may sue and be sued in its name.

* * x * cs

9. (2) * न न न

(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the fore-
going power, the said scheme may provide for all or any of the following
matters, namely:— . पु

(a) the eapital structure of the corresponding new bank, so
however that the paid-up capital of any such bank shail not be ia
excess of rupees one thousand five hundred crores,

Be * + *
CHAPTER V
MISCELLANEOUS.

10, 0) * « के 8 bes

(7) After making provision tor bad and doubtfal debts, depreciation
in assets, contributions to staff and superannuation funds and all other
matters for which provision is necessary under any jaw, or which . are
usually provided for by banking companies, a corresponding new bank shall
transfer the balance of profits to the Central Government.

(7A) Every corresponding new bank shall furnish to the Central
Government the annual balance-sheet, the profit and loss account, and the
auditor’s report and a report by its Board of directors on the working and
activities of the bank during the period covered by the accounts.

e a 93 « *

19. (1) * * हि के * *

(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the fore-
going power, the regulations may provide for all or any of the following
matters, namely:— . i

* *

*

* *



~ पं LOK SABHA

A
BILL
further to amend the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer

of Undertakings) Act, 1970 and the Banking Companies (Acquisition
and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1980.

(Dr, Manmohan Singh, Minister
of Finance)