am.o. us oIlS1A 
THE RESERVE BANK OF INDIA (AMENDMENT AND 
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS) B:rLL, 1952 
[As INTRODUOED IN TnK HOUSE OF TnB ;PEOPLE] 
A 
BILL 
f"J.rtheT to amef£d the Reserve Bltnh of India Ad, 1984 and to make speoial 
provisions in re81,ect of certain high denomination bank note •• 
;BE it enacted by Parliament as follows :-
1. Short tltle.-This Act mav be called the Reserve Bank of India 
(Ameudment and :M;iscdlkmoow:1 i'rovisions) A~t, 1952. 
2. Amendment of Bection 8, Act m of 1934 • .-For the proviso to sub· 
section (3) of section 8 of the B.esorve Bank of India Act, 1934 (hereinafter 
referred to 88 the priucipoJ. Act), the fullowing proviso shall be substituted, 
namely:-
"Provided thut when the Governor is, fur auy reason, unable to attend Ii 
any such meeting. a Deputy Governor uuthoriBed by him in this behaU 
in writing may vote for him at that meeting. ". 
8. Amendment of Bectlon 17, .Act D of 1984,.-In. section 17 of the 
principaJ Act,- 10 
(a) to sub-clause (b) of cluuse (2), the following Ezplanaflon ahall 
be added. nu.mely:-
.. E:epZanation.-For the purposes of this sub-cl.use,-
(i) the expression "agriculturoJ. operations'.! includes 
animal hUl:lbllndry and allied ad-ivities jointly undertaken 10 
with agricultural operations; 
(ii) "crops" include product.. of agricultural operations; 
(iii) the expression "marketing of crops" inoludes the 
processing of crops prior to marketing by agricultural producers 
or any organization of such producers."; 
10 

5 
10 
15 
30 
35 
2 
(b) after sub-ciause (b) of clause (.9), the foilowing sub-clause 
shall be inserted, namely :-
U(bb) the purchaae, sale and rediscount of bills of exchange 
and promissory notes drawn and pa.yable in India &lld bearing two 
or more good -signatures, one of which shall be that of a State 
Co-operative Bank or a. State Financial Corporation, and drawn 
or iSRued for the purpose of financing the production or marketing 
activities of cottage and small scale industries approved by the 
.Bank and maturing within twelve months from the date of such 
purchase or rediscount, exclusive of days of grace, provided that 
the payment of the principaD and interest of Much bills of exchange 
or promissory notes is fully guaranteed by the State Government."; 
(0) after clause (4), the following clauses shall be inserted, 
namely:- . 
.. (4A) the making to State 'Co-operative Banks of loans and 
advances, repayable on the expiry of fixed periods not being less 
than fifteen months and not exceeding five yeurs against such 
securities as may be specified in this behalf by the Central Board: 
Provided that-
(/I) such loans and adva.nces are fully guaranteed as to the 
principal and interest by the State Goyernment; and 
(b) the amount of loans and advances granted to any 
State Co-operative Bank shall not exceed the owned fundi 
of such a bank : 
Provided further that the amount of 10&l1s and advances 
granted by the Bank under this clause shall not at any time 
exceed five llrOrtlS of rupees in tho aggregate. 
(4B) the making to the Jndustrial Finance Corporation of 
India. established under the.. Industrial Finance Corporation Aot, 
1948 (XV of 194B) of loans and advan(le8,-
(a) against seeurities of the Central Government or of 
any State Government, repayable on demand or on the expiry 
of fixed periods not exceeding ninety da.ys from the date of 
such loan or advance; or 
(b) against securities of the Central Government or' 
against bonds and debentures issued by the said Corporation 
and guaranteed by the Central Government maturing and 
repayable within a period not exceeding eighteen months from 
the da.te of such loan or advance: 
Provided that the amount of loans and advances granted 
under clause (b) shall not at a.ny time e:x:ceed three crores 
of rupees in the aggregate." 
~: -•• Am8l14ment of aecUoa i4:, .Act II of 1986.-1n section 24 of the 
principal Aot, after the words 'one thousand rupees' the words .'five 
" thousand rupees' sh,Bll be i1l8erted. 
6. AmeD4ment of section ~, Act II of 19M.-Tn section 40 of the 
principal Act, after the words 'or Ma.drBs' the words 'or at l1uoh of its 
branches as the Central Govemment may, by order, determine' shall be 
inserted. . 

3 
8. Amendment of Hctlon d, Act D of 1984:.~ln section 42 of the 
principal Act,-
(a) in thfl Rxplanation to sub-section (1), after the words 'the 
Reserve Bank' the words '01' the Imperial Bank of India' shall be 
inserted; 
(b) in sub-section (2,),-
(i) to clause (a), the words 'other than the Imperial Bank of 
Indio.' shall be added ; 
(ii) after c)o.lIse (a), the following cla.use shall be inserted, 
namely:-
"(aa) the amount of its borrowings from the Imperial 
Bank of India, classifying them into demand and time 
liabilities ;"; 
10 
(iit) in clause (g), after the words 'discounted in India' the 15 
words 'and foreign h.ills purchased Imd discounted' shall be 
inserted. 
7. lnIertion of n6W section 4SA in Act D of 1934.-After section 48 o~ 
the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, nBIDelY:-
"4HA. Protoction of action taken in good faith.-(l} No suit or 
other legal proceeding shall lie against the Bank or any of its officers 20 
for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in 
pursuance of seotion 42 or section 43. 
(2) No suit or other legat proceeding shall lie against the Bank or 
any of its officers for any damage caused or likely to be caused by any-
thing whioh is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of 215 
section 42 or section 43." 
8. Amendment of section liS, Act D of 1934.-In clause (h) of sub-
section (2) of section liB of the principal Act, the words 'to the Governor, 
or' shall be omitted. 
9. Ordinance UI of 1948 not to apply to certain high denomination bank 30 
DOtII.-Nothing contained in the High Denomination Ba.nk Notes 
(Demonetisation) Ordinance, 1946 (TIl of HM.6) shoJI apply to any bank note 
of the denominational value of five hundred rupees, one thousand rupees 
or ten thoml/md rtl}lees issued after the commenl'ernent of this Act, but no 
8uch blUlk note ISRued before the 13th day of Jl\nUBry, 1946 shall be legal Sn 
tender in pl\ym.nt or on aO<lOunt of the Bmount expre8Aed therein at any 
place in India. . 

, 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
For some time pnst there has be('n 1\ persistent denl/mel for extentling 
Ute facilities provided hy the Reserve Bank of India. to meet the needs of 
rural credit. As (\ fl~8ult uf the eXRminution of the vnriolls proposals in this 
behalf.it isoonsidered necessary to nmend tho Reserve Bunk of India Act, 
1934, for enlarging its scope with a view to enabling it to participate more 
effectively in financing the requirements of rural areas. The principal 
amendments to the Bill are intended to ~-
(1) widen the scope of the terms 'crops', 'agricultura.l operations' 
and 'marketing of crops' used in sectiou 17(2)(b) of the Act, so that 
finance may 1I1so be made available for production and marketing of 
oOIDmodities such as gur, milk, crenm, butter, ghec, etc., and also for 
processing of goods where such processing is a necessary preliminary 
to marketing, e.g. hulling of riC<;l, ginning 8nd pressing of cotton, etc.; 
. (9) provide acoommodation to the State Co-operative Banks and 
State Einancial Corporations for financing the production and market-
ing activities of cottage and small-Rcnle industries, where the repay-
ment of the principal and payment of interest is guaranteed by the 
State Government; 
(3) ennble the Bank to dispense mediurn-t~rm credit for agri-
cultural pUt'polles for periods ranging more than Iii month~ but not 
exceeding 5 years. .. 
All propoeed in the Industrial Finance Corpora.tion (Amendment) Bill, 
1952, provision is also being made to enable the Bank to give Ahort-term 
cftdlt..lacilitiell to the Corporation. The Bill incorporates certain minor 
e.mendments found necessary as 80 result of the experience gained in the 
working of the Bank. 
NBW DBLBI; 
C. 'D. DESHMUKH, 
The 15th November, 1952. 

'8 
Note, on Clau,e,. 
Clause 2.-The amendment is for clarification. 
Clause 3.-The I'Elltl!lons for amending claUl~e (2) 01 Section 17 of the 
Act have u.lready blwn explained in t~e Statement of Objects and Reasons. 
The objective of inserting n. new clause (4A) has also been explained therein. 
The new clause (4tH) is intended for granting ahon-term·finanoial·aeoommo-
dation to the Industrial Finance Corporation. This is necessary for the 
successfut opera.tion of the Corporation. 
I I, . 
. Olausell; 4 anul9.-Higb denomination notes were demonetised .in 1946 
under the High Dp,nominBtion Bank Notes (Demonetieation) Ordinance;· HMO 
(III of 19.46). In viow of the serip1;18 inconvenience c/loused to! tlw\public by 
the withdrawal of high denQlllina1;ionnotes" it has been deci~~ .1;p. 1'18. 
introduce the notes as fi\srly as pos"ible. New series of notes will now be 
issued and the intention is to isaue RB ... 1,000, Re. 5,000 and Rs. 10,000 
denomina.tion notE'S only. As issue of Rs. 5,000 denomination notes is not 
at prosent authorised, under Section 24. of the Ad, it is nacea.fY:rto amend 
that section also in addition to the amendment of the above Ordinance. 
ClauBe 5.-It will be mnde obligatory on the B~ to p~o~ide foreigh 
exchange fa.cilitifls at the preseribed rates and conditions at any of the 
branches of the Honk a.s may be detennined by the Central Government. 
OZa1lBfJ 6.-Rorrowings from t,he Imperial Brtnk will have to be exhibited 
separately in the W,eekly Returns of scheduled banks and such borrowings 
arc to be excluded from their demand and time liabilities in India. . , 
ClausfJ 7.-This new section is' being inserted on the Unes of seotion 54 
of the Banking Companies Act, 1949, to give protection to the bank against 
any suits or actionRcla.iming damages. 
Ola'UBe B.-Since section 7(8) gives the Governor concurrent powers with 
the Central: ROBrd, it is no longer necessary to provide for deleg~ti~n of 
powers to bim under the RegUlations, . 

I 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRTCTS FROII 'fHE RESEUVE BANK O~' INDIA ACT, 1984 (II OF 1984) 
• • • • • 
Seotion 8(3) 
S. OompoilUoD of the Oentral Board, IDd term of oBlce of Dtrectan.-
• • • • • 
(3) A Deputy Governor and' the Direotor nominated under olause (d) 
of sub-seotion (1) may attend any meeting of the Central Board and take 
part in ita deliberations but shall not be entitled to vote: 
Provided that when the Governor is absent a Deputy Governor authorised 
by him in this behalf in writing may vote for him. 
• * * • • 
Section 17(S)(b) . 
1'1. Bum. which tile BIIlk may VlD8&ct.-The Bank shall be 
authorized to carry on and trlLllsBCt· the several kinds of business herein-
after specified, namely:-
• • • • • 
(2)(b) the purchaRe, sale and rediRcmmt of bills of exchange and pro-
missory notes, drawn and paya.ble in Indin. and hearing two or more good 
signatures, Ontl of which shall be that of a. sC'hedulcd bank, or a State eo-
operative bank, and dra.wn or iBsped for the purpose of finanoing seasonal 
agrioultural operations or the marketing of cropR. /lnd maturing within. 
fifte6ll months from the date of AIlCh purohase or redisoount, exolusive of 
days of graoe; 
• • • • • 
Seotion .e4 
M. D8II0ImlD&t.Ioq Of note •. -Bank notes shall be of the denominational 
values of two rupees, five rupees, ten rupees, fifty rupees, one hundred 
rupee., five hundred rupees, one thousand rupees and ten thousand rupees 
unless otheJWise directed by the Central Government on the reoommenda-
tion of the Central Board. 
• • • • • 
Section 40 
to. 'IraUaCtkmI lD forelp achallge.-The Bank shall sell to or buy 
from any authorised person who makes a demand in that behalf at its 
office in Bombay, CBlcutta, Delhi or Madras, foreign exohange at suoh 
rates of exohange and on suoh conditions as the Central Governmenil may 
from time to time by general or special order determine, having regard so 
far as rates of exohange are oonoemed to its obligations to *e International 
Monetary Fund: 
• • • • • 
Seotion 4S (1) tiM (9) 
d. OIl11I'811"U or lIChe4aled buakl to be kept with the BIDk.-
• • • • • 
EzpZIJnatioft..-For the purposes of this seemon liabilities shall noil 
tpeJu4e UJ.e paid-up oa.pital or the reserves, Ol' any oredit balance in ~e 

'7 
pront and loss 8000unt of the bank or the amount of any loan taken frotD 
the Reserve Bank. 
(2) Every scheduled bank shall send to the bank a. return signed by two 
responsible officers of suoh bank showing-
(a) the amount of its demand and time liabilities and the amount 
of its borrowings from banks in India, 
• • • • • 
(g) the inland bills purchased and discounted in India, at the oloae 
of business on each Friday, and every such return shall be Bent not 
later than five days after the date to which it relateB: • 
• • • • • 
BBotion 58(B)(h) 
68. Power of the Ollltral Board to make regalaUoJll.-
• • • • • 
(2) In partioular OJld without prejudice to t,he generality of the fore-
going provision, such regulations may provide for aU or any of the foUow-
ing matters, namely:-
• • • • • 
(h) the delegation of powers and functions of the Central Board 
to the Governor, or to Deputy Governors, Direotors or officers of tAb. 
Bank; 
• • • • • 

HOUSE OF THE PEOPLE 
A 
BILL 
, "! 
further tv amend the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, and to 
m~e certain provisions in respect of' -high denomina.tion 
ba.nk DOtes. 
t" r. : . /. 
(SAn O. D. De81vmulc'h, 
M iniBter for Finance). 
GIPD-JeA»-S88P8-18-11-a2-1,1OO 