Bill No. II, of 1963 
THE PERSONAL INJURIES (EMERGENCY 
PROVISIONS) BILL, 1962 
(As INTRODUCED IN Lol{ SABRA 
ON 3RD DBCBMBER, 1962) 

Bill No. 119 of 1962 
THE PERSONAL INJURIES (EMERGENCY 
PROVISIONS) BILL, 1962 
(As INTRODUCED IN Lolt SABRA) 
A 
BILL 
10 maICe provision fCYr the grant of relief in respect of certain personal 
injuries sustained during the period 01 the emergency. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirteenth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the 'Personal Injuri~ (Emer- Shon title, 
gency Provisions) Act, 1962. extent aM commence-
S (2) It extends to the whole of India. ment. 
(3) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the. 26th 
day of October, 1962. 
"Z. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(1) "civil defence organisation"means any organisation 
10 established for civil defence purposes which is declared by a 
scheme to be a civil defence organisation for the purposes of this 
Act and the scheme; 
(2) "civil defence volunteer", in relation to an injury, means 
a person certified, by an officer of a civil defence organisation 
IS authorised by the Central Government to grant such certificates, 
to have been a member of that organisation at the time when the 
injury was sustained; 
(3) "enemy" means-
(i) any person or country committing external aggres-
20 sion against India; 
Definitions. 

• 
2 
(ii) any person belonging to any country committing 
such aggression; 
(iii) such other country as may be declared by the Cen-
tral Government to be assisting the country committing 
such aggression; S 
(iv) any person belonging to such other country; 
(4) "gainfully occupied person" means a person who is 
engaged in any . trade, business, profession. office, employment 
or vocation and is wholly or substantially dependen' thereon for 
a livelihood, or a person who, though temporarily unemployed, 10 
is normally so engaged and dependent; 
(5) "period of the emergency" means the period beginning 
with 26th October, 1962, the date on which the Proclamation of 
Emergency under clause (1) of article 352 of the Constitution 
was issued and ending with such date as the Central Govern- IS 
ment may, by a notification in the Official Gazette. d~clare to be 
the date on which the emergency shall come to an end; 
(6) "personal injury" means a physical or mental injury 
and includes any disease whether manifesting itself immedia-
tely or subsequently- 20 
(a) caused by-
(i) the' discharge of any missile (including liquid 
or gas or both), or 
(ii) the use of any weapon, explosive or other 
noxious thing, or 2S 
(iii) the doing of any other injurious act, 
either by the enemy or in combating the enemy or in re-
pelling an imagined attack by the enemy; or 
(b) caused by the impact, on any pe::rson or property, 
of any enemy aircraft or any aircraft belonging to or held 3'0 
by any person on behalf of or for the benefit of the Govern-
ment of India or any allied power, or any part of, or any-
thing dropped from, any such aircraft; or 
(c) caused by any explosion or fire which involves any 
explosives or munitions or other dangerous things, required 3S 
for the purposes of defence against the enemy and which 
happens or is caused by, through, or in connection with the 
manufacture. storage or transportation of any such explo-
sive, munition or other dangerous things; 

(7) "personal service injury", in relation to a civil defence 
volunteer, means any physical or mental injury, and includes 
any disease whether manifesting itself immediately or subse-
quently, shown to the satisfaction of the Central Government 
S or other authority authorised to make payments under a scheme, 
to have arisen out of and in the course of the performance by 
the volunteer of his duties as a member of the civil defence 
organisation to which he belonged at the time when the injury 
was sustained or the disease was contracted, and (except in the 
10 case of a personal injury) not to have arisen out of, :md in the 
course of, his employment in any other capacity: 
Provided that before being so satisfied, the Central Govern-
ment or other authority authorised to make payments under a .. 
scheme shall have received from the civil defence organisation 
15 of which the volunteer concerned was a member at the time 
when the injury was sustained or the disease was contracted, 
a report, by an officer of the organisation authorised by the 
Central Government to make such reports, about the injury (lr 
the disease in question; 
20 (8) "schE-me" means a scheme made under this Act. 
3. (1) The Central Government may make a scheme or schemes Power to 
in accordance with the provisions of this Act providing for the grant ~ r~~e 
f 1 · f . t f th f 11 . ... t'..l d' th or re Ie In o re Ie In respec 0 e a OWIng InJuries sus .amea urmg e respect of 
Period of the emergency namely: - pe~sonal in-, . Junes and 
25 (a) personal injuries sustained by gainfully occupied per- p~r8~~Is.er-
, h . if b 'ft..l· h VICe inJuries. sons (With suc exceptIons, any, as may e SpeCl e'.l 1D t e 
scheme) and by persons of such other classes as may be so 
specified; and 
(b) personal service injuries sustained by civil defence 
30 volunteers. 
(2) A scheme may authorise the Central Government or any 
authority authorised by the Central Government to make pay-
ments under the . scheme, in such circumstances and subject to 
such conditions as may be specified in the scheme, to make to or in 
35 respect of persons injured, diseased or disabled due to injuries or 
any diseas&-
(a) payments by way of temporary allowance, which shall be 
payable only so long as the person injure! or diseas('rl is i.-
capacitated for work by the injury or disease and has not rc-
40 eeived any such payment as is mentioned in clause (b); 
(b) payments otherwise than by way of temporary anowanee, 
which shall be payable only where the iniury or disease causes 
ccrious and prolonged or permanent diablement or death; and 

4 
(c) payments for the purchase of or the gritnt at the cost of 
Government of artificial limbs or surgical or other appliances 
and payments for medical and surgical treatment. 
(3) A scheme may empower the Central Government ~o make re-
gulations for giving effect to the purposes of the scheme.· S 
(4) A scheme may provide that it shall come into operation or 
shall be deemed to have come into operation on such date as may be 
specified therein. . 
(5) A scheme may be amended or rescinded at any time by the 
Central Government. 10 
(6)Any decision of the Central Government or other authority 
empowered to make payments under a scheme as to the making, re-
fusal of amount, or as to the continuance or discontinuance, of a 
payment under a scheme may be varied, from time to time, by a sub-
sequent decision of the Central Government or such authority, AS the IS 
case may be, but save in so far as it is so varied shall be final and 
conclusive. ' 
~e1~f from 4. (1) In respect of a personal injury sustained during the hablllty to . pa~ c:omPe~ period of the emergency by any other person, and in respect of a pE'r-
.. tlon or de- sonal service injury sugtained during that period by a civil defence. 20 
1JIaICI· volunteer, no such compensation or damages shall be payable, whe-
ther to the person injured or to any other person, as apart from the 
provisions of this sub-sect ion-
(a) would be paygble under-
(i) the Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923, or 
(ii) the Employees' State Insurance Act, 1948; or 
(b) would, whether by virtue or any enactment or by virtue 
of any contract or any custom or usage having the force of law, 
be payable-
(i) in the case of a personal injury, by any person, or 30 
(ii) in the case of a personal service injury sustained 
by a civil defence volunteer, by the employer of the vol-
unteer, or by any person who has any· responsibility in con-
nection with the volunteer's duties aa such or by any other 
civil defence volunteer, 35 
on the ground that the injury In question was attributable to 
some negligence, nuisance or breach of duty for which the ?er-
son by whom the compensation or damages would be payable 
is responsible. 
(2) The failure to give a notice or make a claim or commence 40 
proceedings within th. time required by any enactment shall not 

be a bar to the maintenance of proceedings in r~spect of any per-
sonal injury or personal service injury, if-
(a) an application for a payment under a scheme has been 
duly made to the Central Government or other authority em-
S powered to make payments under the scheme in respect of the 
injury; .and 
(b) the court or other authority before which the proceed-
ings are brought, is satisfied that the said application was made 
in the reasonable belief that the injury was such that a payment 
10 could be made under the scheme; and 
(c) the Central Government or other authority empowered 
to make payments under the scheme certifies that the application 
was rejected, or that payments made in pursuance of the applica-
tion were discontinued, on the ground that the injury was not 
IS such an injury; and 
(d) the proceedings are commenced within one month from 
the date of the said certificate. 
5. > (1) Where it is necessary, in order to determine the amount of Information . as to carn-any payment to be awarded under a scheme m respect of any per- ins •. 
20 sonal injury or personal service injury, to ascertain the earnings of 
the person injured in respect of any period before he sustained the 
personal injury or the personal service injury, the Central Govern-
ment or other authority authorised to make payments under the 
scheme may, by notice in writing, require-
(a) any person who was an employer of the injured person 
during that period; or 
(b) any other person having any knowledge with respect 
to the financial circumstances of the injured person during that 
period, 
30 to furnish in accordance with the notice any information in his 
possession relating to those earnings or circumstances, and to pro-
duce to any person specified in the notice any wage books, records 
or other documents in his possession containing entries with respect 
to those earnings. 
3S (2) If any penon-
(a) fails to comply with the requirements of any such notice, 
or 
(b) in purported compliance with any such notice, knowing-
ly or recklassly makes any untrue statement or untrue re;>resen-
tatton, or produces any document which is false in a maferial 

Medical at-
tention in 
dispensaries 
and hospi-
tals. 
Penalty for 
raise state-
ment. 
6 
particular or calculated to deceive, 
he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred 
rupees. 
6. (1) The person IIUU18ging any dispelllllU'y or hospital shilll, if 
so required by the Central or a State Government by leDeral or S 
special order.-
(a~ provide at the dispensary or hospital medical and sUfli-
cal treatment for persons who have sustained injuries of the 
nature specified in sub-section (1) of section 3, BDd 
(b) keep such records and make such returns relating to the 10 
persons treated for such injuries as may be required by or under 
a scheme. 
(%) If any person fails to comply, when so required, with the pro-
visions of this section, he shall be punishable with flne which may 
extend to one thousand rupees. IS 
7. Any person who, for the purpose of obtaining a payment or 
grant under a scheme either for himself or for any other person, 
knowingly makes any untrue statement or untrue representation, 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend 
to three months. 20 
Assignments 8. Any assignment of, or charge on, and any agreement to assign 
°ber cha!ges ~o or charge, any payment awarded or to be awarded under a scheme 
vo~ • 
shall be void, and, on the lDsolvency of any person to whom such 
a payment has been awarded, the payment shall not pass to any trus-
tee or other person acting on behalf of the creditors. 2.5 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The War Injuries Ordinance, 1941 was promulgated during the 
last war in order to provide for grant of relief in respect of certain 
personal injuries sustained in the course of hostilities during that 
period. Although the Ordinance still continues to remain in force its 
provisions cannot be invoked for the purpose of granting relief in 
respect of personal injuries sustained or that may be sustained during 
the period of the present emergency. This has necessitated separate 
legislation. 
2. The Bill seeks to empower the Central Government to formulate 
any scheme for grant of relief in respect of-
(a) personal injuries sustained by gainfully occupied persons 
and by persons of such other classes as may be specified; and 
(b) personal service injuries sustained by civil defence 
volunteers. 
Persons suffering a personal injury or a personal service injury will 
not be entitled to any rellef under the Workmen's Compensation Act, 
1923 or the Employees' State Insurance Act, 1948. The interests of 
workers covered by these two enactments will be protected either 
by amending the War Injuries (Compensation Insurance) Act, 1943 or 
undertaking separate legislation on the lines of this Act, which pro-
vides for payment of compensation to the injured person roughly 
equal to the difference between the amount paid under the War In-
juries Scheme and the amount payable under the Workmen's Compen-
sation Act, 1923. Provision has also been made in the Bill for powers 
to call or inormation regarding the earnings and financial circum-
stances of injured persons, for medical attention of injured persons in 
dispensaries and hospitals, and for penalties for making false state-
ments or claims. 
NEW DELHI; G. L. NANDA. 
The 28th Nooember. 1982. 
" 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 3 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to frame 
a sc~eme to provide for grant of rellef in respect of personal injuries 
or personal service injuries Sustained. during· the period of present 
emergency. The scheme to be framed. may authorise the Central 
Government or any authority authorised by it to make payments 
under the scheme, in such circumstances and subject to such condi-
tions as may be specified in the scheme. Clause 6 of the Bill relates 
to medical attention in dispensaries and hospitals of persons sustaining 
personal injuries or personal service injuries. The relief proposed 
will involve expenditure from the Consolidated. Fund of India, the 
extent of which cannot be estimated at present. 
8 

IrmMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATlOlt 
Clause 3 of the Bill emDowers the Central Government to truu 
• scheme or schemes providing for the grant of relief in respect of 
personal injuries or personal service injuries sustained durinl the 
period of the emergency. The scheme to be framed by the Central 
Government may authorise the Central Government or any authority 
authorised by it to make payments under the Scheme. The Scheme 
may also empower the Central Government to make regu!atioIll for 
giving effect to the purposes of the scheme. 
The matters in respect of which pro\'ision can be made in a scheme 
or regulations are generally matters of procedure or detail The 
deleaation of power is, therefore, of a normal character • 
• 

• BILL 
to mak~ pro":ision for the grant of relief in respect of certain 
personal injuries iUStained durini the period of the 
emergency. 
The Prcsidl'Dt has, in pursuance of clause (3) of article 
117 of the Constitution of India, recommend.::d to Lot 
Sabha the consideration of the Bill. 
M.N. KAULa 
S«r,,.,,. 
(Shrl Gul.arilGl NantM, 
Minis,,, of Planni", tII'UI 
La/J(IIII' and Em,1D1""fll.) 