II of t'" 
As INTRODUCED IN Lox SOHA ON 
Bill No. 119 of 1988 
THE INDIAN POST OFFICE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1988 
A. 
BILL 
further to amend the IndiAn Po.t Of/W:e Act, 1898. 
BE it enacted by ParUamant in the ~venth Year of the 
Republic of India II foUOWI:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Indian Post Oftice (Amendment) 
Act, 1986. 
5 (2) It shall come into force on such date II the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazet~, appoint, and different dates 
may be appointed for d:fferent proviNons of this Act. 
Z. In section 1 of the IndiUl Post Olflce Act, 1898 (hereinafter referred 
to as the principal Act), in sub-section (1), the word "Indian" shall be 
10 omitted. I 
3. Section 2 of the principal Act shall be re-numbered as 'Sub-section 
(1) of that section, and-
(a) in sub-section (1) as so renumbered,-
(0 for clause (a), the following clause shall be subgtituted, 
'5 namely:- r , 
(a) the expressioTi "Director General" means the 
Director Gereral of Pests and includes any other otftcer 
ll\1thori~ed to exercise t~ powe~ of the Director General;'; 
Short 
title 
and 
cora· 
mence-
ment. 
Anaand. 
metttol 
section 1. 
Amend-
mentol 
sectienJ, 

Amend-
ment of 
section 3. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 4. 
(ii) in clause (d), for the words Uor Her Majesty's Govern-
ment or the Government of any British possession or fore:gn 
country", the words "or the Government of any foreign 
country" soall be substituted; 
(iii) in clause (i), after the word Uletter/" the word "letter- 5 
card," shall be inserted; I . 
('iv) for clause (;). the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:- i 
'(j) the expression "Post Master General" includes an 
Additional Post Master General, a Director of Postal 10 
Service or any other officer exercising the powers of the 
Post Master General;'; 
(v) after clause (k), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:-- 1 
• (1) the expre!lsion Ustamping machine" means a 15 
machine used to affix impressions to indicate pre-payment of 
postage or other sums chargeable under this Act and includes 
a franking mac1pne.'; 
(b) after 'Sub-section (1) as so re-numbered, the following sui>-
section shall be inserted, name1y:- I 20 
"(2) Any reference in this Act to a law which is not in force 
in any area shaU, in relation to that area, be construed as a 
reference to the corresponding law, if any, in force in that area.". 
4. In )';ectIon 3 of the principal Act, in clause (c), after the words 
"according to the usual manner of delivering postal articles to the 25 
addressee,", the words "or the placing of a postal article in a letter 
deposit box kept at the house or office of the addressee or in a post box 
at the po!'t office rented by the addressee," shall be inserted. 
r 
5. In section 4 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1) ,-
(i) in clause (b), the word "and" occurring at the end shan 
be omitted; 
(H) after clause (b), the following clauses shall be inserted, 
namely:-' 1 
.. (ba) letter!! conveyed and delivered by the sender 35 
thereof personally; 
(hb) documents issued by a court or other aut.horify 
entitled to issue the same, or anv return or answers to such 
documents sent, conveyed and delivered otherwise than by 
post;"; I' 40 
(iii.) in cla\lse (c), ro~ the words "either bv sea or \:)y lnnd", 
the worris "bv land, sea or air" shall be substituted; 
(b) in sUb-section (2), for the word "pqst~rqs". the words. 
'-.I~~er-car~ aqg postcard!i" tm.tiJl ~ ,ul)eUtuted. 

2 of 1974 
s 
•. After seotioQ4 of· tQe. pr~ .4ct, the f9Uowing section shall be Inlet-
inserted, namely:- tion of 
5 
10 
"4A. (1) Any officer (being anofflcer not below the rank of a Sub. 
Divisional Inspector of post offices) authorised by the Central Gov-
ernment by general or special order may, if he has reason to believe 
that any package contBinin.g letters of the nature referred to in sub-
section (1) of section 4 is, Or any such letters are, in any vehicle or 
other' conveyance 01"in any premises and that such letters are in the 
process of being carried in contr"vention of the provisions of that 
section, search the said vehicle or other conveyance or premises and 
seize such letters. 
(2) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 shall, 
so far as may be, apply to any search or seizure under this section 
as they apply to any search or seizure made under the authority 
15 of a warrant issued under section' 94 of the said Code". , 
20 
7. In section 5 of the principal Act, in clause (b), after the words 
"ports or places in India,", the words "or owners of, or persons in charge, 
of any aircraft on a flight between places in India," shall be inserted. 
8. In section 8 of the principal Act,-
(a) for clause (II), the foUowing clause shall be substituted, 
nronely:-
"(a) require the pre-payment of postage on inland postal 
articles or any class of inland postal articles, the grant of any 
rebate on such postage if it is pre-paid by means of stamping 
;5 machines or if such postal articles are pre-sorted and posted in 
such manner as may be specified, and prescribe the manner 
in which pre-payment shall be made;"; 
(b) in clause (d), for the-' words 'charged for the "express 
delivery" of postal' articles', the words ·'charged for such service in 
30 relation to the delivery of any postal article as may be spec·ifted" shall 
be substituted; 
(c) the Explo1r&4tioft Ihall be omitted. 
'ew sectioD 
fA. 
Search 
and 
seizure. 
Amend. 
mento! 
section 
5. 
Amend. 
mentof 
section 
8. 
9. In section 9 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), for clauses Amend-
35 
(a) and (b), the following clauses sh81lbe substituted, namely:"'- ment of 
U (II) that it is published in numbers at such intervals as the 
Central Government may .pec:ify in the rules made under sub-section 
(1) ; 
(b) . that it 'hal a ~ litt of subeCribers: 
(e) that it ia not a catalogUe or price list of any article or 
commodity sold at eoncesaional rate or of the shares of companies; 
section J. 

A ....... 
ment el 
seetioa 
1 •. 
A.I.". 
DleJIt(\f 
acelio. 
IS. 
Am ..... 
.ent ... 
seeei .. 
Ii. 
Insertieo 
ot • 
.ew !CIL 
t,OIl liA. 
'ewer to 
inspMit la' 
seize 
atampi.& 
_ell ... 
r' 
I. .. 
(d) that it does not contain any buIiDeII reply eard except a 
business reply card for its subscription; 
(oe) that its transmissioll by post is otherwise permiaeible usder 
this Acto". 
10. In section 10 of the principal Act,- 5 
(a.) in lub-section (1), for the portion beginning with the words 
"Where arrangements are" and ending with the words ''such posse ... 
sion or country", the following shall be substituted, namely:-
"Where arrangement. are in force with any foreign country 
for the transmission by post of postal articles between India 10 
and such country"; . -
fb) after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be 
inserted, namely:-
"(3) The Central Goven)DleIlt may also make rules to give 
effect to the arrangements referred to in sub-section (l) in J,; 
r~pect of postal artidee other than those to which section& 36 
and 46 apply.". 
11. In section IS of the principal Act, for the words "or to the POit 
Office of the United Kingdom or of any British possession or foreign coun-
try", the words "or to the Post Oftlce of any foreign country" shall be 120 
substituted. 
12. In section 16 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3), after c1auae 
(d), the follOWing clause shan be inserted, namely:-
"(da) regulate the use of ItaD).ping machinet;". 
13. Mter section 16 of the principal Act, the following leCtion shan 2! 
be inserted, namely:-
"l6A. (1) Subject to any rules made by the Central Govemment 
in this behalf, any ofllcer of a Post 0fB.ce authorised by the Post· 
master General, by General or special order, shall, if he has 
reason to believe that leakage of revenue is being caused as a result 30 
of a stamping machine being used in contravention of the provisions 
of this Act or of any rules in any premises, enter such premises and 
conduct an inspection of luch stamping machine, and it on IUch 
inspection, he is satisfied that the stamping machine has been so 
used, he shall I8ize the same: !s 
Provided that before entering web prem.i8es, such of!lcer shall 
give a notice in writing of hit intlmtion to do so to the occupier of 
sueh premisee. : 
(2) The Central Government may make r\IlH to provide for the 
inspection and .eizure of a .tamping machine under sub-aeetf.on (1) .p 
and the manner of dealin, with such maehtne telzed under that sub-
section.". 

1'- In section 21 of the priDclpti Act.-
(a) in sub-section (2) ,-
(i) in clause (d), the word "Uld~· occurring at the end Ihall 
be omitted; 
5 (ii) after clause (e), the following clauses shall be inserted, 
namely:-
"(f) provide that no sender shall post the postal articles 
exceeding such number as may be specified therein unless 
such postal articles are pre-sorted and posted subject to 
10 such other conditions as may be specified therein; 
(g) provide that the delivery of postal articles to an 
addressee receiving more than such number of postal 
articles as may be specified therein from a post office shall 
be made only throuil! a post box rented by him at that post 
15 omce."; 
(b) after SUb-section (3), the following sub-.ection shall b. 
inserted, namely:-
"(4) Where, having regard to the exigencies of postal adminia. 
tration, the Central Government considers it necellsary or 
20 expedient so to do, it may, by order in writing,-
<a) direct that unregistered postal articles addresaeci to 
an addressee located in a multi-storeyed building or a buildinl 
with a large compound involving a distance of more than 
one hundred metrea between the outer gate and the build-
!Ii ing or a building wherein any dog or other dangerou. 
animals are let loose, may be delivered only through • 
letter deposit box installed tor the purpose on the ground 
floor or, u the cue may be, near the gate of such building; 
EzpZaft4tioft..-A single letter deposit box or different 
So letter deposit boxes may be matalled for different addressees 
for the purposes of this clause; 
(b) require the owner or 181 •• of the building referred. 
to in clause (4) to install, or"~a1low any addreslee located in 
IUch building to wian, such letter deposit box. 111'. 
15. In section 23 of the principal Aet, in iUb-aeet1on (3) I after clause 
35 (b), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:-
"Provided that before any such postal article as is specified in 
elause (a) of section 20 i8 deetroyed, I10ticet in writing shall be sent 
to the sender and the addieYee, and the article shall not be deltrofed 
Amead. 
meal of 
secticm 
21. 
Amend. 
mentof 
8eCUOD 
21. 
.... "-.-.. --~-"""""'"'------

until after expiry of one monU) _~*-; Ute on which theJaa of 
such notices is sent.". 
Subltitu- US. For section 26 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
tion of substituted, nattlely:-
DeW 
section 
for 
seC'aun 
16. 
Power to 
intercept 
postal 
articles 
in certain 
cases. 
Amend-
mento! 
aection 
27. 
Amend. 
mento! 
section 
2.7C. 
Amend. 
ment of 
IIetiOD 
34. 
Amc4-
.t_of 
88CijG,D 
at. . 
"26. The Central Government or tbeSta_ Government or any 5 
o1Bcer apecially authorised in this be.balf by the Central or the State 
Government, may, if satisfied that -it is necessary or .expedient so to 
do in the interests of public safety or tranquillity, the sovereignty 
and integrity of India, the security of the State, friendly relatio~s 
wi~h foreign States or public order or for. prevtmt~ incitement to 10 
the commission of any offence, or on the occurrence of any public 
emergency, by order in writing, direct that any postal article or 
class or description of postal articles in the course of transmisslon by 
post, shall be intercepted or detained or shall be disposed of in such 
manner as the authority issuing the order, may direct.". 15 
1'7. In section 27 of the principal Act, in the Explanation,-
(a.) for the words "of any part of India or of His Majesty's 
Dominions or foreign country", the words "in India or foreign 
country" shall be substituted; and 
(b) for, the words "Government of such part or country", the SlO 
words "Government of India or of 8uchcountry" shall be substituted. 
18. In section 27C of the principal Act,-
(4) fqr the words, figures and letters "sections 99D to 99F of the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898", the words and figures "section 96 
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973" shall be substituted; 
(b) for the figures and letter_ "990", the figures 1196" shall be 
substituted. 
19. In sedian 34 oftbep'" Ad, -1n.dae;pro1IIo, for the wordI 
"that sum has . been received Jrom the ad __ ", the words "the 
pGItal article has been deUvered to the acldressee" sbaII be fI)1IbstituW. 
.JO •. In section 36 of ~ principal 4\ot,. ~.~ub.' .. ect1Qll (J),.. 
(4) for the words "with the United Kingdom, or with any British 
possession, or foreign country", the words "with any foreign country" 
sh.n be substituted; 
, of 1898 
1152 of 191 •• 
(b) for the warde ·"ead t.be-UJUtad..lUngdom.-,ol' .• ueb po..-rloD S' 
or .«JUDt&Y'. thewwdlt I.'" IUch coua~I7" Ibal1 ,be -1UbIUt1UtcL 

10 
7 
: It. In. aeetiOft· 37-01 . tee ;prinalpalJ. Ad,-
(a) in sUb-seetion' (Z),-
(i) in- clause (a), the word "and" at the end ~ll be omitted; 
(it) after clause (b), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:-
"(c) provide for the levy of such further charges a. may 
be necessary for the return of undelivered pettal ari.lcles, or 
of any class thereof, to the sender."'; 
(b) for sub-section (3), the followmg sub-seetion shall be substi-
tuted, namely:-
"(3) Every undelivered postal article, after beini detained 
at a post office for theperibd preaeribed under clause (4) at sub-
section (2), shall be forwarded-
(a) to the post office at which it was posted for return 
to the sender on payment of the charges prescribed under 
clause (c) of sub-section (2); or 
(b) to such office a8 may be prescribed by rules made 
under this section.". 
zz. Section 38 of the principal Act shall be omitted~ 
10 23. For section 39 of the principal Act, the following section sball be 
substituted, namely:-
"39. (1) Every postal article received at the offtce. referred to 
in clause (b) of sub-section (3) of section 37, shall be dealt with 
in such manner as the Central Government may, by rules, prescribe. 
(2) In particular and without prejudiee to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such rules may prescribe-
(a) the manner in which the i>ostal articles referred to in 
sub-section (1) may be opened for ascertaining the particulars 
of the sender or the addressee; 
(b) the manner in which the postal artieles referred to in 
sub-section (1) may be returned tet the sender or redirected and 
forwarded to the addr~see and further charges for such return 
or ~tionj 
.Amcd-
JMIItot 
NCtiOll 
17. 
Omission 
or..,sc-
tion38. 
Subatitu .. 
tionof 
IleW 
MCtion· 
tor-__ 
tiona 
Disposal 
otundeli-
vered 
postal 
uticl& 

I'DsertioD 
of new 
le~OIl 
.3A. 
Tamo and 
manner of 
payment 
of money 
orders. 
Amend. 
ment of 
aection 
<44. 
Amend. 
ment of 
.ection 
46. 
Inaerlion 
of new 
lection 
<47A. 
Recovery 
of value-
payablo 
article. 
Amend. 
ment of 
section 
52. 
Insertion 
of new 
section 
57. 
!tealin, 
mail bar 
or postal 
~rticle. 
• 
(c) the period of detention &Dd. the manner of final dilpoaal 
of postal articles which are not disposed of in accordance with 
the provisions of clause Cob); 
(d) the manner in which any money found in any postal 
article Or sale proceeds of any saleable property found in any 5 
postal article finally disposed of in accordance with the provision. 
ot clause (c) shall be credited to the POst Office.". 
Zf. After section 43 of the principal Act, the following section .hall 
be inJerted, nanlely:-
"4SA. Money ordera aball be paid at such times and in such 10 
l'IIanBer al the Director General may. by order, from time to time, 
specify.". 
25. In I8CtiQJ1 '" of the principal Act, in sub·aection (2), for the 
words "one year", the words "six months" shall be substituted. 
26. In section 46 of the principal Act, for sub-section (1). the follow- 15 
ing sub-section shall be su.bstituted, namely:-
"(1) Where arrangements made with any foreign country are 
in force for the issue and payment, through the Post Office, of 
money orders between India and such country, the Centrnl Gov-
ernment may make rules to give effect to such arrangements.". 20 
21. After section -17 of the principal Act, the following section shall 
be inserted, namely:-
"47A. If any person, without reasonable excuse, the burden of 
proving which shall ·lie on him, negleets or refuses to pay the valul 
ot the value-payable article delivered to him without recovering the 15 
value Of the article, such amount shall be recoverablt> by an officer 
of the Post Office authorised by the Post Master General in this 
behalf, from the person so neglecting or refusing as if it were an 
arrear C?f land revenue due from him!'. 
28. In section 52 of the principal Act, for the words. "imprisonment go 
for a term which may extend to seven yean", the words "imprisonment 
for life or for a term which may extend to ten years" shall be substituted. 
29. After section 56 of the principal Act, the following section shall 
be inserted, namely:-
57. If any person-
, ii .. ~ I .. 
(0) commits theft in respect of-
(i) a mail bag, or 
(ii) any poft~ ~rticl~ in the CQurse . of transmission by 
post, Of 

• ,..,. 
5 
10 
r-
0 .... ,,;. 
• 
''"!''''"" 
(iii) any movable property out of a poaW article in 
course of transmission by post, or 
(b) stops a mail with intent to rob or search the mail , 
he shall be punishable with imprisonment for life Or for a term 
which may extend to ten years or with fine or with imprisonment 
and fine. 
EzpZ4f&4tion.-For the purposes of this section, the expression 
"mail" includes every conveyance by which postal article are carried, 
whether it be a ship, aircraft; vehicle, horse or any other conveyance 
and a person employed in conveying or delivering postal articles!;' 
30 .. In secUon 58 of the principal Act,-
(4) in lub-section (1), 
" (i) the brackets and figure" (1)>> shall be omitted; 
(ii) for the words.' "with fine which may extend to fifty 
15 rupees for every such letter", the words "with imprisonment for 
a term which may extend to three years or with fine or with 
both'" shall be substituted; 
20 
25 
'" (b) sub·section (2) shall be omitted. 
31. In _ection 59 of the principal Act,-
(4) in sub·section (1), 
(i) the brackets and figure" (1)" shall be omitted; 
(ii) for the words "with fine which may extend to fifty 
rupees for every such letter", the words "with imprisonment 
for a tenn which may extend to three years or with ftne or with 
both" shall be substituted; 
(b) sub-section (2) shall be omitted. 
32. After section 60 of the principal Act, the following section shan 
be inserted, namely:-
"60A. Whoever contravenes any rule made UDder section 
16, sub-section (3), clause (da), leading to leakage of revenue, shall 
be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
three years Or with fine or with both.". 
33. In section 64 of the principal Act, for the words "by this Act", 
the words "by or under this· Act" shall be substituted .. 
35 34. In section 67 of the principal Act, in the proviso, for the words and 
5.f 1198. figures "the Code of Criminal Procedu.re, 1898", the words and figure. 
2 ., 197... "the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973" shall be substituted. 
35. In section 69 of the principal Act, for the word "letter", occur-
ring at both the places, the words "postal article!' shall be SUbstituted. 
40 31. In aection 72 of the principal Act, the figures "58, 89," ,hall be 
omitted. 
Amend. 
meat of 
section 
'8. 
AmeDeL '. 
mot 
of seetioa 
S9. 
Jnsertion 
of new 
section 
MA. 
Penalty for 
contraven-
tion 
of section 
16. 
Amead. 
ment of 
section 
64. 
Amend. 
mentof 
aectiOli 
67. . I 
Amend. 
ment of 
IOCtiOD 
69. 
AmeDd-
mept 01 
eection 
72. 

I1lwtioe 
of new 
sectloD 
7IA. 
Trial of 
....... 
OmiIaioa 
MCtioa 
73.j 
10 
37. In chapter X of the principal Act, after section 72 the following 
section shall be inserted, namely:-
"72A. (1) An offence under this Act may be tried by any court 
within the local limits of whose jurisdiction it was committed or 
the alleged offender is arrested Or it,; in custody or, where the offence 5 
• in respect of a mail, mail bag, postal article, or money order or 
any movable property sent by post, within the local limits Of whose 
jurisdiction themail.mail bag, postal article. money order or mov-
able property passed in the course of transmission by post. 
(2) Abetment of an offence under this Act may be tried by 10 
any court by which the offence abetted may be tried. 
(3) Nothing in this section shall affect the jurl9diction of a court 
competent to try an offence under this Act by virtue of the provisions 
0'-the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.". 
38. Section 73 of the principal Act shall be omitted. 15 
3t. In section 74: of the principal Act,-
(4) in sUMection (3), the words "and, on such publication, shall 
haYe e1!ect u if enacted by this Act" shall be omitted; 
...... , 
(b) after sub-sectlon (3), the following sub-section shall be 
inserted, namely:- 20 
" (4) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon 
as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament. 
while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive 
se.ions, and if, before the expiry of the session fmmediatelv 25 
following the session ot' the successive session!; aforesaid, both 
Houses. a~e in m~king any modification in the rule or both 
Housee agree that the rule should not be made, the rule 
.hall thereafter have effp.ct only ;n such modified fOrnl or be 
of no et!ect, as the case mal' be; !l0. however, that any !llr.b modi- 30 
flcation or annulment shall be without nre;udice to the validity 
of anythln'g previously done under that rule.". 
2 of 1974. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Indian Post Office Act WIUl enacted in 1898. The Law CoDlIllil-
sion has in its Thirty-eiihth Report made a number of recommendatioDi 
for the revision of the Act. Thereafter, the matter was further 
examined in detail Thia Bill seeks to give effect to such of the recom-
mendations made by the Law Commission as have been found acceptable 
and it also seeka to make certain other amendments in the Act for dealing 
with difficulties wlaich have been experienced in the wox-king of the Act. 
2. Section 26 of the Act provides that on the occurrence of any public 
emergency or in the interests of public safety and tranquillity, the 
Central Government or a State Government or any authorised oftlcer 
may, by order in writing, direct that any postal article or class or 
description of postal articles in course of transmission by post shall be 
intercepted or detained or disposed of in such manner as the authority 
issuing the order may direct. There has been a demand that the pro-
visions of this section should be reviewed. The Law Commission has, 
in its Report gone into the matter at great length. It is proposed to 
amend this section so as to clearly bring the provisions thereof within 
the limits permitted by the Constitution. 
3. The following are the other important amendments which the Bill 
~eeks to make in the Act:-
(a) The Bill provides for exemption from the purview of the 
exclusive privilege of the Central Government to convey letters, 
items like strictly personal letters, documents issued by court of 
justice or other authorities entitled to .do so and letters concerning 
goods or property sent by any means without any consideration. 
(b) The Bill seeks to empower the Central Government to search 
and seize packages containing letters posted in violation of the Act 
and the manner in which such power is to be exercised. 
(c) The BUl seeks to empower the Central Government to grant 
rebate in the rates of postage in respect of postal articles on which 
postage is prepaid by means of stamping machines. 
(d) Quite often, the registered newspapers have been found 
misusing the facility of concessional rates of postage to promote their 
commercial activities. To check the abuse of this facility, the Central 
Government intends to curb the transmission of catalogues or price 
lists along with the newspaper and also intends to restrict the 
transmission of Business Reply Cards along with the newspaper only 
for the bona fide subscription ot that newspaper. 
(e) With the increased use of franking machines by the mailers 
for reasons of economy and convenience, instances of tampering of 
these machines leading to leakage ot revenue to the Government 
have come to notice. To check the abuse ot this facility, the Central 
Government seeks to empower itself with the powers for inspection 
and seizure ot such machines suspected to be Uled traudulently lead-
ing to leakage ot Government revenue. 
11 

.. 12 
(f) Under the existing provisions of the Act, Government acceptl 
liability in respect of sums specified for recovery of delivery of value 
. payable articles only when the sum has been received from the 
addressee. The Bill provides for the assumption of liability to pay even 
when such articles are delivered to an addressee without recovering 
the value by mistake. Consequent upon the assumption of this 
liability, . it is proposed to empower the Central Government to collect 
the amount from the addressee as an arrear of land revenue,' if the 
addressee neglects or refuses to pay the same on demand. 
(g) The Bill seeks to make some of the punishments provided 
for in the Act more stringent. 
4. It is nlso proposed to avail' of the present opportunity to include 
in the Act a provision for the laying of rules made under the Act before 
Parliament. 
5. The Notes on clau~3 explain in detail the various proviSions of 
the Bill. 
NEW DELHI; SANTOSH MOHAN DEV. 
. 28th October, 1986. 

N OfJ~B on daUBe, 
Clause 2.-This clause .eeka ~ omit the word 'Indian' from the _-
pression 'Indian POlt Oftice Act, 1898' to bring it into confonnity with 
recent legislative practice. I 
Clause 3 (a) .-Sub-clauses (i) and (iv) seek to define the expressions 
'Director General' and 'Post Master General' in the light of the changed 
let l;iJ in the Department. Sub-clause (iii) seeks to add the word 'letter-
card' in the expression 'postal article' to make it comprehensive. Clause 
(iv) seeks to define the expression 'stamping machine'. 
Clauses 3(a) (ii), 10(a), 11, 17,20 and 26.-These clauses seek to 
omit the references to 'United Kingdom', 'British possessions', 'Her 
Majesty', etc., from the concerned provisions of the Act as they are no 
longer relevant. 
Clause 3 (b) .-This sub-clause seeks to insert a new sub-section for 
construction of references to a law in the Act which is not in force in 
any area to be construed as a reference to the corresponding law, if any, 
in force in that area. 
Clause 4.-Tbis clause seeks to make the definition of the word 
'delivery' more comp.rehensive by bringing the delivery of postal articles 
in letter deposit boxes and post boxes in its ambit. 
Clause 5.-This clause enumerates the types of letters exempted from 
the purview of the exclusive privilege given to the Department for 
('onveyance of letters. Under this clause, conveyance of strictly personal 
letters, documents issued by a Court of Justice or other authorities 
entitled to issue the same and letters concerning goods or property sent 
by air without any consideration also will be exempted from the exclu-
sive privilege of conveyance of postal articles granted to the Department. 
It is proposed to widen the expression 'letters' so as to include "letter-
cards" in it I 
ClauSe 6.-This clause seeks to insert a new section 4A empowering 
the officers mentioned therein to exercise the powers of 'Search and 
seizure in case of contravention of section 4. It also provides the manner 
in which this power is to be exercised. 
Clause 7.-'I'his clause seeks to include the owners or persons incharge 
of· any aircraft on a flight between places in India in the list of persons 
expressly forbidden to convey letters. 
Cl4use 8.-Sub-clause (a) seeks to empower the Central GOvern-
ment make rules· to grant rebate in the rates of postage in respect 
of postal articles on which postage is pre,:,paid and pre-sorted", etc. 
Sttb-clause (-b) seeks to empower the Central Government to 
prescribe' fees for any service as may be specified in relaUon to "any 
postal article. 
I 
.- ' 

t4 
Clause g.-This clause seeks to enumerate the eligibility criteria 
which a registered newspaper should have, to enjoy the concessional 
postage facility. Under this clause, a registered newspaper for the 
purpose of availing concessional postage facility should be published at 
such intervals as the Central Government may by rules prescribe, and 
should have a bema fide list of subscribers and should be otherwise 
eligible for transmi'Ssion by post under this Act. 
Clause 10 (b) .-This sub-clause seeks to insert a new sUb-section in 
section 10, empowering the Central Government to make rules to give 
effect to arrangements in respect of postal articles mentioned therein. 
Clause 12.-This clause seeks to empower the Central Government to 
make rules to regulate the use of stamping machines. 
Clause 13.-This clause seeks to insert a new section 16A empowering 
the officer of the Post Office to enter the premises and inspect and ..;eize 
the stamping machine in ease of its misUse. 
Clause 14.-This clause seeks to insert a new sub-section (4) in 
section 21 sO as to empower the Central Government to issue an order 
indicating the manner of posting and delivery of postal articles in bulk 
and delivery of postal articles in multi-storeyed buildings, etc. 
Clause I5.-This clause deals with the procedure to be observed 
before destroying the articles posted in contravention of the Act. Under 
the clause, before destroying any article :posted in contravention of the 
Act, notices in writing are to be sent to the sender and the addressee 
and the article is to be destroyed only after the expiry of one month 
from the date on which the last of such notices is sent. 
Clause 17;-This clause seeks to amend section 26 of the Act. Under 
this section, the Central Government or a State Government or any 
oilicer specially authorised fo~ this purpose shall have the powers to 
direct that postal articles or class or description of postal articles in 
course of transmission by post shall be intercepted on the occurrence of 
any public emergency or in the interest of the public safety or tran-
quillity. To b,ring section 26 in line with the constitutional provi'Sions, 
it is proposed to provide that on the occurrenCe of any public emergency, 
or in the interest of the public safety, or tranquillity, the Central Gov-
ernment or a State Government, or any officer specially authorised in 
this behalf by the Central Government or a State Government may if 
aatisfied that it is necessary or expedient to do so in the interests of the 
lIovereignty and integrity of India or the security of the State, or friendly 
relations with any foreign State or public order or fo~ preventing in-
citement to the commission of an offence, by order in writing. direct 
that any postal article in the course of transmission by post, shall be 
intercepted or detained or shall be dispo~ed of in such manner as. the 
authority issuing the order may direct. 
Thia clause also seeks to omit sub-section (2) of section 26 so as to 
w:ovide for judicial review of any action taken under this section. 
ClaUBe~ 18 and 34.-These clauses seek to amend sections 27C and 
67 of the Act to replace the references to certain sections of the Code of 
C~iminal Procedure, 1898 by the relevant sections of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 which has since replaced the earlier Code. 

IS 
Clau.'!e 19.-Section 34 of the Act provides that the Government shall 
not accept any liability in respect of the sum specified for recovery 011 
delivery of value payable article until and unless that sum has been 
received from the addressee: This clause provides that the Central 
Government shall assume liability in respec:t of a case where Yalue 
payable article is delivered to an addressee without recovering the Talue 
of the article by mistake. 
Clause 21.-This clause seeks to empower the Central Government to 
frame rules for levying a further charge for returning the postal article 
to the sender and also 'Seeks to substitute the post oftlce as may be 
specified by the Central Government in place of Post Master General'. 
office. 
Clau.'!e 22.-This clause seeks to omit section 38. 
Clause 23.-This clause ~eeks to substitute section 39 and provides for 
the manner of disposal of postal articles and further charges for retum 
or redirection from the post office as specified by the Central Govemmellt 
under section 37 (3) . . 
Clause 24.-This clause seeks to make a general provision with regard 
to tne time and manner of payment of money orders as similar provisions 
relating to registration and insurance already exist. 
C'-ause 25.- This clause seeks to reduce the period for making a claim 
from one year to six months by the' payee or remitter of money lent 
through money orders. . I 
Clause 27.-Consequent upon assuming liability for a value payable 
artic1p after its deliverv to the addressee without recovering the value 
hy mistake, it becomes "necessary to assume power to recover such value 
as an arrear of land revenue, if the addressee neglects or refuses to pay 
the same on demand. 
Clause 28.-Section 52 of the Act deals with the penalty for theft, 
dishQlnest misappropriation. secretion. destruction or throwing away of 
postal articles. Under the section, the pnnishment for such an oft'ence 
10; imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years and shall 
also be punishable with fine. This clause seeks to make the punishment 
more stringent by extending the imprisonment for life or for a term 
which may extend to ten years and shall also be punishable with fine. 
Clause 29.-This clause is self-explanatory. 
Clause 3O.-This clause seeks to make the punishment more stringent 
for offences committed in violation of the exclusive privilege of con-
veyahce conferred on the Government by providing for impri'SODment 
for a term which may extend to three years or with fine or with both. 
Clause 3t.-This clause also seeks to make the punishment more 
severe for offences committed by persons who are expressly forbiddew. 
trom conveying letters under section 5 of this Act. 
Clauae S2.-'l'his clause provides for penalty for breach of afty rule 
made under clause (da) of sub-section (3) at section 18. 

16 
Clause 33.-Section 64 of the Act deals with penalty for making false 
dee1arations. At present, the section requires certain declarationa to be 
made in respect of postal articles. Now it is proposed to bring within 
the ambit of this penal provision declarations which are required to be 
made not only by the Act but also by the rules made under this Act. 
Clause 35.-Section 69 of the Act deals with the penalty for unlaw-
fulJ.y diverting letters. The word 'letter' is being replaced by 'postal 
article' to make the section more comprehensive. 
Clause 36.-This clause seeks to specify the jurisdiction of courts for 
trial of offences committed under the Act. 
Clause 37.-With enhancement of punishment provided in sections 
58 and 59 of the Act, the offences punishable under the aforesaid sections 
would become cognizable.' This claUse, therefore, seeks to omit the 
referenees to sections 58 and 59 from section 72 of the Act. 
Clause 38.-This clause seeks to omit section 73 of the Act which 
empowers the Central Government to make rules relating to manage-
ment of zamindari and other district posts, as this system is not in vogue 
now. 
Clause 39.-Section 74 of the Act empowers the Government to make 
rules for carrying out the purposes and the objects of the Act. The Act, 
however, does not provide for laying of the rules before both Houses of 
Parliament. This clause 'Seeks to provide that rules framed undm- the Act 
will be laid before Parliament. This is in conformity with recent legista. 
tive practice. 

Clause 19 of the Bill propoaes· to amend 'section 34 of the Indian Post 
Office Act, 1898 to provide' for the assumption, by the Central Govern-
ment, of liability in respect 'of sums specified for the recovery of delivery 
of value payable articies even when: such articles are delivered to 
addressees without recovering the value by mistake. It is not possible to 
estimate the expenditure tbat would be involved on this since it depends 
upon the number of such articles delivered from time to time. Further, 
clause 27 proposes to insert new section 47A in the Act to provide that 
though the Government would first make the payment, the same would be 
recovered from the concerned addressee as an arrear of land revenue if the 
addressee n~glects or refuses to pay the same on demand. Hence the 
expenditure from the Conlolidated Fund of India may, in the final 
analysis, be nil. 
2. Apart from the above, no other expenditure. whether recurring or 
non-recurring, is likely to be incurred if the provsisions of the Bill Ilre 
enacted and brought into operation. 
17 

MEMoRANDUM REGARbIltiG bEUGATID LEGISLATION 
Clause 8 of the Bill which seeks to amend section 8 of the Indian 
Post Office Act, 1898 proposes to empower the·Central Government to 
make rules to grant rebate in the rates of postage in respect of postal 
articles on which postage is prepaid by means of stamping machine and 
the manner of pre-payments which are pre-sorted. It also empowers 
the Central Government to specify the manner of posting of such postal 
articles. 
2. Clause 9 of the Bill seeks to amend section 9 (2) of the Act to 
empower the Central Government to make rules for prescribing the 
number of intervals at which any registered .newspaper. should be 
published. 
3. Clause 10 of the Bill proposes to insert a new sub-section (3) in 
section 10 of the Act so as to empower the Central Government to make 
rules to give effect to arrangements which are in force with any foreign 
country for the transmission by post of certain postal articles between 
India and such country. 
4. Clause 12 of the Bill seeks to insert a new clause (da) after clause 
(d), in sub-section (3) of section 16 of the Act to empower the Central 
Government to make rules for regulating the use of stamping machines. 
50. Clause 13 of the Bill proposes to insert a new section 16A to 
empower the Central Government to make rules for inspection and 
seizure of stamping machines used in contravention of the provisions 
of this Act and it further empowers the Central Government to make 
rules providing for the manner of dealing with the stamping machines 
seized under this clause. 
6. Clause 14 of the Bill seeks to amend section 21 of the Act to 
empower the Central Government to make rules to specify-
(a) the number of postal articles which cannot be posted by a 
sender unless the same are pre-sorted and comply with such 
other conditions as may be specified in the rules; 
(b) the number of postal articles, delivery of which may be 
made to an addressee only through a post box. 
This clause further seeks to empower the Central Government 
to direct any' owner or lessee or any addressee located in a multi-
storeyed building or a building with large compound involving a distance 
of one hundred metres or more between the outer gate and the building 
or a building wherein any dog or other dangerous animals are let loose 
to fix deposit boxes for delivery of letters on the ground floor or at the 
gate of such building .. 
7. Clause 16 of the Bill proposes to substitute section 26 by a new 
section which empowers the Ce~tral Government or a State Govern-
ment or any officer specially authorised in this behalf by that Govern-
1~ 

19 
ment to direct that any postal article or class or description of postal 
articles in course of transmission by post be intercepted or detained or 
disposed of in such manner as the authority issuing the order may direct. 
This power will, however, be exercised only where it is necessary or 
expedient so to do in the interests of the public safety or tranquillity, the 
sovereignty and integrity of India, the security of the State, friendly 
relations with foreign States or public order or preventing incitement 
to the commission or any offence or the occurrence of any public 
emergency. 
8. Clause 21 ot the Bill propose. to amend sub-sections (2) and (3) 
of the Act seeks to empower the Central Government to frame rules 
for levying of further charges for disposal of undelivered postal articles. 
It further empowers Central Government to prescribe the office where 
undeliv~red articles are to be sent. 
9. Clause 23 of the Bill which seeks to substitute section 39 of the Act 
by a new section 10 empower the Central GovernmEnt to make rules-
I .. , 
(a) regarding the manner of disposal of undelivered postal 
articles by the post office to be specified under clause (b) of sub-
section (3) of section 37 and to provide for levy of further charges 
for return or redirection of'such undelivered postal articles by such 
post office; 
(b) regarding the manner in which any money found in postal 
articles or sale proceeds of any saleable property found in any postal 
article shall be credited to the post offices. 
10. Clause 26 of the Bill proposes to substitute sub-section (1) of 
section 46 of the Act by a new sub-section to empower -the Central Gov-
ernment to make rules to give effect to the arrangements made in any 
foreign country for the issue and payment (through the post office) of 
money orders between India and such foreign country. 
The- matters with respect to which rules may be made under the 
aforesaid provisions are matt&rs of procedure or detail, The delegation 
of legislative power contained in such provisions, is, therefore, of a 
normal character. 

Short title. 
extent, 
application 
and 
commen. 
cement. 
DefinL 
tions 
." 
ANNEXURE 
(a or 1888) 
• • • • • 
CHAPTER I 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Indian Post Office Act, 1898. 
• • • • • 
2. In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or 
context,-
(a) the expression "Director General" means the Director Gene-
ral of Posts and Telegraphs: . 
• • • • • 
(d) the expression "mail ship" means a ship employed for carry-
ing :nails, pursuant to contract Or continuinC!: arrangement,' by the 
Central Government or Her Majesty's Government or the- Govern. 
ment of any British possession or foreign country; 
• • • • • 
1'1) the expression "postal article" includes a letter, postcarc1, 
newspaper, book, pattern or sample packet, parcel and every article 
or thing transmissible by post;· 
(;) the expression "Post Master General" includes a Deputy 
Post Master Genera] or other officer exercising the powers of a Po'" 
Mashr General; and , 
• • • * • 

21 
•. For the purpoe.- of w.~ ..... , 
,J 
• • • • • 
(c) the delivery of a po.tal article at the house orotftee of the' 
adclreuee, or to the addreaee or his servant oragant cJr other }:Ierson 
considered to be authorized to receive the article accordin, to the 
Ulual manner ot delivering .,ostal articI" to the ad~esaee, shall be 
deemed to be delivery to the addressee. 
CHAPTER II 
PluvILEGE AND PROTECTION OF THE Go~ 
4. (1) Wherever within India posts or postal communications are 
estltblished by the Central Government, the Central Government shall 
have the exclusive privilege of conveying by post, from one place to an. 
other, all letters except in the following cases, and shall also have the 
exclusive privilege of performing all the incidental services of receiving, 
collecting, sending, despatching and 'delivering all letters, except in the 
follOWing cases that is to say:-
• • • • 
(b) letters solely concerning the affairs of the sender or receiver 
thereof, sent by'· a 'nessengelt on purpo~ and • 
(c) letters solely concernin/! I!oods ornronertv sent either by 
sea or by land to be delivered with ,the goods Or property which the 
letters concern, without hire, reward or other profit or advantage for 
receiving, carrying or delivering them: 
Provided that nothing in this section shall authorize ,any person to 
'~~ke a collection of letters excepted as aforesaid fo~ the purpose of send· 
ing them otherwise than by post. 
(2) For the puryoses of this section an<j section 5, "the expression 
"letters" includes postcards. -
5. Wherever wiUlin 'Indi.a posts or, postal communications are estab-
, li.~ed by the Central .Qove!"t'lmept, the "'ol1owirll~' persons aree~ 
. forb'dden to collect, ,c~,.,tendet'o.r df:1iv.er Jet~s. "r. ,to ~et.ve letters 
, ftir the purpose of cai-rying'or 'deiiverinrr them. although ,·.tJ,eyebtain ftO 
hire, reward or other profit or advantage for so doing, that'is to say:-
• • -. • • I 
(b) owners andm.as~et$ of ve~sels sailing or passing on any river 
or canal in India, or' between any ports or places in India, and their 
lerVants or agents, except as regards letters solely concerning gooda 
on board, and except as regards postal artteles received for con-
veyance under Chapter VII . 
.. • • • , . 
.';"'''-' 
of ~ I 
~ 
of ...... 
miIUoa by 
poet" IUd 
"delivery". 
&dullve 
,rMle .. 
of cOn-
v.,..., 
letteR ~ 
aeMld. to 
tho Go. 
vomment. 
CMtaiD 
perIODS 
apr"'y 
'~D 
to ClOIlWY 
letten. 

... at.,. Ie 
make rules 
... ·.to pay_ 
_t of 
JIOIlap 
aild fea 
'w certaia 
...... 
Power to 
lIlake 
rules as 
tore,is-
terPod 
.·118W. 
papers. 
Power to 
declare 
rates of 
foreign 
pOitage. 
22 
•. The Central Govenuneftt "J, byrul-.-
• • • • .. " 
,) 
(4) require the prepayment of postage on inland postal articles 
or any class of inland postal articlea, and prescribe the manner in 
. which prepayment shall be made; 
•• • • • 
(d) prescribe the fees to be charged for the "express delivery" of 
postal articles, in addition to, or instead of, any other postage charge-
able thereon under this Act. :.1 
Explan.anon..-ClExpreas delivery" means delivery by a special mellen-
~er or conveyance. 
9. (1) • • • • • 
(2) For the purpose of such registration, every publication, consisting 
wholly or in great part of political or other news, or of articles relating 
thereto or to other current topics, with or without advertisements, shall 
be deemed a newspaper, subject to the following conditions, namely:-
(a) that it is published in numbers at intervals of not more 
than thlrty-one days; and 
(b) that it has a bona fide list of subscribers . 
• • .. • • 
10. (1) Where arrangements are in force with the United Kingdom, 
or with any British possession or foreign country, for the transmission by 
post of postal articles' between India and the United Kingdom or such 
pn.!:ses!';ion or country, the Central Government may, in conformity with the 
provisions of such arrangements, declare what postage rates and other 
<:'1ms shall be charged in respect of such postal articles, and mav make 
rules aa to the scale of wei Rht, tenns and conditions· subject to whic:h tho 
rates so declared shall be charged . 
• • • • • 
Official 15. The official mark on a postal article denoting that any postage or 
mark to other ~um is due in respect thereof to the Post OfB.ce of India or .to the 
!:::::: ~Ost Offtce of the Uni~ Kingdmn Dr. 'Of any Brttfsh .possession .or· toreign 
f/I ..... p. ~oli~try, man be 1""l'ms frJefie·.mtenee that tlie sum . denoted as afore. 
Pr0visiun .' 
of pos-
tage stamps 
and power 
to make 
nsles as 
..., thtm. 
. ~lifd is so due. 
CHAPTElt IV 
POSTAGZ STUD'S 
16. (1) • • • • • 
(3) ·In particular and without prejudice to the genetality of the fore-
going power, such rules may- I , .• 
• • • • • 

IS 
···'·'·11. (1) • • • • • 
~ I . ': 
•. , .. (2) In particular and without prejudice to the gener8lity. of the 
foregoing power, such rules may- .. f. 
• • • • 
(d) provide for the granting of receipts for, and the granting 
and obtaining of certificates of, posting and delivery of postal 
articles and the sums to be paid, in addition to any other postage, 
for such receipts and certificates; and 
• • , • • • , ! 
23. (1) • • • • • 
<") Notwithstanding anything in sub-section (1)- i 
. * • • • • 
(b) any postal article sent by post in contravention of the pro-
visions of section 20 may be disposed of in such manner as the Central 
Government may by rule direct. 
• • • • • 
26. (1) On the occurrence of any public emergency, or in the interest 
of the pUblic safety or tranquillity, the Central Government, or a State 
Government, or any officer bpecially authorized in this behalf by the 
Central or the State Government, may. by order in writing, direct that 
any postal article or class or description of postal articles i~. course of 
transmission by post shall be intercepted or detained, or shall be disposed 
of in E:uch manner as the authority issuing the order may direct. 
(2) If any doubt arises as to the existence of a public emergeDCJ'. OI! 
as to whether any act done under sub-section (1) was in the intereat of 
the public safety or tranquillity, a certificate of the Central Government 
~; as the case rnB:Y be, of the State Government shall be conclusive 'proof 
on. the point. . ~ 
27. (1) Where a postal article is received by post from any place be-
yond the limits of India-:1 
(a) bearing Q ftctitious postage stamp, that is to say, any facsimile 
or indtation or representation of a postage stamp. or l 
(b) purporting to be prepaid with any postage stamp which·~ 
been previously used to prepay any other postal article, 
the officel' itl charge of the post offi~ at which th~ postal article Is recely. 
ed, shall send a notice to the addressee inviting him to attend, either in 
pe,rson. or by agent, within a specified tim. at the post oftlce to receive 
dt:li~ry of th~ postal article. 
,,' ',', 'I"" I . 
(2) U the addressee or hfa agent attends at the post office within the 
time specified in the notice and consents to make known to the officer in 
charge of the post oface the name and address of the sender of the POltai 
article and to ~d.liver to the oftlcer aforeeaid the portion of the postal 
Power to 
make 
rules as 
to trans-
mission 
by post 
of postal 
articles. 
Power to 
deal with 
postal 
articles 
posted in 
contraven-
tion ot 
Act. 
Power to 
intercept 
po'tai . arti-
cles for 
public 
aoocJ., 
Power to 
deal with 
postal arti-
cle, from 
abroad 
bearill, 
fictitious or 
previously 
uiCd 
stamp'. 

Procedure 
for diL 
posal by 
Hip Cl)Urt 
of ' applic:.-
tioDl 'for 
reteuo of 
De.., .... 
8Dd .rti-el. _ 
.r.ta1aed. 
Tr.DIlDiI. 
aiOll by 
post of 
v.lue-pay-
able, podal 
artiiIM. 
Power .., 
liv,dect 
to arra .... 
meDia widl 
other 
c:ouatdeI. 
" -• ,·f 
article" which baal'll the addre.- and the ftetitioUi or previoUlly 1II8CI 
postage stamp, or, if the postal article is inseparable from the stamp, t1w 
entire ~ article, -the postal article shaD be delivered to the add~ 
or his agent. 
,'. "*' ,.- -" 
(3) If the addressee or his agent fails to attend at the post oftlce within 
the time specified in the notice, or, having attended within that time, 
retuses to make known the name and address of the sender or to re-
deliver the postal article or portion thereof as required by sub-section (2), 
the postal article shall not be delivered to him, but shall be disposed of 
in such manner as the Central Governmept may direct. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section, the expression "postage 
stamp" includes any postage stamp for denoting any rate or duty of post. 
age of any part of India or of His Majesty's dominions or foreign country 
and the impression of any stampin~ machine p~ovided or a~thorized for 
the like purpose by or under the authority of \he Government of such 
part or country. 
• .. • • • 
27C. Every application made under the second proviso to sub-section 
(3) of section 27B shall be heard and determined in the manner provided 
by sections 99D to 99F of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, by a 
Special Bench of the High Court constituted in the manner provided by 
'~ction g9C of that Code. • ' 
• • • .. • 
,~. The Central Government may, by notiAcation in the oaeW 
Gazette, direct that, subject to the other provisions of this Act and to tee 
payment of fees at such rates as may be fixed by the notification, a sum 
of money specified in writing at the time f)f posting by the sender of • 
postal article shall be recoverable on the delivery thereof from the 
addressee, and that the sum, so recoyered, shall be paid to the sender: 
Provided that the Central', Government .hall not incur any liability 
in respect of the sum spedfted for recovery, unless and untU that sum hu 
"'0" tieceivedfrom the adclressee. 
,. • • • 
,II. (1) Where artmgemerrts made ~th the Un1~ Kingdom, or with 
any British possesSion, or foreign country min foree, for the trlllllMiuloo 
by post of registered, insured. or value-payable postal artielee ~een 
tp'dfi.I,'nd the United Kingdom or' s,uch possession or country, the CeDtNl 
CoVe~e~t may make rules to live eftect to such&r~anaemen •. 
. -,~ .' . . 
, of llH. 

37. (1) • 
CHAPTER VII 
UNDELIVERED POSTAL ARnCLES 
• • • • 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such rules may- ,;. " '" 
• • • • • 
(3) Every undelivered postal article, after being detained 'it a post 
office for the period prescribed by rule under the foregoing provisions of 
this section, shall be either forwarded, free of further charge, to the post 
office at which it was posted, for return to the sender, or sent to the office 
of the Post Master General. 
38. (1) Every postal article received at the office of the Post Master 
General under sub-section (3) of section 37 shall be dealt with as 
follows:-
. (a) if practicable, it shall be redirected and forwarded by post to 
the addressee; or, 
(b) if it cannot be redirected and forwarded as aforesaid, it shall 
be opened by some officer, appointed by the Post Master General in 
this behalf and bound to secrecy, in order to ascertain the name and 
address of the sender. 
(2) If the name and address of the sender are so ascertained, it shall 
be returned by post to the sender, free of further charge or subject to 
such further charge as the Central Government may by rule, direct. 
39. Undelivered postal articles which cannot be disposed of under the 
foregoing provisions, shall be detained in the office of the Post Master 
General for such further period (if any), and shall be dealt with in such 
-anner, as the Central Government may, by rule, direct: 
Provided that-
(a) letters and postcards shall be destroyed; 
(b) money or saleable property, not being of a perishable nature, 
found in any undelivered postal article, shall be detained for a period 
of one year in the oftlce of the Post Master General, and, if on the 
expiration of that period no person has establislied his right thereto, 
shall, if money, be credited to the Post Office, and, if saleable pro-
perty, be sold, the sale-proceeds being credited to the Post Office . 
• • • • • 44. (1) • • • • • 
(2) If neither the payee nor the remitter of a money order can be 
found, and if within the period of one yea.r from the date of the issue of 
the order no claim is made by such payee or remitter, the amount of such 
order shall not be claimable from the Government. 
• • • • • 
Power to 
make rules 
as to dis-
posalof 
undeliver-
edpostal 
articles. 
Disposal 
of undeli-
vered 
postal 
articles at 
office of 
Post M~ 
ter Gene-
ral. 
Final dis. 
posal of 
undeliver-
ed postal 
articles. 
Power for 
remitter 
to recall 
money 
order or 
alter 
name 
of payee • 

Power to 
give effect 
to arrange.. 
ments 
with other 
countries. 
Penalty 
for theft. 
dishonest, 
misappro-
priation. 
secretion. 
destruction, 
or throw_ 
ing away. 
of postal 
articles. 
Penalty 
for con-
travention 
of lee:. 
tion 4. 
Penalty 
for con-
travention 
of sec. 
tion S. 
penalty 
for mak_ 
ing false 
declara-
tion. 
46. (1) Where arrangements made with the United Kingdom, or with 
any British possession, or foreign country are in force, for the issue and 
payment through the Post Office of money orders between India and the 
United Kingdom or such possession, or country, the Central Government 
may make rules t:> give effect to such arrangements. 
• • • .. • 
5%. Whoever, being an officer of the Post Office, commits theft in res-
pect of, or dishonestly misappropriates, or, for any purpose whatsoever, 
secretes, destroys or throws away, any postal article in course of transmis-
sion by post or anything contained therein, shall be ounisha ble wi th 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also 
be punishable w!tk fine. 
• • • • • 
Other Offences 
58. (1) Whoever-
(a) conveys otherwise than by post, a letter within the exclusive 
privilege conferred on the Central Government by section 4, or 
(b) performs any service incidental to conveying, otherwise than 
by post, any letter within the exclusive privilege aforesaid. or 
(c) sends, or tenders or delivers in order to be sent, otherwise 
than by post, a letter within the exclusive privilege aforesaid, or 
(d) makes a collection of letters excepted from the exclUSive 
privilege aforesaid for the purpose of sending them otherwise than 
by post, 
shall be punishable with fine which may extend to fifty rupees for r:-vcry 
such letter. 
(2) Whoever, having already been convicted of an offence under this 
section, is again convicted thereunder, shall, on every such subsequent 
'onviction, be punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred 
rupees. 
59. (1) Whoever. in contravention of the provisions of section 5, carries. 
receives, tenders or delivers letters, or collects letters, shall be "urushable 
with flne which may extend to fifty rupees for every such letter. 
(2) Whoever, having already been convicted of an oft'enc~ under this 
section, is again convicted thereunder, shall, on every such subsequent 
conviction, be punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred 
rupees. 
• • • • 
04. Whoever, being required by this Act to make a declaration in res-
pect of any postal article to' be sent oy post or the contents or value 
thereof, makes in his declaration arty statement' which he ktlows, or has 
reason to believe, to be false, or dOes not believe to be true, shall be 
punishable with fine which may extend to two hundred rupees, and, if 

Penalty 
for de-
taining 
mailg 
or open_ 
ing mail 
bag. 
Penalty 
for un-
lawfully 
. ..J diverting 
letters. 
Authority 
for prose-
cutions 
under 
certain 
sections of 
Act. 
Zamindari 
and other 
district 
posts. 
General 
'power to 
make rules 
and provi.. 
sio.s as 
".,~ rules 
under 
Act 
27 
the false declaration is made for the purpose of defrauding the Govern-
ment, with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees . 
• • • • • 
61. Whoever, except under the authority of this Act or of any other 
Act for the time being in force or in obedience to the order in writing 
f)f the Central Government or the direction of a competent Court, 
detains the mails or any postal article in course of transmission by post. 
or on any pretence opens a mail bag in course of transmission by post. 
shall be punishable with fine which may extend to two hundred rupees: 
Provided that nothing in this section shall prevent the detention of 
an officer of the Post Office carrying the mails or any postal article in 
course of transmission by post. on a charge of having committed an 
'ffence declared to be cognizable by the Code of Criminal Procedure, 
~ 398, or any other law for the time being in force. 
• • • • • 
69. Whoever, not being an officer of the Post Office, wilfully and mali-
ciously, with intent to injure any person, either opens or causes to be 
opened any letter which ought to have been delivered, or does ~ny act 
whereby the due delivery of a letter to any person is prevented or imped-
ed, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend 
to six months, or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or 
with both: 
Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to a Derson who does 
any act to which the section applies, if he is a parent, or .in the position of 
a parent or guardian, of tbe addressee, and the addressee is a m~nor or 
a ward. 
.. • • • • 
72. No Court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable undeI-
any of the provisions of sections 51, 53, 54, clauses (a) and (b), 55, 
56, 58. fi9, 61, 64. 65, 66 and 67 of this Act, unless upon complaint made 
hy oraeT' of, or under authority from, the Director General or a Post 
!\faster General. 
CHAPTER XI 
73. (1) The Central Governmertt may make rules for the management 
of any zamindari or other district post. 
(2) In particular and without preudice to the generality of the fore-
going power, such rules may declare what portions of this Act shall be 
applicable to zamindari and other d~strict posts and to the persons em-
ployed in connection therewith. 
74. (1) • • • • • 
(3) All rules made by the Central Government under this Act shall 
be published in the Official Gazette and, on such publication, shall have 
effect as if enacted by this Act. 
• • • • • 
5 of 1898 . 

LOK SABHA 
:, .... 
, .. A 
BILL 
further to amend the Indian Post Office Act, 1898. 
'. . 
(Shri Stmtosh Moh4n Dev, 
Minister oj State for Communicationl.) 

No.1-3/92-PO 
Government of India 
Ministry of Communications & Information Technology 
Department of Posts 
(P.O. Division) 
Subject: Statement of Reasons for withdrawal of Indian Post Office 
(Amendment) Bill, 1986. 
The extant Indian Post Office Act was enacted in 1898 and there have 
been only minor amendments to it thereafter. Obviously, therefore, some of the 
provisions of the Act are anachronistic and no longer relevant. Therefore, 
amendment of the Act of 1898 was envisaged in 1986 with the introduction of 
the Indian Post Office (Amendment) Bill, 1986. The Bill was passed by the Lok 
Sabha and thereafter sent to the Rajya Sabha and there it remained pending 
since 1986. 
2. During the last 16 years very many changes have taken place and the 
impact of globalisation and revolutionary development in Information 
Technology have brought about basic and major changes in the communication 
market. These changes have transformed the perception and the expectation 
of the public as the consumer of the services and products. Consequently, 
market forces have generated competition among different players leading to 
improvement in quality of services and emergence of more consumer-friendly 
features. In the market driven economy, the traditional services provided by the 
Department of Posts have been losing their usefulness and the need has been 
felt for more relevant, useful services and products which meet the 
requirements of the customers. This essential reform of the postal sector has to 
be conceived and achieved within the basic legal framework provided by the 
relevant Indian Post Office Act, 1898 and it is in this context that Amendment of 
Indian Post Office Act, 1898 have become an essential and urgent need. 
1 

3. The Post Office is now required to fulfil the following objectives:-
(a) fulfil its universal service obligation of meeting the common man's 
needs in communication market at an affordable price· as part of a 
larger international postal, community. 
(b) Achieve financial self-sufficiency with a timeframe reducing its 
dependence on budgetary support. 
(c) make available the benefits of electronic media communication to 
larger segments of customers in the country. 
4. The Postal Sector from its inception has been an open sector with 
only the privilege to carry letter mail being reserved for the government. 
Emergence of private entrepreneurs commonly known as "couriers" have 
resulted in service being offered at widely varying prices with no 
accountability and no standard of efficiency. Obviously, there is a genl 
need for regulating the activities of the participants in the postal se' 
now to safeguard consumer interests in consonance with internatiorlal 
practice. Countries like Spain, Malaysia, Singapore, Canada, Philippines 
etc. have enacted laws to regulate the courier operations. However, 
Indian Post Office (Amendment) Bill 2002 only seeks to provide for 
registration of courier so that these players in the postal sector acquire a 
legal entity, abide by a common code of conduct and become 
accountable to their customers in terms of efficiency of service. 
5. The Department of Posts has recently taken initiatives to introduce 
new services with a view to improving its finances and also to meet the 
new and growing demands of various customer segments as a result of 
liberalization and globalization of economy. The Department is, therefore, 
called upon to re-design and re-position its traditional services and 
products in competition with other service providers so as to maintain its 
2 

niche in the new economic scenario. Therefore, a provision has to be 
made in the Act for their inclusion by suitable amendment hitherto not 
envisaged in the drafting of the Indian Post Office (Amendment) Bill 1986. 
6. It is also proposed to enable the Department to introduce e-
enabled services to make available the benefits of electronic media of 
communication, keeping in view the recommendations No.106 made by 
the Prime Minister's Task Force on Information Technology & Software 
Development. This will also be an important step towards bridging the 
digital divide in the country. 
7. It is also proposed to effect important changes in the structure of 
the organization by according a formal legal status under the Act to the 
Postal Services Board, entrusted with the responsibility of 
operationalizing the various provisions of the Act and live upto the 
expectations of the customers. This is also an aspect which was not 
envisaged in the draft Indian Post Office (Amendment) Bill, 1986. 
8. Thus, the amendments now proposed are provisional for:-
(a) Registration of courier services. 
(b) Introduction of new services for improvement of finances. 
(c) Weeding out anachronistic and irrelevant provisions. 
(d) Induction of technology for e-enabled services for wider 
extension of benefits of electronic media communication. 
(e) Provide legal basis for Postal Services Board to give effect 
to the provisions of the Act. 
3 

.. 
All this represent substantial departure from the amendments which were 
proposed in the draft Indian Post Office (Amendment) Bill, 1986. 
9. In view of the foregoing, it is proposed to withdraw the Indian Post 
Office Act (Amendment) Bill 1986 pending in the Rajya Sabha to pave the 
way for introduction of Indian Post Office (Amendment) Bill 2002. 
4 