COl., ~(a!~IJ1J. .. 
to 
1'll.E £o'iEh C~J~T Sal P P .1 NG (~"lliJ~D l'lENT) BILL, 1 983' 
(1'0 be/J .. s introduced in Lok Sabha) 
• 1. Page 5, line 30,-
for "voyage" r8ad - "v oJ age s" 
2. Page 10, line 11,-
for "officer1! read "officers II 
NE'W UELPI; 
November 21 1 (8 Kartika 30, 1S' Saka) 

As INTRODUC~,IN to~~;~,~~!Rl' . . ' 
• • 
_ No: It~ ot',.tt13 
THE MERCRANT SRIPPING (AMEN-DMEN'h ,BiLL, t:gea' 
A 
BILL 
further to amend th~ Merchant Shipping Act, 1958. 
BE it enacted. Jiy Parliament in· tht! Thirty-fourth Year' of' the Republic 
of India as follows:-
J. (1) This Act may be called the Merchant Shipping (Amendment) 
A('t, 1983., ' 
.) (2) It shall come into force on such date as 'the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
fhort 
title ana' 
cof\1DlCnee-
menl . 
44 011808. ~; In' ~ection 3 of the M'e'rchanf ShipPirig Ad, 1958 (henrina~ refer- ADlend-
red: to as the principal Act), after clauSe (11), the" folloWing: "'ause shall ment of 
be itiserted, rilriii!ly: -=.' section 3. 
10 (1IA) ~'famiby" means,-
(i) in the ease' of male; his wife, his' children, • whether 
married or urm1arried~ hia' de'pe'iideb:t pil'e'ritl 1 Iftd' his; deCeased 
IOn'. widow and children: 

Amend-
ment of 
aect10n 24. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
101. 
Substitu-
tion 01. 
new 
sectIon 
for sec-
tion 102. 
Engage-
ment of 
seaman 
where 
agree-
ment is 
made 
out of 
Indla •. 
2 
Provicle4i that if , pe1'lOn proves that his wife has ceased 
'under the personal law .r>veming him or ,the customary law of 
the community to which the spouses belong, to be entitled to 
maintenance she shall no longer be deemed to be a part of 
such person's family for the purpose of this Act, unless sqch 5 
person subsequently intimates by express notice, in writing to 
the Central Government that she shall continue. to be s() 
regarded: and 
(ii) in the case of female, her husband, her children, whether 
married or unmarried, her dependent parents, her hus1;>and's 10 
dependent parents and her deceased son's widow and children: . . . 
Provided that if a person by notice in writing to the Central 
Government expresses her desire to exclude her husband from 
the family, the husband and his dependent parents shah no 
longer be deemed to be a part of such person's family for the 15. 
purpose of this Act, unless such person subsequently cancels ift 
writing any such notice. 
E.l'planation.-In either of the above two cases, if the child, or, 
as the case may be, the child of a deceased son, of a person has 
heen adopted by another persOn and if under the personal law of 20 
the adopter adoption is legally recognised such a child shall be 
consider~ as excluded from the family of the first mentioned 
person. 
3. In section 24 of the principal Act, the following proviso' shall be 
inserted at the end, namely: - 25 
''.Provided that subject io ~uch order as the Central Government· 
~. i$sue in. thJs behalf, when the office of regis~ of Indian ships 
at any port is vacant or the holder of such office is on leave or Is not 
available, for any reason, .at the port to exercise and discharge the 
powers, duties a."ld functions of the office, the seniormost surveyor 30 
at that port may act as, and exercise and discharge the pOwers, duties 
and functions of, the registrar of Indian ships at that port.". 
4. In sub-section (1) of section 101 of the principal Act, for the words 
"signed by the maSter", the words "signed by the owner or agent and the 
master" shall be substituted.' . 35 
5. For section 102 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
• substituted, namely:-
"102. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other provision 
of this Act, the master of a ship registered at a port outside In4ia 
who has an agreement with the crew made in due form accordin,' 40 
to the law of that port or of the port in which her crew were en-
gaged, may engage in any port in India- . 
(a) a seaman who is not a citizen of India and who holds a 
... c~mtinuous . discbarge certificate or any other similar document 

MINISTRY OF SBIPFING AND TRANSPORT 
THE HERCHjj,NT SHIPPING(AMENDHENT) BILL, 19R3. 
--.--.~-- -"-,,,--'-
Cl1.USA 15 of the Bi.ll seeks to insert r.t ne'YT 'section 177A 
in the principnl Act whi-ch 9r::J.powcrs the Ccntrr..l Government' to 
make ruler- for th-e purposes of preventing occupational accidents 
to seafarers and to give ef"ect to the nrovisions of Inte·rnatio-
nal Labour Organls at ton Convent ion No .134 •. The purposes, .1.11t.e..r 
al~, are as under :-
(a) The nianne r in Which any equipment or g9sr may pe 
mai.ntained, inspected or teBte.cl and cond·itlon foI' 
:3u.ch ma.in~ena.nce, inspection and testing;.. .:, 
(b) The manner in wliicr, the uSe of.' e.ny material or 
pr()ces~ Shall be reptl1ate~ f'or the manl.lfact·ure 
of arlY such eoui.pment or gear; 
(c) ~e provi~1on of sa.fa '!1C3.nS of.' acce~~ to such 
-c"~ipma~t or gear f'OT tha use of sea~en and 
nrr.,,'i ,. ton o-t:' urotect lvc clothing for seamen Where 
n,~cb~ f' ary; 
(ci) Be!."tr;.cti onE! orr the hours of empioY'll19nt of seamen 
in any sps('ificd operation or under. any s~ecif'ied 
circ'.tmstance~; and 
.( e) The manner and 4"or'l'l in which and the perr-on to 
whom any accident occurring on board a Ship r 
~hal+ be repo~~d. 
2. Clause 19 of the Bill seeks to include an express 
provision in section a6S of the principal Act relating to 
the power of tha C01Jrt under that sectton to ordel', subject 
t'J a:'1Y rules made by ·the Cent ral Government 1n this beha.lf, • 
p.ayrnent of rea~:onable ex;..en~es of a wltnes.sattending an 
1mtesti.gation or incmiry. Such a power is even noW avaUable 
under the section to tl':le COtlrt, as it i5 a power exer~lsable 
'ty it under section 312 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 
1n the exercise of its criminal .iur~sdiction. Fowever', 
'WherrJaS the pC't1er under the Code 'of 9rim1nal Proced'.lre, 19'13 
is subject to 'any rul~~ made .by the State C~vernment, the 
power under thO propose1 amendment will be subject to rules 
ma.de! by the Cent ral Government. 
Contd ••• 2/-

-: 2 :-
3. Clause 21 of the Btll seeks to insert a new section 
434A in the pr.incipal Act·, to empower th~. Central .Government 
to frame a scheme fo!' providin~ for the insurance of all 
persons employed as members of the crew on sailing vessels 
against death or per~onal injury caused by accident 
arising in the course of their e~ployment as such members, 
4. The deleg2tion of leg1slr.ltive power under the-
aforementioned provisions relate to matters .of procedure 
or adr.linistrative detail. Hence, the delet~ation of 
legj slati'v·epower is normal in character, . 
.• 
Ne\-; Delhi 
.. '"'. ... ,...: '.~ • i·",.:'~ ' • .' 1 ~ ,.. -:' 
the 30th November, 19R3", 
, , 
Sd/-
( Z. R. ~~SARI ) 
MPTI[ T"SR oW' STATE IN rr:HE 
MINISTRY OF SHIPPING At~D TRANSPORT 

3 
of identity issued by the competent authority of the country in 
. which. the ship is registered or, as the case may be, of the country 
In whIch the sai,d agreement was made; or 
s 
(b) a seaman who is a citizen ·of India and who holds a 
~ertificate of discharge or a continuous certificate of discharge 
Issued under this Act , 
and any seaman so engaged under clause (a) or claUse (b) may sign 
thE; agreement aforesaid and it shal! not be necessary for him to sign 
an agreement under this Act". 
In 6. In the principal A'ct, section 105 shall be re-numbered as sub-section 
(1) thereof and 'after ~ub-section (1) as so re-nu.mber~ the following 
sub-section' shall be inserted, namely:-
I, (2) A copy of the statement referred to in sub-section (1) shall 
also be sent to the se'amen's employment ()ftice concerned.". 
Amend-
mento! 
section 
105. 
7. In section 108 of the principal Act, for the portion beginning with Amend_ 
the words "unless proved to have been made" an!i ending With the words ment of aectfon "if made out of India.", the following shall be substituted,· namely:-:- 108. 
"unless proved to have been made with the cOnsent of all the persons 
20 interested in' the erasure, interlineation or alteration by the written 
30 
35 
attestation,':"- . 
(a) if in India, of some shipping master or customs ~ol1ec­
tor; or 
(b) if outside India, by an Indian consular officer or at any 
port outside India at which no Indian consular officer is avail-
able, any such person as is authorised in this behalf by the 
Central Government by notification in the Official Gazette.". 
8. After section 130 of the principal Act, the' following section shall Insertion 
I?e inserted, namely: _ of new sect10n 
II 130A. Subject to the pro~isions of section 160 and to. such 
restrictions and conditions as may be prescribed, any amo~t 
deposited with or recovered by the shipping. master for makmg 
payment in accordan·ce with the- allotment note made by a seaman or 
for being paid to a seaman or his nominee may, if such amount re-
mains unclaimed with the shipping, master for a period of not les!; 
than six years, be utili~ for the welfare of seamen in such manner 
as the Central· Government may direct.". 
130A. 
Certain un· 
disbursed 
amounts 
to be uti-
lised for 
wellareaf 
seamen. 
9. In sechon 132 of the principal Act, in cl~use (a) of sub-section (1),: Amend-
for the Words "three hundred rupees", the words "three thousand rupees ment 'of . . ' 8~OD 
40 shall be substituted. 132. .' 
10. In section 137 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the 
words "one month from the date of the agreement", the words "one 
month from the date on which .the seaman'$ right to wages begins" shall 
b~ substitl.lted, 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
137. 

Amend-
ment of 
section 
141. 
Amend_ 
ment of 
section 
159. 
1 n8.!!,~Lio.n 
Of neW 
section 
J59A. 
Nomina-
tion. 
Amepd-
merit' of 
se~i"D ". :d\i,: 
160. 
Insertion 
ot new 
section 
l77lt· • 
P01llft!f to 
make 
rules to 
prevent 
~id~nts, 
cle, 
4 
J-J. In .-ct,i.oD '1.* QI. tb.e prit\C:ip~ Act, in 8ul).MctJ.on (3), for the, 
W~ ~~o his ~ ~e~s".tlle wpr,dJ "to the ~D .n~ted by him 
in this behalf under .~ti.on l,~ or if he ha~ pot ,mg any sueh nomi-
m~tj~.q or thenominat~on made by him is or has become void, to his legal 
helri' shall be substituted. S . . .'... 
12. .In section 159 of the principal Act,-
~ a~ in tbeopeni,ng portio~ for tJ;a,e wOr.QJ "s~ su~ loS be thinks 
proper to allow, may- 0', the wor.cl~, fl8y.rea ~ le~ ... sums as 
he think~ proper to alloW, sh,~!r pay and deliver the residue to the 
pers,on n~~.r¥lted by the sea~an or apprentice in this ~ha1f under 
section -159A arid if he has not made any such nomination or the 
nomination made by him is or has become void, the shipping master 
xnay-:-:-'; shJij tw ~~~; 
10, 
(b) in clause ('b), after the words and igures "the Indian 
• I • ,3D ot 1925 SuccesslOn Act, 1925", the words and figures 'or a certificate under t S • 
s~Uon 29 of ~.~ ~dmi~str.~~rs-General Act, 1~" shall be in~rted. 45 of J903. 
13. After section 159 of the principal Act, the following secUon shall 
be j~serted, namely: - ' 
"159A. (1) A. seaman may, for the purposes of sub·section (3) 
of section 141 and c1au~e (b)' of 'Section )59 and 'an apprentice may, 20 
for the purposes of clause (b) of section 159, nomina~e. any person 
• or persons: 
Prpvided that if the seaman or the apprentice has a family, he 
may nominate for the purpoMS atoras,aiJi ~y one or ltlore members of 
his family only and if a seaman or an apprentice f,CquiQit;s a family 2S 
after he has made any such nomination, the no~ina,tionshall become 
~d ) 
(2) The form in which any nomination may be made under sub-
~tion P), t~ C~ft'l1f~~ or v~ation of any s~ nQlniaation 
(induding the ~aking of Ii fresh nomination) aDfi a~l other mat~rs; 30 
connected with such nominations shall be such !is may be prescribed.". 
I~, In se~tion 160 of the princiPJll Act, in sub-section (2), after the 
p~p)Fbo. th~ fQ49\V,ing prov!soshall be inserted, nameiy:'- . 
"Provided further thet if, before the expiration of six years after 
the proctleda of 4De sale have belln 10 paid, no cl~m is made Uu!reto 3S 
th~ amount or my part thereof m4lY be utiliaed for the wttlfare of 
seamen in such \ ManDer as the Central Government may direCt.". 
ti. After section 177 o~ the principal Act, the following section shall 
be inserted, namely:--
"I,77Jl;..(l) T~ C~~t~a1 G.over~ment may, having regard to the 40 
proviSlons of the . Convention concerning the Prevention of Occu-
pational Accidents, to Seafarers adopted by the 'General Conference 
of the International Labour Organisation on the 30th day Qf October, 
1979, make rules 80 as to ensure sare working conditions for Indian 
ships and for preventing accident, and different rules may be made 
for dUferent classes of ships and fQr ships of the saine class in dif-
ferent circumstances, , ' , 

• 
ao of 1978. 
-, 
5 
10 
15 
5 
(2) In particular and withoYt ·peejucliae te the generality of the' 
foregoing powers, such rules may provide for aU Qt' HY' Of ,the fo17 
lowing matters, namely:-
(a) the. manner in which any equipment or gear may be 
maintained, inspeeted or tAtIteci aad .QOIIIiltioQs ai to such 
mai~tenance, inspection aad testing; 
(b) the manner in whieh the use of any material or process 
shall be regulated for the manl1faetwl'e of any sueh equipment 
or gear;· 
(c) the provision of safe means' of acC'e1is to SUCR equij>.~ent 
or gear for. the us.e of seam~n and provision of protective cloth. 
ing. fOJ" seamen where' ~epary; 
(d) r~strjcti~m on the houf.f of elllP1Qy-ment of se.arn~ in 
any specified operation or under any specified circumstaJlces: 
and . 
(e) the manner and form in wbkh and the persol1$ to whom 
any acddent occurring on board a ship shall be repol ted:'. 
18. In sec\~on 19' of the princiwal Act, in dallSe Cd), for the words 
, "~fticer of the ship", the words "o~cer of, or a seamim or ap apprentice 
20 belong!ng to, the ship" shall be substituted, 
1'7. To section 204 of the principal" Act, the fol1owing proviso s~a]J 
be added, namely:-
"Provided that the provisions of this section shall not extend 
to the case..in 'which the hafobour or secreting is by the spouse of 
t~e seaman' or ap~rentice.", 
18. In section 299A of the principal Act. in SUb-section (1) ,-
(a) in the opening J?Ortion, the words "of five hundred tons 
gross or more" shall'be omitted; 
(b) in clause (a) ,for the words "if the ship performs interna-
tional voyage", the words "if the ship 'is of five hundred tons gross 
or more ·and performs international voyages" shall be substituted. 
19, 'In the principal Act, section 365 shall be re·numbered as sub-
seqtiOJl (1) thereof and aftel' sub-section (1) as so re·numbered, the 
fonowin, sulHection s.han· be insert.q, namely::,"""" 
35 "(2) Subj~t to any r\.llas made in this behalf by the Central 
GoverQment. the court making an investigation or il)quiry' under 
this Part may, if it thinks fit, order the payment, on the part of 
that Government. ~f the re"asonable expenses of any witnes~ attend-
ing for the purposes of !'luch investigation or inquiry before such 
... court.". 
ZO, In section 40Z of the principal Act, in lub~ction (l),-
(a) after the words "Indian Navy", the words "or of the Coast 
• Guard" 'shall be inserted; 
t''' (b) the following Explanation shall be inserted at the end, 
45 namely:'-': 
'Explanatfon.-"Coast Guard" means·the Coa..t -Guard con-
stituted vnder section 3 of the Coast Guard Act, 1978.', 
Amend. 
ment of 
section 
194. 
Amend. 
ment of 
sedion 
204. 
Amend-
me»t of 
section 
299A, 
Amend_ 
ment of 
section 
365, 
Amend. 
ment ot 
section 
402, 

Inllertion 
)t new 
sections 
434A and 
l3fB. 
[nsurance 
.f mem-
ben of 
:rew of a 
lallit1l' 
vessel. 
6 
21. Af~r section 434 of the principal Act, the fonowing sections shall 
be inserted, nem~ly: - • 
"434A. (1) Subject to the otberprovWons of this section and 
the scheme framed under sub-~ction (3), the owner of ~ery sailing 
vessel shall take and keep in force, in accordance with the provisions 5 
of the said scheme, a policy of insurance' ~hereby all the members 
. of the crew of such vessel are insured against death or personal 
injury caused by accident in the course of employment as such 
members. 
(2) It shall be the respollsibility of the owner of every sailing 10 
vessel to bear the expenses incidental to the taking of the policy of 
insuran~ referred to in sub-section (1) aRd to pay the premiums 
for keeping it in force: 
Provid~ that the maximum amount which the owner of the. 
sailing vessel shall be liable 'to pay by wav of premium'S per year 15 .. 
shall not exceed-
(a) where the number of members of the crew is not more 
than ten, one hundr~ and fifty rupees; 
(b) where the number of members of the crew is ,moret1'\an 
ten, a sum calculated at the rate of fifteen rupees for each 20 
member of the crew. 
(3) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, 'frame a scheme providing fOr the insur;mce of all persons 
employed as members of the crew of 'Sailing vessel, against death 
or personal injury caused by accident arising in the course of their 25 
employment as such membe;rs. 
(4) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of 
sub-section' (3), a scheme framed urider that Aub-section may pro-
vide for-
(e) the amount ·which should be payable in the case of .. 
personal injury resulting in the death of a member of the crew 
of a sailing vessel due to accident and in the case of other in-
juries: 
Provided that different amounts may be provided in respect 
of different personal injuries not resulting in death:. 35 
(b) the procedure for pa~mp.nt of such amounts; and 
(c) all other matters necessary for giving effect to the 
scheme. ,. 
(5) Where, under the provisions of 'any other law for th~ time 
being in force, compensation is payable in respect of death or ... 
personal injury sustained by a member of the crew' of a sailing 
vessel as a result of an ,ccident in the course of his ·employment as 
such member, then if the amount payab!e in respect of such death 
or personal injury in accordance with the scheme framed Under this 
section- . tI 
, (a) j'i; equal to, Or more than, the compensation payable 
under such other law, no compen~ation' shall be payable under 
such other law; 

5 
10 
15 
(b) is less than the compensation pay'able under such other 
law, the compensation payable under such other law shall be 
reduced by the said amount. /-
(6f Every scheme framed by the Central Government under 
this section shall be laid, as ·'SOon as may be after it is made, before 
each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a' total period of 
thirty day.s which may be comprised in one session or in two or 
more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of .the . session 
immediately following the session or the $uccessive sessio~ afore-
said, both Houses agree that the scheme should not be made, the 
'scheme shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or 
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modi-
fication or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of 
anything previously done under that scheme. . 
434B. (1) No sailing vessel shall ply or proceed to sea 'Unless 
there is in force in respect of the members of the crew of the vessel 
a policy of insurance complying with the requirements of section 
434A and the scheme framed thereunder. 
(2) No customs collector shall grant a port clearance to Ii sailing 
!l0 'vessel until after production by the owner of such a policy of 
insurance. " . 
22. In section 436 of the principal Act, in the Table, t.he existing 
serial Qumber 137 shall be re-numbered as serial number 136A, and after 
serial number 136A as so re-numbered, the following serial number and 
. 25 the entries relating thereto shall be inserted, namely:-
-------- ---------- - -------
. I 
----- -._---------"- --------.-~-.--------
If the owner faib to comply 434A(I} 
with ,ub-gection (I) or 'e"lion 
434A 
-_ .. _--- ----
Imprisonment which 
may extend 10 six 
months or fi ne 
which may ('xtend to 
fi ve thou.-and rupees, 
. 0 r both,". 
Polley of 
insurance. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
436 . 

STA'nMilfr OF 09JE~ AND REASONS 
The Merchant Shipping Act, 1'958 was enacted over two decades 
ago. Tile Act has been amended many a time either to give effect to 
the International Conventions on maritime matters or on the basis of 
the experience gained" in administering the provisions of the Act. The 
defects and deficiencies which- have oome to light subsequent to t~ 
. amendments last made, have been further examined by. the National 
Shipping Board, an Advisory Board on mallitime matters constituted 
under section 4 of the slid enactment. It is considered necessary· to 
give effect to the recommendations of the National Shipping :Bo~rd. 
It is also felt thatl this opportunity may be taken to adopt the provi-
sions of the Prevention .of Accidents (Seafarers) Convention, 1970 by 
incorporating a suitable provision in the Act. 
2. Some of the salient proposals are:-
(1) &!ct1on 101 9f.the Act provides that articles of agreement 
with. the crew shan~ ~ signed ,by the master and the seamen. It i& 
considered desirable to amend the section by providing that oWners 
or agents of ships should IHSO be required to sign" the agreement 80 
as to biRd them to the obligations cast by the agreement o( ship 
owners with respect to payment of wages and other provisions pro-
tecting . the int~ of seafarers" (vide clause 4~ . . " 
(2) According to the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958, employment 
of 'Indian seaman at Indllq1 ports is done only through seamen's' 
employment offtce. As an exceptiori, however, section 102 per-
mits·the JJ1asteor of a fore'lgn' ftag ship to engage a seaman, not being 
a holder of' a certificate of continuous discharge at a port in India, 
otherwise than through the seamen's employment pffice. Accord-
ingly. whenever there is any casual vacancy on board a foreign flag 
ship -at an Indian port. the master may either engage an Indian 
national who does not hold a certificate of continuous discharge or 
he may engage a non-Indian national, whether holder of a certifi-
cate of continuous discharge issued by his country or not. It has 
been noticed that by and large, masters of foreign flag ships employ 
foreigners who often co'me to Indian ports to avail of such casua] 
vacancies. Thus, while a certificate of continuous discharge hold· 
" ing Indian national is debarred from seeking employment, foreign-
ers of any nationality can seek employment on such basis. In order 
to remedy this situation. it is proposed to substitute section 102 SO 
as to confine the scope to engagement by a foreign flag ship· at an 
Indian port to seamen who either belong to the flag State or to the 
State where the rest of the crew of the ship were engaged, presump-
tion being that in the absence of such seaman being available at 
Indian port, employment would naturally be offered to Indian sea-
men holding certificate of contin!loUa di'SCharge (vicf:e clause 5) . 
• 
.. 

9 
(3) At present there is no provision in the Act for flpplication . 
of moneys deposited with shipping masters on behalf of seamen 
which remain undisb'.· ;,ed 01' unclaimed. There are however two 
provisions. namely, section 137(2) and section 141(3) in the Act 
under which such moneys can be deposited with' the shipping mas-
ters. As a welfare measw:e, it is proposed to make a provision that " 
if no claim for the moneys so deposited with the shipping ma$ters 
is received. for a period of six years, then the said amount would 
subject to the orders of the Central Government. be utilised fo; 
the welfare of the seamen (vide clause 8). 
(4) Section 141(3) provides that any amount payable by way 
of compensation to the deceased seamen can be paid to his legal 
heirs. As the legal formality required .to be completed ·for estab-
lishing a heir is cumbersome, it is proposed to provide that coni. 
pensation may be paid to a person nominated by a seaman. sulr 
ject to the condition that in the case ofa seaman having a family. 
the nominee shall. be a member of his family. For this purpose, 
it is proposed to amend section 141(3) and also to define the expres-
sion "family" in section 3 of the Act (vide clauses 2 and 11). 
(5) Section 159 (b) provides that for considering eligibility for 
a claim for moneys due to a 'de~eased seaman, the shipping master 
may require production of a probate. letters of administration or 
a certificate issued under the Indian Succession Act. As the proce. 
dure for obtaining a certificate under section 2g of the Administra-
tors-General Act, 1963 is more expeditious, it is proposed to amend 
this section 'to make a provision that a certificate issued by the 
Administrator-General under section 29 of that Act would also be 
sufficient for payment 'of wages due to a deceased seaman (vide 
clause 13). This would facilitate in the early settlement or claims 
up to the limit of Rs. 50,000/- provided for ,in the said section 29. 
(6) At present there is no provision in the Act for the preven-
tion of' occupational accidents to' seafarers. The • International 
Labour Organisation has adopted a Convention on the subject and 
Government. in consultation with the i'epresentatives or organisa. 
tions of ship owners and seafarers, proposes to ratify and il'npl~­
ment the provisions of the said Convention. It is accordingly pro-
posed tq make a provision in the Act to confer power on the Cen-
tral Government to make rules sO as to ensure safe working condi-
tions on Indian ships and for preventing occupational accidents 
(vide clause 15), 
(7) It is proposed to include Imitable prOVISion providing for 
the insurance of the members of the crew of sailing vessel against 
death or personal injury caused by the accident in the course of 
empolyment. An obligation is sought. to be cast o~ the o:-vner of 
each sailing vessel to take and keep m force a polley of Insurance 

10 
for this purpose. Provision is also being made that no sailing ves-
sel shall ply' w11~ss there is in force a policy of insurance for the 
crew of the' sailing vessel. and also no customs collector shall grant 
port clearance to a sailing vessel until after production of a policy of 
,insurance (vide clause 21), 
3, Amongst the other amendments included in the Bill, mention may 
be made in particular of the following: 
(a) Provision requiring crew to report any change to the cen-
cerned seamen's employment office (vide clause 6), 
(b) Authorisa~on of persons to carryon alterations in agree-
ment with crew in ports where there are no Indian consular officer 
(vide clause 7). 
'(c) Provision to ernpow~r the shipping master to decide dis-
. putes involving Rs. 3.000 and below instead of, Rs. 300 and below 
as at pr.esent (vide clause a). 
(d) Modification regardirtg the commencement of payment 
under an allotment note laid down in 'SeCtion 137 (uide clause 1-0), 
(Po) Pnwision to make an assault on apprentice, seamen, or other 
persons on the ship also an offence under section 194 (vide clause 
16). • 
(f) Provision to enable the court to direct the Government to pay 
convey~ and .daily allowance· to the witnesses in varioU$ investi-
gations and iDQuiries (vide clause ~9). 
(g) Section 436 has been amended to provide for the punish-
ment for the violation of o1fenee under new section 434A (vide clause 
22), 
4. The remaining amendmeJlts included in the Bill are of a UUDOr or 
corasequential D8tur.e, 
5. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 
NEW DF.:Lm; K. VIJAYABHASKAR REDDY. 
The 1st November, 1983. 

· MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 14 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section 177A in the princi. 
pal Act which empowers the Central Government to make rules for 
the purposes of preventing occupational accidents to seafarers and to 
give effect to the provisions of International Labour Organisdtion Con-
vention No. 134. The purposes, i,nter a.lia, are as under:-
(a) The manner in which any equipment or gear may be main-
tained, inspected or tested and condition for such maintenance, 
inspection and testing; 
(b) The manner in which the use of any material or process 
shall be regulated for the manufacture of any such equipment or 
gear; 
(c) The provision of safe means of access to such "'quipment 
or gear for the use of seamen and provision of protedive clothing 
for seamen where necessar.y; 
(d) Restrictions on the hours of employment of seamen in any 
specified operafion or under any specified circumstances; and 
(e) The manner and form in which and the person to whom any 
accident occurring on board a ship shall be reported. 
2. Clause 20 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section 434A in tJie 
principal Act to empower the Central Government to frame a scheme 
for providing for the insurance of all persons employed as members of 
the crew on sailing vesse~s ag;tinst death or personal injury caused by 
accident arising in the course of their employment as. st,lch m.embers. 
3. The delegation of legislative power under the ·aforementioned pro-
visions relate to matters of procedure or-administrative detail. Hence. 
the delegation of legislative power is normai in character. 

Form and 
contents of 
the a;ree-
ment. 
En .... -
nwnt 
ofaeaman 
where 
apee- . 
ment I. 
made out 
of India. 
Changes 
in crew 
to be 
reporL 
ed. 
Alteration 
in acree-
mentwlth 
tbe CNW. 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE MERCHANT SHIPPING Aer. 19s5 
(44 OF 1958) 
• • • • • 
3. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
• • • • • 
24. At each of the ports of Bombay, Calcutta and Madra:::. the prin-
cipal officer of the Mercantile Marine Department, and at any other 
port such authority as the Central Government may. by notification in 
the Official Gazette. appoint, shall be the registrar of Indian ships at 
th~t port. 
• • • • • 
101. (1) An agreement with the crew shall be in the prescribed form, 
and shall be dated at the time of the first signature thereof. and shall 
be signed by the master before any seaman signs the SAme. 
• • • • • 
1ft. If the master of a ship registered at a port ·outsidp. India has an 
agreement with the crew made in due form according to the law of that 
port or of the port in which her crew were engaged and engages a sea-
man in any port in India, not being the holder of a certificate of dis-
c:harge or ·8 continuous certificate of discharge issued in India, the I 
seaman may sign the agreement so made. and it shall not be necessary 
for him to sign an agreement under this Act. • 
• • • • • .~ ." 
105. The master of every foreign-going Indian ship and of evel'Y. 
home-trade Indian ship of two hundred tons gross or more, the crew of 
which has been engaged bef<fre a shipping master, shall, before. finally 
leaving the port where the engagement took place, sign and seni to the 
nearest shipping master a full and accurate statement in the prescribed 
form, of every change which has taken place in his crew. and that state-
ment shall be admissible in evidence . 
• • • • • 
10& Every erasure. intetflinearon 01' alteration in any agre~ment 
with the crew ·(except additions made for the purpose of shipping sub-
stitutes or persons engaged subsequently to the first departure of· the 
ship) shall be wholly inoperative, unless proved to .have been made 
with the consent of-
(a) a11 the persons· interested in such erasure, interlineation or 
alteration by the written attestation. if made in India. of some ship .. 
p~~g master. or customs col1ector; or 
(b) an Indian consular officer if made out of India .. 
• • • ) 

38 of 1925. 
13 
132. (1) Where under the agreement with the crew any. dispute arises 
at any port in India between the master, owuer or agent of a ship and 
any of the crew of the ship, it shall be submitted to the shipping 
master,_ 
(a) where the amount in dispute does not exceed three hundred 
rupees, at the instance of eithe~ p~. to the dispute: 
... ... ... • ... 
Decision of 
question'S 
by 
shipp"ing 
masters. 
137. (1) A payment under an allotment note shall begin at the expiry. 
of one month from the date of the agreement. and shall be made at the 
expiration of every subsequent month after the first month and shall 
be made only in respect of the wages earned b~ore the date ~f payment. 
Commence. 
ment and 
payment 
Of sums 
allotted. 
'" '" '" • '" 
141. (1) '" ... ... '" ... 
(3) Any amount payable by way of compensation under sub-clause 
(ii) of clause (a) of sub-section (1) shall be deposited with the ship~ 
ping master at the port of engagement in India for payment to the sea-
man. or. in the case of a deceased seaman. to his legal. heirs. 
'" '" '" ... 
159. Where any propertv of a deceased seaman or apprentice is paid 
or delivered to·a shipping master. the shipping master, after deducting for 
expenses incurred in respect of that seaman or apprentice or of his pro-
perty such sums as he thinks proper to allow. may-
(a) pay and deliver the ref:idue to any claimants who can prove 
themselves to· the satisfaction of the said shipping master to be 
entitled thereto, and the said shipping master shan be thereby dis-
charged from all further liability in respect of the residue so paid 
or delivered; or 
(b) if he thinks fit so to do, require probate Or letters of admi-
nistration or a certificate under the Indian Succession Act, 1925, to be 
taken out, and thereupon pay and deliver the residue to the legal 
representatives of the deceased. 
160. (1) ... '" '" '" ... 
(2) If, after the proceeds of the sale having been \go paid, any claim 
is made thereto, then, if the claim is established to the satisfaction of the 
shipping master. the amount or so much thereof as shall appear to him 
to be due to the claimant. shall be paid to him. and if the claim is not 
so e'!ltablished. the claimaot may apply by petition to the High Court, 
and such Court, after taking evidence either orally or on affidavit, shall 
make such order OR ~~e ~tl~j(m as shall seem just; . ~" 
Wages 
on 
termina_ 
tion of 
~ervice 
by wreck, 
illness. 
etc, 
Payment 
over of 
properly 
of 
(lecea5ed 
seoomen by 
shipping 
lJlaster. 
Disposal 
CIt 
unclailjed 
property 
ot 
deceased 
seamen. 

General 
offence. 
alalnat 
diacl-
pUna •. 
Diu ..... 
not to be 
har-
boured, 
Safe&J' 
coDIf;tUC-
tion 
certL 
ftcatea 
and 
construc-
tion 
certi-
ficatea 
for 
car,o 
sbips. 
Power of· 
court .. 
toni. 
denee 
and 
regula-
tionot 
proceed. 
in,s. 
Salvage 
payable 
for 
savini 
Ufe, 
carlO 
er 
1ft'eck. 
If 
Provided ·tbat, after the expfrailo n of. six years from the receipt of 
.ueh property by the slripping master, no claim to such property shall 
be entertained without the sanction of tbe Central Government. 
• • • • • . 
IN. A seaman lawfWly ("npted or an apprentice shall be guilty of 
an offence against discipline if he . commits any of the following acbs, 
namely:- . 
• • • • • 
(d) if he assaults the master or any other oftlcer of the ship; 
• • • • • 
1M. No person shall barbour or secrete a seaman or apprentice. who 
has wilfully negleoted or refused to join or has deserted from his ship, 
knowing or having reason to believe the seaman or apprentice to ha,'e 
so done. 
• • • • • 
ZHA. (1) Where in respect of any Indian cargo ship of five hundred 
tons gross or more the Central Government is satisfied that the ~hip has 
been surveyed in the manner prescribed under section 299B and that 
she complies with the congtruction rules made under section 284. the 
Central GovernmeDt· may issue in respect of the ship-
(CI) if the sbip performa international voyages, a certificate in 
the prescribed form to be called a cargo ship safety construction 
certificate; 
• • • • • 
se. For the purpose of any investigation or inquiry under this Part, 
the· court making the investigation or inquiry shall, in respect of compel-
ling the atteoclanc:e. and. eMmiaaUon of witnesses and the production of' 
documents and the reaulation of the proeeedim,gs, have the I8D\e powers 
as are exercisable by that court in the exercise. ~ its criminal ju.risd~c­
tion. 
t • • • • • 
402. (1) • • • • • 
(3) Where salvage services are rendered by or on behalf of the Gov-
ernment or by a vessel of the Indian Navy or the commander or crew 
of any such vessel, the Government, the comtnander or the crew, as 
the case may be, shall be entitled to salvage and shall have the same 
rigbts and remedies in respect of those serviees as any other' salvor. 
• • • • • 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
• 
furt_ to ame~d_ the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 
(Shri K. Vi;aya. BhaBkMa. Reddy, 
MtniBter of Shipping a.fld 
Tfa.mport.) 