Bill No. 119-F of  2023
ORIGINAL    
THE CENTRAL GOODS AND SERVICES TAX
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2023
(AS PASSED BY THE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT—
LOK SABHA ON 11TH AUGUST, 2023
RAJYA SABHA ON 11TH AUGUST, 2023)
ASSENTED TO ON 18 AUGUST, 2023
ACT NO. 30 OF 2023

1
THE CENTRAL GOODS AND SERVICES TAX (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2023
(AS PASSED BY THE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT)
A
BILL
further to amend the Central Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Central Goods and Services Tax (Amendment)
Act, 2023.
(2)  It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint:
Provided that different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act
and any reference in any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed
as a reference to the coming into force of that provision.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 119-F of 2023

2
2. In section 2 of the Central Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017 (hereinafter referred to
as the principal Act),—
(a) after clause (80), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
'(80A) "online gaming" means offering of a game on the internet or an
electronic network and includes online money gaming;
(80B) "online money gaming" means online gaming in which players pay
or deposit money or money's worth, including virtual digital assets, in the
expectation of winning money or money's worth, including virtual digital assets,
in any event including game, scheme, competition or any other activity or
process, whether or not its outcome or performance is based on skill, chance or
both and whether the same is permissible or otherwise under any other law for
the time being in force;’;
(b) after clause (102), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
'(102A) "specified actionable claim" means the actionable claim involved
in or by way of—
(i) betting;
(ii) casinos;
(iii) gambling;
(iv) horse racing;
(v) lottery; or
(vi) online money gaming;’;
(c)  in clause (105), the following proviso shall be inserted at the end, namely:—
"Provided that a person who organises or arranges, directly or indirectly,
supply of specified actionable claims, including a person who owns, operates
or manages digital or electronic platform for such supply, shall be deemed to be
a supplier of such actionable claims, whether such actionable claims are supplied
by him or through him and whether consideration in money or  money's worth,
including virtual digital assets, for supply of such actionable claims  is paid or
conveyed to him or through him or  placed at his disposal in any manner, and all
the provisions of this Act shall apply to such supplier of specified actionable
claims, as if he is the supplier liable to pay the tax in relation to the supply of
such actionable claims;";
(d) after clause (117), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
‘(117A) "virtual digital asset" shall have the same meaning as assigned to
it in clause (47A) of section 2 of the Income-tax Act, 1961;’.
3. In section 24 of the principal Act,—
 (a)  in clause (xi), the word "and" ocurring at the end, shall be omitted;
 (b) after clause (xi), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
"(xia) every person supplying online money gaming from a place outside
India to a person in India; and".
4. In the principal Act, in Schedule III, in paragraph 6, for the words "lottery, betting
and gambling" the words "specified actionable claims" shall be substituted.
Amendment
of section 2.
12 of 2017.
Amendment
of section 24.
43 of 1961.
Amendment
of Schedule
III.

3
5. The amendments made under this Act shall be without prejudice to provisions of
any other law for the time being in force, providing for prohibiting, restricting or regulating
betting, casino, gambling, horse racing, lottery or online gaming.
————
Transitory
provision.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Central Goods and Services Tax  Act, 2017.
————
(As passed by the Houses of Parliament )
MGIPMRND—320LS(S3)—24-08-2023.