1
THE TREATMENT OF ATTEMPT TO SUICIDE AS A
NON-PUNISHABLE OFFENCE BILL, 2010
By
SHRI ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for not treating the attempt to commit suicide as a criminal offence and for
matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first Year of  the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Treatment of Attempt to Suicide as a Non-Punishable
Offence Act, 2010.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, be notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint but which shall not be later than three months from the date of
assent.
2. Section 309 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 shall be omitted.
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
Bill No. 119 of 2010
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
45 of 1860.
5
Omission of
section 309.

2
3. The Central Government shall set up adequate number of counselling centres
having such facilities and such number of qualified counsellors as may be prescribed, to
provide counselling to the persons who attempt to commit suicide or have such tendencies.
4. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carring out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
5
10
Counselling
Centres.
Power to make
rules.

3
\\SERVER3 \ E \ BILL2010 \ LS \ 3760LS
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
A person take the extreme step of committing suicide because of deep frustration when
one develops the feeling of total isolation and helplessness and the society as a whole is
unsympathetic to his or her needs and problems. It is a cumulative effect of psychological
breakdown.
Extreme poverty, unemployment, family discord, destitution, loss of dear relations and
frustration from failure in examinations, love affairs, etc. are some of the reasons behind
persons committing suicide. We are also facing incidents of suicide of farmers and peasants
because of the unprecedented crisis in the agricultural sector. The helplessness created by
economic crises which has consequences that affects the social status of individuals as they
are not able to fulfil their social or family commitments which lead to frustration and ultimately
prompts them to commit suicide. It is a manifestation of a diseased condition of mind deserving
treatment, care and understanding rather than punishment. Therefore, attempt to commit
suicide should not be treated as a crime.
It is said that people who develop suicidal tendencies show signs of frustration and
disappointment and they keep themselves aloof from the society and family. If these symptoms
are noticed then proper counselling could be provided to such person to help them to deal
with their problem thereby preventing them from taking the extreme step of suicide.
Hence, the need is to create social awareness, and set up necessary institutions including
counselling centres to provide help and counselling to such persons. It is rather unfortunate
for a modern society like us to treat people trying to commit suicide as criminals. Even the
Law Commission of India, in its 210th Report, have recommended that section 309 of the
Indian Penal Code relating to the offence of attempted suicide be omitted as it considered the
provision inhuman.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objective.
N
EW DELHI; ADHIR  RANJAN  CHOWDHURY
August 31, 2010.

4
\\SERVER3 \ E \ BILL2010 \ LS \ 3760LS
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for setting up of necessary institutions including counselling
centres by the Central Government to provide counselling to persons with suicidal tendencies.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of
India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of rupees one hundred crore will be incurred
per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five hundred crore is also likely to be
incurred.

5
\\SERVER3 \ E \ BILL2010 \ LS \ 3760LS
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 4 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill.
As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of legislative power is
of a normal character.

6
\\SERVER3 \ E \ BILL2010 \ LS \ 3760LS
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE INDIAN PENAL CODE
(ACT NO. 45 OF 1860)
* * * * * * *
309. Attempt to commit suicide—Whoever attempts to commit suicide and does any
act towards the commission of such offence, shall be punished with simple imprisonment for
a term which may extend to one year or with fine, or with both.
* * * * * * *
Attempt to
commit
suicide.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for not treating the attempt to commit suicide as a criminal offence and for
matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—4542LS1(S3)—28-10-2010.