As INTRODUCED IN 1.06 SABHA

97 DEC 1999

Bill No. 119 of 1999

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1999
By
‘Suet ANANT GANGARAM GEETE, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of. India.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fiftieth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 1999.
2. After article 75 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely:—
"75A. Notwithstanding anything in articles 74 and 75—

(1) The House of the People shall express its lack of confidence in the Prime
Minister and his Council of Ministers only by electing his successor through a com-
posite motion supported by a majority of the total members of the House and present-
ing an address to that effect to the President, who shall then appoint the person so
elected as the new Prime Minister.

Short title.

Insertion of
new article
TSA.

Provision as to
confidence in
the Council of


Amendment of
article 85.

Insertion of
new article
164A.

Provision as to
confidence in
the Council of
Ministers.

Amendment of
article 174.

at the end, namely:—

namely:—

2

(2) In the event of failure of the Council of Ministers to secure, or retain
confidence of the House of the People, and if the House is not able to elect a pe
to be appointed as the new Prime Minister in accordance with the provisions
down in clause (1), the President shall, upon the advice of the Council of
prorogue the House and suspend the operation of any provision of the Constitut
relating to the House of the people for a period which shall not exceed four m

(3) Before the expiry of the period of four months as referred to in clause (2)
the President shall summon the House to reconsider the composite motion with or
without modification, and if the House is not able to express its confidence in the
Council of Ministers, or elect a person to be appointed as the new Prime Minister, |
the President shall dissolve the House of the People.”. ;

4, In article 85 of the Constitution, in clause (2), the following proviso shall be adde

“Provided that the power under sub-clause (b) shall be exercised subject to the
provision of article TSA.".

4, After article 164 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted,

"164A. Notwithstanding anything in articles 163 and 164—

(1) The Legislative Assembly shall express its lack of confidence in the Chief
Minister and his Council of Ministers only by electing his successor through a
composite motion supported by a majority ‘of the total members of the Assembly
and presenting an address to that effect to the Governor who shall then appoint the
person so elected as the new Chief Minister.

(2) In the event of the failure of the Council of Ministers to secure, or retain
the confidence of the Legislative Assembly, and if the Assembly is not able to elect
a person to be appointed as the new Chief Minister in accordance with the provisions
laid down in clause (1), the Governor shall, upon the advice of the Council of
Ministers, prorogue the Assembly and recommend to the President to suspend the
operation of any provision of the Constitution relating to the Legislative Assembly
for a period which shall not exceed four months.

(3) Before the expiry of the period of four months as referred to in clause (2),
the Governor shall summon the Assembly to reconsider the composite motion with
or without modification, and if the Assembly is not able to express its confidence in
the Council of Ministers, or elect a person to be appointed as the new Chief Minister,
the Governor shall dissolve the Legislative Assembly.”.

5, Inarticle 174 of the Constitution, in clause (2), the following proviso shall be added

at the end, namely:—
“Provided that the power under sub-clause (b) shall be exercised subject to the

provisions of article 164A.".


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

‘The Indian political system has come under increasing stress due to fractured polity
and multiplicity of political parties. During the last five General Elections since 1989, no
single political party could secure majority in the House of the People. This period was
marked by a succession of eight coalition or minority governments resulting in frequent
elections. This had a destabilising effect on’ the national psyche and our socio-economic
system. A question mark has also arisen on the credibility of the present constitutional
framework.

The Government has already decided to constitute a panel to review the Constitution
to cope with emerging trends in Indian polity. A new dispensation is needed to impart
stability and efficacy to our polity.

Even within the existing constitutional framework, a provision is needed to assign a
direct and effective role to the House of the People and the Legislative Assemblies in
electing an alternative Government when the Council of Ministers fails to secure, or
retain the confidence of the House/Assembly. Such a provision will accord priority and
activate the role of the House of the People and the Legislative Assembly and eliminate
the vice of backroom political manoeuvres. Moreover, in that case, the dissolution of the
House/Assembly shall become the last resort and occur only when there is insuperable
constitutional impasse.

The most salient aspect of the Bill is a provision for cooling off period and
reconsideration of the composite motion before the hammer would fall leading to the
inevitable dissolution of the House/Assembly:

‘This Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives by insertion of two new articles 75A
and 164A in the Constitution.

New Dewi; ANANT GANGARAM GEETE
November 16, 1999.


ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

* * * * *

85. (1) The President shall from time to time summon each House |
meet at such time and place as he thinks fit, but six months shall not intervene between
last sitting in one session and the date appointed for its first sitting in the next session.

(2) The President may from time to time—

(a) prorogue the Houses or either House;
(9) dissolve the House of the People.

* * * * *

174, (7) The Governor may from time to time summon the House or each House of
Legislature of the State to meet at such time and place as he thinks fit, but six months
not ‘intervene between its last sitting in one session and the date appointed for its
sitting in the next session.

(2) The Governor may from time to time—
(a) prorogue the Houses or either House;
(b) dissolve the Legislative Assembly.

* * * * *


ti .
BILL a
further to amend the Constitution of India.