.,-------- -"-. I~ABH'... ' 
-.----------.:.. .. -...;.: .-~~ " .. --~ -- ... ~, . 
CQRHIGENDA 
to 
TEE DE.LliI AP.ARTM&NT O~ .. 'iERSHIl' BILL, 1986 
(~ be/ .. .s introduced in 10k Sabha) 
1 • Page (11) , line, 4- from hot ton:;-
after "court" ir)~ert '-"fees" 
2. Page 2, line 36,-
for "mav" read "may" 
3. Page 3, liDS 9\-
W n(j)1t read !I(i)" 
4- • Page ~ 1 ':-Il e 7,-
f.or "sol dor" read "sc.ld 0rll 
5. Page 5, line 15,-
for "become" rea~ ''becomes II 
6. Page 8, line 3,-
:for "owners" read "owner l1 
7. Pag0 8, line 5,-
after "of" ins~tl "the" 
8. Page 8, line 6,-
for "owners" read "owner" 
9. Page 8, line ~1,-
for " a II !:!t§£." as " 
10. Page 9, line 32,-
i'Qr "in" read "to" 
11. Page 13, line ~2,-
aft e:r. "ac cordingl.yl, --and It 
12. Page 1J, liHL 31,-
insert ''the'' ... 
.J.. 
for . .t'the_liegistr.a,rff-·re~caz:n,ecj Bagi st:t:a:z-.u-.. 
--::::-::;;,-..= 
P.T.O. 

13. Page 14, line 42,- . . ... . .. .,. 
after IIAssociation" in3ert -
"of Apartment O'!mersll 
14. Page 14, line 44,-
aft.er n~sociationll ~rt "of ""pal't:nent u'w'riers tf 
15. Page 1lt~ lines 45 and 46,-
16. Page 15, l.ine 16,-
ac-Pter It pI'ov1ded" ~nsert "forti 
17. Page 18, line 1 from bottom,-
for t1detedm.1!teJY .... ~~ . ..JId..e.t.e.rm ..... -
18. Page 19, l1ne .. 26,-. 
for_ t!sect.:¥>n 3 tI read. ,~'&ect..ion..BJ' 
1~ Page 24, line 2 frow bottOll,-
,before,~·""· .. insert.".or" 
1m,; DElliI; . 

i. , , ", .... Ci 
fflQ ;DEWlI APARTMENT OWNERSHIP,BILL, 1_ 
ARRANGBMENT OF CLAUSES 
CHAPTER I 
PuLIMINARY 
C),AUS. 
1. Short title; extent and commencement. 
2. Application. 
3. Definitions. 
CHAPTER II 
OWNERSHIP.. HERrrABILITY AND TRANSFERABILITY OF AP,AM'MBN'l'8 
4. Ownership of apartments. 
5. Apartment to be heritable and transferable. 
6. Ownership of apartment subject to conditions. 
7. Compliance with the covenants and bye-laws. 
8. Right of re-entry. 
9. Purchasers or persons taking lease of apartments from apart. 
ment owners to execute an undertaking. 
10. Benamidar of the apartment to be deemed to be the real owner. 
11. Certain works prohibited. 
12. Encumbrances against apartment!!. 
CHAPl'ER III 
DaD OF APARTMENT AND ITS REGISTRATION 
13. Contents of Deed of Apartment. 
14. Registration of Deed of Apartment. 
CHAPTER IV 
A~SOCIATION OF APARTMENT OWNERS AND BYE-LAWS lOR 'THE REGULATION 
OF THE AFFAIRS OF SUCH ASSOCIATION 
15. Association of Apartment Owners and bye-laws relating thereto. 
16. Insurance. 
17. Disposition of property, destruction or dama,e. 
18. Action. 
CHAPTER V 
COMMON PROFITS, COMMON EXPENSES AND OTHER MATTERS 
19. Common profits, common e~p'enses and othe.r matters. 
20. Apartment owner not to be exempt from liability for contribu-
tion by waiver of the use of Ule common areas and facilities. 

.-,', ,'" '.,... ... ..,,;. ~ ,.~ .' '.. ... V· (U) 
CLAUSIS 
21. CQmm~n expenses to be a charge on the apartment. 
~ .,' 
22. Separate assessments. 
22. Joint and. aeveral Uabil1ty of vendor, etc., for unpaid commGll 
expenses. 
CHAPTER VI 
MISCELLANEOUS 
24. Act to be binding on apartment owners, tenants, etc. 
25. Power to exempt stamp duty. registration fee and court and 
power to refund. 
26. Removal of doubts. 
27. Power to make rules. 

Btll No. 11 of 1986 
. 'W •• , 
THE DELHI APART~T, OWNERSHIP BILL, 1986 
A 
BILL 
-
to provide for the ownership of an individual apartment in a mu!ti. 
$toreyedbuilding and of an u.ndivided interest in the com,m.on areas 
and facilities appurti-Onant to such apartment and to make such apart. 
ment and interest her~table and transferable and for matters con-
nected therewith or incidental thereto. 
W~S with a view to securing that the ownership and control of 
the material resources of the community are so distributed as to sub-
serve the co:rimon good, it is expedient to provide for the ownership of 
an individual apartment in a multi-storeyed building and of an undivided 
5 interest in the common areas and faciliti£'S appurtenant to such apart-
ment, and to make such apartment and interest heritable and transfer-
able and to p.rovide for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto; 
~E it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-seventh Year of the 'Republic 
f)f India as follows:-
C}lAPTER I 
PuuMlNARY 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Delhi Apartment Ownership Act. 
1986. 
(2) It extends to the whole of the Union territory of Delhi. 
15 C3> It'shall come into force on such date as the Administrator may, 
by notlftcation in the Oftieial GaRtte~ appoint. ' 
Short tit/e. 
extent aDd 
commence-
ment. 

Appliea. 
tion. 
Defini-
tiona. 
2 
2. The provisions of this Aet shall apply to fINery apartment in a multi-
storeyed building which was constructed mainly for residential or eom-
mercial or such other purposes as may be prescribed, by-
(a) any groap housing co-operative society; or 
(b) any other person or authority, 5 
before or after the commencement of this Act and on a free hold land, 
or a lease hold land, if the leatH! for luch land is for a period of thirty 
yeal'8 or ~ore: 
Provided that, where a building constructed, whether before or after 
the commenceme:tt of this Act. on any land contains only two or three 10 
apartments, the owner of such building may, by a declaration duly exe-
cuted and registered .ander the provisions of the Registration Act, 1908, 16 of 1908. 
indicate his intention to make the provisions of this Act applicable to 
such building, and' on such declaration being made, such owner shall 
execute and register a Deed of Apartment in accordance' with the pro- 15 
visions of this, Act, as if such owner were the promoter in relation to 
such bail ding. 
3. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(4) "Administrator" means the .~drnini~trator of tl,e Union 
territory of Delhi appointed by the President under article 239 of flO 
the Constitution; 
(b) "allottee", in relation to an apartment, means the person 
to whom such apartment has been allotted., sold or otherwise trans-
ferred by the promoter; 
(c) "apartment" means a part of any property, intended for any 25 
type of independent use, including one or more rooms orenclOled 
spaces located on one or more floors or any part or parts thereof, in 
a multi-storeyed building to be used for residence or office or for the 
p.ractice (If any profession, or for the carryin(! on of any occupation, 
trade or business or for such other type of independent use as may 30 
be prescribed, and with a direct exit to a public street, road or high-
wav, or to a common area leadin~ to such street, road or highwaV, 
and includes any garage or room (whether or not adiacent to the 
multt-storeved bui1<1ing in which 'Such apartment is locllted) pro-
vided by the promoter for use by the owner of such apartment for 35 
pa.t'ktnll' anv vehicle or. as the case mav be, for the residence of any 
domestic aide employed in such apartment; 
(d) "apartment number" means 'the number, letter or combi-
nation thereof, designating an apartment; 
(e) "apartment owner" means the person Or persons owning an .t.) 
apartment ,and an undivided interest in the common areas and facili-
ties appurtenant to such apartment in the percentage specifled in the 
Deed of Apartment; J1 
(f) '4Association of Apartment Owners",-: 
m in relation to a multi-storeyed building not faIlhY, within f5 
sub-clause (ii), meal'i, ail the ownerS' of ths Wpart.l1'lertt,'thfrein: 

, 
(ii) in thee ... , of "thil·tnulti-iforeyfd· 6Uildli'l" in any area, 
delignated as !l bl~~, .. P;Oek!t .. or ~~~e~.~,. n:l~' .11 th. own .. 
of the apartment's iii- men block, pocket or other designated ar .. , 
aettJir as a' groap 'in acco~anc~ 'witli' the bye-la~s; 
5 "... (g):"'authority": includes ahy authority constituted QI' ... tablilhed 
by or under any law for the time being in force; 
(h)."Board" medl the Board' of Management of an AHoctatton of 
Apartment Owners elected by its members' under the bye ... 1aws; 
(j) "bye-laws" means the bye-laws made under this Act; 
10 (j) "common areas and facilities". in relation to a multi-storeyed 
t:. ~. 
20 
25 
buUding, means-
• !' •• 
(i) the land on which such building is located and all ease-
ments, rights and appurtenances belonging ~o the land and the 
b1lildillg;' . . .. 
(t;) the foundations, columns, girders, beams" supports, 
main walls, roofs, halls. corridors, lobbies, stairs, stairways, fire-
escapes and entrances and exits of the building; . 
, (iii) 'tne J?as~ents. cellars, yards, gardens. parkin~ ,~ea5, 
. shopptng centres, schoolS .and storage spaces; 
(iv) the premises for the lodging of janito~ Or persons 
employed for the management of the property; 
(v) installations of central services, such as, power, light, 
gas. hot and cold water, heating. refrigeration, air conditioning, 
incinerating and sewerage; 
(vi) the elevators. tanks. pumps, motors, fans, compt:e~rs, 
ductS and iD general all. app~ratus and installations exis.ting for 
common use;' . 
(vii) such otfter community and commercialfaeilitteS as 
may be prescribed; and 
(viii) all other narts of the property necessary 'or conve-
nient to its existe .... ':'t", maintenance and ·safety;' OJ'. nomtan,. 1h 
~~.on ~~;. .. 
(k) "common expenses" means-
(i) all sums lawfully assessed against" the ap'artme~t owners 
35 by the Association of Apartment Owners for meeting the expenses 
of administration. maintenance, repair or. replacement· of the 
common areas and facilities; 
. ' . 
(i.i) expenses declared as common expenses by the provisions 
. 'CJf 'thfR Act or by the bve.:lo~s, o~. agr~d' upon DY tDe ASJQciation 
40 of Apartment Owners; . 
(1) "common profits" means the bA1anee of all incr)me. rent!!: . 
. nrnflbl and Te~lles from- the common areas and rfacmtff'~ . rem'amfng 
litter the df'd,ictfon of the· common ~nl'leSi ., . 

.~.' 
("') ,~,""t IIIIdIadty" .... ,_. .. .. ~ 
(i)··.~~retaryh.:'" '0, .. A~: .. ~ .\.,: ,: .. ;. ":' r 
. ' I .. 
!' •• 
(ii) die Vke-~ ... of die DeIIIi Detelop ..... 4at11ority, or 
(iii) die L.II ... De\'eIoplneJlt· 0ftIcer 0( tile Ceatnl GOVII'D-
" ~ .. i ~. . : ii'i.nt. .. . .:,. .' .. 
w .... ..., be ... u:slaed by tilt Ad"""""",: by aOflftalloa hi tile 011 ... 
Guecte, to..".. tile· faDe... of 1IIe cOIIIpeteat MIfIIoItty ..... dill 
~c.; 
(n) "Deed of Apartment" means the Deed of Apartment refer· 
red to in section 13; 
s 
(0) "Delhi" means the Union territory of Delhi; 10 
(p) "joint family" means a Hindu undivided family, and in the 
case of other persons, a group or unit. the members of which are. 
by custom, joint in possession or residence; 
(q) "limited rommon areas and facilities" means th()5e· common 
areas and facilities which are designated in writing by the promoter IS 
. ,., before the allotment, sale or other transfer oJ any apartment as re-
served for use of certain apartment or apartments to the exclusion of 
the other apartments; 
(r) IIManager" means the Manager of an Association of Apart- IW 
ment Owners appointed under the bye-laws; . 
(I) umulti-storeyed bailding" means a building constructed on 
any land, containin~ four or more apartments. or two or more build-
i:"'gs in any area designated as a block. pocket or otherwise, each 
contairifng two o,r more apartments, with a total of four or more 25 
apartments in all such buildings, and includes a bui1din~ containing 
two or three apartments in respect of which a declar~tion has been 
made under the oroviso to section 2; . 
(t) "owner", in relation to an apartment, inc~udes. for the 
purposes of this Act, 'a leSsee of the· land on which t}:le, ~ui1din~ con- 30 
taining such apartment has beep. construeted, where the lease of such 
land is for a period of thirty years or more; 
(u) IOperson" includes a .firm and a joint family, and also includes 
a group housing co.-operative society; 
(v) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act: 
(w) Ilpromoter" means. the authority, perlon or co-operative ~S 
society, as the. CRose may be, by which. or by whom.. any multi-storeYed 
building has been constructed; 
(x) "property" means the land, the mlllti-storeved buildin!!. All 
Improvements nnrt stnlC'tures thereon. And all F.'MementR. rhtht.R nnr! 
apnllrtenanc~ belonllinr;! thr.reto. !ln~ All ·ArtideJS of. J)e~sonal' prt.l1'I~rtv 40 
Infended For nIp. in r.r,"n~ctJon therp.wfth.· . . .' 

, I." ....... .~.~0011 •• ~ •.• ,~~I..:._ • .:. ........ ,. ::~.~ .,. .•• ':." .;~ . ........ .. 
. _; .. :'nWNDsiiiP, ··H£aI'i'ABiLI~· AlfD ·TR.\N~lILITY··;or· Ap~ $.. 
• -,J ..~ •• '. • I 
4. (1) Every pe~o~ to .whom any apartm.ent isaUotted, sold or other-
wise transferred by the promoter, on or after· the commencement of. this 
5 Act, shall, save as otherwise provided in section 6, and 'liubject to the 
other provisions of this Act, be entitled to the exclusive ownership and 
possession of the apartment so allotted, ~l dar otherwise transferred to 
him: 
(2) Every person to whom any apartment was allotted, sold or other-
10 wise transferred by the p.romoter before the commencement of this Act 
shall, save as otherwise provided under section 6 and 'Subj,ect to the other 
provisions of this Act, be entitled, on and from such commencement, to 
the exclusive ownership and pos~ion of the ,apartment so allotted, 'Sold 
or otherwise transferred to him. 
15 (3) Every person who become entitled to the exclusive ownership 
and posseSSion of an apartment under 'Sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) 
shall be entWed to such percentage of undivided interest in the ct,mmon 
areas and facilities as may be specified in the Deed of Apartment and 
such percenta1e shall be computed by taking, as a basis, the value of the 
apartment in relation to the value of the property. 
20 (4) (a) The percentage of the undivided interest of each apartment 
owner in the common areas and facilities shall have a permanent charac-
ter, and shall not be altered \Vithout the written consent of all the apart-
ment owners; 
25 (b) the percentage of the undivided interest in the common areas and 
. facilities shall not be separated from the apartment to which it apper-
tains and shall be deemed to ,be conveyed or encumbered with the apart-
ment, even though such interest is not expressly menti~ned in the con-
veyance or other instrument. 
30 (5) The common areas and facilities shall remain undivided and DO 
apartment owner or any other person shall bring any action for partition 
or division of any part thereof, and any covenant to the contrary shall 
be void. 
(6) Each apartment owner may use the common areas and facUlties 
35 in accordance with the .parposes for which they are intended without 
hindering Or encroaching upon the lawful rights of the other apartment 
o~ners. 
(7) The necessary work re~attng to maintenance, repair and replace .. 
ment of the common areas and facilities and the making of any additions 
40 or improvements thereto, shall be carried out only in accordance with 
the provisions of this Act and the bye-laws. . . 
(8) The Association of Apa.rtment Owners shall have the irrevocable 
right, to be exercised by the Board or Manager, to have access to each 
apartment from time to time during reasonable hours for the mauden-
45 ance, repairs Or replacement of any of the common areas or facilities 
therein, or accessible therefrom, or for making emergency repairs th",rei.n 
necessary to prevent damage to the common areas and f~cil1ties or. to 
any other apartment or apartments. 
Owaer· 
ship of 
apart-
menta. 
,.' f 
• I ...... '. 
. .)'. 
.. 

~pN:t­
~tto 
tw bld-
.ble' •• d 
tran. ... 
ferab1e. 
Ownersbip 
of apart-
meIIt 
subject to 
coaditions. 
Compli-
aace 
with the 
COveeaDts 
.. bye-
1awI. 
Bilbt 
of 
re-ente,. 
• 
5. Subject to the p~vision..-.t~n-:e;. eaeb aparlment, to.tbet Wi:tb 
tlw uQdivid~d interest in ;the. COIIUX,lOll ,are/is ,and. facilltie'~Dpw::tenant 
tosu~h~'aparhhent: sKan;fof &if 'plirpo8U ·~oii.titut .. a. 'a hefItab1e and 
tranefenable 'immoY8ble. pro,.ny withlB tlae·meaning ·of any law for the 
time, being in force,and accordingly. an apartment owner may tranaler 5 
his .partment and the percentage of undivided intereit ·in the common 
ueas and' facilities appurtenant to sueh apartment by way of sale, mort-
18ge, lease, gift, exchange or in any other mann'U' whatsoever 'in the' 
same manner, to the same extent and subject to the same rights, privi-
leges, obligations, liabilities, iDvestijatiollS, l~,pl proceedings, remedy and 10 
to penalty, forfeiture or punishmen.t as any other immovable property 
or make a bequest of the .same under the law applicable to the transfer 
and succession of immovable property: 
Provided that where the allotment, sale or other transfer of any 
apartment has been ~de by any group housing co-opentive society in 1 5 
favour of any member thereof, the transferability of such apartment aad 
all-other matters shall be regulated by the law applicable to such group 
housing co-operative society. 
6. Where any allotment, sale or other transfer of any apartment has 
been made, whether before or after the commencpment of this Act. In 
pursuance of any promise of payment, or part payment, of the conside- 20 
ration thereof, the allottee or transf-eree, as the case may be, shall not 
become entitled to the ownership and possession of that apar~t or 
to a percentage of undivided interest in the common areas and facilities 
appurtenant to such apartment, UIltil full payment has been made of the 
consideration thereof together with interest, if any due thereon, and f.l5 
where any such allottee or transferee has been inducted into the posses~ 
sion of such apartment or any part thereof in pursuance of such allotment 
or transfer, he shall, until the tull payment of the consideration has been 
macle, contintH! to remain in possession thereof on the same terms and 
coadi,tianson which he was so inducted into possession of such apart- 30 
ment or part thereof . 
. ''7. Each apartment owner shall comply strictly with the bye-olaWB and 
with the covenants, conditions and restrictions set forth in the Deed at 
Apartment, and failure to comply with any of them shall be a ground 35 
for action to recover sums due for damages, or for injunctive relfef, or 
hoth. by the Manager or Board, on behalf of the Association of Apartment 
Owners, or, in a proper case, by an aggrieved apartment owner. 
8. (l) Where any land is given On lease by a person (hereafter in this 
action' referred to g. the lealOl') to another perlon (hereafter in· this 
·-.etten t'eferred·to as the .le •• e, which *arm shall irlc1ude a person. 1n ~ 
wh8fie:favoUr a sub-lease of such land has been "rltnted), and .any multi-
".yetI building has been constructed on suchleue-hold land by the 
I ... 'or by any ather person ,authorised by him or claiming thro"gl"l 
'him, moh -lessee shall Fant· tn respect of. the land 8'11 many sub-leues r: 
al there are apartments in such multi-storeyedbuildmgand shall execute 4a 

5 
7 
separate. deeds of sub-lease in respect, of such Umd iii favour of each 
apartm~t owner~-:-
(4) in the case of a multi..ostoreyed building constructed' before 
the' commencement of this Act, within three months from such com-
niencement~ or 
(b) in the case of a multi-storeyed building consu-ucted after 
the commencement of this Act, within three months from the date 
on which, the possession of any apartment in such multi~toreyed 
building is delivered' to him: . . 
J 0 Provided that no sub-lease ~ respect of any bnd shall be granteci 
except on the same terms and conditions on which the lease in respecL 
of the land has been granted by the lessor and no additional terms and 
conditions shall be imposed by the lessee except with ,the previous ap-
proval of the lessor. 
IS (2) Where the lessee has any reason to suspect that tht:re had· been 
any breach of the terms am~ conditions. of the sub-lease referred to 111 
sab-section (1), he may himself inspect the land on which the multi-
storeyed building containing the concerned apartment has beeh cons-
tructed" or may authorise ane or more p~rsons to inspect such land. and 
20 make a report as to whether there had been any breach of the terms and 
conditions of any Bub-lease in respect of such land and, if so, the natl.l.l'e 
. and extent Of such breach, and for this purpose, it sha1l be lawfUl fo~ 
I the lessee or any person authOrised by him to enter into, and to be in, 
, ,the land in relation to which such breach has been or. is suspeeted to 
25 have been committed. 
(3) Where the lessee Or any person authorised by him makes an 
inspection of the land referred to in sub-section (1), he shall reCord in 
writing his findlngs on such inspection [a true copy of which shall be 
furnished to the apartment owner by whom such breach of the terms 
30 and conditions of sub-lease in respect of the land appurtenant to the 
apartment owned by him has been committed (hereinafter referred t~ 
as the defaulting apartment owner)] and where such ftDdings indicate 
that tht!re had been any breach of the terms and conditions of the sub-
lease in respect of such land, the lessee may, by a notice in writing, 
35 require the defaultiJi.g apartm:ent owner to reftain from comniitting any 
breach' of the terms and conditions of the sub-lease in respect of such 
land, or to pay in ,lieu thereof such composition fees as may be' specified 
in the notice in accordance with 'such scales of composition fees as may 
be prescribed. 
40 (4) The defaulting apartment owner w~o is aggrieved. by any noUce 
served on him by the lessee under sub-section (3) may, within thirty 
days from the date of service of such notice, prefer an appeal to the' 
Court of the District J.01dge having jurisdiction (hereinafter referred to 
as the District Court), either challenging the finding of the lessee or any 
45 person authorised by him or disputing the amount of composition fees 
. as specified in the notice" and the District Court may, after giving the 
par.ties a reasonable opportunity of being heard, confinn, alter or reverse 
those flndings or may confirm reduce or increase the amount of c:omposition 
fees or set aside the' notice. 

8 
(5) Where, on the breach of any terms and conditions of any sub~lealM! 
in respect of any land, any composition fees become payable,· the de-
faulting apartment owners shall be deemed to have been guilty of such 
breach and in default of payment thereof it shall be lawful for the leuee 
to recover the amount of composition fees from the d.efa&Iltin, ~ 
apartment owners as an arrear of J.and revenue . 
. (6) Where any composition fees are paid whether in pursuance of 
the notice served under sub-section (3) or in accordance with the decision 
of the District Court or a higheL' court on appeal, no fw-ther action shall 
be taken by the lessee lor the breach of the terms and conditions of the 
sub-lease in respect of the land in relation to which payment of such 10 
composition fees has been made. 
(7) If the defaulting apartment owner omits or f~ to refrain from 
committing any breach of the terms and conditions of the sui).lease in 
respect of the land or, as the case may be, omits or fails to pay the 15 
composition fees in lieu thereof-
(i) in accordance with the notice issued by the lessee under sub-
section (3), or 
(ii) where the findings of the lessee or the person authorised to 
inspect the land about any breach of the terms and conditions of any 80 
~ub-lease in respect of the land or the amount of composition fees 
specified in the notice issued by the lessee are altered by the District 
Court on appeal or by any higher court on further appeal, in accord-
ance with the decision of the District Court or such higher court, as 
the case ·may be, "5 
the lessee shall be entitled,-
(A) where no appeal bas been preferred under sub-section (4). 
within sixty days from the date of service of the notice under sub-
section (3), or 
(b) where an appeal has been preferred under sub-section (4), SO 
within sixty days from the date on which the appeal is ftnally dis-
posed of by the District Court or, where any further appeal is pre-
ferred to a higher court, by such higher court, 
to e:xercise the right of r~ntry in respect of the undivided inter;est of 
the lessee in the land appurtenant to the apartment owned by the default- S5 
ing apartment owner, and where such right of re-entry cannot be exer-
cised e:xcept by the ejectment of the defaulting apartment owner, from 
his apartment, such right of re-entry shall include a right to eject the 
defaulting apartment owner from the concerned apartment: 
Provided that no such ejectment shall be made unless the defaultin~ 40 
apartment owner has been paid by the lessee such amount a compen-
sation for such ejectment as may be determined in accordance with the 
prescribed. scales 'of compensation. ' 
(8) No appeal preferred under sub-section (4) shall be admitted, 
unless twenty-five per cent. of the composition fees specified in the 45 
noUce served on the defaulting apartment owner has been deposited to 
the credit of the District Court in savings bank account to be opened by 
the District Court in any branch of an approved bank: 

of 1955. 
of 19159.' 
of 1980. 
9 
Provided that the District Court may, on s:rlBcient cause bein, shown, 
either reniit or reduce the amount of such deposit, and the tnterest accru-
inr . on such deposit, shall enure to the credit of defaulting apartment 
OWDer by whom such deposit h. been made: 
5 Provided tarther that the amount of such deposit together· with the 
interest due thereon shall be distributed by the District Court in accord-
ance with the decision in such appeal, or where any further appeal has 
been preferred against such decision, in accordan~ with the decision in 
such further appeal. 
10 (9) The defaulting apartment owner, who is aggrieved by the amount 
offered to be paid to him under the prov" to sub-section (1) as com-
pensation for ejectment from his apartment may, within thirty days frOIl' 
the date of such offer, prefer an appeal to the District Court and the 
District Court may. after' givJng the parties a reasonable opportunity 0: 
15 being heard, maintain, increase or reduce the amount of compensation. 
(10) On the ejectment of the defa.;.Jltfng apartment owner from the 
apartment undel' sub-section (7). the le!lsee by whOm such ~j~ment has 
been m.de may make a fresh allotment of the concerned apartment to 
any other person on such terms and conditions as he may think fit: 
flO Provic:ted that the consideration for such fresh aUotment shaD not be 
more than the amount which has been paid to the defaulting ilpartment 
owner as compensation. . 
(11) Where any lessee omits or fails to take any action either in 
accordance with the provisions of sub-section· (2) or sub--section (3) or 
~5 sub-section (7), the lessor. may. in the first instance, require the leuee 
by a notice in writing to take action against the defaulting apartment 
I)wner under sub-section (2) or sub-section (3) or, as the case may De, 
unCler 'Suli-section (7), within a period of ninety days from the date of 
service of such notice and in the event of the omission or failure of the 
30 lessee to do 80 within such period, the lessor may himself take actien as 
contained in sub-section (2) or sub-section (3) or suD-section . (7) and 
the provisions of sub-section (4) in sub-section (6)' and sub-section (8) . . 
to,sub-section (10) shall, as far as may be. apply to any action .taken by 
him 9S if sueh action had been taken. by the lessee. 
S5 (12) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that no wort 
in any apartment by the owner thereof shall be deemed to be a breach 
of the terms of the sub-lease in respect of the land on which the multi-
storeyed building containing such apartment has been constructed unless 
the work 1'8 prohibited by section 11. 
40 E~lClnation.-In this section. ccappro~ bank" means· the State Bank· 
of India constituted uilder section 3 of the State Bank of India Act. 1955 
or a subsidiary bank constituted under section 3 -:1t the' State Bank of· 
India (Subsidiary Banks) Act. 1959. 'or a corresponding new bank con-
"'tituted' under section 3 of the Banking Companies· (Acquisition and 
45 Trar,tsfer of Undertakings) Act, ~970 or a corresponding new bank COD-·· 
stituted under section 3 of the Banking Compani(t$' (Acquisition .*., 
'rral\Sfer of 'O'ndertaldnp) Act, 1980. 

Purcha-
senor 
persons 
tak1nt 
lease 
ofa,ari-
menta 
from 
apart-
ment 
ownel'l 
toexe-
('ute an 
under-
takinr· 
~n.mi­
duot 
the 
apart-
mentto 
he 
deemed 
to be 
the 
real 
owner. 
Certain 
worb 
prohibi-
ted. 
Encum-
brllDcel 
against 
apart-
ment.. 
10 
•. N~~~~~iaJ)diDg ,anything contained· in the Transfer of ·Property 
Act, 1~. or, in any oth~ law for the time being in ,force, any ,pCf80Jl 4 of 1882 .• 1 
~cquiring any .apartment f1:pm a~ apartnle~ owner by gift, exc;.baoge, 
purchase or otherwise, or talting .lease of an, apartment from an apart-
ment owner for a period of thirty years or more, shall,- 5 
(a) in respect of the said apartment, be subject to the provi-
sions of this Act; and 
(b) execute and register an instrument in such form, in such, 
manner a~d within such period as may be prescribed, giving an ,under-
taking to comply with the covenants, conditions' and restrictions, III 
subject to which such apartment is owned by the apartment owner 
aforesaid. ' 
to. If .any apartment is acquired by any person, whether by allot-
m.ent, s~e or otherwise with the consideration thereof paid or provided 
by another pers!)n, tllE~ acquirer shall, notwithstanding anything, contain- , S 40f 1182, 
~ in the Transfer of' Property Act, 1882, or in the In4ian Truste Act, 1882 201 188t. 
or in any other law for the time being in force. be deemed to be the 
real 0wtler of sU~ apartI;!)ept, and no court sh.l1 ente~in any cb.im 
of the person paying or providing. such cOl1sideration for title to such 
apar;tment on the gro~nd t~t, the .. acquisition of the apartment was made ~o 
on Dehalf of such person or oJ1behJlf of $omeone through whc;nll such 
person claim'S. 
11. No ap~t owner shall do any work which would be prejudi-
cial to the soundness or safety of the property or reduce the value SIS 
thereof or impair any easement or hereditament or shall add any 
materi,alstructure or excavate.ny additional basement or cellar with-
out first obtaining the consent of all. the other apartment owners. 
E.l.:"P~a:'!-~tion.-In this 'Section, reference to apartment· owners shall 
be constru,l!d, in t:elation to a multi-sto.reyed b,uilding in any block,3 0 
pocket or other designated a~ .. the apartment owners of the' concerned. 
multi-storeyed building in such block, pocket' or other designated area. ' 
12. (1) The owner of each apartment may create any encumQJ;a.nce, 
only against the apart~~nt owned by him and the percentage of the 
undiviq,ed interest in the,,' common areas and facilities appurtenant to 35 
such apartment in the saIlle manner and to the same extent· as may 
be created in relation to any other separate parcel of property subject to 
individual ownership: 
Provided that where any such enculY)brance is c.reated, the apartment 
in relation to which such encumbran~ has beencreatedsh.aUnotbe 40 
partitioned or sulHtivided. ' 
(2)N~ labour performed ot;, material furnished with the c~n~tt or 
at the reque'st, of an apartment owner or his agent or'his eontractor or 
suh-contra'ctbr, shall be the basis for a charge or any encUmbranee u~~ 
the pMv{Si~ris ' of . the .Transfer of ~eriy ~~t, 1882,'. ag~~.t, t~e.' ~- +S 4011a1!. 
m~t or ~rope.rt~of any other apa~~t oWl!er not ~ly co~sent-
jng'to, or requesting, ,the same, eXcept t~~,!!uch ~ «;'O'D,sent .. han, 
be deemed to' be given by the other ~partrnent owner In the case of 
emergencY 'repairs' the~tot . ,.' " ' " . 
;. . ,. . . ~, . 

II 
....... 
: , (3r The labour performed and material 'furnished for the commcm 
areas and facilities, if duly authorised by the Associa~ion of Apartment 
Owners in accordance with the provisions of this Act, or the bye-laws, shall 
be deemed, to 'be performed or furnished with the expnss consent of each 
5 apartment .ownerand shall be the basis for a charge' or eneumbrance 
uQder the Act aforesaid alainst each of the apartments and shall be 
subject to the provisions of sub-section (4). 
(4) In the event of a charge or any encumbrance against two or 
:moreapartments becoming effective, the apartment owners of the 
10 separate apartments may remove their apartments and the percentage 
of undivided interest in the c~mon areas and facilities appurtenant to 
such apartments from the charge or encumbrance on payment ,of the 
fractional or proportional amounts attributable to each of the apartments 
'affected and on s~~h payment, the apartment and the percentage of un-
t 5 divided interest in '. the common' areas and facilities appurtenant tl1eretc-
shall be free of the charge or encumbrance so removed: ' 
Provided that such partial payment shall not prevent the person 
having a charge or any of the encumbrances from proceeding to enforce 
thE" rights, In relation to the amount not so paid, asainst any other 
110 apartment and the percentage of undivided interest !n the common areas 
and facilities appurtenant tc? such apartment. 
(5) On any such payment, discharge or other satisfaction, referred 
to in sub-section (4). the' apartment and the percentage ·of undivided 
i~terest in the common area'S and facilities appurtenant' thereto shall be 
115 free and cl~r of the charge or encum branee, so paid. satisfted or cJis-
charged, . " r ,- ~,.., 
CHAPTER TIl 
OEm rOF APAllTMENT AND ITS REGISTRATION 
13, (1) Whenever any allotmen( sale or Qther transfer of any 
30 apartment is made, the promoter shaD,-
(0) iE the case of an allo~ent, sale or other transfer made 
after the commencement of this Act, within three months from the 
dete of such allotment, sale or other transfer, or 
(b) in the case of· any allotment, sale or o~lter transfer made 
~J5 before the commencement of this Act, within six months from the 
date of such commencement; 
execute a Deed of Apartment containing thf' foUowin, partioWal'l. 
namely:-
(i) the 'name of ' the allottee, 
40 (ii) description of the land on ~hich .the building and the com-
mon ~rea!l and faciUties ar.e ,located; and whether the land is 'tee-
, ho~d or lease".hold, ,and if lease-bold, the period of such lease, 
(i.e)_ set 'of ftoor 'plans at the' multf-storeyed building showing 
the lay-out and 'location, number of apariri-tents and bearing a verified 
45 ',stafitmen.tof an arcltiteet certifying' that it is an accurate, copy. of 
tM portions of the plans of the bui1<1i~ig as ftI~~ wjth" a~d approved 
by,. the' local authority wtthfn the jurisdiction of wJlieb the bund~ 
ins is 1~1tect, . . • 
Co.ar.1'5 
of 
Deed of 
Apart-
meat. 

12 
(iv) description of the multi-storeyed building, stating the 
number of storeys and basements, the number' of apartments in that 
building and the principal materials of which it is constructed, 
(v) the apartment number, or statement of the location of the 
apartment, its approximate area, number and dimension of rooms, 5 
and immediate common area to which it bas access, and any other 
data necessary for its proper identifica~on, 
(vi) description of the common areas and facilities and the 
percentage of undivided interest appertaining to the apartment 1. 
the common areas and facilities, 
(vii) description of the limited common are8$ and facilities, if 
any. stating to which apartments their use is reserved, 
10 
(viii) value. of ~he property and of each apartment, and a state-
ment that the apartment and such percentage 01 undivided interest 
are not encumbered in any manner whatsoever on the date· of exe- 15 
cution of the Deed of Apartment, 
(i,r) statement of the purposes for Which the building and each 
of the apartments are intended and restricted as to use, 
(x) the name ·of the person to receive servi~e of process, together 
with the particulars of the residence or place of business of such 20 
person, 
(xi) provision as to the percentage of votes by the apartment 
owners which shall be determinative of whether to rebuild, repair, 
. restore. or sell the property in the event of damage or destruction 
of all or any part of the property: 25 
Provided that the competent authority may. ;f it is satisfied that the 
promoter was prevented bv sumcient cause from executing the Deed 
of Apartment in relation to any npartment within the period of three 
months. or six monthc;. as the case may be. permit the promoter to 
execute such Deed of Apartment within such further perm3, not exceed- 30 
ing six montm. as it may specify. • 
(2) The pl'ODloier shall-
(a) flJe in the ofRce nf the competent authority, and 
(b) tleliver to the eoncemed allottee or transferee. as the calle 
'may 1te, 35 
IIJ rerfiftN coyly of each Deed of Ap.l'tmetlt ." red_tered under Rrt.ion 
14. 
(3) Whenever any trarlsfer of anv apartment I!': made by the owner 
thereof. whether by sale. lease. mort~age. exchauQ'e. gift or otherwise. 
fhe transferor shall deliver to the transferee the certified CODy of the])ee(f 40 
of Apartment delivered to him. under sub-sectfon (2) after ma~ an 
p.ndorsement thereon as- to the name. ·addreB!l and other particulaft of 
the transferee, to enable the transferee to ·flettb~ endorsement on the 
certifted copy of the Deed of, Apartment registered 'in accordance with 
the provisions of se('tion 14. f5. 

" 
(4) Whenever aDy succession takes plac:e to any apartment or plirt 
thereof, the successor abaIl, within a period of six mOAths from tlae date 
of sucla succesliioD, make aD applicatiOD to the competent authority for 
reeorcIiDc such sliccession on the certified cupy of the Deed of Apart. 
S mellt in relation to the concerned apartmeJIt, and, if there is uy 
dispute .. to tbe aluccesUon to the apartment, the competent authodt)' 
shall decide tbe same, aDd for this purpose, such authurit)· shall have 
the powers of a civil court, whUe tryiDl a suit, aDd its decision shall 
have etfect of a decree aDd shall be appealable as if it were a decree 
10 passed by the principal civil court of oripnal jurisdiCtiOD. 
(5) WhelleYel' .y ~ 10 - apwtmeat ....... aecorded ..,. 
tile competent authority under sub-section (4), such authority shall 
sead a true copy of such reeord, to the concerned Registrar for recls-
uatioa thereof in accordance with the provisions of section 14. 
15 (6) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the pro. 
visions of this section shall be in addition to, and not. in derogation of. 
the provisions of any other law, for the time being in force, relating 
to the transCAf of immovable property. 
1'- (1) Every Deed of Apartment and every endorsement thereon 
20 relating to the transfer of the apartment shall be deerr.ed 1.0 be a 
• document which is compulsorily registrable under the Reg:stration Act, 
1. of 1808, 1908 and shaJ.l be registered with the Registrar i.lccordingly, and words 
and expressions used in this section but not defined ~n this Act. shall have 
the meanings l"espectively assigned to them in the R~gistra!.ion Act, 
25 1908. 
(2) In all ~egistration ottifes, a book called "Rpg'..ster 'of Deeds of 
Apartments under the Delhi Apartment Ownership Act, 1986" and, an 
Index relating thereto shall be kept in such form and shall contain such 
particulars as may be prescribed. 
30 (3) Whenever any endorsement on a Deed of Aportment IS regis-
tered, the Registrar shall forward a certified copy thereof to the compe-
tent authority to' enable that authority to make necessary entries in 
the certified copy of the concerned Deed. Of Apartment filed with it 
under sub-section (2) of section 13. 
'l5 (4) A'"1Y person acquiring any apartment shall be deemed to have 
. notice of the contents of the Deed of Apartment and the endorsement, 
if any, thereon :is from the date of its registration under this section. 
40 
CHAPTER IV 
AssOCIATION OF APARTMENT OWNERS AND BYE-I.AW3 FOR '!'HI: UGtJLA'I'lOJll 
OF THE AFfAIRS 01: SUCH AsSOCIATJON 
15. (1) There shall be an Association of Apartment Owners for the 
administration of the affairs in relati',m to the apartments and the pro-
perty appertaining thereto and for the management of common areas 
and facilitial: .' 
45 Provided that where any area has been demarcated illf the construc-
tion of multi-storeyed, buildings, whether such area is called a block or 
pocket or by any other name, there shall be a ~ineJe Association of 
Reeistra-
tion of 
Deed of 
Apart-
ment. 
Associa-
tion of 
Apart-
ment 
Owners 
and 
bye-laws 
relating 
thereto. 

14 
Apartment oWners in such demarcated area. 
(2) The Administrator may, by notification in the O8ldal GUt~tle. 
frame model bye-laws in accordance with which the property referred 
to iD sub-section (1) shan he administered by the AssociadOD of Apart-
ment Owners and every such Association shall, at its first meetina, make 5 
itS bye-laws in accordance with the model bye-laws so framed, aad in 
maId. its bye-laws the Associatioll of Apartment Owners shall D~t 
make any departure from variation of addttion to, or omission from 
tile model bye-laws aforesa:d ~eept with the prior approval 01 th~ 
A.d-inistrator aDd DO such approval shan be Jiven if, in the opinidD of 10 
~. A.ia.?tI"ator;' sue .. departure, variatioP, ~ddition or om_en will 
_ve the effe-=t of altering the basic structure of the model bye-laws 
!rallied by him. ... ... 
(3) The model bye-laws framed under sub-sedion (2) shall provide 
for the. follow,ing, among other matters, wune.ly: - . I 
(a) the mannpr in which the Association of Apartment Owners 
is to be formed; 
(b) the election, from among apartment owners, of a Board of 
MBWlgement by the members of the Association of Apartment 
OwneJ'Sj ' •• 
(c) the number of apartment owners constituting the Board, 
the composition of the Board and that one-third of members of' the 
Board shall retire annually;' 
(el) the powers and duties of the Board; 
(e) the honorarium, if any, of the members of the Board; 
(f) the method. of removal from office of the memben of the 
~; I 
(g) the powers of the Board to engage the &eMcee· of a 
Manager; I ... I .. ~ 
(h) deleaation of powers and duties of the Board to such 30 
l\Ianager; 
(i) method of calling meetings of the Asiot"iation of Ap,artmenl 
Owners and the number of. members of such Association who s}lall 
constitute a quorum for such meetings; 
(j) election of a President of the Association of Apartment 35 
Ownen from among the apartment owners, who shall preside over 
the JOeetinp of the Board and of the Association of Apartment 
OWners' ' , . I , , I .. _ • 
(k) election of a Secretary to the Ass~iation of Apartment 
Owner. from amona the apartment owners, who shall be an u 40 
officio member of the Board and shall -keep two separate minutes 
books, one for the Association and the other for the Boani, pages 
of each of which shall be consecutively numbered and -al1thenti. 
cat.cl by the President of the Asaocia.tiQ~1 and, aball ~,~.jJ). the 
respective mil,lutes boob, the resolutiolU adopted. by the-. Atsaela~ 4S 
tloaor, the~:Doud, as the -case .·may be; 

10 
15 
. tl) eieetion of a ,Treasurer from i.DlOIlI the apa! .... , cnrurt, 
,;~ Ih81l·keeJt 1be' ftfta1leWreCfJIds 'of' the AIBOclaUon ~ "Apart-
ment Owriers .. .also ·of·th .. ~; 
. (17') .mai~J18nc~ r.epaili.,~ • .rep~ment otthe commoa area 
and lacilities and payment therefor; . 
(n) manner of collecting trom the apartment owners or ally 
'Qtber"OQCl\lpmt o.,.pattmen~,.Ibar.·of the .common e~; 
(0) resignation and removal of pttr.,ds employed for the, JIIaiI1. 
tertance, repair and replacement of the eonuriOn flreBs andtaelntlM; 
, (p) 'r.ttici~ "with.. r.tJPrd, \ .~. the use and maintaQmoe of 
".~.,)aj8l'tmelda ,ncllUle. ~·,o.;.\be,. OQIIUIlOIl ...... ,and f.wUes, 
.. ·may. .. be ~lIary t~hP"ttVJqt ~bl.".~ee ill. the 
,·use ·of ,each,,·apart~t .. _ of ,tbe,caIUIlOQ ,areal and, faCJ11iu. by 
the several ·,apertment owners; 
(q) any matter which may be required by the AdminiItrator· 
~,be provided in the, bye-law. for the proper or better admini.tra-
tion of the property; ,. 
(1) such other matters as are required to be, or may' be, pnmd .. 
'ed for in the bye-Iaws. 
110, ,(4) The b~law •. frAmed . .wt4«·s\lb-lec:tion (2) may also ,contain 
provisions, not inconsistent with tbia Act,-
(a) enabling the Board to ~tain certain areas of the building 
for commercial purpoS81 -and-to arant lease of the areas so r~ed. 
and, to apply the proceeds of sudl leue for the reduction of the 
common expenses for maintaining the building, common -.reu and 
facilities, and if any surplus is left after meeting such expenI8I, to 
distribute such surplus to the apartment owners as income; 
(b) relating to the audit of the accounts of the Aasociation of 
:A.)a1'tment Owners" and· of the Board, and of .the administration of 
:the· property; 
" ji(c)apec;ij)'ing, .. tbe,.~a.tf!Whic~BDclthe lJlBIll1er in "which 
,aDn~l geQe1'al.-m~.(~.~ .. neral,mee<tings of· the AMe-
elation of Apartment, ~er'i. ahtll lle"hel4 and conductedj 
. :(d).speCtfyirtg the, time at which and the ~er in which, the 
35 ;' j MIIlual- report relating to the aethtities of the Association of Apart .. 
met Owners· shall be su!xoitted; , 
(e) specifying the manner in which the income derived and 
'; ';', tU~ -illClH'rt"Ciby;·t1aA ~tion of" Apartment- OwnerW' ahall 
,,:bfa"dea1t,'witb, or· all the '.I888;.may' be, ',8CCOWlted for. 
40 11. . (l)' The,BQ8l'd .or:~M;"nager- Insura.ee. 
'i,:., I; (a) ,shaD have,. .it .• iettueBt'ied.o ·to do by·a mortgagee haYing a 
first mortgage covering an apartment, the authority to,' and 
(b) shall, if required so to do by the bYtt-1aws or by a majority 
.: ,. D.~~ ... pilt'rtm8Ilt '~WI'l.~, , 
Q·;~h.~~ ~~ ,tqr :~,;~{RPft"tf.,M~t~ ~,~. Pl,·~ or 
other hUards under luch terms and for su~ ,amol1n1:l as ,.shall, be ,.0 
requatted or required. 

Dispo-
sitionof 
property, 
destrue-
tionor 
damale. 
.,18 .. , 
. . ,(~) Such insurance coverage &hap. ~ w.ritte~ on the property in the 
IlIhIJ of such"~d Or· Mahager lUi' trustee' tor .eacb of the' 'apartment 
: owners in the percentages speci&8 in the bye..1aws. \." I ~ 
(3) The premia paya~l~ in respe~ of eveti such i:r.tsura.nce shan be 
common expenses. , .,' '., 1" 'I • 5 
Ii 
\ (4) The provisiOIlB' o'i sub-aeeUo~ (1) to ~3) ~ban be withOlit pre-
judice to the right of ea~h\ of the aparfinent \ &wner ~M irtNre hisl own • • r' ' , I 
ap,artment for his bfnefit.,., "'~:I': ".~! ,;' ','~ , 
, .I r' \ ~. I, ". \ I ".. \ , • 
I, .: III • .. 
, 17:, ~f within sixty da~~, of the dfte of dama~: or destruction, to: all,. 
or part of any property, ... ril within Such furthet' 'tfirne' as the competent Ie 
aulilodty may,~I·.having ~ to the· circum~esof th~ case,'allow, 
the Association 'of Apartu1eftt' Owders~~c:Wes no1f1 detennine to repair, . . " 1-" . 
,reconstruct or rebuild such property, theri, 1PlId: tn· that event,-' 
'.,.. I 
1 ,,' "':1 :' :, 
'~~ (a) the properi). shall be~. ~eemed'~ be o~ned ip common b~ 
the apartment own.,s; . " ' 15 
! ~ 
(b) the undi~ded interest in the W'Dperty owned ,in, comnaOB, 
which shall appertain to each apartment' owner, shaU be the per-
centage of the undivided interest previously owned by sii~h owner 
in the common areas and facUities; "~ 
~, ..' , 4 
(c) any incumbrances '4f!ecting' any of the apartments shall be lIO 
t,' deemed fq be tr,rlliferred ih accori:lah~ with tlie ~,xisting priority 
to the perCentage ot~, the und~vided iDteiest of the apartment owner 
in the property;' '.f . \. I • 
~;. " 
.~;~ ,(d) th£ Pfoperty ~l be s~bJect to an;, action fOI:\ partitiQn at-
th, ,~uit of anx apartment 0Wll~r 'iR which event, the net pro~ lI5 
of's8le together with the net proc. of the insuranc,~ oil the pro-
perty, if any, shall be'consid~ as one fund and shW be divided 
amongst au the apartment owners in the percen{a~ equal to the per~ ~ 
,centage 9..' undivided 14terest owned 'by ~ch apa,rtmert owner in the 
property after paying out, all the respective shares of the apart- :Je 
ment oV'{llers to .'the .. ~t suftlciept fOI: the p~se and all charges 
on the Undivided interest bl the proper~y own&! by each apartment 
owner. .,.~ .~ '" &.' J 
,\ , 
~8. (1) Without,p~ejUdice·. to tlie rigb4,pt any'- apartI!lent own ... ' 
t ~tl0n .may be broug;ht by tiJBoard or Manager. in eitB~r case t.n the 35 
'Idiscretion of ~he ~arcl on behalf of two .()r·more of the apartment.ownerl 
as ,their respective~rest may ''appear; with respeCt to any cause of 
action relating to the common areas and !~i1ities or 'p1llre than. ona apartment. .. , , 
~ . '~. ~. 
,~ , •. J -,;_ 
(2) The service of process on two or more apar~menf ,oWners in any 40 
, 'action relating to the common areas and facilities or more thaD ou 
ap8rtment may be made on the person, designated in the bye-lawl 'to· 
reee1ve service of process., I • 
" . 

'I 
~:, . 
, ',I' I : '. , 
'COMMqN PROnTS:.,~ EXPl:NSI!lS AND ~ MA~ 
.". ~. ' 
• • r' , , • 
", 19.' (I)' The common profits ot ~,.property shall be diatrib~ted ~~~ 
and the common expenses shall, be charged to, the apartment owp~ 
5 according to the percentage of the undivided interest of the apartllu!pi 
owners in the common areas and 'facilities. I 
. (2) Where tbe apartment owner is not in the occupation of the 
apartment owned by him, the common, expenses payable by such 
~p8!tment owner may be reeqvered from the person in the occupation 
•• of, the apartment. ' -
'20: No apartment owner ,may exempt himself from liability' for his 
eontrlbution'towards 'the common expeme. by waiver of the· use of 
enjoyment of any of the common' areas and facilities, or 'by the a'bandoD-
ment of his apartment. 
, -
15. 21, All sums assessed by the Association C1f Apartment Owners, but 
unpaid for the share of the common. expenses chargeable to any apart-
ment, shall constitute a charge on such apartment prior to all, other 
charges except only--
(i) the charge, if any, on the apartment 'for.,payment ,of Govern-
20 ment ,and, municipal taxes; and . 
(ii) all the sums unpai~ ot:! a first mortgage of the .aPartment. 
, 
-
CorptBo~ . 
profits, 
~~, , eXpeIl- . 
lesand 
other 
matters. 
Apart-
ment 
owner 
not to be 
exempt 
from 
liability 
for eon-
tribution 
by waiver 
of the 
uleotthe 
common 
areas 
anclfaci-
lities. 
Common 
expenaes 
tobea 
charI'! 
on the 
apart-
ment., 
'.22. (1) Notwithstanding anything to the· con.trar'} contained, in any ~ 
law relating to local authorities, each· apartment ·and its pereentage of ..... 
undivided interest in the common areas and facilities appurtenant to menta., 
25 such apartment (including an apartment in respect of which the provisions 
of this Act were applied under the proviso to' seci;!on' 2) 'Shall be deemed 
'to be separate property for'the'purpose of asSeSsment of tax on I8nds anc! 
buildings leviable under such law and' shall be ·usp.ssed and taxed accord-
... ingly; and for this purpose a local authority shall make suitable regula-
3. tions to carry out the provisions of this section. 
(2) Neither the m1l1ti~oreyedbunding nor the p~perty" nOr' the 
. cQmmon 'areas' and facilities' referr8d to" in sub-eection (l) ~ shall be 
deeMed to be 'separate' properties 'fot the purpOse Of the levy of such 
taxes. .. . " ,'" 
".,S":, 

Joint 
... d 
I8ftral 
liabilitr 
ofveudor, 
etl:.~_" 
unplill 
cod\~' 
expeti •. 
Ac!ltO' 
~,tiiftl!:' 
Ina-' ' 
a~: 
Pewerte 
exemJft 
stamp 
duty, 
repltre· 
tiOllfee 
and 
court 
feIff-
powlff"tiS' 
refum!:' " 
18 
23. (1) Upon the sale, bequest or,"other transfer of an apartment, the 
purchaser of the apartment or the grantee or legatee or the tran""', 
as the case may be;' staall <be' jutmly8l'ld '8Pel'e1ly'liable" wlth,th. venb 
or the transferor for all unpaid assessments against ilie vendor dr traDI-
Mor'for'his' shate'of'the'comrmm' ~'Up"to the time of the: .. l., 5 
, bequest or other'tr8J'lifer, 'wtthoatpreJ\1ciiatHo.tbe' right of the purChallr, 
grantl!!e.' lega~'ot'traillferee:m"reeCMll' from-the vendor or tt.1raI;. 
feror any amount paid by the' purebUdr; grantt-e;' leptee or tl'aIlIIfea!ae 
therefor. 
(2) Any purchaser, grantee, legatee or transfe~ referred to in .ulJ. 10 
section (1) shall be entitled to a statement from the Board or M8ft.~ 
ger' aettblg forth the' amount 'of the unpaid assessment against the vendbr 
or transferor, as the case may be, and such purchawr, grantee, lellatee 
or transferee shall not be Hable for, nor shall the apartment be BOld 
subject to'.'cbargefGr allyunpaWabar~ of'common expeasee·agllillst:8Uch I~ 
apartDien.taccrueci prior to:.suoh _,beq1lelt or other transfer, in .... 
of·the'limount set forth'ln the statement. 
CHA.Pl'ER VI 
MISCBLLAJm)US 
24. (1) The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding 20 
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time 
being in force or in any contract, undertaking or other instrument and 
all apartment owners, tenants of owners, employees of owners and 
tenants, or any other person who may, in any manner, use the property 
or any part thereof to which this Act applies, shall be subject to ~ 2S 
proYisions of this Act and the bye-laws and tlJe rules made thereunder. 
(2) All agreements, divisions and dete~inatton!l lawfully made by 
the ~ation -at Apartmrif OWners' in" accordance with the provtstonl 
of ~ Act anef the bye-laws ',ball be deemed' to 'br. biriaing on all aoart. 
ment owners, 301 
25. ,(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the omelet 
rJ.tte, recfuee or' ~mit, .1ietfter p~tfvely ot refrosyM!Ctivaly frem 
a date not earlier than the date of ~~@n~c!ftt of this Ad,-
(a) the stamp duty with which; under any, law relatfnlf to 
stamp duty for the time being in force, instruments or doeuments 35, 
executed by or on bebalf of a promoter, apartment owner or Auo. 
dattmi' of'Apa~t ·OWtiets: relaUiiW· to any of the 'ptirpo&es C1f this' 
A~ 'are respectf\t~fcl\~abl~; , 
'(b) any fee payabJe by or oobehJlll,of My promoter,apartaeat 
owner or A8soeiation·of Apal"atment Owners in relation to instrument. 40 
or documents referred to in clause (a)' under an:v law relating' to 
!'egistration of documentS' or t() court fees, for the time being. in 
foroe, 
and which the Central Government is competent to levy, 
(2) The Cf'nfNl Govel'DlDellt,"" ~ the, am.nnt, 0( anp'1iaty 45 
fit ,. ')taid- i .. , )HII'II .... ee of any' Jaw' l'ef'erni to' inl'U1Meetion '(1) In 
... 'flrc":zZ.h_. to .-It .... · ... · ...... 10 IIIdt t... .. ~.IICIl, 
~ ny. 1\11'" GwehhiieM~. by ortIer, ......." 

1of 1 •. 
J9 
•. For the removal of doubts, it is hereby dec1art'd that the provisiOlli Removal 
of the °Transfer of Property Act, 1882, shall, in so far as they are not uf 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, apply to the transfer of any 4oubta. 
apartment, together with its undivided interest in the common areas o 
5 and facilities appurwnant thereto,. ~,by theow~; oof ·such apart-
ment, whether such transfer is made by. sale, lease, mortgage, exchange, 
gift or otherwi8e, as they ap,ply· to the 0 tran"er of any, immw'~ .pro-
pert,: 
2'1. (1) The Central Government may., by notificatiqn, in, the.: 0ftWA1 Power to 
10 a.ttte, make rules to carry out the provisions of this Ac;f;.: make 
(2) In ~ticular, and without prejudice to the ~~~r~~. ot. ~ 
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any. of the,folloWrm. 
'matters, namely: - 0 
(4) the purposes, other than the purposes speciBed. in section' 2, 
15 for which any multi-storeyed. building may be utilised; 
~o 
30 
35 
(b) the type of independent uses, other than the. ~o spe~ 
in clause (e) of section 3, which may be made of'an ~~t~. ' 
(c) the community and commercial facilities which, ~af ~ 
included in common areas and facilities under sub~la~ I (pit),. of 
clause (;) of section 3; 
(d) the scales of composition fees which may be· pal. ~ 
section 8 for the breach of the terms and conditiolll of·lIoI1y leMIt.-w 
IU~leue; , •. 
(e) the scales in accordance with which co~pensatl~. t;c, 'be 
paid for the ejectment of an apartm~n1: ~wner frO.i,t, his, a~~. 
shall be determined as required by su~secfl.o~ (7) at,~~ ~i.~· . 
(,) the form and manner in which. and the period within 
which, an instrument referred to in clause (b) of section 9, shan be 
ex:ecuted and registered; 
(g)' the form in which the Register of. ~eeds of A~~e!lt. 
under the Delhi Apartment Ownership Act, 1986 and the index 
relating thereto shall be kept and the particulars which such 
regiJtei shall contain as required by sub-section 0 (2) of section 14; 
(h) any ooth~r m~tt~r w.h~~h is req~re.d 0 to be. or may be, 
prescribed. 
(3) Every rule· made °under this Aet shall be laAl;. as soon as ..my 
be after it is made, before each House of Parliamen*. while . it is 'In 
session, for a total period of thirty days which may be co~pri~!!d i~. one 
session or in two or more su~cessive sessions, and if. befQre. the' expiry 
40 o~ the session iIllMediately following the session o~ the s~cce.',8\ve 
session, aforesaid, ~th .lJouses ~gree ip, m~ki~g . any modification. , 0 ~ 
the rule, or both Houses agree thl'lt the. i1JIe s~uld.n.pt o~ Jl}fde, 0 the 
rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified fonn or be of no 
effect. as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
45 annulment shall be withuut· prejudice to the validity of anythln, 
previously' done unde'l' that rule. 
rules. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Delhi Apartment Ownership Bill, 1986 seeks to achieve the object 
uf enabling the conferment of heritable and transferable right in -an 
apartment including its proportionate and undivided interest in land 
and other common area'S. The scarcity of land in Delhi because of very 
rapid urbanisation has led to a vertical growth of buildings. Multi-
storeyed residential buildings, integrated development of commercial 
mstitutional and industrial areas and flatted factories have resulted in a 
marked increase in the number of multi-storeyed buildings in Delhi con-
taining a number of apartments, 'Sharing land and other common facilities. 
In the case of fiats constructed by agencies like the Delhi Development, 
Authority while the Buper-structure is conveyed to the allottee, the land 
is conveyed to a registered agency and the allottees jointly which apart 
from separating the ownership of land and super-structures, interposes 
the registered. agency iD future transfers of properties. In the case of co-
operative societies, di1Bculties are experienced in obtaining loans -in the 
absence of a mortgageable title in an apartment. constructed on 
indivisible land, the title to which rests in the society. The existing 
arrangements also involve the intervention of the Government and 
IIlmcies lib the Delhi Development Authority in the litigation c:Jr 
al8pu.te reprding management of common areas which arise between 
the leaMI and the buyers of the apartments. The legislation therefore 
prop .11 to meet the persistent demand for statutory recognition of an 
8pIII$ ilen t as· a unit of property, capable of transfer and for a statutory 
OII'IP11isation clothed with adequate powers for management of common 
_ in multi-storeyed buildings. 
NEW Dam; ABDUL GJlAFOOR. 
The 27th JanV4f'y. 1986; 
PRl!ElDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLES 117 AND 274 
OF THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No: J-2001118177-LII. dated. 10th February, 1986 fTom 
Shri Abdul Ghafoor, Minister of Urban Development to the Secretary-
General, Lok Sabha.] 
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the 
"ll'oposed Delhi Apartment Ownership Bill, recommends the int~oduction 
otihe-Bill in Lok Sabha under articles 117(1) and 274(1) of the Consti-
tutionand recommends to the House the consideration of the Bill under 
'lrticle 117 (3) of the Constitution. 
20 

. , 
, ( 
01 
'I 
Note. on clau.e. 
.4.1, 
, 4: 
Clczuse 2.-This clause .. specifies the ,killds. of apartments to which the 
proposed legiUation, when enacted, wo~ld "be applicable. 
Clause 3.-This clause defines the various expressions occurring in the 
Bill. " . " 
CZauBe 4.-This clause confers right of exclusive ownership and poBr 
session of 8l\: apartment .in a multi-storeyed b~ding to ~. person to 
whom the saJt1e has been allotted, sol~ or otherWise transfe¥ 
ClAuse 5.-This clause lays down th8t an apartment shall be heritaWe, 
and transferable. . 
• I 
ClvIuac:: 9.-This clause requires a lessee or a transferee of ~ aparti 
ment to execute and have registered an undertaIdng U1 writing. ' 
.' ., ~.. .. e ... ~ .. ~ 
Cl4use lO.-This clause lays down that the benllmidar 'apartment shall 
be deemed 'to be the real owne.r. of the apartment. 
~ " 
. Clause n.-This clause prohibits making of any substantial chan~ 
by an apartment owner without first obtaining the consent of all the 
~ther: apartment owners in a multi-storeyed building . 
. '. ',' ."~ 
Clause 12.-This clause enables an apartment owner to create encum-
brances against his apartment. 
Clause 13.-This clause requires execution of a Deed of Apa.rtuUmt 
in every case of an allotment, sale or transfer and also specifies the 
contents which such a deed shall contain. 
Clause 14.-This clause lays down that every Deed of Apartment 
shall be compulsorily registrable. 
Clause 15.-This clause envisages the forming of AssociatiODS of 
Apartment, Owners and making and framing of bye-laws for the 
administration of affairs in relation to apartments and tlle mangement 
of Common areas facilities. 
III ... a • ..., 

a.wae I6.-This clause deals with insurance of apartments lIabssi 
l6is or damage by fire and other hazards. 
Clc&uBe I7.-'nUs clause deals with dilposi~on of propetty' ift! the' 
-event of destruction or damage. 
Clause 18.-Th.i$ clause enables the Manager or Board of Man .... 
, '~t' of 'an 'association to "take civil actions on behalf of tWo Or more 
oapartment owners. 
:~UiU8e 19~2.Thf~'~clause ~als wi~ .the apportionment of common pro-
fits and expenses relating to apartments. 
'~e 20.-This <:1a'USe lays down that an apartment owner. '~not 
, be' ~pt from Ulbility to pay ~xpenses for common areas and't8cl1it1es 
by waiver or abandDrUnent of their use. 
~e rt1.-'ntis· ClilUse 'lays down that common expensesah8n be 
charged on the apartments. 
, , 
C'UiUae' !2.-'l1Us daUse lilYS down that each apartment' shall be se-
"p8tiite1y 'a~ 'for the pUrposes of 'taxes. 
'aaUB~ 23.-Tms clause lays down that bOth the vendor a!1d the't;rqI-
feree shall be jointly and severally liable for all unpaid Q8e8SJDeIlts in 
respect of an' ap"artmeDt. 
CkNse k~This clause lays down that the proposed lepdatioti;.l1 
have overriding eftect and shall apply to all the apartments. 
I;t'l. ".'.} ,- ":. 
" ,,~ .. ~.:-This cla .. empower. the Central GoVel'1tll\erit l toteduee. 
reJnit, whether prospectively or ~trospectively. any Stamp duty.':rep-
tration fee or court fee or to refund the same. 
Cz4ua~, ~.-:-TP!s ~ause lays down that the provisions of'the Trimlfer 
of Property, Act. 1882 in so far as they are D.9t inconsistent wi~ the pro-
''YitIkms of' the projJo!led legislation shall apply to the' transfer of apart-
ment., ", 
CIauIe 27.-This claUse empOwers the Central Government to inake 
tuld'to carry out the proViSions of thia Act. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 13 of the Bill seeks to make it compulsory on the part of all 
promoters to file a copy of the Deed of Apartment with the competent 
authority whenever any allotment, sale or other transfer of any apart-
ment is made. The' Deed of Apartment will contain detailed particulars 
about the name of the allottee, description of common areas, facilities, 
etc., and the percentage of undivided interest for each apartment in the 
common areas and facilities, etc. The competent authority is to function 
as a focal point in respect of all the apartments covered under the pro-
posed Bill to ensure that such Deeds of Apartments are filed in respect 
of all the apartments. At the time of subsequent transfers like sale, etc., 
also, necessary entries will have tQ be made in these Deeds of Apartments 
and the competent authority will have to keep a record of such changes. 
2. Clause 15(2) of the Bill seeks to make a provision that 
the Association of Apartment Owners will administer the properties in 
accordance with such bye-laws as may be made under the proposed legis-
lation. The bye-laws shall provipe among other things the manne,c in 
which the Association of Apartment Owners is to be formed, election 
of Board of Management by the ;members, powers and duties of the Board, 
honorarium if any to the member Of. the Board~ method and removal 
from office of the me'Illbers of the Board, ma~s relating to meetings, 
maintenance, repairs, etc., to common areas and facilities, etc., etc. The 
competent authority will'have the function of watching the performance 
of the Association of Apartment Owners in accordance with these bye-
laws. 
3. The aforesaid, provisions would require the creation of an office to 
"ssist the competerit authority in' the discharge of his functions. The 
Bill, if enacted will be applicable'to the entire Union tenitory of Delhi 
and will cover all multi-storeyed buildings whether residential, com-
~ercia1 or of any other nature and also whether they are built by any 
co-operative society or any other person or authority. It is estimated that 
at present there would be approximately 50,000 apartments which would 
be covered by this Bill, ·if enacted. There is every possibility of increase 
in the number of these apartments in the tuture as the 'Scarcity of land 
in Delhi and the rapid urbanisation have led to vertical growth of multi-
storeyed buildings. Far the effective implementation pf the provisions, 
th~ work of the competent authority is proposed to be divided into three 
zones, namely. Delhi Development Zone, Municipal Corporation of Delhi 
Zone and New Delhi Municipal CommitteelLandand Development Office/ 
Delhi Cantonment Board Zone. The staft' component required for assist-
,ing the competent authority in the work relating to these three zones 
has been estimated to result in a recurring expenditure of Rs. 5 lakhs per 
annum (approximately) to start with. . 
4. The creation of an office of the competent authority would also 
involve contingent expenditUre for finding out a suitable oftice accomino-
dation, purchase of an inspection vehicle a!1dpuiehast! . of· om~ tbrnfture, 
etc. The expenditure on this account has been worked oUt at Rs. 3 Iakhs 
non-recuning. 
5. The Bill wfll not fnvolve any other expenditure, either recurring 
or non-recurring. 

MEMORANDUM ~ARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Sub-clause (2) of clause 15 of the Bill empowers the Administrator 
~9 tr~ ~odel bye-laws rd.ating to the manner in which the property 
referred to in sub-clause (1) of clause 15 shall be a~istered and 
tUflher empowers the Association of Apartment Owners to make bye-
l~w(; for the purp>ses of Ule administration of such property in accord-
ance with the model bye-laws so framed The Bill further provides that 
in making its bye-laws, the Association of Apartment Owners shall not 
make any departure from, or variation of, or addition to, or omission 
fro~, the said model by.laws except with the prior approval of the 
Administrator, and the Aclministrator shall not grant any such approval, 
if IUCh departure, variation, addition or omisaion has the dect of alter-
ing the basic structure of the model bye-laws. 
Sub-cl41use (3) of that clause enumerates in detail the matters with 
respect to which bye-laws may be made or framed. These matters 
relate, in.ter aJ,;..a, to the manner in which the AS9OCiation of Apartment 
Owners is to be form,d; 'Qle election, from among apartment owners, of 
a lloar~ of M~,gement' bY the members of the Association of Apartment 
Owners; the powers and, duties of the Board: method of calling meetings 
of the Association of "Apartment Owners and quonlm for such meetings; 
maintenance. repair and replacement of the common areas and facilities 
and payment therefor; manDer of collecting from the apartment owners 
share of the common expenses; restricUoDi with regam to the 'use and 
maintenance of the apartments and the use of the common areBl and 
faciHtiea. etc. 
Sub-clause (4) of that clause also enumerates certain additional 
matters which may be included in the bye-laws lIO made or framed. 
2. Clause 27 of the Bill empowers the Central Government, by notifi-
cation in the OfBclal Gazette, to make rules to carry out the provisions 
of the proposed legislation. Sub-clause (2) of this clause enumerates in 
detail the matters with res~ to which rules may be made under this 
clause. These matters relate, inter alia, to the additional purposes for 
Which aily multi-storeyed bufiding may be utilised; .the additional com-
munity and commerclal facilities, which may be specified as common 
aNae and faciU~ies; the scales iii accordance with which composition fees 
may be levied for the breach of the terms and conditions of any lease, 
the form In which the Ragister of Deeds of Apartments under the 
proposed legislation shall be maintained and particulars .whlch such 
Register shall contain. 
3. The mattera with J'8IP8Ct ~ which bye-lawa or rules may be framed 
... mw .. m.atter. of p1"(JOIdure or detail. The delegatiOn of legisla-
Uve power ii, therefore, of • hormal character. . 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
.0 provide for the ownsrship of an individual apartment in a multi-
storeyed bundlng and of an undivided interest in the ~mon areas 
and fadlltIeB appurtenant to such apartment and to maD such 
apartmmt aDd interest heritable and traDsferab1e and for matters 
COIlDected therewith or inCidental thereto. 
'(Shf'i Abclul Ghafoort 
lIIini1tet' of U,.bGn Dh~t) 