AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
हक :

2 JUN 1998

Bill No. 11 of 1998

THE POPULATION CONTROL BILL, 1998
By
Dr. T. Susparamt Reppy, M.P.
A

| BILL

‘Provide for population control through compulsory sterilisation of certain

persous; measures for promoting small family norm and for matters
connected therewith.

Br it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as
lows:

1, (/) This Act may be called the Population Control Act, 1998.

(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
ification in the Official Gazette, appoint.

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, “appropriate Government”
Means the Central Government in relation to Union territories and the State
jovernment in relation 10 a State.

~ 3. Either the husband or the wife in the case of every married couple who have

'0 छा more than (wo living children, on the date of coming into force of this Act, or
hose second living child is born after the commencement of this Act, shall be
wired to undergo compulsory sterilisation:

Short title and

Definition

Compulsory
Serilisation,


Time gap
between the
birth of two
children

Benefits to
couple who opt
to undergo
sterilisation.

Introduction of
subject relating
to population
control in
educational
Institutions.

Minimum age
of marriage.

National
Population
Control Fund.

Utilisation of
the Fund.

Provisions
relating to
‘Central
Government
employees, ete

Punishment

Act to have
over-riding
effect

Power to make
rules

=

Provided that the husband or wife, as the case may be, shall not be required to
undergo sterilisation if he or she is above the age of fifty years.

4. Subject to the provisions of this Act, there shall be a gap of not less than five years
between the birth of two children,

5. If cither the husband or the wife in the case of a married couple, who have only
one child on the date of commencement of this Act, voluntarily undergoes sterilisation, the
appropriate Government shall provide them with the following benefits, namely:—

(i) supply of essential commodities such as wheat, milk, sugar and such other
essential commodities as may be provided at concessional rates;

(ii) free education including higher education to the first child and to the second
child, if any, born within one year from the date of commencement of this Act;

(iii) suitable employment to such child after he completes his education; and
(iv) such other benefits as may be prescribed by the rules made under this Act.

6. The appropriate Government shall introduce a compulsory subject relating
to population control in all educational institutions for all children who have attained
the age of fifteen years, irrespective of class in which they are studying and the course
they are pursuing.

7. No marriage shall be solemnised between a male who is less than twenty-five
years of age and a female who is less than twenty-two years of age.

8. (/) There shall be constituted a fund to be called the National Population
Control Fund by the Central Government.

(2) The Central Government and every State Government shall contribute to
the fund in such ratio as may be determined by the Central Government.

9. The fund constituted under section 8 shall be utilised for the following purposes
namely:—
(i) giving of national population control award to that State or Union territory
which has recorded least population growth rate during the year; and

(ii) giving of national population control certificate to a person or an organisation
which in the opinion of the Central Government, has contributed in awakening the
masses towards importance of population control and adoption of various methods
for population control.

10. (/) Any person who is serving in connection with the affairs of the Union
Government or in any undertaking or organisation under the control of the Union
Government and who has only one living child or who has not procreated any child or who
is unmarried on the date of coming into force of this Act, shall give an undertaking that he
shall not procreate more than one living child.

(2) Any person violating the provisions of sub-section (1) shall be subject to such
disciplinary action as may be determined by the Central Government.

वा, Any person violating the provisions of this Act shall be punished with rigorous
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than four years and with fine which shall
be not less than rupees five thousand.

12. The provisions of this Act shall apply notwithstanding anything contained to
the contrary in any other law for the time being in force.

al Gazette, make

13. The Central Government may, by notification in the Offi
rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.

10

20

25

30

35

40

45


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Rapid increase in the population has given birth to many socio-economic problems

erty, food and housing, unemployment and environmental pollution. We are the
highest populous country after China, China has controlled the rapid growth in its
wulation. It is estimated that our population by the end of this century will cross the
of one hundred crore. If the present trend continues, it will not be possible to
from socio-economic problems occuring due to increase in population.

“It is, therefore, imperative that certain effective steps be taken to check this menace.
our resources are limited, proper upbringing of children is possible only if the size
family is limited. Despite the existence of various birth control measures and various

nily planning programmes to motivate the people to accept these birth control methods,
he problem of population explosion still remains.

‘The Bill, therefore, seeks to make sterilisation compulsory for all persons having
‘or more than two living children. It also provides for certain measures like fixing the
imum age of marriages, minimum gap between the birth of two children, etc. and for
joting small family norm in future generation,

1. SUBBARAMI REDDY


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 5 of the Bill provides for certain benefits to be given to those who undergo
sterilisation voluntarily. Clause 6 provides for introduction of compulsory subject relating
10 population control in all educational institutions. Clause 8 provides for establishing
National Population Control Fund to which the Central Government shall also contribute
The Central Government shall have to incur some expenditure for implementing the
Provisions of this Bill in respect of Union territories. The State Governments will incur
“xpenditure in respect of their State out of their respective consolidated funds, The Bill,
therefore, will involve an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees ten crore out of the
Consolidated Fund of India,

No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 13 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the provisions of the Bill. As the rules to be made relate to matters of detail only, the
delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for population control throu;

gh compulsory sterilisation of certain persons;
Measures for promoting small famil

ly norm and for matters connected therewith.

(Dr: T. Subbarami Reddy, M.P)

MGIP(PLU) MRND-—-1!5L.S 23.04.1998,