Bill No. 11 or 1984. 
THE FINANCJE BILL, .84 
(AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 

THE FINANCE BILLI 1984 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CHAPTER I 
Pal:LlMIN AllY 
CLAUSES 
1. Short title and commencement. 
CHAPTER II 
RATES OF INCOME-TAX 
2. Income-tax. 
CHAPTER m 
DIRECT TAUS 
Inc.ome.-tax 
3. Amendment of section 10. 
4. Amendment of section 11. 
5. Amendment of section 33B. 
6. Amendment of section 35. 
7. Amendment of section 3SC. 
8. Amendment of section 36. 
9. Amendment of section 40. 
10. Amendment of section 40A. 
11. Insertion of new section 44AB. 
12. Amendment Qf section SOCC. 
13. Omission of section 800. 
14. Amendment of section 80E. 
15. Amendment of section SOL. 
13. Amendment of section S014. 
17. Amendment of section 80N. 
18. Amendment of section 800. 
19. Amendment of section BOU. 
20. Amendment of section 161. 
21. Amendment of section 164. 
22. Amendment of section 193. 
23. Amendment of section 194. 
24. Amendment of section 252. 
25. Amendment of section 269C. 
26. Amendment of section 269F. 
27. Amendment of section 269P. 
28. Insertion of new section 26988. 
29. Amendment of section 269T. 
30. Insertion of new section 271B. 
31. Insertion of new section 27600. 
32. Amendment of section 281A. 

CLAVSES 
34. Amendment of Act 27 of 1957. 
CHAPTER IV 
IflDlUCT TAXU 
35. Amendment of Act 51 of 1975. 
36. AuxlUary duties of customs. 
37. Amendment of section 28. 
38. Amendment of section 61. 
39. Amendment of section 129. 
40. Amendment of section 129A. 
41. Amendment of section 129C. 
42. Amendment of section 129D. 
43. Insertion of new section 12 9DD. 
ExcUe. 
44. Amendment of section 2. 
45. Amendment of section 3. 
46. Amendment of section 4. 
47. Amendment of section 35B. 
48. Amendment of section 35D. 
49. Amendment of section 35E. 
50. Insertion of new section 35EE. 
51. Amendment of First Schedule. 
52. Special duties of excise. 
53. Amendment of Act 58 of 1957. 
CHAPTER V 
MISCIUANI'DUS 
54. Amendment of Act 52 of 1963. 
55. Amendment of Act 45 of 1968. 
THE FmST SCHEDULE. 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE. 
THE THmD SCHEDULE. 
THE FOURTH SCHEDULE. 
THE FIFTH SCHEDULE. 

As lNTaODUCED IN Lol SAB SA 
ON 29'111 F'EBIlUAIlY, 1984. 
Bill No. 11 of 1984. 
5 
THE FINANCE BILLJ 1984 
BILL 
.to 9.t.vt t66e.c..t .to tht 6iM.rr.Uat p1r.OP06al6 06 tht Ce.n.tJur1 
GOVell.nmtM 601l tht 6.iM.nUat 1Jetl!L 7984-85. 
& it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-fifth Year of the Republic 
of India as folIows:-
CHAPTER I 
PULIMINABr 
1. III This Act may be called the Finance Act, 1984. 
(21 Save as otherwise provided in this Act, sections 2 to 34 and section 
54 shall be deemed to have come into force on the 1st day of April, 1984. 
CHAPTER II 
RAftS OF INCOME-TAX 
10 2. (I) Subject to the provisions of sub-sections (21 and (31, for the 
assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1984,income-tax 
shall be charged at the rates specified in Part I of the First Schedule 
and shall be increased,-
(a) in the cases to which Paragraphs A, B, C and D of that Part apply, 
15 by a surcharge for purp08es of the Union; and 
\b) in the cases to which Paragraph E of that Part applies, by a surcharp, 
calculated in each case in the manner provided therein: 
Provided that where an assessee, being a company, has made, during the 
financial year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1983, any depoeit with the 
20 industrial Development Bank of india established under the industrial Development 
18 of 1964. Bank of India Act, 1964 under the Companies Deposits (Surcharge on Income-tax) 
Scheme, 1983, then, the surcharge on income-tax payable by the company,-
(a) in a case where the amount of the deposit 80 made is equal to, or 
exceeds, one- half of the amount of surcharge on income-tax payable by It, shall 
25 be reduced by one-half of the amount of surcharge payable by Iti and 
Short title 
and com. 
mene_eat. 
IDcome-ta:. 

2 
(b) In a case where the amount of the deposit so made falls short of one-half 
of the amount of surcharge on Income-tax payable by it. shall be reduced by the 
amount of the deposit. 
( 2 I In the cases to which Sub- Paragraph I or Sub- Paragraph n of Paragraph A of 
Part I of the First Schedule applies. where the assessee has, In the previous year, 6 
any net agricultural Income exceeding six hundred rupees, In addition to total 
Income, and the total Income exceeds.-
(.il In a case to which the said Sub- Paragraph I applies, fifteen thousand 
rupees, and 
(UI in a case to which the said Sub-Paragraph n appHes, twelve thousand 10 
rupees. 
then,-
(a) the net agricultural Income shall be taken Into account. In the manner 
provided In clause (b) 6hat is to say, as if the net agricultural Income were 
comprised in the total income after.- 15 
(.il In a case to which the said &lb- Paragraph I applles. the first flfteen 
thousand rupees. and 
(UI In a case to which the said &lb-Paragraph II applles. the first eight 
thousand rupees. 
of the total Income but without being Hable to tq. only for the purpose of 20 
charging Income- tax In respect of the total lncome; and 
(b) the Income-tax chargeable shall be calculated as follows:-
(.i) the total lncome and the net agricultural Income shall be aggregated 
and the amount of Income-tax shall be determined In respect of the aggregate 
Income at the rate8 specified in Sub- Paragraph 1 or. as the case may be. 25 
9Jb- Paragraph n of the said Paragraph A. as If such aggregate Income were 
the total Income: 
Provided that In a case referred to In the said Sub- Paragraph II. for the 
purpo8e of determining the amount of Income-tax In accordance with this 
sub-clause, the prOVisions of clause (U) of the proviso below SUb-Paragraph II 30 
and the prOVisions relating to aurcharge on Income-tax In the said Sub-Para-
graph II 8hall not apply; 
I.u:J the net agricultural Income shall be Increased,-
(Al In a ca8e to which the said Sub-Paragraph I applies. by a sum of 
fifteen thousand rupees; and 35 
(8) In a cue to which the said Sub-Paragraph n applies. by a sum of 
eight thousand rupees. 
and the amount of Income-tax shall be determined In respect of the net 
agrlculturallncome as so Increased at the rates specified In Sub-Paragraph lor. 
as the case may be, &lb- Paragraph n of the said Paragraph A. as If the net 40 
agricultural Income as 80 increased were the total Income: 
Provided that In a case referred to In the said Sub- Paragraph n. for the 
purposes of determining the amount of Income-tax In accordance with this 
sub-clause. the provisions of clause (<<) of the proviso below the sald SUb-
Paragraph II and the provl810ns relating to surcharge on Income-tax in the 
said Sub- Paragraph II shall not apply; 
(.(.U.) the amount of Income-tax determined In accordance with sub-clause 
~~l shall be ntduced by the amount of income-tax determ lned in accordance 
with sllb-c1&1l8e (.u:J : 
45 

43 of 1961. 
3 
Provided that In a case referred to In the said Sub- Paragraph n. where 
the sum so arrived at exceeds sixty per cent. of the amount by which the 
total Ineome exceeds twelve thousand rupee3, the excess shall be disregarded; 
(.wI the amount of income-tax determined In accordance with sub-clause 
5 (.ui.) shall be Increased by a surcharge for purposes of the Union calculated 
at the rate of twelve and a balf per cent. of such lneome-tax and the sum so 
arrived at shall be the Income-tax In respect of the total Income. 
10 
(31 In cases to which the provisioDI:I of Chapter XU or Chapter XUA or section 
164 or section 164A or section 167 A of the Incom&-tax Act, 1961 (hereinafter referred 
to as the Income-tax Aot) apply, the tax chargeable shall be determined as provided 
in that Chapter or that section, and with reference to the rates imposed by sub-section 
( 1 J or the rates as specified in that Chapter or section, as the case may be. 
(4) In cues in which tax has to be deducted under sections 193, 194, 194A, 
194B, 194BB, 194D and 195 of the Income-tax Act at the rates in force, the decllction 
15 shall be made at the rates specified in Part U of the First Schealle. 
(5) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (6), in cases In which income-tax 
has to be calculated UDder the first proviso to sub-section (5) of Hction 131 of the 
Income-tax Act or charged under sub-section (4) of section 172 or sl'b-sectlon (2) 
of section 174 or section 175 or sub-section (2) of section 176 of the said Act or 
20 deducted under sectlon 192 of the said Act from income chargeable under the head 
"Salaries" or deducted under sub-section (9) of section 80E of the said Act from any 
payment referred to In the said sub-section (9) or In which the "advance tax" payable 
under Chapter xvn- C of the said Act has to be computed, at the rate or rates In 
force, such Income-tax or, as the case may be, "advance tax" shall be 80 calculated, 
25 charged, deducted or computed at the rate or rates specified In Part UI of the 
First Schedule: 
Provided that In cases to which the provisions of Chapter XU or Chapter XIIA or 
sub-section ( 1 A) of section 161 or section 164 or section 164A or .ectlon 167 A of the 
Income-tax Act apply, "advance tax" shall be computed with reference to the rates 
30 imposed by this sub-section or the rates as specified In that Chapter or sectlao, as 
the case may be: 
Provided further that an assessee, being a COmpIUlY, may, in lieu of payment of 
the amount of surcharge on Income-tax at the rate specified In Paragraph E of Part 
III of the First Schedule, make a deposit under the scheme framed under sub-
35 section (1'1 before the last Instalment of "advance tax" Is due In Ita cue, and where 
it does so, the suroharge on Income-tax payable by the company,-
(.iJ In a case where the amount of the deposit so made Is equal to or exceeds 
the amount of surcharge on Income-tax payable by It, shall be n-'4and 
(.it) In a case where the amount of the deposit so made falls short of the 
40 amount of surcharge on Income-tax payable by It, shall be reduced by the 
amount of the deposit. 
(6) In the cases to which Sub-Paragraph I or Sub-Paragraph II of Parlll1'aph A 
of Part m of the First Sohecille applles, where the assell8ee bu, In the prevlou8 
year or, If by virtue of any provision of the Income-tax Act, Income-tax Is to be 
45 charged In respect of the Income of a period other than the previous year, in .uch 
other period, any net agricultural Income exceeding six hundred rupees, in addition 
to total Income and the total Income exceeds,-
l.Q In a case to which the said Sub- Paragraph I applies, fifteen thou8and 
rupee8, and 
50 (U) in a case to whloh the said Sub-Paragraph U applies, twelve thousand 
rupees, 
~n, in oalculating Income-tax under the first provl8o to sub- sectlon (5) of sectlon 
of the Income-tax Act or in charging Income-tax under sub-section l21 of 

4 
section 174 or sectlon 175 or sub-sectlon 12) of section 176 of the said Act or In 
computing the "advance tax" payable under Chapter XVII-C of the said Act, at the 
rate or rates In force,-
(CL) the net agricultural Income shall be taken Into account, In the manner 
provided In clause (b) (that Is to say, as If the net agricultural Inoome were 
oomprlsed In the total Income after,-
(.ij in a case to which the said Sub- Paragraph I applies, the first fifteen 
thousand rupees, and 
(<<) In a case to which the said Sub-Paragraph n applles, the flrst eight 
thousand rupees, 
of the total income but without being liable to taJQ, only for the purpose of 
calculating, charging or computing duch income-tax or, as the case may be, 
"advance tax" in respect of the total Income; and 
(b) such Inoome-tax or, as the case may be, "advance tax" shall be so 
calculated, charged or computed as follows:-
i.(.j the total income and the net agricultural Income shall be aggregated 
and the amount of income-tax or "advance tax" shall be determined In respect 
of the aggregate income at the rates speclfled In Sub- Paragraph I or, as the 
case may be, Sub- Paragraph n of the said Paragraph A, as If such aggregate 
5 
10 
15 
income were the total Income: 20 
Provided that In a case referred to In the said Sub- Paragraph II, for the 
purposes of determining the amount of income-tax or "advance tax" In accor-
dance with this sub-clause, the provisions of clause (W of the proviso below 
the said Sub- Paragraph n and the provisions relating to surcharge on Income-
tax in the said Sub- Paragraph n sha1l not apply; 25 
(.c.J the net agricultural Income shall be Increased,-
,AI in a case to which the said Sub- Paragraph I applies, by a sum of 
fifteen thousand rupees; and 
(5) In a case to which the said Sub-Paragraph n applies, by a sum 
of eight thousand rupees, 30 
ad the amount of income-tax or ''advance tax" shall be determined In respect 
of the net agricultural income as so Increased at the rates specified in the said 
SUb-Paragraph lor, as the case may be, the said SUb-Paragraph n, as If the 
net agricultural Income as 80 increased were the total Income: 
Provided that In a case referred to In the said Sub-Paragraph n, for the 35 
purposes of determining the amount of income- tax or "advance tax" In 
accordance with this sub-clause, the provisions of clause (.il) of the proviso 
below the said SUb-Paragraph n and the provisions relating to surcharge on 
income-tax In the said Sub-Paragraph n shall not apply; 
(.iUl the amount of income-tax or "advance tax" determined In accordance 40 
with sub-clause (.i) shall be reduced by the amount of income-tax or, as the 
cue may be, "advance tax" determined in accordance with sub-clause (.it): 
Provided that In a case referred to in the said Sub- Paragraph n, where the 
sum so arrived at exceeds sixty per cent. of the amount by which the total 
Income exceeds twelve thousand rupees, the excess shall be disregarded; 45 
(.w) the amount of Income-tax or "advance tax" determined In accordance 
with sub-clause (.iUl shall be Increased by a surcharge for purposes of the 
Union calculated at the rate of twelve and a half per cent. of such Income-
tax or, as the case may be, "advance tax" and the sum so arrived at shall be 
the Income-tax or, u the case may be, 'lldvance tax" in respect of the total 50 
lncolDe. 

8 of 1964. 
" 
5 
( 1) Where an assess88, being a company, makes, during the flnanclal year 
commencing on the 1st day ot April, 1984, any deposit with the Industrial Develop-
ment Bank of India established under the Industrial De"elopne nt Bank of india Act, 
1964 under any such scheme as the Central Government may, by notification In the 
5 Official Gazette, frame In this bellalf, then the surcharge on Income-tax payable by 
the company for the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1985,-
10 
(.il In a case where the amount ot the deposit 80 made la equal to or exceeds 
the amount of surcbarge on Income-tax payable by It, shall be 'niL; and 
(.u) In a case where the amount ot the deposit so made talls short of the amount 
of surcharge on Income- tax payable by It, shall be reduced by the amount of the 
deposit. 
(II For the purposes of this section IDd the First Schedule,-
(a.) "company In which the pubUc are substanUally IDterested" means a 
company which Is such a company as Is referred to In section 108 of the 
15 Income-tax Act; 
(bl "domestic company" means an Indian company, or any other oompany 
which, In respect of Ita Income Uable to Income-tax under the Income-tax Act 
tor the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1984. baa made the 
presorlbed arr8Dpments for the declaration and payment within India of the 
20 dividends (lnoluding dividends on preference sbarea) payable out of such Income 
In accordance with the provisions of section 194 of that Act; 
(cJ "Industrial company" means a company which Is malnlyenppd In the 
business of generation or distrIbution of electricity or any other form of power 
or In the carrlqe, by road or Inland waterways, of pusenprs or goods or In 
25 the construction of ships or In the execution of projects or ID the muwfacture or 
processing of goods or In mining. 
~. - For the purpo8es of thIs clmse,-
(.ll a company shall be deemed to be mainly engaged In the business of 
generation or dlstrlbuUon of electricity or any other form of power or In the 
30 carriage, by road or Inland waterways, of passengers or good8 or In the 
con8truCtion of shlps or In the execution of projects or In the manufacture 
~r processIng of loods or In mInIng, If the Income attributable to any one or 
more of the afore8ald acttvlUes Included in Its total Income of the previous 
year (u computed before maklng any deduction under Chapter VIA of the 
35 Income-tax Act) 18 not less than fifty-one per cent. of such total Income; 
(.uJ "project" meus a project for the constructIon of a building, road, 
dam, bridge or other 8tructure or as8embly or Installation of any machlDery 
or plant; 
(a) "ln8urance commission" means Uly remuneratIon or reward, whether by 
40 way of commission or otherwIse, for sollcltlDg or procuring luunnoe buslnes. 
(lnoludlq buslne.s reIatIDg to the oontlDulnce, renewal or revival of policies of 
lDsurance) ; 
45 
(e.) ''Det agricultural Income'~ In relatlon to a person, 1Ueus the total amount 
of ip-loultural bloome, from whatever .ource derIved. of that person computed 
In accordance with the rule. contained In Part IV of the First Schedulel 
(6) ''tax-INe .eOllrlty" means any .ecurtty of the Central Government I •• ued . 
or declared to be lnocm;ae-tax free, or any .. curlty of a State GoV8l'll1ll8Dt Issued 
Income-tax free, the Income-tax whereon Is payable by the State Gowl'IlmeDt, 
191 all other word. and aprea.lons uaed In thl. section or In the Firat 
50 Schedule but not defined In thls .ub-sectlon and defined In the Inoome-ta Act 
ahall have the meanlnp Nspectlwly uslped to them In that Act. 

6 
CHAPTER UI 
DIRECT TAUS 
AIIIendmeRt of 3. In sectlon 10 of the Income-tax Act, In claus8 (.50). after the words ''tea 
section 10. bushes". the words "or for rejuvenaUon or consolidatlon of areas used for cultlva- 5 
tion of tea" shall be Inserted with effect from the 1st day of April. 1985. 
Amad_.t of 4. In section 11 of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section (5) • after clause (x.) 
MCtioIl 11. aocI the Expl •• i"n thereto, the folluwing clause shall be Inserted with effect from 
the 1st day of April. 1985, oamely:-
"(xi) deposits with the Industrial Development Bank of India established 
under the industrial Development Bank of india Act, 1964;". 
A._elmeDt of S. In section 33B of the Income-tax Act, before the~, the following 
nctioG 338. proviso shall be Inserted with effect from the 1st day of April, 1985, namelyt-
''Provided that no deduction under this section shall be allowed In relation 
10 
to the assessment year commencing on the 1st da,y of Aprll, 1985 or any 15 
subsequent .. sessment year. ". 
6. In eectlon 35 of the Income-tax Act.-
(ell in sub-section (2) • in clause lAA\ .-
(.e.) before the ExpI .. ation, the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:-
11 of 19M 
''Provided that no deduction shall be admissible uDder this clause in respect 20 
of any expenditure incurred on the acquls1Uon of any laDd, whether tbe land 
Is acquired as such or as part of any property, after the 29tb day of February. 
1984. "; 
lU) the ~ shall be numbered a8 ~ J and after ~ J 
a. 80 numbered, the followtng ~ shall be Inserted. namely:- 25 
'~ 2. -For the purpo .. s of this clause,-
(a) ''land'' Includes any laterest in laDd; aDd , \. 
(b) the acquiSition of any laDd shall be deemed to bave been made by 
the a ....... on the date on which the Instrument of transfer of such land 
to him baa been registered under the Registration Act, 1908, or where 30 
he baa taken or retained the po ..... lon of sucb land or any part thereof 
in part performance of a CODtract of the nature referred to in .ection 63A 
of the Tran.fer of Property Act, 1882. the date on which be baa 80 taken 
or retained po ..... lon of such !aDd or part;'; 
(b) ill .. b-.ectlon (fA). for the words "Where tbe asses8ee pays any sum", the 35 
words, fIIur- and letters ''Where, before the 1st day of March, 1984, the 
a ....... paJil any sum" IIhalI be IlUbatttuted: 
Ie) .... b-HOtlon (IBJ. ill elau .. (a), for the words ''Where an a ....... hal 
Incurred any expendUure", the words, figures and letters ''Where, before theist 
day of Karch, 1984. an .. s .... has incurred any elll*ldtture" shall be substituted. 40 
7. III aectiOD 36C of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section (J), in clause (a). after 
the words, fwure. aDd letters ''after the 29th day of February, 1968", the warda. 
fll\lre. aDd letter. ''but before the 1. day of March. 1984" IIball be 1118erted. 
.. III IleCtton 38 of the Income-tax Act, in sub- section (J). In clause (.il4l, after 
the word. "payment of any alarl", the worda, flpre. aad letter. ''for uay period 
of employment before the 18t day of March, 1984" .hall be lDaerted. 
J6 of 1908. 
4 of 1182. 
I 
"I .. 
i 

7 
9. In section 40 of the Income-tax Act, In clause Ie.). with effect from the 1st day Amendment e: 
of AprU, 1985, - aection 40. 
(ll) in sub-clause W, for the words "seventy-two thousand rupees", the words 
"ODe hundred and two thousand rupees" shall be substituted; 
5 (b) In sub-claule (S), for the words "six thousand rupees", the words "eight 
thousand flve hundred rupees" shall be substituted. 
10. In section 40A of the Income-tax Act, -
(ll) in sub-section (5), in clause (e), in sub-cIaUII8 (.i.J. with effect from the 1st 
day of April, 1985,-
10 (.i.J for the \VOros "flve thousand rupees", the words "seven thousand flve 
huDdl'ed rupees" sball be substituted; 
I.LiJ for the words "sixty thousand rupees", the words "ninety thousand 
rupees" aball be aubet1tuted; 
(.u.tJ after tbe provtao, the following proviso shall be ilUl8rted, namely:-
15 'Provided further that in relation to any month or part thereof comprised 
in any such previOUS year as is relevant to the assessment yMr commencing 
on the 18t day of April. 1985, or any subsequent assessment y.r, tbe 
reference to "five thousand rupees" in tbe preceding proviso shall be 
construed as a reference to "seven thousand flve hundred rupees". '; 
20 (b) In sub-section (6). for the words "sixty thousand rupees", the words ''ninety 
thousand rupees" shall be substituted with effect from the 1st day of April, 1985; 
Ie.) after sub-section Ill. the following sub-section shall be inserted and shall 
be deemed to have been inserted with effect from the 1st day of April, 1980, 
namely:-
25 "(91 No deduction shall be allowed in respect of any sum paid by the assessee 
as an employer towards the setting up of. or as contribution to, any fund or 
trust for any purpose, except where such sum is so paid,for the purposes and 
to the extent provided by or under clause (.w) or clause (v) of sub-section III 
of section 36 or. as required by or under any other law for the time being in 
30 force. ft. 
35 
40 
11. After section 44AA or the m(.'Ome-tax Act, the following section shall be 
inserted with effect from the 1st day of AprU, 1985, namely:-
'44AB. Every person,-
lal carrying on business shall, if bis total sales, turnover or gross receipts, 
as the case may be, in busineaa exceed or exceeds twenty lakh rupees In any 
previous year or years relevant to lhe asseSSlllent year commencing on the 1st 
day of April, 1985 or any subsequent assessment year; or 
(bl carrying on profession shall, if bis gross receipts in professiOll exceed 
ten lakh rupees in any previous year or years relevant to the assessment 
year commencinc OD tbe 1st day of April, 1985 or any subsequent assessment 
year, 
get his accounts of such previous year or years audited by an accountant before the 
specified date and obtain before that date the report of such audit In the prescribed 
form duly signed and verified by such accountant and setUng forth such particulars 
(5 as may be prescribed: 
Pro\lded that In a case where such porson Is required by or under any other law 
to gd his accounts audited by an accountant, it shall bo 8ufficlcT,t c~)mpliance with 
A •• d •• tol' 
aection «)A •. 
In..nioa 01 
ae .. _c:tiOf 
40MB. 
Audit of 
aC:COIlD ta 01 
c:.tllill perl 
c:arryilll 011 
bosiaeno 
plOfeuloa. 

A 
• 
A 
• 
8 
the provisions of this section If such person gets the acoounts of such busineBB or 
profession audited under such law before the specified date and obtainB before that 
date the report of the audit as required under such other law and a further report 
in the form prescribed under this section. 
~. - For the purposes of this section,-
1,(,) "accountant" shall have the same m_nlnc as in the ~ below 
sub-section (2) of section 288, 
\..ul "specified date", in relation to the accounts of the previouB y_r or 
y_rB relevant to an I assessment year, m_ns the date of the expiry of four 
months from the end of the previous year or, where there is more than one 
previous year. from the end of the previous year which expired last before 
,the commencement of the assesBment J8Ilr, or the 30th day of June of the 
assessment year. whichever is later. ' • 
~lHIltof 
.r::t!oa aocC, 
. 12. In section 80ee of the Income-tax Aot, in sub-s80tion {31 • for clauBe (el. 
the following clause shall be Bubstltuted, namely,-
• 
"Ie) the sharee forming part of the issue are offered for subsoription to 
the pubUc and suoh offer for subscription Is made by the company before the 
1Bt day of March, 1984 ;" • 
" .. 08 of 
ec:tiotI SOD. 
13. Section 80D of the Inoome-tax Act shall be omitted with effect from the 
1st day of April, 1985. 
..... t of 14. In section 80E of the Income-tax Act, in Bub-section (J), after the 
d08 IOE. words ''he haB paid ", the words, figures and letters ", before the 1st day of 
March, 1984, II shall be inBerted • 
...... of U. In section 80L of the Income-tax Act, in sub-seotion \1), with effect 
ICtioIt SGL. from the lBt day of Aprn, 1985,-
1«) after clauBe\..ul, the following clause shall be tnBerted, namely:-
"i.c.ial Interest on depoBits under suoh National DepoBU Scheme aB may 
be framed by the Cantral Governm8llt and not1f1ed by it In this behalf 
In the Offloial GueUe;"; 
\b) in clause UUl , for the words ''under any scheme ", the words 
''under any other scheme" shall be substituted; 
Ie) the followtnc proviso shall be lneerted at the aDd, namely:-
''Provided that where the I1'OBS total lnoome of the asBessee 
Inoludes any income by way of interest on any deposits referred to 
in clause (.U4) or income in respect of units referred to in clause (VI. 
there shall be allowed In oomputlng the total lDoome of the &8sessee 
• further deduction of an amount equal to .0 much of such iDoome u 
baa not bem allowed by way of deduction UDder the foregoing provlelons 
of th1a sub-sect1on; so, however, that the amount of such further 
deduction sball not exceed three thousand rupees. " • 
•• -. of 16. In .ectlon SOM of the Income-tax Aot, in 'BUb-seotion H). with 
ctioa ... ,aect from the lat day of Aprn, 1986, - _ 
(4) for the worda "an amount equal to- ", the worda "an amount equal 
to .lay per Oalt. of IUOb iDCome. II IIhall be IUb.Ututed; 
Ib) clau88B (4) and (b) aball be omitted • 
..... t of 17. In section 80N 01 the Income-tax Aot, for the words "a deduction 
:tioa .".. of the whole of the iDCome", the worde "a deducUoD of an amQlJ.1lt equal 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 

9 
to fifty per cmt. of the Income" shall be substituted with effect from the 
1st day of April, 1985. 
18. In section 800 of the Income-tax Act, for the words "a deduction 
of the whole of the 1Dcome ", the words "a deduction of an amount equal 
5 to fifty per cent. of the Income" shall be substituted with effect from 
the 1st day of AprU, 1985. 
19. Section SOU of the Income-tax Act shall be numbered as sub-
section (1) with effect from the 1st day of April, 1985, and,-
(a) in sub- section (1) as so numbered. in clause (<<J, after the words 
10 and brackets "a permanent physical disability (other than blindness) ", 
the words 'being a permanmt physical disability specified In the rules 
made In this behalf by the Board, and II shall be inserted with effect 
from the 1st day of April, 1985; 
(b) after sub-section' III as so numbered, the following sub-section 
15 shall be inserted with effect from the 1st day of April, 1985, namely:-
"(2) The Board shall, in making any rules for specify1ng any 
disability for the purposes of clause (Ulof sub-section (f), have 
regard to the nature of such disability and the effect which suoh 
disabiUty is Ukely to have on the capacity of a person subject 
20 thereto, or suffering therefrom, to engage In a gainful employment 
or occupation. ". 
25 
30 
36 
20. In section 161 of the Inoome-tax Aot, after sub-sectlon (1J, the 
following sub-sectlon shall be inserted. with effect from the 1st day of 
April, 1985, namely:-
, (1AJ Notwithstanding anything contained In sub- sectlon (1), where 
any Income In respect of which the person mmtiooed In clause (.w) of 
sub-section (1) of sectlon 180 Is Hable as repres81tatlve assessee 
consists of, or Includes, profits aDd gains of business. tax shall be 
charged on the whole of the Income In respect of which such person 
is so liable at the maximum marginal rate: 
Provided that the provisions of this sub- section shall not apply where 
such profits and gains are receivable under a trust declared by any 
person by wUl exclusively for the benefit. of any relative dependent on 
him for support and maintenance, and such trust is the only trust so 
declared by him. 
&ptamtl.on.'- For the purposes of this sub-secUon. "maximum 
marginal rate" shall have the meaning assigned to it In &ptamtl.on 2 , 
below sub- seetlon (3) of sectlon 164. '. 
21. In section 164 of the Inoome-tax Act, with effect from the 1st 
40 day of AprU. 1985.-
(aJ In sub- section ('), after the proviso. the foUowlDg proviso 
shall be ·lnserted, namely:-
''Provided further that where any income In respect of wb1ch the 
person m81tlooed In clause (.w) of sub- sectton (J) d. section 160 is 
'6 liable as represmtatlve aS88ssee consists of, or 1nClude8. profits 
and galns of bu8tne8S, the preceding prov18o shall apply only If 
suoh profits and gains are receivable under a trust dec,lared by 
any per80n by will aclu8ively for the benefit of-any relative 
ciepeodmt on him for wpport and maintenanoe, and INCh trust 18 
the only trust so declared by him. "; 
Amendment of 
section BOO. 
Ameadmeat of 
section IOU. ' 
Am._.of 
sectioa 161. 

10 
lb) to sub-section (tl. th~ following proviso shall be added, namely:-
''Provided that in a case where the whole or any part of the 
relevant Income Is not exempt under aection 11 or aect10D 12 by 
virtue of the provlatOilS oontalDed in OIIlUM (cJ or olause let) of 
sub-section (I) of section 13, tax shall be oharged on the relevant 
lnoume or part of relevant Income at the maximum marginal 
rate. n; 
IcJ in sub- section (31. after the proviso and before ~ r. 
the following provisos shall be Inserted, namely:-
''Provlded further that where the relevant lDoome ooul8u of, 
ar lncludee. proftts and p.1ns of business, the preceding proviso 
shall apply OGly if the income Is receivable under a trust declared 
by any person by will exclusively for the beDeflt of any relative 
dependent on him for support and maiDtmanoe, and. such trust il 
the Oftly trust 80 declared by him: 
Provided also that in a case wbere the wbole or any part of 
the relevant 1ncome Is not exempt under sectloD 11 or lection 12 
by virtue of the proviBlou oontalned m clause (el or elauae let) 
of sub-seotion (J) of section 13, tax Bhal1 be oharpd OIl the 
relevlUlt Income or part of relevant Income at the maximum 
marg1Dal rate. ". 
1._. of 22. In flection 193 of the Income-tax Act, In the proviso, after 
c:tiDa 193. clause (.cu), the following clause shall be luerted with effect from the 
1st day of olme. 1984, namely:-
-(v) any interest payable to IUl lDdlvtdual, who II resident m 
india, on deb4Dtures issued by a oompany in whlcb the publio are 
substantially interested., being debaltures llated on a recoplsed 
stock excbange ID Jndla In aooordaDoe with the Securities Cootraots 
(Regulation) Act, 1956, and. any rules made thereunder. if-
(al the iIlterest Is paid by the company by IUl account payee 
oheque.and 
lbl the amount of such Interest or. as the eale may be, the 
aggrepte of the amounts of sucb interest paid or likely to be 
paid <harl .. the financial year by the company to such 1nd1v1dual 
does not exceed one thousand rupees. tI. 
endJllent of 23. In secUoll 194 of the Income-tax Act, for the first proviso, 
tioft 194. the following proviso shall be substituted with effect from the 1st day 
of .line. 1984, namely:-
.. 
CI 
"Provided that DO such deduction shall be made In the case of a 
shareholder. being an Individual, who 18 resldmt In india, of a 
company In which the public are substantially interested, if-
l4l the dlvld81d.ls paid by sucb oompany by IUl aoOOUDt payee 
oherfue; aod 
lbi the amount of such dividend or. aa the cue may be, the 
agarepte of the amo\Blts of sucb dividend distributed or paid 
or likely to be distributed or paid duriJli the financial year by 
the company to the sharebo1der does not exceed one thousand rupeel:". 
24. In section 2U of the Income-tax Act,-
5 
lD 
15 
25 
30 
35 
40 
""lIndaelof 
:uctioft 252. 1«) after sub-section (4j, the followlnc aub-secUon shall be Inserted. DaDlely:-
"l~ The Central Gowemment may appoint ... of the Vice-PresideDb 50 
of die Appellate Tn"bunal to be the Senior Vice-Presideat thereof. fl. . . . 
J 
42 of 1956. 

10f 1956. 
11 
(h) In sub-sectlOD (S), for the words "A Vlce-Presldent", the words "The 
SeDlor Vice-President or a Vloe-Preeldeot" shall be substituted. 
25. In section 269C of the lDcome-tax Act, In sub-section tl), for 
the words "twenty-ftve thousand rupees", the words "flfty thousand 
5 rupees" shall be substituted with effect from the 1st day of June, 1984. 
26. In section 269F of the Income-tax Act. In suD-section (61. In clause la.\, 
for the words "twenty-ftve thousand rupees", the words "fIfty thousand rupees" 
shall be substituted with eftect from the 1st day of June, 1984. 
27. In section 269P of the Income-tax Act, In suD-section (1). In the provlso, 
10 for the words "ten thousand rupees", the words ''tWenty-five thousand rupees" 
shall be 8ubstltuted with effect from the 1st day of June, 1984. 
l8. In Chapter XXB of the Income-tax Act, -
(4) In the beading, for the words "MODE OF II:PAVN[S'f'· , the words 
"MODI: OF ACCJ:PTANCL, PAYMDlT 01 IIPAYM"'" shall be substituted; 
15 (bl before section 269T, the follOWing section shall be Inserted, namely:-
'269SS. No person sba1l, after the 30th day of June, 1984"take or accept 
from any other person (hereafter In this section referred to as the depositor) 
any loan or deposit otherwise than by an account payee cheque or account 
payee bank draft If. -
20 (et) the amount of such loan or deposit or the aggregate amount of such 
loan and depoSit; or 
(bl on the date of taking or accepting such loan or deposit, any loan or 
deposit taken or accepted earller by such person from the depositor Is 
remaining unpaid (whether repaynent has fallen due or not), the amount 
25 or the aggregate amount remaining unpaid; or 
Ie.) the amount or the aggregate amount referred to In clause (a.) 
together with the amount or the aggregate amount referred to In 
clause (b), 
Is ten thousand rupees or more: 
30 PrOvided that the provisions of this section shall not apply to any 
35 
40 
loan or deposit taken or accepted from, or any loan or deposit taken 
or accepted by.-
(a.) Government; 
(b) any banking company, post omce savlngB bank or co-operatlve bank; 
lel any GDrporatlon established by a Central, State or Provlnclal Act; 
(d) any Government company u deflned In section 617 of the 
Computes Act, 1956; 
(t!J such other Instltutlon, 88soclatlon or body or cl88s of lnatltutlons. 
assoclatlons or bodies which the Central Government may, for reasons 
to be recorded In writing, notify In this behalf In the Offlclal Gazette. 
~.- For the purposes of thls sectlon,-
l.il "banking company" shall have the meaning uSlgned to It 
In clause (loll of the ~ to sub-.ectlon (4) of .ectloo 40A; 
Amendment 
section 2691 
Amendment 
section 269 
Amendment 
section 26~ 
IlIHItion c 
new sectic 
269S5. 
Mode of tal 
or ac:ceptill 
certlli n loa 
_d depos' 

12 
\.uJ ''co-operative bank" shall have the meaning assigned to 
it In Part V of the Banklng Regulation Act, 1949; 
l.w.l ''loan or deposit" means loan or deposit of money. ' • 
• 1D ___ t of 29. In section 289T of the Income-tax Act. in the ErpllllGtiOtl, after clause l.tl. the 
ectioa 2li9T. folloWing clause shall be inserted. namely:- 5 
lMitioa of 
... aec:tioa 
71B. 
allure to 
et eccollll ta 
aditecl. 
•• Itioe of 
.. MCtioa 
~DD. 
leAaity mr 
tmtraveaUoA 
r aectioa 
)9SS. 
.. 
c 
a 
:t 
'(.i4) "co-operative bank" shall have the meanJoa usJcaed to jt ill Part Vofthe 
Ba.nk1ng Regulation Act. 1949;'. 
30. In the Income-tax Act. after section 27lA. the following section shall be 
inserted with effect from the 1st day of April. 1985. aamely:-
''271B. If any person faUs. Without reasonable cause. to get his accounts lD 
allCilted in respect of any previous y-.r or years relevant to an assessment 
year or obtain a report of such audit as required under section 44AB"tbe Inoome-
tax Oftlcermay direct that such person shall pay. by way of penalty. a sum equal 
to one-half per cent. of the total sales. turnover or gross receipts. u the case 
may be. In business. or of the gross receipts In profession. In such 15 
previous year or years or a sum of one hundred thousand rupees. whichever is 
less. ". 
31. In the Income-tax Act. after section 2760, the following section shall be 
inserted. namely:-
"27600. If a person. without reasonable cause or excuse, takes or accepts 
any loan or deposit in contravention of the proviSions of section 26988. he shall 
be punishable With imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years and 
shall also be liable to fine equal to the amount of such loan or deposit. ". 
32. In section 28lA of the Income-tax Act.-
(al In sub-section (l), for the portion beginning with the words ''the real owner 25 
of such property UDleSIh-" and ending with the words ''to the Income-tax Officer.", 
the following shall be substituted, namely:-
''the real owner of such property unless notice in the prescribed form and 
containing the prescribed particulars in respect of the property has been given 
by the claimant within a period of one year from the date of acqui8ition of the 30 
property to the Commissioner "j 
(bl after sub-section (11, the follOwing sub-secUons shall be inserted, namely:-
"lIAI Where any such property is acquired by the claimant before the 1st 
day of March. 1984, the provi810ns of sub-section (1) 8hall be deemed to have 
heenfulfllled if notice In the prescribed form and contain1ng the prescribed 35 
particulars In respect of the property 18 given by the claimant, within a period 
of one year from the said c:late,to the Commissioner. 
lll3) Notwithstanding anything contained in 8ub- section (I) or sub-section 
(fA), In relation to any suit relating to any immovable property 'of: a value not 
exceeding ftfty thoUiaDd rupees. the provisions of lub-section lnor, as the 40 
case may be. sub-8ection (1A) shall be deemed to have been fulftl1ed if.' at any 
time before the auit, notice in the prescribed form and containing the p~eSCribed 
particular8 in respect of the property hal been given by the claimant to tbe 
Commi .. iClller. tI; 
(e) for 8ub-section (2), thA following 8ub-section shall be subaW:ut.ed. namely:- 46 
"(2) The Commls8ioner shall, on an application made in the prescribed 
manner, by the claimant or any perlon acting on hla behalf or claiming under 
him, aDd on payment of tbepreacribed ~ees, i88ue, for the purpose8 of a suit 
, I 
10 of 1949. 
JO of 19..,. 

1
(1.,.: 
.' 
.... 
13 
referred to in sub-section (f). a certified copy of any notice given by the claim-
ant under sub-section (ll or sub-section (fA) or sub-section (18). within fourteen 
days from the date of receipt of the appllcatlon. ". 
33. In tbe Nintb Scbedule to the Income-tax Act. for the brackets. words. figure. 
5 and letters "/Sl.e. section 32(1)(uiJ aDd section 80M (I)(4)(.(.)}". the brackets. words and 
figures "1Sl.e. section 32(1) (uiJ)" shall be substituted with effect from the 1st day of 
April, 1985. 
10 
15 
M. In the Wealth-tax Act. 1957/with effect from the 1st day of April. 1985.-
(4) 111 section 5.-
(.(.) in sub-section (r),-
(1) in clause Uv). In the proviso. for the words "one hundred thousand 
rupees". at both the places where they occur. the words "two hundred 
thousand rupees" shall be substituted; 
(2) after clause (xxv). the following clause shall be inserted. namely:-
"(XXU1) any depoSits under such National Deposit Scheme as may be 
framed by the Central Government and notified by It In this behalf In the 
Official Gazette; "; 
(3) after clause (uuUJ .. the following clause shall be inserted. na.mely:-
"(xxuila) any deposits with the Industrial Development Bank of india 
established under the Industrial Development Bank of India Act. 1984,"; 
(.iiJ In sub-section (1AJ ,-
(J) for the brackets and figures "(xxulJ. (xxuU).", the brackets. flgures 
and letters "(XXU1), (xxui), (xxuUJ. IxxuUa)," shall be substituted; 
25 (2) for the words "one hundred and slxty-flve tbousand rupees". at both 
the places where they occur. the words "two hundred and siXty-five 
thousand rupees" shall be substituted; 
131 after the proviso, tht! follOWing proviso shall be Inserted. namely:-
"Provided further that where the assets of the assessee include any 
30 aBsets. being units referred to In clause (xxv) or any deposits referred 
to in clause (xxuz.I. wealth-tax shall not be payable by the a .. 88see In 
respect of. and there shall not be included in the net wealth of the 
aBsessee. so mucb of the value of such assets &8 has not been excluded 
from the net wealth of the assessee under this sub-section; so. however. 
35 that the value of tbe &8eets excluded under tbis proviso shall not exceed 
thirty-five tbousand rupees. "; 
(.u.tJ In sub-section (3). for the brackets and flpres "(xxui), (xxuUJ,", the 
brackets, flgures and letters "(lOCUIIl, (xxui), (xxuC.c:J. (uuUa)," .ball be 
substituted; 
40 Ib) in section 2IA.-
(I) for the portion beginning with the brackets, flpre aDd words "WallY 
part of such property" and ending with the words "beDeflelal to tM rev_ue,", 
the following shall be substituted. namely:-
"(-'J any part of .ucb property or any income of .ucb truat [ wbetber 
derived from .uch property or from voluntary OOIlt.r1buU .. r_rred to III 

14 
sub-clause (.i.ia) of clause (24l of section 2 of the Income-tax Act] is used 
or applied. directly or indirectly. for the benefit of any person referred to 
in sub-section (3) of section 13 of the Income- tax Act, or 
(.c.tl any part of the income of the trust Lwhether derived from such 
property or from voluntary contributions referred to in sub-clause l.(.la) of 5 
clause (24) of section 2 of the Income-tax ActJ, belD1 a trust created on or 
after the 1st day of April. 1962, enures, directly or indirectly, for the 
benefit of any person referred to in sub- section (3) of sectlon 13 of the said 
Act, or 
(.ut.) any funds of the trust are invested or deposited, or any shares in a 10 
company are held by the trust. in contravention of the provisions of clause (d) 
of sub-section (J) of section 13 of the Income-tax Act. 
wealth-tax shall be leviable upon. and recoverable from. the trustee or maaager 
(by whatever name called) in respect of the property beld by him under trust at 
the maximum marginal rate:"; 15 
If) In the ~ below the second proviSO, after clause (41), the 
following clause shall be inserted, namely:-
I (1IIl "maximum marginal rate" means the rate of wealth-tax applicable 
in relation to the highest slab of wealth in the case of an individual as speci-
fled In Part I of Schedule I;'. ' 
CHAPTER IV 
.RDIUCT TAUS 
20 
DI_.eat of 35. The Customs Tariff Act. 1975 (hereinafter referred to as the CuBtoms Tariff 
::t 51 of 1975. Act). shall be amended in the manner specUied in the Second Schedule. 25 
; 
.Way dati. 36. (I) In the case of goods mentioned in the First Schedule to the Customs Tariff 
f CURoIII" Act, or In that Schedule, as amended from time to time. there shall be levied and 
collected as an auxUlary duty of cu.toms an amount equal to fifty per cent. of the 
value of the goods as determined in accordance with the provisions of section 14 of 
the Customs Act. 1962 (hereinafter referred to as the Customs Act). 30 52 of 1162-
i 21 9Jb-section 1 J 1 shall cease to have effect after the 31st day of March. 1985~ 
except as respects things done or omitted to be done before such cesser; and section 
6 of the General Clausell Act, 1897, shall apply upon such'cesser all if the said sub- 10 of 1197. 
section had then been repealed by a Central Act. 
(3) The auxll1ary dutle. of cu.toms referred to In sub-section (7) shall be in 35 
addition to any duties of customs chargeable on wch aoods under the Customs Act. 
or any other law for the time beiDlln force. 
(41 'lbe proviSions of the Customs Act and the rules aDd regulations made there-
under, including those relating to refunds and exemptions from duties, shall. as far 
~ 
( 
as may be, apply in relation to the levy and collection of the auxiliary duties of 40 
customs leviable under this section in respect of any goods as they apply In relation 
A 
.. 
• 
to the levy and collection of the duties of customs on such goods under that Act or those 
rules and regulations, as the case may be. 
37. III section 18 of the Customs Act, In 8Ub-section I J) ,after the provi.o, the 
following ~ shall be inserted. namely:--
"~. - Where the service of the notice is stayed by an order of a 
Court. the period of such stay shall be ex~uded ~n computing the aforeSaid 
, • • - ~ ---- ...... Iv mtWlths or five years, a. the case may be. ". 
45 

15 
38. In section 61 of the Customs Act, to sub-section (2) , the following proviso shall Ameadlll .. t c 
be added, namely: - lectiOll 6L 
''Provided that the Board may, If it considers it necessary 80 to do in the public 
interest, waive, by special order and under circumstances of an exceptional 
5 nature to be specified in such order, the whole or part of any interest payable 
under this sub-section In respect of any warehoused goods. ". 
39. In section 129 of the CUltoms Act, -
(al for sub-section (2), the following sub-sections shall be substituted, namely:-
"(2) A Judicial member shall be a person who has for at least ten years held 
10 a Judicial office in the territory of India or who has been a member of the Central 
Lap.l Service and has held a post in Grade I of that service or any equivalent or 
higher post for at least three years, or who has been an advocate for at lealt ten 
18ars. 
~. - For the purposes of this sub- section, -
15 (oil in computing the period during which a person has held judicial office 
in the territory of India, there shall be included any period, after he has beld 
any Judicial office, during which the person has been an advocate or has held 
the office of a member of a tribunal or any post, under the Union or a State, 
requiring special knowledge of law; 
20 (.w In computing the period during which a person has been an advocate, 
there shall be included any period during which the person has held a Judlo.!ial 
office or the office of a member of a tribunal or any post, under the Union or 
a State, requiring special knowledge of law after he became an advocate. 
I~ A technical member shall be a person who bas been a member of the 
25 Indian Customs and Central Excise Service, Group A, and has held the post of 
Collector of Customs or Central Excise or any equivalent or higher post for at 
least three years. "; 
(b) after sub-section 14J, the following sub-section shall be Inserted, 
namely:-
30 "(.fA) Tbe Central Gowemment may appoint one of the Vice-Presidents of 
the Appellate Tribunal to be the Senior Vice-President thereof."; 
35 
40 
45 
(clin sub-section lS). for the words "The Vice-President", the words 
"The Senior Vice-President or a Vice-President" shall be substituted. 
40. In section 129A of the Customs Act,-
(al in sub-section ( II • in the proviso, for the words "Provided that", the follow-
ing shall be substituted, uamely:-
''Provided that no appeal shall lie to the Appellate Tribunal and tbe Appellate 
Tribunal shall not have Jurtedlction to decide any appeal in respect of any order 
referred to in clause (b) if such order relates to,-
(a) any goods Imported as baggage, 
(b) any goods loaded In a conveyance for importatlon into india, but which 
are not unloaded at their place of destination In India, or so much of tbe 
quantity of such goods as has not been unloaded at any 8Uob destination if aoodl 
unloaded at sucb destination are short of the quantity required to be unloaded 
at that destination; 
(e) PIlyment of drawback as provided in Cbapter X, aDd tbe rul.s made 
thereunder: 
Provided furtber that ", 
Amenclaraat c 
IeCtioIl 121 •. 

16 
(b) after 8ub-8ection ( J I, the following sub-8ection shall b6 inserted. D&D1ely:-
" ( 1 A) Every appeal apinst any order of the nature referred to in the first 
provi80 to 8ub-sectlon (J) , which Is pending immediately before the commence-
ment of 8ection 40 of the Finance Act. 1984. before the Appellate Tribunal and 
any matter arising out of or connected with such appeal and whioh is 80 pending 5 
8hall 8tand transferred on 8uoh commencement to the Central Oovernmeat and 
the Central Governmeat &ban deal with such appeal or matter under 8ection 
12900 as if such appeal or matter were an application or a matter ari81ng out 
of an appllcation made to it under that section. " • 
...... tof 41. In sectioo 129C of the Customs Act, in aub-eectioo lof), for the wordl "tenlO 
... 129C. thcw_nd rupees", the wordll"fifty thcw_rwf rupeea" ....... be __ itutecL 
'0 .... 
• c 
• 
'" 
42. In aection 129D of the CU8toms A ct. in sub-section (3) , for the words ''two 
years". the words ''one year" shan be substituted. 
43. After sect10D 129Dof the Customs Act, the following seoUon sball be inserted. 
namely:- 16 
I l29DD. (1) The Central GoIeDllDeDt .. ,. OIl the ...,.icatiOD of ..., 
pe.- aarieNd by ..., order ..-a UDder -=:tiOll 128A. where the order. 
of the MtUre referred to in the fint plOli8o to "'.-at" (1) of -=:lion 
129A, ...... or IDOdify 8UCh order. 
~. - For the purposes of this sub-eeotlon. 'brder paased 20 
lDIer section 12SA "inchaes an order passed under that section before the 
commencement of section 40 of tbe Finance Act. 1984. against which an 
appeal has not been preferred before such commencement and could have been. 
if the said sect10.0 bad not come into force. preferred atter such commence-
ment. to the Appellate '1\"ibunal. 25 
(2) An application under sub-eect1on (7) sball be made within three months 
from the date of the communication to the applicant of the order against which 
the appUcation 18 being made: 
Provided that the Central Government may. if it is satisfied that the 
appUcaat was prevented by sufficient cause from presenting the application 
witbin the aforesaid period of three months. allow it to be presented within 
a further period of three months. 
(3) An application under suHecUon (J) shall be in sucb form and sball 
be VerifIed in such manner as may be specified by rules made in this behalf 
30 
am shall be accompanied by a fee of two hundred rupees. 35 
(4) The Central Government may. of ita own moUon. annul or modify 
8D.Y order referred to in sub-sectlon ( J) • 
151 No order enhancing any penalty or fine in Ueu of confiscation or 
OODflacating goods of greater value sball be passed under this section._ 
lal in any case in which an order passed under section 12SA haa 
enhanced any penalty or fine 1n Ueu of confiscation or haa confis-
oated goods of greater value. am 
(b)inlDyother cqe, unle8S the person affected by the proposed 
order haa been pen noUce to show oauae against It within one 
year from the date of the order sought to be lDDulled or modUted. 
(6) Where the Central Governlb8nt 18 of opSn1oo. tbat any duty of oustoms 
baa DOt heeD 1ev1ed or haa been .bort-Ievled, no order levying or enhllDclng 
tile duty .ball be made under t1d8 .. oUon we .. the person affected by the 
propoHd order S. liven noUce to _how caUM ... t it within the time l1m1t 
.,ealftal In Motion 26. , • 
40 
45 
50 

17 
EXc..i4e 
44. In sect100 2 of the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944 (herelD-
after referred to as the Central Excises Act),in clause l~), after sub-clause 
(uU.c:) , the following sub-clause shall be inserted, namely:-
"I.(x) in relation to artificial or synthetic resins and plastic materials. 
6 inclu:les their conversion into moulding powders ;". 
45. In section 3 of the Central Excises Act, in sub- section (1 ~ in the proviso.-
(a) for the words -excisable goods which are produced or manufactured 
in a free trade zone and brought to any other place in ladia shall be an 
amount equal to". the following sball be substituted. nameJy:-
10' "excisable goods which are produoed or manufactured.-
1,(,) in a free trade zone and brought to IlIU' other place in 1ad1a; or 
(.i..ll by a h1Dfred per oent. export-or1ented undertaldng and allowed 
to be sold in India. 
shall be an amoUllt equal to'L} 
11 (bl for ~ 2, tbe following ~ sball be substituted. 
namely:-
'~2. - In this proviso.-
(.(.) "free trade zone"m.eans the Kandla Free Trade Zone and the 
Santa Cruz Eleatroaics Export Processing Zone and 1001111es any 
20 other free trade zone whlch the Central Goverameat may. by 
notWcation in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf; 
(..uJ "bundred per cent. export-ariented undertaking" means 
an UDdertaldng which has been approved as a hUDdred per cent. 
export-or1ented UDdertaldng by the Board appointed in this behalf 
25 by the Central Government in exercise of the powers conferred 
by section 14 of the Industries (Development and Regulation) 
Act, 1951, and the rules made UDder that Act.'. 
46. In sub- sectlon (4) of sectlon 4 of the Central Excises Act. in sub-clause 
(.U.) of clause (d), in the~, in clause (.i), for the words "'or reduction of 
30 duty of excise on such goods equal to. any duty of excise already paid'~ the words 
and figures "orreducUon of duty of excise under such Act on such goods equal to, 
a,ny duty of excise under such Act, or tbe additional duty UDder section 3 of the 
Customs Tariff Act, 1975. already paid" shall be substituted. 
47. In section 35Bof the Central Excises Act,-
35 (4) in sub-section (1), in the proviSO, for the words "Provided that'~ the 
40 
following shall be substit1.Ud, namely:-
"PrOVided that no appeal sball lle to the Appellate Trib1alal a.ad the 
Appellate TribWlal shall not have jurisdiction to decide ~ appeal in 
respect of any order referred to in clause (b) if such order relates to.-
(al a case of loss of goods. where the loss occurs in transit from a 
factory to a warehouse or to another factory. or from one warehouse to 
IIDDther. or during the course of processing of the goods in a wareboW18 
or in storage, whether in a factory or in a warehoufe; 
(b) a rebate of duty of excise on eoods exported to any country or 
territory outside ladla or on exolsm1e materials ueed in the mlAu-
facture of aoocIa wbloh are exported to ~ 00W1try or territory oat-
sJde India; 
. t 
A..eIm.tof 
aec:tioll 3. 

18 
lel goods exported outside Jodla (except to Nepal or Bl11&8O) without 
pafmeat of duty: 
Provided further that"; 
lb) after sub-sect1oo (J). the following sub-section shall be inserted, 
namely:- 5 
.. (IA') Every appeal agliJult lIllY order of the nature referr.t to in 
the f1rst provSao to sub-seotjon l J) • wbich is pending immediately 
before the commenoement of sect.1on 47 of the FiDlDoe Act, 1984, before 
the Appellate Tr1bwlal am any matter ari8ing out of, or coaneoted with, 
such appeal and whioh is 80 pending shall stud transferred on suoh 10 
commenoement to the Central Government, lad the Ceatral Government 
shall deal with such appeal or matter under aeoUon 35EE 88 if such appeal 
or matter were an appl1oat1on or a matter arl81Dg out of an appl1clUon 
made to it UDder that section. " • 
....... t or 48. In -.:tioo 35D of the Central Kxc~ Act, in ~tiaD (.5). for 15 
-=uc. 350. the words "tell that_nd ~, the words "fifty fhoo_'"' ~ .. IbaIl 
be .ulJetituted. 
....... t of 49. In section 35E of the Central Exoises Act. in sub-aection (3) • for the words 
dOD 35£. ''two years", the words "one year" shall be substituted. 
sMltioG of 
- aectio. 5EE. 
• 
,I 
• It! 
SO. After seotion 35E of the Central Exoises Act, the folloWing section sball be 
tneerted. namely:-
3SBL l J) The Central Gmellllllellt may, em the application of any penon 
aur"" by ..., order..-. under -.:tiaD 35A, .... re the order. of the 
aature referred to in the fint prun.o to ~tiaD U\ of -.:tiaD 358, IIIIDUl 
or modify .ucb order. 
Expl.luul.t.ion.- For the purposes of thls sub .... ection. "order passed under 
s.olton 3SA" includes an order pas.ed u~ that section before the commencement 
20 
25 
of section 4'7 of the Finance Act, 1984 against which an appeal bas not been pre-
ferred before IUch commencemeDt aDd COQld have been, if the said section bad not 
come into force. preferred after such commencement, to the Appellate Tribunal. 30 
(21 An 1lpp11cation UDder aab .... ect1on (J) _ll be made within three months from 
the date of the communication to the applicant of the order apinat which the appli-
cation 1_ being made: 
Provided that the CeDtral Government may, if it is aatisfied that the applicant 
waa prevented by sufflcieDt cause from presenting the application within the afore - 35 
aid period of three months. allow it to be p resented Within a ilrtber period of 
three moatb8. 
(31 An application under aub .... ect1on (J) sball be in auch form and shall be 
verified in auch manner as may be specified by rules made in this behalf and 8hall 
be accompanied by a fee of two hundred rupees. 40 
(4) The CeDtral GovernmeDt may. of its own motion. annul or modify any order 
referred to in aub ... eotioo (I). 
,SJ No order enhancing any penalty or fine in lieu of conflscation or conflacating 
goods of greater value shall be pused under this 8eotion.-
~ In any case in which an order passed under section 35A ba8 enhanced 406 
any penalty or fine in lieu of oonflscation or bas confi8cated goods of greater 
value. aDd 
(hi In any other case. unles8 the person atrected by the propoa.t order bas 
been PV8l notice to 8bow ~u .. alflul 1~ within ODe year from the date of the 
--- --..... t t.n hili amwlled or modified. ao 

10 of 1897. 
19 
(6) Where the Central Government is of opinion that any duty of excise has 
not been levied or has been short-levied, no order levying or enhaulclo.g the duty 
shall be made under this section unless the person affected by the proposed order 
is given notice to show cause against it within the time Umlt specified In section 
5 llA.". 
51. The First Schedule to the Central Exalses Act,-
(al shall be amended In the manner specified In the Third Schedule; and 
(bl shall, with effect from such date as the Central Government may, by notifi-
cation In the Official Gazette, appoint, be also amended in the manner specified 
lOin the Fourth Schedule. 
A. •• eat of 
Pint 
Scbe6d •• 
52. (n In the case of goods chargeable with a duty of excise under the Ceotral :r.:" ._ 
Exclses Act, as amended from time to time, read with any notUlcatloo. for the time 0 .~ ... 
being in force Issued by the Central Government in relatioo. to the duty 10 chargeable 
(o.ot being a notificatioo. providing for any exemption for giving credit with respect to, 
15 or rewction of duty of excise under the said Act on BIlcb goods ecpal to, any duty of 
excise under the said Act, or the additional duty under section 3 of the Customs Tariff 
Act, already paid on the raw material or component parts used In the prow-,tion or 
manufacture of such goods), there shall be levied and collected a speclal duty of excise 
equal to ten per cent. of the amount so chargeable on such goods. 
20 (2) Sub-section (1) shall cease to have effect after the 31st day of Maroh, 1985, 
except as respects things done or omitted to be done before such cesser; and section 
6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897, shall apply upon such cesser as tr the said sub-
section had then been repealed by a Central Act. 
(3) The special duties of excise referred to in sub-section (11 shall be in addition 
25 to any duties of excise chargeable on such goods under the Central Excises Act, or 
any other law for the time being In force. 
,of) The provisions of the Central Excises Act and the rules made therEUnder, 
including those relating to rel1nds and exemptions from duties, shall, as-far as may 
be, apply In relation to the levy and collection of the special duties of excise leviable 
30 under this section In respect of any goods as they apply in relation to the levy and 
collection of the duties of excise on such goods under that Act or those rules, as the 
case may be. 
53. The Additional Duties of Excise (Goods of Bpeclallmportance) Act, 1967 (here- A..._.t, 
Inabr referred to as the Additional Duties of Excise Act), shall be amended In the Ad 51 flit! 
35 manner specified in the Fifth Schedule. 
CHAPTER V 
54. In the Unit Trust of India Act, 1963, In sub-section (1) of sectloo 32, with 
effect from the 1st day of April, 1985,-
40 (a) clause (b) and clause (ba) shall be omitted: 
(bl In Explanation 1,-
45 
(.il in clause (a). for the words, brackets and letters "clauses (CIa) and (b)., 
'the word, brackets and letters "clause I(Ia)" shall be aubatUuted; 
(.uJ in clause (b), for the words, brackets and letters "clau8ea (fxI)~ and (bb)., 
the word, brackets and letters "clause (bbl" shall J:»e substituted. 
55. In the Gold (CoJllrol) Act, 1868,-
(al in lUb~ion (2) of ..:tion 8lB, for the words "teD ................. , 
the words "fifty· thGI_ nd rupees" ...... be "ituted; 
A. ..... 
Ad 5201 IS 

20 
(b) in aub-eection (3) of section 82, for the words "two years ", the words "one 
,ear" sball be substituted. 
Oe.~n wu:te..t tht PItOV,u.ioMt 
CoUtet.ion 06 Tau Act.1931. 
It Is he.-by declared that It is expedient in the public Interest that the provisions 5 
of clauses 35, 36, 44 and 46, sub-clause (al of clause 51 (except Part I of the Third 
Schedule) and clauses 52 and 53 of this Bill shall have immediate effect under the 
Provisional Colleotlon of Taxes Act, 1931. J6 01 1931. 

5 
21 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
(See secUon 2) 
PART I 
INCOME-TAX AND SURCHARGE ON INCOME-TAX 
PaJta91laph A 
Sub-PaJta9JuJph I 
In the case of every individual or Hindu undivided family or unregistered firm or other association 
of persons or body of individuals. whether incorporated or not, or every artUlcial Juridical person 
referred to in sub-clause (vU) of clause (31) of section 2 of the Inoome-tax Act. not being a case to 
10 Which Sub-Paragraph n of this Paragraph or any other Paragraph of this Part appUes,-
(1) where the total income does not excE'ed 
Rs.15,OOO 
(2) where the total income exceeds Rs. 15, 000 
15 but does not exceed Rs. 20, 000 
(3) where the total income exceeds Rs.20, 000 
but does not exceed Rs.25,OOO 
(4) where the total income exceeds Rs. 25, 000 
but does DOt exceed Rs. 30,000 
20 (5) where the total income exceeds Rs.30, 000 
but does not exceed Rs.50,OOO 
(6) where the total income exceeds Rs. 50, 000 
but does not exceed Rs. 60,000 
(7) where the total income exceeds Rs.80, 000 
25 but does not exceed Rs. 70,000 
(8) where the total income exceeds Rs. 70, 000 
but does not exceed Rs. 85,000 
(9) where the total income exceeds Rs. 85,000 
but does not exceed Rs. 1,00,000 
30 (10) where the total Income exceeds 
Rs.l,OO,OOO 
Nil; 
25 per cent.of the amount by which the total income 
exceeds Rs. 15,000: 
Rs. 1,250 plu.6 30 per cent. of the amount bv whioh 
the totallncome exceeds Bs.20,OOO: 
Rs. 2, 750 ~ 35 per cent. of the amount by which 
the total income exceeds Rs. 25, 000; 
Rs. 4,500 plu.6 40 per cent. of the amount by which 
the total income exceeds Rs.30,OOO; 
Rs. 12 , 500 pf.w 50 per cent. of the amount by which 
the total Income exceeds Rs. 50, 000; 
Rs. 17,500 pf.w 52.5 per cent. ef the amount by 
which the total income exceeds Bs.60,OOO: 
Rs. 22,750 plu.6 55 per cent. of the amount by which 
the total income exceeds Rs. 70,000; 
Rs. 31,000 pf.w 57.5 per cent. of the amount by 
which the total income exceeds Rs. 85, 000: 
Rs.39,825 plu.6 80 per cent. of the amount by which 
the total income exceeds Rs. 1,00,000. 
The amount of income-tax computed in accordance with the preoeding proviSiOnS of this flab-Para-
graph shall be increased by a surcharge for purposes of the Union calculated at the rate of twelve and 
35 ''!l halfper cent. of such income-tax. 
40 
Sub-PaJta9JuJph II 
In the case of every Hincll undivided family which at any time cllring the previous year bas at least 
one member whose total income of the previOUS year relevant to the assessment year commencing on 
the lst day of April, 1984 exceeds Rs. 15,000,-
(1) where the total income doe.I DOt exceed NU.; 
Bs. 8,000 
(2) where the total income exceeds Rs. 8,000 
but does not exceed Rs. 15, 000 
22 per cent. of the amount by whioh the total in-
come exceeds Bs. 8,000; 
45 (3) where the total income exceeds Rs.15, 000 Rs. 1,540 plu.6 27 per cent. of the amount by which 
the total income exceeds Rs. 15, 000 i but does DOt exceed Rs. 20,000 

(4) where the total income exceeds as. 20,000 
but does not exceed Rs. 25,000 
(5) where the total income exceeds Rs.25,OOO 
but does not exceed Re. 30,000 
22 
ae. 2,890 'fbA 35 per Cellt. of the amount by which 
the total income exceeds as. 20, 000; 
aad, 6.foO 'fbA .foO per oent. of the amount by which 
the total Income exceeds Rs. 25,000; 
(6) where the total1ncome exceeds RI.30,000 
but does oot exceed Rs. 50,000 
al. 6,640 plJJIJ 50 per Cellt. of the amount by which 5 
the total income exceed. Rs~ 30,000; 
('1) where the total Income exceedl Re. 50, 000 Ils. 16,640 plJJIJ 60 per cent. of the amount by 
which the total income exceeds Rs. 50,000: 
Provided that for the purposes of thts fhb-Paragraph,-
(.il no tncome-tax shall be payable on a total tncome not exceeding Rs.12,OOO; 
(.i.i.) where the total Income exceeds Rs. 12,000 but does DOt exceed Re. 17,610, the tncome-tax 
payable thereon shall not exceed forty per cent. of the amount by which the total income exceedll 
Re.12,Ooo. 
SuJl.cM.\gC!. on .iJlCOIIIC!.-t4x 
10 
The amount of income-tax computed in accordance with the preceding provisions of thi8 Sub-Para- 15 
graph shall be increased by a surcharge for purposes of the Union calculated at the rate of twelve and 
a half per cent. of ... oo income-tax. 
PaJt4gJtaph B 
In the case of every co-aperatlve society,-
Ratu 0' .iJlCOIIIC!.-tax 
(1) where the total income doe. not exceed 
Ra.10,OOO 
(2) where the total income exceeds Rs.I0, 000 
but does oot exceed Rs. 20,000 
15 per cent. of the total income; 
Rs. 1,500 ptw 25 per Cellt. of the amount by which 
the total income exceed. Rs. 10,000; 
20 
(3) where the total income exceed. Rs.20, 000 Rs. 4, OOO~ .foO per cent. of the amouat by which 25 
the total income exceeds R8. 20, 000. 
SuJl.cluvtgC!. on .income.-talt 
The amount of income-tax computed in accordance with the preceding provisiOlUl of thta Paragraph 
shall be increased by a surcharge for purpose. of the Union calculated at the rate of twelve and a half 
per cent. of web income-tax. 
PaJt49Jtaph. C 
Sub-PaJt4gJtaph. I 
In the case of every registered firm, not being a caee to which am-Paragraph n of this Paragraph 
appUes,-
R4tu 0' .income.-t4x 
(1) where the total income does DOt exceed N-U.; 
a.. 10,000 
(2) w'here the total income exceeds Rs. 10,000 
bat does not exceed Rs. 25,000 
5 per cent. of the amount by which the total income 
exceeds Rs. 10,000; 
30 
35 
(3) where the total income exceeds Rs.25, 000 
but doea not exceed RI. 50,000 
R •. 750 plJJIJ 7 per cent. of the amount by which 40 
(4) where the total income exceeds Rs. 50, 000 
but doee DOt exceed Ra. 1,00,000 
the total income exceeds RB. 25,000: 
RI. 2, 500 ~ 15 per cent. of the amount by which 
the total income exceeds Rs. 50, 000; 
(5) where the total income ex~ed8 Rs.1,OO,OOO RI.10,OOO pt.u6 24 per cent. of the amount by which 
the total income exceeds RI. 1,00,000. 
SWlch.alr.ge. on .income.-.tax 
The amount of income-tax computed in accordance with the preceding provisionl of this liab-Para-
p-aph shall be lncreued by a aurcharge for purposes of the Umon calculated at the rate of twelve and 
a half per cent. of such Income-tax. 
Sub-PaJt4gIlaph. II 
III the caee of every registered firm whoee total income includes income derived from a profes8ion 
carried on by it and the income 80 included il not les8 than fifty-one per cent. of such total income. _ . 
.fo6 
50 

(1) where the total income does not exceed 
Rs.10,OOO 
23 
(2) where the total income exceeds Rs. 10,000 
5 but does not exceed Rs. 25,000 
4 per cent. of the amount by which the total income 
exceeds Rs. 10,000; 
10 
(3) where the total income exceeds Rs.25, 000 
but does not exceed Rs. 50,000 
(4) where the total income exceeds Rs. 50,000 
but does not exceed Rs. 1,00,000 
(5) where the total income exceeds Rs. 1,00, 000 
Rs.600 flu/; 7 per cent. of the amount by which 
the total income exceeds Rs. 25,000; 
Rs. 2,350 flu/; 13 per cent. of the amount by 
which the total income exceeds Rs. 50, 000; 
Rs. 8,850 flu/; 22 per cent. of the amount by 
which the total income exceeds Rs. 1,00,000. 
~ on .incoI2--= 
The amount of income-tax computed in accordance with the preceding provisiOlls of this fUb-Para-
graph shall be increased by a surcharge for purposes of the Union calculated at the rate of twelve and 
15 a half per cent. of such income-tax. 
20 
~. - For the purposes of this Paragraph, "registered flrm" includes an unregistered firm 
assessed as a registered firm under clause (b) of section 183 of the Income-tax Act 
~J) 
In the case of every local authority, -
Ratf. 06 .incorllt-tax 
On the whole of the total income 50 per cent. 
SuAc.hall..ge on .inC.Orllt-tax 
The amount of income-tax computed in accordance with the preceding provisiODs of this Paragraph 
shall be increased by a surcharge for purposes of the Union calculated at the rate of twelve and a half 
25 per cent. of such income-tax. 
In the case of a company, -
Ra.tu 06 .income-tax 
I. In the case of a domestic company,-
; 30 (1) where the company is a company in which 55 per cent. of the total income; 
the public are substantially interested 
(2) where the company is not a company in 
which the public are substantially interested-
(.i) in the case of an industrial company 60 per cent. of the total income; 
35 (U) in any other case 65 per cmlof the total Income. 
n. In the caSe of a company other than a domestic company,-
(.i) on 80 much of the total income as consiSts of -
laJ royalties received from Government or 
an Indian concern in pursuance of an agree-
40 ment mad~ by it with the Government or the 
Indian concern after the 318t day of March, 
1961 but before the 18t day of Aprll,1976. or 
! (b) fees for rendering technical services 
received from Government or an Indian con-
45 cern in purlUaDee of an al1'eement made by 
it with the Government orthe Indian concern 
after the 29th day of February, 1964 but before 
the 18t day of April, 1976. 
and where such agreement haa. in either calle. 50 per cent .• 
50 been approved by the Central Govenunent 
tU) OIl the balance. If any, of the total 
income 
'TO per cent. 

24 
SWtc.htVI.9"- on .inc.ome.-tax 
The amount of income-tax computed in accordance with the preceding provisions of this Paragraph 
shall be increased by a surcbarge calculated at tbe rate of five per cent. of such income-tax. 
PARTU 
Ra.tu 6011. de.duc.:ti.on o! tax a,t 60U1te,,- .in ee.Jtta.Ut e46U 
In every case in which under the provisions of sections 193, 194, 194A, 194B, 194BB, 194D and 
195 of the IDcome-tax Act, tax is to be deducted at the rates in force, deduction shall be made from 
the income IlUbJect to deduction at the following rates :-
Income-tax 
Rate of Rate of 
income-tax surcharge 
1. In the case of a person other than a company-
(4) where the perlOn is resident in India-
UJ on income by way of interest other 
than ''Interest on securities" 
(.i.L) on income by way of winnings from 
lotteries and crossword puzzles 
(.(.Ul on income by way of winnings from 
horse races 
(.wI on income by way of inllUranee 
commission 
(v) on income by way of interest pay-
able on 
(A) any security, other than a tax-
frp.e security, of the Central or a State 
Government; 
10 per cent. 
30 per cent. 
30 per cent. 
10 per cent. 
10 per cent. 
(8) any debentures or other securities 
for money issued by or on behalf of any local 
authority or a corporation established by a 
Central, State or Provincial Act; 
3. 75 per cent.; 
3.75 per cent.; 
Nil; 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
Ie) any debentures issued by a com-
pany where such debE:ntures are listed on a 
recognised stock exchange in lndia in 
accordance with the Securities Contracts 
(Regulatioo) Act, 1956, and any rules 
made thereunder 
42 of 1956. 
36 
(ui) on any other income (excluding in-
terest payable on a tax-free security) 
Ib) where the person is not resident in 
Indta-
(.(J in the case of a non-resident Indtan-
(A) on investment income and long-
term capital gains 
(8) on income by way of interest 
payable on a tax-free security 
Ie) on the whole of the other income 
20 per cent. 2.5 per cent. ; 
40 
20 per cent. 2. 5 per cent.; 
15 per cent. 1.875 per cent.; 
46 
income-tax at 30 per cent. and surcharge at 3.75 
per cent. of the amount of the income, 
or 
Income-tax and surcharge on income-tax tn res-
pect of the Income at the rates prescribed In 50 
Sub- Paragraph I of Paragraph A of Part m of 
this Schedule, If such Income had been the 
total Income, 
; whichever Is higher; 

25 
Income-tax 
Rate of Rate of 
income-tax surcilllrge 
(U) in the case of any other person-
5 (A) on the whole. of the income Cexclud- income-tax at 30 per cent. aDd surcharge at 3.75 
10 
15 
20 
25 
~o 
35 
40 
45 
{; . .. 
50 
55 
ing interest payable on a tax-free securtt~ per cent. of the amount of income, 
(8) on Income by way of interest 
payable on a tax-free security 
2. In the case of a company-
Ia) wbere the company Is a domestic 
company-
(.l.) on Income by wa y of interest other 
than ''Interest on securities" 
(U) on any other income (excluding 
lmerest payable on a tax-free security) 
fb) where the co~any Is not a domestic 
company-
~.(.) on Income by way of dividends pay-
able by any domestic company 
lUI on income by way of interest payable 
by Government or an Indian concern on 
moneys borrowed or debt incurred by 
Government or the Indian concern in 
foreign currency 
(.i.U.) on income by way of royalty 
payable by Government or an IncHan con-
cern In pursuance of an agreement made 
by it with the Government or the Indian 
concern after tbe 31st day of March, 1976, 
where such royalty is In conSideration 
for the transfer of all or any rights 
(including the granting of a licence) in 
re~ect of copyright in any book on a 
subject referred to In the proviSO to 
aub-section (1A) of section U5A of the 
Income-tax Act, to the Indian concern 
(.w) on income by way of royalty [not 
being royalty of the nature referred to In 
sub-item (b) (-i.UlJ payable by Govern-
ment or an Indian concern in pursuance 
of an agreement made by it with the 
Government or the Indian concern and 
which has been approved by the Central 
Government. -
tAl where the agreement is made 
after the 31st day of March, 1961 but 
before the 1st day of April, 1976 
(8) where the agreement i8 made 
after the 31st day of March, 1976-
or 
income-tax and surcharge on lncome-tax in respect 
of the Income at the rates prescribed In &lb-Para-
graph I of Paragraph A of Part m of this Schedule, 
if au ch Income had been the total Income , 
whichever Is higher; 
15 per cent. 1.875 per cent. 
20 per cent. 1 per cent.; 
21.5 per cent. 1. 07i per cent.; 
25 per cent. Nit; 
25 per cent. Nit; 
40 per cent. NiL; 
50 per cent. 2. 5 per cent.; 

28 
Ipcomtd!X 
Rate of Rate of 
lncolllg-iax surcbg8 
(1) on so much of the amount of 20 per cent. NiL; 
mcb income as COllsisy of lump sum 5 
coulderatioo for the traufer outsi4e 
IDdta of, or the In.,artmg of Informa-
tion outside lDdta in respect of. aoy 
data, documentation, drawing orapecl-
flcattoo relating to any patent, in- 10 
ventlOD., model, deslp, secret formula 
or process, or trade mark or similar 
property 
(2) on the balance, If any, of such 40 per cent. NCl.; 
income 15 
IvJ on income by way of fees for 
tficbnical services payable by Government 
or an Indian concern in p.lrauance of an 
agreement made by it with the Govern-
meat or the hldlan concern and which 20 
has been approved by the Central Govern-
ment-
(A) wbere the agreement is made 50 per cent. 2.5 per cent.; 
after the 29th day of February, 1964 
but before the 1st day of April, 1976 25 
(8) where the agreement is made 40 per cent. HiL; 
after the 31st day of Much, 1976 
(u<.) on income by way of interest 44 per cent. 2. 2 per cent.; 
payable OIl a tax-free security 
luUl on any other income 70per cent. 3.5 per cent. 30 
~. - For the put1)oses of this Part, ''investment income", '1ong-term capital pins" and 
''non-resident Indian" shall have the meanings assigned to them In Chapter XD-A of the hlcome-tax Act. 
PART DI 
Ra.tu 60ll ealc.ul.aung Oil chall.9.i.ng .inCOI!Ie.-tax .in c.vtta.i.n C!lUU, de.du.c..t.i.ng .income.-tax 6JLO," 
.inco. chtVtge.abie. uru1eJr. ~e. he.ad "SalaIUe.6" Oil 4ny ptlljllle.nt 1le.6fNte.d .to .in 6ub-uc..t.i.on (9) 35 
06 ~e.etl.on .Of 4Ild eo".,u.ti.ng "advanc.2. tax". 
In cases in which income-tax has to be ca:culated under the first proviso to sub-section (5) of BeetiOD. 
l32 of the mcome-tax Act or charged under sub-eection (4) of seetion 172 or sub-section tt) of section 
174 or BE-ction 175 or aub-eection (t) of section 176 of the aid Act or deducted under section 192 of the 
said Act from income chargeable under the head "Salaries" or deducted under sub-eectlon (9) of section 40 
80E of the said Act from any payment referred to in the said sub-eection (9) or In which the "advance 
tax" payable under Chapter XVU-e of the said Act has t.o be computed, at the rate or rates In force, 
such Income-tax or, as the case may be, "advance tax' {not being "advance tax" in respect of any In-
come chargeable to tax under Chapter XU or Chapter XD-A or aub-eection (JA) of section 161 or section 
164 or section 164A or section 167A of the mcome-tax Act at the rates as speclfted In that Chapter or 45 
section}, shall be so calculated, charged, deducted or computed at the following rate or rates:-
PtVI.491t4ph A 
Sub-PtVI.49lt4ph Z 
In the case of every indivic:Ual or Hindu undivided (amily or unregistered firm or other alsomation 
of persOllS or body of Individuals, whether incorporated or not, or every artiCcla1 juridical person 50 
referrE-d to In sub-clause (uUJ of clause 13l) of Bection 2 of the Income-tax Act. not belng a case to 
which Sub-Paragraph D of thts Paragraph or any other Paragraph of this Part applies. -
Ra.tu 06 .inc.0me.-.tAx 
(1) where the total income does not exceed 
Rs.15,OOO 
(2) where the totaltncom(' exceeds 
Rs.15,OOO but does not exct"ed Rs.20,OOO 
HiL; 
55 
20 per cent. of the amount by which the total Income 
exceeds R •• lS,OOO; 
, 
, ,. 

(3) where the total income exceeds 
Rs.20,OOO but does not exceed Rs.25,OOO 
(4) where the total income exceeds 
Rs.25,OOO but does not ex(!eed Rs.30,OOO 
27 
Rs. 1,000 pl.u.6 25 per cent. of tht' amoont by which 
the total income excl'cds Rs. 20, 000; 
Rs.2,250 piu.4 30 per cent. of thl' amoont by which 
the total income exceeds Rs. 25,000; ~. \.;,.!:< 5 (5) wht're the total income exceeds 
Rs.30,OOO hut dOt's not exct'ed Rs.40,OOO 
Hs.3, 750 pl.u6 35 per cent. of the !imoont by which 
the total income exceeds Hs.30, 000; 
(6) where the totalinoome excet'ds 
Rs. 40, 000 oot does not exceed Rs. 50, 000 
(7) where the total income exceeds 
RR. 7,250;plu.6 40 per cent. oftht' amount by which 
the total income eXCt'l'ds Rs. 40,000; 
10 Rs. 50, 000 but doH not exceed Rs. 70, 000 
Rs.ll,250 plu.6 45 per cent. of the amount by which 
the total ineome exceec:h .. Rs. 50, 000; 
15 
(8) where the total Incom(' exceMs 
Rs.70,OOO but does not exceed Rs.l,OO,OOO 
(9) where the total Incomt> exceeds 
Rs. 1,00,000 
Rs. 20,250 plu.6 50 per ct'tU.of thl' amoont by which 
the total income exceeds Rs. 70, 000; 
Rs.35,250 pl.u.4 55 per cenLofthe amwDl by which 
the total income exceeds Rs.l,OO,OOO. 
'!be amount of income-tax computed in accordance with the preceding provisions of this SUb-
Paragraph shall be increased by a s\D'charge lor pwposes of the Union calculated at the rate of 
twelve aId a half per ceut of such income-tax. 
Sub-PtVtt1glU1ph II 
20 In the case of every Hindu lBldivided family which at any time during the previous year bas at 
least one member whose total income of the previous year relevant to the assessment )'ear 
commencing 00 the 1st day of April, 1985 exceeds Rs.15,OOO,-
(1) w hert· the total income does not exceed 
,'.' 25 Rs.8,OOO 
(2) where the totaliocome excE'l'ds 
Rs.S,OOO but does not exceed Ra.15.000 
(3) where the total income exceeds 
Rs.15,OOO but does not exceed Rs.20,Ooo 
30 (4) where the total income exoeeds 
Rs.20,OOO but does not exceed Rs.25,OOO 
(5) where the total income exceeds 
Rs.25,OOO but does not exceed Rs. 30,000 
(7) where the total income exoeeds 
Rs.50,OOO 
22 per cent.of the amount by which the total 
income eXCl'eds R s. 8,000 ; 
Rs.I,540 r£ub 27 per cent.of the amount by which 
the total income exceeds Ra.15, 000; 
Rs.2.890~35 per cent. ofthe amountbywhlch 
the total income exceeds Rs. 20,000 ; 
Rs. 4, 640 f'.Jlu.6 40 per cent. of the amount by which 
the totallocome exceeds Rs. 25,000 r 
Rs. 6, 640 ptu.6 50 per cent. of the amount by which 
the totalinoome exceeds Rs.30,OOO; 
Rs.16,640 plu6 60 per cent. of the amount by which 
the total income exceeds Rs.50,OOO: 
Provided that for the purposes of this SuIH> aragraph, -
(.i) no iocome-tax shall be payable on a total income not exceeding Rs.12,OOO; 
(U) where the total income exceeds Rs.12.00Q but does not exceed R •• 17,6JD, the iDcome-tax 
payable thereon shall not exceed forty per cent. of the amount by Which the total income exceeds 
Rs.12,OOO. 
The amount at iDcorne-tax oomputed in accordance with the preceding provision. of this Sub1Iarap-apb 
45 _hall be increased by a surcharge for purposes of the Union calculated at the rate of twelv45 lad a balf 
per cent. of such inoome-tax. 

28 
Pall.4911.4ph 8 
In the case of every oo-operaUve society,-
Ra-tu 06 ..inC.OIlle.-tax 
(1.) where the total income does oot exceed 15 per ceDt. of the tota1inoomei 
Be.l0,OOO 
(2) where the total income exceeds 
B8.10,OOO but does DOt exceed Rs. 20,000 
(3) where the total income exceeds 
Bs.20,OOO 
Bs.1,500 ptu6 25 per cent. of the amount by which 
the totallnoome exceeds R8.lO,OOO; 
Bs.4,OOO ptu6 40 per ceDt. of the amcnmt by which 
the totalinoome exceeds Bs. 20,000. 
SuJc.~e. all income.-tax 
'!be amount of income-tax oomputed iD accordance with the preceding provisiODS of this Paragraph 
shall be iDcreased by a surcharge for purposes of the Union calculated at the rate of twelve and a half 
per ceDt. of such income-tax. 
P4Il4911.4ph C 
Sub-P4Il49I1.4ph I 
In the case of every registered firm, DOt beiDg a case to which Sub-Paragraph n of this Paragraph 
applies,-
Ra-tu 06 ..income-tax 
~ where the totalinoome does not exceed NiL; 
Bs.lD,OOO 
(2) w here the total income exceeds 
B8.10,OOO but does not exceed Rs.25,OOO 
(3) w here the total income exceeds 
Rs.25,OOO but does DOt exceed Rs.50,OOO 
5 per cent. oUhe amoQlt by which the total 
income exceed8 Bs.lO,OOO; 
Rs. 750 ~ 7 per ceDt. of the amount by which 
the totallDcome exceeds Rs. 25, 000 ; 
5 
10 
15 
20 
(4) w here the total income exceeds 
Bs.50,OOO but does DOt exceed Rs.l,OO,OOO 
Bs.2,500 ~ 15 per cent. of the amount by which 25 
(5) w here the total income exceeds 
Rs.l,OO,OOO 
the totalinoome exceeds Rs. 60,000 ; 
Bs.lO,OOO plu6 24 per cent. of the amount by whicb 
the total income uceeds Rs.l,OO,OOO. 
SWtt!h4ll.ge. on ..income.-tax 
Tbe amount of income-tax computed in accordance with the preceding provisions of this Sub-Paragraph 30 
shall be inoreased by a surcharge for purposes of the UDioD calculated at the rate of twelve sad a half 
per cent. of 8uch tDcome.tax. 
Sub -PaII.4911.4ph I I 
lD the case of mery repstered firm wbose tcltalincome inc1Uies inoome derived from a professloD 
carried OD by It IIDd the income so 1Dcll11ed is DOt less than flfty-one per cent. of such totalincome,- 35 
Ra-te.6 06 ..income.-tax 
(1) where the total inoome does DOt exceed NCL.; 
Bs.l0,OOO 
(2) where the totalinoome exceeds 
Rs.l0,OOO W does DOt exceed Bs.25, 000 
(3) where tile totalinoome exceeds 
B •• 16,OOO W doe. not exceed Bs. 50,000 
(4) where the total inoome exceed. 
a •. 50,OOO but doe. DOt exceed R •• l,OO,OOO 
(6) where the totallDcome exceed. 
B •• l,OO,OOO 
" per ceDt. of the amount by wblch the totallnoome 
exceed. R8.10,OOO; 40 
R •• 800 ptu6 7 per oent. of the amount by which the 
totalinoome exceed. R •• 26,OOO; 
R •• 2,350 I'lu6 13 per oent. of the amOUDt by which 
the totallDoome exceed. B8. 50,000; 
R •• 8,850 plu,6 22 per cent. of the amount by wbloh 45 
the total Jncome exceed. R8.1,OO,OOO. 

29 
SuJLc.hallge on .income-tax 
'!be amount of J.noome-tax oomputied in accordance with the preceding provisions of this Bub-P aragr IIPh 
sball be increased by a surobarp for purposes of the Umon calculated at the rate of twelve and a half 
per oent. of sa J.noome-tax. 
6 ~.- I'or the purpoHS of Ws Paragraph, "registered tlrm"J.nc11des an unreg18tered tlrm 
10 
15 
assessed u a repstereel firm UDder clause (b) of secUon 183 of the Inoome-tax Act. 
10 the oue of flVery local authority ,-
Rate 06 .income-tax 
On the whole of the total income 50 per cent. 
SUltc.hallgf. on .income-tax 
Tbe amoUDt of inoome-tax computed in accordance with the preced1ng provisions of this Paragraph 
sball be increued by a surcbarge for purposes of the Umon calculated at the rate of twelve and a half 
per ont. of such 1noome-tax. 
10 the cue of a company, -
Ratu 06 .income-tax 
L In the oue of It domelltic company. 
(1) where the compau.Y 18 a compaoy in 66 per cent. of the totalincomei 
20 which the public are IlU.b8tlDUally interested 
(2) where the company 18 DOt a company 
in wblch the pubUc are subetaat1ally interested-
(.i) in the cue of an Diustr1al compaD,y 
(.(.(J in any other cue 
60 per cent. of the total income i 
66 per cent. of the totallncome. 
25 De In the case of a company other than a domestic com~,-
(.i) on so much of the total income as 
coD8ists of-
(41 royalUes received from Government 
or • Indian ooncern in pursuance of an 
30 acreement made by it with tbe Government 
or the Iad1an concern after the 31st day of 
March, 1961 but before the 1st dll¥ of April, 
1978, or 
:(b) fees for remer1ng technioal services 
36 received from Government or an ladian 
CODOern in purSU8DOe of an agreement made 
by it with the Government or the iu:l1an 
concern after the 29th day of February, 
1964 but before the 1st day d. AprU,1976, 
40 and where such agreement has, in eUher case, 50 per cent.; 
been awroved by the Cntral Government 
(<<) on the hal_ce, if say, of the total 
inoome 
70 per cent. 
SUil.c.haIr.gf. on .income.-.tax 
46 '!he amount of income-tax compulled in accordanC"e with the preced1nc provisions of this Paragraph 
50 
shall be increased by a surobarge calculated at the rate of five per cent. of such income-tax. 
PARTlY 
£" SfL section 2('1 (~ 
BULD roa C OMPUTATIOIf f# ..... AGaICUtruaAL IRCOME 
R.It.e 1. - Ap1cWturalincome of the nature referred to in sub-clause la) of clause (11 of sect101l 
2 of the 1ooo--'''·.bal1 be computed u if 1t were income ohargeable to income-tax Ulder 
that Act under the beal''lDoome from other sources" and the provisions of sections 57 to 59 of that Act .hall, 80 far u m~ be, apply aocCll'd1Ddv~u:L-____________________ _ 

8 
P 
o 
30 
ProvJded that 81Ib-8eotioQ:(21 of NOtIon 68 shall apply subject to the moditJoltion that the referenoe 
to lNIotlon 40A therein Bball be ooutr18l 18 DOt inol1li1Dg a relerenoe to aub-lJ8CtioD8 U) ud (4) of 
lNIotion 4OA. 
Il&t.e. 2. - Agrloultural income of the nature referred to in nb-olmse. (bl or nb-olmse (e) of 
c1&118e (1) of aeotloD 2 of tbe 1D00me-tax Jd..fotber ~ income derived from aay buI.ldlng required 
88 a dwell1ng boue by tbe Neelver 01 the real or rev8llue or the ouJiWdor or the reoe1ver 01. renU-
JD-kiDd referred to in tbe said s"o1ause(~ 8ball be compmed u U it were income oharpab1e to 
income-tax lIJder that Act lDder the held "Profits lad gains of bua1ae88 or professiOD" aDd the 
proviBJona ofaeoUona SO, 31,32,34,86,87,38,40, 40A.stberthan llUb-HotlODll I'"~ aad(4) tIlereoD, 
6 
41,43 aad 43A oftbe lDcome-tax Act sball • ., far as mq be, appJ;y acoord1qly. 10 
Jbt.e. 3. - ABr1cultural inoome of. tbe nature referred to in a.o1 ... '(e) of olauH {1J of MetioJl2 
of the" Jqoome-tax Act, be1Dg income derived from 8DY bulldiq requlred u a dweJ.l1na bola. by the 
receiver of the rent or rev8DUS or the oulttvator or tbe reoe1ver of reat-1n-kiD:I referred to in the slid 
ab-011U1118 lel ahall be computed &8 U it were income ohargeable to income-tax lIJder that Ad.1Dder 
the head 8lncome from bowie properi\v" lad tbe proviaJou of aeotl0D8 23 to 27 of that Act 1haIl, so far 16 
as may be, IPM acoordiDgly; 
Provided that Bub-seoUoo(21 of the 8aid aeoU0Il23 8hall'appJ.v subject to the modJtJ.c&Uou that tile 
refereo.oea to 'total 1noom.e " therein shall be oonatrued 88 referenoes to net agr1oultura1income 1M 
that the words. flgurea aDd letter 'ad before maJdDc lIlY deduction 1Dder Chapter VIA" shall be omiUed. 
Il&t.e. 4. - Notwltb8taD ding aoytblng contained in lIlY other provlldona of U.se rul.s, in a cue 
where the 888e88 .. derives income from sale of tea grown lad m_ufaotured by blm in 1Ddla, s_ 
income 8ba11 be computed in acoordlDoe with rule 8 of the lnoome-tax Rule.., 1962, m:i sixty per cent. 
01. such income 8hall be regarded as the agrloulturai 1noome of the 88Besaee. 
Il&t.e. 6. - Where the &8seS8ee 18 a partner of a regUtered tlrm or an 1IDregistered tJrm .... 8aed 
20 
u areg1atered firm UDder olauae (b) of 8eoUon 183 of the Inoome-tax Act, whioh in the preVioUi year 26 
has any agricultural income, or lB a partner of. an unregUtered tlrm which baa not been use_ed &8 • 
regiatered tlrm UDder clauae (b) of the said 8ection 183 aad which in the previous year hu either no 
income chargeable to tax UDder the lDocme-tax Act or hu totalinoome DOt exceeding the mu:1mum 
amount not chargeable to tax In the oue of an au-epatered flrm but baa any acrioultural income, th8D, 
tile agrloultural1noome or los8 of. the ftrm 8~ be computed in accordance with these rules and hl8 30 
share in the agd.culturalincome or loa8 of tile fJrm shall be oomputed in the m8lll1er laid down in sub--
INlcUon (J), 8Ub-sectlon (2) and sm-section (31 of section 87 of the Income-tax Act ud the ahare 80 
computeC1 8hall be regarded as the agricultural income or los8 of the Use8S ... 
JlIle. 8. - Where the 888e8888 lB a member of an 888OClatlon of perllOll8 or a body of tnd1v1duals 
(other thin a lDDdu lDIivlded famlly. a oomplllY or a fJrm) whioh in tile prevlou year baa e1tber DO 36 
.come ohargeable to tax UDder the Income-tax Act or h88 total income DOt exceeding tbe mu1mum 
amount DOt chargeable to tax In the oaae of an auoc1atlon of perBOD8 or a body of izdlvSduala (other 
tIlIID a Bluiu UDdlvtded family. a company or a firm) bat baa any agrioultural tnoome, thea.. the 
ap1culturalincome or 1088 of the auooiatlon or body shall be computed in accordanoe with these rules 
.ad the .ha~ of the 888easee in the agrlculturalincome or 1088 80 computed .hall 'be regarded u the 4D 
acrtoWturallnoome or 1088 of the ......... 
rib 7. - Where the result of the computaUon for the previous year in respect of IIDY .oaroe of 
apioulturalincome Is a loea. such 1088 8hall be set off against the income of the UININee. U lIlY. 
lor that prev10ua year from 8DY other source of agricultural income: 
ProvJded that where the UINIS888 18 a partner of, an zreg1stered ftrm wbleh h88 not been useued 46 
.. a repatarecI firm UDder olause (b) of II8OUon 183 of the lnoome-tu Act or 18 a member of ID uaool..-
UDD of pef8C118 or a body of 1Dd1\1dula BDd the share of. the 88ses888 In t~ agrloulturallnoome of the 
.arm. UMOI,t;t,., or bocb'. as the case lila, be. 18 a JDa •• such lou Bhall not be set off agaJDBt aay 
iDoome of t ........ from 8DY otber source of IIp'loulturallDoome. 
rib. a.- Aoy sum pqable by the ........ on aooouat of aa, tax leried by the state Governmeot CI1 50 
tile apoioulturu iDoome shall be deducted in oomput,lna tile 8p'loultural income. 
~ t. -(J)Wbare tile ............ in the prev .. year rueuat to the UseB8ment year oommellO'" 
ina on t. hi dq of AprSl, 18M, aa, lp1D11Itaral inoame IIDd tbe net rea. of the computation of the 
aptc1iJt1ll'lllaoome of tile ........ for ., cae or more of tile prerioul yeara relev .. to the ....... 
..... ,e&n oommeaalDl OIl tbll8& dq 01. AprjI. 1878 or the lilt day 01 Apr1l. 19'17 or the 18& dq of &15 
AprSl. 11'18 or tile 18& d., of April, 1J'l1 or tbII18t dq of April. 1880 or tbe 1at day of API11. 1181 or 
t:brll8&d., 01. Ala1l.1882 or the let .. of A~Il. uas, 18 a a8. tha, for the purpo ... of nb-aeataoD 
,~ ~ ....tIaa. Z ofibSa Aot.- J i 

31 
(.lJ the loea 110 computed for the prev10U8 year reJeuat to the 88aessmeat year commeacSDc 011 
the lst day of April, 19'16, to the extent. if IDY. auch loss has not been set off apiDst the agr1cul-
tura11ncome for the previous year relevaat to the ... essmeat year commeocSDc OIl the 1st day of 
April, 1977 or the let day of April, 1S'18 or the 1st day of Ap:oi1. 1979 or the lat day of April, 1980 
5 or the l8t day of April, 1981 or the 1st da,y of April, 1982 or the let day of April, 1983, 
,(U) the IOS8 80 computed for the previous year relevant to the ...... meat year commenc1Dg 
on the 1. day of April, 1877, to the extent, if IDY. such 10 •• hu DDt been set off apjD8t.fhe 
agricultural income for the previous year relevant to the as.s.ment year commenc1Dg on the 1st 
day of AprU, 11P7 8 or the ht day of April. 19'19 or the 1 st day of AprD., 1980 or the 1. da.y of 
10 April, 1981 or the 1st day of April, 1982 or the 1st day of April, 1883, 
(.(.U) the loa8 110 computed for the prtMoUS year relevant to the use .. ment year commenc1Dg on 
the 1st day of April, 1878, to the extent. if IDY. such JoS8 hu DOt been set off.,.mat the agrIoul-
tural1noome for the previous year relevant to the uaeasment year commencin, on the 1st dll¥ of 
April, 1979 or the 1st day of April, 1980 or the 1st day of April. 1881 or the 1st da,y of Ap:oil, 1982 
15 or the let da.y of Apr11, 1983. 
l.w) the Joe8 80 oompu&ed for the previOUS year relevant to the usessment year commencing on 
the 1st dq of Apr11, 1979, to the extent, if any, such loss has DOt been. set off aga1Dst the &p"1oul-
tura11noome for the previous year relevant to tbe 88S83sment year commencing on the lat dq of 
April, 1980 or the lit day of Apr11, 1881 or the 1st d8¥ of Apr11, 1982 or the 1st day of April, 1983, 
20 (v) the Joss 80 comptUd for the previous year relevlllt to the use8sment year commeno1Dg on 
the 1st de, of Apr11, 1980, to the extent, jf any. 8uch loss has not been set off ap1nst the agricu1-
tura11noome for the previous year relevant to the 88sessment year commencing on the 1st day of 
April, 1981 or the lst d8¥ of April, 1982 or the 1st day of April, 1883, 
(uiJ the loss so computed for the previOUS year relevant to the asBe88ment year commencing OIl 
25 the 1st de, of April, 1981, to the extent, jf any, such loss has not been set off against the agricul-
tura11ncome for the previous year relevaut to the 88se8sment year commencmg on the 1st day of 
April, 1982 or the 1st d8¥ of April, 1983, 
(uiiJ the Jo8S 10 computed for the previous year relevant to the use88ment year commencmg OIl 
the 1st de, of April, 1982. to the extent, U IIDY, such loss has not been 8et off agamst the agrtcu1-
30 tura11ncome for the previous year relevant to the 88sessmeot year commencing OIl the 1st day of 
April, 1983, aDd 
luUlJ the lou 10 computed for the previous year relevant to the usus meat year commenc1ag OIl 
the tat day of April, 1983, 
shall be set off agalnat the agricu1turallnoome of the uselsee for the prev10Ul year relevant to the 
35 useslment year oommencing on the 1. day of April, 1984. 
. -
(2) Where the assessee has, in the previous year relevant to the assellment year oommencing on 
the 1st de, of April, 1985 or, if by virtue of any provision of the lncome~ax Act. inoome-tax i8 to be 
charged in respect of the income of a period other than that previous year, in such other period, any 
agricultural inoome and the net result of the oomputation of the apiculturalincome of the &8sessee 
40 for any ODe or more of the previOUS years relevant to the assessment years commencing OIl the 1 st day 
of Apr11, 1977 or the 1st day of April, 1878 or the 1st day of April, 1979 or the 1st day of April, 1980 
or the 1Ft de, of Apr11, 1981 or the 1st de, of April. 1982 or the 1st day of April, 1983 or the 1st day 
of Apr11, 1984, is a loss, then, for the purposes of sub-section (6) of section 2 of this Aot,-
1,(,) the 108880 oomputed for the previous year relevant to the assessment year commencJng on 
4.5 the 18t day of April, 1977, to the extent, if any, such loSI has not been set off against the agricul-
tura11noome for the previous year relevant to. the assessment year commenoing on the 1st day of 
Apr11, 1978 or the 1st de, of April, 1979 or the 1st day of April, 1980 or the 1st day of April, 1981 
or the let de, of April, 1982 or the lst de, of April, 1983 or the 1st day of April, 1984, 
(.ill the 1088 so computed for the previous year relevant to the assessment year commencing on 
50 the lat d8¥ of April, 197sl, to the extent, U any, such Joss has not been set off against the agrioul-
tura11noome far the pr~10US year relevant to the assessment year commenoing on the 1st day of 
April, 1979 or the lIt day of Apr11, 1980 or the 1st de, of April, 1981 or the 1st day of April, 1982 
or the 1st de, of April, 1983 or the 1st day of April, 1984, 
(.(.U) the 108s 10 computed for the previous year relevant to the assessment year commencing 
55 on the 1st de, of April, 1979, to the extent, if any, such loss has not been set off aga1n8t the agricu1':' 
tura11noome for the previoua year relevant to the ulessment year commencing on the 1 st day of 

32 
April, 1980 or the 1 st day of April, 1981 or the 1st day of April, 1.982 or the lst day of Ap:il, 1983 
or the 1st day of April, 1984, 
(.w) the loss so computed for the previous year relevant to the assessment year oommencing on 
the 1st day of April, 1980, to the extent, if &Dy, such loss has not been set off against the .lcul-
tural income for the p:ev10UB year reJevaut to the assessment year oommenotng on the 1st day of 5 
April, 1981 or the 1st day of April, 1982 or the 1 st day of April, 1.983 or the 1st day of April,l984, 
(vi the loss so comP1Ud for tbe previous year relevaot to the asse .. meot year commencJnl on 
the 1st day of April, 1981, to the extent, if any. such loss has not been set off agaWt the agr1oul-
turallnoome for the previous year relevaut to the 88SellSmeot year oommenciq on the 1. day of 
April. 1982 or the 1st day of April, 1983 or the 1st day of April, 1984, 10 
(ui.) the loss 80 computed for the previOUS year relevant to the assessment year oomBl8naing on 
the 1st day of April, 1982, to the extent, U any, lIuch losll has not been aet off apiDst the agrloul-
turalincome for the previous yell1' relevant to the asse •• meDi year commenoiDg on the 1st day of 
April, 1983 or the 1st day of April, 1984. 
(uUJ the loss so computed for the previous year relevant to the assessment year commencing on 15 
the 1st day of April, 1983, to the extent, if any, such loss has not been set off against the agricul-
tural moome for the previous year relevant to the ass88smEDt year commenciDg on the 1st day of 
April, 1984, am 
(uU.ll the loss so computed for the previous year relevant to the assessment year oommencing 
em the 1st day of April, 1984, 20 
shall be set off aga1Dst the agrlculturalinoome of the assessee for the previous year relevant to the 
assessment year oommenoing on the 1st day of April. 1985 or the period aforesaid. 
(3) Wbere a change has oocurred in the OODstltutlon of a firm, notilmg in s~rule (1) or sub-rule 
(2) shall eoUtle the firm to set off so much of the loss proportlonate to the share of a retired or 
deceased partner computed In the manner laid down in s~seotioD (1), sub-seotlon (2) and sub-section 25 
(3) of secUon 67 of the mcoma-tax Act as exceeds bis share of prof1ts, if any, of the previous year 
JD the firm, or entitle any partner to the benefit of any portion of the saJd loss (c0D1>uted 1n the 
mIDDer aforesaid) which Is not apportlonable to him. 
(4) Wbere any person deriving any agricultural income from any source has been sucoeeded in such 
capac1ty by another person, otherwise than by inheritance, nothing 10 sub-rule (1) or s~uJe (2) shall 30 
entltle 8QY per80n, other than the person iDcurrlng the loss, to have it set off UDfer sulrrule (t' or, as 
the case may be, sub-rule (21. 
(5) NotwltbstaDdJng 8Il,Ything contalned 10 this rule, DO loss which has not been determloed by the 66 ol1976. 
IDcome-tax Officer UDder the prov18lons of these rules or the rules coataJDed 10 Pari IV of the =:: JfIT7. 
FtrstSchedule to the Finance Act, 19'16, or ofthe First Schedule to the Floance (No.2) Act, 1977, or of 21 of =: 
the Schedule to the Finance Act, 1978, or of the First Schedule to the Finanoe Act, 19'79,or of the .. olltlO. 
First Schedule to the Finance (No. Z) Act, 1980, or of the First Schedule to the Finance Act, 1981, or ~ :~ :i 
of the F1rst Schedule to the FiDBDoe Act, 1982,or of the Firat Schedule to the Finance Act, 1983, 11 of lIl3. 
Ihall be aet off under .ub-rule (1) or, 88 the case may be, aub-rule (f). 
R4. 10. - Where the net re8ult of tbe oomP1&atlon made In aooordaooe with these rulea 1s a los., 40 
the lou 10 computed shall be ipored aDd the net agrlcu1tural1Doome.ball be deemed to be 'flil. 
RAte. 1L - '!be prov181oDs of tbe Income-tax Act relaUq to procedure for as .... lDeat (Iaol1lUDa 
the prcwiatODl of section 288A re1atiDg to rolDf1nl oU of income) lhall,wlth tbe necelury modltJoa-
tlons, appq ill relldi101l to the oompubltloD of tba net qrloulturallDoome of the ...... ee .. tlley 8JIIlly 
In rellltioll to the ...... ment of the total Iacome. 45 
RAiL 12. - For the purposes of oom~ the net ap-ioultaral1Doome of tbe ... e ••• , the 
lDoome-tax Offioer .ball have the .ame pawer. as be bas UDder tile 1Doome-tax Aot for the purposes 
of U8888meat 01. the total 1Doome. 

33 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE 
(Set sectlon 35) 
PART I 
°In the First Schedule to the Custom. Tariff Act,-
5 (.i) In Heading No. 26.02/04, for tbe entry In column (3), the entry "100%4fshall be substltuted; 
(<<J In sub-heading No. (1) of Heading No. 27.10, for the entry In column (3), the entry "100%" 
shall be substituted; 
(.ut.l In Heading No. 27.12/13, for the entry In column (3), the entry "100%" shall be substituted; 
(.iv) In sub-heading No. (2) of Heading No. 53.01/05, for the entry In column (3), the entry "100% 
10 plu.6 Rs. 10 per kUogram" shall be 8ubstltuted; 
(v) In Heading No. 98.01/02, for tbe entry In column (3), the entry "200%" shall be sub.tltuted. 
PARTn 
Heading Sub- heading No. aDd description of Rate of duty 
No. article Standard Preferential 
U A~ 
(1) (2) (3) H) 
In the First Schedule to the Custom. Tariff Act, for Heading No. 92. 01/13, 
the following Heading shall be .ubstltuted, namely:-
"92.01/13 Musical ln8trument8; Instruments and appll-
20 mce. for recording or reproducing sound or 
both; televl.lon Image and sound recorders 
or reproducers; decoy calls and mouth-blown 
sound-signalling Instruments; parts and 
accessories of the above articles; prepared 
25 media for sound or similar recording; sound-
recorded or similar media 100% 
III rat Ion when 
rates of duty are 
proteetlw 
l5J 
" 

34 
'l'HE THIRO SCHEDULE 
lSu. section 51 (aJ ] 
PART I 
In the First Schedule to the Central Excises Act,-
(..iJ Item No. IF shall be omitted; 
(.u) Item No. llB shall be omitted; 
(.UiJ Item No. 22D shall be omitted; 
(.w) Item No. 230 shall be omitted; 
(v) Item No. 24 shall be omitted. 
PARTn 
Item No. Dascrlptlon of .. goods 
(1) (2) 
In the First Scbewle to the Central Excises Act.-
(.iJ In Item No.4. under ''II. Manufactured tobacco ft. for sub-Item 
(5). the following sub-Item shall be substituted. namely:---
'(5) Chewing tobacco. Including preparations commonly known aa 
"It:htwl ~' • "IWranI', "Odlta", "14Irdtt', "SJbhtt' tJW:t "!iIIrJi!' 
(..w for Item No. 16. the following Item shall be substituted. namely:-
'16. TYRES-
Rate of duty 
(3) 
Thirty per cent. 
«I. ~.'J 
6 
10 
16 
20 
'~e" means a pneumatiC lyre In the manufacture of which rubber 
Is used. and Includes the bmer tube. the tyre nap aDd the outer cover 
of such a tyre: 
L (1) Tyres for motor vehlcles- 26 
(a) Tyres for two- wheeled motor vehicles, namely. scooters, 
motor cYcles, mopeds and auto- cYcles-
(.(J tyre. Fifty rupees per tyre. 
(.U.) tubes 
(b) Others-
(.(J tyres 
(.u) tubes and nIPs 
(2) Tyres for tractors, including .Icultural tractors-
(a) tyres 
(b) tubes and nIPs 
(3) Tyres for trailers, 
(aJ of sizes, namely, 
7.50 - 16 aDd 9.00 - 18 ... 
(lJ tyres 
Twenty-five per cent. 
«I.~.. 30 
One thousand and five 
hUDClred rupees per 
tyre. 
Sixty per cent. 
«1~. 
35 
Five lundred rupees 
per tyre. 
Twanty-flve per cent. 40 
«I.~. 
Plft buDdred ntpee. 46 
per wre. 
Twnty-f1ve per cent. 
ad. LGtdaI. 

36 
Item No. Description of .goods 
5 
10 
15 
20 
(1) 
(b) Others-
(.i.) tyres 
(.uJ tubes and flaps 
(2) 
n. Tyres for cycles and cycle rlckshaws-
(1) tyre. 
(2) tubes 
m. Tyres for vehicles or equipments designed for use off 
the road 
IV. All other tyre. 
~ 1._ ''Motor vehicles" means all mechanically 
propelled vehicles. other than tractors. designed for use upon roads. 
&plJJmti.on lI. _ ''Motor vehicles". "tractors. including agri-
cultural lractors" and ''trallers'' shall Include a chassis; but 
25 shall not Include a vehicle running upon fixed ralls. " 
30 
(..i.U.J In Item No. 59. for sub-Items (1) and (2), the followl.Jg sub-
Items ,shall be substituted, namely:-
"(1) MagnetIc tapes of width not exceeding 6.5 mlllimetres 
for sound recording. whether In .apools or In ~eel. or In any 
other form or packing, but excluding caesette tapes. 
(2) Sound recorded magnetic tapes of width not exceeding 
6.6 mUllmetr8s, whether In spools or In reels or In any other 
form or packlDg, but excludlDg sOllDd recorded cassette tapes. 
Rate of duty 
(3) 
One thousand and five 
hundred rupees per 
tyre. 
Slxty per cent. 
ad 1X1l.oIUl1n, 
Slxty paise per tyre 
or fifteen per cent. 
ad. ~, whichever 
Is higher. Thlrfy paise per tube 
or fifteen per cent. 
ad. \JOloIrmn, which-
ever Is higher. 
Sixty per cent. 
ad.~. 
Twenty- .. lve per cent. 
ad. VtJI.tYUtm. 
Twenty-flve per 
cent. 
ad.~. 
Twenty-five 
per cent. 
ad va/.DIrIIJfI4" ~ 

36 
THE FOURTH SCHEDULE 
tSU section 51 (bLI 
Item No. Description of goods 
( 1) (2) 
In the First Scbedule to the Central Excises Act,-
(.i) for Item No. 16A, the following Item shall be substltuted, namely:-
'26A. COPPER AND PRODUCTS THEREOF-
''Copper'' sball include any alloy In which copper predominates 
by weight over each of the other metals. 
(1) Unwrought copper In lIlY form (refined or DOt including 
blister copper and cement copper), including Ingots, notched 
bare, wire bars, blocks, Shlbe, billets, sbote, pellets, 
cathodes and cakes. 
~.- This sub-Item Includes wire bars and 
bUlets with their ends tapered or otherwise worked simply 
to facllltate their entry Into machines for converting them 
Into, for example, wire rods or tubes. 
(2) Waste and scrap of copper. 
(3) Wrought bars, rods (Including wire roda), angles, 
sh."es and sections, of copper_ 
(.i) Wrought bars and rods (Including wire roda) of 
copper. 
(Ul Wrought angles, shapes and sections of copper. 
(4) Castings, not otherwise specified. 
(5) Copper wire. 
(6) Wrought plates, sheets, blanks (including circles) 
and strips of copper. 
~. - In this sub-Item, '!blank" means a piece 
of plate, sbeet or strip, In any shape, including a clrel, 
prepared for subsequent fabrication. 
(7) Copper foU. 
(8) Copper powders (excluding cement copper) and 
flabs. 
(9) Pipes and tubes of copper. 
(10) Shells and bllDke for pipes aud tubes, hollow 
"eotloD8 of copper. , ; 
Rate of duty 
(3) 
5 
Five thousad ad sill 10 
hundred rup ... per 
metric tmme. 
Five thousand and six 
hundred rupees per 
metric tonne. 20 
Five tbouaand and six 
hundred napeea per 
metric tonne. 26 
Six thouslDd and three 
hundred rupees per 
metric tonne. 
Five thousand and six 
hundred rupees per 30 
metric tonne. 
Twenty per cent. 
tMI. u:tl.oIamI. 
Six thousand and three 
hundred rupees per 35 
metric tonne. 
SIX thouaand and three 40 
'hundred rupees per 
metric tonne. 
Twenty per cent. 
tMI. 1A2l.ovm. 
Twenty-eight per cent. 45 
tMI.~. 
Twenty-eight per cent. 
«i VfliINm. 

37 
Item No. Description of .goods 
(1) 
In tbis Item.-
(.i) "waste and scrap" means waste and scrap metal nt 
5 only for the recovery of metal by remeltlng or for use In 
the manufacture of chemloals, but does not Include slag, 
droll, scallngs, ash and other cuprous residues; 
!.u.) "wrought bars and rods (Including wire rods)" 
means 
10 (a) any extruded, rolled, drawn or forged products of solid section, 
of which the width or the maximum cross-sectional dimen-
sion exceeds 6 m1l1imetres and which. if they are nat. have a 
thlcimeu exceeding one- tenth of the width; or 
(b) any cast or slntered products, of the same forms 
15 and dlmenslona,wblch have been subsequently worked 
after production (otherwise than by simple trimming or de-
scaling). provided that they have not thereby assumed the 
character of any article or product falling under any 
other Item; 
20 (.(..i.iJ ''wrougbt angles. shapes and sections" means 
(a) any extruded. rolled. drawn or forged products of soUd section 
(other than round. rectangular. square and hexagonal). 
of which the width or the maximum cross-sectional 
dimension exceeds 6 mUllmetres and which. If they are flat. 
25 haw a tblckness exceeding one-tenth of the width; or 
(bJ any ca8t or 8lntered products. of the same forms and 
dhnenslons. which have been subsequently worked after 
productlon (otherwise than by simple trimming or de-scaling), 
provided that they have not thereby assumed the character of 
30 any artlcle or product falling under any other Item; 
35 
(.iv) ''wIre'' means any rolled. extruded or drawn product of 
solid and uniform cross- section. of which no cross- sec~ional 
dimension exoeeds 6 mllUmetres, but does not Include electric 
wires and cables. falling under Item No. 33B; 
tv) "plate" means a nat product whose tblclmess exceeds 
10 millimetres and the width exceeds 300 mUlImetres; 
(ui) "sheet" means a nat product. out to length. whose 
thickness exceeds O. 15 millimetre but does not exceed 
10 millimetres,and the width exceeds 300 mllUmetres; 
~ (uU) "strip" means a nat product whose thlclme8s exceec» 
0.15 millimetre but does not exceed 10 mllllmetrellt0f any 
. width and generally not cut to length and usually lD cOli; 
(ui.i.i.J ''foil'' means a nat product of thlckneas (excludlnlaDJ 
backtq) not exceeding 0.15 mlllimetre,'of any width, generally 
~ not cut to lencth and usually In coil, whether or not emboe8ed. 
cut to sh..,e. perforated. coated. printed or backed with paper 
or other relnforolng material; 
(.ex) ''powder. and nws" means all type. of powders ad 
nakes. but does DOt Include cement copper ad powder. uad 
5' a .. s prepared u oolours. plgmenta. pmtl or tM lUre, 
(x.)- ''pipes ad tIl_" m ..... ·'.·'..,Ubw opr6claGt olllDlfor1ll 
... -.ectlon aDd _11 tbl ...... hay" a OGDt .......... -
pbery produaed ." dNwIDC. cuUIIC or u;trul_ "..... 
Rate of duty 
(3) 

38 
Item No. Description of . goods 
(1) (2) 
(xi) "shells and blanks" means a hollow cylinder pro-
duced by extrusion, rotary piercing or casting for subse-
quent drawing Into pipe or tube; 
(x.i.i.J ''hollow section" means a section which Is normally 
extruded, drawn or cast, the cross-sectlonol which comple-
tely"encloses a void or voids. '; 
(.uJ lor Item No. 26B, the following Item shall be substituted, 
namely:-
'26B. ZINC AND PRODUCTS THEREOF-
"Zinc" shall Include any alloy In which zinc predominates 
by weight over each of the other metals. 
(1) Unwrought zinc In any form Including blocu, plates, 
ingots, cakes, bars, billets, hard or soft slabs, catbodes, 
anodes, pellets, spelter and broken zinc. 
(2) Waste and scrap of zinc. 
(3) Wrought bars, rods (including wire rods), angles, 
shapes and sections of zinc; zinc wire. 
(i) Wrought bars and rods (including wire rods) of zinc. 
(.uJ Wrought angles, shapes and sections of zinc and 
zinc wire. 
(4) Wrought plates, sheeta, blanks (including Circles, but 
excluding calota) and strips of zinc; zinc foU. 
~.r- In this 8U~ltem. "blank" means a piece 
of plate, sheet or strip in any shape, Including a circ1"i 
prepared for subsequent fabrication. 
(5) Zinc calota. 
(8) Zinc powders and ~es. 
(7) Pipes and tubes of zinc. 
(8) Shells and blankl for pipes and tubes, hollow 
sections of zinc. 
~;_ In this Item,-
(..(J "waste and scrap" means waste and scrap metal 
fit only for the recowry of metal by remelting or for 
use in the manufacture of chemicals, and Includes dross 
and .sh; 
Rate of duty 
(3) 
5 
10 
Three thousand two 
hundred and seventy- 15 
five rupees per metric 
tonne. 
Three thousand two 
hundred and seventy-
five rupees per metric 20 
tonne. 
Three thousand two 
hundred and seventy- 25 
five rupees per metric 
tonne. 
Three thousaDd 
eight hundred rupees 
per metric tonne. 30 
Three thouaaDd eight 
hlDldred rupees per 
metric tonne. 
35 
Four thousand seven 
hundred and fifty 
rupees per metric 
tonDe. 40 
Twenty per cent. 
ad~. 
Forty-flve per cent, 
ad UIItO'leII. 
Forty-flve per cent. 
ad~. 
60 

6 
15 
25 
39 
Item No. Description of goods 
( 1) (2) 
(U) "wrought bars and rods (Includlug wife rods)" means 
ial any extruded, rolled, drawn or forged products of soUd 
section, of which the width or the maximum cross-
sectional dimension exceeds 6 mlllimetres and which, 
If they are flat, have a thlclmess exceeding one-tenth of 
the width; or 
(bl any cast or slntered products, of the same forms 
and dimensions, which have been subsequently worked 
after production (otherwise than by simple tr1mmmg 
or de-scaling), provided that they have not thereby 
assumed the character of any article or product fall-
ing under any other hem; 
(.(.U) ''wrought angles, shapes and sections" means 
(a) any extruded, rolled, drawn or forged products of solid sec-
tion (other than round, rectangular,- square and 
hexagonal), of which the width or the maximum 
cross-sectional dimension exceeds 6 mUllmetres 
and which, if they are flat, have a thlclmess exceeding one-
tenth of the Width; or 
(bl any cast or slntered products, of the same 
forms and dimensions, which have been subsequen-
tly worked after production (otherwise than by simple 
trimming or de-scallng),provlded that they have not 
thereby assumed the character of any article or 
product falling under any other Item; 
(.wI "wire" means any rolled, extruded or drawn 
product of solid and uniform cross-section, of which 
30 no cross-sectional dimension exceeds 6 ;mill1metres; 
Iv) "plate" mellDS a nat product. cut to length. whose 
thickness exceeds 10 mWlmetres and width exceeds 
500 milllmetres; 
(ui.) "sheet" mellDS a flat product whose thickness 
35 dXceede 0.15 mWlmetre c but does not exceed 10 
mlll1metres,and width eXceeds 500 mUllmetres; 
(uU.) "strip" means a nat product, generally not cut 
to length, whose thickness exceeds 0.15 milllmetre. but 
does not exceed 10 milllmetre8, and width does not 
40 exceed 500 mUllmetres; 
(ui.i.i) "foU" melUl8 a flat product wb.oee thickneS8 
(excluding any backing) DOt exceeding 0.16 mUllmetre, 
whether or DOt embossed, cut to shape. perforated, 
coated, printed or backed with paper or other reinforcing 
"6 material; 
(.lxl ''Powders and flakes" meIUUI all types of powders 
and flakes, Including dust, but excludlDg powders and flakes 
prepared as colours, pigments, paints or the Uke, 
(xl ''Pipes and tubes" mellD8 a hollow product of uniform 
51) cl'08s-.eotiOl1 having a continuous periphery produoed by 
drawlDg. out .. or _tntslOll pro08ls, 
(x.<.) ''bollow-sectloD'' means a sectlO1l whloh ,. normally 
extruded, drawn or cut and the cros8-8!Ctlm of plgh 
Rate of duty 
(3) 

40 
Item No. Deacrletlon of goode 
( 1) ~2} 
l.u.il for Item No. 27, the following Item aball be IUbetltuted, 
namely:-
'27. ALUMINIUM AND PROOOCTS THEREOF-
"Aluminium" ahall Include any Illoy in which Iluminlum 
predominate. by weight oftr each of the' other metals. 
(1) Unwrought aluminium In Uly fonn Including Ingots, 
plga, blocks, blllets, alabs, notched bara, wire bars, 
shots and pellets. 
(2) Waate and scrap of aluminium, 
(3) Wrought bara, rods (Including wire rods), angles, 
ahllPes and sections of aluminium. 
(4) Castings, not otherwise specified. 
(5) Aluminium wire. 
(8) Wrought plates, aheete, blanks (Including circles) 
and strips of aluminium. 
~.- In thl. sub-Item, ''blank'' meana a piece 
of plate, sheet or strip In any shape, including a Circle, 
prepared for subsequent fabrication. 
(7) Aluminium foil. 
(8) Aluminium powder. and nakea. 
~.-Th .. aub-Itea lncludH aluminium powders 
.lad with other blue metal powders, but doe. not 
IMI_ powdin or a..u-, prepared as P ..... pasta, 
eoIaua, paIDU or .. like. _ . 
Rate of du!l 
(3) 
5 
Fifty per cent. 
«/.~ptu6 
four thousand 1D 
napees per metric 
tonDe. 
Fllty per cent. 
«/.~ptu6 
four thousand 15 
rupee. per 
metric tonne. 
Fllty per cent. 
«/. U'Jl.oirmI • 
four thousand 20 
rupees per 
metric tonne. 
Fifty per cent. 
ad.~ptu6 
four thousand 25 
rupees per metric 
tonne. 
Fifty per cent. 
ad. IA2lO'tfIII ptu6 
four thousand 30 
napees per 
metric tonne. 
Fifty per cent. 
«/.~ptu6 
four-t~.aDd 35 
rupees per 
metric tonne. 
Fifty per cent. 
ad. u:It#eII • 
four thou.aud 
rupees per 
metric tonne. 'S 
Fllty per cent. 
«/.~ptu6 
four thoualDd 
rupee_per 
metric tonne. 

5 
10 
15 
'41 
Item No. Descrlptlon of goods 
( 1) (2) 
(9) Pipes and tubes of aluminium. 
(10) Shells and blanks for pipes and tubes. hollow 
sections of aluminium. 
(11) Containers, plain, lacquered. or printed or 
lacquered and printed. 
&plJJm.ti.Dn. -- In this ltem,-
(.i! "waste and scrap" means wute and scrap metal fit only 
~ for the recovery of metal by remeltlng or for use .In the 
manufacture of chemicals, but does not Include sludge, 
dross, scallngs, skimmings, ash and other residues; 
(<<J -wrought bars, rods (Including wire rods)" means 
Rate of duty 
(3) 
Fifty percent. 
«1 va/..oIIIlIft ~ 
four thousand 
rupees per 
metric tonne. 
Fifty per cent. 
«1 \.l2lo.'rem plu6 
four thousand 
rupees per 
metric tonne. 
Fifty per cent. 
«1 val.oIu!m plu6 
four thousana 
rupees per 
metric tonne. 
(a) any extruded, rolled, drawn or forged products of solid section, of 
25 which the width or the maximum cross-sectional dimen-
sion exceeds 6 millimetres and which, if they are flat, 
have a tbickness exceeding one-tenth of the width; or 
(b) any cast or slntered products, of the same forms and 
dimensions which have been subsequently worked after 
30 production (otherwise than by simple trimming or de-
scaling), provided that they have not thereby assumed 
the character of any article or product falling under any 
other Item; 
(.(.U) "wrought lDgles, shapes and sections" meana 
35 (a) any extruded, rolled, drawn or forged products of solid section (other than 
round, rectangular, square and hexagonal), of which the width 
or the maximum cross-sectional dimension exceeds 6 millimetres 
and which, If they are flat, have a thickness exceeding one-
;tenth of the width, or 
lb) any cut or slntered products, of the same forms and dimen-
sions, which have been subsequently worked after pl'Oc:l.lctlon 
(otherwise than by shnple trimming or de-scaling), provided 
that they have not thereby usumed the character of any article 
or product falllng UDder any other Item; 
45 (.w) "wire" means rolled, extruded or drawn product, of solid and 
IIBiform cro.s-sectlon, of which no cross-sectional dimension 
exceeds 8 mlllimetrea.;blt does DOt Include electric wires and 
cables fallllll under Item No. 33B; 
lv) "plate" means a flat product of l"ectaDgular section, geDerally 
60 out to l-cth, whose thlclme.s Is 8 mlIllmetres and abovel 
lull "sheet" me .. a nat proc:l.lct of rectaDplar seotlon, pnerally 
out to leagth. Wboe.l~htolmes8 exceed. O. 15 mWlmetre but I, below 
6 mlllimetres; 

Item No. o.scrlptlo1l of pod! 
( 1) (2) 
(uU:) "strip" means a prodllct of recUmplar SectlOD, supplied In 
call or nat form, of thlclmes8 exoeecilDg O. 15 millimetre but 
below 6 mlllhnetresrth length more than eight times the Width; 
(vUii ''foil'' means a nat product of rectutgular section, of 
thickness (excluding any backing) not exceeding 0.15 mlllhnetre, 
whether or not embossed, cut to shape, perforated,. coated, 
printed or backed with paper or other reinforcllllm&terlal; 
(ixl ''pIpes and tubes" means a hollow product of uniform cross-
section having a continuous periphery produced by drawing, 
casting. extrusion or welding process; 
lld ''hollow section" means a section which Is nonnally8XtrUdeci, 
drawn or cast and the cross-section of whlch completely encloses 
a void or voids; 
(U) "container" means containers ordinarily intended for packaging 
of goods for sale, Including collapsible tubes, casks, drums, 
cans, boxes. gas cylinders and pressure containers, whether 
In assembled or unassembled condition and containers lmo\m 
commercially as flattened or folded containers. '; 
(.£vI for Item No. 27 A, the following Item shall be substituted, namely:-
• 27 A. LEAD AND PRODUCTS THER EOF-
"JAad" shall Include any alloy In which lead predominates by 
weight over each of the other metals. 
(1) Unwrought lead (including argentlferous lead), Including 
Ingots, pigs, blocks. anodes, slabs, cakes and cast sticks. 
(2) Waste and scrap of lead. 
~. ,-In this sub-Item, "waste and scrap''means 
waste and scrap metal fit ODly for the recovery of 
metal by remelting or for use In the manufacture of 
chemicals, but doe. DOt Include slag, aah &lid other residues. 
(3) Pipes and tubes of lead. 
(.) Shells and blanks for pipes and tubes. 
(I) Wrought lead In the form of bars, rods, angles, 
secllou •• ..,... wires. plates. sheets. circles. 
strips ad foUs. 
Rate of duty 
(3) 
Eight hundred and 
forty rupees per 
metric tonne. 
Eight hundred and 
forty rupees per 
metric tonne. 
Twenty per cent. 
ad. \MJl.O'IfJII. 
Twenty per cent. 
tG VIJliYrRIft. 
Ooe thousand rupees 
per metrlo tonne. t. 
6 
10 
16 
25 
30 
35 

Item No. In the First 
Schedule to the Central 
Exelses aDd Salt Act, IM4 
(1) 
43 
THE FIFTH SCHEDULE 
~ seetton 53) 
Description of goods 
(2) 
In the First Schedule to the Additional J:)Jtles of Excise Act., .... 
Ul In Item No.4. UDder "u., ~ ~,_ 
(4) for the entry In the third column Igalnat lub-ltem (2). the 
entry ''Two hundred and sixty rupees per thousand or one hundred 
and seventy-five per cent. '~VllltJItII:M ~ ; twelve rupees per tboua&Dd. 
whichever Is higher." shail be substituted', 
(b) for sub-Item (5). the followlug sub-Item sball be subrtltuted. 
namely:-
'(5) Chewing tobacco, including preparatloDa commODly kDown 
&8 ~ M26ata", "IGiJaIf', tim", "1JIIrJrt', "!Mrt' tIId ~" 
(<<) In Item No. 22, for each of the entries In the third column ap.1nat 
sub-Items (1) (4) and (1) (b) , the entry ''Ten per cent. I ~ \IItDWJII ptU6 
rupees two per square metre." shall be . substituted. 
Rate or duty 
T 3D per cent. 
~ 1IflIitJJea. ',; 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The object of the BUl is to give effect to the financial proposals of the 
Central Government for the financial year 1984-85. The notes on clauses 
explain the various provisions contained in the Blll. 
NEW ~D&ulI; 
ne 29da Fe .. .,. 1984. 
PRANAB MUKHERJEE. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLES 117 
AND 274 OF THE CONBTlI'UTION OF INDIA 
~opy of letter No. 'F. 3 (l)-B(D)/84 dated the 29th February, 1984 
from Sbrl Pranab Mukherjee. Minister of Finance, to the Secretary-
General. Lok Sabha.] 
The PreSident. having been informed of the subject matter of the 
proposed Bill. recommends under clauses (1) and (3) of article 117. 
read with clause (1) of article 274. of the Constitution of India. the 
Introduction of the Finance Bill. 1984 to the Lok Sabha and al80 re-
commends to the Lok Sabha the consideration of the Bill. 
2. The Blll wUl be Introduced In the Lok Sabba immediately 
after the presentation of the Budget on the 29th February. 1984. 

46 
Clause 2, read with the First Schedllie to the Bill, seeks to prescribe the rates at which Inoome-tax 
(Including surcharge thereon) Is to be levied on incomeschargeable to tax for the assessment year 1984-85. 
Further, it lays down the rates at which tax i& to be deducted at source during the financial year 1984-86 
from incomes subject to such deduction under the Income-tax Act; and the rates at whioh "advance tax" 
is to be paid and tax is to be calculated and charged in speCial cases for the financial year 1984- 86. 
Rates of income-tax for the assessment year 1984-86: 
Part I of the First Schedule to the Bill specifies the rates of income-tax (including surcharge) on incom4 
liable to tax for the assessment year 1984- 85. These rates are the same as those specified In Part m of 
the First Schedule to the Finance Act, 1983, for the purposes of deduction of tax at souroe from 
''Salaries'' and for computation of "advance tax" payable during the financial year 1983-84. 
Where a company has made any deposit during the financial year 1983-84 under the Companies 
Deposits (Surcharge on Income-tax) Scheme, 1983, with the Industrial Development Bank of India, the 
amount of surcharge on income-tax payable by it for the assessment year 1984-85 will be reduced by the 
amount of the deposit so made, subject to a maximum of one-half of the amount of surcharge payable by iL 
Rates for deduction of tax at source during the financial year 1984-85 from income other than "Selari8'l": 
Part II of the First Schedule to the Bill specifies the rates at which income-tax ( tncludlng surcharge 
where applicable) is to be deducted at source during the financial year 1984-85 from incomes other than 
''Salaries'' and retirement annuities under section 80E(9) of the Income-tax Act. The rates specified in 
this Part for deduction of tax at source are the same as those specified in Part II of the First Schedule 
to the Finance Act, 1983, for the purposes of deduction of tax at source during the financial year 1983-84. 
Rates for deduction of tax at source from "Salaries" and retirement annuities. computation of ''advance 
tax" and charging of income-tax in special cases during the financial year,1984-85: 
Part m of the First Schedule to the Bill specifies the rates at which income-tax (including surcharge) is 
to be deducted at source from "Salaries" and retirement armuities referred to in section 80E(9) of the 
Income-tax Act and also the rates at which ''advance tax" is to be paid and income-tax is to be calculated 
or charged in speCial cases for the financial year 1984- 85. 
With the exception of the rate schedule applicable to individuals, Hindu undivided famllies (other 
than those with one or more memLers having income exceeding the exemption limit). unregistered firms, 
etc., the rates of tax applicable to other categories of taxpayers (including companies) are the same as 
those specified in Part I of the First Scheclule to the Bill for the assessment of incomes Uable to tax 
for the assessment year 1984-85. However, the rate schedule applicable to Individuals, Hindu undivided 
familtes (other than those with one or more members having income exceeding the exemption limit), 
unregistered firms, etc •• has been replaced by a new rate schedule. Under the new rate schedule. the 
tax rate applicable to the income slab of Rs. 15,001 - Rs. 20, 000 has been reduced from 25 per cent. to 
20 per cent. and the tax rate applicable to incomes above Rs. 1 lakh has been reduced from 60 per cent. 
to 66 per cent. The tax rates in the intermediate slabs have als~ been revi.ed .uitably. 
The surcharge on income-tax in the case of all non-corporate assessees will continue to be charged 
at the rate of 12. 5 per cenL of such income-tax. 
The surcharge on income-tax in the case of all categories of companies will also continue to be charged 
at the rate of 5 per cenL of such income-tax. Companies wlll, however, have tbe option of makiDi a 
deposit with the Industrial Development Bank of India (under a scheme to be notified by the Central 
Government) in lieu of payment of the entire amount of such surcharge. 
Clause 3 seeks to amend clau8e (SO) of section 10 of the Income-tax Act. 
Under the exi8ting provl8ions. any subsidy. received from or throuah tbe Tea Board,under a "beme 
notified by the Central Government for replacement or replantation of tea bu8bes by an aBse .... wbo 
carries on tbe business of !P'Owing and manufacturiDi tea in IDdla is exempt from tax. 
Under au propoaed amendment, any subsidy received from the Tea Board under a acbam •• DOttned 
by tbe Central GoverDIDtmt, for rejuvenation or consolidation of areu used for culUYatlOll of '- wUl alao 
be exempt from tax. 

46 
This amendment will take effect from 1st April. 1985. and wlll. accordingly,apply in relation to the 
assessment year 1985- 86 and subsequent years. 
Clause 4 seeks to amend sub-section (5) o( section 11 of the Income-tax Act relating to income from 
property held under trust for charitable or religious purposes. 
Sub-section (5) o( the said section spcclfies the (arms and modes of investing trust funds. The 
proposed amendment seeks to include deposits with the Industrial Development Bank of India as one of 
the forms and modes of investing or depositing trust funds. 
This amendment will take effect (rom 1st April. 1985,and will. accordingly. apply in relation to the 
assessment year 1985- 86 and subsequent years. 
Clause 5 seeks to amend section 33B of the Income-tax Act relating to rehablUtatlon allowance. 
Under the existing provisions, a deduction in respect of rehabilitation allowance is allowed for 
facllltattng the re-establishment, reconstruction or revival of the business of an industrial undertaking in 
India which is discontinued because of extensive damage to, or destruction of. its building. machinery, 
plant or furniture as a direct result of natural calamities (such as flood, cyclone, earthquake, etc. ), 
riot or civil disturbance, accidental fire or explosion or enemy action. 
Under the proposed amendment, no deduction wlll be allowed under this provision in relation to the 
assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April. 1985 or any subsequent assessment year. 
This amendment wOl take effect from 1st April. 1985. 
Clause 6 seeks to amend section 35 of the Income-tax Act relating to deduction in respect of expendi-
ture on SCientific research. 
Under the existing provisions in section 35(2)(ia) the whole o( the capital expenditure incurred by an 
assessee on scientific research related to the bUSiness carried on by him is allowed as a deduction in 
computing the taxable profits of the business of the year in which such expenditure is incurred. Sub-clause 
(a)(i) seeks to provide that the above deduction will not be available In respect of capital expenditure 
incurred on the acqul.8ition of any land after the 29th February. 1984. 
Sub-clause (a)(U) seeks to insert an Explanation to provide that, for the purposes of this clause, land 
would include any interest in land and shall be deemed to have been acquired on the date on which the 
document purporting to transfer the land is registered under the Registration Act, 1908, and where the 
possession of any land has been obtained in part performance of a contract of the nature referred to in 
section 53A of the Transfer of Property Act. 1882, on the date on which such possession was obtained. 
Sub-clause (b) seeks to amend sub-section (2A) of this section. Under the existing provisions, a 
weighted deduction equal to one and one-third times the sum paid by a taxpayer to a SCientific research 
association or universlty or college or other institution or to a publ1c sector company to be used for 
sclentific research undertaken under a programme approved by the prescribed authority is allowed in 
computing the taxable profits of the business of the year in which such expenditure is incurred. Under 
the proposed amendment, the weighted deduction will not be allowed in respect of such sums paid after 
the 29th February, 1984. 
Sub-clause (c) seeks to amend sub-section (2B) of this section. Under the existing provisions. a 
weighted deduction equal to one and one-fourth times the amount of expenditure incurred by a taxpayer 
on scientific research undertaken under a programme approved by the prescribed authority 1s allOWed 
In computing the taxable profits of the business of the year in which such expenditure is incurred. Under 
the proposed amendmeDt~ the weighted deduction will not be allowed in respect of such expendlture 
incurred after the 29th February, 1984. 
Tbese amendments will take effect from 1st April. 1984. 
Clause 7 seeks to amend section 35C of the Income-tax Act relating to agricultural development 
allowance. 
Under the existing provisioDS. a company or a co-operative society which uses the products of 
agriculture. animal husbandry or dairy or poultry farming as raw material or processes such produots 
• 

47 
is eligible for a deduction of the !!Xpendlture incurred, whether directly or through an approved associa-
tion or body, in the provision of agricultural Inputs and extension services to cultivators, growers or 
producers of such products. 
Under the proposed amendment, no deduction under this provision will be allowed in relation to 
expenditure incurred after the 29th February, 1984. 
This amendment will take effect from 1st April, 1984. 
Clause 8 seeks to amend clause (11a) of sub-section (1) of section 36 of the Income-tax Act. 
Under the existing provisions, a weighted deduction equal to one and one-third times the amount of 
the expenditure incurred on payment of any salary to an employee who is totally blind or suffers from 
a permanent physical disability is allowed in computing the taxable profits. Under the proposed amend-
ment, the weighted deduction will not be allowed in respect of salary paid for any period of employment 
after the 29th day of February, 1984. 
This amendment wUl take effect from 1st April, 1984. 
Clause 9 seeks to amend section 40 of the Income-tax Act relating to amounts not deductible in the 
computation of business Income. 
Under section 40 (c), expenditure incurred by a company on the provision of any remuneration or 
benefit or amenity to a director or a person who has a substantial interest In the company or to a relative 
of the director or of such person, and the expenditure or allowance in respect of any assets of the company 
which are used by such persons for their own purposes or benefit, is not allowable as a deduction In comput 
Ing the taxable profits of the company, to the extent such expenditure or allowance is. In the opinion of the 
Income-tax Officer, excessive or unreasonable. The aggregate of such expenditure and allowance is 
further subject to an overall cer 'ng limit of Rs. 72,000 In a year, In respect of anyone director or persOil 
who has a substantial interest In the company or a relative of the director or such person. Where such 
expenditure or allowance relates tu only a part of the year, the monetary celling is the amount calculated 
at the rate of Rs.6, 000 per month or part of a month comprised in the period to which the expenditure or 
allowance relates. 
The proposed amendment seeks to raise the overall monetary celling of Rs. 72,000 to Rs.1, 02, 000 
and the monthly ceiling of Rs. 6,000 to Rs. 8,500. 
This amendment will take effect on 1st April, 1985, and will, accordingly, apply In relation to the 
assessment year 1985-86 and subsequent years. 
Clause 10 seeks to amend section 40A of the Income-tax Act relating to payments not deductible In 
certain circumstances. 
Sub-clauses Ca) and (b) seek to ammd sub-sections (5) and (6) respectively of section 40A. Section 
40A(5) places certain celling limits on the deductible amount of expenditure Incurred by a taxpayer OIl 
account of payment of salary to any employee or a former employee or In providing any perquiSite, etc., 
to any sU.1h employee. Under this prOVision, expenditure Incurred by an assessee on payment of salary to 
an employee In respect of the period of his employment In India during the relevant year w1ll not be 
allowed as deduction In computing the taxable profits of the employer to the extent it exceeds an amount 
calculated at the rate of Rs. 5, 000 for each month or part of a month. In the case of a persOll who ceases 
or ceased to be the employee of the taxpayer during the relevant accounting year or any 
earlier year, the ceiling limit Is Rs.60, 000 per annum. Further, the aggregate of expmdlture incurred 
by an assessee In providing any perquisite to an employee and the amount of expmdlture or allowance (such 
as depreciation allowance) in respect of the assets of the assessee used by the employee for his own purpos 
or benefit is not allowed as deduction in computing the profits of the business or profession to the extmt it 
exceeds 20% of the amount of salary paid to the employee or an amount calculated at the rate of Rs. I, 000 
for each month or part th~reof comprised in the period of employment, whichever is less. 
Where the assessee haa Incurred any expenditure on payment of fees for Bm'Vlces rendered by a person 
Who, at any time during the 24 months immediately preceding the relevant year, was an employee of the 
assessee, section 40A(6) provides that such expenditure by way of fees, or where the assessee has als(\ pai 
any salary to such person during the relevant year t the aggregate expenditure on the payment of Buch fees 
and salary shall not exceed Rs.60, 000. 

4S 
The proposed amElldmEllts to sub-sections (5) and (6) of section 40A seek to raise the monetary limits 
aforesaid from Rs.5. 000 to Rs. 7.500 per month and the annual celling of Rs. 60. 000 to Rs. 90. 000. 
These amElldmEllts wnl take effect from 1st AprU. 1985, and wtll. accordingly. apply in relation to the 
assessmEllt year 1985-86 and subsequent years. 
Sub- clause (c) seeks to insert a new sub-section (9) in section 40A. The proposed sub-section provides 
that no d.ction shall be allowed in the computation of taxable profits in respect of any sum paid by the 
assessee as an employer towards the setting up of. or as contribution to. any fund or trust for any purpose. 
except where such sum is paid or contributed (within the limits laid down under the relevant provisions) 
to a recognised provident fund or an approved gratuity fund or an approved superannuation fund or for the 
purposes and to the extent required by or under any other law. 
The proposed provision wi11 take effect retrospectively from 1st April, 1980, and w1ll. accordingl~ apply 
in relation to the assessmmt year 1980-81 and subsequmt years. 
Clause 11 seeks to insert a new section 44AB in the Income-tax Act relating to audit of accounts of 
certain persons carrying on business or profession. 
The proposed provision seeks to make it obligatory for a person carrying on business to get his accounts 
audited before the "specified date" by an accountant. if the total sales. turnover or gross receipts in busin-
ess for the previous year or years exceeds or exceed twenty lakh rupees. A person carrying ·on profession 
wUl also have to get his accounts audited before the said date if his gross receipts in profession for the 
previous year or yars exceeds or exceed ten lalm rupees. Such persons will also be required to obtain 
before the specifled date a report of the audit in the prescribed form. These requirements will apply only 
in relation to the accounts for the previous year or years relevant to any assessment year commencing on 
1st April, 1985 or any subsequent assessment year. 
In cases where the accounts of a person are requried to be audited by or under any other law. it w1ll 
suffice if the person gets his accounts audited under such other law before the specified date and also 
obtains before the said date the report of audit in the prescribed form. in addition to the report of audit 
required under such other law. 
The expression "accountant". for the purposes of this proviSion. will have the same meaning as in the 
Explanation below section 288(2) of the Income-tax Act. The expression "specified date". in relation to 
the accounts of the previous year or years relevant to any assessment year. means the date of the expiry 
of four months from the md of that year or where there is more than one previous year. from the md of the 
previous year which expired last before the commencement of that assessment year or the 30th June of sucb 
assessment year. whichever date falls later. 
The proposed amElldment w111 take effect from 1st Aprll, 1985J and will. accordingly. apply in relation 
to the assessment year 1985-86 and subsequent years. 
Clause 12 seeks to amend sub-section (3) of section 80CC of the Income-tax Act. 
Under the existing provisions. where certain specified categories of asses sees purchase new equity 
shares out of their income chargeable to tax. they are allowed a deduction, in the computation of their total 
Income. of an amount equal to 50 per cent. of the cost of the shares so purchased. Where such cost exceeds 
Ra.20.000. the amount with reference to which the deduction Is allowed Is limited to Rs.20, 000. 
Under the proposed amendment. no deduction wtll be avaUable with refermce to the cost of any shares 
offered for public subscription after the 29th February, 1984. 
This ammdment wil1 take effect from 1st April, 1984. 
Clause 13 seeks to omit. with effect from 1st April, 1985. section 800 of the Income-tax Act relating 
to deduction in respect of medical treatm81t of handicapped dependants. The deduction wlll not. therefore, 
be Rvallable for the aBsessmmt year 1985-86 and subsequent assessment years. 
Clause 14 seeks to amand section 80E of the Income-tax Act relating to deduction in respect of paymEllt 
for securing retiremEllt annuities. 
UDder the existing provisiotUl, an Indian citlzm who Is resident in India and is a partner of a registered 
flrlll red_lng professional service as R chartered accountant. 80Ucitor, lawyer, architect, or such 

49 
other professional service notified by the Central Government, is entitled, subject to certain conditions, to 
a deduction, in the computation of his total income, in respect of the amount paid by him as premium 
under an approved contract for the purpose of securing for him a life annuity in old age. 
Under the proposed amendment, no deduction will be allowed under this provision in relation to the 
amount paid as premium after the 29th February, 1984. 
This amendment will take effect from 1st April, 1984. 
Clause 15 seeks to amend section SOL of the Income-tax Act relating to deductions in respect of inoome 
from specified financial assets. 
Under the existing provisions, income from investment in specified financial assets (including units of 
the Unlt Trust of India) is deducted in computing the taxable income. The aggregate amount of the deduction 
under this provision is limited to Rs. 7, 000. In addition, a further deduction of an amount up to Rs.3, 000 is 
allowed Wlder the Unlt Trust of India Act in respect of income from units of the Unit Trust of India. 
The amendment under sub-clause (a) seeks to include, in the categories of income quaUfying for 
deduction 1Dlder section SOL, any interest on deposits under any such National Deposit Scheme as may be 
framed by the Central Government and notified by it in this behalf in the Official Gazette. 
The amendment under sub-clause (b) is consequential to the amendment under o;ub-clause (a). 
The amendmmt under sub-clause (c) seeks to insert a proviso to section SOL to the effect that where the 
gross total income of the assessee includes any income by way of interest on any deposits under any notified 
National Deposit Scheme or any income in respect of units of the Unit Trust of India, the assessee shan be 
entitled, in addition to the deduction of Rs. 7,000 under the main provision, a further deduction of an amount 
equal to so much of the income from the aforesaid assets as has not been allowed as deduction under the 
main provision, subject to a maximum of Rs.3, 000. 
The proposed amendmEnts will take effect from 1st April, 1985, and will, accordingly, apply in relation 
to the assessment year 1985-86 and subsequent years. 
Clause 16 seeks to amEnd section 80M of the Income-tax Act relating to deduction in respect of certain 
inter-corporate dividEnds. 
Under the existing provisions, where the gross total income of a domestic company includes any income 
by way of dividEnds from a domestic company, a deduction is allowed in computing its total lnoome of an 
amount equal to, -
(a) the whole of such income, if the dividend income is derived from a domestic company exclusively 
or almost exclusively engaged in the manufacture of anyone or more of the specified priority articles; an 
(b) sixty per CEnt. of such income in any other case. 
The proposed amendmEnt seeks to introduce a uniform rate of deduction of sixty per CEnt. for all inter 
corporato dividEnds. 
This amEndmEnt will take effect from 1st April, 1985, and wDl, accordingly, apply in relation to the 
assessment year 1985-86 and subsequEnt years. 
Clause 17 seeks to amend section 80N of the Income-tax Act relating to deduction in respect of dividend 
received from certain foreign companies. 
Under the existing provisions, an Indian company deriving income by way of dividends on shares 
allotted to it in a foreign company in consideration for the provision of technical "lmow- how" or technical 
services to such company is Entitled to a deduction of the whole of such income by way of dividEnds in the 
computation of the taxable income to the extent such income is received in or is brought into India by the 
taxpayer in accordance with the law regulating payments and dealings in foreign exchange. The proposed 
amendment seeks to restrict this deduction to fifty per cent. of such income. 
This amendment wil1 take effect from 1st April, 1985, and will, accordingly, apply in relation to the 
assessment year 1985-86 and subsequent years. 

50 
Clause 18 seeks to amend sectlon 800 of the Income-tax Act relatlng to deductlon In respect of 
royalty. etc, received from certain forelgn sources, 
Under the exlstlng provisions. an Indlan company deriving lncome by way of royalty, commlBslon, 
fees or any similar payment received from the Government of a forelgn State or a foreign enterprlBe 
In conslderatlon of the provision of technical "know-how" or technical services Is entitled to a deduction 
of the whole of such Income In the comput.,don of the taxable lncome, to the extent such Income ls 
received In or brought Into India by the company In accordance with the law regulating payments and 
deallngs In forelgn exchange. The proposed amendment seeks to restrict this deduction to 50 per cent. 
of such Income. 
Thls amendment wtll take effect from 1st April, 1985J and will, accordingly, apply In relation to 
the assessment year 1985-86 and subsequent years, 
Clause 19 seeks to amend sectlon 80U of the Income-tax Act relating to deduction In the case of 
totally blind or physically handicapped resident persons. 
Under the existing provlslons, a resident lndlvldual who Is either totally blind or suffers from a 
permanent physlcal dLsabUlty (other than blindness) whlch has the effect of reduclng substantlally bis 
capacity for engaging In a gainful employment or occupation Is entitled to a deduction up to a sum of 
Rs. 10,000 In the computatlon of his taxable Inoome. 
Sub-clause <a) seeks to secure that In order to qualify for a deduction under this provLslon, the 
person m .. t suffer from a permanent phYSical jisablllty of a type which Is speclfled by the Central 
Board of Direct Taxes In rules made In this behalf. 
Sub-clause (b) seeks to Insert a new sub-section (2) in section BOU. The new sub-section provides 
that In making any rules for specifying any dlsablllty for the purposes of section BOU. the Board wlll 
have to take lnto account the nature of such disablllty and the effect Which such dlsabUlty ls llkely to 
have rn the capacity of the person suffering therefrom to engage In gainful employment or occupation. 
The proposed amendment wlll take effect from 1st Aprll. 198!ltand wlll. accordingly, apply In 
relation to the 88Se8Sment year 1985-86 and subsequent years. 
Clause 20 seeks to amend section 161 of the Income-tax Act relating to llablllty of representative 
88seasee. 
Sub-sectton (1) of section 161 provldes that every representatlve assessee. as regards the Income 
In respect of which he ls a representatlve asseessee, shall be Hable to assessment In his own name In 
respect of such Income and tax shall be levied upon and recovered from him In llke manner and to the 
same extent as It would be leViable upon and recoverable from the person represented by him. 
The proposed amendment seeks to lnSert a new sub-section (lA) In section 161 of the Act. The 
new sub-section provides that where any Income In respect of whIch the person mentloned In clause (Iv) 
of sub-sectlon (1) of section 160 Is Hable as a representative assessee consists of. or Includes, profits 
and gains of business. tax shall be charged on the whole of the Income In respect of which such person 
Is 80 Hable at Ibe "maxlmum marginal rate". The proposed provisIon wUl. however, not apply In 
cases where such profits and gaIns are receivable under a trust declared by any person by wUl exclu-
sIvely for the benefit of any relatlve dependent on him for support and malntenanoe. and such trust Is 
the obly trust so declared by him. 
For the purposes of the new provlslon. the term "maximum marginal rate" shall have the same 
meaning .. In ~xp1aoatlon 2. to section 164 of the Income-tax Act. 
The proposed amendment wUl take effect from 1st AprU. 1985, and wUl~accordlngly.l apply in 
relation to the an.sment year 1985-86 and subsequent years. 
Clause 21 seeks to amend sectton 164 of the Income-tax Act relating to charge of tax where share 
of beneflclarles 18 unJcnown. 
Sub-tiectlon (1) of section 164 of the Income-tax Act Provides that where any Income In respect 
of Which the persons mentioned In clauses (Ill) and (Iv) of sub-section (1) of section 160 are Uable 88 
representative aeseeae8li Is not specifically receivable on behalf of. or for the beneflt of. anyone 

51 
person or where the individual shares of the persons on whose behalf or for whose benefit such Income 
Is receivable are lndetermlnate or unknown, tax shall be char~ed on the relevant Income at the 
maximum marginal rate, The proviso to sub-section (1) of section 164 provides that In the four types 
of cases specified therein, the relevant Income will not be charged to tax at the maximum marginal 
rate, but tax on such Income shall be charged as If It were the total Income of an association of persons. 
Sub-clause (a) seeks to lnsert a further proviso to sub-section (1) of section 164 of the Act. The 
new proviso seeks to provide that where any Income In respect of which the per8(ln mentioned In clause 
(Iv) of sub-section (1) of section 160 Is liable as a representative assessee oonslsts of, or Includes, 
pre>flts and gains of bUSiness, the provisions of the first proviso referred to 10 the· preceding paragraph 
shall apply only If such profits and gains are receivable under a trust declared by any person by wlll 
exclusively for the benefit of any relatlve dependent on him for support and maintenance and such trust 
Is the only trust so declared by him. 
Sub-clause (b) seeks to Insert a proviso to sub-eectlon (2) of section 164. The aforesaid sub-section 
(2) proVides that In the case of Inoome derived from property held under trust wholly for charitable or 
religIous purposes or which Is In the nature of vohmtary contributions received by the trust or which Is 
of the nature of profits and gains of buslness, tax shall be charged on so much of the Income as Is not 
exempt under section 11 or section 12 of the Income-tax Act as If the Income not 80 exempt were the 
Inoome of an association of persons. 
The new provllO seeks to provide that In a case where the whole or any part of the aforesaid Income 
Is not exempt under section 11 or section 12 because of the contravention of the provisions contained In 
clause (c) or clause (d) of section 13(1) of the Income-tax Act, tax shall be charged on such Income 
or part thereof, as the case may be, at the maximum marginal rate. 
Sub-clause (c) seeks to Insert two new provisos to sub-section (3) of section 164 of the Income-tax Act. 
The first of these provisos seeks to carve out an exception to the provisiOns contained 10 the first 
proviso to section 164(3). The existing first proviso specifies the cases in wbich the relevant income deriV 
by a trust In part only for charitable or rellglous purposes Is to be charged as If It were the total Income 
of an asSOCiation of persons, and not at the maximum marglnal rate as laid down In section 164(3) of the 
Act. The .proposed new proviso seeks to provide that where the relevant lncome consists of, or Includes, 
proflts and gains of bUSiness, the provisions of the exlstlng first proviso shall apply only If the lncome Is 
receivable under a trust declared by any person by will exclUSively for the benefit of any relative dependent 
on him for support and maintenance, and such trust Is the only trust so declared by him. 
The second of the two new provisos seeks to carve out an exception to the provisions contained In 
section 164(3). This prOviSO seeks to secure that In a case where the whole or any part of the relevant 
Income derived from property held under trust In part only for charitable purposes or which Is of the 
nature of voluntary contributIons received by the trust or which Is of the nature of profits and gains of 
business shall be charged to tax at the maximum marginal rate In cases where the trust forfeits exemp-
tion from tax for contravention of the provl810ns contained In clause (c) or clau8e (d) of sub-section (1) 
of section 13, and not as If such Income were the total Income of all assoclatlon of persons. 
These amendments wlll take effect from lst April, 1985, and wlll, accordingly, apply In relation to 
the assessment year 1985-86 and subsequent years. 
Clause 22 seeks to amend section 193 of the Income-tax Act relatlng to deduction of tax at source 
In respect of Interest on securltles. 
Under the existing prOviSiOns, the person responsible for paying any Income chargeable under the 
head ''Interest on securities" Is required, at the tlme of payment, to deduct lDOOme-tax at the tatee In 
force on the amount of Interest payable. In respect of Interest payable on certain securities specified 
In the 8ectlon, no tax Is required to be deducted at source. 
The proposed amendment seeks to provide that no tax need be deducted from any Interest payable 
to an individual who Is resident In India, on debentures Issued by a company In Which the pu.b1lc are 
substantially Interested, If such debentures are listed on a recognised stock exchange In india; the 
Interest Is paid by the company by an account payee cheque; and the aggregate amount of latereet 
payable by the company to Buch Individual does not exceed one thousand rupees. 
This amendment wUl take effect from 1s~t~J~un!mSe!a. ...... 1u9Eli184I3&.' __________________ _ 

52 
Clause 23 seeks to amend section 194 of the Income-tax Act relating to deduction of tax at sOurce 
In respect of dhTldends paid. 
Unde~ the existing provisions, the prinCipal officer of an Indian company or a company which has 
made the prescribed arrangements for the declaration and payment of dividends (lncludlng dividends 
on preference shares) within India Is required to deduct lncome-tax from the amount of such dividend 
at the rates in force. 
The proposed. amendment seeks to provide that In the case of a share holder being an Individual, 
resident In India, no tax need be deducted at source from such diVidend Income where the dlvldend 
Is paid by a company In which the publlc are substantially Interested; the aggregate amount of such 
dividend pald does DOt exceed one thousand rupees; and the dividend Is paid by the company by an 
account payee cheque drawn on a bank. 
This amendment wUl take effect from 1st June, 1984. 
Clause 24 of the Blll seeks to amend section 252 of the Income-tax Act. 
&lb-clause (a) of this clause seeks to insert a new sub-section (4A) in this section so as to empower 
the Central Government to appoint one of the Vice-Presidents of the Appellate Tribunal to be the 8en1or 
Vice-President thereof. 
Sub-clause (b) seeks to make a consequential amendment in sub-section (5) of this section to provide 
that the Senior Vice-President of the Appellate Tribunal shall also exercise such of the powers and 
perform such of the functions of the President of the Appellate Tribunal as may be delegated to him by 
the President by a general or special order in writing. 
These amendments will take effect from 1st April. 1984. 
Clause 25 seeks to amend section 269C of the Income-tax Act relatlng to Immovable property In 
respect of which proceedings for acquisition may be taken. 
Under the exlstlng proviSions, the Central Government Is, subject to the fulfilment of oertaln 
condltlons, empowered to acquire any Immovable property having a fair market value exceeding; 
Ds. 25, 000 In cases where the declared consideration for the transfer of the property Is less than 
the fair market value of the property on the date of transfer. 
The proposed amendment seeks to raise the aforesaid monetary Umtt to Rs. 50. 000. 
This amendment will take effect from 1st June. 1984. 
Clause 26 seeks to amend section 269F of the Income-tax Act relating to the bearing of objections 
in respect of proceedings (or the acquisition of immovable property under Chapter XXA of the Act. 
The proposed amendment is consequential to the amendment of section 269C of the Inoome-tax Act 
effected by clause 25. 
This amendment will take effect from 1st June. 1984. 
Clause 27 seeks to amend section 269P of the Income-tax Act relatlng to the statement to be furnished 
In respect of transfers of Immovable property. 
UDder the existing provisions. any person presenting a document for tl'ansferring any 
immovable property for an apparent consideration exceeding Ds.lO.OOO is required to furnish to the 
registering officer a statement in tbe prescribed form in duplicate in respect of such transfer. 
The proposed amendment seeks to provide that such statements wlll have to be flied before the 
registering officers only In cases where the apparent consideration exceeds Rs. 25, 000. 
This amendment wlll take effect from 1st June. 1984. 
Clawse 28 seeks to Insert a new section 269SS In the Income-tax Act relating to the mode of taking 
or accepting certain loans and deposits. 
The proposed proVision seeks to provide that, after 30th June. 1984. no person shall accept lDy"lolD 
or deposit from any other person of ten thousand rupees or more except by account pa,ee cheque or 
account payee bank draft. This requirement will also apply In cases where, on the date of taking or 
accepting a loan ~r deposit from a person. any earlier IOID or deposit taken or accepted from the .ame 
person and rem81nlDg unpaid on that date, Is ten thousand rupees or more. 
The proposed requirement wUl also apply If the aggregate amount of such earlier 101D or deposit and 
the amouut of loan or deposit proposed to be taken or accepted from that person 18 ten thousand rupees or more. 
Tbe proposed requirement will, bo .. ver, not apply to any loan or depo81t taken or aooepted from or 
lIlY 101D or ciepoelt taken from or aooepted by Government, any baldng company, poat dice .avtng'. 
-..... ·~:· .. ·~.I~''..rt,·, ~ .. ; .. ~ •. ~l:'l.~, ..... (':' .i::,"~", ... :'; ,", 1:.. '" _ ,,~.,",. ., , " 
".' " r' ',',; ./ ,: ::"1' '" '''~:.: 

53 
bank or any co-operative bank; any corporatton established by a Central, State or Provincial Act; or any 
Government company as defined In section 617 of the Companies Act, 1956. The provisions of the new 
section will also not apply to any loan or deposit taken, or accepted from, or any loan or deposit 
taken from, or accepted by, any institution. association or body or class of InsUtutions. associations 
or bodies. which the Central Government may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, notify in 
tbis be_ilalf in the Official Gazette. 
For the purposes of this provision, the expression ''banking company" will have the meaning assigned 
to it in clause (a) of tbe Explanation to section 40A(8) of the Income-tax Act. The expression Oleo-operative 
bank" will have the meaning assigned to It In Part V of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949, and the exprel-
slon ''loan or deposit" will mean any loan or deposit of money. 
The proposed provision will take effect from 1st Aprll, 1984, but as stated earlier, the requll'e1118nt 
laid down under the proposed section will apply only In relation to loans and deposits taken or accepted 
after 30th June, 1984. 
Clause 29 seeks to amend section 269T of the Income-tax Act relating to mode of repayment of certain 
deposits by banking companies, co-operative banks. etc. 
Under the proposed amendment, the expression "co-operative bank" Is proposed to be defined as having 
the same meaning as Is assigned to it in Part V of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949. 
This amendment wlll take effect from 1st April. 1984. 
Clause 30 seeks to insert a new section 271B in the Income-tax Act relating to failure to get 
accounts audited. 
The proposed provision seeks to provide that If any person falls. without reasonable cause, to get his 
accounts audited in respect of any year or obtain a report of sucb audit as required under new section 44AB 
(proposed to be inserted in the Income-tax Act by clause 11 of the Bill), the Income-tax Cl'flcer may 
impose a penalty equal to one- half per cent. of the total sales. turnover or gross receipts, as the case 
may be, in the bUSiness, or of the gross receipts In the profession. In the relevant year. subject to a 
maximum of Rs.l, 00, 000. 
The proposed amendment will take effect from 1st Aprll, 1985,and will, accordingly, apply in relation 
to the assessment year 1985-86 and subsequent years. 
Clause 31 seeks to Insert a new sectlon 276DD In the Income-tax Act which provides for a penalty for 
contravention of section 26985. 
Under the proposed new section. If any person, without reasonable cause or excuse. take, or acoepts 
any loan or deposit In contravention of the provisions of new section 269SS. be shall be punishable wlth 
Imprisonment for two years and shall also be liable to fine equal to the amount of such loan or deposit. 
This amendment will take effect from 1st Aprtl, 1984. 
Clause 32 seeks to amend section 281A of the Income-tax Act relatlng to effect of failure to furnish 
Information In respect of properties held benaml. 
SUb-clause (a) seeks to amend sub-section (1) of section 281A. 
Under the existing provisions. the real owner of any property held benami or any person acting on his 
behalf Is debarred from instituting any suit In any court to enforce any right in respect of any property 
held benaml unless the Income from such property or the property Itself haa been di8Cl08ed in any return 
of Income or net wealth by the claimant or a notice In the prescribed form and containing the prescribed 
particulars In respect of the property has been given by him to the Income-tax Officer. The existing 
provisions do not lay down any time limit for 8uch disclosure in the return of Income or net wealth or for 
giving a notice In the prescribed form to the Income-tax Cl'flcer. 
It is proposed to replace the existing option of making a disclosure In the return of income or net 
wealtb and replace It by a provision for giving notice in the prescribed form within a lpeclfled period. 
Hence, under the amended provisions of sub-section (1), the real owner of the property wUl be required 
In all cases to give a notice In the prescribed form containing the prescribed particulars In reapeot of t.he 
property within a period of one year from the date of acquisition of the property to the Comml •• loner of 
Income- tax. 

54 
&1b-claus8 (b) seeks to Insert two new sub-sections In section 281A. New sub-section (IA) seeks to 
cover.cases where such benaml acquisition of property Is made before the Introduction of the FInance 
Blll. The new sub-section accordingly provides that where any such property Is acquired by the claimant 
before 1st March,1984, the requirement of the amended sub-section (1) of section 281A shall be deemed 
to have been fulfilled lf notice In the prescribed form and containing the prescribed particulars In respect 
of the property Is given by the claimant within a period of one year from that date to the CommiSSioner of 
Income-tax. 
New sub-section (lB) carves out an exception to the provisions contalneclln the amended sub-section 
(1) and the new sub-sectlo"n (IA) In cases where the value of any suit relating to any Immovable property 
does not exceed Rs. 50, 000. New sub- sectlon (1B) provides that in such cases the aforesaid provisions 
shall be deemed to have been fulfilled if, at any time before the suit, notice In the prescribed form and 
containing the prescribed particulars in respect of the property is given by the claimant to the Commis-
Sioner of Income-tax. 
&1b-clause (c) seeks to substitute sub-section (2) of section 281A by a new sub-section. The new 
sub-section provides that the Commissioner of Income-tax shall, on an applicatlon made In the prescribed 
manner by the claimant or any person acting on his behalf or claiming under him, and on payment of the 
prescribed fees, issue for the purposes of a su it a certified copy of any notice given by the claimant 
under sub-section (1) or sub-section (IA) or sub-section (IB), within 14 days from the receipt of the 
appllcatlon. 
These amendments take effect from 1st April, 1984. 
Clause 33 of the Blll seeks to amend the Ninth Schedule to the Income-tax Act. This amendment Is 
consequential to the amendment made In section 80M of the Income-tax Act by clause 16 of the BUt 
Clause 34 seeks to amend the Wealth-tax Act, 1957. 
Sub-clause (a)(I)(I) seeks to amend the proviso to clause (Iv) of sub-eectlon (1) of section 5 of the 
Act. 
Under the existing provisiOns, the value of one house belonging to the taxpayer Is exempt from wealth-
tax up to one hundred thousand rupees. The proposed amendment seeks to raise this llmlt to two hundred 
tho .. and rupees. 
Sub-clause (a)(I)(2) seeks to wert a new clause (xxva) In sectlon 5(1) of the Wealth-tax Act to prOVide 
exemption from wealth-tax in respect of any deposits under such Natlonal Deposit Scheme as may be 
framed by the Central Government and notified by It tn this behalf In the Omclal Gazette. 
Sub-clause (a)(I){3) seeks to Insert a new clause (xxvlla) In section 5(1) of the Act to Include any deposit 
with the Industrial Development Bank of india In the nst of assets exempt from wealth-tax. 
Sub-clause (aHU) seeks to amend sub-section (tA) of section 5 of the Act. 
Sub-clause (a)(U)(1) seeks to secure that exemption in respect of the value of the deposits under any 
. notlfled Natlonal Deposit Scheme and deposits with the Industrial Development Bank of india together with 
the value of the other assets speclfled In section 5(tA) of the Act wlll not exceed the specified amount. 
Sub-clause (a)(U)(2) seeks to raise the limit up to which the value of specified usets Is exempt from 
wealth-tax from one hundred and Sixty-five thousand rupees to two hundred and slxty-flve thousand rupees. 
Sub-clause (a)(II)(3) seeks to Insert a second proviso to sub-section (tA) of section 5 of the Act. The 
proposed provlso seeks to secure that where the assets of the assessee Include any units of the Unit Trust 
of India or any deposits under any n~lfled National Deposit Scheme. the assessee shall be entitled, tn 
addition to the exemption proVided eder sob-section (tA), a further exemption In respect of the value of 
the units and the deposIts aforesaId In so far as such exemption has not been allowed under sub-sectlon 
(l),read with sub-sectlon (tA) of section 5, subject to a maxlmum of Rs. 35, 000. 
Su~clause (a)(Ul) seeks to amend sub-section (3) of section 5 of the Act. The proposed amendment 
seeks to secure that the value of deposits under any notified National Deposit Scheme or of any deposits 
with the Industrial Development Bank of India shall qualify for exemption under seotten 6 of the Act onl, 
If such deposits have been held by the "8.8ee for a period of at leut six months endtngwlth the relevant 
valuatIOn dat.. 

55 
Sub-clause (b) of tMs clause seeks to amend section 21A of the Act. 
Sub-clause (b) (1) seeks to provide that where any property is held under trust for any pubUc purpose of 
a charitable or religious nature In India, tax shall be leviable upon and recoverable from the trustee or 
manager in respect of the property held by him under trust at the ''maximu?\,\ marginal rate" if the trust 
forfeits exemption by reason of any of the following factors, namely:-
(i) any part of the trust's property or any income of the trust, Including Income by way of 
voluntary contributions Is used or applied, directly or Indirectly, for the benefit of any person 
referred to In section 13(3) of the Income-tax Act, 8. g., the settlor, the trustee, their relatives, 
etc.; or 
(if) any part of the Income of the trust, created on or after lst Aprll, 1962, Including Income by 
way of voluntary contrlbutlons, enures, dIrectly or tndlrectly, for the benefit of any of the penon 
referred'to In sectton 13(3) of the Income-tax Act; or 
(II!) any funds of the trust are Invested or depoSited or any shares In a company are held by the 
trust In contravention of the Investment pattern for trust funds laid down in clause (d) of sub-section (1), 
read with su~sectlon (5), of section 13 of the Income-tax Act. 
Sub-clause (b)(2) seeks to amend the Explanation below the second proviso to this section. Tbe 
proposed amendment seeks to provide that Uie expression "maximum marginal rate" would mean tbe 
rate of wealth-tax applicable In relation to the highest slab of wealth in the case of an individual as 
specified in Part I of Schedule I to the Wealth-tax Act. 
These amendment. wUl take effect from 1st April, 1985"and will, accordingly, apply In relation to the 
assessment year 1985-86 and subsequent yean. 
Clause 35 read with the Second Schedule seeks to amend the Customs Tariff Aot, 1975,to-
(1) raise the rate of basic customs duty (standard) on slag, ash and residues containing metals or 
metalllc compounds; 
(U) raise the rate of basic wstoms duty (standard) on certain categories of petroleum oUs and 
preparations, not elsewhere specified; 
(1Ii) raise the rate of basic customs duty (standard) on petroleum Jelly and certain mlDeral waxes; 
(Iv) raise the rate of basic wstoms duty (standard) on wool, raw and wool tops; 
(v) raise the rate of basic customs cl1ty (standard) on buttons and button moulds; studs, cuff-
links IDd press fasteners; slide fasteners; b18llks and parts of such articles; 
(vi) revise the desorlption of Heading No. 92. 01/13 relating to musical lD8truments,etc. 
Clauge 36 seeks to levy up to the 31st March, 1986, awdllary dutles of oustoma on all Imported good8 
at the rate of 50 per cent. of their value. 
ClBU8e 37 seeks to laIert an E!P1anatg 1ft su~sect1on (1) of seoUon 28 of the Cuatoms Act 
providing for the exclusion of the period of stay under a court order In relation to computation of 
ttnle-llmlt for the service of notice for short levy, erTOlleous refund, etc. 
CllI18e 38 seeks to add a provl8O to su~sectlon (2) of sectIon 61 of the CustIDma Act enabllDc the 
Board to waive the tnterest payable on warehoused goode In public lDter .. t and UDder exceptional 
ctroumatanOM. 
Clause 39 seea tID substltute sub-sectlon (2) of section 129 of the Cuatoma Abt by two DeW sub-
a.otto.. Under the flnt aDleDdmeDt. It Is propoeed to provtde that a perBOll shall qualify for appoint-
IIUIII& .. a fudlolal member of the Customs, Exclae and Gold (Control) Appell. Trlbanallf be bill 
for at l ... t ten f8an beld a Judicial oface In the territory of lIIdla or b. beeD a member of the Cmtral 

56 
Legal Service and has held a post In Grade I of that Service or any equivalent or higher post for at 
least three years. A person who has been an advocate for at least ten years wUl contlnue to be 
ellglble for such appointment 88 hitherto. For thls purpose, In computlng the period during which 
such a person has held a judicial office, any period durlng which he has been an advocate or has held 
the office of a member of a tribunal or any post under the Union or State requiring special knowledge 
of law after he has held any judicial office will be Included. Similarly, In computlng the period during 
which a person has been an atjvocate of a High Court, any period durlng which he has held a judicial 
office or the offlce of a member of a tribunal or any post under the Union or State requiring special 
knowledge of law after' he became an advocate . wllJ also be Included. 
Under the second amendment, It Is proposed to provide that a person who has been a member 
of the Indian Customs and Central Excise Service, Group A and has held the post of Collector of 
Customs or Central Excise or any equivalent or higher post for at least three years wBI qualify for 
appolnbnent as a technical member In the Appellate Tribunal. 
Provision Is also being made for the appoIntment of a Senior Vice-President of the Appellate 
Tribunal. 
Clause 40 seeks to exclude from the Jurisdiction of the Appellate Tribunal, customs cases relating to-
(a) goods Imported as baggage, 
(b) sbort·landed goods, 
(c) payment of drawback. 
Clause 41 seeks to ralse the monetary limit of the customs cases to be dectded by single member 
Benches of the Appellate Tribunal from Bs.10, 000 to Bs. 50,000. 
Clause 42 provldes for reduction In the time llmlt for seeking revlslon of the orders of the 
subordinate authorltles by the Board/Collector. 
Clause 43 seeks to proVide for revision by the Central Government of the types of cases excluded 
from the jurisdiction of the Appellate Tribunal under clause 40 of the BUl. The provlslons are on the 
lines of the provisions which existed prior to the setting up of the Appellate Tribunal. 
Clause 44 seeks to amend clause (f) of section 2 of the Central Excises Act to specifically 
Include conversion of artificial or synthetic resins and plastic materials into moulding powder in the 
deflnition of "manufacture" in relation to artificial or synthetic resins and plastic materIals covered 
under Item No. 15A of the First Schedule to the Act. 
Clause 45 seeks to amend seolion 3 of the Central Excises Act to provide for the levy of duty of excise 
on excisable goods produced or manufactured by a 100% export oriented unit and sold in India equal to the 
duties of customs leviable on importation of the Uke goods from abroad. 
Clause 46 seeks to amend Explanation to section 4(4)(d)(U) of the Central Excises Act to provide 
that in computing the amount of duty of excise deductible from the cum-duty price under any Act, the 
effective amount of duty of excise payable on goods under assessment shall not include the effect ofthe 
notification providing for set-off or proforma credit of the duty under the relevant Act butalso theadditlonal 
duty leviable under the Customs Tariff Act, 1975, already paid on the raw materials and component parts 
used in the production or manufacture of such goods. 
Clause 47 seeks to exclude from the Jurisdiction of the Appellate Tribunal, central excise cases 
relaUng to -
(a) goods lost in transit/storage, 
(b) goods exported under rebate of duty, 
(c) goods exported without payment of duty. 
Clause 48 .eeks to raise the monetary limit of the central excise cases to be decided by single 
member Bencb •• of the Appellate TrtbuDilI from Ra. 10,000 to Re. 50,000 . 
. ~....,-........... '------" . ....,"',., 

57 
Clause 49 provides for reduction in the time limit for seeking revision of the orders of the subordinate 
authorities by the Board/Collector. 
Clause 50 seeks to provide for revision by the Central Government of the types of cases excluded from 
the jurlsdlctlon of the Appellate Tribunal under clause 47 of the BUl. The provisions are on the lines 
of the provisions whlch existed prior to the setting up of the Appellate Tribunal. 
Clause 51 seeks to amend the First Schedule to the Central Excises Act. 
Sub-clause (a) of this clause read with the Third Schedule seeks to amend the First Schedule to the 
Central Excises Act to -
(a) omit Item Nos. IF, llB, 22D, 23D and 24; 
(b) amend the description of sub~tem 11(5) of Item No.4 relating to chewing tobacco to specifical 
inclme certain tobacco preparations within its scope: 
(c) amend the de3cription of Item No. 16 relatlng to tyres to fix the speCific rates of duties on ce 
specified varieties of tyres: 
(d) amend the description of sUb-ltems (1) and (2) of Item No. E9 relating to magnetic tapes and 
sound-recorded magnetic tapes to widen the scope of the sub-ttems. 
Sub-clause (b) of this clause, read with the Fo,trth Schedule also seeks to ameod the First Schedule to t1 
Central Excises Act to broadly align the excise classification in respect of oopper, Zinc, aluminium 
and lead with the corresponding customs classification. 
This amendment will come into force from a date to be notified by the Central Government. 
Clause 52 seeks to levy up to the 31st day of March, 1985, special duties of excise on all excisable 
at the rate of 10% of the duty leviable under the Central Excises Act, read with any notification for the U 
being in force issued by the Central Government in relation to the duties so chargeable, other than a 
notification providing for set-off or proforma credit of the excise duty or the additional duty leviable 
under the Customs Tariff Act, 1975, already paid on the raw materials and component parts used in the 
production or manufacture of such goods. 
Clause 53 read with the Fifth Schedule seeks to amend the First Schedule to the Addltional nIties of 
Excise (Goods of Special Importance) Act, 1957 to change or amend the description of-
(1) sub-ttem No. 11(2) of Item No.4 relating to cigarettes to revise the rate of duty; 
(2) sub-ltem No. 11(5) of Item No.4 relating to chewing tobacco to specifically include certain 
tobacco preparations within its scope; 
(3) Item No. 22 relating to man-made fabrics to revise the rate of duty. 
Clause 54 seeks to amend section 32 of the Unit Trust of India Act, 1963, relating to Income-tax and 
other taxes. 
Sub- clause (a) seeks to omit clause (b) and clause (ba) of sub-section (1) of section 32 of the said Act. 
The omission of these two clauses is consequential to the amendments proposed under clause 15 and 
clause 34 of the Blll respectively. 
Sub-clause (b) seeks to amend Explanation 1 to section 32(1) of the said Act. The amendments under 
this sub-clause are consequential to the omission of olause (b) and clause (ba) of section 32(1) of the Unit 
Trust of India Act under sub-clause (a) of this clause. 
The proposed amendments will take effect from 1st April, 1985,and will, accordingly, apply in 
relation to the assessment year 1985- 86 and subsequent years. 
Clause 65 seeks to amend the Gold (Control) Act, 1968 - (a) to raise the monetary limit of the gold 
control cases to be decided by single member Benches of the Appllate Tribunal from Rs. 10,000 to 
Ra. 50, OOf)and 
(b) to reduce the time limit for seeking revision of the orders of the subordinate authorlties by the 
Administrator/Collector from two years to one year. 

58 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 24 of the B1ll which seeks to iD8ert a new sub-fSectlon (4A) In section 252 of the Income-
tax Act, 1961. empowers the Central Government to appoint one of the Vice-Presidents of the lncome-
tax A~ellate Tribunal to be the Senior Vice-President thereof. As the intention 18 only to convert one 
of the posts of Vice-Presidents into that of Senior Vice-President, the expenditure involved w1ll be 
to the extent of the difference in the salary of a Vice-President and a Senior Vice-President, which is 
Rs.250 per month. Thus the reBlrrlng expenditure on account of this provision would be Rs,3, 000 per 
year. 
2. Clause 39(b) of the But which seeks to Insert a new sub-section (4A) in section 129 of the Customs 
Act, 1962, empowers the Central Government to appoint one of the Vioe-Presidents of the Customs, 
Excise and Gold (Control) Appellate Tribunal to be the Senior Vice-President thereof. As the intention 
Is only to coovert one of the posts of Vice-Presidents into that of Senior Vice-President, the expendi-
ture Involved will be to the extent of the difference in the salary of a Vice-President and a Senior Vloe-
Pre8ident, which 18 R8.250 per month. Thus, the reBlrring expenditure on account of this provision 
would be Rs.3,OOOper year. 
I. Clau8e 410f the Blll relating to the Customs Act, 1962, clause 48 of the Bill relating to the 
Central Excises and SaIt Aot, 1944 and clause 55(&) of the Bill relating to the Gold (Control)Act, 
1968, seek to enhance the powers of the single member Benches of the Olstoms, Excise and Gold 
(Cootrol) Appellate TriWnal. As a 8ecpel to this proposal, the machinery of departmental 
representatives would need to be strengthened. For this purpose, the creation of the follOWing posts 
18 envisaged. The annual recurring expenditure in this regard is as follows: 
Average Annual 
annual expenditure 
B.No. Post Nos. expeDdtture 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
t. 
7. 
Chief Departmental Representative 
Senior Departmental Representative 
JuDlor Departmeatal Representative 
Personal ASs1atant$eoographer 
Upper Division Clerk 
Lower Dtvialon Clerk 
Peon/Sepoy 
per post 
R8. Rs. 
1 49,000 49.000 
4 40,700 1,62.800 
4 32,200 1,28,800 
4 16,700 86,800 
4 13,100 52.400 
4 10,400 41,800 
4 7.300 29,200 
Total 5,30,600 
4. Claules 43 and 50 of the B11I leek to insert two new lections 129DD aDd 350 in the C 
Act, 1962 and the Central EXciles and Salt Act, 1944,respectlvely which invest the Ceatral Go:. 
with powen of rev1sloll apinst oertaln orders Jassed by the Collector of Customs k\ 
case may be, the Collector of Ceotral Excise (Appeall). It II proposed to utili. ~~ :.e:::) o:::.:.:e 
for exerciling the powerl of revlsim UDder the aforeatd new sectloDl As h .. ry 
to be mvolved wilen thelle new proytatonl are enacted aad b ........... into· &Uti C • DO apead1ture Ie lJkely ........... opera on. 
5. The provildou of the an do DOt brvolve all)' other expead1tare of a reourrl Dature. DI or DOD-l"eourr1ng 

59 
.MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGA TED LEGISLATION 
y Clause 2(7) of the Bill providefl that if a company makes a deposit with the Industrial Development Bank 
~ India in accordance with any scheme framed by the Central Government, the surcharge on income-tax 
!. payable by the company will be red,;ced to the extent mentioned in the said sub-clause. The scheme to be 
i framed by the Central Government wUl contain details as to the manner of making such deposits, the period 
: for which such deposits may be maue and other connected matters of detail. 
I 
~ Clause 15(a) of the Bill seeks to insert a new clause (ila) in sub-section (1) of section SOL of the Income-
l tax Act, 1961 which seeks to include interest on deposits under such National Deposit Scheme framed by the 
t Central Government as may be notified by it in the Official Gazette as one of the categories of income 
! quallfylng for deductlon under this section. 
Clause 19(a) of the Bill seeks to provide that the permanent physical disability which would entitle an 
assessee to get deduction under section 80U of the Income-tax Act will henceforth be only such permanent 
. physical dlsabillty of a type as may be specified by the Central Board of Direct Taxes by rules made in this 
behalf. Sub-clause (b) of this clause also provides that in making any rules for speclfylng any disability under 
. this section, the Board will take into account the nature of such disability and the effect which such disabillty 
is likely to have on the capacity of the person subject thereto or suffering therefrom to enpge in a gainful 
employment or occupation. 
Clause 28 of the Bm seeks to insert a new section 289SS in the Income-tax Act whiclt provides that no 
person shall take or accept any loan or deposit otherwise than by an account payee cheque or account payee bank 
draft if the amount of such loan or deposit is ten thousand rupees or more. The prOvisions of this section shall 
not apply to any loan or deposit taken from or accepted by, Government, banking company, etc., and such lnstitu-
tion, association or body, or class of institutions, associations or bodies which the Central Government may, for 
reasons to be recorded In writing, notify in this behalf in the Official Gazette. 
Clause 32 of the B11l seeks to amend section 281A of the Income-tax Act relatlng to the effect of failure to 
furnish information in respect of properties held benami. By an amendment to sub-section (1) of this section, It 
is proposed to replace the existing option of making a disclosure in the return of income or net wealth or giving a 
notice to the Income-tax Officer before instituting any suit in any court to enforce any right in respect of property 
held benami by a proviSion for g1 ving notice within one year of the date of acquisition of the property to the 
Commissioner in the form to be prescribed by rules made by the Central Board of Direct Taxes under the Act and, 
containing such particulars to be specified by the Board in such rules. New sub~'hction (lA) proposed to be inse ' 
in this section provides that the prescrlbed notice containlng the prescribed particulars required to be made unde 
sub-section (1) aforesaid shall, in respect of any property acquired before 1st March, 1984, be deemed to have 
fulfllled if such notice containing the particulars is given to the Commissioner within a period of one year from t 
date. New sub-section (lB) provides that the aforesaid provisions of sub-section (1) and sub-section (lA) shall b 
deemed to have been fulfUled in respect of any suit relating to any immovable property of a value not exceeding 
Rs. 50, 000 if notice in the prescribed form containing prescribed particulars in respect of the property Is given b 
the claimant to the CommiSSioner at any time before the suit. The new sub-section (2) to this section empowers 
Commissioner, on an application made by the claimant In the manner prescribed by rules and on payment of the 
specified In such rules, to furnish a certified copy of any notice given by him under the aforesaid provisions. 
Clause 34(a)(I)(2) of the Bill seeks to Insert a new clall!le (xxva) in section 5(1) of the Wealtb-tax Act. The ne 
clause (xxva) 1lroposes to provide for exemption in respect of any deposits under such National Deposl.t Scheme a 
may be framed by the Central Government and notified by It in this behalf in the Official Gazette. 
Clause 43 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section 129DD in the Customs Act, 1962. This new eectlon seeks 
invest the Central Government with powers of revision in respeot of certain orders passed by the Collector of 
Custom8 (Appeals) under section 12" of the Act on an appUcation made by the person aggrieved by the order. 
section (3) of this section requires aach application to be made in 8uch form and shall be verifled In suoh mamut 
as may be specifled by rules made In this behalf by the Central Government. 
Clause 50 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section 35EE in the Central Excl.es and 8&1t Act, 1 M4. Th18 D8W 
section seeks to Invost the Central Government with powers 'of revision in respect of certain orders passed by 
Collector of Central Excise (Appeals) under .ectlon 35A or that Act on an applicatlon made by the per8Dll"'~ 
by the order. Sub-seotion (3) of this 8ection requires such application to be made In suoh form and .ball be ye 
in such manner as may be speclfled by rules made in this behalf by the Central Government.. 
The deleptloD of lqialative power under the afore-mentloned provtslona relate. to mattera of prooedare or 
adminiltrative detail or to matters In respect of which it 18 not practicable to make detailed pro'f1.lou. B..,. 
the delepUou of legi8lative power 18 of a aormal oharacter. 

LCl{ SABRA 
A 
BILL 
to give effect to the financial proposals of the Central Government for the 
financial year 1984-85. 
(Sb,; Pranab Mukberjee, 
Minister of Finance.> 