BW No. II of 1958 @ 
THE RICE-MILLING INDUSTRY 
(REGULATION) BILL~ 1958 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 

BW No. II of I'~ 
THE RICE-MILLING INDUSTRY (REGULATION) 
BILL, 1958 
(As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABRA) 
A 
BILL 
to regulate the rice-muting industry in the interests of the general 
public. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Ninth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Rice-Milling Industry (Regula- Short title. 
tion) Act 1958. extent and , commen~-
5 (2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu ment. 
and Kashmir. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Govern-
ment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. " 
2. It is hereby declared that it is expedient in the public interest Declaration 
[0 that the Union should take under its control the rice-milling industry. ad~ to expe-r lency 0 
3. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "defunct rice mill" means a rice mill in existence at the 
commencement of this Act but in which rice-milling operations 
have not been carried on for a period exceeding one year prior 
IS to such commencement; 
(b) "existing rice mill" means a rice mill carrying on rice-
milling operations at the commencement of this Act, and in-
cludes a rice mill in existence at such commencement which 
is not carrying on rice-milling operation.c: but in which rice-
20 milling operations have been carried on at any time within a 
period of one year prior to such commencement; 
c:ontrol bv 
the Union: 
Definitions. 

!flf!::=:t 
ofIicen. 
GlUt of 
permitlin 
reIpcd ~ 
new or· 
defunct rice 
mills. 
(c) "licensing officer" means' an officer appointed as such 
under section 4; 
(d) "milling rice", with its grammatical variations means 
recovering rice or any product thereof from paddy with the aid 
of power; 5 
(e) "new rice mill" means a rice mill other than an exist-
ing rice mill or a defunct rice mill; 
(f) "notified order" means an order notified in the Official 
Gazette; 
(g) "owner", in relation to a rice mill, means the person 10 
who, or the authority which, has the ultimate control over 
the affairs of the rice mill, and where the said affairs are en-
trusted to a manager, managing director or managing agent, 
such manager, managing director or managing agent shall be 
deemed to be the owner of the rice mill; 15 
(h) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this 
Act; 
(i) "rice mill" means the plant and machinery with 
which, and the premises, including the precincts thereof, in 
which or in any part of which, rice-milling operation is car- 20 
ried on . 
.. The Central Govemment may, by notified order,-
(a) appoint such persons, being gazetted officers of Gov-
emment, as it tbinks fit to be licensing officers for the purpose 
of this Ad; and 25 
(b) define the limits within which a licensing officer shall 
exercise the powers conferred on licensing officers by or under 
this Act. 
5. (1) Any person or authority may make an application to the 
Central Government for the grant of a permit for the establish- 30 
ment of a new rice mill; and any owner of a defunct rice mill may 
make a like application for the grant of a permit for recoIllll).encing 
rice-milling operation in such mill. 
(2) Every application under sub-section (1) shall be made in 
the 'prescribed form and shall contain the particulars regarding the 35 
location of the rice mill, the size and type thereof and such other 
particulars as may be prescribed. ' 
(3) If, on receipt of any such application for the grant of a 
permit, the Central Government is of opinion that it is necessary 
so to do for ensuring adequate supply of rice, it may, subject to the 40 
provisions of sub-section (4) and sub-section (5), gz.ant the permit 

3 
specifying therein the period within which the mill is to be esta-
blish<i!d or, as the case may be, the mill is to recommence rice-mil-
ling operation and such other conditions as it may think fit to 
impose, in accordance with the rules, if any, made in this behalf. 
5 (4) Before granting any permit under sub-section (3), the Cen-
tral Government shall cause a full and complete inve&.tigation to 
be made in the prescribed manner in respect of the application and 
shall have due regard t()-
(a) the number of rice mills operating in the locality; 
10 (b) the availability of paddy in the locality; 
(c) the availability of power and water supply for the 
rice mill in respect of which a pennit is applied for; 
(d) whether the rice mill in respect of which a permit is 
applied for will be of the huller type, sheller type or combined 
15 sheller-huller type; 
(e) whether the functioning of the rice mill in respect of 
which a permit is applied for would cause substantial unem-
ployment in the locality; 
(f) such other particulars as may be prescribed. 
20 (5) In granting a permit under this section, the Central Gov-
ernment shall give preference to a defunct rice mill over a new 
rice mill. 
(6) A permit granted under this section shall be effective for 
the period specifie.d therein or for such extended period as the 
25 Central Government may think fit to allow in any case. 
6. (1) Any owner of an existing rice mill or of a rice mill in res- Grant of 
pect of which a permit has been granted under section 5 may make liccucn. 
an application to the licensing officer for the grant of a licence for 
carrying on rice-milling operation in that rice mill. 
30 (2) Every application under sub-section (1) shall be made in 
the prescribed form and shall contain the particulars regarding the 
location of the rice mill, the size and type thereof and such other 
particulars as may be prescribed. 
(3) On receipt of any such application for the grant of a licence, 
35 the licensing officer shall grant the licence on such conditions (in-
cluding, in particular, conditions relating to the polishing of rice), 
on payment of such fees and on the deposit of such sum, if any, as 
security for the due performance of the conditions as may be pres-
cribed. 

R.evocation. 
IUlpension 
and 
amendment 
of liccncea . 
Certain 
reatriction8 
on rice 
mills. 
.. 
(4) A licence granted under this section shall be valid for the 
period specified therein and may be renewed from time to time for 
such period and on payment of such fees and on such conditions 
as may be prescribed. 
7. (1) If the licensing officer is satisfied, either on a reference S 
made to him in this behalf or otherwise, that.-
(a) a licence granted under section 6 has been obtained 
by misrepresentation as to an essential fact, or 
(b) the holder of a licence has, without reasonable cause, 
failed to comply with the conditions subject to which the 10 
licence has been granted or has contravened any of the provi-
sions of this Act or the rules made thereunder, 
then, without prejudice to any other penalty to which the holder 
of the licence may be liable under this Act, the licensing officer 
may, after giving the holder of the licence an' opportunity of 15 
showing cause, revoke or suspend the licence or forfeit the sum, if 
any, or any portion thereof deposited as security for the due per-
formance of the conditions subject to which the licence has been 
granted. 
(2) Subject to any rules that may be made in this behalf, the 20 
licensing officer may also vary or amend a licence granted under 
section 6. 
8. (1) No person or authority shall, after the commencement of 
this Act, establish any new rice mill except under and in accord-
ance with a permit granted under section 5. 25 
(2) No owner of a rice mill shall, after the commencement of 
this Act, carryon rice-milling operation except under and in ac-
cordance with a licence granted under section 6: 
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall apply to an 
existing rice mill for such period as may be specified in this behalf 30 
by the Central Government by notified order. 
(3) No owner of a ~e mill,-
(a) in respect of which a licence has been granted under 
section 6, shall carry on rice-milling operation in that mill after 
the expiry of the period of t.he validity of the licence; 3S 
(b) in respect of which the licence has been revoked or 
suspended under section 7, shall carry on rice-milling opera-
tion in that mill after the revocation or, as the case may be, 
during the period for which the licence has been suspended; 

s 
10 
s 
(c) shall, without the previous perDllSSlon of the Central 
GJvernment, change the location of the whole or any part of 
the rice mill in respect of which a licence has been granted 
under section 6; 
(d) shall, after the commencement of this Act, effect any 
expansion of the rice mill except with the previous permission 
of the Central Government: 
Provided that no such permission shall be necessary for the 
replacement of any parts of the machinery of the rice mill 
where such replacement does not result in an increase in the 
productive capacity of the rice mill. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of clause (a) of this sub-section, 
the period of the validity of a licence shall not be deemed to have 
expired, if an application for its renewal is pending before the licen-
J 5 sing officer. 
20 
35 
9. (1) For the purpose of ascertaining the position or examining ?ower. of 
the working of any rice mill or for any other purpose mentioned mspectlon. 
in this Act or the rules made thereunder, the licensing officer or any 
person authorised by the Central Government in this behalf shall 
have the right-
(a) to enter and inspect any rice mill; 
(b) to order the production of any document, book, register 
or record in the possession or power of any person having the 
control of, or employed in connection with, any rice mill; and 
(c) to examine any person having the control of, or em-
ployed in connection with, any rice mill. 
10. If, for the purposes of this Act, any qutMion arises as 
whether-
(a) there has been an expansioD of a rice mill, or 
to Decision of 
Central 
t!rovemmena 
fina.I rea-
Jecting 
c:ertaiD 
matten. 
(b) the replacement of any parts of the machinery of a 
rice mill has resulted in an increase in the productive capacity 
of the rice mill, 
the Central Government may, after giving the owner of the rice 
mill an opportunity of being heard, decide the question and the 
decision of the Central Government thereon shall be final. 
11. Every owner of a rice mill shall furnish to the Central Returns. 
Government such returns relating to the affairs of the rice mill and 
in such forms as may be preScribed. 

Appeals. 
b 
12. (1) Any person aggrieved by a decision of a licensing officer 
under section 6 or section 7 may, within thirty days from the date 
on which the dedsion is communicated to him, prefer an appeal to 
an appellate oflicer who shall be a person nominated in this bahaU 
by the Central GoverDmeat:5 
Provided that the appellate officer may entertain the appeal after 
the expiry of the said period of thirty days, if he is satisfied that the 
appellant was prevented by suffident cause from filing the appeal in 
time. 
(2) On receipt of an appeal under sub-section (1), the appellate Iv 
offlcer shall, after giving the appellant an opportunity of being heard, 
dispose of the appeal as expeditiously as possible. 
Penalties. 13. (1) If any person contravenes or attempts to contravene or 
Otrencee 
by 
companies. 
abets the contravention of any of the provisions of !lection 8 or sub-
section (2) of section 18, he shall be punishable with imprisonment 15 
for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may 
extend to five thousand rupees, or with both, and in the case of a 
continuing contravention, with an additional fine Which may extend 
to five hundred rupees for every day during which such contraven-
tion continues after conviction for the first such contravention. 20 
(2) If any person,-
(a) when required by this Act or by any order under this 
Act to make any statement or furnish any information, makes 
any statement or furnishes any information which is false in any 
material particular and which he knows or has reason to believe 25 
to be false or does not believe to be ~rue, or 
(b) makes any such statement as afore.aid in any book, 
account, record, declaration, return or other. document which he 
is required to maintain or furnish under this Act, or 
(c) contravenes any rule the contravention of which is made 30 
punishable under this sub-section, 
he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to two 
thousand rupees, or with both. 
14. (1) If the person cOlnmitting an offence under this Act is a 3 
~ompany, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, 5 
was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct 
of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall be 
deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall b~ liable to be proc~ed 
altainst and punished accordingly: 

7 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render 
any such person liable to any punishment provided in this Act, if 
he proves that the offence was committE'd without his knowledge 
or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of 
5 such offence. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where 
an offence under this Act has been committed by a company and 
it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to, any neglect on the part of any 
10 director, manager, secretary or otlier officer of the company. such 
director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to 
be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against 
and punished accordingly. I 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section,-
15 (a) "company" means any body corporat.e, and includes a 
firm or other association of individuals; and 
(b) "director", in relation to a firm, means a partner in the 
firm. 
15. No court shall take cognizance of all¥ offence punishable Cognizance 
:aD under this Act except on a report in writing of thE' facts constituting of offences. 
such offence 'made by the licensing officer or any person duly autho-
rised by the Central Government or the licensing officer in this behalf. 
16. No court inferior to that of a presidency magistrate or a Jurisdiction 
magistrate of the first class shall try any offence punishable under of courts. 
25 this Act. 
17. Notwithstanding anything contained in section 32 of the Code Special 
of Criminal Procedure, 1898, it shall be lawful for any magistrate provisi.OD 
of the first class or for any presidency magistrate to pass a sentence fu:~1DI 
of fine exceeding two thousand rupp.es on any person convicted of 
30 any offence under this Act. 
18. (1) If the Central Government is of opinion, having regard to Power to 
the necessity for ensuring an adequate supply of rice In any area ex~pt in 
or to the conditions prevailing therein, that it would not be in the ~ 
public interest to apply all or any of the provisions of this Act to 
as the rice mills or to any class of rice mills in that area, it may, by 
notified order, exempt for such period and subject to such conditions 
as it may think fit to impose, all the rice mills or such class of rice 
mills in that area as it may specify in the order from the operation 
of all or any of the provisions of this Act or of any rule or order 
40 made thereunder. 

Deleaation 
of powers. 
i 
(2) Where any notified order under sub-section (1) granting an 
exemption is cancelled, no owner of a rice mill shall carryon rice-
milling operation in that rice mill after the expiry of such period 
as may be specified in the order cancelling the exemption, except 
under and in accordance with a licence granted to him under section 6. S 
19. The Central Government may, by notified order, direct that 
any power exercisable by it under this Act shall, in relation to such 
matters and subject to such conditions, if any, as may be specified 
in the direction, be exercisable also by-
(a) such officer or authority subordinate to the Central Gov- 10 
ernment, or 
(b) such State Government or such officer or authority 
subordinate to a State Government, \ 
as may be specified in the direction. 
Licensing 20. The licensing officers and every person duJy authorised to I, 
offi:rs, ~n=.' discharge any duties imposed on him by this Act shall be deemed 
:~:. C to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian 4' fIi 1860. 
Protection 
of action 
taken UDder 
the Act. 
Penal Code. \ 
21. (1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie 
against any person for anything which is in good faith done or 20 
intended .to be done in pursuance of this Act or any rule or order 
made thereunder. 
(2) No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Govern-
ment for any damage caused or likely to be caused by anything 
which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of 2S 
this Act or any rule or order made thereunder. I 
Power to 22. (1) The Central Government may, subject to the conditioll 
make rules. of previous publication, make rules for carrying out the purposes 
of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 38 
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the fol-
lowing matters, namely:-
(a) the form of application for the grant of a permit under 
section 5 and the particulars it may contain; 
(b) the manner in which an investigation i!S to be made in 3S 
respect of an application for a permit and the matters to be taken 
into account in granting or refusing a permit; 
.' i 

9 
(c) the form of application for the grant or renewal of a 
lieence in respect of a rice mill and the particulars it may 
contain; 
(d) the form of a licence which may be granted or renewed 
5 under section 6 and the conditions subject to which the licence 
may be granted or renewed, including conditions relating to the 
polishing of rice, the fees to be levied for the grant or renewal 
of a licence and the deposit of any sum as security for the per-
formance of such conditions; 
10 (e) the circumstances under which licences may be varied 
or amended under sub-section (2) of section 7; 
(f) the submission of returns relating to a rice mill by the 
owner and the forms in which, and the authorities to which, such 
returns may be submitted; and the collection of any information 
I, or statistics in relation to rice mills; 
(g) the form and manner in which appeals may be filed 
under section 12 and the procedure to be followed by appellate 
officers in disposing of the appeals; 
(h) any other matter which has to be, or lllBy be, pres-
1.0 cribed under this Act. 
(3) Any rule made under this section may provide that a contra-
vention thereof shall be punishable under sub-section (2) of section 
13. 
(4) All rules made under this section shall be laid for not leu 
25 than thirty days before each House of Parliament as soon as possible 
after they are made and shall be subject to such modifications as 
Parliament may make during the session in which they are so laid 
or the session immediately following. 
23. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not in ~pplica- f 
30 derogation of, any other Central Act for the time being in force. ~ili~ Ia~ 
• not barred. 
24. The provisions of this Act shall not apply to any rice mill ~~l;ot :~ 
owned by Government. nee mills 
owned by 
Government. 
25. (1) If, immediately before the commencement of this Act, R~ and I8vmgs. 
there is in force in any State to which this Act extend!'! any law or 
.35 order relating to the regulation or control of rice mills in that State, 
that law or order shall stand repealed. 

10 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, any certificate of registration, 
permit or licence granted in respect of any existing rice mill, under 
any such law or order hereby repealed and in force immediately 
before the commencement of this Act, shall continue to be in force 
for such period as may be allowed under the proviso to sub-section 5 
(2) of section 8 for the licensing of such rice mill under the provisions 
of this Act, and for the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that 
the provisions of section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897, shall 10 of 1897-
apply in relation to such repeal, as they apply· in relation to the 
repeal of an enactment by a Central Act. 10 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
It is necessary, in the general interest, to regulate the working 
of rice mills in such a manner that while, on the one hand, the hand-
pounding industry gets reasonable facilities for development and 
employment is provided for the rural population, on the other, requi-
site facilities· for conversion of paddy into rice are not curtailed, 
particularly at a time when efforts are being made to increase 
appreciably the production of paddy in the country. With this object 
in view, it is considered that the working of rice mills be regulated 
by the issue of lIcences, and the setting up of new rice mills, or the 
expansion of the existing rice mills, be prohibited without the specific 
permission of the Government. The Bill aims at the achievement 
of these objectives as also to provide for certain other matters con-
nected with the functioning of the rice mills. 
AJIT PRASAD JAIN. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 17th February, 1958. 
n 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 4 of the Bill contemplates appointment of certain lieensing 
officers for granting licences in respect of rice mills and clause 12 
of the Bill contemplates appointment of certain appellate officers for 
hearing appeals against the decisions of licensing officers. It is 
intended that the functions of licensing officers and appellate officers 
would be performed by the existing officers of the Central Govern-
ment end State Governments. The Bill, when enacted and brought 
into operation, would not, therefore, involve any appreciable 
additional expenditure. Moreover, the Government would derive 
some small revenue in the shape of fees for granting licences and 
additional expenditure, if any, on account of this piece of legislation 
will be nominal. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 22 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make 
rules in respect of matters specified therein. They relate inter alia 
to the form of application for the grant of permits and licences, the 
manner in which an investigation is to be made under this Act, the 
fees which may be levied for the grant or renewal of a licence, the 
conditions subject to which licences ·may be granted, the returns 
which have to be submitted by the owners of rice mills and the 
form and the manner in which appeals may be preferred and disposed 
of. The matters in respect of which rules may be made are of a 
routine and administrative chamcter. Moreover, the rules shall be 
subject to the scrutiny of Parliament. The delegation of legislative 
power is thus of a normal character. 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to regulate the rice-milling industry in the interests 
of the general public. 
The President has, in pursuance of clause (3) of article 117 0f 
the Constitution of India, recommended to Lok Sabha 
the consideration of the Bill. 
M.N.KAUL, 
Secretary. 
(Shr; Ajit Prasad Jain, 
Minister of Food and Agriculture). 