BU1 No. II of 1"1 
THE MEDICINAL AND TOILET PREPARA-
TIONS (IiXCISE DUTIES) AMENDMENT 
BILL, 1961 
(To BE INTRODUCED IN Lox SABRA) 
• 

BIll No. ncd"V!r 
THE MEDICINAL AND TOILET PREPARATIONS 
(EXCISE DUTIES) AMENDMENT BILL, I¢I 
(To BE INTRODUCED IN LOit SABRA) 
A 
BILL 
to amend the Medicinal and Toilet Preparationa (Ezeiote Duties) 
Act. 1955. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twelfth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Medicinal and Toilet Prepara- Short title 
tions (Excise Duties) Amendment Act, 1961. :!:nt. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Govern-
ment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
2. In section 19 of the Medicinal and Toilet Preparations (Excise Amendment 
Dutie/i) Act, 1955 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), for of section 19. 
BUb-section (4), the follo'Wing suboteetion shan be substituted, 
namely:-
"(4) Every rule made under this section shall be laid as soon 
as may be after it is made before each HOUR of Parliament while 
it is in session for a total period of thirty d,aya Which ma, b. 
comprised in one session r1r in two IUOl!essive lIfIsion&, 'aDd if 
before. the expiry of the session in whiC!h it fa 'It) laid or the 
session immediately following both HOU&H 'agree in ·ma1dn« inY 
modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the,rule-lAould 
not be made, the rule shall th~reafter have eftect only in such 
-modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, 
that any such modification or annulment shall be without Fe-
judice to the validity of anythinl.previou.ily 'doM aDder that 
nUe.". . 

2 
Amendment 3. In the principal Act, for the Schedule, the following Schedule 
of Schedule. shall be substituted, namely:-
Item 
No. 
"THE SCHEDULE 
(See section 3) 
Description of dutiable goods 
I. Medicinal preparations, contain in, alcohol, 
which are prepared by distillation or to 
which alcohol has been added, and which 
are capable of being consumed as ordinarY 
alcoholic beverages. . 
2. Medicinal preparations not otherwise spe-
cified containing alcohol-
(,) Ayurvedic preparations contammg 
self-generated alcohol, which are not 
capable of being consumed as ordinary 
alcoholic beverages. 
(iJ) Ayurvedic preparations containing 
self-generated alcohol, which are 
capable of being consumed as ordinary 
alcoholic beverages. 
(iii) All others 
3. Toilet preparations containing alcohol, which 
are prepared by distillation or to which 
alcohol has been added. 
Rate of duty 
Rupees three and 
eighty five naye 
paise per litre of 
S 
the strength of 10 
London proof spirit. 
Nil. 
Thirty eight naye 
paise per litre. 
Rupee one and ten 
naye paise per litre 
IS 
20 
of the strenRth of 
London prootspirit. 25 
Rupees seven per 
litre of the strength 
of London proof 
spirit. 
Explanation. I.-"London proof spirit" means that mixture of ethyl 30 
'alcohol and distilled water which at the temperature of 51 degrees 
Fahrenheit weighs exactly 12/13th parts of an equal JIleasure of 
distilled water at the same temperature. 
Explanation II.-Where in respect of any dutiable goods the unit 
of assessment for the purpose of any duty under this Act is a litr.e of 35 
the strength of London proof spirit, the duty shall be increased or 
reduced in such proportion as the strength of' the dutiable goods is 
gt~a.ter or less than that of the London proof spirit.". . 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Consequent on the decision to adopt metric units from the 1st 
April, 1961, in the sale of alcohol and collection of duty thereon, it is 
proposed to provide for the levy and collection of excise duty on 
medicinal and toilet preparations in terms of metric units. 
At present toilet preparations that are considered capable of being 
consumed as ordinary alcoholic beverages, are subject to duty at the 
rate of Rs. 17/8/- and others at the rate of Rs. 5 per 'gallon of the 
strength of London proof spirit, Since toilE;t preparations are in the 
nature of lUXUry articles and there is no foreign competition-imports 
being banned or severely restricted-it is proposed to fix a uniform 
rate of duty of about Rs. 32 per gallon of the strength of London proof 
spirit which comes to Rs. 7 'per litre in terms of metric units, irres-
pective of whether the preparations are capable of being consumed as 
ordinary alcoholic beverages or not. 
Under existing item 2 (ii) of the Schedule to the Act, Ayurvedic 
preparations containing self-generated alcohol which are capable of 
being consumed as ordinary alcoholic beverages are subjected to duty 
at the rate of Rs. 3 per gallon. However, by virtue of" the proviSion 
contained in sectiQn 19 (2) (xix) of the Act, read with Rule 8 of the 
Medicinal and Toilet Preparations (Excise Duties) Rules 1956, the 
rate of duty with respect to such preparations has been reduced to 
Rs. 1· 75 per gallon with effect from the 10th September, 1960, and it 
is this reduced rate that is proposed to be expressed in terms of metric 
units in the Bill. 
• 
MORARJI DESAI. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 25th February, 1961. 

~ .... _ .::za::::=: ..... ,~· ... ~~:~.:.:;:?*?:=:s:.¥. .. :" .. a.£.:£ .. i$_(&a& a 
Power to make 
ru1 I. 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE MEDICINAL AND ToILZ'l' PREPARATIONS (ExClD 
DUTIES) AcT, 1955 (16 OF 1955) 
• • • • • 
StIPPLDDIlTARYPROV.I8ID:ro 
11. • • • • • 
(4) All rules made 'by the Central Government under this section 
..aan he Jaid hebiIe·beICh & __ af'Partiamaat as IOOIl .I!m.y'.be -after 
.tbeyaremade . 
Item 
No. 
• • 
THE SCHEDULE 
(See aect1on. 3) • 
'Description of dutiable goods 
• 
!I. ,MediQnd and'toilet prepantiOlll, containiag 
akohol, whicb au: roparcd bydjstiUadon 
or to which alcohof has been addad, and 
Which are capable of being consumed IS 
. ordin.ry .leo1dic :beveragas. 
2. Medicinal and toilet ,preparatiaas DOt.01hcr-
wise speclfied containing alcrihol-
,(t") -Ayurvodic: pnparationl ~ 
self-generated alcohol, which are not 
capable of being consumed as ordinary 
alcoholic beverages. 
(i.") Ayurvedic preparations containing 
self-generated alcohol, which are 
capable of being consumed as ordinarr 
alcoholic beverages. 
(ii.") All others 
3. Medicinal and toilet preparations, not con-
taining alcohol, but containing opium, 
Indian hemp, or other narcotic drug or 
IUlI'tOtic. 
I 
• 
Rate of duty 
ftNl. 
Rupees tbme per 
JaUon. 
Rupees five per gallon 
of the strength of 
London proof spirit. 
Nil. 

s 
Explanation 1._" Gallon" means a measure of capacity which is 
equivalent to 160 fluid ounces. 
Explanation II.-"London proof spirit" means that mixture of 
ethyl alcohol and distilled water which at the temperature of 51 
degrees Fahrenheit weighs exactly 12/13th parts of an equal measure 
of distilled water at the same temperature. 
Explanation III.-Where in respect of any dutiable goods the unit 
of assessment for the purpose of any duty under this Act is a gallon 
of the strength of London proof spirit, the duty shall be increased 
or reduced in such proportion as the strength of the dutiable goods 
is greater or less than that of the London proof spirit. 

tOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to amend the Medicinal and Toilet Preparations (Excise Duties) 
Act, 1955 
The President has, in pursuance of clause (1) of article 117 and 
clause (I) of article 274 of the Constitution of India, 
recommended to Lok Sabha the introduction of the Bill. 
M.N.KAUL, 
SICf',tary • 