Bill No. II of 1959 
THE STATE BANK OF INDIA 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 1959 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA 
ON 23RD FEBRUARY, 1959) 

Bill No. II of 1'59. 
THE STATE BANK OF INDIA (AMENDMENT) 
BILL,1959 . 
1 (Aa . INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the State Bank of IT'.dia Act, 1955. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Tenth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the State Bank of India (Amendment) Short tide. 
Act, 1959. 
5 Z. In section 22 of the State Bank of India Act, 1955 (hereinafter Am~ent 
of I9!1!1· referred to as the principal Act) ,_ oflcc:tlonaa. 
'of 1949. 
(a) in clause (d) of sub-section (1), for the words "or 
managing director", the words "managing director, or legal or 
technical adviser" shall be substituted; 
10 (b) after sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall 
15 
be inserted, namely:-
• (4) In this section-
(a) "banking company" has the same meaning as 
in the Banking Companies Act, 1949; 
(b) "manager" means thp. chief executive officer, 
by whatever name called, of a banking company; 
(e) "private company" has the same meaning as in 
the Companies Act, 1956'. 
3. In section 23 of the principal Act, the proviso shall be omitted. Amendm~t 
of eec:tion 
~3· 

Amendment 
of lCCtion 
33· 
~ 
t. In section 33 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-clause (d) of clause (i), ~or the words "under 
any law for the time being in force in India", th~ words "by or 
under any law for the time being in force in India other than 
companies with limited liability" shall be substituted; 5 
(b) for clause (xii), the following clauses shall be substi-
tuted, namely:-
"(xii) the transacting of pecuniary agency buslneu on 
commission; 
(xiia) the entering into contracts of indemnity, 8m-ety- 10 
ship or guarantee with specific security or otherwise;"; 
(c) after clause (xx), the following clause shall be Insert-
ed, namely: _ . .,~~ 1 
"(xxa) notwithstanding anything to the contrary con-
tained in any other law for the time being in force, the 15 
establishment and maintenance of superannuation pension, 
provident or other funds for the benefit of the employees 
of the State Bank or dependents of such employees or for 
the purposes of the Stare Bank, and the granting of superan-
nuation allowances, annuities and pensions payable out of 20 
any such fund;". 
~endm~nt 5. In section 34 of the principal Act, for sub-sections (3) and (4), 
~. IeCtlOD the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:-
"(3) The State Bank shall not discount or purchase or 
'advance or lend or open cash credits on the security of,- 2, 
(a) any negotiable instrument of any individual or 
firm payable at the place where it is presented which does 
not carry on it the several responsibilities of at least two 
persons or firms unconnected with each other in general 
partnership; 30 
(b) any negotiable instrument or security (not being 
an instrument or security in which a truste'e may invest trult 
money under section 20 of the Indian Trusts Act, 1882, or the 
corresponding provision of the law for the time being in 
force in any country where the State Bank has a branch) 35 
which does not mature within-
(0 fifteen months from the date of such discount, 
purchase, loan, advance or opening of cash credits, if 
the instrument or security is drawn or issued for the 
purpose of financing seasonal agricultural operations; 40 
and 

(ii) six months from the date aforesaid if the hi .. 
strument or security is drawn or issued for any other 
purpose." . 
6. In section 35 of the principal Act, for sub-sections (2), (3) Amendm~nt 
5 and (4), the following sub-sections shall be substituted, namely:- ~;. section 
10 
20 
• (2) The terms and conditions relating to such acquisition, 
if agreed .pon by the Central Board of the State Bank and the 
directorate or management of the banking institution concerned 
and approwd by the Reserve Bank, shall be submitted to the 
Central Government for its sanction and that Government may 
by order in writing (hereafter in this section referred to as the 
order of sanction) accord its sanction thereto. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or any 
other law for the time being in force or any instrument regulat-
ing the constitution of the banking institution concerned, the 
terms and conditions as sanctioned by the Central Government 
shall come into effect on the date specified by the Central Gov-
ernment in this behalf in the order of sanction and be binding 
upon the State Bank and the banking institution concerned as 
well as upon the shareholders (or, as the case may be, proprietors) 
and creditors of that banking institution. 
(4) If for any reason the terms and conditions cannot come 
into effect on the date specified in the order of sanction, the 
Central Government may fix another suitable date for that 
25 purpose. 
(5) On the date on which the terms and conditions as afore-
said come into effect the business and the assets and liabilities of 
the banking institution concerDed as covered by the acquisition 
shall, by virtue, and in accordance with the provisions, of the 
30 order of sanction stand transferred to, and become respectively 
the business and the assets and liabilities of, the State Bank. 
(6) The consideration for the acquisition of the business 
and the assets and liabilities of any banking institution under 
this section may, if so agreed upon, be paid either in cash or by 
35 allotment of shares in the capital of the State Bank or partly 
in cash and partly by allotment of shares, and the State Bank 
may, for the purpose of any such allotment, increase, subject 
to the other provisions contained in this Act relating to the 
increase of capital, the capital of the State Bank by the issue 
... of such number of shares as may be determined by the State 
Bank. 

.\ 
(1) A:t:ty business acquired under this section shan thet~ 
after be carried on by the State Bank in accordance with the 
provisions of this Act, subject to such exemptions or modifica-
tions as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Oftlcial Gazette, make in this behalf in consultation with the S 
Reserve Bank: 
Provided that no such exemption or modification shall be 
made so as to have effect for a period of more than seven years 
from the date of acqUisition. 
(8) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial 10 
Disputes Act, 1947, or in any other law or in any agreement for 14 of 1947 
the time being in force, on the acquisition of the business and 
the assets and liabilities of any banking institution under this 
section, no officer or other employee of that banking institution 
shall be entitled to any compensation to which he may be entitled IS 
under that Act or that other law or that agreement and no claim 
in respect of such compensation shall be entertained by any 
court, tribunal or other authority, if on his having accepted in 
writing an offer of employment by the State Bank on the terms 
and conditions proposed by it he has been employed in accordance 20 
with such terms and conditions. 
(9) The Central Government may, if it considers necessary 
or expedient in the case of any banking institution in relation 
to which an order of sanction has been made under this section, 
'appoint, whether before or after the coming into effect of the 25 
terms and cond tions relating to the acquisition of the business 
and the assets and liabilities of that banking institution, a suitable 
person to take over the management of that banking institution 
for the purposes of winding up its affairs and distributing its 
assets, and the expenditure incurred in connection with such 30 
management (including the remuneration for the person so 
appointed and his staff, if any) shall be paid out of the assets of 
the banking institution or by the State Bank as the Central 
Government may direct. 
(10) Simultaneously with the appointment of a suitable 35 
person to take over the management of any banking institution 
under SUb-section (9) or immediately thereafter, the Central 
Government shall issue directions to be followed by that person 
in the management of that banking institution for the purposes 
aforeSaid and thereupon- . 40 
(a) the provisions of the Companies Act, 1956 or the 
BankilIg Companies Act, 1949, or any other law for the time' 
I of 19,6. 
10 o! 1949. 

s 
being in force or any instrument having effect by virtue of 
any such Act or law, in so far as they are inconsistent with 
such directions, shall cease to apply to or in relation to that 
banking institution; 
S (b) all persons in charge of the management, including 
any person holding office as manager or director of the bank-
ing institution immediately before the issue of such· direc-
tions, shall be deemed to have vacated their offices as such; 
and 
10 (c) the person appointed to take over the management 
of the banking institution shall in accordance with those 
directions take all such steps as may be necessary to facilitate 
the winding up of its affairs and distribution of its assets. 
(11) The Central Government, when satisfied that nothing 
15 further remains to be done in order to wind up the affairs of 
any such banking inst1tution, may by another order in writing 
direct that as from such date as may be 'specified therein the 
banking institution shall stand dissolved and thereupon any such 
direction shall have effect notwithstanding anything to the con-
20 trary contained in any other law. 
(12) No action under this section shall be questioned on the 
ground merely of any defect in the constitution of any banking 
institution in relation to which such action has been taken. 
(13) In this semon "banking institution" includes any indivi-
25 dual or any association of individuals (whether incorporated or 
not, or whether a department of Government or a separate insti-
tution), carrying on the business of banking.'. 
7. In section 36 of the principal Act, after sub-section (3) the Amendment , of ~on 
following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:- 36. 
30 "(4) No amount applied for any of the purposes specified in 
sub-section (2) shall, for the purposes of the Indian Income-tax 
Act, 1922, be treated as income, profits or gains of the State 
Bank.". 
8. In section 41 of the principal Act,- Amendment 
at sectiOD 41. 
3S (a) in sub-section (1), for the words, brackets and figures 
"sub-section (1) of section 144 of the Indian Companies Act, 

1913", the words and figures "section 226 of the Companies Act, 
1956" shall be substituted; 
(b) in sub-section (5), for the word "flrat", the word 
"annual" shall be substituted; 
(c) in clause (d) of sub-section (7), for the words "profit S 
and loss" occurring for the second time, the words "profit or loss" 
shall be substituted. 
Amendment 9. In section 42 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1). for the 
~. aeaion word "hereinafter", the words "in this Act", shall be substituted. 
Amendment 10. In section 50 of the principal Act, for clause (0) of sub-section 10 
~. section (2), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:-
"(0) the establishment and maintenance of superannuation 
pension, provident or other funds for the benefit of the employees 
of the State Bank or of the dependants of such employees or for 
the purposes of the State Bank, and the granting of superannua- IS 
tion allowances, annuities and pensions payable out of any such 
fund;". 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Certain minor amendments in the State Bank of India Act, 1953, 
have been found necessary in the light of the experience gained since 
the Bank was originally established in 1955. The amendments pro-
posed are explained in detail in the notes on clauses attached to the 
Bill. 
NEW DELHI; MORARJI DESAL 
The 3rd February, ID5D. 

Clause 2.-Section 22 deals with the disqualifications for appoint-
ment as a director of the Central Board of the Bank or local board or 
local committee. The amendments proposed are intended to remove 
the prohibition in respect of a legal or technical adviser of the bank 
being appointed as a member of such boards or committees and to 
define some of the expressions used in the section. 
Clause 3.-The amendment is of a drafting nature. 
Clause 4.-Section 33 deals with the business which the bank is 
permitted to transact. Clause (i) (d) of the section as it stands is 
capable of being so interpreted as to permit the State Bank to make 
loans on the primary security of the shares of ordinary joint stock 
companies. This is not, however, the intension, and the object of 
the amendment is to clarify the position. Opportunity is also being 
taken to redmft clause (xii) so as to improve its language. 
Clause 5.-The language of sub-sections (3) and (4) of section 34 
of the prinCipal Act is somewhat obscure, and it is proposed to re-
draft these sub-sections, so as to make the meaning clear. 
Clause 6.-Section 35 of the State Bank of India Act provides for 
the acquisition by the State Bank through negotiation of the business 
of any existing bank. It has, however, been found from actual ex-
perience that the procedure for the acquisition which is now pre-
scribed is elaborate and time-consuming, and it is proposed accord-
ingly to redraft the section, so as to simplify the procedure. The 
amendments provide,-
(a) that if the scheme for the transfer of the assets p ... " 
liabilities to the State Bank is approved by the boards of direc-
tors of the two institutions, such a decision will prevail in spite 
of any statutory or other provision to the contrary; 
(b) that the formal transfer can be made effective through 
an order of the Central Government, without the necessity of 
executing elaborate legal documents; 
(c) that the residuary institution, after the transfer of its 
assets and liabilities to the State Bank may, if necessary, be 
8 

9 
wound up, according to a simpler procedure than is now pre--
scribed; 
(d) that the provisions of section 25F and 25FF of the Indus-
trial Disputes Act, 1947, in regard to retrenchment compensa-
tion, which are intended to be applicable in a case in which 
there is a substantial break in the continuity of employment or 
a reduction in emoluments 01' other benefits, will not be applied, 
in the case of employees whose services are transferred with 
their consent to the State Bank, on the merger of the itlltitution 
in which they were previously employed. 
ClaUle 7.-Section 36 of the principal Act provides for certaili 
payments being made to the State Bank of India in reimburesment 
of the losses incurred by it on the establishment of new branches. 
It is proposed to clarify the intention that such payments will not be 
treated as income chargeable to income-tax. 
CZa,J,ses 4 and 10.-Sub-section (1) of section 50 of the principal 
Act confers on the Central Boarti of the State Bank the power to 
make regulations for the conduct of the affairs of the bank after 
~onsultation with the Reserve Bank and with the previous sanction 
of the Central Government. Among the powers thus specified is a 
power to establish a pension fund for the benefit of employees who 
have entered the service of the bank after July 1, 1955. There is 
some inconsistency between this provision and the provision made 
in section 30 of the Life Insurance Corporation Act, 1956, read with 
section 44 ibid and it is, therefore, proposed to introduce a new 
clause (xxa) in section 33 and to redraft section 50 (2) (0). so as to 
make it clear that the new pension fund for fresh entrants to its 
service can be established by the bank. 

-MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED ,LEGISLATION 
. ,Sub-section (10) of section 35 of the State Bank of India Act, as 
.. BOW ,propesed, confers on the Central Government power to issue 
'certain directions for facilitating the orderly winding up of banking 
inetitutiona,wOOse business Is taken over by the State Bank of India 
, under that section_ It is contemplated that the directions, if any, 
will be issued only in cases where the residuary company, after it 
has completely transferred its banking business, will have no further 
functions todtscharge. The delegation of power to 'the ;Central Gov-
, ernment in such a case to simplify the somewhat: elaborate '})l'OCedure 
for winding up which is otherwise prescribed by the law is'consldered 
to be reasonable. 
The new clause (xxa) of section 33, read with sub-section (2) (0) 
" . of- section, 50 as ROW proposed, clarities the· position in' regard 10 the 
eStablishment of 'certain pension; and provident :iundafol' .the 
employees of the bank. The' necessary regulations. for-this pup&Se 
will be made' within the scope of ,the power which bas' already: <been 
conferred" on the Central Board of the State ,Bank -UDdeF, 1IeCtion 
50 (1)' of ~ Act. 
The dfJegationof leg1slative power in both the cases is ot the nor-
.,.mal ,tJpe. 
10 

• 
iXTRACTS FROM THE STATE BANK OF INDIA k. 16im 
(No. 23 OF 195:5) 
• • • • • 
2Z. '(1) No person shall be qualified to be a medor of the I?isqualifica-
Central 'Board or a member of B Local Board 'or of a Local Committee ~ 
if- of CeDtraI Board or 
(a) he holds the office of director, provisional director. :-ef'!:rhip 
promoter, agent or manager of any banking company already Bor.rd~ or 
established or advertised as about to be established; or CommitueL 
(b) 'hevis a salaried officer of Government.' not specially 
authorised by the Central Govemment to be a director or mem-
ber; or 
( c) -he' has been :removai' or dismissed·from 1Ibe service of 
Government on a charge of eorruption or bribery; or 
(d) he holds any office of profit under the State Bank other 
than the office of chairman, vice-chairman or manaem. 
directol'; or 
• • • • • * 
23. -If a director of the Central- Board or B member;of a Local Vacatioo. of 
Board or a Local Committee-- office or di.rccton, 
(a) becomes subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned 
in section' 22; or 
(b) resigns his office by giving notice in writiDg under his 
hand, in the case of the chairman and vice-chairman, to the 
Central Government and in the case of other directors or mem-
bers of Local Boards or Committees, to the Central Board, and 
the res'gnation is accepted; or 
(c) is ahseat without,leave of the Central Board, the Local 
Board or the Local Committee of which he is a director or mem-
ber, as the 'case may be, for more than three consecutive meetiDga 
thereof; 
his leat shalL thereupon' become weant: 
Provided that nothing in claus& (c) shall··applytothechairmtm 
in relation to his membership of a Local Board or of a LoeaICoin-' 
mittee. 
* • • • * • 
II 
etc. 

Other buli-
netI which 
the State 
Bank may 
tJ'aDUet. 
BuIiaeu 
wbic:b the 
State 8aDt 
may not 
InDIIId. 
H 
33. Subject to the other provisions contained in this Act, the Stat. 
Bank JIlQy.carry on and transact any of the following kinds of busi-
ness, namely:-
(i.) the advancing and lending of money and the opening of 
cash credits upon the security of-
(a) stocks, funds and s~urities (other than immovable 
property) in which a trustee is authorised to invest trust 
money by any law for the time being in force in India or in 
any other country in which the State Bank has a branch; 
(b) debentures or other securities for money issued by 
or on behalf of a district board, municipal board, committee 
or other local authority under the authority of any Central 
Act, Provincial Act or State Act or of any law for the time 
being in force in any;other country in which the State Bank 
has a branch; 
(c) subject to such directions as may be issued by the 
Central Board, debentures of companies with limited liabi-
lity registered either in India or in such other country as the 
Central Government may approve in this behalf; 
(d) subject to such directions as may be issued. by the 
Central Board, shares and debentures of corporations estab-
lished under any law for the time being in force in India; 
* * * • • * 
(.ri.i) the transacting of pecuniary agency busineu on com-
mission and the entering into of contoracts of indemnity, surety-
ship or guamntee with specific security or otherwise; 
• • • * 
34. (1) 
* • * • • • 
(3) The State Bank shall not discount or buy, or advance or lend, 
or open cash credits, on the security of any negotiable instrwnent ttf 
any individual or firm payable at the place where it is presented for 
discount which does not carry on it the several responsibilities of at 
least two persons or firms unconnected with each other in general 
partnership. . 
(4) The State Bank shall not discount, lend or advance or open 
cash credits or. the security of any negotiable security (not being a 
security in which a trustee may invest trust money under section 20 

i3 
1 of .tl82. of the Indian Trusts Act, 1882, or the corresponding provision of iaw 
for the time being in force in any country where the State Bank has 
a branch) which-
(a) at the date of the proposed transaction has a longer 
period to run than fifteen months, if the security is a bill drawn 
for the purpose of financing seasonal agricultural operations and 
six months in other cases; or 
(b) if the security is a bill drawn after sight, it is drawn for 
a longer period than fifteen months in the case of a bill drawn 
for the purposes of financing seasonal agricultural operations end 
six months in other cases. 
'" '" '" '" '" '" 
.35. (1) 
• '" '" '" '" • 
State Bank 
may acquire 
the busines8 
of other 
(2) If the terms and conditions relating to the acquisition of any bank&. 
7 of 1913. 
10 011949. 
such banking institution are approved by the Central Board and the 
directomte of the banking institution concerned and are also approved 
by the Reserve Bank, they shall be submitted to the Central Govern-
ment, and, if sanctioned by the Central Government by order in 
writing, shall, notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in 
the Indian Companies Act, 1913, or in the Banking Companies Act, 
1949, be binding on the State Bank and the banking institution con-
cerned as well as the shareholders and creditors. 
(3) The consideration for the acquisition of any banking institu-
tion or of any assets or liabilities of a banking institution under this 
section may, if so agreed upon, be paid either in cash or by allotment 
of shares in the capital of the State Bank or partly in cash and partly 
by way of such allotment, and the State Bank may, for the purpose of 
flIly such allotment of shares, increase, subject to the other provisiollJ 
contained in this Act relating to the increase of capital, the capital 
of the State Bank by the issue of such number of shares as may be 
determined by the State Bank. 
(4) Any banking business acquired under this section shall there-
after be carried on by the State Bank in accordance with the provi-
sions of this Act subject to such exemptions or modifications as the 
Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make 
in this behalf in consultation with the Reserve Bank:: 
Provided that no such exemption or modification shall be made 
so as· to have effect for a period of more than seven years from the 
dab- of acquisition. . 
• • • • • • 

i4 
AUcHt. a\ (l)'rM-'aftainoftbe Stat. Bank shall be auditadr;-by tWO -
auditors dulyqualifi.ed to act as auditors of companies under .ub-
section (1) of section 144 of the Indian Companies Act, 1913, ,Wbo-7,o( 1913· 
shall. be- appointed by the Reserve Bank in consultation with the 
Central Government. 
• • • • • • 
(5) The auQitor& shall severally be, and continue to act as, auditors 
un til the Jirst general meeting ,Iter their respective appointment, 
and if any vacancy ~es before the expiry of the term' of offtce of 
an auditor, the -vacancy may be filled by the Reserve Bank . 
• • • • 
(7) The auditors shall make a report to the Central Government 
upon the annual balance sheet and accounts, and in every such report 
they shall state-
(a) whether., in their opinion, the balance sheet is a full and 
fair balance sheet containing all the necessary particulars and 
properly d,rawn up so as to exhibit a true and correct view of the 
affairs of the State Bank, and in caae they have called for any 
explanation or information, whether it has been given and whe-
ther it is sai.isfactoryj 
('0) whether or not the transactions of the State Bank which' 
have come to their' notice have been within the powers of the 
State Bank; 
(c) whether or Dot the returns received from the·oftiees'snd· 
branohesof . the State Bank have been found adequate for the 
purpose' of their audit; 
(d) whether -the profit and loss account show .. a true balance 
of profit and loss £Or the period covered by such account; ·and 
• • • • • • 
BaJaoce 42. (1) A general meeting (hereinafter referred to as an annual 
~~eet s:~ general meeting) shall be held at such time e.nd at such place where_ 
~ank::lbe there is a local head offiee of the State Bank, as shall from -time to _ 
=e at time be specified by the Central Board before the end of March in .. 
meetina· each year, and a general meeting may be convened by the State Bank 
at any other time: 
Provided that the first .annual general meetiDg-ihall be held at ... 
Bombay . 
• • • • • • 

58. (1) 
• • • • • • 
Pown of 
Central 
Board to 
make re-
IUlatiom. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such reguletions may provide for-
• • • • • 
(0) the establishment and maintenance of pensions, provident 
or other funds for the benefit of employees of or for the purposes 
of the State Bank; 
• • • • • • 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the State Bank of India Act, 1955 
The President has, in pursuance of clause (I) of article II 7 and 
clause (I) of article 274 of the Constitution of India, recom-
mended to Lok Sabha the introduction of the Bill. 
GMGJPND-LS-I-19 16(B)LS-19-a-59- 1650 
M. N. KAUL, 
Sscr'tary' 
(Shr, Morarji DlSai, 
Minister of Financ..) 