THE PROVISION OF COMMUNICATION FACILITIES IN
 EVERY VILLAGE  BILL, 2007
By
SHRI RAMDAS ATHAW ALE, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the facilities of telephone and post and telegraph office in all the villages
of the country and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  ( 1) This Act may be called the Provision of Communication Facilities in Every
Village  Act, 2007.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, the words and expressions used
but not defined in this Act and defined in the Indian Post Office Act, 1898 and the Indian
Telegraph Act, 1885 shall have the meanings, respectively, assigned to them in these Acts.
Short title and
extent.
Bill No. 11 of  2007
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Definition.
5
6 of 1898.
13 of 1885.

2
3. The Central Government  shall provide in every village throughout the country, the
following facilities, namely:—
(i) a post and telegraph office; and
(ii) a public telephone connection with STD facility under the control of the head
of the Village Panchayat.
4. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the provisions of this Act.
Power to
make rules.
Provision of
communication
facilities in
villages.
5

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
In India, about seventy-five  per cent of the people live in villages. There are number
of villages in remote areas inhabited by tribals and backward classes. Even after sixty
years of our independence, no development work has been done at such places. There are
no postal facilities available in these areas. There are no telephones and the villages have
virtually no communication links with the rest of the country. It takes months together
for a letter to reach villages. Most of the villagers come to the cities for work and remain
cut-off from their families due to non-availability of modern means of communication
in their native villages. The postal, telephone and other communication facilities have
thus become necessary for every village. The villagers can keep their money in saving
account of the post offices thereby making available a lot of money to the Government
for development works. The introduction of modern means of communication in every
village will be the first step towards taking the boon of modern science to the doorsteps
of rural India.
N
EW DELHI; RAMDAS   ATHAWALE
December 18, 2006
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides that every village shall be provided with the facilities of a
public telephone connection and a telegraph and post office by the Central Government.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India.
It is estimated that a sum of about rupees two hundred crore per annum will be involved as
a recurring expenditure out of the Consolidated Fund of India.
A sum of rupees fifty lakh is also likely to be involved as a non-recurring expenditure.
4

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 4 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of  the Bill. The rules will relate to the matters of detail only. The
delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.
5

LOK   SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the facilities of telephone and post and telegraph office in all the villages
of the country and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Ramdas Athawale, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—196LS(S-5)—08.02.2007.