As INTRODUCED IN 1.06 SABHA

27 su 2001

Bill No. 11 of 2001

THE FRUIT AND VEGETABLE BOARD BILL, 2001

By
‘Suet CHANDRAKANT KHAIRE, M.P.
A

BILL

to provide for the development, storage and sales of fruits and vegetables and their
products.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-second Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

CHAPTER I
‘PRELIMINARY
1. (J) This Act may be called the Fruit and Vegetable Board Act, 2001.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.

(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notifi-
cation in the Official Gazette, appoint:

Provided that different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act
and for different States or different parts thereof.

Short title
extent and
commence-
ment.


Declaration as

to expediency take under its control the fruit and vegetable industry.

of control by
the Union.
Definitions.

Establishment
and
constitution
of Fruit and
Vegetable
Board.

2
2.It is hereby declared that it is expedient in the public interest that the Union should

3. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, —

(a) “Board” means the Fruit and Vegetable Board established under section 4;

(6) “dealer means a dealer in fruits and vegetables;

(c) “Executive Director" means the Executive Director appointed under
section 6;

(@) “export” and “import” mean, respectively, taking out of and bringing into
India by land, sea and air;

(०) “Government” means the Central Government;

(f) “member” means member of the Board and includes the Chairman;

(g) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act,

s

CHAPTER Il
ESTABLISHMENT OF FRUIT AND VEGETABLE BOARD
4. (0) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by notification in q
the Official Gazette, appoint in this behalf, there shall be established for the purposes of
this Act,a Board to be called the Fruit and Vegetable Board.

(2) The Board shall be 8 body corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual
succession and a common seal, with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both
movable and immovable, and to contract and shall by the said name sue and be sued.

(3) The head office of the Board shall be at New Delhi and the Board may, with
previous approval of the Government, establish offices or agencies at other places in
outside India.

(4) The Board shall consist of the following members, namely:—
(a) aChairman to be appointed from amongst the fruit and vegetable growers by”
the Government; ]

(b) three members of Parliament, of whom two shall be elected by the Ht
the People and one by the Council of States;

(¢) five members to be appointed by the Government to represent respectit

(0 the Ministry of the Central Government dealing with agriculture;

(ii) the Ministry of the: Central Government dealing with commerteay
(iii) the Ministry of the Central Government dealing with finance;
(iv) the Ministry of the Central Government dealing with industri
development;
(v) the Indian Council of. ‘Agricultural Research;
(d) four members to be appointed by the Government from amongst the gro\
of fruits;
(e) four members to be appointed by the Government from amongst the
of vegetables; 2
() two members to be appointed by the Government from amongst the de
and exporters of fruits and vegetables.
+


20

25

30

35

40

3

(5) The Board shall elect, from amongst its members, a Vice-Chairman who shall exercise
such of the powers and perform such of the functions of the Chairman as may be prescribed
and as may be delegated to him by the Chairman.

(6) The term of office of the members and the procedure to be followed in the discharge
of their functions by the members shall be such as may be prescribed.

(7) The Executive Director and any such officer of the Government (not being amem-
ber of the Board), as is deputed by the Government in this behalf, shall have the right to
attend the meetings of the Board and take part in the proceedings thereof but shall not have
the right to vote.

(8) The Board may associate with itself in such manner and for such purposes, as may
be prescribed, any persons whose assistance or advice it may desire in complying with any
of the provisions of this Act and a person so associated shall have the right to take part in
the discussions of the Board relevant to the purposes for which he has been associated, but
shall not have the right to vote.

5. The Chairman shall be entitled to such salary and allowance and such conditions of
service as may, from time to time, be determined by the Government.

6. (0) The Government shall appoint an Executive Director to exercise such powers and
perform such duties under the Chairman as may be prescribed or as may be delegated to him
by the Chairman.

(2) The Government shall appoint a Secretary to the Board to exercise such powers

and perform such duties under the Chairman as may be prescribed or as may be delegated to
him by the Chairman.

(3) The Executive Director and the Secretary shall be entitled to such salaries and
allowances and such conditions of service in respect of leave, pension, provident fund and
other matters as may from time to time be determined by the Government.

(4) Subject to such control, restrictions and conditions as may be prescribed, the
Board may appoint such other officers and employees as may be necessary for the efficient
performance of its functions.

(5) The Chairman, the Executive Director, the Secretary and other officers and employees
of the Board shail not undertake any work unconnected with their duties under this Act
except with the permission of Government.

व. (0) The Board may appoint such committees as may be necessary for the efficient
discharge of its duties and performance of its functions under this Act.

(2) The Board shall have the power to co-opt as members of any committee ap-
pointed under sub-section (1) such number of persons who are not members of the Board as
itmay think fit and the persons so co-opted shall have the right to attend the meetings of the
committee and take part in the proceedings of the committee but shall not have the right to
‘vote,

8. (1) It shall be the duty of the Board to promote by such measures as it thinks fit, the
development, storage and marketing of fruit and vegetables and the fruit and vegetable
products industry.

(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-section (/), the measures
referred to therein may provide for—

(@ formulating policies for overall development and improvement of production,
quality, storage and marketing of fruits and vegetables;

Salary and
allowances
and other
conditions of
service of
Chairman.
Appointment
of Executive
Director, ete.

Commnttees
of the Board.

Functions of
the Board.


Dissolution
of the Board,

Power to
make rules.

4
(6) fixing annual production targets of fruits and vegetables;

{0 review of measures fr ataining production targets, vic, supply of inputs like
fertilizer, water ‘supply, plant protection, Measures, credit facilities, etc.;

(4) fixing import quotas for improved seeds;

(e) advising the Government on extension of cold storage facilities;

® review of the price trends of table and seed fruits and vegetables;

(g) development of fruit and vegetable products industries;

(A) review of the cost of production of fruits and vegetables and the prices

(i) regulation, control and Promotion of the export, of fruits and vegetables and
fruit and vegetable Products and review of the grading of fruits and vegetables;

(0) collection and maintenance of statistics on any matter relating to fruits and
vegetables and fruit industries;

(0 performing such other functions as the Government may from time to time

9. (1) The Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette and for reasons to be
specified therein, direct that the Board shall be dissolved from such date and for ‘such period
‘as may be specified in the notification:

Provided that before issuing any such notification the Government shall give a
reasonable opportunity to the Board to make. Fepresentation against the proposed dissolution
and shall consider the representations, if any, of the Board,

(2) When the Board is dissolved under the Provisions of sub-section (/),—

(a) all powers and duties of the Board shall during the period of dissolution be
exercised and performed by Such person or persons as the Government may appointin
this behalf;

(b) all funds and other properties vested in the Board shall during the Period of
dissolution, vest in the Government; and

(©) as soon as the period of dissolution expires, the Board shall be reconstituted
in accordance with the provisions of this Act.

10. (1) The Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purpose of this Act.

(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:-—
(@) the powers and functions of the Vice-Chairman of the Board;

(6) the term of office and other conditions of service of the members, the Manner
of filling vacancies among, and the Procedure to be followed in the discharge of their
functions by the members:

(2 the holding of minimum number of meetings of the Board every year;

(a) the circumstances in which and the authority by which a member may be
removed;

(e) the power which may be exercised and the duties which shall be performed by
the Executive Director and the Secretary;

35

40


5

( the procedure to be followed at the meetings of the Board for the conduct of
business and the number of members which shall form the quorum at a meeting;

(g) the maintenance of records of business transacted by the Board and the
submission of copies thereof to the Central Government;

(A) the power of the Board, its Chariman, the Executive Director and committees
of the Board with respect to the incurring of expenditure;

(0 the condition subject to which the Board may incur expenditure outside
India;

(@) the preparation of budget estimates of Teceipts and expenditure of the Board
and the authority by which the estimates are to be sanctioned;

(00 the form and the manner in which the accounts should be maintained by the
Board;

(0 the deposit of the funds of the Board in Banks and the investment of funds;
(m) the conditions to be observed by the Board in borrowing the money;

(n) the collection of any information or statistics in Tespect of fruits and vegeta-
bles;

(0) any other matter which has to be, or may be, prescribed by or provided for by
rules under this Act.

(3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, fora total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session o in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the Successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the tule, or both Houses agree that the rule
| not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of
no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.

IL. () The Board may make regulations not inconsistent with this Act and the Tules
made thereunder for enabling it to discharge its functions under this Act.

(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such regulations may
Provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—

(a) the procedure to be followed at the meetings of the committees appointed by
the Board and the number of members which shall form a quorum at a meeting;

(0) the delegation to the Chairman, members, Executive Director, Secretary or
other officers of the Board, or any of the powers and duties of the Board under this
Act;

(20 the travelling and other allowances, leave and other conditions of service of
officers (othet than those appointed by the Government) and other employees of the
Board;

(d) the maintenance of the accounts of the Board;

(e) the maintenance of the registers and other records of the Board and its
various committees;

(9 the appointment by the Board of agents to discharge, on its behalf, any of its
functions;

(8) the persons by whom, and the manner in which, payments, deposits and
investments may be made on behalf of the Board:

Power to
make
regulations.


6
(@)Noregultion made by the Boar shall ave effet untiithas been approved 0)
Government and published in the Official Gazette, and the Government, in approving a
reputation, may make any change therein which appears fot 40 Be neceSS0
The Goverment may, by nafication in the Official Gaze cance] ay gation
which has been approved and thereupon, the regulation shall cease to have effect.



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

‘The fruits and vegetables are grown in the country on an extensive scale. With the
establishment of Horticulture, Directorates in the States and the encouragement given to
horticulture, the production of fruits and vegetables is growing day by day. Now there are no
storage or good transport facilities for these commodities. The export and import policies are
not well defined for these things.

At present there is a great possibility of exporting fruits and vegetables and the
products prepared with fruits and vegetables. Therefore, to encourage production, storage
and export of fruits and vegetables and their products, it is expedient that the Union
Government takes under its control the development of fruits and vegetables and the fruit
and vegetable products industry.

Hence the Bill.

New Deut, CHANDRAKANT KHAIRE
February8, 2001


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the establishment of the Fruit and Vegetable Board.
Clause 5 provides for payment of such salary and allowances to the Chairman of the Board
as may be determined by the Government. Clause 6(3) provides for payment of salaries and
allowances to the Executive Director and the Secretary to the Board. Clause 6(4) provides for
appointment of such other officers and employees as may be necessary for efficient perfor-
mance of the functions of the Board. Clause 7 provides for appointment of committees and
co-option of such persons as members thereon who are not members of the Board. Such
members, of the committees will also have to be paid travelling and other allowances for
attending the meetings of the committees, Under clause 8, the Board will take such measures
as it thinks fit to promote the development and improvement of production, storage and
marketing of fruits and vegetables and the fruits & vegetable products industry. An annual
recurring expenditure of about rupees five crore is, therefore, likely to be involved from the
Consolidated Fund of India.

A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees ten crore is also likely to be incurred in
carrying out the purposes of the Bill.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. Clause 11 empowers the Fruit and Vegetable Board to make
regulations, with the previous approval of the Central Government and by notification in the
Official Gazette, not inconsistent with the provisions of the Bill and the rules that may be
made thereunder.

‘The matters in respect of which rules or regulations may be made pertain to procedure
or administrative detail and as such the delegation of legislative power is of a normal
character.


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for the development, storage and sales of fruits and
4 vegetables and their products.

(Shri Chandrakant Khaire, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—6367LS—19-02-2001.