As INTRODUCED IN Lox SABHA

|? MAY 708

Bill No. 11 of 2006

THE POLITICAL PARTIES (MAINTENANCE AND AUDITING OF
ACCOUNTS) BILL, 2006
By
Suri Mouan Sincx, M.P.
A
BILL

to provide for preparation, maintenance and auditing of annual accounts of political
parties and for matters connected therewith.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as

follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the the Political Parties (Maintenance and Auditing of Short title,
Accounts) Act, 2006. extent and
commencement.
5 (2) It extends to the whole of India.

(3) Itshall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— Definitions.

(०) "Commission" means the Election Commission of India constituted under
10 article 324 of the Constitution;


Maintenance
and auditing
of accounts
of political
parties.

Submission
and
publication of
audit report.

Penalty.

Power to
remove
difficulties.

Act to have
over-riding
effect,

Power to
make rules.

2

(9) "political party" means an association or body of individual citizens of India दे
registered with the Commission as a political party in accordance with the provisions
contained in section 29A of the Representation of the People Act, 1951; and

(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.

il (7) Every political party shall prepare and maintain annual accounts ofall its receipts,
expéndituré and other relevant records in such form and manner, as may be prescribed.

(2) The accounts of every political party shall be audited by an auditor authorized to
audit the accounts of a company under the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949.

4. (1) Every political party shall submit its annual certified copy of the audited accounts
together with the audit report thereon to the Commission within such time, as may be
prescribed.

(2) The Commission shall cause the annual certified copy of the audited accounts
together with the audit report thereon of each political party to be published in such manner,
as may be prescribed.

5. If any political party contravenes the provisions of this Act, the Commission may,
after giving a reasonable opportunity to the concerned political party,—

(i) withdraw its recognition, if it is a political party recognised by the Commission
under the Election Symbols (Reservation and Allotment) Order, 1968; or

(ii) withdraw its registration as a political party, for such period, as may be
prescribed.

6. (/) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, after consulting the Commission, by order to be published in the Official
Gazette make such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may
appear to it to be necessary for removing the difficulty.

(2) Every order may under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament.

7..The provisions of this Act shall apply notwithstanding anything contained to the
contrary in any other law for the time being in force.

8. The Central Government may, in consultation with the Commission, by notification
in the Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.

43 of

38 of I!

15


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The Representation of the People Act, 1951, provides that every candidate at an
election, either to the House of the People or to the Legislative Assembly of a State, shall
keep a separate account of all his expenses incurred in connection with the election but there
is no provision providing for maintenance and auditing of accounts of political parties. Since
use of money power to win election has become an integral part of our election process and
political parties are carrying on their political activities with the help of black money, it is high
time that a law providing for maintenance and auditing of accounts of political parties be
brought forward. Such a legislation will not only help free and fair elections by discouraging
anti-social elements employed by the political parties by using money power to disturb the
free and fair elections but will 2150 give a right to the people of the country to know from
where the money comes to a political party and where it goes.

The Bill seeks to achieve the above objective.

New De.ut; * MOHAN SINGH
January 31,2006.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM.

Clause 4 of the Bill provides that the Commission shall cause the annual certified copy
of the audited accounts together with the audit report thereon of each political party to be
published in such manner, as may be prescribed. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely to involve a recurring expenditure
of about rupees twenty lakh per annum.

No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of detail only and as such the
delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.


LOK SABHA

A -
BLL

to provide for preparation, maintenance and auditing of annual accounts to political
parties and for matters connected therewith.

(Shri Mohan Singh, M.P)

MGIPMRND—5151LS(S-4}—08.02.2006.