1
THE RIGHT TO INFORMATION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019
By
SHRI KUNWAR PUSHPENDRA SINGH CHANDEL, M.P.
A
BILL
to amend the Right to Information Act, 2005.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Right to Information (Amendment) Act, 2019.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 11 of 2019
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
Amendment
of section 19.
2. In section 19 of the Right to Information Act, 2005, after sub-section (6), the following
sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
"(6A) The second appeal under sub-section (3) shall be disposed of within fifty
days of date of filing the appeal or within such extended period not exceeding a total of
one hundred days from the date of filing thereof, as the case may be, for reasons to be
recorded in writing.".
5

3
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Right to Information Act, 2005 is a milestone in the journey of instilling values of
democracy in India. It empowers the people and creates a sense of responsibility for
transparency among the citizens as well as the Government. It has been ensured through this
Act that the information is provided within the prescribed time limit but there are no clear-cut
guidelines to provide information by the Information Officer in case there is second appeal
on account of the applicant being not satisfied with the information or other reason. It is a
point that undermines the very objectives of this Act as a result of which a large number of
appeals are pending before the Information Commission.
Through this Bill the likely slackness in the implementation of the Act will be removed.
For this, the information sought through the second appeal in the Act can be made available
within minimum fifty days and maximum hundred days so that any obstacle coming in the
way of instilling high degree of transparency could be removed.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; KUNWAR PUSHPENDRA SINGH CHANDEL
January 18, 2019.

4
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE RIGHT TO INFORMATION ACT, 2005
(22 OF 2005)
* * * * * *
19. (1) * * * * *
 (6) An appeal under sub-section ( 1) or sub-section ( 2) shall be disposed of within
thirty days of the receipt of the appeal or within such extended period not exceeding a total
of forty-five days from the date of filing thereof, as the case may be, for reasons to be
recorded in writing.
* * * * * *
Appeal.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to amend the Right to Information Act, 2005.
————
(Shri Kunwar Pushpendra Singh Chandel, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—3298LS(S3)—30-01-2019.