1
Short title.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2018
By
SHRI GOPAL CHINAYY A SHETTY, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of  India
 as follows:—
1.  This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2018.
2. In article 124, after clause (7), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
"(8) The Chief Justice of India shall not be eligible for further office either under
the Government of India or under the Government of any State or in any Public Sector
Undertaking after he has ceased to hold his office.
(9) A Judge of the Supreme Court shall not be eligible for further office either
under Government of India or under the Government of any State or in any Public
Sector Undertaking after he has ceased to hold his office.".
Bill No. 11 of  2018
Amendment
of article
124.5
10

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS  AND REASONS
Independence of judiciary is an essential attribute of rule of law, which is a basic
feature of the Constitution. Judiciary must be free from all pressure including the pressure
from executive as well as psychological pressure relating to their appointment after retirement.
The Judges are required to ensure the independence and impartiality of judiciary by keeping
them free from any allurement of employment under the Government after their retirement.
The Constitution nowhere restricts or prohibits retired Judges of the Hon'ble Supreme Court
and the Hon'ble High Courts to hold further employment either under the Government of
India or under any of the State Government. The Constitution, on the other hand specifically
prohibits the Chairman of Union Public Service Commission and its Members, the Chairmen
and the members of  State Public Service Commissions for further employment after their
retirement, either under the Government of India or under the Government of the State.
Likewise article 148(4) provides that the comptroller and Auditor General shall not be eligible
for further office either under the Government of India or under the Government of any State
after he has ceased to hold his office.
The Hon'ble Judges of the Supreme Court, various High Courts, the Comptroller and
Auditor General of India, the Chairman of Union Public Service Commission, the Chairmen
and members of the State Public Service Commissions  are constitutional functionaries and
they should be kept free from all kinds of allurement of employment under the Government
after cessation of their respective offices. It is presumed that re-appointment of Judges, after
cessation of office would have effect of undermining the independence and fairness of
judiciary.
In the present scenario, the Judges are getting handsome salaries, other amenities,
perks and post retirement benefits. The Judges of the Supreme Court and the High Courts are
adjudicating rights of citizens which have been jeopardized by the Government. The Judges
are coming in contact with the Government on every step. As such need of the moment is to
introduce similar provisions in the Constitution for prohibiting the Chief Justice and the
Judges of the Supreme Court from holding any employment under the Government of India
or under the Government of State after their retirement.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; GOPAL CHINAYYA SHETTY
December 29, 2017.
2

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * * *
CHAPTER IV .— THE UNION JUDICIARY
124. (1) There shall be a Supreme Court of India consisting of a Chief Justice of India
and, until Parliament by law prescribes a larger number, of not more than seven other Judges.
* * * * * *
(7) No person who has held office as a Judge of the Supreme Court shall plead or act
in any court or before any authority within the territory of India.
* * * * * *
3
Establishment
and
constitution
of Supreme
Court.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Gopal Chinayya Shetty, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—3644LS(S3)—20-01-2018.