     As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 11 of 2022
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022
By
DR. D. RA VIKUMAR, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as
follows:–
1.(1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2022.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. After article 21A of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted,
namely:–
“21B. (1) The State shall provide affordable and quality healthcare services
including emergency medical treatment to citizens in such manner as the State may,
by law, determine.
(2) The State shall take appropriate measures for progressive realisation of
the right guaranteed under clause (1).”.
Short title and
commencement.
5
Insertion of
new article
21B.
Right to
affordable
healthcare
services.10

2
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
India is a party to Universal Declaration of Human rights, which provides that
“Everyone has the right to a standard of living adequate for the health and well-being
of himself and of his family, including food, clothing, housing and medical care and
necessary social services…”. This commitment to healthcare is implicit in the
Constitution, as the right to health has been construed as a part of right to life under
article 21 of the Constitution in several judicial pronouncement by the Supreme Court.
Moreover, article 47 as a Directive Principle provides that “improvement of public
health” shall be among the primary duties of the State. The Supreme Court has also
reiterated that the right to health includes affordable treatment, and that it is the duty
of the State to make provisions for affordable treatment.
The COVID 19 pandemic has brought into limelight the inadequate condition of
healthcare system in India. This requires urgent steps to make affordable and quality
healthcare accessible to everyone. It is only with an enforceable right to healthcare
service that the situation of healthcare in India will improve.
Hence this Bill.
NEW DELHI;                           D. RA VIKUMAR
July  9, 2021.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides for making the right to affordable and quality
healthcare services including emergency medical treatment a fundamental right. The
Bill, therefore, if enacted would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of
India. It is estimated that an expenditure of about rupees one thousand crore would
be incurred per annum from the Consolidated Fund of India.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.
3

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Dr . D. Ravikumar, M.P .)