1
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No.  11 of 2020
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2020
By
SHRI SANTOKH SINGH CHAUDHARY,  M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-first Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment)  Act, 2020.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In article 124 of the Constitution, in clause (1), the following proviso shall be added
at the end, namely:—
“Provided that such number of Judges, as is equal to the proportion of population
in the country of the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and the Other Backward
Classes to the total population of the country, shall be appointed from amongst the
persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and the Other
Backward Classes.
Explanation.—In this article, the expression “population” means the population
as ascertained at the last preceding census of which the relevant figures have been
published.”.
Amendment
of article 124.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5
10
15

2
3. In article 216 of the Constitution, the following proviso shall be added at the end,
namely:—
“Provided that such number of Judges, as is equal to the proportion of population
in the State of the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and the Other Backward
Classes to the total population of the State, shall be appointed from amongst the
persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and the Other
Backward Classes.
Explanation.—In this article, the expression ‘population’ means the population
as ascertained at the last preceding census of which the relevant figures have been
published.”.
4. In article 312 of the Constitution, after clause ( 4), the following clause shall be
added, namely:—
“(5) The law providing for the creation of the all-India judicial service aforesaid shall
specifically provide for reservation in appointment of Judges for the persons belonging to
the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and the Other Backward Classes in the same
proportion, as the population of the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and the Other
Backward Classes bear to the total population of India.".
Amendment
of article 216.
Amendment
of article 312.
5
10
15

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
There is a need for representation from the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes
and the Other Backward Classes in higher judiciary. In the face of inadequate number of
judges from backward classes in higher courts, it is imperative to have a reservation policy in
this regard. This would ensure the well-being of all sections of society as the needs of the
oppressed would be better understood, leading to social equity. Of the three pillars of
democracy, Legislature and Executive have been brought under the ambit of constitutional
reservation. Naturally, the Judiciary must also be covered by the same principle.
Judiciary comes under the definition of ‘State’ under article 12 of the Constitution.
Articles 15(4) and 16(4) provide for special provision for advancement and reservation
respectively in favour of any backward class which is not adequately represented in the
services under the State. As our higher judiciary still has inadequate representation from the
Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and the Other Backward Classes communities, this
Bill aims to provide reservation for the same.
The Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice has
recommended reservation for the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and the Other
Backward Classes communities in higher judiciary in its various Reports presented during
the fourteenth Lok Sabha. The Parliamentary Committee on Welfare of the Scheduled Castes
and the Scheduled Tribes also recommended reservation for backward classes in higher
judiciary in its Report in the year 2000.
The nine Judge Supreme Court Bench in the case of Indra Sawhney Vs. The Union of
India had upheld reservations for Other Backward Classes.
When the Parliament enacts a law to provide for the creation of an all-India judicial
service, it is imperative that reservation is provided to the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled
Tribes and the Other Backward Classes as is provided for in other All India Services such as
the Indian Administrative Services.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SANTOKH  SINGH  CHAUDHARY
November 27, 2019
3

4
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
*******
124. (1) There shall be a Supreme Court of India consisting of a Chief Justice of India
and, until Parliament by law prescribes a larger number, of not more than seven other Judges.
*****
216. Every High Court shall consist of a Chief Justice and such other Judges as the
President may from time to time deem it necessary to appoint.
*****
312. (1) Notwithstanding anything in Chapter VI of Part VI or Part XI, if the Council of
States has declared by resolution supported by not less than two-thirds of the members
present and voting that it is necessary or expedient in the national interest so to do, Parliament
may by law provide for the creation of one or more all India services (including an all-India
judicial service) common to the Union and the States, and, subject to the other provisions of
this Chapter, regulate the recruitment, and the conditions of service of persons appointed, to
any such service.
(2) * **** *
(3) * **** *
(4) The law providing for the creation of the all-India judicial service aforesaid may
contain such provisions for the amendment of Chapter VI of Part VI as may be necessary for
giving effect to the provisions of that law and no such law shall be deemed to be an amendment
of this Constitution for the purposes of article 368.
*******
Establishment
and
constitution of
Supreme Court.
Constitution
of High
Courts.
All-India
services.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India
————
(Shri Santokh Singh Chaudhary, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—4391LS(S3)—13.01.2020.