i

CLAUSES

CHAPTER 1

PRELIMINARY
1. Short title, extent and commencement,
2. Definitions and interpretation,
CHAPTER If
hivewitons NOT PATENTABLE
3. What are not inventions.

4. Inventions relating fo ctomic energy not patentable.

5, Inventions where only methods or processes of manufacture
and substances when produced by such methods or pro-
cesses patentable,

CHAPTER III
APPLICATIONS FOR PATENTS

6. Persons entitled to apply for patents,
7. Forra of application.
8. Information and undertaking regarding foreign. applications.
9. Provisional and complete specifications.
10. Contents of specifications, |
11. Priority dates of claims of a complete specification.

CHAPTER IV

EXAMINATION OF APPLICATIONS
12. Examination of application.
13. Search for anticipation by previous publication and by prior
claim,

93.0)



(8)

CLAUSES

4, Consideration of report of examiner by Controller.

15. Power of Controller io refuse or require amended applica-
tions in certain cases.

16. Power of Controller to make orders respecting division of
application,

17, Power of Controlier to make orders respecting dating of
application. ।

18, Powers of Controller in cases of anticipation.
19. Powers of Controller in case of potential infringement.

2. Powers of Controller to make orders regarding substitution
of applicants, ete.

21, Time for putting application in order for acceptance.
22, Acceptance of complete specification.
48. Advertisement of acceptance of complete specification.
24. Effect of acceptance of complete specification.
CHAPTER V
OPPosITION TO GRANT OF PATENT
25. Opposition to grant of patent.

26. In cases of “Obtaining” Controller may treat application as
application of opponent.

37. Refusal of patent without opposition.

28. Mention of inventor as such in patent.

CHAPTER VI

ANTICIPATION m4 1
39. Anticipation by previous publication.
38. Anticipation by previous communication to Government.
31, Anticipation by public display, ete.
32. Anticipation by public working.
33. Anticipation by use and publication after provisional speci-
fication.
34, No anticipation if circumstances are only as described in
sections 29, 30, 31 and 32.

CLAvsEs

CHAPTER Vir

Provisions fur seckecy oF om

IY LNVENTIONS

35. Secrecy directions z

lating to inventions relevant for defence
Purposes, |

36. Secrecy directions 10 be periodically reviewed,

37. Consequences of secrecy directions. i

38. Revocation of Secréey directions and extension of time,

39, Residents not to apply for patents outside India without
prior permission.

40, Liability for contravention of section 85 or section 39.

41. Finality of orders of Controller and Central Government.

42. Savings respecting disclosure to Government.
CHAPTER VIII

GRANT AND SEALING OF PATENTS AND RIGHTS CONFERRED THEREBY

43. Grant and sealing of patent,

44. Amendment of Patent granted to deceased applicant.

45. Date of patent.
46. Form, extent and effect of patent
47. Rights of patentees,

48. Patent rights not infringed when used for certain purposes.

49. Patent rights not intringed when used on foreign vessels,
etc,, temporarily or accidentally in India,
50. Rights of co-owners of patents.

51. Power of Controller to give directions to co-owners,

52. Grant of patent to true and first inventor where it has been
obtained by another in fraud of him,

53. Term of patent,



(ws)
CLAUSES
CHAPTER 1X

ENTS OF ADDITION

54. Patents of addition.
55. Term, of patents of addition.
56. Validity of patents of addition,
CHAPTER X
AMENDMENT OF APPLICATIONS AND SPECIFICATIONS

57. Amendment of application and specification before Con-
troller.

58. Amendment of specification before High Court,
59. Supplementary provisions as to amendment of application
or specification,
~ CHAPTER XI
RESTORATION OF TAPSED PATENTS
90. Applications for restoration of lapsed patents.

61. Procedure for disposal of applications for restoration of
lapsed patents.

62. Rights of patentees of lapsed patents which have been
restored.

CHAPTER जा
SURRENDER AND REVOCATION OF PATENTS
63. Surrender of patents. 7
64, Revocation of patents.

65. Revocation of patent or amendment of complete specf-
fication on directions from Central Government in eases
relating to atomic energy.

66. Revocation of patent in public interest,
CHAPTER XIII
REcIsteR OF PATENTS
67. Register of patents and particulars to be entered therein.

68. Assignments. ete., not to be valid unless in writing and
“registered.

+ 69. Registration: of assignments, tansmissions, etc.

70. Power of registered grantee or proprietor to deal with
patent

ary
Ww)

73. Controller ang othey ofticers.
74, Patent olfice and its branches.

75, Restrictions on employees of patent office as to right or
interest in patents,

78. Officers and sinployees not to furnish information, ete.
CHAPTER XV
Powers of ContROLLER GENERALLY
71. Controller to have corisin powers of a civil court.
78, Power of Controller to correct clerical errors, ete.

79. Evidence how to be given and powers of Cantroller in
respect thereof.

80. Exercise of discretionary powers by Controller.
81. Disposal by Controller of applications for extension of time.

CHAPTER XVI

WorKING OF PATENTS, COMPULSORY LICENCES, LICENCES OF RIGHT AND

REVOCATION
82. Definitions of “patented articles” and “patentee”,

83. General principles applicable to working of patented inven-
tions.

84, Cornpulsory licences.

85. Matters to be taken into account in granting compulsory
licences,

86. Endorsement of patent with the words “Licences of right”.

87. Certain patents deemed to be endorsed with the words
“Licences of right”,



&)
QLAUSES है
88. Effect of endorsement of patent with the words “Licences

of right”. :
89, Revocation of patents by the Controller for non-working.

90. When reasonable requirements of the public deemed not
satisfied.

91. Power of Controller to adjourn applications for compulsory
licences, etc., in certain cases.

92. Procedure for dealing with applications under sections 84,
86 and 89.

93. Powers of Controller in granting compulsory licences.
94. General purposes for granting compulsory licences.
95. Terms and conditions of compulsory Ucences.

96. Licensing of related patents.

97. Special provision for compulsory licences on notification
py Central Government.

98. Order for licence to operate as a deed between parties con-
cerned.
CHAPTER XVII
Use OF INVENTIONS FOR PURPOSES OF GOVERNMENT AND ACQUISITION OF
YNVENTIONS BY CENTRAL GOVERNMENT
99. Meaning of use of invention for purposes of Government.
100, Power of Central Government to use inventions for pur
poses of Government.
101. Rights of third parties in respect of use of invention for
purposes of Government.
108, Acquisition of inventions and patents by the Central
Government.
103. Reference to High Court of disputes as to use for purposes
of Government.
CHAPTER XVIII
Surrs CONCERNING INFRINGEMENT OF PATENTS

104. Jurisdiction.
105. Power of court to make declaration as to non-infringement,

CLAUSES

106.

197.

110.

111,

112,

413.

114.

115.

116.
117.

118.

119.
120.
121,
122.
123.

. Reliefs in suits for in

9. Right of exelusive licensee to take proceedings

of groundless threats

Defences, ete., in suits for i ena,

gement.

infringement.

Right of licensee under section 84 to take proceedings
against infringement,

Restriction on power of court to grant damages or account
of profits for infringement,

Restriction on power of court to grant injunction in certain
cases,

Certificate of validity of specification and costs of subse-
quent suiis for infringement thereof.

Relief for infringement of partially valid specification.

Scientific advisers.
CHAPTER XIX
APPEALS

Appeals.
Procedure for hearing of appeals. \

CHAPTER XX

PENALTIES
Contravention of secrecy provisions relating to certain
inventions.
Falsification of entries in register, ete.
Unauthorised claim of patent rights,
Wrongful use of words “patent office”.
Refusal or failure to supply information.

Practice by non-registered patent agents

Offences by companies.



{will}

CLAUSES

Parmys £02

125. Register of patent agents.

426. Qualifications jor registration ७5 patant agents.

127, Rights of patent agents.

verification of documents by

128. Subscription and certain
patent agents.

129. Restrictions oP practice as patent agents.

al from register of patent agents and restoration.

ier to refuse to deal with certain agents.

arsons authorised to act

130. Remov:

131. Power of Conire
as

132. Savings in respect of other p
agents.
CHAPTER XXI1

JnvTERNATIONAL ARRANGEMENTS

nm as to convention coun
vuntries not providing fo:

133. Notificatior tries.

134, Notification as to ca

135. Convention applications.
ions relating

rr reciprocity.

to convention applications.

136. Special provis
137. Multiple priorities.

138. Supplementary provisions 4!
of Act to apply te conve!

CHAPTER जहा

MiscELLANEOUS

ड to convention applications.
139. Other provisions tion applications.

140. Avoidance of certain restrictive conditions.
141. Determination of certain contracts.

142. Fees.
143. Restricti

144. Reports of exe
145. Publication of patented

ons upon publication of specifications.

miners to be confident

inventions.

jal.

Ci ausms

rvice of 1६0४

. Security
security For costs

ie
Si. fransnt
ausinission of ovders of
7 . Ys OF cuurts to Cor
50. Svoneeiseion - Controller,
0 06 ४0१९४ o

+ €९., aud 1
५ Gud 19080

dos. 481 0777:

huction ef patent

95. Re, 0. @ 8
9. Repor (
sof (6॥16100 :७ be qla
@ placed (0६01५
fore Darian ev
।

to bing

ए

ren

of eut ६0 se! Bef ad Stich
ay
neut to sell oy use
<I &

if Pow u tod
मु Wer vo :
gh Courts to x

rules.

150, Power of ©
ver cf Central Gov

160. Rules te —

ment io mak:
0 make rules.

be pla a
placed before Parliament

1 provis
P ions with
amed to have he a * ct to certain cali
been refused under Act 2 applications
° © of 1911

of Act 2 of 13
रे 2 of 1511 ०
and savings, il ia so far

it relates to patents

18३
163. Amend:

ut of Act 43 of 195%,

THE

द SCHEDULE,



|
|

ANS COS

पका ile |.

by Periamient in the

1301 120 200
5 है, (7) This Act may be called the Pa
(2) 1६ extends to the whole of India

(8) Tt shall come into force on such date
ment may, by notification in the (3:

Provided that different

70 provisions of this Act, and
the commencement of ¢
the comin

His
into force of that prov:

ision,

1 velatinag te

Mighleenth Yoax ता

1967 Short tithe

he Central Govern:
MWilcial Gazette, appe

Gates may be appointed for
any reference in any sueb pr

Act shall be construed as a velerence ta

Mo. 120 of 196

MERE.

ihe

extent and
eommenges
mene

different
visi

m to



My perso inebad.

fu
af chat perso:

iintive or

(9) SComiraer™

Designs 2y

Drade
fo}
patent made hy

an applicalion for

virtue of

(0) )
under sud-section

1 conntry” paeans

count
(7) of seetion 153:

noi

ai

Meawing assign
1४ Code of Civil Proced: 905;

to ther ex.

Irs,

ve hoenee irom
ch confers on the pies

sed by hin
ing the paientce)
apd “exclusi

A partentee

and

the licensee

Peet ot the patented inye:
constried according?

” means any sul

estance intended for the

cents as an

use of

babies articte food oy

er conya.
d

k:;

(2) “Government undertaking” — moans any industrjal
nodertaking carri

of the Government, or
Gi) by 2 corporation estab]

hed by a Centr 1, Provin.
cial or State Act, which is owned or conirofied by ६ Gov.
eriument, or
(it) by a Government comy g ined in section Bry
of the Companies Act, 1956,

1 of 1996.

and includes the
¥ University «

Coun

iL of Scieny
Slabtished by
eastitation for scien
Rolly or for the m

fic and Indus
vin Indie and
‘fic or technical ecu

ajor part hy the Government

SON which is ihanccrt

6) “High Coure

Union y Of Uelbi and the
Uimachil Pradesh. the ILgi Co :

है 8 2३

and includes

and an alleged inv

serts the es

of the medicines or subst

5

other

vation of plants;

G73 in veiation to 1
the Union territory of Tripuy

Ua grel

Zu,
to the Unien territe ry of the

९ wh का (|
mon territory of the L
the Higt

SDA en,

10348.

In relation to the 1]

ए and Ami

coaddiie
3 Court of Kev,

fe} to veletion lo the Union ter
and Din and the Union territory of Dade
tbe Uigh Court of Bomhay;

(vi) in relation to the Uniat

vermtory of T
the High Court of Madrias;

mehoherry,

(726) in relation lo the Union ie:

ritery of  Charel
the High Court of Punjab and पे,

arvana; and

(vii) in relation

10 any other Stale, the High Cuurt |
६8: State;

‘oe
17) “invention” mearig any New and nsetul—

(3 art, process. method 97 manner of manulaetat

ia) machine, apparatus or otner a

rticle;

एस) substance produced by manufacture,

any new and useful improve;

Ment of any of then,
tion;

(A) “legal representative” means a person wha in law repre.
tate of a deceased person;

(7) “medicine or drug” include:

(@) all medicines for interne

‘al or external use of human
beings or animals,

(i) all subs
diagnos:

ances Intended to be use
» treatment, mitigation oy pre
human beings or animals,

a for or in the
vention of diseases in

(#2) all substances intence.
maintenance of pubi
of any epidemic dise

(iv) all chemi
१७ intermediat

d to be used for or in the
health, or the prevention ar control
ase among human beings

er animals,
ave ordinarily useg
manufacture af any
ances ahove referred to,
does not include insectic;

eal substances whieh)
es in the preparation or

९, germicide, fungicide

OV
subsiance intended to he user

d for the protectian or pre



4

Gin} “patent” means a patent granted under this Act and
inchades for tie purgoses of sections 4, 49, 5 :
Ob, 63, 63, 66, 68, 69, 70, 78, 134, 140, 15
XVI, XVI and a valent
Indian Patents and Desi

(

§i, 52, 34, 95.

37, 58, BA and 156

Chaplers

anted under the

“patent agent” ineaus a person for the time being
under this Act as a patent agent;

tev

(०) “patented article” and “patented process” mean respec
an article or process in respect of which a patent is in

livel
fore

(p) “patentee” means the person for the time being entered
on the register as the grantee oy proprietor of the patent;

(व) “patent of addition” means 9 patent granted in accord-
ance with section 54;

(r) “patent off
seetion 74:

meang the patent olfice referred to in

{s) “person” includes the Government;

(६) “person intere

sted” includes 2 on engaged in, or in
promoting research In the same field as that fo which the
invention relates;

हु fit) “prescribed” means, in relation to proceedings belore a
High Court. prescribed by rules made by the High Court, and
in other cases, prescribed by rules made under this Act;

(७) “p ibed manner” includes the payment of the pres-
cribed fee;

ul (we) “priority date” has the meaning assigned to it by section

(@) "register means the register of patents referred to in
section 67;
हु (y #प्राएए and first inventor” does not inctude either the first
importer of an invention into India, or a person to whom an
invention js first communicated from outside India.

(2) In this Act, unless the context

otherwise
reference—

requir

any

(a) to the Controller shall be construed as including a
veference 10 any officer discharging the functions of the Con-
troller in pursuance of sub-section (2) of section 73;

हि (8) to the patent office shall be construed as including a
reference to any branch office of the patent office, हु

Sof 1991

in

15

0
oh

30

35

«
1०
> °
20
| हु
il
|

oe

fAPTER 1

are nol inventions withiy the raga

The tollows

or which claims

staplished natural law,

(a) an invention which is ir!
ary io well

obvivusly conlr

iended use of which

or injurious le public

(b) an invention the primary 07
y ar movali

would be cont
health;

(०) the mere discovery of a scientific principle or the for-

raulation of an abstract theory

or new use for

(0) che mere discovery of any new Prop! rt
a known substance or of the mere new Use of a Wrown process,

machine or apparat

ixture resulting
compane

(९) a substance obtained by a mere ad
only in the aggregation of the properties of the
thereof or a process for producing such substance;

(f) the mere arra ngement or re-arzangement or duplication
of known devices each Iunctioning independency ef one anothe.
in a known way;

sting applicable during the

(9) a method or pracess of t
apparatus

process of ™m sufacture for rendering the machine
or other equipment more efficient of for the improvement or
restoration of the existing machine, apparatus of other eyuip-
ment or for the improvement or control of manufactur

(h) a method of agriculture or horticulture;

(i) any process for the medicinal, surgical, curative,
lactic or other treatment of human beings or any process for 3
similar treatment of animals or plants to render them free of
disease or to increase their economic value or that of their
products.

4. No patent shal! be granted in respect of an invention relating
to atomic energy falling within sub-section (1) of section 20 of the

33 of 1962 Atomic Energy /\ct, 1962.

Inventions
relating

10 atomic
energy not
patent.
able,

~



Lwentions
re

only
Tetveds
PO.

at
Teanutac-
ture and
sbstances
when pro.
duced by

OF pros
eesses,
patent
8912,

1४
entitled
10 apply
for

patents,

Form of
applica.
tion.

5. In the case of inveations—-

intended for use, छा eavable of he

(a) claiming substance:
tiny used. as food or as inericine or dra

alloys, optical
pounds}

cal processes (inclucin
and inter-metallic ९

in respect of claims for the mothiedt

the patent shall be granted only
01118 for the sub

or process of manulaclure snd in respect al ८
stances when produced by such methed or prove:

CHAPTER JLT to
APPLICATIONS FOR PATENTS
6. (7) Subject iu the provisions contained in section 134, an
y any of

application for ¢ patent for an favenlion may be made

(he fellowing persons. thai is to s

(a) by any person claiming to be the true and first in- 1५
vertor of the invention;

(b) by any person being the assignee of the person claim-
ing to be the true end first inventor in respect of the right to
raake such an application;

(०) by the legal representative of any deceased person
who immediately before his death was entitled to make such 29
an application,

(2) An application under sub-section (/) may be made by any
of the persons referred to therein either alone or jointly with any

w
un

other person.

7. (४) Every application for a patent shall be for one vention
only and shall be made in the prescribed form and filed in the
patent office

(2) Where the application is made by virtue of an as:
of the tight to apply for a patent for the invention, the:
furnished with the application or within such period
prescrived after the filing of the application, proof of the rignt to
make the application.

(3) Every application under this section shall state that the 5
Applicant is in possession of the invention and shall name the owner

mment

7

claiming to b rSOE

ine applica

the true and first inventor; and whe:
‘ the epp!

specification,

8. (2) Where an applicant for a patent under this Act ie proe Informa-
secuting either alone or jointly with any oth moan appii- ton and
cation for a patent in any countcy outside Ind vespect of the eee

yo same or substantially the same invention, or where to his know- regard
ledge such an application is eing prosecuted by some person ing

through whom he claims or by some person deriving title from him, loreign

he shall file slong with his application— applica-
tions,

(६) a statement setting out the name of ६] country
15 where the application is being prosecut. the serial number
and date of filing of the application and such other particulars
as may be preseribed; and
(8) an undertaking that, up to the
of his complete specification Aled : » he would keep the
20 Controller informed in writing, from time to time, of details of
the nature referred to in clause (4) in respect of overy other
application relating to the same or substantially the same in-
vention, if any, filed in any country outside India subsequently
to the filing of the statement referred to in the aforesaid clause,
25 within eight weeks from the date of the matter coming to his
knowledge.

@) The Controller may slso require the applicant to furnish, as
far as may be available to the applicant, details relating to the
objections, if any, taken to any such applicstin s is referred to

30 in sub-section (2) on the ground that the invention is lacking in
novelty or patentability, the amendments effected in the specifica-~
tions, the claims allowed in respect thereof and such other parti~
culars as he may require.

ie of the aeceptance

9. (1) Where an application fox a patent (aot being a convention Provi-
35 application) is accornpanieg by a provisional specification, a complete sional
specification shall be filed within iwelve months from the date of व tere
filing of the application, and if the complete specification is not eo कल्प,
filed the application shall be deemed to be abandoned: cations,
Provided that the complete specification may be filed at any
4o time after twelve months but within fifteen months from the date
aforesaid, if a request to that effect is made to the Controller an.”
the prescribed fee is paid on or before the date on which the cost.
plete specification is Sled.



कह claim cr clai

; (9) The claim or
हि to a single invention
3 hased on the matter

8

pase of the same

applications in the
respect

nal specifications m
ich one ig 2 mo!
she whole of such
ention and may 5
one complete
ional specifice-

(2) Where two or maore
nt are accompanied by
yhich are cognate or of ¥
Controller is of opinion the
to constitute a single i
allo

provi:
(6) A declaration

such eases as may be prescribed, be
(४ re) fuy
5 etion o thin

te specification ar w:
Dreseribed after the filing of that spe hes
छू at speci

appl
of inventions ४
of another and the
jnventions are such as
properly be included in one patent, he may
specification te be filed in respect of all such prov

tions.

vention sh.

wibed,

may

i
0:

with the eomp

ro

(7) Subject to the foregoing prev.

Specification filed after a Sions of this sectic:

Spec provisional if
; ion 1 : १ siomal specific
am respect of developments of ditions
vas described in the provisiona,

. » & complete
०0 additier ation may include claims
11088 to, the inveation which

dditi . 1 specifi :
additions in respect of whieh tt pecificstion, being developments or

(3) Where an application for a patent (not being 8 convention
) is accompanied by 8 specification purporting to be a com~
if the applicant so requests al

10

application

plete specification, the Controller may, हैं हि हक के |
any time before the acceplance of the application, jrect that such 75 the provi हे ; applicant sy n |
spesification shall be treated for the purposes of this Act as a provi- patent of section 6 to makes spon be entitled under |
sional specification and ceed with the application accordingly. E application for a
(4) Where a complete ecification has been filed in pursuance 35 M1. (2) There shail be a priov
of an application for 8 patent accompanied by 8 provisional specifi- हि specification. tity date for each claim of a complet
eation or by 8 specification treated by virtue of a direction under @ & ह plete Priotity |
sub-section (3) as a provisional specification, the Controller may, 20 whieh pack claim of a complete specificati cane
if the applicant so requests at any time pefore the acceptance of ne applicant considers to be the man shall indicate the date of a
the application, cancel the provisional specification and post-date 20 हि (3) Where a complete speci priority date of that claim, complete
the application to the date of filing of the complete specification. single application accompanied mee is filed in pursuance of oeecike
Contents of — 10. (1) Every specification, whether provisiona! or complete, shal? (a) ॥ provisional os a cation,
speciica describe the invention and shall begin with @ title sufficiently > हु ‘al specification; or :
to which the jnvention relates. 25 . (9) a specification which is tr {
tion under sub-section is treated by virtue of a direc i

indicating the subject-matter
(2) Subject to any rules that may be made in this pehalé under 25 tion, (3) of section 9 as ॥ आते
this Act, drawings may, and shail, if ihe Controfler so requires, he ° provisional s

supplied for the purposes of any specification, whether complete or

pecifica- |

and the claim is fai ased on the matter disclose e ica
अं d the cl; irly based 2
; Bie ly ta) mt 2 disclosed in th specifi
Bes 7

previsional; and any drawings so supplied shall, unless the Control- claim chat is
the 4 5, n si se ¥ +
che specification, 30 ali be the date of the fling of 2 गा date of that :
ant specification,

(4) Where the com

jer otherwise directs, be deemed to form part of
in pursuance of two

pe construed 3°
Plete specification is fled or

proceeded with

and references in this Act to a specification shall
necordingly.
(3) If in any particular case th

application should be further supplemente
alleged to constilute 2p

of anything illustrating the invention or हि
invention, such model or sample as he may require shall be furnished 35
before the acceptance of the application, but such model or sample

shall not be deemed to form part of the specification.
(4) Every complete specification shall-
(a) fully and particularly describe the invention and
operation or use and the metho

(b) disclose the best method of perfo:
which is known to the applicant and for
to claim protection; and

e Controller considers that an
ad py a model or sample

its

ming the invention
which he is entitled

3 by which it is to be performed; 40

or more applications

entioned in sub set

oO. tier disclosed—

हि in one of tho:

35 claim shall be the date
by that specification:

specifications as are m

है arcompanied py 5
fairly based on the ma‘ panied by such

-section (3) and the claim is

९ speci ns, the priority e of that
‘pecifications, th lority date ०:
nf filing of the appl. cation accompant
ompanied

(8) partly in one and partly in

that claim shall! be the date of
e of ¢

ac i
companied by the Specification 9:

another, the priority date of

he filing of
a th 10911
f the later date. application

sl se



Exami-
mation

of appli-
cation.

10

(5) Where the complete specification has Seen filed in pursuance
of a further app’ m made by virtue of sub-section (1} of section
16 and the claim is fairly based on the matter disclosed in any of
the earlier specifi ns, visional Gr complete, as the case may
be, the priority date of that elaim shall be the date of the filing of
that specification in which the matter was Srst disclosed.

(6) Wheve, under the foregoing provisions of this section, any
claim of a complete specification would, but for the provisions of
this sub-section, have two or more priority dates, the priovity date
of that clairn shall be the earlier or earliest of those dates.

(7) In any case to which sub-section (3), (4), (5) and (6) do
not apply, the priority date of a claim shall, subject to the provisions
of section 137, be the date of filing of the complete specification.

(8) The reference to the date of the filing of the application or
of the complete specification in this section shall, in cases where
there has been a- post-dating under section 9 or section 17 or, as
the case may be, an ante-dating under section 16, be a reference
to the date as so post-dated or ante-dated.

(9) A claim in a complete specification of a patent shall not be
invalid by reason only of—
(a) the publication or use of the invention so far as claim-
ed in that claim on or after the priority date of such claim; or
(b) the grant of another patent which claims the invention,
so far as clairned in the first mentioned claim, in a claim of the
same or a later priority date.

CHAPTER IV
EXAMINATION OF APPLICATIONS

12. (1) When the complete specification has been filed in respect
of an application for a patent, the application and the specification
relating thereto shall be referred by the Controller to an examiner
for making a report to him in respect of the following matters,
namely: —

(a) whether the application and the specification relating
thereto are in accordance with the requirements of this Act
and of any rules made thereunder;

(9) whether there is any lawful ground of objection to the
grant of the patent under this Act in pursuance of the appli-
eation;

25

30

35

(0) whether the ]
ant is the
this Act; and

5 {e) swy other matter whic

ification

(2) ‘The examiner to whom the api dion and the
relating thereto are referred under sub-section (4) shall ordinarily
make the report to the Controller within a period of eighteen, months

from the date of such reference.

10-13. (J) The examiner to whom an application for a patent is rex
ferred under section 12 shall make investigation, for the purpose of
ascertaining whether the invention so fay as claimed in any clain
af the complete specification—

(a) has heen anticipated by publication before the date of
filing of the applicant's complete specification in any specifica-

15
tion filed in pursuance of an application for a patent made in
India and dated on or after the ist day of January, 1952:
(8) is claimed in any claim of any other complete specifi-
cation published on or after the date of filing of the applicant’s
20 complete specification, being a specification filed in pursuance

of ‘gn application for a patent made in India and dated before
or claiming the priority date earlier than that date.

(2) The examiner shall, in addition, make such investigation as

the Controller may direct for the purpose of ascertaining whether

25 the invention, so far as claimed in any claim of the complete specifi-

cation, has been anticipated by publication in India or elsewhere in

any document other than those mentioned in sub-section (7) before
the date of filing of the applicant’s complete specification,

(3) Where a complete specification is amended under the provi-
30 sions of this Act before it has been accepted, the amended specificas
tion sball be examined and investigated in like manner as the origi-
nal specification.
investigations required under section
in any way to warrant the
shall be incurred by the
of by reason of, o¢ in con-
report

(4) The examination and

12 and this section shail not be deemed

35 validity of any patent, and ne liability

” Central Government or any officer ther

nection with, any such examination or investigation or any
or other proceedings consequent thereon,

Search
ई anti.
cipation
by pre~
vious
publica~
tien and
by, prior
claim,



Conside-
ation of

Power
of Cone
troller

to refuse
or require
amend-
ed
applic:
tions in
certain
casen,

Power
of Con-
troller
to make
orders
respect~
ing divi-
sion of
applica-
tion.

satisfied that the application cr
pecification filed in pursuance thereaf dces not nply with
the requirements of this Act or of any rules made thereunder, the
Controller may either-

(6) refuse to proceed with the application; or

(9) require the application, specification or drawings to be
amended to his satisfaction before he proceeds with the appli-
cation.

(2) If it appears to the Controiler that the invention claimed in
the specification is not an invention within the meaning of, or is not
patentable under, this Act, he shall refuse the application.

(3) If it appears io the Controller that any invention in respect
af which aa application for a patent is made might be used in any
inanner contrary fo law, he may refuse the application, unless the
specification is amended by the insertion of such dis-claimer in res-
pect of that use of the invention, or such other reference ie the Hie-
gality thereof, as the Controller thinks fit.

16. (1) A persom who has made an application for a patent under
this Act may, at any time before the acceptance of the complete
specification, if he so desires, or wilh a view to remedy the objection
raised by the Controller on the ground that the claims of the com-
plete specification
application in respect of an invention disclosed in the provisional
or compleie specification already filed in respect of the first mention-
ed application.

(2) The further application under sub-section (7) shall be ac-
companied by a complete specification, but such complete specifica-
tion shall not include any matter not in substance disclosed in the
complete specification filed in pursuance of the first mentioned
application.

late to more than one invention, file a further 3

15

tion in pm
and the

the priority date

ith as a subslantive applic

prov 05 Of
and hefore

20 section to a date later than six
actually made or weuld, t
emed to have heen made.

(2) Where an anplicstion 128 drawings} is
required io be amended unde: e (b) of sub-section (7) of
section 15, the application or specification shall, if the Controller
so directs, be deemed to been made on the
requirement is complied with or
on is returned te the app’
tex comply

ate on which the
there the application or speci
ant, on the date on which it is re-Sled
ihe requirement.

30 18. (1) Where it appe

claimed

to the Controlier that the invention 80
far as of the complete specification has been at~
ticipated in the manner referred to in clause (a) of sub-section (1)
ov sub-section (2) of section 13, he may refuse to accept the com-
plete specification unless the applicant—

in

(6) shows to the sati: tion of the Controller that the
priority date of the claim of his complete specification is noi later
than the date on which the relevant document was published; or

(6) am
the Controller,

ion of

orders
respect-
ing
dating
of anpli-
cation,

Por
of Con-
tro‘ler

in vases
of anti+
cipation.

|


Powers
of Con-
troller in
case of
potential
infringe-
ment,

14

aon is claimed
spacification “xed io in clause
+ he may, subject to the provi-
that a reference tc that other
eried by way of notice to the public in the 5
it’s cornplete specification unless within such time as may be

plicant shows to the satisfaction of the Controller
ty 8 claim is not later than the pricrity
id other specification; or 10

y date of hy
m of the s

4 atisfaction
ate speciScation is amended to the satisfacti

the Controller, as a result of an investigation
: otherwise,--

(3)
under
é: i i i: the I
fa} that the invention so far as claimed in any claim oF pe 5
cant’s cor i i a ot!
applicant’s complete specification has been claimed ix any nee
complete specification referred to in clause (a) of sul
(1) of section 13; and

(b) that such other complete specification was published on
or after the priority date of the applicant’s claim;

then, unless it is shown to the satisfaction of the Controler ate
priority date of the applicant’s claim is not later than | om Hovity
date of the claim of that specification, the provisions ot * “se on
(2) shall apply thereto in the same manner as they apply to mae a5
fication published on or after the date of filing of the app!
complete specif

% 5 rder of Controller under sub-section (2) or sub-

(4) Any order of the Controller under "they complete
section (3) directing the insertion of a reference to an! we
specification shail be of no effect unless and until the other paten 30
granted.

19, (1) il, im consequence of the investigations required by the
foregoing provisions of this Act or of proceedings under section 25, it
appears to the Controller that an invention in respect of pica an
application for a mt has been made cannot Pe oe te 58

ial risk of infri i i ny other p: .
substantial risk of infringement of a claim of ai ; h
may direct that a reference to that other patent shall be inserted in

ation by way of not

(७) the &
that th
5 the said claim of the ot!

(9) the complete specitication ig amended
of the Controller;

ces ie the satisfactions,

(2) Where, after a reference to another patent has been inserted
in a complete specification in pursuance of 8 direction under sub:
70 section (1)—

(a) that other patent is revoked or otherwise ceases to be
in force; or

(b) the specification of that other patent is amended by the
deletion of the relevant claim; or

{cj it is found, in proceedings before the court or the Con-

troller, that the relevant claim of that other patent 18 invalid or

18 not infringed by any working of tho applicant’

the Controller may, on the application of the
reference to that other patent.

8 invention,
applicant, delete the

20 20. (7) If the Controller
eribed manner at any time
virtue of any assignment or
cant or one of the applicani

is satisfied, on a claim made in the pres-
before a patent has been granted, that by
agreement in writing made by the appli-
ts for the patent or by operation of law,
the claimant would, if the patent were then granted, be entitled
25 thereto or to the interest of the applicant therein, or to an undivided

share of the patent or of that interest, the Controller may, subject

to the provisions of this section, direct that the application shal

(2) Mo such direction as aforesaid shall be given by virtue of
any assignment or agreement made by one
applicants for a patent except with the co:
applicant or applicants,

35 (3) No such direetion as aforesaid shall be given by virtue of
any assignment or agreement for the assi ev
an invention unless—

(a) the invention is indentified therein b:

y reference to the
number of the application for the Patent; or

Powers
of Con-
troller

to make
orders
regard.
ing substi.
tution of
appli-
cants,
ete,



Time for
putting
applica-
tion in
order
tor
accept-
ance,

18

{b} there is produced to the Controller an acknowledgment
by the person by whom the assignment or agreernent was made
that the assignment or agreement relates to the invention in
respect of which that application is made; or

(2) the rights of the claimant in respect of the invention 5
have been finally established by the decision of a court; or

(व) the Controller gives directions for enabling the appli-
cation to proceed or for regulating the manner in which it
should be proceeded with under sub-section (5).

(4) Where one of two or more joint applicants for a patent dies 10
at any time before the patent has been granted, the Controller may.
upon a request in that behalf made by the survivor or survivors,
and with the consent of the legal representative of the deceased,
direct that the application shall proceed in the name of the survivor
or survivors alone. is

(5) If any dispute arises between joint applicants for a patent
whether or in what manner the application should be proceeded
with, the Controller may, upon application made to him in the
prescribed manner by any of the parties, and after giving to all
parties concerned an opportunity to be heard, give suei: direciions 20
as he thinks fit for enabling the application to proceed in the name
of one or more of the parties alone or for regulating the manner
in which it should be proceeded with, or for both those purposes,
as the case may require.

21, (1) An application for a patent shall be deemed to have been 25
abandoned unless within fifteen months from the date on which
the first statemeni of objections to the application or complete
specification is forwarded by the Controller to the applicant or
within such longer period as may be allowed under the following
provisions of this section tke applicant has complied with all the 30
requirements imposed on him by or under this Act, whether in con-
nection with the ermplete specification or otherwise in relation

to ihe anplieation

Explanation—Where the upplication or any specification or, in
the case of a convention application, any document filed as part of
the application has been revurned to the applicant by ine Controller
in the course of the proceedings, the applicant shall not be deemed
to have complied with such requirements unless and until he has
re-filed it,

a
Fs
&
=
&

(2) The period

in
the pres manner
a, be extended for a

१६
Sas

ion of ine period so spec
period so
ended pe

od}, so, however, that the ‘otal period for
with the requirem of the Controller does not
mouths from the daie on which the objection:
section {7} are forwarded to the applicant

ed to in sub.

ह (9) It at the expiration cf the period of fifleen months specified
yo 19 sub-section (1} or the extended period— 7

; (a) an appeal to the High Court is pending in respect of
the application for the patent for the main invention, or :
(6) in the case of an application for a patent of addition, an
appeal to the High Court is pending in respect of either that
15 application or the application for the main invention,
the time within which the requirements of the Controller shall be
complied with shall, on an application made by the applicant before
the expiration ot the said peviod of fifteen months or the extended
period, as the case may be, be extended until such date as the
20 High Court may determine.

a) If the time within which the 299०8) mentioned in sub-
section (3) mav be instituted has not exvired, the Controller may
extend the period of fifteen months, or as the case ray be, the ex-

tended veriod, until the expiration of such further veriod as he may
25 determine:

Provided that if an appeal has been filed during the said further
period. and the High Court has granted any extension of time for
complying with the requirements of the Controller, then, the re-
quirements may be complied with within the time granted by the

30. Court.

22. Subject to the provisions of section 21, the complete speci-
fection Went ction 21, : Accept-
ation filed in pursuance of an application for a patent may be ance of
accepted! by the Controller at any time after the applicant has com- Com.
pled with the vequiremenis mentioned in sub-section (1) of that plete
35 Section, and, if not so accepted within the period allowed under speci-
that seution for compliance with those requirements, shall ऐड ca
accepted 2s soon as may be thereafter: Hea

Provided that the applicant may make an application to the Con-
troller in the prescribed manner requesting him to postpone accep-
4० tance until such date (not being later thah eighteen months from
the date on which the objections referred to in sub-section (J) of
section 21 are forwarded to the applicant} as may be spectfied

2 tlie St tmeere—



aceep-
tance of
complete
specifi.
cation.

Réfect

of aceep~
tance of
eomplete
epecii-
cation,

Oppoat-
tion to
grant of
patient,

sion is made, the Controller

tion, and, if 8
‘ay postpone acceptance a agly
n the anceptance of a complete specification, the
notice thereof to the applicant and shall a
ctig the fect that the specificat

in the appl

CO.

ontroller
in the
aceepted, 5
i with the
din pursuance thereof shall be apen to public

drawings (li any
inspection,

24, On and froma the date of advertisement of the acceptance of
a complete specification and uniif the date of sealing of a patent in 10
respect thereot, the applicant shail have the like privileges and mghts
aa if a patent for the invention lad been sealed on the date of
udvertisement of acceptance of the complete specification:

Provided that the applicant shall not be entitled to institute any
proceedings for infringement until the patent has been sealed. a5
CHAPTER V
OPpposrilon TO GRANT OF PATENT

28, (1) At any time within four months from the date of advertise-
gnent of the acceptance of a complete specification under this Act
{or within such further period not exceeding one month in the
aggregate as the Controller may allow on application made to him
in the prescribed manner before the expiry of the four months
aforesaid) any person interested may give notice to the Controller
of opposition to the grant of the patent on any of the following
grounds, namely: —

(8) that the applicant for the patent or the person under
or through whom he claims, wrongfully obtained the invention
or any part thereof from him cr from a person under or through
whom he claims;

(b) that the invention so far as claimed in any claim of the 40
complete specification has been published before the priority
date of the claim—

(i) in any specification filed in pursuance of an appli-
cation for a patent made in India on or after the Ist day of
January, 1912; or 35

(ii) in India or elsewhere, in any other document:
Provided thai the ground specified in sub-clause (ii) shall

not be available where such publication does not constitute an
anticipation of the invention by virtue of sub-section (2) or sub-
section (3) of section 29; 40

(c) that the invention so far as claimed in any claim of the

complete specification is claimed in a claim of a complete

20

30

3S

fe

रा

@ of the appli-
19 for a patent

India,
that of

id} that
cornplote sp
priority date of that claim.

the

Explenation—For the purposes of this cl: use, an invention
relating te a process for which a patent is claimed shall be deem-
ed to have been known or used in India before the priority date
of the claim if a product made by that process had already been
imported into India before that date except where such importa-

‘ion has been for the purpose of reasonable trial or experiment
only;

(e) that the invention so far as claimed in any claim of the
compiete specification is obvious and clearly does not involve
any inventive step, having regard to the matter published as
mentioned in cleuse (6) or having regard to what was used
in India before the priority date of the applicant's claim;
है 6) that the subject of any ciaim of the complete specifioa-
tion is not an invention within the meaning of this Act, or is not
patentable under this Act; ;

1 . oat the complete specification does not sufficiently and
clear! escribe the invention or the method bh it i,
be performed; Y which 1 के 90

(hy that the applicant has failed to disclose to the Control-

ler the information required by section 8 or has furnished the in-

ormation which in any materia pal a s false to his
fe ts rticular wa:
0

है (i) that in the case of a convention application, the applica-
tion was fot made within twelve months from the date of the
rst application for protection for the invention made in a con
vention country by the applicant or a w |

ferivee Sate Pp person from whom he

but on no other ground.

हि an Where any such notice of opposition is duly given, the Con-
tro er shall notify the applicant and shall give to the applicant and
© opponment an opportunity to be heard before deciding the case

(3) The grant of a patent shall not b
r 8 e refused on th
stated in clause (c) of sub-section (2) if no patent has been pari
in pursuance of the application mentioned in that clause; and for

eR 3 ०-.



In cases
of “Ob.
taining”
Control-
Jer may
treat
applica.
tion as
applica-
tion of
oppo-
nent,

Refusal
of patent
without
opposi-
tion,

20

the purpose of any inquiry under clause (d) er clause (९) of that
sub-section, nu account shall be taken of any socret use.
26. (1) Where in any opposition proceeding under this Act—

(०) the Controller finds that the invention, 80 far as claimed
in any claim of the complete specifica was obtained frora
the opponent in the mann t owt in ela {a} of sub-section
(1) of section 23 and refuses the application on thet ground, he
may, on reguest by such opponent made in the prescribed man-
ner, direct that the application shall proceed in the meme of the
opponent as if the application and the specification had been
filed by the opponent on the date on which they were actually

filed.

(b) the Controller finds that a part of an invention described
in the complete specification was so obtained from the oppone!
and passes an order requiring thal the specification be amended
by the exclusion of that part of the invention, the opponent may,
subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), file an application
in accordance with the provisions of this Act aceompanied by a
complete specification for the grant of a patent for the inven-
tion so excluded from the applicant’s specification, and the Con-
trolier may treat such application and specification as having
been filed, for the purposes of this Act relating to the priority
dates of claims of the complete specification, on the date on
which the corresponding document was or was deemed to have
been filed by the earlier applicant, but for all other purposes
the application of the opponent shall be proceeded with as an
application for a patent under this Act.

(2) Where an opponent has, before the date of the order of the
Controller requiring the amendment of a complete specification
referred to in clause (b) of sub-section (1), filed an application for
a patent for an invention which includes the whole or a part of the
invention held to have been obtained from him and such application
js pending, the Controler may treat such application and specifica
tion in so far as they relate to the invention held to have been
obtained from him, as having been filed, for the purposes of this
Act, relating to the priority dates of claims of the complete specifica-
tion, on the date on which the corresponding document was or was
deemed to have been filed by the earlier applicant, but for all other
purposes the application of the opponent shall be proceeded with
as an application for a patent under this Act.

27. If at any time after the acceptance of the complete specifica-
tion filed in pursuance of an application for a patent and before the
grant of a patent thereon it comes to the notice of the Controller
otherwise than. in. consequence of proceedings in opposition to the

20

30

w

5

4०

oe

;
i
i

vant under seetion 25, tha’
claim of the complete sp:
priurity date cf the ciai

wa

for a patent made in India and dated on or
January, 1912;

after the Ist day of

(0) im any other docuraent in India or elsewhere,

ihe Controller may refuse to grant the patent unless, within such
lime as may be prescribed, the complete specification is amended to
TO his satisfaction:

Provided that the Controller shall not refuse to grant the patent
on the ground specified in clauye (4) if such publication does not
constitute an anticipation of the invention by virtue of sub-section
(2) or section (3) of section 29,

fb.

15 28. (1) If the Controller is satisfied, upon a request or claim made
in accordance with the provisions of this section,—

(a) that the person in respect of or by whom the request or
clan is made is the inventor of an invention in respect of which
apyilication for a patent has been made, or of a substantial part

20 of that invention; and

(0) that the application for the patent is a direct conse-
quence of his being the inventor,
the Controller shall, subject to the provisions of this section, cause
him to be mentioned as inventor in any patent granted in pursuance
25 of the application in the complete specification and in the register
of patents:
Provided that the mention of any person as inventor under this

section shal] not confer or derogate from any sights under the
patent.

30 (2) A request that any person shall be mentioned as aforesaid
may be made in the prescribed manner Ly the applicant for the
patent or (where the person alleged to he the inventor is not the
applicant or one of the applicants) by the applicant and that person,

(3) If any person [other than a person in respect of whom a re
35 quest int relation to the application in question has been made under
sub-section (2)} desires to be mentioned as aforesaid, he may make

a claim in the prescribed manner in that behalf. है
(4) A request or claim under the foregoing provisions of this
section shall be made not later than two months after the date of
go advertisement of acceptance of the complete specification or within

in Se i, ncaa ee

Men.
tion of
inven.
vor as
such in
patent.



Anticipa-

tion by
previous
publica.
ton,

42

such further period {not exceeding one month) as the Controller
may, on an application made te him in that behalf before the ex-
piraiion ए! the said period of two months and subject to the pay-
qaent of the prescribed fee, allow.

ta

(5) No request or claim under the foregoing provisions of this
section shall be entertained if it appears to the Controller that the
request or claim is based upon facts which, if proved in the case of
an opposition under the provisions of elause (9) of sub-section (1)
of section 25 by the person in respect of or by whom the request or
claim is made, would have entitled him to relief under that section. 1°

(6) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (5), where a claim is
made under sub-section (3), the Controller shall give notice of the
elaim to every applicant for the patent (not being the claimant) and
to any other person whom the Controller may consider to be interest-
ed; and before deciding upon any request or claim made under sub- 15
section (2) or sub-section (3), the Controller shall, if required, hear
the person in respect of or by whom the request or claim is made,
and, in the case of a claim under sub-section (3), any person to
whom notice of the claim has been given as aforesaid.

(7) Where any person has been mentioned as inventor in pursu- 20
ance of this section, any other person who alleges that he ought not to
have been so mentioned may at any time apply to the Controller
for a certificate to that effect, and ihe Controller may, after hearing,
if required, any person whom he may consider to be interested, issue
such a certificate. and if he does so, he shall rectify the specification 25
and the register accordingly.

CHAPTER का
ANTICIPATION

29. (1) An invention claimed in a complete specification shall not
be deemed to have been anticipated by reason only that the inven- 35
tion was published in a specification filed in pursuance of an appli-
cation for a patent made in India and dated before the Ist day of
January, 1912,

(2) Subject as hereinafter provided, an invention claimed in a
complete specification shall not be deemed to have been ee 35
by reason only that the invention was published before the priority

i
I

4

5 person from whem he de:

daie of the rel or the

applicant for 4
fa} that the matter p
he is not himself the true

(wi
his consent or the consent of any such person, a

(b} where the patentee or the applicant tor the
any person from whom he derives title learned of the 1
tion before the date of the application for the patent, or, in the
case of 2 convention application, before the date ot the appli-
cation for protection in a convention country, that ihe applica
tion or the application in the convention country, as the case
may be, was made ag soon 38 reasonably practicable thereafter:

Provided that this sub-section shall not apply if the invention
was before the priority date of the claim commercially worked in
Tndia, otherwise than for the purpose ot reasonable trisi, either by
the patentee or the applicaat for ihe patent or any person trom whom
he derives title or by eny other person with the consent of the paton-
tee or the applicant for the patent or any person from whem he
20 derives title.

15

(3) Where a complete specification is fled in pursuance of an
application for a patent made by a person being the truco and first
inventor vr deriving title from him, an invention claimed in that
specification shall not be deemed to have been anticipated by reason
only of any other application for a patent in respect of the same
invention made in contravention of the rights of that person, or by
season only that after the date of filing of that other application
the invention was used or published, without the consent of that
person, by the applicant in respect of that other application, or by
any other person in consequence of any disclosure of any invention
by that applicant.

25

29. An invention claimed in a complete specification shall not Anticipa-

be desmed to have been anticipated by reason only of the commumi- Son by
हि मु “A . ‘any person atstho- Previous
on of the invention te the Government or to any person 8५0४0 Oem

35 d by the Government to investigate the invention or its merits, CY cation to
7 of anytaing done, in consequence of such a communication, for the Govern.

purpose of the investigation. ve
i i i icipa-

31, An invention claimed in a complete specification shall not be लि a

os 4 alr ता... ion by

deemed to have been anticipated by reason only of public

(a) the display of the invention with the consent of the true aiepley
and first inventor or a person deriving title from him at an®™

1888 (B)L.S.—5.

40



Anticipa-
tion by
public
working.

Anticipa-
tion by
use and.
publica.
tion after
provi-
sional
specifica-
tion.

industrial or other exhibition to which the provisions of this
section have heen extended: by the Central Governme
notification in the Official Gazette, or the use thereof w
consent for the purpose of such an exhibition in the place where

it is held; or 5

{b) the publication of any description of the inventi in
consequence of the display or use of the invertion at any such

exhibition as aforesaid; or

(c) the use of the invention, after it has been displayed
or used at any such exhibition as aforesaid and during the 10
period of the exhibition, by any person withcut the consent of
the true and first inventor or a person deriving title from him;
or

(d) the description of the invention in a paper read by the
true and first inventor before a learned society or published 15
with his consent in the transactions of such a society:

if the application for the patent is made by the true and first inven-
tor or a person deriving tile from him not later than six months
after the opening of the exhibition or the reading or publication of
the paper, as the case may be. 20

32. An invention claimed in a complete specification shall not be
deemed to have beon anticipated by reason only that at any time
within one year before the priority date of the relevant claim of the
specificalion, the invention was publicly worked in India—

(a) by the patentee or applicant for the patent or any 25
person from whom he derives title; or

(b) by any other person with the consent of the patentee
or applicant for the patent or any person from whom he
derives title;

if the working was effected for the purpose of reasonable trial only 30
and if it was reasonably necessary, having regard to the nature of
the invention, that the working for that purpose should be effected
in public.

33. (1) Where a complete specification is filed or proceeded with
in pursuance of an application which was accompanied by a provi- 35
sional specification or where a complete specification fled along with
an application is treated by virtue of a direction under sub-section
(3) of section 9 as a provisional specification, then, notwithstanding
anything contained in this Act, the Controller shall not refuse to
grani the patent, and the patent shall not be revoked or invalidated, 4°

agdeignotbs

on or in the in the provisional gy

ch

na as OP ESBA as 8 proy ision:
Puolished is, India oy elsowhe
# ulng of that specifice

tion was used in i
time atter the date of

on,

5 {2) Where g come

€ specificati
conve! peciicat:
tt}

application, thea, notw
m this Act, the Contrall Ny
१ 207'01167 shall not refuse है
the एल shen oo walle ! ‘refuse to grant the patent and
any matter di eee © tevoked or invalidated, by reagon only that
पंत, on, +0४8त 10 any application for protect, हु
to tig, ater ed Yar i for protection in 5

*Y upon which the convention application ig founded was
६ led was

used in India op publishe: Indi. elsewhere at any time after
hed in India or

or है
he date of that application for protection. .

2 18 fled in pursuance of 3
isianding gy hing contained

34, Notwithstand:

ing anythi
ler shall not refs 8 anything containe

din this Act, the ¢
Se to ace e ie » the Controle No anti.
15 ०० to grant 2 patent amd se a pomplete Specification for a patent cipation
‘ > A paten 1 हि ite
by reason only of p shall not be revoked or invalidated {feireum.

. any circumstaie: ‘ हि stay
oF section 36 or sect Rees which, by virtue of section 29 ances

1 ‘ion 31 oF section 39, do i asdes,
हि ; sect 2. de not eons: ici *
tion of the invention claimed in the specification, गा cred.
. cribed in
sections
29, 30, 31
and 32.
CHAPTER VII
20 PROVISIONS FoR SECRECY oF CERTAIN INVENTIONS
35. (1) Where, in res i
; the comtiencemene nee of an application made before ov after
troller they तल न Of his Act for 2 patent, it appears to the Co. Franti
| Content invention is one of 4 class notified to him b he felating
i , “overnment as relevant for defer "Po: ‘on, where {2 inven
as व ernment ace purposes, or, where !? inven.
ive dint penton appears to him to be so relevant hh y tions nie
ataeett ns for Prohibiting or restricting the publication ct detent
fi ‘ respect to the invention or th पक
ec
such information to any person or class of persons specified in aes
Sheet persons specified in the
० (2) Wh Cc
| 3 cea 2 * nae en gives any such directions as are refer.
: - ion » he shall give [0 i
| an > lve notice of the appli
| ernment wns to the Central Government. and the Centar on
"3 Upon receipt of such noti i “the
vment पर i notice, consider whe:
| ऊ publi ann ee the invention would be prejudicial to the setae ne
कै rae, i upon such consideration, it appears to it th nab.
i x aah of the invention would not so Prejudice, gi af eae
ontrolle : ! woke the ०
nen ue to that effect, who shall thereupon revoke th in ‘tions
| olify the applicant accordingly. oeieeetions

!



yas wnder
may at any time

Controlier 5

# the com
and thorenpon

- ¢ the invent:
avply as if the inve! of the ¢ ;
Government, and accordingly the Controller s ae
1 Government of the direc by hi

hall give nutice to the

Centre

1 guesti hether an 13 ,

anes.” ee been given under section 35 continues to be relevant

direc- directions have been gi nue aon d by the Central Govern-
Honstobe yo. defence purposes shall be re-considered by

vention in respect of which 70

i £ such directions
मी शक ment within nine months from the gate हु seen of ene et on
viewed. and ther rvals not exceeding ५९ nths, an

4 ereafter at intervals 1 कक the as
“ae ae ae eoustderation it appears to the Central Governme t thats
an ti ia of the invention would no longer be pret el
fete of India it shall forthwith give notice to the otro हे nen
है ‘the Controller 3} : irectior -
Gin ana the Controller shall thereupon revoke the direc
ingly a g nt
viously given by him. ; scection (0), २०
गण esult of every re-consideration under sub section a
mount ithi nd 1!
ne om vnicated to the applicant within such time a
shall be ८: ni ts is
manner as may be prescribed. ५, tome
any directions under section 35 are in for
Conse. 37, (7) So long as ny
or. secrecy in respect of an application— ; suming to seuont 35
te S der re! rg 425
Girec- (6) the Controller shall not pass an 0:
bons,

the same; and 7
i i i Act, no
(0) notwithstanding anything contained in गज panced n°
appeal shall lie from any order of the Control
see ene subject to the directions, 30
vi that the application may, subject ¢ evens.
eee tho stage of the acceptance of the compe'e 0,
tion, b th acceptance shall not be advertised nor the soe in Hr
वश लिंक and no patent shall be granted in pursuance of the apr
publi a ¥ a

cation. हु
(2) Where a complete specification filed in ursuance of an appl 35
ion for a patent for an invention in respect of w rections
have been given under section 35 is accepted during the ९
in fo ce of the directions, then~ i.
nin (a) if, during the continuance in force of. the aie fons. any ५०
the invention is made by or on behalf of. o1 tot ws at
of the Government, the provisions of sections 100,

ap

granied for the inve:

as ifthe patent had been

Government that the appli
d hardship by re

of the

5 orce of the direc ons, the Central Governrnent
May meke to } fen payment {if any) by way of solatinm
88 appears to the Contral Government to be reasonable having
regard to the novelty and utility of the invention and the pur
pose for which it is designed. and ta any other relevant cireum-
10

stances,

(3) Where a patent is granted in pursuance of an application in
respect of which directions have been given under section 35, no
renewal fee shall be payable in respect of any period during which
those directions were in force,

75. 38. When eny

direction given under section 35 is revoked by the Revoca..
Controller, then,

notwithstanding any provision of this Act specify- ton of
ing the time within which auiy step should be taken or any act done dina
in connection with an application for the patent, the Controller may,

tions and
subject to such conditions, if any, as he thinks fit to impose, extend extension
°° the time for doing

anything required or authorised to be done by ar Of time,
under this Act in

connection with the application, whether or not
that time has previously expired.

39. (1) No person resident in India shall, except under the autho- Residents
rity of a written permit granted by or on behalf of the Controller, not to

°5 make or cause to be made any apelication outside India for the grant ऑफ for
of a patent for an invention unless—- outside

India
(2) an application for a patent for the same invention has without

been made in India, not less than six weeks before the applica- Prior per-
tion outside India; and mission,

30 (6) either no directions have been given under sub-section
(2) of section 35 in relation to the application in India, or all
such directions have been revoked,

(2) The Controller shall not grant written permissi

son to make any application outside India without
35 sent of the Central Government,

ion fo any per-
the prior con-

— This section shell not apply in relation to an invention for
which an application for protection has first been filed in a country
outside India by a person resident’ outside India, पु



28

Liability 48, Without prejudice to the provisions contained in Chapter XX,
waven- plication for 8 paient ony person contravenes
tion of any dir given by the Controller wader section 35
section 35 gy makes or causes ation for the grant of a patent
39, the application for patent §

३६ in respect of an AP.
९९५०७ as to secrecy
to be made an applic

~ secti 2 हे
ae jon outside India in contravention of section

under this Act shall be deemed to have bees abandoned and the

patent granted, if any, shail be liable to pe revoked under section 64.

Finality 41. All orders of the Controller giving directions as to secrcey aS

under this Ct हु

£ the Central Government
"9

orders
ae well as all orders ०
tion in any court oF any 1c

of Con-

qroller shall be final and shall not
and ground whatsoever.
Central हे .

Govetn-

ment.

pe called in ques

disclosure by

1 be held to prevent the
patent

42. Nothing in this Act shal
application for

Savings :
respect- the Controller of information concerning an
ing dis- ora specification filed in pursuance thereof to the Central Geverti-
haa ment for the purpose of the application oF specification peing 75
ernment. examined for considering whether en order under this Chapter
should be made or whether an order so made should be revoked.
CHAPTER ३
GRANT AND SEALING OF PATENTS AND RIGHTS CONFERRED THEREBY
Grant 43. (1) Where 8 complete specification in pursuance of an applica- 20
and tion for a patent has been accepted and either—
sealing of हा os
rend ° (a) the application jnas not been opposed under section 25
and the time for the filing of the opposition has expired; or

has been opposed and the opposition has

favour of the applicant; oF 25
the Controller

(b) the application
been finally decided in
(९) the application
py virtue of any power vested fi

jnas not been refused by
nm him by this Act:
yy the applicant in the prescribed
jn the case of @ joint application,
808९ the patent 10 30
he date oD which

1, on request made by
the applicant or,
tly, and the Controller shall ९
1 of the patent office and (|
ed in the register.

(2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2) and of the provi-
sions of this Act with respect to patent of addition, a request under
this section for the sealing of 9 patent shall be made not later than 35
the expiration of a period of six months from the date of advertise-
ment of the acceptance of the complete specification:

the patent sha
form, be granted to
to the applicants join
be sealed with the sea:
the patent is sealed shall be enter!

nem

Pros

d that—

the expi
ation to 1:

on of the said six months any
plication for the pate none
hh Court, the requ

pend-
t may be

5
after the fins) deterreination
(9) where the
; ह ० applicant or

एल० _the ६ or one of the applicants i
con at गरम कक of the time within whic uaa I wow
1० sub-section the request could othervvie oe ele
Id otherwise be made,

he said request may be made al any time within twelve month
t wi
ay be mad y th within twel
elve months

aiter the date of the death or at such later time as the Cont
E f the death or
a at 8 x time as the Controller

(3) The period wi
within which und
the sealing of which under sub-section 4
ibe sealing of a paient may be made ma section (2) a request for
15 tended by the Controller ¢ 'y, from time to tim
in an application mad जा to such longer period as ma: a be ny
made nnd the prescribed him in that behalf, i the eopliearien i
scribed fee paid within that longer application is
period:

Provided that
the first mentioned
under this sub-secti st mentioned period shal
sub-section by more than three mnonths we th be extended
१ the aggregate.

20 Explanation.—For the purposes of this tion a proceeding sha
p y the Pt his section a proc ta

be deemed to be हि
pending so |
(apart fro व long as the time f
a proceeding hall be dk extension of that me) han appeal therein
for any appeal cee cme to be finally बम nol expires, and
मै apari from " 0 the tim:
5 without the appeal being brought. any such extension) has expired

44, Where, at any ti
1 y lime after
of an application a patent has bee: i
धर under 5 n sealed a
person to whom the or this Act, the Controller is satisfied that the Amend-
a body corporate. hag ent was granted had died, or, in th that the ment of
30 the Controller a 2 ceased to exist, before the ‘pate @ Case of Patent
y amend the patent by sub: atent was sealed, granted
stituting for the nam to deceas-

of that person th
९ name of th
person to whom the patent. ought के ed appli- 1
cant,

have been
nm granted, and th
deeme lay. : he patent sh a
med always to have had effect scondineh effect, and shall be
° y.

. (1) Subject he other provisions conta: is ct, te of
4 et te at
5. 0 the other sions Contained in this Act,. p,

35 every patent shall b ts ate on whic. ie compiete paten
‘y pi e da’ ti
iL ed as of the date ti
hi; d hich th let tent,

(2) The date of
every patent shall be
entered in the register.



Form,
extent
and
effect of
patent.

Rights of

patentees.

Patent
rights
not in-
fringed
when
used for
certain
purposes.

3e

(3) Notwithstanding anything contaimed in t section, no suié or
other procecding shall be commenced or prosecui din respect of an
intringement commitied before tne date of advertisement of the
acceptance of the complete 5982:

46, (1) Every patent shall be in the prescribed form acd shail 5
have effect throughout India.

(2) A patent shail be granted for one invention o

Provided that it shall not be competent for any person in a suit
or other proceeding to take any objection tv a patent on the ground 5 49. (7) Where a vessel or airer

2 by the wse of the «

the 2

tion.

1 not be deemed io cons
Dan ferred on the patentee ky this Act in 1
whether before or after the conumencement of |

xt]

spect o

rogister wiry Patent

that it has been granted for more than one invention. 10 ३0० or & land vehicle owned hy a person ordin a suciy Tights not
47, (1) Subject to the other provisions contained in this Ack, @ country comes into India {including the to: ers thereat) ae :
patent granted, whether before or after the commencement of this temporarily or accidentally only, the rights conferred by a patent
Act, shall confer upon the paientee— for an invention shall not be deemed to be infringed by the use of forcign
(a) where the patent is for an article or substance, the the invention— vessels,
exclusive right by himself, his agents or licensees to make, use, 15 ड़ (a) in the body of the vessel or in the machinery, tempos '
exercise, sell or distribute such article or substance in India; : apparatus or other accessories thereof, r as the invention rarily or |
(b) where a patent is for a process of manufacturing an : is used on board the vessel and for its accident.
article or substance, the exclusive right by himself, his agents (b) in the construction or working tnala,
or licensees to use or exercise the process in India and of using vehicle or of the accessories thereo'
j

or selling in India articles or substances made by such process 20 20 as the case may be.

and of authorising others so to do.

(2) The rights conferred on the paten‘ee by this section shall be
exercisable only subject to the provisions of any other law for the
time being in force.

48. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, 25

(a) the inportation by or on benalé of the Government of
any patented machine, apparatus oF other article for the pur-
pose merely of its own use, or

(b) the importation by or on behalf of the Government of
any patented medicine or drug for the purpose merely of its own 39
use or for disiribution in any dispensary, hospital or other
medical institution maintained by or on behalf of the Govern-
ment or any other dispensary, hospital or other medical insti-
tution which, the Central Government may, having regard to the
public service that such dispensary, hospital or medical institu- 35
tion renders, specify in this behalf by notification in the Official
Gazette, or

(c) the making of a patented machine, apparatus or other

(2) This section shall not extend to vessels, aircraft or land
vehicles owned by persons ordinarily resident in a foreign country
the laws of which do not confer cor: g rights with respect
to the use of inventions in vessels, aircraft or land vehicles owned
25 by persons ordinarily resident in India while in the ports or within |
the territorial waters of that foreign country or otherwise within हि
the jurisdiction of its courts.

30. (1) Where a patent is granted to two or more persons, cach pights
of those persons shall, unless an agreement tc the contrary is in of co-

3° force, be entitled to an equal undivided share in the patent. owners
. है f २४)
(2) Subject to the provisions contained in this section and in of patents.

section 51, where two or more persons are registered as grantee or
proprietor of a patent, then, unless an agr 4 to the contrary is
in force, each of those persons shall he entitled, by himself or his
35 agents, to make, use, exercise and sell the patented invention for
his own benefit without accounting to the other person or persons.

(3) Subject to the provisions contsined in this section and in sec-
tion 51 and to any agreement for the time being in force, where two

फिल्म REET RER

article or the use of « patented process or the making of an article 5० or more persons are registered as grantee or proprictor of a patent,
by the use of the patented process by or on behalf of the Se 40 4° then, a licence under the patent shall not ‘be granted and a share in
ernment for the purpose merely of its own use or by persons on the patent shall not be assigned by one of such persons except with
its behalf who may be specially authorised for the purpose, ot the consent of the other person or persons. गा
1833(8)1.8--6, =



saat

Power of
Control-
ler to gi
direction
to com

OW

sited articte is sold by one of two or more per-
ielor of a patent, the purchaser
him shall be entitled to deal with

¥ the article had been sold by a

jest te the provisions contained in this section, the rules
applicable to the ownership and devolution of movable pro-

g 1 apply in relation to patents: and nothing con-
fmed in ction (1) or sub-section (2) shall affect the mutual
hts or obligations of trustees or of the legal representatives of a 10
ed person or their rights or obligations as such.

nig section shalt affect the rights of the assignees
in a patent created before the commencement

re two or more persons are registered as grantee of 15
patent, the Controller may, upon application made

it escribed manner by any of those persons, give such

5 in accordance with the application as to the sale or lease

of the patent or any interest therein, the grant of licences under the
patent, or the exercise of any right under section 50 in relation 20
thereto, as he thinks fit.

(2) Uf any person registered as grantee of proprietor of a patent
fails to execute any instrument or to do any other thing required
for the carrying out cf any direction given under this section within
fourteen days after being requested in writing so to do by any of 25
the other persons se registered, the Controller may, Upon application
made to in the prescribed manner by any such other person,
give directions empowering any person to execute that instrument
or to-do-that thing in the name and on behalf of the person in default.

(3) Before giving any directions in pursuance of an application 30
under this section, the Controller shall give an opportunity to ke

heard—

(a) in the case of an application under sub-section {1}, to
the other person or persons registered as grantee or proprietor
ot the patent; 35

(9) in the case of an application under sub-section (2), to
the person in default.

(4) No direction shall be given under this section so as to affect
the mutual rights or obligations of trustees or of the legal represen-
tatives of a deceased person or of their rights or obligations as such, 40
or which is inconsistent with the terms of any agreement between
persons registered as grantee or proprietor of the patent.

है 8

10 invention which the court finds ha:
hi

45

20

28

33

been reveled on the
1d im cont:

5 3, ४ ior revo
patent, dizects the comple:
clusion of a claim or clai

petitioner, the court may, by order passed i
eon : ry pas in tr
permit the grant to the petitioner of the whole or

the patentee, in liew of the pai oo eee gtul

गा tent so revoked or is exciuded i:

(2) Where an:
y such order is pag
quest 8 ny suc ‘ 5 passed, the Contrefier 81911, ८
y the petitioner made in the prescribed Tenet ee me ही fi ire.
(४) im cases where ¢ hole! the poton
5 the court permits the w
to be granted, a new patent शिरकत che gam
as the patent revoked;
(ii) in cases wher

here the ermi
Patent to be granted, a new stent foe wwe
date as the patent revoke:
as may he prescribed:

hole of the put
hole of the putem
8 the same date and nis

re ts a part only
patent for such part bea: 4

d and numberag in

such

Provided (६ Ce
require the petitiones lohan may as 2 condition of such grant
tea p x 2 a new and complete spevificati n to
pat aeration of the Controller describing and claiming थे 2
¢ invention for which the patent is to be granted ‘het
PR is t > granted,

(3) No suit shalt b

; e brought for any infri g
granted under this section committed bofvee the cute i so on whien
uch potent was दान the sctual daze on whieh

. ubject to the provisions of thi, 1, the term
(2) t B: f this Act, the te 6:
58. (7) Sub: hy his Act, e £

30 patent granted under this Act shall— हाट Bera जी
: Term of
a if कि . ‘
(a) in respect of an invention claiming the method o: paren
nt ct OF PTO

35

and Designs Act, 1911, or in the patent grante thereunder, the term
" , he tent h a
PB g cd
40 of every patent granted under that Act in re Spect of an invention
claiming a substance or the method fe process of manufacture in
1 UW:

cess of manufacture of a stance, (including the substance
fe substance, (includi an ost:
when produced by such method or process) where the sub:
hey by t 0058) where th

is intended for use, or is capable of being used, as food or as a

medicine or drug, be ten years from the date of the patent; and
dat t and

(5) in respect-of any other invention, be fo en years tron
b) tof any other ent: be fourte 0:
ion, urteen

2) Notwithstandi i n
(2) ithstanding anything contained in the Indian Patent:
Ss

a



L
t
wv
%
ड़
€

respect thereof, w

able of being

Patents of

addition.

38

ubsiance is intended for use, or is cap-

ag medicine oy drug shall be—

amencement of this Act, or

ihe date as of which the patent was

Patents and Designs Act, 19H, 5 ३०1१३.

(«)

2)

sealed under
whichever is less:

Provided that where at the commencement of this Act any such

con of an extension granted under the Act

aforesaid, the patent shall cease to have effect om the expiration of
the period of such extension.

(3) A patent shall cease to have effect notwithstanding anything
therein or in this Act on the expiration of the peviod prescribed for
the payment of any renewal fee, if that fee is not paid within the pres-
eribed period or within that period as extended under this section.

(4) The period prescribed for the payment of any renewal fee shall 15
be extended to such period, nct being more than six months longer
than the prescribed period, as may be specified in a request made to
the Controller if the request is made and the renewal fee and the
prescribed additional fee paid before the expiration of the period

xo specified.

patent is im force by re

io

20

CHAPTER IX
PaTENTS OF ADDITION

54. (1) Subject 10 the provisions contained in this section, where
an application is made for a patent in respect of any improvement in
or modification of an invention described or disclosed in the complete 25
specification filed therefor (in this Act referred to as the “main in-
vention”) and the applicant also applies or has applied for a patent
for that invention or is the patentee in respect thereof, the Control-
ier may, if the applicant so requests, grant the patent for the improve-
ment or modification as a patent of addition.

(2) Subject to the provisicns eontained in this section, where an
invention, being au improvement in or modification of another inven-
tion is the subject of aa independent patent and the patentee in
respect of that patent is also the patentee in respect of the patent for
the main invention. the Controller may, if the patentee so requests, 35
by order, revoke the patent for the improvement or modification and
grant to the patentee a patent of addition in respect thereof, bearing
the same date as the date of the patent so revoked.

(3) A patent shall not be granted as a patent of addition unless
the date of filing of the complete specification was the same as or 49
later than the date of filing of the complete specification in respect of
the main invention.

(4) A patent of addition shall not be sealed before the sealing of
the patent for the main javention; and if the period within which,

30

:

5 the patent
menvioned pe .
गे हि a A. patent ef add:
० that ०2 te 23 equal Terra of
thereof as patents
that term or 7

patent for ihe main invention and addition,

no longer:

Provided that if the pat
¢ hat ne patent for the mai
under this Act, the couri, ox, ag the कि ‘ia
request made to him by the p:
15 order that the patent of addi
for the remainder of the ter
and thereupon the patent shall cont
patent accordingly.
(2) No renewal feag k
(2: ses shall be payable i
adds le payable in respect of 8)
20 aed e eat if any suck patent becomes an independent pat nt
section {7}, the seme fees shall thereafter he payable

upon ihe same datos, as it the patent had been origina’ anted as
, th
had been originally granted a:

invention is revoked
ase may be, the Controller, on
2 in the p vibed manner, may
sil become an independent patent
18 patent for the main invention
inue in 407९8 as an independent

56. (1) The grant of a paten acaition shall not be refused, and vaj idity of
patent of additi 1 t d, ते
di hi b fu Lidi
3

25 4 patent
5 invalidates आम a patent of addition shall not be revoked or patents
cool, Saas ground only that the invention elaimed in the addition
romore fication does not involve any inventive i ;
gard to any publication or use of— हु हु sep having

(०) the main invention describ

x0 tion relating theo ed in the complete specifica-

b i ६
tion ¢ Dany yah in or modification of the main inven-
in the complete specification of a patent of addi-

tion to the patent for the main inve tion or of an application for
hi te f : nvyen! or of lication f

35 8nd the validity of a iti
¥ a patent of addition shall eo
the ground that the invention ought ve bec ch
independent patent.

हे questioned on
to have been the subject of an

2) ४५ al of
mining il the zemoval of doubts it is hereby declared that in deter-
heathen fea, elty of the iuvention claimed in the complete
4० wan oe B pursuance of an application for a patent of dition
meet invention had also to the complete specification ix है whe
is describes in whieh the



Amend-

mentof upon applic
applica- by an applicant
ti a [010

ion for the patent 0;
rich conditions, if any,

specifica-
tion before 5'
Controller.

refusing an applica’
specification under

jnfringement of the pate
jon of the patent js pending,

for the revocat
before or after the fill

ci

Awrexpsaen's OF APP

83. (3) Subject to the provis
ion mace UW t

Provided that the Controler

nt 09 a

eeding com enced

amend.

(2) Every application for les

patent or 8 specification ander

the proposed
$

Amend-
ment of
specifica-

tion before in such manner an

Court.

amendment, and
ong for whieb the application

(3) Every applic:
patent or 8 specificati

of the complete specification and
ment shall be advertised in the pre:
ma is at
within the prescribed perio

(4 Where an applicatio
any person interested mey,
advertisement thereof,
thereto; and where suc:
the Controller shali notify ४
this section is made and shi
nent an opportuni

(5) An amendment under
dment of the priori
shall be without prejudice to

may be, or qnclude, an amen

(6) The provisions of this section
the right of an applicant for 2 patent to
directions of the Control
im the course

comply with the

ance of the complete specification oF

opposition to the grant of 4

58. (1) In any proceeding befor

of a patent, the High Court
in section 59, allo’

or otherwise, as the High C
ings for yevocation t
it may allow the specificatio
of revoking the patent.

६ the complete spe
as the Controller

tion to amend an 9
this section while an.

ation for leave to aunt

jon under this section mM:
the nature of the proposed. amend-

scribed manner.
qyertised under sub-section (3);

all give to tt
ity to be jeard before

he High Court de!

shall not छ

ny procecdin

this section
sha

is made.

2

give notice to the
+ a notice is given ¥
he person by ¥
hat pe:
he decides the case.

this section

patent.

yoay,

ww the patenice to ame!
d subject to sach

‘ourt may thi

m to be 9169

pplication है
yy suit ‘be!

ve to amend आ!

| give एप

५ terms as to costs,

the application S
od subject to

8 any order allowing OF
७ for a patent or 3

fore a court for the ro
g before the High Court
whether the suit or pro-

ng of the application to

nm application for a 15
snali state the nature of
७11 particulars of the rea-

nd an application for a
ade after the acceptance 20

dq after the
Controller of opposition 2
within the period aforesaid,
‘hom the application under
rson and to the oppor

of a complete specification 3°
‘ity date of 8 claim.

gmend bis specification to
or issued before the accept-
of proceedings in 35

€ the High Court for the revocation
subject to the prov!

isions containee

nd his corsplete specification
advertisement 40

nk fit, and if in any proceed-

cides that the patent is invalid,

ded under this section instead

E
रू
=

AY

ion is

the apo

to the ©

igh Court to
entry thereot

59. (7) No amend:
8 mendment of an appli
7० specification shall be sent of an application far 8 patent 0
दिए aid ade except by way of disclai: 7 mee etary
for the pur poze no amendment thereof sheli 2178 कारक evi
00०8 of खत व न sins f shell tbe allowed, exe provisions
Of a conte जा én obvious mistake, and n है cme 2
IS would be that the हल करत _ Shall ७2 allowed the test ot whiee meat 2
eee ae ow ० Scation as ameaded would clai देय appeal
vende a हि nee disclosed in the  specificati कर be ae an
me Jo sist ecification befor or
woul not fall w * claim h ecif ; ended
vould not fall wholly within the ote olen ot ता ton
tion bef t मे माल srepe of mi “
ore ihe cmentmee cope of a claim of the specifica. fom
20 (2) Where after the dat
te advertisement of acceptan
ce of a

jet ficati 9 1 th fu is all d
by the Controller or by the Hi ourt,——
th Fo. y the High C :

|
|

(a) the amend:
ment shall for
part of the specification: all for all purposes be deemed to form

i (8) e fact specification has been ei
6) the fact that the specificat
b amended shall be
(०) the right of the applicant or patentee to make amend-
th t of the applicant o: tent ki d.

i ment shall not t
hal net be cal दर as
: fraud, called in question except on the
ground of

i (3) In const

ling the specification as ame:

specification a

3° made to the specification as or ginally accepted.
8. epte

reference may be

CHAPTER XI

i
ZSTORATION
| RESTORATION OF LAPSED PATENTS

; हे
60. (7) Where a patent has ce:

failure to d te }
pay any re दर 0 have effect
y renewal fee within the prescribed ens jeason of Applica-
3 od or within tions for

35 that period as ex!
tend
patentee or his le: a ved under sub-section (4) of i
by two or gal representative, and where 0) section 53, the Testoration
more perso , and where the patent was held oeiapsed
patents,

+ नाक
jointly, ै: पं

j one or more of tl ently, thon, with the lea

j © hem witho: : + leave of the C

i yen from the date on which a eming the others, may, ake a
4० @PPlication for the patent ceased 1: i one

the restoration of the patent, 0 have effect, make an

i

ee ea



ie alse apply patents
६ to the modifi-
te sub-section
te the period

ne provisions of 5
fore the commence

(4) of section 53, :।
prescribed ¢ efor
ov to sub-section {8) of sectio
(3) An application under this
verified in the prescribed manner, fully sett
which led to the failure to pay the 9
may require from the applicant such furtl
think necessary.
Procedure 61. (1) If, after hearing the applicant in eases. where the appli-
for eant so desires or the Controller thinks fit, the Controlier is prima
aise ons facie satistied that the failure te pay the renewal fee was uninten-
for resto- ¢ional and that there has heen no undue delay in the making of the 15
rationof application, he shall advertise the applicalion in the preseribed man-
lapsed ner; and within the prescribed P etiod any person interested may
patents. give notice to the Controller of opr jon thereto on either or poth
of the following grounds, that is to say—

ig |!
(a) that the failure to pay the renewal fee was not uninten- 2°

7 that Act.
section shail contain 8 statement,
out the cireumsiances
tee, and the Controller
x evidence as he may 10

tional; or
(b) that there has heen undue delay in the making of the
application.

(2) If notice of opposition is given within the peried aforesaid,
the Controller shall notify the applicant, and shall give to him and 25
to the opponent an opportunity ts be heard before he decides the case.

(3) HE no notice of opposition is given within the period aforesaid
or if in the case of opposition. the decision of the Controller is in
favour of the applicant, the Controller shall, upon payment of any
unpaid renewal fee ang such additional fee as may be prescribed, 30
restore the patent and any patent of addition specified in the applica-
tion which has ceased to have effect on the cesser of that patent.

(4) The Controller may, if he thinks fit as a condition of restoring
the patent, require that an entry shall be yaade in the register of any
document or matier which, wader the provisions of this Act, has to 35
be entered in the register but which has not been 50 entered.

62. (1) Where a patent js restored, the rights of the patentee shall
be subject to such provisions 88 may be prescribed and to such other
patents provisions as the Controller thinks fit to impose for the protection or
which compensation of persens who may have begun to avail themselves 40
have been of, or have taken definite steps by contract or otherwise to avail
restored. themselves of, the patented invention between the date when the
patent ceased to have effect and the date of the advertisement of the
application for restoration of the patent under this Chapter.

Rights of
patentees
of lapsed

2

a n Patents 8 Act, 1911 5 Zot 2011.

2 of 1911.

ecuted

shall be commmence
ment of a patent comrm.
ased to have effect a
eation for vestoration

e date
of the

7, at any time by giving पे

eribed manner to the Con voller, offer to surrend

(2) Where such an offer is made, the Controller shall adv

70 offer in the prescribed manner, and alsu notify every person other

than the patentee whose name appears in the register as having am
interest in the patent,

(8) Any person interested may, within the preseribed period alier
such advertisement, give notice to the Conivoller of opposition te tae
currender, and where any such notice is given the Controller 1५ 21
notify the patentee.

(4) If the Controller jg satisfied afier hearing the patentee and
any opponent, if desirous of being heard, that the patent may prs~
perly be surrendered, he may accept the offer and, by order, revolc
20 the patent.

पर

a

हुए, (1) Subjeel to the provisions contained iu this Act, a patent, है;

whether granted pefore or after the commencement of this Act,
may, on the petition of any person interested or of the Central
Government or on a counter-claim in a suit for infringement of the

25 patent, be revoked by the High Court on any of the following
grounds, that is te say—

(a) that the invention, so far ag claimed in any claim of the
eomplete specification, was claimed in a valid claim of earlier
priority date contained in the complete specification sf another

30 patent granted in India;

(b) that the patent was granted on the application of a
person not cntitled under the provisions of this Act to apply
therefor:

Provided that a patent granted under the Indian Patents and

35 Designs Act, 1911 shall not be revoked on the ground that the
applicant was the communicaiee or the importer of the inven-
tion in Todia and therefore not entitt d to make an application
ios the grant of a patent under this Act;

(c) that the patent was obtained wrongfully in contraven-
40 tion of the rights of the petitioner or any person under or
through whom he claims;

 _ (B)LS.—-7,

yooauion:
dels,



(6) that the sah
cation, is not an 3

(९) that the
complete specifica
Imown or used int
to what was published i
documents referred to in

bi 9 date of the claim or
a or elsewhere in any of the

ted under the fadian

Provided that in velation to palents ¢
hall have effect as if 9 o¢ 1911.

Patents and Des 1, this claus
the words “or é hag been omitted; 10

(f) that the invention 50 far as ciaimed in any claan cf the

complete specification is obvious or does aot involve any inven-

tive step, having regard to what was knows or used in India

or what was published in India or clsewhere before the priority

date of the claim: 15
Provided that in relation to patents granted under the

Indian Patents and Designs Act, 1911, this elause shall have 2 of 1911.

effect as if the words “or elsewhere” hag been omitted;

(g) that the invention, so far as claimed in any claim of
the complete specification, is not useful; 2०

(४0) that the complete specification does not sufficiently and
fairly describe the invention and the roethod by which it is to
be performed, that is to say, that the description of the method
or the instructions for the working of the invention as contained
in the complete specification are not by themselves sufficient to 25
enable a person in India possessing average skill in, and average
knowledge of, the art to which the invention relates, to work
the invention, or that it does not disclose the best method of
performing it which was known to the applicant for the patent
and for which he was entiiied to claim protection; 30

(i) that the scope of any claim of the complete specification
ig not sufficiently and clearly defined or that apy claim of the
complete specification is not fairly based on the matier disclosed
in the specification;

(j) that the patent was obtained on a false suggestion or 35

representation;
(k) that the subject of any clair of the complete specifica-

tion is not patentable under फंड Act;

() that the invention so far as claimed in any claimn of the
complete specification was secretly used in India, otherwise 4o
than as mentioned in sub-section (2), before the priority dale

of the claim;

uw

d undes sectina JD ६ a
cation for the evant f made aS P pl
section 20. te aD 8 India in contr: ion of
ection 39; Wa Ww contray tion, of

(9) that Teavg to a t
: 2 Wy 8 the complete specification under

section 57 a¢ sertion 58 wa, obtained by feud
ained by feud.

cs of clauses (०) and ) of
(6) no account shalt be ”

(2) Por the purpos bh,
sub-section {2}.

‘eorel uses and

(8) where the patent is for a
: by a process dase
5 India of th
tute knowl or use in Tr
the importation, except wh
the purpose of ve 1
2० (8) For the purp:
20 shall be taken of ar

P or for a product ag
@ importation inte

by thot process shall consti-

asonablo trial

eriment only.
s¢ of clause (1) of sub. i

हि a) sub-section है।
any use of the invertion— ”

# nO account

(a) for the pose cf reesonahle trial or experiment only:
burpose of reg 3 $ 8
nahle tria xD: nen:

७) by the Gov;

Gove ne ernment or by any persou authorised by the

or by a Government taline :

of the appli ent undertaking, in cons:

derives pelican! for the patent or any person from whom he
directly ० e aaving communicsted or disclosed the inventi e
as afores ety to the Government or person autho Hon
ait or to the Government undertakine- or ised

85

(०) by any cther i
के "er person, in consequ: i
३० lor the po. sequence of the ay ei
connate or any person from whom he derives title bea
coma feated or disclosed the invention, and without vine
se equuescence of the applica 7
whom he denen na he applicant or of any person from
(4) Without prejudi
( judice to the provisi ii i
35 Da है ” fhe provisions contained in suh- i
’ Gepatont may be revoked hy the High Court on the veri mot
patent overnment, if the High Court is _ satisfied tha he
eines pes without reasonable cause failed to compl: with the
'४| Ci | : ५
patented दशक शक Governm to make, use or oxertise the
ent हैं m for the purposes of Gov i
4० meaning of section 99 upon reasonable femme Smnment within the
JL A notice of any petition for ४,
section shall be served on all per:

evocation of a patent under this
Sons appearing from the register te



42
a inieresis therein
£ the e to have shares or interes’
be proprietors of that paieni or to ; t oe ven
an hi हक not be necessary lo serve थे nelice 01६ a her pe
Revecation apy time af cceptonce of
of patent i Government is s fied t aera nergy for 5
or amend ent or a patent is |. an invent हर > enorgy tor
2 patent or a patel s ५ 301) 88७ 1) of section 2
maent of which no patent can be granted under sub: section oe दा to
हम या of the Atomic Energy Act, 1962, it may direet Be ee the
९९1 be " ie ६011. हि ‘cation ot +०
ton on refuse to proceed further with the Ppa Oe cntroller, “fen
direc patent, as the case may be, and सिल्क की soto the gatentes 10
tions from ving ice to the applicant or, as the case may » te m
cl ‘iving noti 0 the app ! -_ no ewister
cer tnd every other person whose name has been ontered #2 के की व
ment in a having an interest in the patent, and after givin i en ani
tunity. ¢ : 2 urther
canes tunity of being heard, may refuse io proceed fu
किशन application or may revoke the patent. 1), the Controller 5
enerey. (2) In any proceedings under गला hare कल the
: i tent or the pa’ a
ay allow the applicant for the pa t a
complete specification in such manner as he considers hing the
instead of refusing to proceed with the application or revoking
patent. .
i ini atent 20
Revoca. 68. Where the Central Government is हित open 3 oe हि fel
है हे i hich it i ised is mischievous
tion of or the mode in which it is exercis : Hs 80 te See
ial i ic, i ‘ivi; 2 हू);
patent generally prejudicial to the public, it may, After डॉ ing ae
in public rtunily to be heard, make a declar: i
i an opportunily x \ bere.
toterest Official Gazette and thereupon the patent shall be deemed t as
voked.
CHAPTER जाए
REGISTER OF PATENTS ता
register
Register 67. (1) There shall be kept at the patent office a regi

oi patents patents, wherein shall be entered—

: i ts3 O
and parti (a) the names and addresses of grantees of patents; . 3
| Ss ४ issions of
be entered (8) notifications of assignments and of transmi:
therein,

patents, of licences under patents, and of amendments, exten-
2 ss finds is, an
sions, and revocations of patents; an हु रे
(० particulars of such other matters affecting the validity कि
er proprictorship of patents as may be prescribed. 5

(2) No notice of any trust, whether express, implied ed Sane
tive, shall be entered in the register, and the Controller sha
nifected by any such notice. हे ह 1
(3) Subject to the superintendence and direction of tre ene ५०
Government, the register shall be kept under the co
management of the Controller.

83 of 1965,

ARON

satanic

ryan, bo AS
8 Tent tid

a docuraent waless in

पु हैं 1 2

as governing their rights and andres

obligations and the application for regi tration of such document gistered,

30 js filed in the prescribed manner with the Coatrolley within six
months from the execution thereof or within such further period not
exceeding six months in the aggregate as the Controller on applica~
tion made in the prescribed manner allows:

Provided that the document shall, whe

0 registered, have eect
15 from the date of its execution,

69. (1) Where any person becomes entitled by a
mission or operation of law to a p
becomes entitled as a Taortgagec, }
interest in छ patent, he shail apply

2° manner to the Controller for the
case may be, of notice of his intez

jgnment, trans.
ent or ta a share ia a patent o

a writing in tho praseribed
istration of his title or, ay the
tin the register,

(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (7),

application for the registration of the title of a
entitled by assignment to a patent or a share in a patent or becom.

25 ing entitled hy virtue of a mortgage, licence or other instrument te
any other interest in a patent may be made in the prescribed man-
ner by the assignor, mortgagor, licensor or other party fo that ine
strument, as the case may be.

an
my person becoming

(3) Where an application is made un
3° tration of the title of any person the
of title fo his satisfaction,—

der this section for the regig-
Controller shall, upon proof

(6) where that person is entitled
8 patent, register him in the register

prietor of the patent, and enter in the
35 instrument or event

to a patent or a share in
as proprietor or co-proe
register particulars of the
by which he derives title; or

(0) where that person is entitled ta
the patent, enter in the register y

any other interest in

tice of his inlerest, with par-

creating it:

Provided that if there is any dispute between the parties whether

4° the assignment, mortgage, licence, transmission, operation of Jaw or
any other such Lo has validly vested in such person a title
to the patent or any share or interest therein, the Controller may
Tefuse to take any action under clause (a) ox, as the case may be,

ticulars of the instrument, if any,

0 atherwise to any other :

iments,
trans.
missiona,
ete,



Power of
registered

grantee or other person of which notice is en’

pro-
prictor
to deal
with

patent.

Rectifica-
tion of
register
by High

Court.

4a
é (9) Notic

ties have heen determined : shall be si
: snall he gi
bd be entitled

appe

until the rights of the

under clause (2),
by a competent court.
hall be supplied to the Conti

prescribed

(4) Theve s goller in th
all agreements,
, 5 (4):

nmer for being filed in the ६

atent office copies of
my order ७

m
licences and other documents affecting the title 10 any patent or any * .
licence thereunder authenticated Mm the prescribed manner also the register shall that not
. pon the कि के t
ed relevant to the subject- q upon the Controller in the preserihe
a af such notice sectify 38 preserihed manner whe
“ou ectify the register accordingly

such other documents as may be prescri

72. (1) Subject to tt व
2 Subject to the provisions contained in thig Act

matter?

Provided that in the case of a licence gr
Controtler shall, if so raquesied by the pate
steps for securing that the terms of the licence
any person except wnder the order of a court.

(5) Except for the purposes of an application under sub-see-
tion (2) or of an application to yeetify the register, a document
im respect of which no entry has been made in the register under 15
sub-section (3) shall not be admitted by the Controller or by any
court as evidence ot the tille of any person to a patent or to a share
or interest therein unless the Controller or the court, for reasons to
8 writing, otherwise directs.

AMY Register

anted ander 8 patent, the
cnient limes bs to be open

mtee or licensee, take ‘°
are nol disclosed to

ro
cules made thereunder, the reg)
open to inspection by t bli
5 'ए the public 1 cert
seal of ihe pate oF I ic; and certified copies, s wi for i
if abent off any pies, sealed ma
pi fice, of any ent: 01 the register shall be Wiven te tie.

any person requiri
pi quiring them on payment of the prescribed fee

hail at all o

(2) The register shal
5 roan a gister shall be prima faci
15 fequired or authorised by or ander A

vidence of any matters
to he entered therein.

Qe

amore

CHAPTER, XIV

be ded i TEN’ OF
pe rece PAavENt OFWICE AND ITS ESTABLISHMENT
78. (7) The Contr
ject also to any rights vested in a है * outroiler Gene i ‘
ree tere ain ane register, the pecson y | so Marks appointed under कि निकल मर Parents, Designs and ‘Trade

हि * - =. erchandi: ‘arks section The
tee or proprietor of a patent shall bave | #3 of 1950, 86 purposes Marks Act, 1958, shall be the C ० 4 Of the Tr
or otherwise deal with, the | poses of this Act.
any consideration for any 25 हि

i

sions contained in this Act relating to co- 20
Controle

‘ade and and of
n é and other
ontroiles of Patents for officers

79, Subject to the provi
ownership of patents and su’

persons registered as gran
power to assign, grant licences under,

patent and to give effectual receipts for rte fees and th seh des ६०५
YY appoint as many examiners

and other officers and wi
2: with such desi; i
gnations as it think,
3 fit for the

such assignment, licence or dealing:
Provided that any equities in respect of the patent may be en- है हु purpose of discharging, under the हि
forced in like manner as in respect of any other movable property. 25 the Controller, such functions of टक्कर and directions of
may 41 i ee ‘ont हि
y from time to time authorise them to हि under this Act as it
arge,

11. (1) The High Court may. on the application of any person

aggrieved—
(a) by the absence oF omission from the

74. (7) For the p
purposes of thi |
| is Act, there 5: i
shall be known as the patent office. — ore shall be an oftice whieh Petent
office

and

register of any

(2) The paten € provided by the Central Government under
tent office provided by the Central C E
fA mt und

variation or

entry; oF
(b) by any entry made in the register without sufficient 2 of 1911. 30 the Indi
न रे
cause; oF i under hn aatents and Designs Act, 1911, shall b its
(c) by any entry wrongly remaining on the register; or 35 { ck. हा e the patent office *F4nches.
(d) by any error or defect in any entry in the register; (3) The head offiee of the patent offi
deletion, of any entry wpe Central Government may कल जी ee shall be at such place as
ing t 1! ati >» am नर
ig the registration of patents there may the purpose of facili.

be established, at such

make such order for the making,
tbink fit, branch offices

therein as it may think fit
rocceding under this section the High Court may
dient to decide in 49 |

(2) In any P
ion that may be necessary or expe
| (4) There shall be a seal of the patent office,

decide any questi
connection with the yectification of the register.

35 other places as the Ce
Ce: G
Of the patent यह niral Government may

3

|
|
|
1



46
ine
he patent office shall be
es of the 9 appoiatmenis,
by inheritance of
a by that office.

‘Restr 75. AY 6
tones avable, during the petiod
employees in acquire oF take, a ee
ofpatent poquest, any right or inte

odice us
to tight or
interest
_ patent office shall not, except 5
76. An officer or employee in the pal nt ofes shaljirection. in
Officers vt on required or authorised by this ne _ a os by order of
Cinpegees ‘ ‘tis g of the Central Government or the +o
employees writing e Cen
in veoh » which is being, or has
iors (a) furnish information on a matter we One eats pas 10
ion ९७. \ dealt with under this Act or under th vor tait,
tion, ete. Jeon, dealt tr
si ee दब rati fa document re-
este) prepa or assist in the preparation of नर ion
i r this Act or u 2
quired or permitted by or under ms अल oF पान stent OfKCS; 9 gr 101k
Patents and Designs Act, 1911, to be lodg ड़
' atent office.
* (०) conduct a search in the records of the p
c ir

CHAPTER XV
Powsrs or CONTROLLER GENERALLY contvotter
rules made in this beha the 7 vvowers 2०
t re hi this Act shi ave
ust ae ie uder the Code of Civil Procedure,
: tters, namely:—
ce of any person

VW Subject to any
Controller 7. oe
ro have in any procee 5 ne a
certain of a civil court while trying 8 : का
powers of 1908, in respect of the followin;

wil हि rei e attendan:
a owl (a) summoning and enforcing thi
court,

5 of 1908.

and examining him on oath;
(9) requiring the discov

ment; as
ia 5
eeivl lence on affidavils; ;
¢) receiving evi दिल + witnesses
uing commissions for the examination 0०

ery and production of any docu- 25

(6) iss
or documents; ३०
२) awarding costs; — de within
oy reviewing his own decision on application mat
i er:
the O erined time and in the prescribed mann हा sonication
) i rder sed ex parte 0
ing aside an order pass a plication
ac nin the prescribed time and in the शाला चल 3
my i be prescribed.
atter which may presi i ;
enn e Controller in exercise of

costs awarded by th . Il be exe-
®) amy oo oad pon him under sub-section (2) shal
the powel

cutable as a decree of a civil court.

35

|

rovisions conta:

plicatior

cor जा clerical error in any
ather document filed in pu
application for a patent or a
entered in the register,

of such 4
y clerical error

in any maiter which is

(2) A correction may he made in pursuance of this section either
19 won a request in writing made by any person interested and accom
panied by the prescribed fee, or without such 8 request,
(3) Where the Controller proposes to make any such correction
as aforesaid otherwise than in pursuance of a request made under
_ this section, he shall give notice of the proposal to the patentee or
*> the app. t for the patent, as the case may be, and to any other
Person who appears to him to be concerued, and shall give them an
opportunity to be heard before making the correction,

(4) Where a requesi is made under this section for the correetion

of any error in a patent or application for a patent or any document
7 fled in pursuance of such an application, and it appears to the Con-
troller that the correction would materially alter the meaning or
Scope of the document to which the request relates and ought not to
be made without netice to persons affected thereby, he shall require

Notice of the nature of the proposed correction to be advertised in
25 the prescribed manner.

(5) Within the prescribed time after any sttch advertisement as
aforesaid any person interested may give notice to the Controller of
opposition to the request, and, where such notice of opposition
given, the Controller shall give notice thereof to the person by whom

3° the request was made, and shall give to him and to the opponent
an opportunity to be heard before he decides the case,

is

79. Subject to any rales made in. this behalf. in any proceeding pridence
under this Act before the Controller, evidence shall be given by given and
affidavit in the absence of directions by the Controller to

वि the con- powers of
35 trary, but in any case in which the Controller thinks it tight so ६0 Controiler
do, he may take oral evidena

8 in lieu of, or in addition to, evidence in respect
by affidavit, or may allow any party te be cross-examined on the ९९०7,
contents of his affidavit.

80. Without Prejudice. to any provision contained in. this Exercise

Act requiring the Control! y party ings tienen

40 Act requiring the Controller to hear any party to the proceedings ticnary

thereunder or to give any such party an opportunity to be heard, the powers by

Controller shall give to any applicant for a patent, or for amendment Controller.
of a oe (if within the prescribed time the applicant so

1883 (D)LS—g,



नल ली, Se फिी ७, .  अ

oa

48

adverseiy to
by o¢ under this

requires) an opportunity to be heard before exer

the applicant any discretion vested in the Centroll

Aet.
made there

81, Where under the provisions of this Act or the rul

Disposal aan 4 hi
+; extend the time for doing any ect, nothing 5

by under the Controller may
Control- in this Act shall be deemed to require him to give notice to or hear
ler of the perty interested in opposing the extension, nor shall any appeal
Pe lie from any order of the Controller granting such extens
extension CHAPTER XVI
of time.

§, LICENCES OF RIGHT AND IO

WorkING OF PATENTS, COMPULSORY LICENCE!
REVOCATION

Definitions o4. in this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires,—

of “patent: (a) “patented article” includes any article made by a patent-

ed articles”
and ed process; and

“patentee”. (b) “patentee” includes an exclusive licensee.
judice to the other provisions contained in this 15
onferred by this Chapter, regard shall

1 considerations, namely,—

to encourage inventions and ta
corked in India on a commercial
practicable 20

General 83. Without pre:
principles Act, in exercising the powers ८
applicable po had to the following genera
to working

(a) that patents are granted

of patented
inventions. secure that the inventions are w

seale and to the fullest extent that is reasonably
without undue delay; and

(b) that they are not granted merely to enable patentces to
enjoy a monopoly for the importation of the patented article.

84. (1) At any time after the expiration of three years from the
Compul- gate of the sealing of a patent, any person interested may make an 25
sory application. to the Controller alleging that the reasonable require-
Keences. ents of the public with respect to the patented invention have not
been satisfied or that the patented invention is not available to the
public at a reasonable price and praying for the grant of a eompul-
work the patented invention. 30
(2) An application under this section may be made by any person
notwithstanding that he is already the holder of a licence under the
patent and no person shall be estopped from alleging that the reason-
able requirements of ‘he public with respect to the patented inven-
tion are not satisfied or that the patented invention is not available 35
to the public at a reasonable price by reason of any admission made
by him, whether in such a licence or otherwise or by reason of his

having accepted such a licence.

{3) Every application under sub-sect
ment setting out the nature of the applicant’

sory licence to

jon (1) shall contain a state-
'$ interest together ee 40

Sava ws nr

led under this s

éxoller
5 (5) 3 72 section 8%,

of the |

he +
jen b ave not beer
ailable he public
tha paientss ence 0००:
ine paientse to grant a Heence upon

salisiied or that the patented invention ic

a reasonable price, may orde:

Such terms as he may deem fit.

io (5) Where the Controller di
he mas 4 x er directs the pater ७ tah
he may as incidental thereto s citentee to grant a Vieence

exerci, wi
98, excise the powers set out in section

88. I mini:
a determining whether or not to make an order in
9 3 rin pur

ef an application Aled secii
ig aceon ed under seciion 84, the Controller shall tal

SUaNce Matters
‘ke into to be taken

inte

account
time which has elapsed जाए
ent Toeasures already taken by licences.
8 to make full use of the invention;

(४) the ability of the ai '

20 public advantage;

(४) the nature of the i i

है ature invention, the
since the sealing of the patent and the D
the patentee or any license

pplicant to work the invention to the

(Hd) the capacity

of the appli :
were granted: pplicant to undertake the risk in

but shall not be required to take

4! हि int
to the making of the application. © account matters subsequent

86. (7) At i
25 any time after the expirati
dete ot 1 expiration of three
विनर कक] ‘ealtng a a patent, the Central Government ma a
3 Controller for an ord: vt ana
/ er that a
povlorsea wih the words “Licences of right” on te ground that the th
3० का वीके शाला of the publie with respect to the me as the
Hot been satisfied or that the patented invention sent words
2 is no

available to th i
e public at a reasonable price. “Licences
of right"

the
Endorse-
है 8D meni of

(2) The Controller, if satisfied tha
ः
“he pi ct to aten' nvention have not been satis-
ne public with respect to the patented invent! hi tb 11
0] h te i
ied or that the patented invention is not available to the public at
A

35 2 reasonable price, शा ay make an order that the patent be en rset
rea ble price, m: EY der that th t be 9; d
x atent endorser

t the reasonable requirements of

3 a

ona) more a patent of addition is in force. any a

arora § section for an endorsement either of the o:
patent of addition shall be treated as an appli

lication made
riginal patent
cation for the



ee a ee EEE Ee

a0

sand where a paient of addition granted
i endorsed under this section,

endorsement of bath pat
in respect of a patent ¥ 'त०
of addition shall also be so ender
(4) All endorsements of patents made under this section shall be 5
published in the Official Gazett and in
bic for bringing the

anufacturers.

endorsement to the notice

7, (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act,—

Certain 87. ; ws act

patents (a) every paient in force at the commencement of this Act 0

feendors. in respect of inventions relating to— sod ox

ed with the (i) substances used or capable of being used as foo

words as medicine or drug; |

ces of (ii) the. methods or processes for the manufacture er

Tight”. production. of any such substance as is referred to in sul is
clause (i);

(#2) the methods or processes for the manufacture °r
proditction of chemical substances {including alloys, oe रे
cal glass, semi-conductors and inter-metallic compounds);
and 90
{b) every patent granted after the commencement of this

Act in respect of any such invention as is referred. to in section
°s ry + at
shall be deemed to be endorsed with the words tom ne sent
i i referr in clause {a}, from the a
in the case of inventions referred to in cla a ner
mencement of this Act, and, in the case of inventions referred to in
clause (b), from the date of sealing of the patent.
(2) In respect of every patent which is deemed to be endorsed
with the words “Licences of right” under this section, the provisio!
of section 88 shall apply. ३०
५ ej
88. (7) Where a patent has been endorsed with the words eee
one ot of right”, any person whe is interested in working the patented im
endorse~

grant him a licence for the

tion 1 ; j atentee to
mentot tion in India may require the p 23, notwith-

such terms as may be mutually agreed upo:

patent 07056 on हि ‘ec t.
with the हिल कि that he is already the holder of a licence under the paten

a हे हि
“Liven ces (2) If the parties are unable to agree on the terms of the Hcence, 35

of right”. Gither of them may apply in the prescribed manner to the Controller

to settle the terms thereof.
(3) The Controller shall, after giving notice to the parties and

earing them and after mma king suc uiry as he may deem fit,
hi he d af’ ak: h enquiry as hi dee: jp
iS
tocide the terms on which the licence shall be granted by the patentee. 4o

le io hira in thi

requisition as is
5 to work the pater

nm py the Controller,

(8) 1; pect of every patept deemed to be &: do with the
words ४ nees of right” under sub-clause (i) or sub-clause GO of

10 clause (4) of sub-seciion (1) of section 87, whether the patent was
granted before ar after the commencem of this Act, the royalty
and other remuneration reserved te the patentee under 4
liceace granted to any person after such commencement shall
in no case exceed four per cent. of the net ex-factory sale price

15 in bulk of the patented article (exclusive of taxes levied under any
law for the time being in force and any commissions payable)
determined in such manner as may be prescribed.

(6) Save as otherwise provided in sub-section (5), the provisions

of sub-sections (7), (2), (4), (5) and (6) of section 93 {regarding

20 the powers of the Controller) and of sections 94 and 95 shall apply

to Hiecences granted under this section as they apply to licences
granted under section $4,

89. (1) Where, in respect of a patent, a compulsory licence has Revocation
been granted or the endorsement “Licences of right” has been made a शक
25 or is deemed to have been made, the Central Government or any per- Controller
son interested may, after the expiration of two years frotn the dete for non-
of the order granting the first compulsory licence or, as the case. may working.
be, the date of the grant of the first licence under section 88,
apply to the Controller for an order revoking the patent on the
30 ground that the reasonable requirements of the public with respect
to the patented invention have net been satisfied or that the patented
invention is not available to the public at a reasonable price,

(2) Every application under swh-section (2) shall contain such
particulars as may be prescribed and the facts upon which the appli-
35 7ation is based, and, in the case of an application other than by the
Central Government, shall also set out the nature of the applicant's
interest.

(3) The Controller, if satisfiéd that the reasonable requirements
of the public with respect to the patented invention have not been
satisfied or that the patented invention is not available to the public
at a reasonable price, may make an order revoking the patent,

(4) Every application under sub-section (7) shall ordinarily be
decided within one year of its being presented to the Controller.



90. For the purposes of sections 84, 86 and 59, the reasonable re-
हि he 9 i i (७ have been satisfied —
x pent quirersents of the public shall be deerned not to have bee atinfied

reat . {a} i, by reason of the default of tt teatee to manufacture

tents of in India fo an adequate extent and supply on reasonable terms the
the public patented article or 8 paxt of the 1018 which is 3
seen sary for ite efficient working ox if, by rea of here

fied patentee to grant a licence 05 ficenees on reasonadle terms,

dustry or the development
new trade or indusiry in
person or classes of एलए- 10
rejudiced; or

(i) an existing trade or
qhereof or the establishment of any 7
India or the trade or industry of any
sons trading or manufacturing in India is p

(४) the demand for the patented article is not being met
to an adequate extent or on reesonable terms from manutac-
ture in India; or हि
(iii) a market for the export of the patented article 15
manufactured in India is not being supplied or developed or
such market capable of being created is not being created: or

(i) the establishment or development of eormmercial

activities in India is prejudiced; or
(b) if, by reason of conditions imposed by the patentee (whe. 2¢
ther before or after the commencement of this Act) पाए oe
i der the patent, or upon the purchase, ir
oer oie patented x the manufacture, use or

use of the patented article or process, = 7
sale of materials not protected by the patent, or the cstablisnmen हि
or development of any trade or industry in India, is prey 5 25

or
{c) if the patented invention ig not being worked in India on
dequate extent or 15 not being 80

a commercial scale to an a' oo A
worked to the fullest extent that is reasonably practicable; or
ia is being 30

(व) if the demand for the patented article in Indi
met to a substantial extent by importation from abroad by—

{i) the patentee or persons claiming under him; or

(ii) persons directly or indirectly purchasing from him;

or
(iii) other persons against whom the patentee is not tak- 35
ing or has not taken proceedings for infringement; or
(e) if the working of the patented invention in India on a
commercial seale is being prevented or hindered by the imports:
tion from abroad of the patented article by the patentee or the
other persons referred to in the preceding clause. 4०

sonata

tion 86 oF s:

91. (2) Where au application under section 4,
tion 89, as the case may be, is made on the ground ment

has for a
o be Worked on a comme
ble the in ion to be so wer
veasonably practicable, he may, by
order, adjourn the further hearing of the application ior such period
not €+
be sufficient for he invention to be so worked:

Previded that in any case where the patentee establishes that the
reason why a patented invention could net be worked as aforesaid
before the date of the application was due to any State or Central
Act or any rule or regulation made thereunder or any order of the

75 Government imposed otherwise than by way of a condition for the
working of the invention in Tadia or for the disposal of the patented
articles or of the articles made by the process or by the use of the
patented plant, machinery, or appatatus. then, the period of adjourn-
ment ordered under. this sub-section shall he reckoned frora the date

20 09 which the period during which the working of the invention was

= prevented by such Act, rule or regulation or order of Government as
computed from the date of the application, expires.

ce the sealing of ६

able the inv:

wa

insullicient to
scale to an adeq
ed to the fullest

50

&

(3) No adjournment under sub-section (1) shall be ordered unless

the Controller is satisfied thai the patentee has taken with prompti-

25 {ude adequate or reasonable steps to start the working of the inven-
tion in India on a coramercial scale and to an adequate extent.

92. (1) Where the Controller js satisfied, upon consideration of
an application under section 84, section 86 or section 89, that a prima
focie case has been made out for the making of an order, he shall
direct, the applicant to serve copies of the application upon the
vatentee ahd any. other person- appearing from the register to be
interested in the patent in respect of which the application is made,
and shatl advertise the application in the Official Gazette.

30

(2) The patentee or any other person desiring to oppose the
application may, within such lime as may be prescribed or within
such further time as the Controller may on application (made either
pefore or after the expiration of the prescribed time) allow, give to
the Controller notice of opposition.

3.

tv

4o (3) Any such notice of opposition shall contain a statement set-
ting out the grounds on which the application is opposed.
(4) Where any such notice of opposition is duly given, the Con-
troller shall notify the applicant, and shall give to the applicant and
the opponent an opportunity to be heard before deciding the case.

|
|

Power ag
Centr

1 $0 86190

appli
tions Zor
compulsory

ing twelve months in the aggregate as appears to him ta °***

Procedure
for dealing
with appli-

tions 24,
86 and 89.



Hi ot
Controller

in gran

compulsory by the patentee upon the grant of

licenses.

थे

made
aol

lication

99. (7) Where the Controller is satisficd on
under section 84 ihat the manufacture, 0: fs
tis prejudi

5 imps
ander the patent, or upon ~
the purchase, hire or use of the pa d article or process, he may, >
of that section, order the grant of ticences
& applicant as he thinks fit

ng protected by the pa

ui

under the patent to such customers of th
as well as to the applicant

(2) Where an application under section 84 is made by a person 15
being the holder of a licence under the patent, the Controller may,
jf he makes an order for the grant of a licence to the applicant, order
the existing Hcence to be canceled, or may, if he thinks fit, nstead
of making an order for the grant of a licence to the applicant, order
the existing licence to be amended.

1s
(3) Where on an application made under section 84, the Control- °

Jer orders the grant of a licence, he may direct that the licence shall

nperate—

entee of any right which he may have

(a) to deprive the pat
exercise or vend the invention or io 20

ag patentee to make, use,
grant licences under the patent;

(b) to revoke all existing lice
tion.

neces in respect of the inven-

(4) Where two or more patents are held by the same patentee and
an applicant for a compulsory licence establishes that the reasonable
requirements of the public have not been satisfied with respect 40°25
some only of the said patents, then, if the Controller is satisfied that
the applicant cannot efficiently or satisfactorily work the licence

granted to him under those patents without infringing the other
direct the grant of 9

patents held by the patentee, he may, by order,
licence in respect of the other patents also ta enable the licensee to
work the patent or patents in regard to which a licence is granted
under section 84.

(5) Where the terms and condition:
by the Controller, an application may be made to the Controller by
the licensee for the revision of the terms on the ground that the
terms settled have proved to be more onerous than originally ex~
pected and that jn consequence thereof the licensee is unable to work
the invention except at a Joss:

Provided that no such application

{a) unless the licensee has w
mercial scale for 8 period of at le

8 of a licence have been settled

shal! be entertained,—
orked the invention on 2 com 49
ast twelve months, or

(b) a second time,

—%

SS '
(8) The decision of the Controller shall be subject to थ!
the High Court, :
94. The powers of the Contr
section &4 shall be oxercised

on made wader General
ring the following Purposes

छः

Her 0000 an applic

ha view io

§ general purposes, that is to — for
है . | . granting
{a} that vatented inventions are worked on a carn compul~

seale in India without undue delay and te the fullest extent that किए
is reasonably practicable; cence:

है (b) that the interests of any person for the time being work.
10 ing or developing an invention in India under the protection of
a patent are not unfairly prejudiced.
95. (1) In settling the terms and conditions of a licence under Terms
section 84, the Controller shall endeavour to secure— and con-
” iti
(i) that the royalty and other remuneration, if any, reserved compat,
15 to the patentee or other person beneficially entitled to the patent, 509 lis
is reasonable, having regard to the nature of the invention, the ceness,
expenditure incurred by the patentee in making the invention or
in developing it and obtaining a patent and keeping it in force
and other relevant factors;
20 (ii) that the patented invention is worked to the fullest ex-
tent by the person to whom the licence is granted and with rea-
sonable profit to him;
(iii) that the patented. articles are made available to the
public at reasonable prices,

25 (2) No licence granted by the Controller shall authorise the
licensee to import the patented article or an article or substance
made by a patented process from abroad where such importation
would, but for such authorisation, constitute an infringement of the
rights of the patentee.

30 (3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), the
Central Government may, if in its opinion it is necessary so to do
in the public interest, direct the Controller at any time to authorise
any licensee in respect of a patent to import the patented article or
an article or substance made by a patented process from abroad

35 (subject to such conditions as it considers necessary to impose relat-
ing among other matters to the royalty and other remuneration, if
any, payable to the patentee, the quantum of import, the sale price of
the imported article, and the period of importation), and thereupon
the Controller shall give effect to the directions,

4०0... 96. (1) न anything contained in the other provi- Licensing
sions of this Chapter, at any time after the sealing of a patent, any Of telated
person who has the right to work any other patented invention either Patents,



PEE Ea ७७ Oe aE TTA ४ ४७७0७0७७४""श"शनशनशश"श"श"श"शश"""श/शशणणएणएण

Special
provision
for com.
pulsory
licences
on notifi-
cation by
Central
Govern-
ment,

56
as patentee or as Vicensee thereof, exc!
to the Controller for the grant ef a
pa’

‘e from working the other inve
advantage possible.

(2) No order under sud-seetion
Controller is satisfied—
{i) that the applicant is able and willing to grant, हित pro-

4 ४ licensees i y 80 desire,
cure the grant to the patentee and his licensees if they so desire to
of, a licence in respect of the other invention on reasonable
terms; and

1 contri-

(ii) that the other invention has made a substan’ a :
bution to the establishment or development of commercial or in-
dustrial activities in India,

(3) When the Controller is satisfied that the conditions mentioned 75
in sub-section (1) have been established by the applicant, he may
make an order on such terms as he thinks fit granting a licence under
the first mentioned patent and a similar order under the other patent
if so requested by the proprietor of the first mentioned patent or his
licensee.

, (4) The provisions of sections 92 and 110 shall apply to licences

granted under this section as they apply to licences granted under
section 84,

20

87. (1) If the Central Government is satisfied in respect of any
patent or class of patents in force that it is necessary or oxpedient 25
in the public interest that compulsory licences should be granted at
any time after the scaling thereof to work the invention or inven-
tions, it may make a declaration to that effect in the Official Gazette,
and thereupon the following provisions shall have effect, that is 10 3०
say—

(i) the Controller shall on application made at any time after
the notification by any person intérested grant to the applicant
a licence under the patent on such terms as he thinks fit;

(8) in settling the terms of ६. licence granted under this see-
tion, the Controller shall endeavour to secure that the articles 35
manufactured under the patent shall be available to the public at
the lowest prices consistent with the patentees deriving a reason-
able advantage from their patent rights.

(2) The provisions of sections 92, 93, 94 and 95 shall apply in en
lation to the grant of licences under this section as they apply in 40
relation to the grant of licences under section 84.

aga y

37

38. Any order 107 the grant of a licence u
Gperaie ag if it were a deed grantin,

& licer

pat: 2 and all other ary

onditions, if any, settled by the Controller. a deed
between
parties
concer.
ed.

3 CHAPTER XVIL

Use OF INVENTIONS FOR PURPOSES 0५ GOVERNMINT AND ACQUISITION OF
INVENTIONS BY CENTRAL GOVERNMENT है

99. (1) For the purposes of this Chapier, an invention is said to Meaning
be used for the purposes of Government if it is made, used, exercised ot use vf
10 or vended for the purposes of the Central Government, a State Gov- fo शा
ernment or a Government undertaking or any other undertaking in pe Sof
a class or classes of indusiries which ihe Central Government, having Govern-
regard to the interests of the general public, may notify in this behalf ment.
in the Official Gazette.

15 (2) Nothing coatained in this Chapter shall apply in the case of
any such use of an invention as is deemed not to constitute an in
fringement of the patentce’s rights under section 48,

109, (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, at any power of
time after an application for a patent has been filed at the patent Centra]
20 office or a patent has been granted, the Central Government and any Govern.
person authorised in writing by it, may make, use, exercise or vend mente
the invention for the purposes of Government in accordance with ventions
the provisions of this Chapter. for pur.

roses Of
(2) Where an invention has, before the priovity date of the rele- Goveras

25 Vant claim of the complete specification, been duly recorded in a ment,
document, or tested or tried, by or on behalf of the Government or
a Government undertaking, otherwise than in consequence of the
communication of the invention directly or indirectly by the patentee
or by a person from whom he derives title, any use of the invention

30 by the Central Government or any person authorised in writing by it
for the purposes of Government may be made free of any royalty or
other remuneration to the patentee.

(3) If and so far as the invention has not been so recorded or tried

or tested as aforesaid, any use of the invention made by. the Central
35 Government or any person authorised by it under sub-section (1),
at any time after the acceptance of the coraplete specification in res-
pect of the patent or in consequence of any such comraunication as
aforesaid, shall be made upon terms as may be agreed upon either



58

x the use, between the Central Government or any
person authorised under sub-section (1) and the patentee, or, as may
in default of agreement be determined by the High Court on a

reference under section 103.

before or afte:

(4) The authorisation by the Central Government in respect of an $
invention may be given under this section, either before or after the
patent is granted and either before or after the acts in respect of
which such authorisation is given or done, and may be given to any
person, whether or not he is authorised directly or indirectly by the
applicant or the patentee to make, use, exercise or vend the inven- 10

tion.

(5) Where an invention has been made, used, exercised or vended
by or with the authority of the Central Government for the purposes
of Government under this section, then, unless it appears to the
Government that it would be contrary to the public interest so to do, 15
the Government shall notify the patentee as soon as practicable of
the fact and furnish him with such information as to the extent of
ihe making, use, exercise or vending of the invention as he may,
from: time to time, reasonably require; and where the invention has
been made, used, exercised or vended for the purposes of a Govern-
ment undertaking or an undertaking in a class or classes of indus-
tries notified by the Central Government under section 99, the Cen-
dral Government may call for such information as may be necessary
for this purpose from such undertaking.

20

(6) The right to make, use, exercise and vend an invention for 25
the purposes of Government under sub-section (7) shall include the
right to sell the goods which have been made in exercise of that
right, and a purchaser of goods so sold, and a person claiming through
him, shall have the power to deal with the goods as if the Central
Government or the person authorised under sub-section (1) were 30
the patentee of the invention.

(7) Where in respect of a patent which has been the subject of an
authorisation under this section, there is an exclusive licensee as is
referred to in sub-section (3) of section 101, or where such patent has
been assigned to the patentee in consideration of royalties or other 3
benefits determined by reference to the use of the invention (includ-
ing payments by way of minimum royalty), the notice directed to
be given under sub-section (5) shall also be given to such exclusive
licensee or assignor, as the case may be, and the reference to the
patentee in sub-section (3) shall be deemed to include a reference to 40
such assignor or exclusive licensee.

33
161, U) Inv ion to ar 5
i) In relation to any use of a patented invention, or an in- Rights of
BION, OY ~ Rights ५:

vention in respect hi
of which an applicati
mu Z a ation for a patent is p t
made for the purposes of Government— Batent Js Pending, on i
5, nient, parties in

(a) by the Contrai Go

vermment any p
tment or any person authorised by

5 the Central Government under section 100; or
(0) by the patente. i कि
the p 8 or applicant for the na bo ६ ere,
made by the Central Government, Baten fe the onder Govern
: Govern.

the provisions of i
a any licence, ssi m i"
made, whether before 0 nec, assignment or agreement granted or T+
10 ween the pat 076 or after the commencement ot this Act, bet:
९ derives title 2 entee or applicant for the palent (or any ersi ae
other tha: . nae am or from whom he derives title) and any: p who
he Central Government shall be of fi ० Person.
as those provisions— of no effect so fax

(i) restrict or regulate the us
15 ment of the invention, or ०.
relating thereto, or

(ii) provide for the makin,

; e for the purposes of Govern~
any model, document or information

0 f 8 of payments i
an a n invention or of the model, document or infor oe ion
eau g erelo for the purposes of Government (ineludi 08 pay.
20 S by way of minimum royalty); eens एक
;

and the reproduction or publica ion of any mode! doe
छा of or document
en

connection with the said use fo: 2

the model or document.
25 (2) Where the patent

patent, has been 8881,

ties or other benefits

vention (including
relation to any use

‘ or the right to apply for or obtain the
gned to the patentee in consideration ef ro I
determined by reference io the use of thi हि
payments by way of minimum royalty) 4

of the invention on

made for the purposes of G
of Gov-
order of the Central Government,
2

rence to the assignor of the patent,
of that sub-section shall be divided
Ssignor in such proportion as may
70 38 may in default of agreement be
on a reference under section 103,

be agreed upon between them o
determined by the High Court

40 (3) Where by virtue of sub.
are required to be made by ४
suthorised under sub.
use of an invention

heen (3) % section 100, payments
rection (0 roa rovernment or persons
sect of that section in respect of the

8 purposes of Government and where in



respect of such patent there is an exclusive licensee authorised under
his licence to use the invention for the purposes of G ament,
such sum shall be shared by the patentee and such licensee in such
A upou between them or a5 may
med by the H gh Court on a 3
regard to any expen~

proportions, if any, as
in default of agreement b
reference under section 103 to be just, having

diture incurred by the licensee—
(a) in developing the said invenlion; or
¢ than royal-

.(b) in making payments to the palentees othe
ties or other benefiis determined by reference to the use of the 10
invention, including payments by way of minimum royalty in
consideration of the licence. हर 5

102. (7) The Central Government may, if satisfied that it is

Acquisi- .
tion of necessary that an invention which 18 the subject of an application
invenlions for a patent or a patent should be acquired from the applicant or 75
and the patentee for a pubiic purpese, publish a notification to that

patents हे
by the effect in the Official Gazeite, and thereapon the invention or patent
Central and all rights in vespect of the invention or patent shall, by force
Govern- ¢ thig section, stand transferred to and be vested in the Central

ment.
20

Government.

(2) Notice of the acquisition shall be given to the applicant, and,
where a patent has been granted, to the patentee and other persons,
if any, appearing in the register as having an interest in the patent.

(3) The Central Government shall pay to the applicant, or, as
the case may be, the patentee and other persons appearing on the 25
register as having an interest in the palent such compensation as
may be agreed upon between the Central Government and the appli-
eant, or the patentee and other persons; or, as may, in default
of agreement, be determined by the High Court on a reference
under section 103 to be just, having regerd to the expenditure in- 3°
curred in connection with the invention and, in the casc of a
patent, the term thereof, the period during which and the manner

jn which it has already been worked (including the profits made
-during such period by the patentee or by his licensee whether ex

clusive or otherwise) and other relevant factors. 35
Reference 103. (1) Any dispute as to the exercise by the’ Central ‘Govern-
दि ment or a person authorised by it of the powers conferred by sec-
disputes tion 100, or as to terms for the use of an invention for the purposes
as touse of Government thereunder or as to the right of any person to

76 made in pursuance of sub-section "| SSeS
of compensation payable for
section 102, may be

for जप receive any part of a payme
poses © (3) of that section or as to the amount

Govern- aon . .
ment. the acquisition of an invention or a patent under:

amin ttmNTe Ramee

35 Government undertaking and thi

5 (2) if the pate:
way of counter-claim ३;
upon which a natent 1

to t हु iti
0 the proceedings, petition by
; ft of the on any ground
ve revoked under section 64; and

(0) whether a patentee is or is
patentee is or is not a party to the proceed.

ings, put in issue the validi हि
हे sue the validity of the “itl woe
To for its revocation, y of the patent without petitioning

(3) If in such p: 5
६०2 such proce aforesal
whether an in 2 edings as aforesaid

tioned in section

i any question aris:
‘00. has been recorded, tested or tried as in chen
the invention, ov of aa disclosure of any document regarding’
iy हे fate ‘ence of the test or tri reof, would
15 in the opinion of the Central Government ne thereof, would,
oublie interest, the di nt, be prejudicial to - the
advocate of oh disclosure may be made confidentially to th
8 other party or to an independent expert mutually

agreed upon.

(4) nd ini . . oa

20 Central Government 5 under this section any dispute between ‘the

invention for the nt and any person as ta terms for the use of an
regard to any pene on of Government, the’ High’ Court shail ‘have
person from whom he deme een Which that person or an:
entitled to receive a derives title, may have received, or ma be

25 ‘Bvention i » Gizeetly or indirectly in respect of the the
5S in question. for the purposes ef Government. © use of the

this section, the High Court may

dings or any question or issue of
or ane 0 an official referee, issi

3० towne ator on such terms as the High Court “may “direct, and

conan he High’ Court in the foregoing provisi : ‘see

m shail be construed accordingly. eins Prowistins of this see.

(6) Where the i i
); cre the invention clai i
person who at the time it was raed isin the rye
Government or of a State Gov.

a Made by a
; $ in the service. of the Central
ernment or was an employee of a
cove n é e subject-matter’ fhe invention j
ed by the relevant overnment or the p: vincipal oe ३] ve
inci cer of the

Government undertaki to be connected wit! 1९ work done in the
aking to b th th kd in th
dl Ci ected
course of the normal duties of the Government servant or employee

88,
at
5 for ine

gen



Turisdic-
tion,

b.

Ce.
Govier of
ment to
Fy
-a-
8

wage-

nt,

62,

of the Government undertaking, then, notwithstanding anything
contained in this section, any dispute of the nature referred to in

) relating to the jnvention shali be disposed of by the
Central Government conform ably to the provisions of this section
so far as may be applicable, but before doing so the Central Govern- §
ment shall give an opportunity to the patentee and such other parties

as it considers have an. interest jn the matter to be heard.

CHAPTER XVIII
SUITS CONCERNING INFRINGEMENT

104, No suit for a declaration under section 105 ot for any relief 70
under section 106 or for infringement of a patent shall be instituted
in any court inferior to a district court having jurisdiction to try the

suit:
Provided that where 8 eounter-claim for revocation of the patent
is made by the defendant, the suit, along with the counter-claim, 15

shall be transferred to the High Court for decision.
ned in section 34 of the

Specific Relief Act, 1963, any person may institute a suit for 2
declaration that the use by him of any process, or the making, use 07
sale of any article by him. does not, or would not, constitute 87 2,
infringement of a claim of a patent against the patentee or the
holder of an exclusive licence under the patent, notwithstanding
that no assertion to the contrary has been mat

the licensee, if it is shown—
(a) that the plaintiff jias applied in writing to the patentee 25
written acknowledgment to the cffect

of the declaration claimed and has furnished him with full parti-
ड़ or article in question; and

culars in writing of the proces:
(b) that the patentee or Jicensee has refused or neglected
to give such an acknowledgment. 30

_ (2) The costs of all parties in a suit
-~tue of this section shall, unless for spe
fit to order otherwise, be paid by the plaintiff.

(3) The validity of a claim of the specification of a vatent shall
nat be called in question in a suit for a declaration prousht by virtue 35
of this section, and accordingly the making or refusal of such 8
declaration in the case of 8 patent shall not be deemed to imply
‘hat the patent is valid or invalid.

(4) A suit for a declaration may pe brought by virtue of this
section at any time after the date of advertisement of aceentance of रा!
the complete specification of a patent, and references in this section

to the patentee shall be construed accordingly.

sub-section (2

OF PATENTS

105. (1) Notwithstanding anything eontai: 47 of 1963

de by the patentee oF

or exclusive licensee for 2 ¥

for a declaration ‘brought by
cial reasons the court thinks

i
|

Power of
Court to

proceed
mgs,

oa) the contiauance of the threats; and
any, as he has sustained thereby,

(2) Unies i:
pect of whieh the
would consti , fingers
the publication of = comple

15 the specificati :
may grani to

29891 proves that the acts in res-
४ ore threatened constitute or, if done
ot ot 4 patent or of rights arising from
a specification in respect of a claim of
; ay the pisintiff to be invalid, the court
f all ov any of the reliefs prayed for.

vedings

Explanation — e. ay .
does ee meni mee sotification of the existence of a patent
‘ Maie a tt £ proc पु 34७ ren

° torcet of proceeding within the ए i i
section. © e meaning of this

107. (2) In any suit iri De

20 many sult uiringeraent

whi 5 suk taent of a patent, every gro fences,
ich it may be revoked under section 64 shall be cvallcble ax हि ete, in

gr नि ड़ . fori
ound for defence. suite for ins
.

(2) Ina suit for iniri
s initingernent of a pat 8 i
लय की or s a patent granted in resp: ment.
meine 9 oF process £ taamntfacture of @ substance referred bin tee
Be na ny s ance of the samme chemical composition or constite tion
tae mentiones substance shail be presumed, unles he “con
is pr to hav ; : 8
'ज is proved, to have been made by the aforesaid metho
we ee id patented method
a

8. The reliefs which a court may grant in y suit for in- Reliefs
16: a co ma
gram any su
fringement ine RO an injunction (subject to such terms, if any, as “Ste
3° the court thinks fit) and, at the option of the plaintiff, eit! |
t 14५ i the pla , either damages fringe.

109, (1) The hol i xclusive li ment.
as the Laan is oi an exclusive licence shall have the like right Right of
35 the patent commit * fs respect of any infringement of exclusive
damages or an account ee e licence, and in awarding livensee
such suit the oe prolts or granting any other relief in any to take
हि ~ e into consi i a proceed-
or likely to be svt ee sideration ny loss suffered ings
case may be, the prc ; exclusive Heensee a8 such or, as the “gains
; . 0! hy ans Paroe , oe :
4० as it constiluies an ir y Means of the infringement so far infringe-
licensee as such.

germant of the rights of the exclusive ment
GMGIPND.—i833 (8) LS--10



Tight of
licensee
under
section 84
to take
proceed-
ings
against
infringe-
ment.

Restric-
tion on
power of
court to
grant
damages
or

account 2
of its

for in-
fringe-

Restric-
tion on
power
of court

& a

roupent of a patent by the holder of 2b
(2), the paiente ynall, unless he
ff ie the suit, dded as a defendani, but 3
ant shall not be liable for any costs unless
3 part in the proceedings.

(2) In
exclusive
has joined as a plaints
patentee so added as dete
he enters an appeare

310. Any per:
24 shall be entitled to call upon the patentee to take proceedings to
prevent any infringement of the patent, and, if the patentee refuses
or neglects to do so within two months after being 80 called upon, the
licensee may institute proceedings for the infringemeat in his own 10
name as though he were the patentee, making the patentee 2 defen-
dant; but a patentee so added as defendant shall not be liable for any
costs unless he enters an appearance and takes part in the proceed-

ings.

icence hag been granted under section

क्र, (1) In a suit for infringement of 8 patent damages eT है? 15
account of profits shall not be granted against the defendant who
proves that at the date of the infringement he was not aware and had
no reasonable grounds for believing that the patent existed.

Expionation—A person shall not pe deemed to have been aware
or to have had reasonable grounds for believing that a patent exists 20
by reason only of the application to an article of the word “patent”,
“patented” or any word or words expressing oF implying that a
patent has heen obtained for the article, unless the number of the
pateni accompanies the word or words in question.

(2) In any suit for infringement of a patent the court may, if it 25
thinks fit, refuse to grant any damages or an account of profits in
respect of any infringement committed after a failure to pay any
renewal fee within the prescribed period and before any extension of
that period.

(3) Where an amendment of a specification by way of disclaimer, 30
correction or explanation has been allowed under this Act afier the
publication of the specification, no damages or account of profits shall
be granted in any proceeding in respect of the use of the invention
before the date of the decision allowing the amendment, unless the
fication as originally published was 35

court is satisfied that the speci
framed in good faith and with reasonable skill and knowledge.

(4) Nothing jn this section shall affect the power of the court to
grant an injunction in any suit for infringement of 2 patent.

412. If in proceedings for the infringement of a patent endorsed or
deemed to be endorsed with the words ग्‌ (६९९९४ of right” (otherwise
than by the importation of the patented article from other countries)

the infringing defendant is ready and willing to take a licence upon

4o

_ सिनररररपरनअ«सध« 3 i i
junetiod® save in the circumstances

~ ment,

tion of a patent under secti 4 the validity of any clai a
under section 64 £! i
हु validity lain: of a speci. of validity
ro the Court may certify that

patent or in an
in so far as it relates है की sae the
re a the validity of the claim obtai
ns favour, he shall be entitled to :
™ moose charges and expenses of
renee है ing properly incurred so
20 meet of which the certificate was
© suit or proceeding otherwise di

Provided that the costs a ecified in th: be
ee When t S as specifi 8 sub-section sh.

the court that he was not
25 pe iaised the dispute and withdrew
me aware of such a certificate.

3) Nothi i
auth seeing contained in this section shali
puthonis ig courts hearing appeals from d.
ringement or petitions for r oto pa
30 on the scale referred to therein, we

114. (1) If in proceedin,
that any claim of the speci

7. certain
ge Casee,

il3. (1) Ef jn an
¥ proceedings before @ Hi
fi 2 High Conrt for the reve
|! 8 revooa- Certificate

is found by the
+ cai Ie है n€ court to be valid, Sf spect
the validity of that claim was contested acation and

in those proceedings Wi subsequent
proceedings and was upheld.
2) Where any such certificate has been granted, then, if in any
. ( _ suits for
has 1 anted, , if in a inininge-
; ¢ ment

claim of the

Freee ng for revocation of the patent ‘heree.
elaim, the patentee or other pergon rely-
ns a final order or judgment in
an order for the payment of his
ge incidental to any such suit
a as ey concern the claim in
granted, unless th मु
cane e court trying

; all not
he claim satisfies
ant of the certifica

> gat te when
forthwith such defence when he

party disputing the validity of t
aware of the gr: .

be construed ag
r orders in sui

¢ 5 suits
cation to pass orders for costs

5 for infri
ies for infringement of a patent it is found
ion, being a claim in respect of which feet tor

intringement is alle; i
s ‘ged, is valid, bh nent
the erent is all 8 valid, but that any other claim is i id, mentee
45 तक, Y grant relief in respect of any valid claim whe part a
} ich ir tally
valid
os specifiea.
vided that the court shall not “n

grant relief exce
ह pt by way of
mentioned in sub-section “oO.

chapoescgger:

!


(2) Where the plaintiff prov ae
1 good faith and with reavona ६. wader
grant re of an:
to the diserelion of Ube cauri
which damages or an aveount of profits show i
exercising such discretion the court may talko ints
conduct of the parties in insert:ng dt claims
vation or permitting them to remain ths

min snd shalt

fe

such liv

(3) Bvery such appeal shall be heard ag experiitionsty |

Scientific 5, in any sult we i er
advisers, @ court uader this Act, the court may 2: an ° blo and endeavour s be m 7
an application has 920९0 made by any yart 79 poried of twelve का the node deride the appesl within s
an independent scientific adviser te ass tor te inquive and . m the Gate ६ 8 filed
report upon any such question of fart ox ६ (net invelving a CHAPTER एफ
question of interpretation of law) a5 it may lors e for the pur- ts Powatrres
pose. _ . he It any person fails ta comply with any diree Comte:

(2) The remuneration of the scien Iviser shall be fixed by 15 section 35 or makes or causes to be made an applicatinn for mtn ae
the court and shall include the costs of making 2 report and a proper of 2 patent in contravention of section 39, he sh 3 b . vient ine grant secrecy “
daily fee for any day on which the scie adviser may be required imprisonment for a term which may extend to to हि punishable with provisvons
to attend before the court, and such remmacration shall be defrayed fine, or with both, हल fo two years, or with setating
out of moneys provided by Parliament by few for te purpose. co. - |

. ~ 119, If any person makes, or cau: made, a Las . |
. CHAPTER XIX . . 20 2ny register kept under this Aet, ota writing fala Ly tele entry MD Palsifies- |
3 be a copy of an entry in such : दा ज purporting to tion of
APPEALS causes to bi a register, cr produces or tenders, or enliieg in
6. vor sot di komt 9 be produced or tendered, in evidence any suck: sting Tegister,
Appeals. 116, (7) No appeal shall lie from any decision, order or irec- cnowing the entry or writing to be false, he sha’l be. ne 1. writing 7
C ! Goverament, or imprisonment for a term which may extend io मिल भइ with

tion made or issued under this Act by the Cer
irom any act or order of the Controller for the purpose of giving 25

effect to any such decision, order or dir
42) Save as otherwise expressly provided in b-section {1),
at appeal shall lie to a High Co from any decision, order or
direction of the Controtler wmder any of the following provis:ons.
that is to say, 30
section 15, section 16, section 17, section 18, section 19, section
ms 20, section 25, section 27, section 28, section 51, section 54, section
87, section 60, section €1, section 6B, sub-yection (3) of section 69,
section 78, section 84, section 86, section 89, section 93, section 96 and 35

25 fine, or with both.

9 वि
. wa. if any person falsely represents that any article sold by him Unautho-
* Bet conte nia or is the subject of an application for a patent in Tised claim
pdia, all be punishabl. ith fine which m to five Sepaten
PT able with fine which may extend to five loa

hundred rupees,

o Explanation i.—For the purposes of this section, a eTSON ६: 2
, ,
3 > 2 person shall |.

{a) that an article is i 19 i

= is patented in India if there is st
. t a amped,
nereved or impressed on, or otherwise appiied to the article the
word “patent” or “patented” or some other wor’ expressing or im.

section 97. ‘ " '
35 plying that a patent for the article has been obtained in India;

(3) Every appeal under this section shal} be in writing ६8) that an article is the subj. f
ays a subject an applicati
shall be made within three months from the date of the decision, patent in India, if there are stampen on ae wep teation tor
order or direction, as the case may be, of the Controller, or within or otherwise applied to, the article the we a impressed on
such: further time as the High Court : in accordance with the for”, “patent pending”, or some other words ft patent applied
’ $ 3 implying that an

al 1६ under section 158 allow. i 4o application for a patent for the article has been made in Indi:
| is A n India,
4 ॥
ction 158 allo 4a |

and



imply- aed
» applied tor

or to 8 f
.e, unless there

pen

ACKOTY i
applied for in any country outside Indie
388, Hs

husiv

8 00 any document

muses on his plac

Wrongful

use of issued by or otherwise the words “paten+ office” or any other 3
alam words which would reasonably lead io the clief that his place of © ; 70. Eaplanation—¥or the purposes .
office; Wusiuicss is, ov is off y connected with, the patent office, he shall ~ “s of this section,
0९, a . (a) “2 :
be punishable with imprisonment for ४ term whieh may extend to feta (a) “company” x hody co
six months, or with fine, or with both. m of other association idval राजा eed includes a
~ duals; ani
Refusal or 422. (7) If any person refuses or f to furnish— (8) “director”, in reistion (७ a § :
failure to firm. है stion to a firm, means a partner 20 tf
supply (a) to the Central Government any information which he is 15 . ~
नक्शा required to furnish under sub-section (5) of section 100, is
‘ion, CHAPTER
(9) to the Controller any information or statement which he ५ HAPTER KEL
ig required to furnish under section 146, P ,
हे ATENT AGENTS
he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one thousand i 125. The Cont i
“छा - Che Controller shali w
rupees. 20 ter of patent agents 4 which shall be ent er to he cailed the vegis- it ro
(2) If any person, being required to furnish any such inforrna- es of all persons qualified to h + 98 entered the names and address- of patent |
५ ५ हि inf ti 1660 to have thei 1 address. of paten
tion as is referred to in sub-section (1), furnishes formation or 29 Section 126, ave their names so entered under 2g2tls , |
statement which is false, and which he either knows or has reason
el t मु belie
to Delay कह which सका eiend te oe हक, 25 i 126. (/) A person shall be qualified to h:
aD #n वि गा हर धर the regi . है 9 have his be .
or with fine, or with both. | name of patent agents if he fulfit ‘he f i" name ente: in Qua
5 हि हि i — . . S the following conditi tions for
Practice 193, If any person contravenes the provisions of section 129, he | @ conditions, registra:
bynon- gj} j sth fne which may ext . ses ;
rosistered shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred (a) he is a citizen of India: flon as
patent rupees in the case of a first offence and two thousand rupees in the > ° ent
agents, case of 9 second or subsequent offence. 30 25 (0) he has completed the age of 2 gents, is
. . age 0: years; ४
Offences 124. (1) If the person committing an offence under this Act is 8 (c) he } years; |
by com- company, the company as well as every person in charge of, and é e has obtained a degree tr
हि pany, & s a F) territory of वि ree from > Universite ¢ icf
panies. } erritory of India or pessesses such other University in the in|

yesponsible to, the company for the conduct of its business at the
the offence shall be deemed to be guilty
pe liable to be proceeded against and °°

time of the commission of
of the offence and shalt

punished accordingly:
i 8 i an this न 25 of 1961, 30
Provided that nothin, contained in this sub-section shall render

any such person liable to any punishment if he proves that oa
offence was committed without his knowledge or that he exercised
all due diligence to prevent the commission of wich offence.

¢

4०

offence and shall be 15;
accordingly,

equivalent qualifica- l

tions as the Central vernment may specify j 3 beh
he Cent: Go nt may speci 1) thi Lf.
his beha

and, in addition —

(४) is an advocate within the w

Act, 1961; or neaning of the Advoeates ;

(ii) has passed the
for the purpose;

qualifying examination preseiitied



, shall, on payme

one before the said ६ ९
entered in the register of pa

ed to have 198 nai

8 i i is Act and 5
Rights 427. Subject ta the provisions contained in this Act and nen
patent “ rules made thereunder, © fatent agent whose name is entered
rant m Une.

agents, पा the register shati be e
(०) to practise before the Controller; and

s, transact ail business anc dis-

be preseribed in connection

under this Act.

६9) to prepare ahi socument
charge such other functions as may 9?
with any proceeding before the Controller

ained in sub-section (2)

o 428. (4) Subject to the provisions conte in st ction
पाए and to se rules made under this Act, all application’ fa eo 15
verifica- — syynications to the Controller under this Act may Ene enon
pone patent agent authorised in writing in this beha! yy t
e
documents concerned.
by patent
agents: (2) The following documents, namely,—

( applications for patents;

(i) applications for the restoration of lapsed patents:
e sealing of patents after the time

iii) applications for th :
slowed toe that purpose by or under sub-section (2), oF sub-

section (2) of section 43 has expired:

: 25
(iv) applications for leave to amend;

२) spplicatio 0. ulsory licences or for revocation;
(७) applications for comp’ 3
and

(vi) notices of surrender of patents;

हि son
pall be signed and verified in the manner prescribed py the person 3,
making such applications or giving such notices:

६ from India, they 1 सन be

1 i rson is absen 1
Provided thet tt om his beh atent agent authorised by

verified on his behalf by a P

iyned and
him i in that behalf.

him in writing

ait?

129, (३) No person, eith

any other Rost
© | agent,

held ont, unless he is regis 9
ess he aud all his हेड

£2) No compa:

: y or other body corporate shall practise, describe
iiself or hold ilself out as paient agents or permit itself to be so
described or held out,

Explanation ~~-For the purposes of this section, practise 88 ७ patent ,
170 agent includes any of the following acts, namely: —

{a} applying for or obtaining patents in India or elsewhere;

(0) preparing spccificaiions or other documents for the pur-
poses of this Act or of the patent law of any other count:

- {c} giving advice other than of a stientifie or technical na
45 ture as to the validity of patents or their infringement,

130. (1) The ‘Central Government may remove the name of any Removal
person from the register when it is satisfied, after giving that person from
a reasonable opportunity of being heard and after such further in- registerot

quiry, if any, as it thinks fit to make— Patent
agents :
; . and resto-
20 (i) that his name has been entered in the register by error or ration. |

on account of misrepresentation or suppression of material fact;

(ii) that he has been convicted of any offence and sentenced
to a term of imprisonment or has been guilty of misconduct in i
his professional capacity which in the opinion of the Centra? 4
25 Government renders. him unfit to be kept in the register,

(2) The Central Government may, on application and on sufficient

cause being shown, restore to the register the name of any person
removed therefrom.

131. (1) Subject to any rules made in this behalf, the Controller Power of
30 may refuse to recognise as agent in respect of any business under this Controller

Act— to refuse
to deal
(a) any individual whose name has peen removed from, and with in
t restored to. ister:
not restored to, the register; agents,
1883 (B)L,S.—11. Re BIR OG



Savings in
respect

of 0४0७४
persona
authorised
to act 88
agente.

Notifice~
ion as to

convention
countries,

Noti-
fication
as to
eountries
not
providing
recipro-
city.

scted of un offence unde:
serson who has been canvieted of an offence wr der

tent agent, who |
119 or mainly in ?

agent in apply
benefit ०:

employed;
में) any company or शिवा, if any person whom the Controller
iv recognise as agent in respect of any business an fer
ava director or nenager of the company or is a 10

poriner in the firm

The Controller shall refuse to reeognise as agent in respect of
“this Act any person who neither resides nov I
in India.

132. Nothing in this Chapter shali be deemed to prohibit— 1s

{a} the applicant fer a patent or any person, not being पे
patent agent, who Is d authorised by the applicant from ae हि
ing any specification or appearing or acting before the Controller;

or
(b} an advocate, not being a patent agent, from taking part
in any proceedings under this Act otherwise than by way of draft- 20
ing any specification.
CHAPTER XXII
INTERNATIONAL ARRANGEMENIS

423. (1) With a view to the fulfilment of a treaty, convention a
arrangement with any country outside India which afk 5 ie i 25
eants for patents in India or to citizens of India similar priv ges a
ake granted to its own citizens in respect of the grant of patent ae
the protection of patent rights, the Central Government may, by ob
fication in the Official Gazette, declare such country to be a conv 3०
tion country for the purposes of this Act.

(2) 4 declaration under sub-section (1) may be made for the ie
poses either of all or of some only of the provisions of this Act, an है
country in the case of which a declaration made for the purposes °
some only of the provisions of this Act is in force shall be deem ,
be a convention country for the purposes of those provisions only. 35

134, Where any country specified by the Central Government »
this behalf by notification in the Official Gazette does not ecor pee
citizens of India the same rights in respect of the grant of ine en! Sand
the protection of patent rights as it accords to. its own nationals,

alee

पक लक

ड़

national of sv
with ar

bests

5 8) to be v
patent; or

(2) to apply for a license or hold suv

granted under this Ac

135. (1) Without prejudice io the provisions B
10 ४, where a person has made an application for a patent ia respect of *
an invention ia a convention country (hereinafter referred to as the
‘basic application"), and that serson or the legal regcesentative or
assignee of that person makes an application un this Aet for a
patent within twelve months 916७ the date on ieh, the hasic sp-
15 plication was made, the priority date of a claim of ithe complete
specification, being a claim based on matter Josed the ba:
application, is the date of making of the hasic application.
Explanation.—Where applications have been made for similar
protection in respect of an invention in two or more convention
20 countries, the period of twelve months referred to in this ड़

shall be reckoned from the date on which the earlier or earliest of
the said applications was made.

{
डे

(2) Where applications for protection have been made in one or

Taore convention countries in respect of two or more inventions

25 which are cognate or of which one is a modifi-

eation of another, a single ‘convention application may,

subject to the provisions contained in section 10, be made in respeet

of those inventions at any time within twelve roonths 1076 the date
of the earliest of the said applications for protection:

30 Provided that the fee payable on the making of any such appli-

cation shall be the same as if separate applications have been cade

in respect of each of the said inventions, and the requirements of

clause (0) of sub-section (1) of section 136 shalt, in the case af

such application, apply separately to the applications for protection
35 in respect of each of the said inventions.

136, (1) Every convention epplication shall—
{a) be accampanied by a complete specification; and
(0) specify the date on which and the convention gountry

pect of the
invention had been made in a convention country before that

relating to
. ‘ है oon

in which the application for protection, or as the ease may be, oy
40 the first of such applications was made: and tens,

(०) state that no application for protection in res}



Multiple
priorities.

‘Supple-
inentary
provisiovs
as to
conven.
tion
applica-
tions.

date by the applicant or by any person frem whom he derives
title.

(2) Subject to the provisions contained in section 10, a complete
pecification fled with a convention application may include claims
in respect of develupments of, or additions.to, the invention in res- 5
pect of which the application for protection was made in a convention
country, being developments or additions in respect of which the
applicant would be entitled under the provisions of section § io
make a sepatate application for a patent.

(3) A convention application shall not be post-dated under sub- 10
section (2) of section 17 to a date later than the date on which under
the provisions of this Act the application could have been made.

137. (1) Where two or more applications for patents in respect
of inventions have been made in one or more convention countries
and those inventions are so related as to constitute one invention,
one application may be made by any or all of the persons referred
to in sub-section (1) of section 135 within twelve months from the
date on which the exrlier or earliest of those applications was made,
in respect of the javentions disclosed in the specifications which
accompanied the basic applications.

(2) The priority date of a claim of the complete specification,
being a claim 988९७ on matters disclosed in one or more of the
basie applications, is the date on which that matter was first. so
disclosed.

(3) For the purposes of this Act, a matter shall be deemed to 25
have been disclosed in a basie application for protection in a con-
vention country if it was claimed or disclosed (otherwise than by
way of disclaimer or acknowledgment of a prior act) in that appliea-
tion, or any documents submitiea uy. the applicant for protection in
support of and at the same time as tha. aplication, but no account 30
shall be taken of any disclosure effected by way such document un-
Jess a copy of the document is filed at the patent office with the con-
vention application or within such period as may be prescribed after
the filing of that application. .

138. (1) Where a convention application is made in accordance 34
with the provisions of this Chapter, the applicant shall furnish, in
addition to the complete specification, copies of the specifications or
corresponding documents filed or deposited by the applicant in the
patent office of the convention country in which the basic applica-
tion was made, certified by the official chief or head of the patent 4०
office of the convention country, or otherwise verified to the satis-
faction of the Controller, along with the application or within three
months thereafter, or within such further period as the Controller
may on gocd cause allow.

a”

20

si

is

20

30

|

document i
cation or decument,

(2) if any such specificaiion or atin
janguage. a translation into
verified by affidavit
ler, shall be anne:

{3) For the purposes of this Act, the date on w
tion was made in a com 0 country is such da:
ler is satisfied, by certificate of the official

nica an applica-
the Control.
chief or bead of the
patent office of the convention country or otherwise, is the date on

which the application was made in that convention count:

139. Save as otherwise provided in this Chapter, alt the provisions
of this Act shall apply in relation to a convention application and
a patent granted in pursuance thereof as they apply in relation to
an ordinary application and a patent granted in pursuance thereof.

CHAPTER ZXUI

MISCELLANEOUS
140. (2) It shall aot be lawful to insert—

(0 in any contract for or in relation to the sale or lease of
a patented article or an article made by a patented process; or

(४) in a licence to manufacture or use a patented article; or
(iii) in a licence to work any process protected by a patent,
a condition the effect of which may be—

(व) to require the purchaser, !cssee, or licensee to acquire
from the vendor, lesser, or licensor, or his nominees, or to pro-
hibit him from acquiring or ‘o restrict in any manner or to any
extent his right to acquire from any person 07 to prohibit him
from acquiring except from the vendor, lessor, or licensor तह
his nominees, any article other than the patented article or an
article other than that made by the patented process; or

(b) to prohibit the purchaser, lessee or licenses from using,
or to restrict in any manner or to any extent the right of the
purchaser, lessee or licensee, to use an article other than the
patented article or an article other than that made by the patent-

ed process, which is not supplied by the, vendor, lessor or licen-
sor or his nominee; or

(c) to prohibit the purchaser, lessee or licensee from using
or to restrict in any manner or to any extent the right of the

im a foraign

Other pro-
visions o£
Act to
apply ta
conver.
tion
applicay
tions,

Avoidance
of certain

restrictive
conditions.



purchaser, lessee or licensee tu use any process other than the
patented process;

and any such condition shail be void.

(2) & condition of the uature 2. ed 10 in clause (७) or clause
{b) or clause (०) of sub-section (३) shall noi cease to be a condition 5
falling within that sub-section merely by reason of the fact that the
agreement containing entered into separately, whether
before or after the contract ag to the sale, lease or licence of

the patented article or process

has 2

(3) In proceedings against any person tor the infringement of 10
a patent, it shall be a defence to prove that at the time of the in-
fringement there was in force a contract relating to the patent and
cortaining a condition declared unlawul by this section:

Provided that this sub-scetion sball not apply if the plaintiff ts
not a party to the contract ard proves to the satisfaction of the 55
court that the restrictive condition < inserted in the contract
without his knowledge and consent, express ot implied.

(4) Nothing in this section shall—

by which a person is
1 those of a particular 20

(a) affect a condition in a cont
prohibited from selling goods other ¢
person;

(b) validate a contract which, bul for this section, would

be invalid;

(e) affect 2 condition in a contract for the lease of, oF
jicence to use, a patented article, by which the lessor or licensor 25
reserves to himself or his nominec the right to supply such new
parts of the patented article as may be required cr to put 5

keep it in repair.

(5) The provisions of this section shall also apply to contracts
made before the commencement of this Act if, and in so far as, any ¥
restrictive conditions declared uniawful by this section continue in
force after the expiration of one year from such commencement.

141. (1) Any contract for the snie or lease of a patented article

Determi- है .
nationef or for licence to manufacture, use or work a patented article or
certain process, or relating to any such sale, lease or licence, whether made 3s

contracts. before or after the commencement of this Act, may at any time after

the patent or all the pate

wots hy which the article or process was

en

protected al
ceased ia |
in the con
chaser, less
3S Uscee mon

anticg &

(2) The provisions of this
any right of deiermining 2
section.

tion shall be without
tex le apart trom this

142, (1) There 1k id i
7 1 be paid in respect uf the grant F
cere sh i pect grant of patents Fees.
16 and applications therefor, and in respect ot other matters in relation

to the grant ot patenis under this Act, such fees as may be prescrih

ed by the Central Government. —_—

(2) Where a fee is payable in re: °

fee as payable in respect of the doing of an aet by
the Controller, the Controller shal not do that act until the fee has
15 been paid. i until the tee has

j & Where a fee is payable in respect of the fling of a document
at the patent office, the document shall be deemed not ta have been
filed at the office until the fee has been paid,

wo fe 90 Where a principal patent is gvanted later than two years

om the date of the application for patent, the fees which ha

become due in the meantime may be paid within a term of th ve
months from the date of the recordal of the patent in the register,

हि 148. Subject to the provisions of Chapter VIT, an application Restric-
or a patent. and any specification filed in pursuance thereof Hons
25 not, except with the ca tl 1 @ thereof, shall upon
Controll @ consent of the applicant, be published by the publi-
ontroller or be open to public inspection at any time b cation of
date of advertisement of ¥ © before the specifica-
s of acceptance of the application in pursuance ons

of section 23,

144, The reports of examiner: Ci
5 a s to the Controller under thi Ri
5 ‘anni r under this Act Reports
3! shat nat be open to public inspection or be published by the Con- cxami
m er; and such reports shall not be liable to production or inspec- tobecen
ion in any legal proceeding unless the court certifies that the ‘pro- fidential.

duction or inspection is desir: t e interests of justice, and ou
a desirab the int t: 1; ht
e in in if , and oug!

35 Provided that the Controller may, on application made in the

te nate by any person, disclose the résult of any search
under section 13 in. respect of an. licati

1 y application for t

where the complete specification has been ‘published. * poten



38

‘The Controlier shall issue periodically 8 publication of pat-
ations containing such information as the Ceniral Gov-

ented inv
ernment

448, The Controller may, at any time during the continuance of
the patent, by notice in writing, yequire a patentee or @ licensee,
exclusive or otherwise, to furnish to him within two months from
the date of such notice or within such further time as the Controller
may allow, such information or such periodical statements as to the
extent to which the patented invention has been commercially work-
ed in India as may be specified in the notice.

ww

147. (1) A certificate purporting to be signed by the Controller
as to any entry, matter or thing which he is authorised by this Act
or any rules made thereunder to make or do, shall be prima facie
evidence of the entry having been made and of the contents thereof
and of the matter or thing having been done or omitted to be done. 15

(2) A copy of any entry in any register or of any document kept
jn the patent office or of any patent, or an extract from any such
register or document, purporting to be certified by the Controller
and sealed with the seal of the patent office shall be admitted in
evidence in all courts, and in all proceedings, without further proof

or production of the original.

(3) The Controller or any other officer of the patent office shall
not, in any legal proceedings to which he is not a patty, be compel-
lable to produce the register or any other document in his custody,
the contents of which can be proved by the production of a certified 25
copy issued under this Act or to appear as a witness to prove the
matters therein. recorded unless by order of the court made for
special causes.

148. (1) If any person is, by reason of minority, lunacy or other
disability, incapable of making any statement or doing anything re- 3°
quired or permitted by or under this Act, the lawful guardian, com-
mittee or manager (if any) of the person subject to the disability,
or if there be none, any person appointed by any court possessing

jurisdiction in respect of his property, may make such statement or
a statement as nearly corresponding thereto as circumstances permit, 35
0 on bebalf of the person subject

and do such thing in the name an'
to the disability.

y
ke}

ay be made by the court for the purposes
etition of any person acting on behalf of |
lity or of any other person interested 4o
t or the doing of the thing.

(2) An appointment mi
of this section upon the p
the person subject to the disabi
in the making of the statemen

meena earomntocenan te

i
]
;
i
i
i
i
i
:
i

18. Any notice required or authorised to be given by ov
this Act, and any application or other docurnent so authoris
required to be made ar filed, may he given, made or filed by »

_ 156. Tf any whom notice of amy opposition is giv
# this Act or by w application nade to the C
grant of a licence under a patent neither

; a lees sides nor carrics
business in fadia, the Controller may require him to give sa
for the costs of the proceedings, and in default of such securit,
given may treat the oppositioa or application as abandoned

To ; 461. (1) Every order of the High Court on a petition for revoca- Transrnta.
tion, including orders granting certificates of validity of any elaiza, sion of
shall be transmitted by the High Court to the Controller who shall orders
ta : nourts (0
ater entry thereof and reference thereta to be made in. the Controller,

3S (2) Where in any suit for infringement of a patent or in any suit
under section 106 the validity of any claim or a specification is con-
tested and that claim is found by the court to be valid or not valid
as the case may be, the court shall transmit a copy of its judgment
and decree to the Controller who shall on receipt thereof cause an

20 entry in relation to such proceeding to be made in the prescribed
manner in a supplemental record.

(3) The provisions of sub-sections (1) and (2) shall elso apply
to the court to which appeals are preferred against decisions of the
courts referred to in those sub-scctions.

25 152. Copies of all such specifications, drawings and amendments Transrais-
left at the patent office as become open to public inspection under sion of
the provisions of this Act, Shall be transmitted, as soon as may be, copies of
after the printed copies thereof are available, to such authorities tons, ete,
as the Central Government may appoint in this behalf, and shall be and inspee-

30 open to the inspection of any person at all reasonable times at places tion
to be specified by those authorities and with the approval of the ‘TF
Central Government.

153. A person making a request to the Controller in the prescrib- Taforma-
tion relat:

ed manner for information relating to any such matters as may be |

35 prescribed as respects any patent specified in the request or as res- net
pects any application for a patent so specified shall be entitled, sub- Parents
ject to the payment of the prescribed fee, to have information sup-
plied to him accordingly.

154. If a patent is lost or destroyed, or its non-production is ac- Loss or
counted for to the satisfaction of the Controller, the Controller may destruction
at any time, on application made in the prescribed manner and on of patents,



a)
£ ६6 he sealed (@)

i ou witb ।
cel which any
be placed ceiore which ery

Reports
nt g the exe- 5
Controfier
io be 5
placed
before
Parlia~
ment, Ss
Patent rubject 16 , a patent | [288 che estauh ० tent office
to bind shall have to ali inter and the regulation generally of the business of the patent office,
Govern- has against any person to including its branch offices; है
ment, & vt 3
. नि eis + हू G j (iz) the maintenance of the regisivr of patents and the
Right of AS7. Nothing in this Act shail affect the power of the Government atters to be entered th “ser ae es
Govern- oy ef any person deriving title directly indirectly from the 10 matters to be entered Ub
ment to | ' 1 कै. ज for
शा or Government to sell or use any articles forfeited under any law ० oe eos नि
wee for the time being in force. (x) the matters in respect of which the Controller shail
अल्प arti- have powers 0: civ:l court;
cles.
:
Power of am we a हि + . ३ था) t time when and the / in which the regist
ugh " 458. fhe Bigh Court may make rules consistent with this Act aii. 13 (४1) ne ime when and th a which the registe:
Courte to #3 te the conduct and procedure in respect of all proceedings before ang any other document open io inspection may be inspected
make it under this Act. sod under tas et : |
rules. .
हि ह (vii) the qualifications of, and the preparation of a roll of,
Eowere 159. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the scientific advisers for the purpose of section 115;
Govern- Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
ment to
make है ह ह . हि 20 (viii) the manner in which any compensation for acquisi-
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, tion by Government of an invention may be paid;
the Central Government may make rules to provide for all or a
of the following matters, aamely>— .
(iv) the manner in which the register of patent agents may
(४) the form and menmner in which any application for 98 be maintained; the canduct of qualifying examinations | for
patent, any speci Sous or @tawings and any other application patent agents; and maiters connected with their jr and
ar document may be filed in the patent office; 25 conduct, including the taking of disciplinary proceedings against
वि patent agents for misconduct;
{ii) the time within which any act or thing may be done
under this Act, wweluding the manner in which and the time 25 (xv) the regulation of t! , printing, publishing and
within which any matter may be advertised under this Act; selling of indexes to, and abridgin of, specifications and other
, a , . documents in the patent office; and the inspection of indexes and |
dit) the fees which may be payable ander this Act and the i 30 abridgments and other documenis; ।
wanner of payment of such fees; जज रे
. . oe any other matter which has to be or may be pres- i
(in) the maiters in respect of which the examiner may make cribed. ) any रे P ro
a report to the Controller; . 30 .
- = ।



Rules to
ff € placed
before
Parlia-

ment,

Special
provisions
with
respect to
certain
applica-
tions
deemed
to have
been
refused
under
Act

2 of 1911.

(3) The power to make rules under this seclion shall he subject
to the condition of the rules being made after previous publica-
tion.

160, Every rule made under this Act shalt be laid, as scon as may
be after it is made, before each House of Parliament while it is ins
session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in
one session or in iwo successive sessions, and, if before the expiry
of the session in which it is so laid or in the session immediately
following, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule
or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 13
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect,
ag the casc may be; so, however, that any such modification or an-
nulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything pre-
viously done under that rule,

161, (7) Where, as a result of action taken by the Controller 15 291

under section 12 of the Atomic Energy Act, 1948, or under section 20
of the Atomic Energy Act, 1962, an application for a patent made
before the commencement of this Act could not be accepted within
the time specified for the purpose in the Indian Patents and Designs
Act, 1911 (hereafter in this section referred to as the
Act), and, consequently, was deemed to have been refused by reason

of sub-section (4) of section 5 of the repealed Act, the application
may, if the applicant, or, if he is dead his legal representative, makes

a request in that behalf to the Controller in the prescribed manner
within three months from the commencement of this Act, be revived 25
and shall be disposed of as if it were an application pending at the
commencement of this Act to which the provisions of this Act apply
by reason of sub-section (3) of section 162.

(2) The Controller may, before proceeding to act upon any such
request as is referred to in sub-section (1), refer the matter to the 30
Central Government for directions as to whether the invention is one
relating to atomic energy and shalt act in conformity with the direc-
tions issued by it. .

(3) Where in pursuance of any such application as is referred to
in sub-section (/) a patent is granted, the rights of the patentee shall 35
be subject to such conditions as the Controller thinks fit to impose for
the protection or compensation of persons who may have begun to
avail themselves of, or have taken definite steps by contract or other-
wise to avail themselves of, the patented invention before the date
of advertisement of the acceptance of the complete specification, 40

की ee

repealed 2° 9 of i911.

|

38 of 1897.

2of 1913.

4) A patent granied in pursuance of any sach application 88 is
referred to in sub-section (7) shall be dat ते on which
the request for reviving such applicat: ler sub
seetion (2).

wv

162. (4) The Indian Patents and DB: et, 1911, in so far as it
relaies to patents, is horehy repeuled, that iy to say, the said Act shall
be amended in the manner specified in the Schedule.

(2) Notwithstanding the repeal of the Indian Patents and Designs
Act, i911, in so far as it relates to patents—

10 (a) the provisions of section 21A of that Act and of any rules
made thereunder shall continue to apply in relation to any
patent granted before the commencement of this Act in pursu-
ance of that section, and

(9) the renewal fee in respect of a patent granted under
wS that Act shall be as fixed thereunder.

(3) Save as otherwise provided in sub-section (2), the provisions
of this Act shall apply to any application for a patent pending at the
commencement of this Act and to any proceedings consequent there-
on and to any patent granted in pursuance thereof.

20 (4) The mention of particular matters in this section shall not
prejudice the gencral application of the General Clauses Act, 1897,
with respect to repeals.

(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, any suit for

25 infringement of a patent or any proceeding for revocation of a

patent, pending in any court at the commencement of this Act, may
be continued and disposed of, as if this Act had not been passed,

163. In sub-section (7) of section 4 of the Trade and Merchandise
Marks Act, 1958, the words and figures “and the
Patents and Designs for the purposes of the Indian Patents and

30 Designs Act, 1911” shall be omitted.

Repeat of
Act 2 of
1911 in se
far as it
relates to
patents
and
savings,

Amend.

Controller of ment of
Act 43 of
1958,



5
. Section 2—
(68) omit clause (1);
(b) in clause (2) omit “(as eots designs)”;
10

(c} for clause (3), substitete—

*(3) “Controller” ie
Patents, Designs and Tra
section (1) of seetion 4 of

Marks Act, 19587;
(व) in clause (5) for “trede raatk as defined in section
478”, substitute “trade aa dofined in clause (v) of sub- 15
section (J) of section 2 of the Tr and Merchandise Marks 45 51 1998
Act, 1958”;

(2) omit clause (8);
(f) in clause (7),-

the Controller General of

Miarks appointed under sub-
and Merchandises

the Trade
43 of 1958.

1, suostitute “Delhi”; 2°

@) in sub-clause (0), for
(4) after sub-clause {e}, insert—

“Gy in yelation to the Uni
and Nager Haveli and Goa, Dam
Court of Bomba;

an and Diu, the High

{g) in relation to the Union territory of Pondi- 25
cherry, the High Court ०

(h) im relation to the Union
Court of Punjab and Haryana.”;

Ja

jerritory et Chandi-

(20) and (77);

substitute—
the patent office referred to

(9) omit clauses (3,
(h) for clause (22)
©(12) “Patent Off ce” means

jin section 74 of the Patents Act, 1967.

5, Omit Part L

3°

84

1S

20

30

की

relating io desigz
by the Co ‘

10, Omit section 594.

11, Scetion 61—Omit sub-sec’

12. Fer section 82, substitute—

“62. The
Power

of

116७ 99७, 00 reeves
lev may, on request in writing accompanied

by the
sentation Ci
of any desi ontrol-
any design ० ler to
register ci designs,” correct
clerical

13. Section $3— omen
(8) in sub-section (it, omit“ t
y ction (it, omit ‘to a patent or” and “patent or”;
“patent or” and for “patents

5+

, subsitute “designs,”;

ra

(ce) b i" 5
{ n sub-section (7 “paleat or” wherever that ex-
६ Re a Ww
; uM hat ex.
(8) in sub-section (4), omit “to a patent or’
14. Section 64—

2) न
{ patents or” and omit “either”

(8) in sub-section (5), omit clause (a).

15. Omit section 66.

16. Section 67--Omit “f
; mit “for a patent, or for amen i
cation or of 8 specification, or”. amendment of an applic



17. Section 69—In sub-seetion (J), omit “io grant a patent for
an invention or”.

ign shall net be invalidated
use of, or the publication
the design in 1
section as that within which

18, Section 71A—Omit “or from patents, specifications and other.”

period specified in thi.
eation may be made.

appli-

19, Omit section 72.

0. Omit sections 7 5 (3) ए' soati
20. Omit sections 74A and 7 s हु (3) The application for the registration of a design under
this seciion must be made in the same manner as an ordinary
application under this Act, |
(a) in sub-section (/}, omit “other”; H
(b) in sub-section (2), in clause (०), omit “opponent”, @ Where it is made to appear to the Central Government ।
{ 10 that the legislature of any such Commonwealth country as nay
be notified by the Central Government in this behalf has made
satisfactory provision for the protection of designs registered
(a) in sub-section ()— to in India, the Central Government may, by notification in the
6) in clauses (०) and (0), omit “specifications”; Official Gazette, direct that the provisions of this section, with {
० ) : such variations or additions, if any, as may be set out in such
(ii) for clause (९), substitute— H 15 notification, shall apply for the protection of designs registered
| in that Commonwealth country.”,

91, Section 76— H
i

22. Section 77—

“(e) providing for the inspection of documents in
the patent office and for the manner in which they may

be published;”; 15 25. Omit the Schedule.

(iit) omit clause (eee);
(0) omit sub-section (2A).
23. Omit section 78.

24. For section 78A, substitute—

“7BA. (1) Any person who has applied for protection for 2० :
Recipro- any design in the United Kingdom or his legal representative or |
arrange~ assignee shall, either alone or jointly with any other person, i
ment be entitled to claim that the registration of the said design under
with this Act shali be in priority to other applicants and shall have

United sas + * Kin:
Kingdom the same date as‘the date of the application in the United [8-
and dom:

other .
Common- Provided that—

/+ नह (a) the application is made within six months from the
application for protection in the United Kingdom; and

25

(b) nothing in this section shall entitle the proprietor ०७
of the design to recover damages for infringements happen- os _
ing prior to the actual date on which the design is registered f है
in India, 1 Li



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS ANU REASONS

The existing Indian Patents and Designs Act was enacted ie
1971 and since then there have been substantial changes in the
political and economic conditions of the country. The need for a
comprehensive law so zs to ensure more effectively that patent
rights are noi worked to the detriment of the consumer or to the
prejudice of the trade or the industria] development of the country
was felt as early as 1948 बाते in that year the Government appointed
the Patents Enquiry Committee to veview the working of the
patents law in India. The Committee submitted its final report in
1950. The Patents Bill 1953, baséd largely on the U.K. Patents Act,
1949 and incorporating some of the recommendations of the Com-
mittee was introduced in the Lok Sabha on 7th December, 1953. The
Bill, however, lapsed on the dissolution of the First Lok Sabha.

2. In 1957, the Government of India appointed Shri Justice N.
Rajagopala Ayyangar to examine afresh and review the Patents
Law in India and advise the Government on the changes necessary.
The Judge submitted a comprehensive Report on Patents Law
Revision in September, 1959, The Patents Bill, 1965, based mainly
on the recommendations contained in his detailed report and in-
corporating a few more changes in the light of further examination
made particularly with reference to patents for food, drugs and
medicines, was introduced in the Lok Sabha on 215६6 September,
1965. This Bill was referred on 25th November, 1965 to a Joint
Committee of Parliament. The Joint Committee, after a careful
consideration of the matter, adopted a number of amendments to
the Bill, Phe report of the Joint Committee, with the amended
Bill, was presented to the Lok Sabha on 1st November, 1966. The
Patents Bill, 1965, as reported by the Joint Committee was formally
moved in the Lok Sabha on 5th December, 1966, but could not be
proceeded with for want of time and eventually lapsed with the
dissolution of the Third Lok Sabha on 3rd March, 1967.

3. The present Bill contains comprehensive provisions to amend

and consolidate the existing law and also contains the amendments
referred to above. The notes

recommended by the Joint Committee
8 explain the provisions of the Bill, wherever necessary.

FAKHURUDDIN ALI AHMED.

en. clause:

New Deu;
The 10th August, 1967.

88

Notes ov clauses

different 5

sé 1~-Pow 13 tet
Act inte force on different dates as it may not be pi
some of the provisions of the Act which impose additional duti
the patent office into force immediately after the Bill is ens

Clause 2—The definition of ‘inveition’ in the existing Act has
been modified so as to represent more accurately the existing posi~
tion as defined by case-law. Several new definitions have also been
ineluded. For example, a definition of ‘person’ has been. included
‘n order to remove any doubt as to whether it includes the Govern-
ment. A definition of ‘Government underiaking’ has become neces-
sary in, view of the occurrence. of this expression. in several-places in
the Bill. In the new definition of ‘true and ‘first inventor’ it is made
clear that. it does not include the first importer of the invention. and
the first communicatee from abroad.

Clause 3—In this clause are set out the several types of inven-
tions or. alleged inventions which are regarded umiversally or almost
universally as not being patentable. In view of the non-availability
of case-law on the subject in India, it would be advantageous to
codify this part of the law as generally understood and applied.

Clause 4—For making this law self-contained, a reference 10 sec-
tion 20 of the Atomic Energy Act, 1962, is included under which no
patent can be granted for inventions relating to atomic energy.

Clause 5.—In the case of inventions relating to baby ‘and invalid
food, medicines and drugs it would not be. in the interests of an
under-developed country like India to grant patents in respect of the
substances. themselves. But there is no such objection in relation
to the processes involved and also in reldtion ta: the substances
when produced by such processes. This clause accordingly restricts
patentability tothe processes involved in the manufacture or. pro-
duction of such substances and to the substances when produced by
such processes.

Clouse 6.—This replaces sub-section (1) of section 3 of the exist-
ing Act, but has been remodelled on the lines of section 34 of the

jf

|
|


90

Australian Patents Aci, 1952 and section 1 of the U.K Patents Aci,
1949, by expressly including assignees, legal representatives, ete.
among persons entitled to apply for patents.

Clause 7 dealing with the form of application seeks to make it
clear that ‘every application shall be for one invention only.

Clause 8&—As the majority of the applicants for patents in India
are foreign nationals and as in several cases the appiication in India
is'for the same or substantially the same invention as that for which
a patent has already been applied for in a foreign country, this clause
seeks to ensure that all relevant information as respects such foreign
invention is made available to the Controller for the purpose of dis-
posing of questions relating to novelty of invention, patentability,
ete,

Clause 9.—This clause replaces section 4A of the existing Act.
‘The increase in the time limit, namely, fifteen months in all in sub-
clause (1) should benefit Indian nationals to get the complete speci-
fications in proper order for being filed.

Clause 10.—This clause dealing with contents” of specifications
corresponds to section 4 of the existing Act but has been amplified
in the light of section 4 of the U.K. Patents Act, 1949.

Clause 11.—This clause seeks to make provision respecting the
priority date for each claim of a compiete specification and is based
on section 5 of the U.K. Patents Act, 1949, and sections 44 and 45 of
the Australian Patents Act, 1952, but its scope is enlarged in order
‘to provide for the various contingencies which may arise in the
determination of the priority date for each such claim.

Clauses 12 and 13—The existing Act does not contain any speci-
fie provision requiring the Controller to make a compulsory search
for ascertaining the novelty of an invention before its acceptance.
These clauses make it obligatory for searches to be made by exami-
ners in respect of all patent applications. Clause 12 also prescribes
the time-limit within which such searches should ordinarily be com-
pleted. Anticipation by publication is not to be confined to publica-
tion in India as at present and publication of an invention in India
or any foreign country hefore the priority date claimed would con-
stitute anticipation. Such a provision will enhance the commercial
value attached to Indian patents.

Clause 14.~Thig clause is intended ‘to make it clear that the
applicant should be given an opportunity of being heard before Sa
objections raised by the examiner are upheld by the Controller.

Clause 15 deals with the
application for patent may be

Clauses 16 to 20.—Apart from, ion,
ther
suitable 01

Under clause 18, where an application and the claims based
thereon relate to more than 096 invention, the Controller imay
allow the applicant 10 amend the complete] हैं
confining it to a single invention.

cification by

Clause 17 deals with the powers of the Controller for the
purpose of post-dating applications,

Clause 18 deals with the powers of the Controller in cases
ef anticipation.

Clause 19 deals with the powers. of the Controller in cases
where an invention cannot be performed without risk of
infringement of some claira cf an earlier patent.

Clause 20 deals with cases where substitution in the names
of ‘applicants becomes necessary.

Clause 21—This clause provides for the maximum limit of time
within which an application or a complete specification should be
accepted if the application is not to be regarded as abandoned, As
the subject-matter in all these cases is the complete specification,
time should commence to run from the date of the complete speci-
fication and not from the date of the application’ as under section
5(4) of the existing Act. It would also be necessary to provide for
further extension of time where delay takes place in the office of
the Controller by reason of the investigations to be made by the
examiner. Sub-clause (2) contains the necessary provisions in thig
behalf.

Clause 22. makes provisions similar to those contained in section
18 (7) of the U.K. Patents Act, 1949, as respects acceptance of com-
plete specification.

Clause 23 deals with ‘advertisement of acceptance of the com-
plete specification and replaces section 6 of the existing Act,

Clause 24—This corresponds to section 7 of the existing Act
except that the rights and privileges of the applicant commence not



32

plance of the apyieation as in the exisiing
071.

irem the date of the a
Act but from the date of the acceptance of the coraplete spec!

rocedure
y the pub-
ds for oppesition

isting

Clause 25.—This clause purports to retain the
being nece

for opposition to the grani of patents as
lic interest, at the same time enlarging the grounc
mentioned in section 9 of the existing Act.

* which are brought io

ier

Clause 26 deals with cases of ‘ubtaining
light in opposition proceedings and seeks to authorise the Controli
to deal suitably with the opponent's claim in such cases.

Clause 27---'This clause, modelled on section 15 of the U.K. Pa-
tents Act, 1949, would be useful where anticipatory publications are
brought to the notice of the Controller without the informant filing

a formal opposition to the grant.

Clause 28—This clause seeks io give recognition to the right of
the first inventer to be mentioned in the patent, if he so, desires,
although he may have parted with his proprietary interest thercin.

Clauses 28 to.34 seek to afford guidance to the Controlier in
determining what constitutes anticipation under ‘the other provi-
sions of the law (for example, clause 13).

Clauses’35 to 42.—These clauses replace in a more comprehensive
manner section 21A of the existing Act and are intended to secure
that inventions relevant for defence purposes which are the subject-
matter of: applications for patents are in the interests of national
security kept secret. Any secrecy orders passed by the Controller
in respect of such inventions are to be notified io the Central Gov-
ernment and are to be periodically reviewed. Though applications
which are subject to secrecy directions may proceed up to the stage
of acceptance they may not be advertised and no patent shall be
granted in respect thereof. It is also provided that no person resi-
dent in India shall,'except with the prior permission of the Control-
ler apply for a patent outside India unless an application for patent
for the same invention has been made in India not less than six
weeks before the application outside India and either no secrecy
directions have been made in India or such directions have been
revoked. Ary contravention of secrecy directions will, apart from
any criminal liability. render the applicant ineligible to proceed with
the application. Payment by way of solatiumn is also provided for
an applicant who may suffer hardship by reason of any jo

directions.

a ८०

88

ks to replace section 16 of the exis
ally it

and m: the date of Aling

of the patent and not the date of the app.
Aci, [Compare ;
tio 67(4) of the Austral:

@ specification the
lication‘as in the existing
of the U.K, Patents Act. 1949 and sec.
Patents Act, 1952.4

o 6 replaces ses 19 4 sete
on Clause 4 replaces section 12 of the existing Aci relating to the
effect extent and form of paieri in 2 modified form.

Clause 47 seeks io define in clear terms the rights of a patentee
rights which have at present to he determined with reference te
decided cases, In the case of a patent for a process’ it. is sought to
be made clear that the pateniee has the exclusive right to the sale
in India of articles made by patented process. “Such 4 provision
age to Indian patentees, हु

Clause 48.—This clause seeks to provide that the importation or
making by or on behalf of the Government of any patented inachirte,
apparatus or other article for the purpose merely of its own : tise
and the importation’ by or on behalf of the Government of any a.
tented medicine or drug ‘for the purposé merely of its owl use i"
for distribution ‘im certain dispensariés, hospitals or meitli¢al inst: a
tions shall not be'réegarded as an infringement of patent tights:.'The
clause also provides that the use of patented inventions in the नरक]
of research as distinguished from use for commercial pur ose; ill
not be regarded'‘as infringement of patent rights, poses

Clause 49 replaces section 42. of the existing Act and at the
same time seeks 10 ensure reciprocity. .

Ch Clause 50.—This clause which ig in modification of section 37 of
the existing Act, seeks to define the rights inter se of joint paten-
tees and follows ‘section 54 of the U:K. Patents Act, 1949. in addi,
tion ta cases where a patent has been granted to two or more per-
sons, this clause also covers cases where registered ovinérthip in

patent has arisen by assignment or devolution. पा

Clause 51, modelled on sectiori 55 ‘of th K.
» mo fe U:K. Patents Act, 1949,
seeks to authorise the Controller to give directions to co-owners
with respect to the exercise of their rights wherever “necessary,



B4

lause 52 seeks to replace sect of the existi ct and
2 existing
Clause 5% ks t ph ection 13(2) of ik AC id

ave to be revoked in
provides for cases where patents have fo be 1 प्र
tru rst inventor.
true and first invent 7
. jon 14 of the existing

nt hereatter
But

Clouse 58.—~This clause seeks to replace कि eet
Act with su 2 modifications. The tery ve दि y Daven pee
4 > not sixteen years as ; ee
Ge fourleen years and not i nd dug, where
woe ose of patents in the field of 00 eae cunce when peo.
the proces i substance an 1 a 1
rocess for producing a substa’ (0०: (eide
ae 21 by. such process alone will hereafter be Pine दी
दिल 5 the term will be ten years. The sm one Te ted
in the field ef food, medicine and arug wou i" oe ot ten क न
ining period of their life or for 8 १ od
the remaining peri te 2 eer eos.
trom the commencement of the new Act whicheve:

secti the U.K. Patents
led on section 26 of vs
Cc 55 end 56.—Modelle 0 th IGA ० the
Act, ‘on, these clauses considerahly mo ae जो ie
i A i ith the grant of p
existing Act dealing wil § t
pect of improvements and modifications.

ications
ith a aments of applica
}—These deal with amen aan
Clauses 57 to 59.—T है aoe ollen and “befo
specifications before the 5 alee
wig Court * rhe coope of permissible amendments Defore ant afer
won ‘ance of an application or a complete specification किला का
wy claws 59. It is sought to be made clear that a arene
हि the complete specification, only such a ee than soe न
हि i ims wider or
effect. of making the claims wi fer fhe
secifcation before amendment will be.permissi!
i)

so Asti: ct and seek
छा 80 to 62 replace section 16 of the क्या ee once. of
lauses taboraiely with restoration in certain ‘ the conditions
to deal more 8 and the procedure to be followed an torations,
lapsed ey be imposed in connection with such rest
which may

3 3 with voluntary render atents. It is now
Cc 63 deals 9 voluntary surrender of pal
lause 63 di

wided that in addition to the offer of surrender bein) advertised
a ion to th fs ig

their
pro’

be notified and
| tent should noi 4
interested in the pa’ x is accepted.
au कक if any considered before the surrende
opposi A >

laces section
Cc 64 deals with revocation of patents and ret — section
6 he existing Act. It is now proposed that panes ngs for re
wo ation should lie only in the High Cort आग ened and prevail
ton. ified i light of exp: f a
i mplified in the lig! ‘ अल ay per
tion cond one. Under this clause it would be veay any Nee
inte (शत and also to the Central Government y
interes

tion.

SS 68 is new and
& patent or to have the
invention relates ta

smpawer the Contry

ecification arr,

Clause 66.—This reprod:
Suitable safeguar

art

the countey’s national

Clause 67 seoks to provide for

the mainten,
gister and the Particulars. to

drive of 9 pevent
be entered there
Clause 68 sceks to provide that evety transaction relating ६0
patents which is registradle should be entered in the register as
Soon as possible after the transection 1४ entered into. At preseni
while patent registers furnish complete information as regards pro-

prietary interests, the Same cannot he said of licences and other
interests,

Clauses 69 and 70 deal w

vith the regist:
terests in patent,

sand the power of re,
tors to deal with such patents,

ton of proprietary in-
rantees or prop.

Clause 71 seeks to prov:

ide for the rectific.
the High Court.

ation of registers by
Clause 72 seeks to

declare that the re
public inspection.

gister shall be open to

Clauses 73 to 76 deal with.
Clausé 75 which is new seeks ६;
office from acquiring any”
heritance or bequest,
employees of the pate
Sefve secrecy in resp
to which they may के;

interest in patents except by way of in-
Clause 76, whieh is also new, requires the
nt office (upon pain of punishment) to ob-

et of confidential information and docunients
ave access in the discharge of their duties,

Clauses 77 to 81 deal with the general powers of the Controller
and their exercise. The powers include a power to correct clerical
errors in patents or in specifications or in other documenis or in the
register, !

Clause 82 contains certain special definitions, For
Chapter XVI it has to be made clear that a patenteo
clusive licensee who has. the sol

‘he purposes of
includes an ex-
९ vight to grant a sub-licence,

Clause 82 seeks to emphasiz

ze as does clause 94 from another as-
pect that the main purpose fur which a patent is granted is to have

the oe worked in this country ३१० its advantage,



aces sections ८
Act, the ri

ment as “persons is
sive that other persons b
24 to obtain licences.

patents in the field of drugs,
tents for chemical in-

i words “Licences
pulsory licence, if

Clause 87 is new and provides th
medicines or baby and invatid Sood
ventions shall be deemed to be endorset wi
of right”. The royeliy paya’ y
anted hereafter in respect of tar
is sovghi to b i 1
re also being made to ६

हिल
5

the

$8. Suitable provi-
ant for a licence te
These
the

fhe inverition.
visions are intended to secure the proper developm:
drug and chemical industries in the country.

Clause 89 seeks to vest a residuary power in the Controller to
revoke a patent in ihe event of the inveation nct being worked to
an adequate extent in the country or not being available to the pub-
lie at a reasonable price notwithstanding the compulsory licensing

rovision, ete. Such a provision will also have the indirect effect
inducing patentees to imparl to licensees sufficient details as to
nlions, The clause also lays down
tions for revocation of

sa
the know-how for working ine
the time limit for the disposal of appt
patents,

Clause 90 seeks to define what is meant by the expression “yeas
sonable requiremenis of the pu have not been satisfied” for the
parposes of the preceding clauses in the context of an under-deve-
loped country like India.

Clause 91 seeks to empower the Controller to adjourn any pro-
ceeding under this Chapter for a per iod not exceeding 12 months 80०
ay to cover cases where jt is sought to be shown t iat the time
yetween the sealing of a patent and the application under this
Chapter is not sufficient to enable the patentee to work the inven-
tion to an adequate extent.

Clauses 92 and

powe

Heences.

vat © has

raport of a patented
2» of a compulsory Hee
9 to impor I
of such वे

a valty aad other
d other matter:

: rtended ta
blocking purpo:
\ents.

Clause 97 seeks 10
sisting Act.

Lon 2

private sector which may be notified for th
tral Government. =

pases of Gover

cases.

nment

defi

Clauses 100 aad 104
purpas

to regulat

tament anc the rights
thereto. The authority ¢ athe ;
be the Central Government, but
tion may be us elude the
ment. Government undertaking,

poses far wh
rposes af a

vention
provides,

for a public purpose
r payment of compensation,

Clause 102. Jurisdiction is sought to be vested in th
oe decide disvutes. relating to the uso of any invention for
noses of Government. ,



| हु

of patents
gs is given

patterned on section 6€ of the U.K. Patents Act,
court to grant declaratory
npoment even ¥ re the defendent has not
पे the right of the plaintiff er has not asserted any adverse
sob in birosel!.

Clouse 106 sceks to replace 50९0 ०00 36 of the existing Act and
provides for a remedy in case of groundless threat of legal proceed:
ings. .

Clause 197—Rased on section 32(4) of the U.K. Patents Act,
1949, this clause secks to provide that the grounds on which a patent
may be revoked would be available ag grounds of defence to an
action for infe ngement,

The clause also provides that in actions for infringement of a
patent in respect of a process for manufacturing a substance. *
shall be presumed unless the contrary i proved that every  suct
substance has been produced by the patented process.

Clause 198 provides for reliefs which may be granted in a suit
fer infringement, the acts constituting infringement being deter-
mined with reference to clatise 47 and the terms of the patent.

Cluuses 109 and 110 deal with the right of exclusive licensees
and licensees under section 84 to take proceedings against_infringe-

a

ment, |

Clauses 111 and 112 seek to replace section 30 of the cesisting Act
and restrict the power of the court to grant damages, injunction, etc.
in certain cases.

se 113 seeks to replace section 32 of the existing Act, but the
power to grant certificates of validity is confined to petitions for
70. Where any such certificate has been granted. this clause
‘ in suits for infringement. Where a mat-
ter is taken to an appellate court by the patentee, the attack on the
validity of the claim cannot be said to he frivolous and therefore
sub-clause (3) does not vest any such power as to costs in the ap-
pellate court.

re
Clause 114 modelled on section 62 of the U.K Patents Act, 1949,
seeks to replace section 354 of the existing Act relating to infringe-
ment of partially valid specifications.

ait

|
|
|
|

Clause
nearing of under that
clause sei to set cut in may
be appointed, the: Hy

cistlig Act provi

for the
essors, This

of persons to

rovide ior
ection,
uo appeal shall lie from त
meni on the lines of sec
Marks Act, (958

is des:
isions and orders of the Central (1
don 109(L) of the Trade and Merchandise

Clause 117 seeks to lay down the procedure for the hearing of
appeals under section 116, It is in modification of the provisions
contained in secticn 28C of the existing Act and follows section
105 (4) and (5) of the Trade and Merchandise Marks Act, 1958,

Provision is also made that an appeal under the section 116
shouid be heard as expeditiously as possible and that every en-
deavour shall be made to dispose of the appeal within a period of
fwelve months from the date on which ii is filed.

Clauses 118 to 124 seek to provide for the punishment of offences
under the new law. The existing Act docs not contain adequate
provisions in this behalf, the only penalty provided therein (section
78) being in respect of the wrongiul use of the words “patent offi

Ciauses 125 to 132— Vhe provisions contained in sections 75 and
76 of the existing Act on the subject of agency are insufficient to
regulate appearances hefore the ControHer by persons styling ihem-
selves as patent agen: It is desirable, as in other countries, that
pateni agenis should be properly qualified to do their work—a work
which involves great skill and responsibility. “Uhese clauses, which
are new, therefore provide for statutory contrel of patent agents.
No person whose name is not entered in the register of patent
agents will hereafter be permitted to describe himself as a patent
agent, but nothing in this Chapter would compel an individual to
resort to a patent agent for Sling his apolication or prevent him
from acting in the matter himself or through an authorised agent.

Clauses 133 to 139 seek to replace section. 78A of the existing Act
which is confined to reciprocal arrangements between India and the
United Kingdom and other parts of Her Majesly’s dominions by
more comprehensive provisions. Apart from making due provision
for the mutual protection of inventions, a clause on the lines of
section 132 of the Trade and Merchandise Marks Act, 1958, has also
been included (clause 134) whereby: nationals of countries which
do not accord reciprocity to our citizens will be denied the right
to apply for patents, etc., in India,



100

Clause 149 based on suction 57 of the U.K. Fat
section 112 of the Australian Patents Act, 1952,
tended to onsure thet patent rigt
a monopoly wider in scope or
under the patents by the statute.
tracts, leases or licenees which iend to impose 5
other party with regard to ihe purchase of 8
cesses other than the patented article or patented process ६
dered void as being resirictions on trade injurious te the p
terest. This clause will also apply to contracts mace before
commencement of this new law in so far as any such restrictions
are allowed to continue after the expiration of one year from such
commencement. The perind of one year would et ble the parti
to have the contracis suitably altered, if they so choose.

idlic in-
the

3

Clause 141 is also new and is designed io co 1४६९४ attemp' i
patentees to extend the duration of their patent moncpoties beyond
the period allowed by statute This clause will enable the pat
tee, lessee or licensee to determine a contract containing any such
restrictions on givmg three months’ notice.

rictions
ate,

Cleuses 143 and 144—These clauses while placing
upon the publication of reports of examiners, specificatior
seck to vest 9 discretion in the Controller as lo the publication of
the result of any search under clause 13. Such a provision would
be of value to inventors who desire tc know the extent of a prior

mvention.

Clause 146.—T
regarding the extent to which an inventic:
worked in India is necessary for the proper working of this law,
part from its statistical value.

‘his provision which is confined to © iniormatien
peing coramercially

Clause 147.--Sub-clauses (2) and (2) are based on section Tl
and 76 of the existing Aci and sub-section (3) is based on sect
176 of the Trade and Merchandise Marks Act, 1958.

Ciause 151 seeks to replace section 33 of the existing Act by
‘yore elaborate provisions. While orders of High Courts regarding
cevocation of patents or certificates of validity of claims 8९
entered in the register of patents, orders of other ccurts in suits for
ngement, ete., are to be filed in a supplemental register as such
orders affect only the parties thereto.

Clause 161—This, clause makes special pro jons in respect of
applications for patents w h wore referred from time to time to
the Department of Atomic Energy for directions as they had yefer-

i
|
1

ences to aicmie खाल 25.

These appliecctions n.
i

in the ground

sd, dine
mum period

to no

ib
ihe a

accentance pres:

indiay section § of the

{1} renewal fees in resp ‘ ‘
1 tees in respect of patents yranted under that Act:
(2) to paients granted under section 214 thereoi: and
_ th 38
3} infringement sui

3 and suits tor revocati f
gener jon of patente
pending at the commencement of the new Act mas



PINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

The Rill seeks 10 amend end conselidsie the law celating to
patents contained in the Indian Patents and Designs Act, 1914, with
2 view to stimulate inventions among Indisns and to encourage the
development and exploitation of new inventions for industrial pro-
gress in india and to ensure that palent rights are not abused, to
the detriment of the national interests. The Patent Office, which
administers the Indian Patents and Designs Act, will have to keep
a close watch over the commercial exploitation of patents and licen-
sing and other proceedings under the Act. The steady increase in
the number of applications for patenis year after year, the proposal
tor extensive world-wide search for novelty, the expansion of the
grounds of opposition, grounds for the grant of compulsory licences
and the provisions for revocation for non-working, will involve
additional functions on the Patent Office.

Clause 18 of the Bill envisages compulsory search for ascertain-
ing ‘novelty’ of an invention and for determining ‘anticipation’, the
scope of search extending to prior publication not only in India but
elsewhere. Involving as it does much heavier work and responsi-
bility than at present, it will necessitate an appreciable augmen-
tation of the Examining and Supervisory officers of the Patient Office.
Further, it will necessitate the setting up of a Special Abstracting
Section at the Patent Office, Calcutta, which will engage itself on the
collection of all foreign patent specifications and other technical
documents, classification of the same industry-wise, preparing abs-
tracis of the same and printing or duplication of the abstracts, ete.

Clause 74(2) of the Bill provides for the establishment of branch
offices of the Patent Office at different centres in the country in
order to meet the growing requirements of the public and to
facilitate registration of patents. To begin with, it is intended to
have 3 branch offices of the Patent Office. This is on lines similar
to the three branch offices of the Trade Marks Registry functioning
at Calcutta, Delhi and Madras under the Trade and Merchandise
Marks Act, 1958. The branch offices will be concerned with receiv-
ing of applications for patents, preliminary examination of the
applications and amendments thereto, taking hearings and attend-
ing to all further correspondence such as communication of orders
and the like, except of course detailed search for anticipation which
will be conducted at the Head Office, Calcutta.

102

iii

ed at about
The acta

made as may be deter

including F

i veervitment of staf will, how.
ed by careful work-study.

ever, be

Requirement of personnel and finance:

1, Annual emolumenis of

officers:—
7 1
> Rs. 2,657,000
2700
2. Annual emeluments of
(a) Senior Scientific
Assistants. 10}
है, Supats. 3 7 हि
1) रा $ jf Rs. 98,700
है, Incidental expenses. Rs. 44,300
Total: Bs. 4,00,000

Taking the average of the past 3 years, the annual expenditure
of the Patent Office is of the order of Rs. 9-5 lakhs, while the annual
income by way of fees realised amounts to Rs, 132 lakhs. It is to
be mentioned in this context that while a general increase in the
revenues may be expecicd on account of the filing of larger number
न applications for paiar year after year and also on account of
the enhanced rates of 12: pplications and for renewals yet the
reduction of the term of patosts from 14 years to 10 years and the
stopping of the grant of product patents in the fields of food drugs
and medicine. will probably offsel to some oxtent the above | How-
ever, on balance it may expected that the present revenue is
ely to be maintaimed. Apart from that. as so pertinently pointed
out by Shri Justice Rajagouala Ayyangar in his report on the Revi-
1883 LS.—15

j



104
ce should be

ce of a Patent Off
‘ is

sion of Patents Law “The maintencsire Optic La oe how it
consiaer' service rendered to tn » and wa
ane . the UE. & USA. and other advanced counts -
poked upon the Uk. o& ४० 2d other 2 1 न
oe stove it gn increase in the cost shouid result in a ०

गाज of the 5 worthwhile
efficiency of the serv

ice, the cost is always

MEMORANDUM REGARD

Clause 158 authorises the
cenduct of procedure in vespect of
lav.

Clause 159 authorises the Central Government to make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this law. The rules are subject 16 the
condition of previous publication, The matters set out in that clause
in respeet of which rules may be made are matters of a procedural
nature and are merely ancillary to the proper implementation of
this law

The rule-making power sought to be conferred by the above two
clauses is of a normal character.

105



पतला On NORTE जा

ANNESUS

“WetRAcTs PROM vag INDIAN Parents 880 Desicens AC, 17
(2 oF 1911)
An Act to amend the jaw relating to ine protection of inventions

and desigas.

Wrarvas it 3S exped!
tection of gnvertions an

पा 10 amenc the jaw relating to the pro-

६ designs; 1६ is hereby enacted as follows

PRELIMINARY

4, (1) This Act may be calle!

*

2. In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subjec'

or context:— है े
(1) «Advocate General” means an Advocate General appointed
under the Constitution and in relation to the State of Jammu
Kashmir, the ‘Advoeate-General for that State:

८ article of manu-

respects designs) any

cenvticle’? means (85 nant
” Arey ‘ artificial oT natural, OT partly artificial

facture and any substance,
and partly natural:

(3) “Controller” means the Co
appointed under this Act:

niroller of Patents and Designs

रू * * % eo .
ion:
(5) “Designs” means only the features of shape, con es
pattern of ornament applied to any article by का ate ba oe
Spanical or ९ emical,
or means, whether ynanual, mec! शी, ३०ए ced ony
i i i yppeal to and are 1५०8:
bined, whieh in the finished article 899९8 ed ue

by the ee ah inate ce 8 or proneEpanical device
ae a व _ [८ mark as defined ही section ee:
49 of 1860. property mark as defined 18 section 479 of the Indian Pe!
(6) “pistrict Court” has the meaning assigned to that expression
5 of 1908. by the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 . .
*

*
रु

106

india and Designs Short
d the Incian Patents an ig! Se ee

tent ant
Act, 1911. हि ६6०४
है . mence-
ment.
4 Defini-
tions

Applica-
tion.

Specifica-
tions.

197

६8) “av en” means any manner Ct
includes av improvement and an alleged invention.

new manufacture and

(10) “४

ducing,

manufacture” includes any al
aking an article, and also

or produced by manufacture:

(11) “patent” means 8 paten! granied under th
this Act:

(12) “patentee” means the person for the time being entered on
the register of patents kept under this Act as the grantee or proprie-
tor of the patent:

* * नि हि दि

PART 1
Parents
Application for and Grant of Patent.

3. (1) An application for a patent may be made by any person
whether he is a citizen of India or not, and whether alone or jointly
with any other person.

(2) The application must be made in the prescribed form, and
must be left at the Patent Office in the prescribed manner.

(3) The application must contain a declaration to the effect that
the applicant is in possession of an invention, whereof he, of in the
case of a joint application one at Jeast of the applicants, claims to
pe the true and first inventor or the legal representative or assign
of such inventor and for which he desires to obtain a patent, and
must be accompanied by either a provisiona} or complete specifica-
tion and by the prescribed fee.

(4) Where the true and first inventor is not a party to the appli-
cation, the application must contain a statement of his name, and
such particulars for his identification as may pe prescribed, and the
applicant must show that he is the legal representative or assign of
such inventor.

4. QA provisional specification mast describe the nature of the
invention.

QQ) A complete specification must particularly describe and
ascertain the nature of the invention and the manner in. which the
same is to be performed.



(8) # *
ith th
st

ymence W: हि
Ajstine! st

end with 9

(4) Winere the Controller de
}

suitable drawins:

ance of the police
६ the comp!

shall be $
and such dave

ion,

part © ete specifica i .
y case the Controle
guppremmented by 2
on of alleged

ए particu} |
id be further é

4 the invent
as he May
lication. put
: the spec

(8) It in ae
application show
of anything iv ing x
invention, such model oF sample कि
the acceptance of tae 4

part of
Jyali not be de mp

emed to 07

garnple § na application was accomPp
The Controjier may, where the ae weifieation xf the
2 > : te 89 है
(8) complete * 09 apeci=

oa purporting

ests, treat v specine:
me the application

by 9 specificati

applicant so re
fication and proc

£ scant does not |

(0) ४६ the applicant at :

oe e may leave ig at any 5! sre

3 i plication. hh
with his ahs from the date of the app!

pine mon

said nine रे
ten youth:

nest made by the apt
le and the prescribed fee is P

provided that pe 1 ee ete oo
ot exceet ng

as may be specified in @ re
troiler, if the coquest is m

the period 80 specified.

period, 2

ete
(2) if the comp | ;
allowable under sub-section Y 7 m
be abandoned at tne expiration ©

of an Spt or @
patent on that application,
nt, and such pT!

s in this Act referre

inveriion

ly

tion and drawings

vhe application. spe
been prepared in the prescribed manner, or

the title of the specification does not suffi
ject-matter of the invention, or

8 the

fd) the staieraent of claim does not sufficiently defi
on. or

Id} where « complete specification has is}

ecification, the invention par! jou

fieaiion is not substantially the same
isional specification, or

en left after 1
rly deserihed in
8 that

the invention 85 doseribed and claimed is prima facie
> ypanufacture or improvement, of

not a mranmer of ne

ecification relates to more than one inver

a1, OF

(g} in the case of au application claiming priority under
ton 784, the specification describes and claims an invention
subsiantially jatger than or substantially different trom the
invention disclosed the specification fled with the application
mode outside India by virtue of which priority is claimed, or

se of en application for a paient of addition
158, the invention de: ibed and claimed in the
fication is not an improvement or modification of that
and claimed in the original specification,

to accept the application or require that the applica-
aiication or drawings be amended before he proceeds with
; and in the latter case the application shall, if the
, bear date as from the time when the require-

he may

tion, spi

the applic
Controller s
ment is complied with:

ovided that, when a pecificat! on comprises more than one
invention, the application shall, if the Controller or the applicant so
tires, be restricted to one invention and the other inventions may
je made the subject-matier of fresh applications, and any such
fresh application shall be proceeded with as a substantive application
but the Controller may, in his discretion, direct that any such fresh



it tem

application made pefore the tance of the original epplicatioa
shall bear the daie of the original pplication or such later da
he may fix, and the fresh application shall be deemed, for the pur-
ta} ch it bears in

uch direction:

as

been made on the date ७

‘pos:
accordance with

ation is left after

Provided further that where a complete specif
a provisional specificztion, the Controller may, if the applicant so
requests, cancel the provisional specification and direct that the
application shall be deemed to have been made on the date on which
the complete specification was left, and proceed with the application

accordingly.

(1A) If the Controller considers, at any time before the accept-
ance of an application, that the invention claimed therein has been
wholly or in part claimed in a specification published on or after
the date which the patent applied for would bear if granted, apper-
taining to an application for a patent which if granted will be of
vricr date fo the patent. applied for, he may require that the appli-
eani’s specification be amended by the insertion of a reference +o
such other specification, by way of notice te the public.

(2) Where the Controller yefuses to accept an application or
requires an amendment or the insertion of a reference, the appli-
cant may appeal from his decision to the Central Government.

(3) The investigations required by this section shall not be held
in any way to guarantee the validity of any patent, and no Hability
shall be incurred by the Central Government or any officer by
reason of, or in connection with, any such investigation, or any

proceeding consequent thereon.

(4) Unless an application is aecepted within eighteen months
irom the date of the application, the application shall (except where
an appeal has been lodged) be deemed to have been refused:

Provided that where, before. or within three months after, the
expiration of the said period of eighteen months. a request is made
to the Controller for an extension of time, the application shall, oa
payment of the prescribed fee, be continued for any period so
requested not exceeding in all three months from the expiration of
the said period of eighteen months

6. On the acceptance of an application the Controller sball give
notice thereof to the applicant and shall advertise the acceptance;
and the application and specifications with the drawings (if any)
shall be open to pithie inspection,

1 Effect ef

accent.

we ance of
applicae
tis

Opposi-
tion to
grant of
patent.

Adver-

tisement

on accep- “
tance of

applica-

tion.

nd until the date of
xpiration of lhe time 10:
tivileges and righ

nthe d

४ of the acc

Provided that the applicant 80211

1 nitled to ingtitute any

proces gs tor infring i हु pane

proceedings for infringement until the patent has heen seale: as
2 paten! has h sealed,

@

8. [Unguiry bejore sealing 19 है|
Den qi Ss g patent.) Rep, by th ian Pa 8 and
Designs (Amendment) Act, 1930 (7 of 1930), ‘ nian Patents an

lime Oe Any person may, on payment of the prescribed jes, at any
time ithin four months from the date of the advertisement of the
eptance of an application. give notice at the Patent Office of

opposition to the grant of th + है
namely:— ६ of the patent on any of the following grounds,

(a) that the applicant obtained the invention from him, or

from a person wv i
E of whom he is the legal rey entativ A
दि 9 the legal representative or assign;

a a that the invention has been claimed in any specification
ed in India which is or wil! be of prior date to the patent, the
grant of which is opposed; or ,

. (c) that the nature of the invention or the manner in which
it is to be performed is not sufficiently or fairly described and
ascertained in the specifications; or : ,

(9) that the invention has been i
_ v ecn publicly used in any part of
India cr has been made publicly known in any part of Talia: ar

; (९) that the complete specification describes i
invention other than that described in the पता sects
tion, and that such other invention cither forms the subject of
an application made by the opponent for a patent which it
granted would bear a date in the interval between the date t
the application and the leaving of the complete specification, or
has been made available to the public by publication in an:
document published in India in that interval; ¥

but on no other ground.

(2) Where such notice is given, the Controller shall give notice
of the opposition to the ‘applicant, and shall, on the expiration of
those four months, after hearing the applicant, and the opponent
if desirous of being heard, decide on the case. !



SHIELD ERE

- ee
iz |

Contesier 5

(3) The ु
° vee sf the Grant
the Central Gover “atte Si
tent shall. ing of
patent.

) such condi

applica

i d the Control
intly, and the roller
the he Patent Office

the ssa]

Notwithstanding anyth sontained in sub-section (1)
fy (1)

AY ६४ t g anything contained im

¢ twithstandt

{a} an applicant has agreed in writing hat on the grant to
a} applica ck 12 t 1 tt

nim of a patent he will assign 1६ to another party or to a joint
i Pp a wi हर ६ to 00, 0
pplicant and refuses to proceed with the application, or
applicant ane

7 cas ५ व छ fe:
{b) disputes arise between joint applicants ss to proce ad
9) di tes arise belwe joint applicants es to proceed

with an application, 1 sneh acreemont

f

if he is satisfied of the exi c b हे
व दमा eave, tha ay joint applicant er applicants ०
ones । direct that such other

ed with the applicati
“+ proceed with the application
oF

+
or, in any other’ case,

ty
t roceed alone, may
to be allowed to proceed

act onan Ly nd may grant 3 patent to him or them, as the case may
id
५५ 829 ५

be:
Provided that—

the Cortrofer shall not give any such direction until
E
i Her shall giv
every party interested has had an opportunity of being heard by
3 'घ if bi heard b;

=“ irecti Hl lie to the Cen-
(i) an-appeal from any such direction shall lie
(ii) ar £ 5

tral Government.

2) A patent shall be se  scon as may be, and not after
Pp bi aled as a

th का at. of twenty-four months from the date of application:

the expiration of twe h te of it

a wnee @ है sion of the
eee here the Controller has allowed an बाय OE

कण » jeati y be accepted, 2 }
i ithi i n application may ८ oe
ote vont neem after the said twenty-four months
extension ० months

be allowed for the sealing of the patent: ‘he conta
हि he T
(b) where the sealing is delayed by an appeal to

Government, or by opposition to the grant of the patent, or by
positi 4 f the
प्‌ ith hy हे b
any proceedings taken for obtaining a direction of the Controller
n dings taken f btaini direet th

tw

of an applican:

which wouid oth the
patent may be seaicd at any C months atter
the date of his death op at such later time !8 Controle may
think fit:

(9) where for any Teasou a patent cannor be sealed within
the period allowed by any of the foregoing provisiong of ihig
séciion, that perind May, On Fayinent of the Prescribed fee and
on compliance with the prescribed conditions, be extended to the
extent applied for but Rot exceeding three months,

Date of Li, Except as othe:
patent. shall be dated and se

tWwise expressly provided by @

Act, 8 patent
led 38 of ihe date of the appli

011:

Provided that no proceedings shali bo 1
infringement commiited

aken ६;

respect oi an
before the advertisement 9.

'€ acceptance
of the application,

1 32, (1) A patent sealed with the seat ०६ the Patent Offre shall,
extent subject to the other Provisions of this Act, confer on the patentee
andform the exclusive brivilege of ma ng, selling and using invention
of patent, throughout India and of authorizing others sa to do,

(2) Every patent may be in the Prescribed form and shail be
granted for one invention only, but the Specifies tion May contain
more than one claim; and it shall not be competent for any person
in a suit or other proceeding to take any objection to a patent on the
ground that it has been stanted for more than one invention.

Fraud 43. (1) A patent granted to the true and first inventor or his
lent ap legal representative Or assign shall not be invali

daied by an appli-
plications cation in fraud of han, or by protection obtained thereon or by any.
for use or publication of the invention subsequent to that fraudulent
patents, aplication during the period of protection.

(2) Where a patent has been revoked by tt Court on
the ground ‘that it has been obtained in fraud of the tine and first

savenior, or where the grant of a patent has been refused by the

section 9 on the ground stated in clause (a) of sub-
tion (1) of that section, the Controller may, on tha application
of the true inventor or his legal representative or assign made in
accordance with the Provisions of this Act, grant to hiry a patent

for the whole or any part of the invention, and the patent so



iid

as the patent so revoked, or, in
as beon refused, the same
had been granted:

granted shall bear the same date गा
the case of a patent the grant of whic has
would have been borne by the patent t

J
date 8: _ है
y infringement छा

| date when such

Provided that mo suit shali be brought tor
the patent so granted commitied before the actu
patent was granted,

13A. (1) Where the same applicant has pul in two or mMOFe gingie

rovisional specifications for inventions wit are cognate or modi- patent

Pp ntions which ar gn

14 fications for Inver Teh

fications one of the other, and has obtained thereby concurrent for cog-
’

i nate in-
Cc ¢ is ion कि
isional protection for the same, and the Controller is of opin ventions
provisi
that the whole of suc’

hh inventions are such as to constitute a single
i aten y allow
invention and may properly be included in one patent, he may ioe
one complete specification in respect of the whole of 8 iF
tions and grant a single patent thereon,
+ the date of the earliest of such appli-
he validity of the same, and ip deters
४, the Cou: Controller
mining other questions under this Act, me active dates over
a ard to the 76७] vi
3 case may be, shall have regard | हम कण
बल काश] specifications. relating to the several matters ciaimi

the complete specification.

(2) Such patent shall bea
cations, but in considering t

Term of Patent
patent for the duration thereof Term of

14. (1) The term limited in every ee act, be sixteen patent

shall, save as otherwise expressly provided by
its date.

ee al term of which had not expired on

1930. shall have effect as if the term

vs instead of fourteen years, and

has been granted for the

ving been granied for the

(1A) Any patent the origin:
or betore the Ist day of July,
mentioned therein was sixteen years ‘
any license existing at that date whic ही
term of the patent shall be treated as ay
term as su extended if the licensee so desires,

ariy to a contract with the patentee or any
into before the Ist day of January, 1930, is
by reason of the extension of the ierm
100, any District Court having juris-
de in this behalf, determine in what
y liability shall be borne,

(18) Where any p
other person entered to
subjected to loss ०7 liability है
of any patent under this secti
diction may, on application ma
manner and by which parties such loss 0
anything therein or in this

(2) A patent shall, notwithstanding = विन Ore thin

Act, cease if the patentee fails to pay
the prescribed times:

ee

ve, ov within three months
ment, applies tc the Con-
# such
3 as the
eeding in of] three

he continu

case may

months 1 for payment,

(3) If any proceeding is
the patent commitied

en ia respect of an infringement of
‘er a failure to pay any fee within the pres-
cribed time, and before any enlargement thereof, the Court. before
which the proceeding is taken may, if it thinks fit, refuse to award
any damages in respect of such infringement.

Extension 45. (1) A patentee may present a petition to the Central Govern-
of term of ment praying that his patent may be extended for a further term but
1

such petition must he left at the Patent Office at least six months be-
fore the lime limited for the expiration of the patent and must be
accompanied by the prescribed fee and must be advertised by the
patentee within the prescribed time and in the prescribed manner.

(2) Any person may within such time as may be prescribed and
on payment of the prescribed fee give notice to the Contraller of
objection to the extension,

(3) Where a petition is presented under sub-section (i), the
Central Government may, as it thinks fit, dispose of the petition
itself or refer it to a High Court for decision,

(4) If the petition be referred to a igh Court, then on the hear-
ing of such petition under this section, the patentee, and any person
who has given notice under sub-section (2) of objection, shall be

made parties to the proceeding, and the Controller shall be entitled
to appear and be heard.

(5) The Central Government or the High Court to which a peti-
tion is referred shall in considering the petition have regard to the
nature and merits of the invention in relation to the public, to the

profits made on the patent and to all the circumstances of the case.

(6) If it appears to the Central Government or to the High Court.
when the petition is referred to it, that the patent hag not been suffi-
ciently remunerative, the Central Government or the High Court,
as the case may be, may by order extend the term of the patent for a
further term not exceeding five or in exceptional cases ten years or
may order the grant of a new patent for such term not exceeding ten

years as may be specified in the order and subject to any restriction,
conditions and provisions which the Central Government or the High
Court, as the case may be, may think fit.

|



| ee

yea. (1) Where a patent for 89 ive!
granted, and ihe applicant oF the pa
for a further patent jn vespert of ary
96 invention, he may 7

est that the term limite

patent १९०५
e same 2s that of the origital
if he does

thereol be thi
term as is unexpired, and, &
ferred 10 08 8 patent of addition) may be grant
aforesaid.

7 (2) Save 88 oth

addition shall remain in
jing in force,

jnvention rema
of addition 90 fees shall be payable tor rene¥
the patent for the origina.

provided that if
६ addition shall, if the auinority ©) y it is re-
ft, and the fees payable,

then the patent of

voked so orders, become an independent paten

and the dates when they become payable, shall be determined py its
date, but its duration shall not exceed. the unexpired term of the

patent for 406 original yavention.
(3) The grant of a of additio
that the invention 15 a proper subject

the validity of the patent shall not be
yn ought to have beet th

y imp

apphicet
that patent fi
patent CT so
ant (her

50, 9 pate
ed for such yerm aS

rom fe"
og The duration

much of that
ginatter 707

plies
gation of ४

ourided oY this Act, a patent of
the patent £0 the original
and in sespect of a patent

val:

1 invention is revoked,

erwise expressly 9)
force as tong ad
put no longer!

yy whic

give evidence
a patent of addition, and
d on the ground that
an jadependent
»

wn shail be conclu

patent
for

questione
e subject of

the inventio
patent.
46. (1) Where any patent jas ceased owing to the failure of the Restora~
any prescribed fee within the prescribed time, the tion of
in the prescribed manner for lapsed.
potent.

patentee to pay

entee may apply to she Controller 4

the patent.

pati
an order for the restoration of
(2) Every such. application shall contain थे statement of the cit-
cumstances which heve Jed to the omission oF the payment of the
was un-

prescribed fee.

(3) Tf it appears fro:
intentional or unavoidable and
£ the application,

yhat the omission
delay has oecurred in
shat) advertise the ap-

time as may be

m such statement
chai nc undue
the Controller
hin such

the making ©
plication in the prescribed manner, and will
prescribed any person may give notice of opposition of the Patent
Office.
jer shall notify the ap-

(4) Where such notice is given the Control!
plicant thereof.

(5) After the expiration of the prescribed
shall hear the case andy subject to an appeal to the
ment, issue #7 order either restoring the patent

period the Controiler
Central Govern-
subject ४० any

ee Tt गए 7 7+++77+-

uy

g dasmer!
Yaed lo he acd

persons who

ter of the patent a

Aunend. An
nen nendinent of
ment of ren हे pli i
upplica- _ EL (0 An applic nt cf Application or Specifienti
tion or in writing left at em or a patentee may at ee
epecica- ed fee, seek 1090. 9 Patent Office and ६९०८ at any time, hy re
tion by drawings for i e to amend his snolheate लक कक by th ‘preseribe
5S min . seri
ung par न pplication or ificati ae
0६ thereof, way of Man ep ० including
er, correctia
7/00. 07

Contro}
हब 1... ९8१०6
ler, nation, stating
rt. ५ stating th हि
amendment. g tac re of, and the reas
हु ihe reasons for, th
, the proposed

(2) If th
Ca: the applicati
कक shall determin for a patent has not be
(if any) the amen: anne Mhether and subject mn accepted; the
~ shall be allo _ ० what ve
wed. conditions

(3) In any other
a y other ¢:
ami ase tl
endment shall be adve he request and the nat
ime within three mi: nee in the proserib sure of the proposed
may gi i on ine prescribe ane
¥ give notice at the Pat from its first advertiverment and at any
ent Office of opposition tthe any person
a 0 the amendment,
x en.

(4) Where such a notice is given the Controller shall give noti
h gi
4) Wi tice i ne
vi
fs Cc notice

of the o wee
>pposition to th
and decide the case. € person making the request,
; : est, and shall h
ear

(5) Where

वि re no notice

notice of ce of .

कप, of opposition does opposition is given,
ther and subject ६ not appe: :

to be allowed

or the pe
~ ar, the C 2 person so givi
what conditions ® Controller shall £0 Biving
५ if any, the amendmen ermine
mt ought

(6) The decision of the Controller in ei her cas
(९९13: ह।
it Controller in eith
fs f th n ei

to an app
Es €;

ppeal to the Central Gov. ms
rennet shall be subject

7) Ne
oath No amendment :all
“s 2 orspecification, a at
i rger than, or substan
p) 16५1 ™
he application or spe.
OL».

be allow:
amended, in that would make th
lly different fr m an invention suh: st, appli-
feation as i ‘rom, the inventi s stantially
© it stood before ation claimed by
endmeént,

(8) Leave
2 to 2
to amend sh: o
fo make the amendment atl be conelusive as to the ri
endment shail be ai या auowed, except in the right of the part
tised in the 1 case of frai y
prescribed mari aad; and thi
manner, and [8
, shall

form part of the ap-

in all Courts
age and for al
plication or specification purposes be deemed to



emcee IL EP 3० <

| 4 ििििििशिशश

» when and so long as any suit for

Thi ion shall not apply ;
न Court for the revocation of the

infringement or proceeding before a
patent is pending.
roreeeding before Amené~

1६ for iniziy mn a patent or 9 .
48, In any suit for iniringement of a F गण eat of

1 Court may by order ‘
७ the revocation of a patent the Co ry bs specifics
a Court for the rev a ay of disclaimer, correc- oe by

the patentee to amend his specification by w
Jlanation in such manner, and subje:

tion or exp! i ee ae
costs, advertisement or otherwise, as the Court may think fit:

$ shall be so allowed that would make
Jaim an invention substantially larger
‘om, the invention claimed by the
specification as it stood before the amendment, and where an appli.
ch an order is made to the Court notice of the apph

er, and the Controsler shall have

Provided that no amendmen
the specification, as amended, ¢
than, or substantially different fi

eation for su é
tion shall be given to the ontroll

the right to appear and be heard

of disclaimer, Restric-

tion on

recovery
of

19, Where an amendment of 8 specification by way oe
correction or explanation has been allowed under this Act: 1 ja

ages shall be given in any suit in respect of the use of the invention
pefore the date of the decision allo

atentee establishes to the satisfaction ;
Pain was framed in good faith and with reasonable skill

ledge.

of the Court that his original
and know-

Register of Patents
eister
20. (1) There shall be kepi at the Patent Office a book called me Reet
Register of Patents. wherein shall be entered the names an a & patents
resses. of gtantees of paients, notifications of assign Sane og
a i atents, am -
transmissions of patents, of licenses unter Pp न हा
i ions tents and such other matters
ments, extensions, and revocations of pa ‘i s
affecting the validity or proprietorship of patents as may be pres:
cribed.

inventions and address ook existing 2t the

¥ ist f
ee ent of this pe incorporated with, and form part

commencement of this Act shall है
of, the register of patents under this Act.
patents shali be prima facie evidence of any

‘hi ister of i
ty this ted or authorised to be inserted therein.

matters by this Act direc
licenses and any other docurnents affecting
license thereunder, must
for filing in

(4) Copies of deeds, L
the proprietorship in any patent or in any
be supplied to the Controiler in the prescribed manner

the Patent Office.

ct to such terms aS tO the Court.

Jlowing the amendment, unless the damages.

Patent
to bind
Govern.
ment.

119

Covernment

the service of Governe
agents, contractors or
them, at any time after the application, and after giving notice to
the applicant or patentee, make use ercise the invention for the
service of the Government on such terms as may, either before or
after the use thereof, be agreed on, with the approval of the Central
Government, between such officers or authorities and the applicant
or patentee, or, in default of agreement, as may be settled in the
manner hereinafter provided. And the terms of any agreement or
license concluded between the applicant or patentee and any person
other than such.officers or authorities, shall be inoperative so far as
concerns the making, use or exercise of the invention for the service
of the Government.

(3) Where an invention which is the subject of any patent has,
before the date of the patent, been duly recorded in a document. by,
or tried by or on behalf of, the officers or authorities administering
any department of the service of Government ‘(such invention not
having been commuuaiceted directly or indirectly by the applicant or
patentee}, such officers or authorities, or such of their agents, cen-
tractors, or others, as may be authorised in: writing by them, may,
after giving-notice to the applicant or patentee, make use or exer-
cise the invention so recorded or tried for the service of the Govern,
ment free of any royalty ar other. payment to the applicant _ or
patentce, notwithstanding the existence of the patent. Tf, in the
opinion of.such officers or authorities, the disclesure to the applicant
or patentee, as the case may be, of the document recording the in-
vention, or the evidence of the trial thereof, if required, would be
detrimental to the public: interest, it may be made confidentially to
counsel on behalf of the applicant or patentee, or to any independent
expert mutually agreed upon.

(4) In the event of any dispute as to the making, use or exercise
of an invention under this section, or the terms therefor, or as to the
existence or scone of any record or trial as aforesaid, the mattes shall
be referred to the High Court for decision, who shall have power to
refer the whole matter or any question or issue of fact arising there-
on to be tried before a special or official referee or an avibitrator upon
such terms as it may direct, The Court, referee or arbitrator, as’ the



Mo ° 320

ease May be, may inte cone

sideration the validity cf th

cant 07
or arbitrator, further,
entitled io take into conside
the applicant or ‘patentee,
patent, may have received directly or indi
ment or from such officers or authorities in

atic

< any other pe

eet of such patent:

ament servant

the Central
with work done
i be setiled by
or patentee and

Provided that, if the inventor or pate
and ‘the subject-matter of the faventi
Government or State Government fo |
in the course of suchi ser any 5
the Central Government after hearing the
any other person having an inter: |

pplican
invention or patent.

rvices of the Govern-
for which
ali be deomed always
11 pursuance

(5) The right to use an invention for
ment under the provisions cf this section, ०
this section is substituted, sh nelude, 2
-to ‘have included, the power to gell any articles mane i
of such ‘right which are no longer req services of the
Government.

shall affect the right ol ‘the Govern-

e directly or indireetiy frora the
ticles forfeited uoder any law fer
toms or excise.

(6) Nothing in this section
ment or of any person deriving
Government to sell or use any af
the time being in force relating to cus’

218. (1) The inventor af any improvement by instruments or
mnunitions of war may (either for or without valuable consideration)
assign to the Central Government all the benefit of the invention
and of any patent obtained er to be obtained for the invention; and
the Central Government may be a pariy to the assignment.

shall effectually vest the benefit of the in-

vention and patent in the Central Government, and all covenants
and agreements therein contained for keeping the invention secret
and otherwise shall be valid and ‘effectual (notwithstanding any
want of valuable consideration). and may he enforced accordingly
= by or on behalf of the Central Government.

(2) The assignracnt

(3) Where any such assignment has hi
ernment may, at any’ time before the एप
‘certify to the Controller that, in the inte’
the particulars of the invention and of the man:
be performed should be kept secret.

wr

mer i

een made, the Central Gov-
Jiecation of the specification,
rest of the public service,
which it is to

Assiga-
ment of
patent
to the
Central
Govern~
ment.

i
\
i

pplication and spe.
amendment of the
22, shall,
mi Office, be
howity of ty

mm during
kept sealed by
we under the authority of

(6) The sealed packet
continuance of ‘the pat
Government to re i
again kept sealed ii

1) be delivered at any time during the
nay person authorised by the Central
shali, 1f returned to ihe Controller, be

; (7) On the ox

shall be delivercd to ६

(8) Where the C
application for a pateat has i

ater 8 be

the publivation

he watent, the sealed packet
i.

ee eet 9 as aforesaid, after an

Pe s 2 dett ai the Patent Office bi
पक ut before
with the drawings (if 28), shall the application and specifications,
sealed by authors Bay), ४ ali 96 forthwith pla i t
d by authority of the Controller, and the packet shall be tonject
subject

to the foregoing
prov. 3 respecting a ©
of the Central Government. ting a packet sealed by authority

(9) No proceeding by

| ion or otherwise shall lie for revacae
wise shall lie for
jon of a patient granted for an invention in relation’to which a

certificate has been given py the Central Governme ‘orcsaid
fi hi en giver he
डे ¥ x ९ =
nt as aforesai

(10) No copy of any specification or othe
5 : 5. 7 हि “FC wi
ay enn oe Zeauired to be placed in a sealed pect, cu ie
गन bat sve ever be published or open te the inspection of the
roa vin save wel as provided in this section, the provisi "
apply in respect of any such invention ted. ‘patent
nt

as aforesaid,
1 ।

(11) The Central Gov ne be |

re ‘al Government may at y ti i हु

कि , a हे 9 at any time waive $ i

हनी with respect to eny particular invention waa the
2 s, documents and drawings shall be th है "

and dealt with in the ordinary way. Sncelorth kept

(12) The comnunicatia .
a > communi: m of any inventi i
an hee Cones y invention for any improvement

ms of war to the Central G
ony Per or persons authorised by the Central Government to in
gate the same or the merits thereof, shall not, nor shall anything



|

i be deemed use OF publi-

done for the purposes of the invertigal
grant oF validity of

£ such invention so as te prejy lice the

cation 0:
any patent for the sane.

Compulsory Licences and Revocation

spiration of three years fror

22, (1) At any time siter the
date of ihe sealing of a patent any Pi
the Controller upon any one 07 more of the grounds specified in
sub-section (2) for a licence under the patent.

(2) The grounds vpon which an. application under sub-section
(i) may be made are as follows, that is to say,—

(a) that the patented invention, ' being capable of being

- commercially worked in India, has net been commercially work-

ed therein or is not being so worked to the fullest’extent that is
reasonably practicable;

(9) that a ‘demand for. the patented article in India:is not
being oct to an adequate extent or on ceasonable terms, or is

५ being met to a substantial extent by importation of the patented

article from other countries;

(2) that the commercial wo:
is being prevented or hindered by

; ed article from other countries;
(d) that by reason of the refusal of the patentee to grant a

Jicente or licences on reasonable terms—
( a market for the export of the patented article
manufactured. in India is not being supplied, or

(ii) the working or efficient working in India of - any
tion which makes 8 substantial contri-

other patented invent
bution to the establishment or development of commercial

or industrial activities in India is unfairly prejudiced;

(९) that by reason of conditions. imposed by ‘the patentee
upon the grant of licences under the patent, or upon the - pur-
chase, hire or use of the patented article or process, the manu-
facture, use or sale of materials not protected by the patent or
the establishment or development of commercial or industrial
activities in India is unfairly prejudiced.
this section may be made by'-any per-
son notwithstanding that he is already the holder of a licence under
the patent; and no person shall be estopped from alleging any of the
matters specified in sub-section (2) by reason of any admission made
by him, whether in such a licence or otherwise, or py reason of his

having accepted such a licence.

king of the invention in India
the importation of the patent-

(3) An application. unde!

m the Applica~
erson interested may apply to wor for
‘eence.

Susie en oom

अमन

an appli-
vation
under
nection 22,

icence tu the

role ; fit; and ma:

aie direct that slf oti

patent shall be revoked

right whic! have ; - vison

veh हैं ich he may have as a patentee, to make. use, exercis है
d the invention er io grant licences under the pat है t i

cences under ६; ent;

(8) revoke any exis

& licence yt ii
grant a new licence up such a nt दल thinks
grant a new मं 28 as the Controfler think:
4 any licence held by th iii i :
Ba Cantos ela the applicant in si u
as the Coniroiler may think fil; Pisani ta See anaes
5 4

(९) grant a licene: a
cence under the patent
the applicant ens patent to such custome:
ine दि and on wee ter 38 as the Controller thinks ft i
पर 11 vot is satisfe that the manufacture, use or .sal : हर
tals not protected by the patent i ५ pre by
० patent is unfat judi
reason of aa impos s unfairly prejudiced by
120. conditions imposed by the patentee upon the grant हि
९] 8 patent or upon th a i हि
the patented article or process: ® purchase, hire or use of

Provided that where t i
| e the application i
that eed That the ० sion is made on thi
" ean Estented invention is not being commercially ok
i Indie s not peng worked to the fullest extent that i
iy practicable and it | है ० छा
ane ‘ ppears to the Control
wich has elapsed since the granting of the vent fen fon
ay annie jpouicient to enable it to be so worked he
may, der, adjourn the applicaticn for ‘
07: ‘ aticn v ri i
in his opinion, give sufficient time for thi save ort eae
को, fe e invention to be so

¢ xcept In cases where tac terms of a lice ave heen settle,
2) E. 58 where th fali hi tt!
S ce ee) ad

y mutual agree and 8 arms otherwise provide, any person
b greement and such tarms ot!

. s otherwise provid
to whom a licence has been granted! under sub-section (1) shall be
entitled to call upon the patentee to lake proccedings to prevent

any infringement of the patent and if tl

any infringe ४ Pe and if the patentee refuses फट

na atte nee months after being so called upon, the Toone

ay चयन 000० ings for the infringement in his own name ne

rons oe es patentee, making the patentee a defendant 4

a Patents an ded as defendant shall not be liable for a 1 cos
San appearance and takes part in the यह



‘a ‘Bndorse+

288. (0) At any time = years
ahe date of the sealing ment may sent of a
apply to the Control ads spe' ee
fied in sub- ection (2) ot tis of the tion by
patent with the words ‘ 02३ oh Right”. Govert-
(2) An application wider this section may also be 1 fe on the ment.
patentee 40 grant + cence oF

jopment of
rly prejudiced
afnich by the
dient in the pub-

eve!

fusai of the
os

the estab shment oF थे

ndja is untai

ground that by the te
zeasonable torres
commercial oF industrial aetivities im 3
or the development of an ind , the control
Union is declared by Parliament tre @
lic interest, js being prevented ot
(3) Where 2 patent of addition
sub-section (3) either Sor the end
the patent of addition shall be deemed to ne
endorsement of both the patents and where
js granted of yefused it ghall be ९
xefused in respect of oth the patents.

Yicences 01.

ot

astey,
py law 0
hindered.

plication under
jomnal patent oF
ieation for the
application
granted or

ig in force, any SE
ssement of the OF
pe an appl

any such

ghis section shail be
ection 20.

(4) All endorsements of patcals made under
sts maintained under 5!

entered in the Register of Parents

reby declared that nothing
€ Central Government ०:
ion for the grant of 2
ng ot jrading activity

[& removal of doubts it is he

in this section ghall affect the tight of th

any State Government to make 3n applical

licence in respect of any industrial undertak!:

d or carried था py such Government.

the Cont olier has made an ement upon Provision
patents

endors
of Righ as to
on shall at any time after such endorsement pe endorsed
ce unde tent upon such terms “Licences
& settled by the Controller on of Right”.
tee or of the person applying

(6) For th

owne

288. (1) Where

a patent “Licences
(a) any pers
entitled as of right ६० 2 Ticen

ag in default of agreement may 2

the application. either of the patent
for a licence;
(b) the Co

holding a licence
ment, order the
by virtue of the ०!
aforesaid mannets

on the application of a person
granted under the patent pefore the endorse-
licence to be yevoked and grant a new jicence
sodorsement upon terms to be settled in the

troller may,

(९) if io proceedings for the infringement of the patent
tented article from

(otherwise than by the importation of the pal
othet countries) the infringing defendant is ready and will

Exercise
of powers
on appli.

cation
under
section
22 or
section
23A.

tak

ing 1
no injunction
cov
ceed deubl

tre
ail not ex-

dorsed shall हि
only of ha ast i ot a patent 80 en«
y ne fees which would otherwise havi पे ६, be one moiety

7 ave been payable, ,

mn) a section 23 shall apply te
ad 3
(1) as they apply to a licence

हि @) The provisions 0६ su
ny licence granted unde
granied under :

= application under
ha view to securing

aac. (1) "
section
the followi
e following gersral puryoses, that is t
poses, that is to a

atcaller

(a) that inventi
. inventions (६
seale in In * be worke
and 1 sh worked on at
worked shall be w whic १ should in the public i a commercial
fullest ¢: ३ worked the thout und lic interest be so
nt thet is reasonably practic st me delay and to the
ly practicable;

(0) that the inv
to a patent si! iv inventer or other person benefici
nt shal oie ti son beneficially ५
to the nat | receive reasonable vernuner neficially entitled
ature of the invention; uaneration having regard

६0) that the in

¢ nteresis of any

working on te ; s oi any person for ¢ i

working oF veloping an invention in India ४ या
हि patent is not unfairly prejudiced under the proves:
2) Subject to th i set

shal, in prs to the provisions of sub-secti

eee section (1 Cc
sch application ne whether ic make an order हि ह a ot ang
ich गए not, take account of th किए mat te aren
as cf the following matters, that

(a) the naty h 3०६
है re of the invent ‘h. 12:
since the wali vention, the lime whi
the pate “ing of the patent and mescures | 1 - ot ke
by mt any licensee to make full nse at thes een
H 2 of the invention;
3

(b) the abilit

y of any
granted under t] Bay person to whom a lie .
advantage; and he order to work the sovention 40. the * we
“ pithlic

(c) the risks t

न 0 be undertaken

capital and worki ndertaken by that person in providi

put shall not ad working the invention if the applicatio in providing

the applicati account of matters subseque: ‘ion is granted;
pplication. sequent to the making of



हर

wee indice bo the fo tions re-

ace, ° 1० eaggeet ०६-- tating १०

At, wh + cine weed icine, in- food or
i being used

cance capable

a the

or

5 3
able of being used as o¢ as part of a
(0) any invention CaP te of being

i > curative device;
surgical 00 curaitve sot him be 09 sens
ant of a dicence une the
appears to him that

, om apolica ion ¥
the Controller shall. of + nliaat!
interested, order the grant 7
patent on such terms as he thi

there are gond reasons for vefusi हि wg x
es, insecticides,
devices shalt be
the
‘hts.

to secure that food, medi
a al and ative | हा
the lowest prices consistent nie
20० edvantage from their patent

and
g

available to th 2
patentees’ deriving a Tea:

public at

ibis section shail entitle the en
nd the invention as 100, ove.
cide. or for the purposes of a ne art
jeide, germicide or fungicide or as

pnt for no other purposes.

(8) A Licence granted uade:
to make, use, exercise and
insecticide. germicide or fu
tion of food, medicine, }ost ८
of a surgical oF curative dcvie

an a natent referred to in sub-sec~
(4) Where a vatent other than 2 2

SS ‘oduc-
if stance or process for PT
is i vce in respect oF 8 substance | : meee
Oe ee na th rcentral Government 5 satished Best its
aay in the १ ic & 5 licence suc!
i ecessary in the public interest tna pment Bey noti-
odin shot ते be granted. the Central ove: ; tay ON sec
a patent shou real Goreite, direct that the prove © os and
fication in tae ON Gorette, Cire ay the हागा
fo-sectian (2) resp! . oie made १०
tion (1) and sub-sec ) ee far Os Seen be ae ele
ett the terms thereof. 2 Se ae
ee ply to such 8 patent. and on ne कक
s ० su | doe al
Coe the said provisions shell apply ec sea tho ov 8
- 29 section . ०
feat ० 2 appli-
Every applicatio धर | पक the &D
78 shal जे ify the nature of the ord ght By the
tien 23CC, shall 59201 of the ort the ते

ares : an ; : ets BEO i he application
ion nae endl the facts ure" which the appt
arest, if any, हे e fae

tion
ing a substance

9. under sect:on

applic “
i isfied, WP onsideration of
हा Controller is satisfied, ween ९०7 mene my
atest et 2 हु facie case has been Mm हे oreo
te eal the applicant to serve CO} हि
any persons appeatl

hn application. fact
कदर कि an order, he shall direct a ener
fre application upon the patente

Inven-

of feod, medicine,

Procedure
on appli-
cation
under
section 22,
section
23A or
section
28८९,

i
i

tha

The patent rug to oppese

the

pelore or after the expiration
© Controller notice of opp

हि (4) Any such notice of opposition shall contain a statement sett-
ing owt the grounds on which the application is opposed,

(9) Where any such notice of opposition. is duly given the Con-
troller shall notify the applicant, and shall give to the applicant
and the opponent an opportunity to be heard before deciding the

case
Supple- 23K. (1) Any order made by the Controller under section 23,
mentary वि ction 388 or section 23CC for the gtant of a licence shail, without
auth ress prejudice to any other mode of enforcement have effect as if it
pect to were a deed, executed by the patentee and all other necessary
orders parties, granting a licence in accordance with the order.

under

section 23, (2) Notwithstanding anything coniained in this Act xno order

section shall be made in pursuance of an application under section 23 or

op oe section 23A or section 288 or section 2802 which would bé 4६

ce variance with any treaty, convention, arrangement or engagement
applying to India and any other country.

Appeals. 23F, (1) An appeal shall lie to the High Court-at Calcutta from
any order of the Controller made under section 23 or section 283A or
under clause (a) or clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 23B or
under section 23CC. .

(2) Every such appeal shall be made within three months of the
date of the order passed by the Controller and shall be in writing.
(3) In calculating the said period of three months, the time, if
any, occupied in granting a copy of the order appealed against shall
be excluded. :
Procedure 236. (1) When an appeal has been preferred to the. High Court
forhear- at Calcutta under section 23F, it shall be heard by a Bench of not
ing of less than two Judges.
appeals,

(2) The Bench hearing the appeal may, if it thinks fit, and shall,
on the request of the parties to the appeal, cajl in the aid of an
assessor specially qualified for the purpose, and hear the appeal
wholly or partially with his assistance.



coat gine

128
ssessor under

if any, to be paid to an @
case Be deiermined by the High Court

६ of the expenses of the execution of this

(3) The remunerah
jon shall

4

Lo hate RAR, *
by giving notice in छ- Power of
५ to surrender his patent, and the Controller
of the offer and hearing all oe
pinks fi, accept the offer, and dered
potent.

the preser)

Ay patentee may at any १413
atroller, off

24.
ed manner to the Com
Controiler may, it afler giving not
who desire lo be heard he
४९ revocation of the patent.

parties
thereupon make an order for th
if the Ceniral Gov- Revoca-
Gazette, the patent tien ot

pievous to the State patent on
public

grounds

25. A patent shall pe deemed to be revoked

ernment declares, by notification in the Official
or the mode in which it is exercised to be misc
or generally prejudicial to the public.

- Legal Proceedings
e obtain- Petition
(६ for re-

vocation

hole or in part may bi

atent in ४7
for intringemen

26. (1) Revocation of a p
ed on petition to or on 2 counter-claim in 8 suit
pefore a High Court on ail or any ©

(a) that the invention has t
grant of a patent in India;
true and first inventor or

(b) that the
4ive or assign Was not the applicant or one
the patent;

(c) that the patent was
the person applying for the revoci
or through whom he claims;

been the subject of 8 valid prior

his legal representa-
of the applicants. for

obtained in fraud of the rights of
ation or of amy person under

ention was not, at the date of the patent, 3

(8) that the inv
improvement,

manner of new manufacture OF

(e) that the invention does not involve any
yy or used prior

having regard to what was know
the patent;

inventive step,
to the date of

the invention is of no utility; ..

specification does not sufficiently and
the nature of the invention and
tion is to be performed.

(f) that

(g) that the complete

fairly: describe and ascertain
the manner in which the inven’
jon does not sufficiently and

invention claimed:
on a false suggestion OF

(h) that the complete sspecificat
scope of the

clearly ascertain the
(i) that the patent was obtained
representation;

£ the following grounds, namely:— of patent.

G
vention

(k

(0) that th

tha e compiete speci
b m piste gpec
en method of performance
app icant for the patent at 1)
eft at the Patent Office;

hone हे the
of the invention known io the
cification was

(m) that pri

है prior to th

other person the date of the pate:

sons (not bei L tent, the

ment of the ot being authorities बल palenten or
x service of Gove mastering any depart

of, or any oth vernment, or th हित
othe: eat, 38 agents or contre

tral Government) secre authorised in that shalt 5 ontractors

. secret] r 7 हे if. oy, the Cen-

mercial sca’ ° y worked the invent! , °

experime ae (and not merely by way vention on a corn

profit ment) in India. and thereb; by of reasonable tris] or

p ts In excess of such amount Yee
con of all the circustances as

| direct cy indirect
weak 2 ourt may in considera-
= the case deem reasonable;

;

() that the i

५, en ion ‘

is not the same ae gation claimed in the complete specificatt

tion, and th. at contained in ee ecification,

Hon, at the i मै ined in the provis ae

in the provisional invention claimed, so far te कसा specifica~

the complete a. _ Specification, was not is not contained
plete specification was filed: _ new at the date when

Provi .
rovided that this sub-section shall hav fF
sh ve ffs

ground of . नि
revocation specified ct in relation to the

@) in clause subject to the. provisions of section 782
(9), ct to the. provi 0:
b 9: lion 78A,

(४४) in clause (d object to the provisions of sub-section
(d}. subj to the provisions of sul
i s ection

(4). of section
13, -secti
section 40, sub-section (12) of section 21A. section 38 and
+ om 38 810:

(2) A petiti
ton for revocation of a patent may bi
r e presented—

{a) by the Advccate General or

him;
im; ot any person authorized by

(0) by any person alleging —

(i) that the pat
patent was obtai: in £
ned in fraud of his rights,

or of the rights
ights of y s
claims; or any person under or through whom he

(ii) that he, ०
claims, wa. » oF any person’ under or
cluded in aie true and first inventor jhrough whom he
१ the claim of the patentee; oF any invention in-
7



5० 1908

139

or through whom he
or manufacture,
in India, be?

(iti) that he, or any person under
claims an interest in ai trade, busine
had publicly used or sold,
ihe date of the patent, anything claii
his invention.

marniiacture

(3) The High Court may, irrespective of any provisions of the
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, in this behalf, require any person.
ather than the Advocate General or any person authorizea by him,
applying for the revocation of a patent to give security for the P
ment of all costs incurred or likely to be ineurred by any pers:
appearing to oppose the petition.

27, (2) Notice of any petition for revocation of a patent under Nosiee of
section 26 shall be served on all persons appearing from the registt? ee to
to be proprietors of that patent or to have shares or interests ae persons
in, and it shall not be necessary to serve the notice on any OUST intevesi_

हे

4
person.

(2) The notice shall be dezmed to be sufficiently served if 3 copy
thereof -is sent by post in a registered letter directed to the pers'
and place for the time being stated in the register.

i i रु Framing
28, (1) A high Court may, if it thinks fit, direct an issue for the कक

190 Ce istrict Court, §§
trial, before itself or any other High Court, or any District Cour
of any question arising upon 3 petition to jtself under. section 28 jorore

i be ied accordingly. other
and the issue shall be tried according! other

(2) If the issue is directed to another High Court, the fading
shall be certified by that Court to the High Court directing 2
issue. -

(3) if the issue is directed to a District Court, the finding. of that
Court shall not be subject to appeal, but the evidence j गा pon
the trial shall be recorded and a copy thereof, certified ae the
Judge of the Court, shall be transmitted, together ie 8 a लि
marks which he may think fit to make thereon, to = ® High oon
directing the issue, and the High Court may thereupon 1 ‘pon हि
the finding of the District Court, or dispose of the patil aoe ee
evidence recorded, or direct a new trial. as the justic: the

may require.

it i istrict rt having Suits for
29, (1) A patentee may institute a suit in a District ane ie infringe:
jurisdiction to try the suit against any person who, “ ves pect ment of
contizuanee of a patent acquired by him unde: this Act wat his patents.
of an invention, makes, sells or uses the invention wl
० मु न or the
Hicense, of counterfeits it, or imitates it:

aban suns! एल

W

Exemp-
tion of
innocent
infringer
from
liability
for
damages.

Order for
inspec-
tion, ete.
in. suit.

Certifi-
cate of
validity
question-
edand
costs
thereon.

Trans-
mission of
decrees
and
orders to
the Con-
troller,

131

Provided that where & counter claim for revocation of the patent

's made by the defendant, the suit, alo:
¢ हि

with the count
Sferred to the High Co

‘or decision,

है (2) Every ground on which a patent may be revoked under sec-
lion 26 shall be available by way of defence to a suit for infris
ment :

1

30. A patentee shall not be entitled to recover any damages in
respect of any infringement of a palent granted after the commen-
cement of this Act from any defendant who proves that at the date
of the infringement he was not aware, nor had reasonahla means
of making himself aware, of the existence af the patent, and the
marking of an article with the word “patent”, “patented”, or any
word or words expressing or implying that a patent has been ob-
tained for the article, stamped, engraved, impressed on, or other-
‘vise applied to the grticle, shall not be deemed to constitute notice
of the existence of the patent unless the word or words are accom-
panied by the year and number of the patent:

Provided that nothing in this section shall affect any proceed-
1783 for an injunction.

31. In a suit for infringement of a patent, the Court may, on
the application of either party, make such order for an injunction,
inspection or account, and impose such terms and sive such direc-
tions respecting the same and the proceedings thereon, as the
Court may see fit.

32. In a suit for infringement of a patent the Court may certify
that the validity of the patent came in question. and if the Court
so certifies, then in any subsequent suit in that Court for infringe-
ment of the same patent the plaintiff, on obtaining a final order or
indgement in his favour, shall, unless the Court trying the suit
otherwise directs, have his full costs, charges and expenses of and
incidental to the said suit properly incurred.

33. A Court making a decree in a suit under section 29 or an
order on a petition under section 26 shall send a copy of the decree
or order, as the case may be, to the Controller, who shall cause an
entry thereof and reference thereto to be made in the register of
natents. ! .



132

resented under Power
3 High Court to which a petition has been presea ner itch

on 26 stay, proces lismiss the petition if is Croat to
७ 26 may stay, proceedings on or dismis the petit t - sto
०0 the petit wn would be disposed of more justly ० stay
opinion the petition wo sta पा 7
ently by another High Court. cond gi
f 5ng
9 + revocation of Hearing
5. o 3 ४ infringement or Tevoc® Hes
i a sui ceding for infringe tof a
re Gomme mn aes it thinks fit, and shall on the reqves assessor.
ay, if s fit, °

९ 5 id ot assessor Spe-
ep 2 ings in the aid of an assessor SPY
1 oecedings, call in the a’ ae

all the parties to the pr: i an
oly eae’, and try the case wholly or partially a
ally हि

moe,

respect of SU 31]

suriedietion in
ising appellate: jurisdiction resent
Oo covet a eiey, weit thinks At, call-in the aid of 20 8

suit or proceeding may, 1
ns aforesaid.

Jer thi
if any, fo be paid to an assessor nce et
be determined by the Court and be १

(3) The remuneration, i
f the execution of this Act,

section shall in every case
ny it as part of the expenses 0

i i e Grant of
contained in section 19. if th Grant ot
tent finds that any one veces of
है ct of which the particular
subject to its discretion 35 Gaims.
subje i io
ages should be reckoned

तेः esirable, grant
sem ते without

358. Notwithstanding anything हि अब
i i infringement 0:
Court in any ection for infring ot a a ene

or rnore of the claims in the specifica
infringement is alleged are valid, a may,
to costs ang as to the date from whic

dment as 11 may 8 des
and to such terms as to amen rey eatin

i w 4 In

ref i f. any of such claims which “specification.
velief in respect पाक of any other claim in the consideration
regard. to the inv e-Court may take into im the

isi iseretion th
exercising such disc on the»
the conduct of the parties im be
specification oF permitting the

है| id claims
serting such jnvalid लेडी |

1 to remain there.” ©
m a patent, Remedy

to have an interest eee धरा

" erson claiming a any :
3 ee advert ents or otherwise. threat t oe ary wound.
advertisements Se abt teresa seu

by circulars. othe
person with any legal proce an "
alle atent.

4 infringement of the pe any perso
हिना ing a ait against him in a नंगा oon ;
to Uy the suit, and may: obtain an doer tion ace (em)

v8 ar the, 1 intr ent to whic e
nuance of such threats, + if the alleged infringem ch 8
be has sustained thereby, हैं fact ‘an. infringement of the pe _|
threats related was not 1 |

erson aggrieved “thereby treats at
‘Cot + havin risdiction legal pro-
against the contl ceedings.

nm action for

ae ee 6 with due

ion shail not POY roseoute

Provided that this secti 2 enced

infringement of the patent
diligence.

sala nsec

Grant of
patent:
two or

Sto

more
Persons,

Public
vse or
know-
ledge of
invention

Diseon_
formity.

Loss or
destruc.
tion of
patent.

Provi- .
sions as
to exhibj.

_ tons and

Teadings
before
learned
societies,

Miscelianeous

37. Where, after the commencement of this
granted to two ५
specified In the pat ¢

the iegal interest there, joint tenanis, but, subjece +
contract to the contrary, each of such persons shall be ent.
use the invention for his own profit without accou
others, but shall not be entitled to grant a licence
consent, and, if any such person dies, his beaeficial ‘nterest in the

atent shall devolve on his legal representatives,

ig

to aly

itled te
dang to the
rithout their

38. The public use or knowledge of an invention in India
before the date of the application for a patent thereon shall noi
invalidate the patent granted thereon if the knowledge has been
eotained surreptitiously or in fraud of the true and | first inventor
cr his legal representative or assign or has been. communicated to
tae public in fraud of such inventor ‘or his 3९8७1 representative or
छोड़ा or in breach of confidence:

Provided that such inventor or his legal representative or assign
has not acquiesced in the public use of his invention, and that he
applies for a patent within six months after the commencement ‘ot
such use.

388. A patent :hall-not be held to:be invalid ‘on the ground
thas the complete specification claims a further or different invention
to that coniained in the provisional, if the invention therein
claimed, so far as it is not contained in the provisional, was novel
ai the date when the complete specification was put in, and the
applicant for the patent was the true and first invenior thereof, or
the legal representative or assign of such inventor,

39. Lf a patent is lost or destroyed, oY its” non-production is
accounted for to the satisfaction of the Controller, the Controller
1089 at any time, on payment of the prescribed fee, seal a duplicate
thereof.

40. The exhibition of an invention .at an industrial’ or other
exhibition to which the provisions.of this section: have been extend-
ed by the Central Government by notification in the Official Gazette,
or the publication of any description of the. invention during: the
period of the holding of the exhibition, or the use of the invention
for the purpose of the exhibition in. the place where the. exhibition
is held or the use of the invention or the publication ct any deserip-
tion thereof, during or after the period of the holding of the exhibi-
tion, by any person elsewhere without the privity or consent of the



inventor or the reading of a paper
society, or the publication of that paper in the so
shall not prejudice the right of the inventor to apply for and obtain
a patent in respect of the invention, or the validity
granted on the application:

Provided that—

(४) the exhibitor exhibiting the invention or the inventor
reading the paper or authorising the publication thereof, as the
case may be, gives to the Controller previous notice in the pres-
eribed form; and :
(०) the application for a patent is made before or within six
monihs from the date of first exhibiting the invention or of the
reading of the paper, as the case may be, or when it has not been
so read, of the said publication,
41, The trustees of the Indian Museum may at any time require Models to
a patentee to furnish them with a model or sample of his invention be An
on payment to the patentee of the cost of the manufacture of the saan °
model or sample, the amount to be settled, in case of dispute, by the juseum.
Central Government.

42, (1) A patent shall not prevent the use of an invention for the Foreign
purposes of the navigation of a foreign vessel within the jurisdiction vessels in
of any Court in India, or the use of an invention in a foreign vessel inden
within that jurisdiction, provided it is not used therein for or in con-
nection with the manufacture or preparation of anything intended to
be sold in or exported from India.

(2) This section shall not extend to vessels of any foreign State
of which the laws do not confer corresponding rights with respect
to the use of inventions in Indian vessels while in the ports of that

State, or in the waters within the jurisdiction of its Courts.
* कं * * * *

51B. The provisions of section 21 shall epply to registered designs Registra-
as if those provisions were re-enacted herein and in terms made tion of

* हि हि designs to
applicable to registered designs. bind the
* * * * * * Govern-

ment.

34, The provisions of this Act with regard to certificates of the Applica-
validity of a patent, and to the remedy in case of groundless threats tion of
of legal proceedings by a patentee shall apply in the case of regis- certain
tered designs in like manner as they apply in the case oi patents, othe
with the substitution of references to the copyright in a design for act asto
references to a patent, and of references to the proprietor of a design ः to
for references to the patentee, and of references to the designs for designs.

references to the invention,

GRNERAL

Patent Office and proceedings thereat
i P प्र

58. (1) The Central Gove
of this Act, an office w'
to as, the Patent Office.

17908? may provide
ich shall be called, and is in this

2 purposes Patent

red Office,

Let re!

(2) The Patent Office shall he under the immediate contro! of the
Controller of Patents and Designs, who shall act under the superin-
tendence arid direction of the Central Governrnent.

(3) There shall be a seal for the Patent Office.

(4) Any act or thing directed to be done by or to the Controller
may be done by or te any officer authorized by the Central Govern-
ment.

56, The Central Government may appoint: the Controller, and so Officers
many officers and clerks, with such designations and duties, as i} and
thinks fit. . clerks,

Fees

57. (1) There shall be paid in respect of the grant-of patents avid Fees.
the registration of designs, and applications therefor, and ih respect
of other matters with relation to the patents and designs under ‘this
Act, such fees as may be vreseribed by the Central Governrhent, 50
however that the fees prescribed in respect of ‘the instruments and

matiers mentioned in the Schedule shall not exceed tho:

se there
specified. . .

* * * 4 x * s

59A. A person making a request to the-Controller in the prescrib-
ed manner as respects any patent specified in the request or as orm
respects any application for a patent so specified, for information ing to
fo be furnished to him by the Controller of any such matters as may, Patents.
be prescribed affecting that patent or application, shall be entitled,
subject to the payment of the prescribed fee, to have information
supplied to him accordingly, है : ‘

* * % “

Pa



136

61. (1) Where an application for a patent has been abandoned or pronipi-

deemed to have been refused, the specifications and drawings (if ti

ion of

shall publica-

any), accompanying or left in connection with such application, tion of
not, save as otherwise expressly provided by this Act, at any time necis-

be open to public inspection or be published by the Controller,

cation,
drawings,

* * + *
ete,
where
applica-

ti

ion

abandon.
ed, etc.

62. The Controller:imay, on request’ in writing accompanied by hatan

the’ prescribed fee,—

troller
to correct

» (a) correct any clerical error in or in connection with an "
clerical

application for a patent or in any patent or any specification;

(७) correct any clerical-error in the representation of a
design or in the name or address of the proprietor of any patent
or design, or in any other matter which is entered upon the re-
gister of patents or the register of designs.

63. (1) where a person becomes entitled by assignment, trans-
mission or other operation of law to a patent or to the copyright in
a registered design, hé may make application to the Controller to
register-his title, and the Controller shall, on receipt of such applica-
tion. and on proof of title to his satisfaction, régister him as the
proprietor of such patent or design, and shall cause an entry to be
made in the prescribed manner in the register of the assignment,
transmission or other instrument affecting the title.

(2) Where any person becomes entitled as mortgagee, licensee or
otherwise to any interest in a patent or registered design, he may
make application to the Controller to register his title and Con-
troller, shall, on receipt of such application and on proof of title te
his satisfaction, cause notice of the interest to be entered in the
prescribed manner in the register of patents or designs, as the case
may’ be with particulars of the instrument, if any, creating such
interest. , Loe
- ,..(3). The person. registered as the proprietor. of.a patent or design
shall, subject to the provisions of this Act and to any. rights appear-
ing from the register to be vested in any other person, have power
absolutely to assign, grant licences as to, or otherwise deal “with,
the patent or design and to give effectual receipt for any eonsidera-
tion for any such assignment, licence or dealing:

errors.

Entry of

assign-
ments and
transmis-
sions in

registers.

|
|
i

Rectifica.
tion of
register.

Publica-
tion of
patented
inven.
tions.
Exercise
of discre-
tionary
power

by Con-
troller.

137

Provided that an

be enforced in
perty.

| equities in tespect of the patent or

dasi 4
anner ae i esign may
manner as in respect of any other ae ey

thoveable pro-

(4) Except'in the case of an applica

a document or. m uade under section 64,

instrument in cespe i

रे u : me pect of which 1, iy

made ty the register in accordance with the’ provisions of eat
1 2. है हि ५

fons Gl ped @) shall not bé admitted in evidence in any cox a

proot 2 ve tine ane parent or to copyright in a design or to any

ater तु ss the Court, f ord

writing, otherwise directs. Oh Besson $e Be recorded in

64. (1) The Controller
inane! 2५ the cntroller may, on the application in the prescribed.
fom आल दल को by the non-insertion in or ornission
of patents or desi
नं हि ; of guns. of any ७
y any entry made in either such register without sufficient 22 8,
use,

order for making, expunging or vai » Make such

and rectify the register accordingly. -

* s Fa

“1 e .

(5) Nothing in this section: shall be deemed

Controller— to empower the

2 = + *

66. The Controller shall issue periodically a publication of paten-

a iE fe
ted inventions containing such information as the entral -Govern-

7 0, «- न wo
न



SRR AceRES

38

पं f * वि Tefusal

9. (1) The Controller may telusc to grant 2 to grant
invention, or to register 2 design, of which the use would, in his patent
opinion, be contrary to law of morality. tc, i

patent for an

a * + .

+

ui docu-

4LA, Printed or written copies or extracts, purperting to
certified by the Controller and sealed with the seal of the Patent oe
Office, of or from patents, specifications and other documents in the Patent.
Patent Office, and of or from registers and other books kept there. onice,
shall be admitted in evidence in all Courts in India, and in all pro-
ceedings, without further proof or production of the originals:

drawings and amendments Transmis-
under sion of
be, copies of
fica-

1 such specifications,
8 become open to public inspection
Jrali be transrnitted, as 5003 as ma’
e available, to such autho:
behalf, and shall snd ins.
ble times at pection
the thereof.

42, Copies. of al
left at.the Patent Office, a
the provisions of this Act, 5
after the. printed copies thereof ar
as the Central Government may appoint in this
be open to the inspection of any person at all reasona
places to be appointed by those authorities and approved by

Central Government.
2 2 = ° * a *

ving notice of any opposition under this sccurity
Act or giving notice to the Court of appeal from any decision ot for costs,
the Controller under this Act, neither resides nor carries on business
in India, the Controller or the Court, as the case may be, may
¢ such person to give security for the payment of all costs

44.5. Where a person gi

requir:
jncurred and likely to be incurred in the procecdings or appeal, as
the case may be, and, in default of stich security being given, may
disallow the opposition or dismiss the appeal. -
ह Agency
73. The following documents, namely,— Subsorip-
Sante £ tion and.
(1) applications for 8 patent, . verifica-
(2) notices of opposition, tion of
(3) applications for extension of terms of a patent, certain.
(4) applications for the restoration of lapsed patents, docu .
ments.

(9) applications for leave to amerid,
(6) applications for compulsory licence or revocation,
(1) riotices of surrenders of patent, and?”
(8) applications for endorsement of patent with- the. words
"Licenses of Right”,
shall be signed and verified, in the manner’ prescribed, by the person

making such applications or giving such notices:

Power for

Central
Govern~
ment to
make
rules.

aoe bsent trom

India,

verified on

' 99 him in wr

nications to
all attendance

95 .

7
2) The Controller may, if he sees fit require.

* ® * 4 नि

} the persotial signature or presence of any applicant, op-
.
' nee ny applicant. of

Powers. ete i
vwers, ete., of Central Government

77, (1) The Central G
om OS en overnment ma’ Kee i
hinks expedient subject to the provisions ot this Act miles as it

के * .
* * क्ष

(९) for making i
हि ८ making or requiring duplicates 4 i
crawings and other documents. हु © of “specifications,

(व) tt i
रे हि ) secu ing and regulating the publishing and seili
ypies, at such prices i 7 हु ge
ch prices and in such me 7 ral
ee ; manner as the C
vovernment thinks ft, of specifications, 8 i oor
dowuenentes , drawings and other

vshine ee anil and regulating the making, printing, pub-
tions end other da of indexes to, and abridgments of, specifica
for the inenecti locuments in the Patent Office; and providi
inspection of indexes and abridgment P vi ns
ments; s and other decu-

° * * शत
* * *

{eee} for ensuring secrecy with respect to patents to w
f ४ secrec :
eens ia t to nts to which

* * :

(2A) Nothing in ection (2
ane Fs m (2) shal! apply in the ८

nade for the purpose specified in clause tee) ot sub-section i noma
a y such rules may modify any of the provisions ‘of thi (sand
s Inay be necessary for that purpose. है Act so far

bd ¥
* *
ह . .



Ojences

78. If any pe
ment issued by him, or otherwi
any other word

१1 wses on his slace of business, or on any docit-
8, the words “Patent Office”, or
ling that his place of busin is officially
connected with, or is, the Pateut Office, he punishable with
fine which may extend io two hundred a in the case
of a continuing offence, with further fine of twenty rupees for each
day on which the offence is con d alter conviction therefor.

हर]

Reciprocal arrangements with the United Kingdom und other
parts of His Majesty’s dominions

78. (.}.Whereas His Majesty has by Ordey made 005 the 28th
day of July, 1938, declared British India to be a convention country
within the meaning of section 91A of the Patents and Designs Acts,
1907 to 1938, any person who has epplied for protection for any
invention or design in the United Kingdom, or his legal repre-
sentative or assignee shall, either alone or jointly with any other
person, be entitled to claim that the patent that may be granted 10
him under this Act, for the said invention or the registration of the
said design under this Act, shall be in priority, to other applicants
and shall have the same date as the date of the application in the
Jaited Kingdom:

Provided that—

(a) the application is made in the case of a patent within
twelve months, and, in the case of a design, within six months
from the application for protection in the United Kingdom; and

(9) nothing in this section shall entitle the patentee or the
proprietor of the design to recover damages for infringements
»appening prior to the actual date on which, in the case of a
patent, his application js accepted or, in the case of a design, the
design is registered, in India.

(2) The patent granted for an invention. or the registration of &
design shall not be invalidated—

(a) in the case of a patent by reason only of the publication
of a description of, or use of, the invention, or

(b) in the case of a design, by reason only of the exhibition
or use of, or the publication of a description or representation of,
the design,

in India. during the period specified in this section as that within
which the application may be made,

Wrongful
use of
words
“Patent
Office”.

United
Kingdom
and other
parts of
His
Majesty's
domi-
nions.

(०) the applicaiion shall be ac
specification; and

by a complete

(89) if the application is not a cepted within cighteen raonthys
fr the date of the application for protection in the WJnited
Kingdom, the specification shali, with the drawings (if any) sup.

plied therewith, be open to public inspection at the expiration
of that period.

(4) Where il is made to appear 10 the Central Goverament that
the legislature of any other pari of His Majesty’s dominions has made
satisfactory provision for the protection of inven 1008 or des: ड़
patented or registered in India, the Central Goverm ent may,
notification in the Official Gazette. direct that the provisions of this
section, with such variations or additions, if any, as may be set out
in such notification, shall apply for the protection of inventions or

designs patented or registered in that part of His Majesty’s domi-
nions. cae हु

y

a * शत



THE 8

EDULE
(See Section 5;
Fees
On application for a patent accompanied by provisional speci-
fication . : पु पु पु
On filing complete specification after provisional specification

On application for a patent accompanied by complete specifi-
cation . . . . . .

For sealing a patent

Before the expiration of 4th year from the date of the patent
Before the expiration of the sth year from the date of the patent
Before the expiration of the 6th year from the date of the patent
B: fore the expiration of the 7th year from the date of the patent
Before the expiration of the 8th year from the date of the patent

Before the expira’

ion of the 9th year from the date of the patent

Before the expiration of the 10th year from the date of the patent
Before the expiration of the 11th year from the date of the patent
Before the expiration of the r2th year from the date of the patent
Before the expiration of the 13th year {rom the date of the patent
Before the expiration of the r4th year from the date of the patent
Before the expiration of the 1sth year front the date of the patent

Provided that the fees for two or more years may be paid in

advance.

On application to extend the term of a patent

In respect of each year of the extended term of a patent or of a

new patent granted under section 15
An application for registration of a design

142

Ps)

i
i
रु

७५०२4 ee लक नियण-7:एएएणएणएणएण /»»»तणतिनत अननन-““--- 7०-००



PP IEE OE ETE ITI a
ee eR

LOK SABHA

meee

4
BILL

to amend and onsolidate the law Telating to Patents,

(Shri Fakhruddin Aly Ahmed, Minister of Industrial Development
and Company Affairs.)

fon