1
THE TECHNICAL EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS, MEDICAL
EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS AND UNIVERSITIES
(REGULATION OF FEE) BILL, 2010
By
ADV. P.T. THOMAS, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the regulation of fee in technical educational institutions, medical
educational institutions and universities and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Technical Educational Institutions, Medical Educational
Institutions and Universities (Regulation of Fee) Act, 2010.
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 120  of 2010
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “Council” means the National Council for Educational Cost and Prices
established under section 3;
(b) “fee” means any amount demanded or charged or collected, directly or
indirectly, for, or, on behalf of any institution, or paid by any person in consideration
for admitting any person as student in an institution;
(c) “institution” means a technical educational institution or medical educational
institution or any such institution registered under the Societies Registration
Act, 1860 and recognised as such by the appropriate statutory authority or a university
as defined in section 2 of the University Grants Commission Act, 1956 and includes an
institution deemed to be a university under section 3 of that Act or under any other
law for the time being in force; and
(d) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, appoint, there shall be established a Council to be known as the National
Council for Educational Cost and Prices.
4. (1) The Council shall consist of a Chairperson and six members, who shall be
appointed by the Central Government from amongst persons having special knowledge in
the field of higher education, public affairs or administration in educational matters and
atleast twenty-five years of experience in the field.
(2) The following shall be ex-officio members of the Council—
(a) the Director of the Indian Institute of Technology, Delhi;
(b) the Director of the All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi;
(c) the Vice-Chancellor of Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi;
(d) the Director of Delhi School of Economics, New Delhi;
(e) the Director of Indian Institute of Management, Ahmedabad; and
(f) the Director of Indian Institute of Sciences, Bengaluru.
5. (1) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of
service of the Chairperson and members of the Council, except the ex- officio members,
shall be such, as may be prescribed, by the Central Government.
(2) The allowances payable to the Chairperson and members of the Council including
the ex-officio members for attending the meetings of the Council shall be such, as may be
prescribed by the Central Government.
6. (1) The Central Government shall determine the nature and categories of the
officers and other employees required to assist the Council in the discharge of its functions
and provide the Council with such officers and other employees as it may think fit.
(2) The salaries and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of the
staff of the Council shall be such as may be prescribed by the Central Government.
7. The Council shall meet at such time and places, and shall observe such rules of
procedure in regard to the transaction of its business, including the quorum at such meetings,
as may be prescribed by the Central Government.
8. The Council shall advise and recommend to the Central Government on matters
relating to fixation of fee to be charged by various institutions for a particular course of
study.
21 of 1860.
3 of 1956.
Definitions.
Establishment
of the
National
Council for
Educational
Cost and
Prices.
Composition
of the Council.
Salaries and
other terms
and conditions
of service of
Chairperson
and members
of the Council.
Staff of
Council.
Meeting of the
Council.
Council to
advise on
matters
relating to fee
charged by
institutions.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
9. The Central Government shall prescribe the maximum amount of fee that can be
charged by an institution on the basis of the recommendations of the Council.
10. Any institution, which demands or accepts any fee or donation, in any manner
whatsoever, in violation of the provisions of section 9, shall, without prejudice to proceedings
for prosecution under the provisions of this Act or any other law for the time being in force,
be liable to a penalty which may extend to fifty lakh rupees.
11. The Central Government may, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, pay to the Council in each financial year such sums as may be considered
necessary to the Council for performing its functions under the Act.
12. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised  in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without  prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Central
Government
to prescribe
fee limit.
Penalty for
demanding fee
in excess of
the prescribed
limit.
Payment of
sums to the
Council.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15

4
S 3\E\BILL 2010 / LS / 4744LS
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
There has been an unprecedented growth in the number of students pursuing higher
education in recent years. The higher professional education, especially technical and medical
education, is being provided mainly through private institutions. The current national policy
supported by several judicial pronouncements is against commercialization of higher
education, rather, the policy encourages private ‘not-for-profit’ participation with surplus
revenues to be ploughed back for growth and development of institutions.
It is a matter of public concern that technical educational institutions, medical educational
institutions and universities should not resort to unfair practices such as charging exorbitant
fee, etc.
It is, therefore, proposed to bring a legislation to regulate the fee charged by technical
educational institutions, medical educational institutions and universities. The Bill
inter alia provides for—
(a) setting up of a council to be known as the National Council for Educational
Cost and Prices for tendering advice to the Central Government on matters relating to
fixation of fee to be charged  by various institutions for a particular course of study;
(b) prohibition on accepting fee in excess of the amount prescribed by the
Central Government; and
(c) imposition of monetary penalty upto rupees fifty lakh on institutions charging
fee more than the limit prescribed by the Central Government.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; P.T. THOMAS
August  2, 2010.

5
S 3\E\BILL 2010 / LS / 4744LS
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for establishment of a Council to be known as the  National
Council for Educational Cost and Prices. Clause 4 provides for appointment of Chairperson
and other members of the Council by the Central Government. Clause 5 provides, inter alia,
for salaries and allowances payable to the Chairperson and other members of the Council.
Clause 6 provides for appointing officers and staff for functioning of the Council. Clause 11
provides for payment of sums to the Council by the Central Government. The Bill, therefore,
if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that
a recurring expenditure of rupees ten crore per annum will be involved.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be incurred.

6
S 3\E\BILL 2010 / LS / 4744LS
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 12 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the provisions of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of detail only. Therefore, the delegation
of legislative power is of a normal character.

GMGIPMRND—4744LS(S3)—27-10-2010.
LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the regulation of fee in technical educational institutions, medical
educational institutions and universities and for matters connected  therewith
or incidental thereto.
————
(Adv. P .T. Thomas, M.P.)