. ' 
LOK SABRA 
" ~ fII>, .. • • 
" . 
roRRI GENnA , . to 
. . ~ . . 
THE DELHI POLICE BILL, 1978 ':" , . 
L-fb be/As introduced in Lok sabh~ 
1. Page ii, line 27,-
;CgJ: "e'rl-ect'!ng" ~ "erecting" 
2. Page iv, line 33,-
t:a.t. flatS. ,,.. ~ "e~,.}' 
3. Page 10, in the marg:inal heading to, clause ~,-
ig..t, "regulating 'o~ tra~f..i.plJ '~"regulatiPg 'traffic" 
4. Page 27, line 27,-
(QI:. "of sub- set16n (1J .:.of setion ')7", 
~ 'tor sub-section (1) of s(;!et1on' ')7". 
S. Page 29, in''-the margirial...:.beading tQ elalJ"se ~,­
m 'tperforme" ~ ''perforIO "- ' 
6. Page 31, in the marginal hea.~ing to clau se·,69,-
t:w:.. "Cbvemment. ment" ~ .. '~Governm~nt .. , 
7. Page 32, line 1'),-
~ "Jucial " ~ ",rJhdici"al'" 
8. Page 3'), line'29,": 
r.a.r. ''place se t apart for thepurpo se by the order 
of the comp~tent authority" 
tW. ''public well, tank, re servoir, pond, pOQl, 
aqueduct or part of a river, streaxn," . 
9. Page 40, in the margirial he~d1ng to clause _1,11,-
rs:u:. "licencee " ~ "11cenSfie" 
10. P~ge 41, line 1'),-
, , 
m "the" ~ "fine" 

.. 2 -
11. Page 44,tg£ the marginal heading to elause 130,-
~ ''Prqsecution for offences under other 
enactmen ts not ~reet~d." 
12. Page. 46, 'in the m~rgina1 heading to clause 134,,-
!Ql: "Rules, tiona or" ~ "Rules,' regulations ,or" 
13. Page 49, line 5,-
rsu: "discharged all" ~ "d! scharge all" 
14. Page 49, line 36,~ 
m ''photog~htt ~ ''photographs" 
15. Page 49, l:41e 37,~., 
m. ''persons'' ~ "a perS)Il" 
16. Page 50, line 5,-
m. "Ord,inqpee" ~ ".Act" 
17. Page 51, line 11,-
m "Schedule IIII" ~ "Behedule IU" 
18. Page 51, line 47,-
after "such" ~ tla" 
19. Page 55, line 6,-
nu:. "no te " ~ ''no te IS" 
20. Page 55, line 3 fl"om bottom, ... 
!su:. "terriory" ~ "territory" 
21. Page 56, line 8,-
m "po sing':' ~ ''po sting" 
22. Page 59, line 27,-
rsu:. "clauses" ~ "clause" 
23. Page 65, line 7,-
before ''no ttl wsert "( " 
24. <hrrect line numbors on page s 46 and 48. 
NEW DELHI; 

As INTRODUCI!:D IN LoK SABHA ON 
JlW :N... 110 of 1t7 •• 
... WBS.t .. 2 ii S 
'!'HE DELHI POLICE: 13I~, 187ft 
. . 
C~118r.a 
CHAPTER 1 
PJt!LIMINARY 
1. Short titl., extent and commencement. 
2. Deftnitions. 
CHAPTER n 
ORGANISATION, SU'P!:RINTEN~CE AND CONTROL OF THE POLICE f'QRCZ 
3. One pOlice force for the whole of Delhi. 
4. Superintendence of police force to vest in the Administrator. 
5. Constitution of police force. 
6. Commissioner of Police. 
7. Additional Comniissionet of pulice. 
8. Deputy, Additio!l.al Deputy and Assistant Commissioners of 
Pclice. 
8. Itppotntment of Principals of Police training institutions. 
10. Constitution of police distTtets, su.b·divi&ions and police stations. 
11. Officers in charge of police districts, police sub-divisions and 
police stations. 
12. Appointment of subordinate ranks. 
13. Certificate of appointment. 
14. Effect of suspension of Jrolice officer. 
15. General powers of Cmnmission-er of pOlice. 
II: Power of Commissioner of Police tD investigate and regulate 
matters of police accounts. 
17. Special POliCe officers. 
18. Additional police officers. 
CHAPTER TIr 
REGULATION, CONTROL ANn DISCIPLINF. OF THE DELm POUCE 
19. P'raming of regulationll for administration of the police. 
20. Commissioner of Police may call for retums. 
1626 LS-l 

ii 
CLAtTSZS 
21. Powers of punishment. 
12. Procedute for awarding punishments. 
23. Appeal froon orders of punishment. 
U. Police offtcers to be deemed to be always 'on duty and to be 
liable to emptloyment in any part of Delhi. 
151 Oreumstances under which police officer of subordinate rek 
may resign. 
16. Certificate, arms, etc., to be deUvered by person ceasing to be a 
pollce oftlcer. 
17. Oecupation of, and UabUlty to v~.te,prem1ees provic1eci for 
pollee ofBcen. 
CHAPTER IV 
PoLICI: UGULATIONS 
28. Power to make regulations for regulating traffic and for pre-
servation of order in public places, etc. 
29. Power to give directions to the public. 
30. Power to prohibit cei"tain acts for prevention of disorder. 
31. Police to provide against disorder, etc., at places of public amuse-
ment or pUblic assembly or meeting. 
32. Power to prohibit, etc., continuance of music, sound or noise. 
33. Issue of order for prevention of riot, etc. 
3(, )iaintenance of order at religious or ceremonial display, etc. 
35. Commissioner of Police may take special measures to prevent 
outbreak oj epidemic disease at fairs, etc. 
36. Power to reserve street or other' public place for public purpose 
and power to authorise errecting of barriers in streets. 
37. Power to make regulations ptohibiting diSl*>sal of the dead 
except at places set apart. 
CHAPTER V 
SPECIAL MEASURES FOR MAINTENANCE OF PUBLIC ORDER AND SECURITY or 
STATE 
38. Employment of additional police to keep peace. 
39. Employment of additional police in cases bf sp!eCial danger to 
public peace . 
.fO. Employment of additional police at large work and when appre-
hension regarding behaviour of employees exists. 
41. Compensation for injury caused by unlawful assembly how 
recoverable. 
42. DisJAlte in regard to cost of deputing additional police or com .. 
Densation under section 41. 

ill 
CLAUSES 
43. Recovery ot amount payable under section 38, 39, 40 or 41. 
44. Collector to award compensation. 
45. Recovery of amounts payable under sections 39 and 41. 
46. Dispersal of ganes and bodies of persons. 
47. Removal of persons about to commit oft'ences. 
48. Removal of persons convicted of certain offences. 
49. PeriOd of operation of orders under section 046, 47 or 48. 
50~ Hearing to be given before order undet section 46, 47 or 48 it 
pa.sed. 
51. Appeal against orders under section 46, 47 or t48. 
52. Finality of order in certain cases. 
53. Procedure on failure of person to leave the area and his entry 
therein after removal. 
54. Temporary permission to enter and consequences of non-observ-
ance of conditions of such permiSSion. 
55. Taking measurements and photographs, etc., of peI'Sons aeainst 
whom an order under section 46, 47 or 48 is made. 
56. Resistance to the taking of measurements, etc. 
57. Banning of use of dress, etc., resembling uniform of armed 
forces. 
58. Constitution of Defence Societies. 
CHAPI'ER VI 
EXECUTIVE DUTIES AND POWERS OF pOLICE OFFICDS 
59. Duty of police officer to enforce provisions of the Act. 
60. Other duties of a police officer. 
61. Power to enter places of public resort. 
62. Power to search suspected persons in street, etc. 
63. Emergency duties of police. 
64. Superior police officer may himseJf perform duties imposed on 
a subordinate officer. 
65. Persons bound to comply with the reasonable directions of pollee 
officer. 
CHAPTER VII 
POWERS IN RELATION TO UNICLAIMED PROPERTY 
. 66. Police' ···to" take charge of unclaimed pToperty. 
67. Procedure for disposal of pr'operty taken charge of under sec-
tion 66· 
68. Delivery of property to person entitled. 

iv 
CLAUSES 
69~ in default :of claim, property to be at disposal of Government. 
CHAPTER VIII 
SPECIAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO EXEBClSE OF POWERS UNDER ~ CoDE OF 
CRIMINAL PROCEUuRE, 1973 
70. Power of Central Government to authorise CommisaiolWr of 
Police and certain other officers to exercise powers of District 
Magistrates and Executive Magistra* under the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973. 
71. Notifications under section 70 to be laid before Parliament. 
72. Referettees to Judichtl Magistrate 'of the. Finlt Cia. in aeetiona 
108, 109 and 110 of the Code of Criminal Proce~ 1973 Dot to 
be construed as references to an Executive Magistrate. 
CHAPTER IX 
SPECIAL roWERS UNDER THE PREVENTION OF CRUELTY TO ANIMALS Aer, 1960 
73. Powers with regard to offences under Act 59 of 1960. 
74. Powers of Metropolitan Magiltra~ to return animal to persoll 
from whose possession it was taken. 
75. Veterinary officer to examine the animal. 
76. Anima~ to be dealt with under Act 59 of 1960. 
77. Power of police officer to unaaddle amrnal or to Wlload it. 
78. Anest without walTani in case of certain offences under Act 59 
of 1960. 
79. Provisions of Chapter to be in addition to the provisions of Act 
59 of 1960. 
CHAPTER X 
OFFENCES AND PUNISHMENTS 
80. Disregarding the rules of the road. 
81. Causing obstruction or mischief by animal. 
82. Exposing animal for hire, sale, etc. 
83. Causi~ any obat4w:tion in a street. 
84. Obstructing a footway. 
85. Causing obstruction and annoyance by performances, ets. 
86. Doing offensive acts in or near a street or public place. 
87. Letting loose horse, etc., and suffering ferocious doIa te be .t 
large .• 
88. Bathing or washing in places not set apart for ., .. purposes. 
89. Defiling water in public wens, etc. 

• 
CLAUSES 
9O.~ .. ~a. 
91. Behaving indecently in public. 
92. Obsttuc*.J or aAnaylag pUSHI8I's in tAe .a$reet. 
A Uilbebayi~ wiUl in_t to pravolle a 8Naca .f the palce. 
'94. Prohibition against flying kites, etc . 
•. CommlttiJtg nai!aftee in or near street, ete. 
96. Disregard of notice in public building. 
97. Penalties for offences under sections 80 to 96. 
9B. Penalty fbr failure to keep in confinement cattle, etc. 
99. Punishment for cruelty to animals. 
100. Wilful trespass. 
101. False atamn 9f fire or damaie ·to fire alarm. 
102. Being found under suspicious ~ea bRweea INnset and 
sunrise. 
103. Posaession of pTQperty of which no satisfactory accoUAt can be 
given. 
104. Omission by pawn brokers, etc., to repGrt to pollee posRSilion or 
tender of property IWlpect.ed to be stolen. 
105. Melting, etc., of property referred to in section 104. 
106. Taking pledge from child. 
107. Suffering disorderly conduct at places of public amusement, etc. 
108. Cheating at games and gambling in street. 
109. Penalty for disobedience to order UDder aection 37. 
~1()' R..w1lJ f~ ~v_n& ~1tJ,Qu. etc., uDder aectioa, 21. 
Ill. Liability of licensee of place of pu~lie amasemewt or enter-
taiDlJ¥R~ fOI: act.a Qf l8l'¥ant&. 
112. Penalty for not obtaining licence in respect of place of public 
eDtutailNllent or gerti&ate of reaistration in respect' of eating 
house or for not renewing such licence or eerti.ficate within 
prescribed period. 
113. Penalties for contrlWeQt.ifNl of orders, eJlc., ~er .aections 29, 30, 
31J 32, 33 and 34-
ll4tPe~lt~ for contravention of tegulations, etc., made under ~ 
tions 35, 36 and 37. 
1115. Penalty for contravention of directions under section 46, 47 or 41. 
) 16. Penalty for entering without permission area from which a 
,.,... iI c1t.reetIQ4 til nmrNe biIIlI8lt or OPe!lBtayjIIw who per-
mitted to return temporarily. 
117. Penalty for contraventioa 01 ordeu UAder .ecticm 57. 
11& .... 'toy ... awoail'l . .., aot, OGmJ»JriJlg! with dkeaUon. aWe. under 
clause (b) of sub-section (1) of ..va. ~ 

vi ....... 
lLAl1SBS '11 '1 
119. Penalty for contravening directions unc:h!r! section 88; 
120. Dangerous performances. 
121. Neglect tJr refIJsil to serve as special police offtcer. 
122. Penalty· for making false statement, ·ete;, "and for misconduct of 
police officers. 
123" Penalty for failure to deliver up certificate of appoin~ment or 
other article. 
124. Vexatious entry, search,arrest. etc., by police officer. 
; "', . 
125. Penalty far vexatious delay in forwarding a person an'Qted. 
126. Penalty for unauthorised u~e of police uniforms. 
127. Power to make regulations regarding carrying weapons without 
authority. ' 
128. Prosecution for certain offences against this Act to be in the 
"cliacretiOil of Delhi police. 
129. Summary disposal of certain cases. 
130. Prosecution for offences under other enactments not a1fected. 
131, OJfences by companies. 
CHAPTER Xi 
MISCEI.t .. ANEOUS 
132. Disposal of fees, rewards, etc. 
133. Method of proving orders and notifica~ons. 
134. Rules, regulations or orders not invalidated by defect of form or 
irregularity in procedure. 
135. Presumption in prosecutions for contravention of order mad. 
under section 46, 47 or 48. 
136. Officers holding charges of, or succeeding to, vaeancles competent 
to exercise powers. 
137. Forfeiture of bond entered into"by" perS':m 'under Bub-section (1) 
of section 54. 
138. No police officer to be liable to penalty or damage for act done 
in good faith in punuance of duty .. 
139. No public servant liable as afore~d for. giving ~.t in good 
faith to any rule, regulation, order or directipnlSsued with 
apparent authority. .' 
140. Bar to s~ts and prosecutions. 
141. Licences and written permissions to specify eMIIIition., etc., and 
to be signed. 
142. Public nC1tices how to 1)e given. 
143. Consent, etc., of a competent authority may be prcwe4 by writ-
ing under its slgnature.' '.Jill 

vii 
CLAVSES 
144. Signature on notices, etc., may bQ stamped. 
145. Persons interested may seek to annul, reverse or alter any ruIo 
or order. 
146. Powers of Commissioner of Police under other Acts. 
147. Power to make rules. 
l.a. Notification of rules and regulations in the Oftlcial Gazette ana 
laying of rules and regulations. 
149. Cel88l' of operation of certain enactments and lavinp. 
150. Police force functioning in Delhi immediately before the ~ 
mencement of thia Act to be deemed to be pollee force consti-
tuted under this Act. 
151. Power to remove difIlcultier 
152. Repeal and saving. 
SCHEDULE I. 
SCHEDULE II. 
SCHEDULE III. 

5 
10 
Bill No, 120 of. 1978 
zc:uv 
THE DELHI POLICE BILL, uns 
BILL 
to amend and consolidate the law relating to the Tegulation of th~ polk-. 
in the Union territory of Delhi. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-ninth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
CHAPrER I 
PRELmuNAR'Y 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Delhi Police Act, 1978. 
(2) It extends to the whole of the Union territory of Delhi. 
(3) It shan be deemed to have come into force on the 1st duy of July, 
1978. 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(4) "Administrator" means the Administrator of Delhi appointed 
under articl'€' 239 of the Constitution; 
Short title, 
extent 
and com-
mence-
ment. 
DefIni-
tions. 

2 
(b) "cattle" includes elephants, camels, horses, asses, mulet, 
iheep, goats and swine; 
(e) "competent authority", when used with reference to the 
exercise 'Of any power or discharge of any duty under the provisions 
of )thi$ Act, means the Commissioner of Police appointed under S 
section 6 or any other police officer specially ,empowered. in that be-
half by the Central Government; 
(d) "constable" means a police officer of the lowest grade; 
(e) "Corporation" means the Municipal CorporatiJon of Delhi 
constituted under the Delhi Municipal Corporation Act, 1957; 10 86 of 1951 
(1) "Delhi" means the Union territory of Delhi; 
(g) "Delhi police" or "police force" means the police force 
referred to in section 3 and includes-
(i) all per9:>ns appointed as special police officers under 
sub-section (1) of section 17 and additional police officers IS 
appointed under section 18; and 
(ii) aU other persons, by whatever name known, who 
exercise any police function in any part of Delhi; 
(h) "eating house" means any place to which the public are 
admitted and where any kind of ~ood or drink is supplied for con- 20 
Bumption on the premises by any person owning, or having any inte-
rest in, or managing, such place and includes--
(i) a refreshment room, boarding house or coffee house, or 
(ii) Ii shop . where any kind of food or drink is supplied to 
the public for consumption in or near such shop, 25 
but does not include a place of public entertainment; 
(i) "municipality" means the New Delhi Municipal Com-
mittee, the Cantonment Board or any other municipal body, other 
than the Corporation, established by or under any law for the time 
being in force in or in any part of Delhi; 30 
(;) "place" includes-
(i) any building, tent, booth or other erection, whether 
permanent or temporary; and 
(ii) any area, whether enclosed or open; 
(k) "place of public amusement" means any place where music, 3S 
singing, dancing or game or any other amusement, diversion, or 
recreation or the means of carrying on the same is provided, to 
which the public are admitted either on payment of money or with 
the intention that money may be collected from thtose admitted and 
includes a race course, circus. theatre, music hall, billiard or bagatelle 40 
room, gymnasium, fencing school, swimming pool or dancing hall; 
(1) "place of public entertainment" means a lodging bouse, 
boarding and lodging bou&e or residential hostel and includes any 
eating house or other place in which any kind of liquor or intoxi-
cating drug is supplied (such as a tavern or a shop where beer, 4S 
, 

spirit, arrack, toddy, ganja, bhang or opi'um is supplied) to .the 
public for consumption in IOf near such place; 
(m) "police officer" means any member of the Delhi police; 
(n) "prescribed" means prescribed. by rules; 
5 (0) "public place" means any place to which the public have 
access, whether as of right or not, and includes-
(i) a public building and monument and precincts thereof; 
and 
(ii) any place accessible to the public for drawing water! 
10 washing or bathing or ibr purposes of recreation; 
(p) "regulations" means regulations made under this Act; 
(q) "rules" means rules made under this Act; 
(1') "street" includes any highway, bridge, way over a cause-
way, viaduct or arch or any road, lane, footway, square, court, 
IS alley or passage accessible to the public, whethler or not it is a 
thoroughfare; . 
(s) "subordinate ranks" means members of the police force of 
and below the rank of the Inspector; 
(t) "vehicle" means any carriage, cart, van, dray, truck, hand· 
20 cart or other conveyance of any description and includes a bicycle, 
tricycle, a rickshaw, a motor VEhicle, a vessel or an aeroplane. 
CHAPTER II 
ORGANISATION, SUPERINTENDiENCE AND CONTROL OF THE POLICE FORCE 
3. There shall be one police force for the whole of Delhi and all om.-
25 cers and subordinate ranks of the police force shall be liable for posting 
to any branch of the force including the Delhi Armed. Police. 
4. The superintendence of the Delhi police throughout Delhi shall 
vest in, and be exercisable by the Administrator and any control, direc-
tion or supervision exercisable by any officer over any member of the 
30 police force shall be exercisable subject to such superintendence. 
3S 
5. Subject to the provisions of this Act,-
(a) the Delhi police shall consist of luch number in the lever'" 
ranks and have such organisation and such powers, functions and 
duties as the Administrator may, by general or special order, deter-
mine; and 
(b) the recruitment to, and the pay, allowances and all other 
conditions of service of the members of, the Delhi police shall be 
such as may be prescribed: 
Provided that nothing in clause (b) shall apply to the recruit-
ment to, and the pay, allowances and other conditions of service of 
the members of the Indian Poliee Service or the Delhi, Andaman 
and Nicobar Islands Police Service. 
One police 
forCe for 
the whole 
of Delhi. 
Superin-
tendence 
of police 
force to 
vest in 
the Admi-
nistrator. 
Constitu-
tion of 
police 
force. 

Commi8. 
aioner of 
Police. 
Additional 
Conunis-
sioner of 
Police. 
Deputy, 
Additional 
Deputy 
and 
Assistant 
Commis-
sioners of 
Police. 
Appoint-
ment of 
Principalo; 
of Police 
training 
institu-
tions. 
Consti-
tution of 
police 
districts, 
Rub-divl-
o;ions anI! 
pollee 
Idatlons. 
6. F01' the direction and supervision of the police foree in Delhi, the 
Administrator shall appoint a Commissioner of Police who shall exercise 
and perform such powers and duties and perform such functions as are 
specified by or undet" this Act. 
7. (1) The Administrator m. y appoint one or more Additional Com- 5 
missioners of Police for tbe purposes of this Act. 
(2) The Additional Comm.is.voner of Police shall-
(a) assist the Commissioner of Police in the exercise of bis 
powers and the performance of his duties in such manner and to such 
extent, and 
(b) exercise such powers and perform such dnties of the Com-
missioner of Police and within such local limits, 
as the Administrator may, by general or ~ial order, specify. 
10 
8. (1) The Administrator may appoint one or more Deputy Commis-
sioners of Police or Additional Deputy Commissioners of Police or 
Assistant Commissioners of Police for the purposes of this Act. 15 
(2) Without prejudice ~ the other provisions of this Act and subject 
to any general or special orders made by the Administrator in this 
behalf, every Deputy ConmUssioner of Police or Additional Deputy 
Commissioner of PoliCe( or Assistant Commissioner of Police shall, under 20 
the orders of the Commissioner of Police, exercise such of the powers 
(except the power to make regulations) and perform such of the duties 
of the Commissioner of Police and within such local limits as may be 
specified in !luch orders. 
9. (1) (a) The Administrator shall appoint a police officer not below 25 
the rank of a Deputy Commissioner of Police to be the Principal of the 
Police Training School for Delhi. 
(b) The Commissioner of Police may by general or special order 
assign to the Principal of the Police Training School such powers and 
duties as he may deem, fit for the proper functioning of that School. 30 
(2) (a) The Administrator may establish a Poli~e Training College 
for Delhi and appoint 8 police officer of appropriate rank to be the 
Principal of ~ucb College. 
(b) The Conun.issioner of Poli~e may by general or special order 
assign to the Principal of the Police Training College such powers and 35 
duties 8S br may deem fit for tbe proper ,administration of that College. 
10. Subject to the control of the Administrator, the Commissioner at 
Police shall-
(a) constitute poJice districts within Delhi; 
(b) divide 'Such police districts into police sub-divisions and 40 
specify the poliCe stations comprised in each such sub-division; and 
(c) define the limits and extent of such police districts, pollce 
Rub-divisions and polic(' stations. 

11. (1) Each police district shall be under the charge of a Deputy 
Commissioner of Police who may be assisted in the discharge of his du-
ties by one or more Additional Deputy Commissioners of Police. 
(2) Each police sub-division shall be under the charge of an Assis-
5 tant Commissioner of Police and each police station shall be under the 
charge of an Inspector of Police. 
10 
15 
12. Subject to such general or special orders in writing al the Admi-
nistrator may make in this behalf,-
(a) Inspectors of Police may be appointed by the Additional 
Comndssioner of Police; and 
(b) Sub-Inspectors of Police aad other officers of subordinate 
rank may be appointed by the Deputy Commissioners of Police, Addi-
tional Deputy Commissioners of Police, Principal of the Police 
Training College or of the Police Training School, or any other polic'J 
Officer of equivalent rank. 
13. (1) Every police officer of the rank of Inspector and below shall 
on enrolment receive a certificate of appointment. 
(2) The certificate shall be issued under the seal of such officer, and 
shall be in such form, as the Administrator may, by ieneral or special 
20 order, specify. 
(3) A certificate of appointment shall become null and void when the 
pel'S In named therein ceases to belong to the Delhi police or shall re-
maill inoperative during the period such person is suspended from the 
Delhi police. 
25 14. The powers, functions and privileges vested in a police officer 
shall remain suspended while such police officer is under suspension from 
office: 
Provided that notwithstanding such suspension such person shall not 
cease to be a police officer and shall continue to be subject to the control 
30 of the same authorities to which he would have been subject it he had 
not been under suspension. 
15. The Commissioner of Police shall direct and regulate all matters 
of arms, drill, exercise, observation of persons and events, mutual rela-
tions, distribution of duties, study of laws, orders and modes of proceedings 
35 and all matters of executive detail or the fulfilment of their duties by 
the police force under him. 
16. The Commissioner of Police shall have the authority to investigate 
and regula.te all m~tters of account connected with I the Delhi police and 
ail persons concerned shall be bound to give him reasonable aid and faci-
40 Uties in conducting such investigation8 and to conform to his orders con-
sequent thereto. 
17. (1) The Commic;;sioner of Police may, at any time, by a written 
order, signed by himself and sealed with his own seal, appoint any able 
bodied male person not lesl than eigbteen. years of age, whom he COIlliden 
, 
Officers hi 
charge of 
police 
districts, 
police 
sub-
divisions 
and police 
stations. 
Appoint-
ment of 
subordi-
nate ranks. 
Certificate 
of ap_ 
point-
ment. 
Effect Of 
suspension 
of police 
officer. 
General 
powers ot 
Commis-
sioner of 
Police. 
Power of 
Commis-
sioner of 
Police to 
investigate 
and regu-
Jate mat-
ters of 
pollee aC-
counts. 
Special 
pOlice 
offieera. 

Additional 
.police 
officers. 
Framing 
of regula-
tions for 
adminis-
tration of 
the poliee. 
6 
fit, to be a special pu.lCe ofticer to assist the Delhi police on any occasiorl., 
when he has 1'08S0n to apprehend the occurrence of any riot or II'8ve 
disturbance of the peace in any area and he is of opinion that the ordinary 
police force is not sufficient for the protection of persons residing, and for 
the security of property, within such area. 5 
(2) The Commissioner of Police shall publish the names of special 
police officers appointed under this section in such manner as may be 
prescribed. 
(3) Any person objecting tu the appointment of any person as such 
special police oflicer may send his reasons for such objection to the Com- 10 
missioner of Police within fifteen days of such appointment and the Com-
missioner may accept such objection and cancel the appointment of such 
oflicer or, after giving to the objector an opportunity to be heard, reject 
the objection. 
(4) Every special police officer appointed under this section shall, on IS 
appointment,-
(a) receive a certificate of appointment in such form as may be 
specified by the Administrator in this behalf; 
(b) have the same powers, privileges and immunities and per-
form the same duties and be subject to the same authorities as an 20 
ordinary police officer. 
18. Where additional police officers are required to be deputed under 
section 38, section 39 or section 40 the Commissioner of Police may 
appoint such number of additional police officers as he considers neces-
sary and every such additional police officer shall, on appointment,- 25 
(a) receive a certificate of appointment in such form as may be 
specified by the Administrator in this behalf; 
(b) have such of the powers, priviIeces and immunities and per-
form such of the duties of a police officer as are specifically mention-
ed in the certificate; and 30 
(c) be subject to the same authorities as an ordinary police offi-
cer of the SaDle or similar rank or grade. 
CHAPTER III 
REGULATION, CONTROL AND DISCIPLINE OF THE DELm POLICE 
19. Subject to the orders of the AdministrRtor, the Commissioner of 35 
Police may make regulations not inconsistent with this Act or any other 
law for the time being in force-
(a) regula.tjng the inspection of the police force by his subordi-
nates; 
(b) determining the description and quantity of arms, accoutre- 40 
ments, clothing and other necessaries to be furnished to the police; 
(c) prescribing the places of residence of members of the pollee 
force; 
(d) for in&titution, management and regulation of any p011C8 
tund for any purpose connected with poilice administration; 45 

7 
(e) regulating the dIstribution, movements and location of the 
police; 
<f) assigning ciuties to police officers of all ranks and grades, and 
prescribing the manner in which, and the conditions subject to which 
5 they shall exercise and perform their respective powers and duties; 
(g) regulating the collection and communication by the police 
Off intelligle'J1Ce and information; 
(h) generally, for the purpose of rendering the police efficient 
and preventing abuse or neglect of their duties. 
10 20. The Commissioner of Police may call for such returns, reports and 
statemenrts on any subject connected with the prevention ;:md detection 
of crime, the maintenance of order and the performance of the duties of 
his subordinates as such Sll1'bor.dina1es may be able to furnish to him. 
21. (1) Subject to the provisions of article 311 of the Constitution 
l'i and the rules, the Commissioner of Police, Additional Commissioner of 
Police, Deputy Commissioner of Police, Additional Deputv Commissioner 
of Police, Principal of the Police Training College or of the Police Train-
int!' School or any other officer of equivalent rank, may award to any 
police officer of subordinate rank any of the following punishments, 
20 namely:-
(a) dismissal; 
(b) removal from service; 
(c) reduction in rank; 
(d) forfeiture of approved service; 
25 (e) reduction in pay; 
30 
3.5 
(f) withholding lof increment; and 
(g) fine not exceeding one month's pay. 
(2) Subject to the rules-
(a) any police officer specified in sub-section (1) may award the 
1'unishment of censure to any police officer of subordinate rank; 
(b) the Assistant Commis,o;ioner of Police may award the puniflh-
ment !Of censure to police officers of, or below, the rank of S'th-
Inspectors of Police; 
(Ie) any police officer of, and above. the rank of Inspector ma~ 
award punishment drill not exceedin/l fifteen days or fatigue duty 
or any other punitive duty to constables. 
(3) Notbin/l in sub-section (l) or 8uh-sectil:>n (2) shall affect. anv 
police officer's liability for prosecution and punishment for any offence 
committed by him. 
4e1 (4) The Commissioner of Police, Additional Commissioner of Police. 
Deputy Commissioner of Police. Additional Deputy Commissioner .of 
Police. Principal 'of the Police Trainin/l College or of the Police Trainfn~ 
School. Assistant Commissioner of Police, or any other police offtcer of 
eqUivalent rank may suspend any police offeer of subordinate rank who 
Commis-
sioner of 
Police may 
call for 
returns. 
Powers of 
punish-
me'ht. 

procedure 
awm,uing 
punish-
ments. 
Appeal 
from 
orders of 
punish-
'.nent. 
Police offi-
cers to be 
deemed to 
be always 
on duty 
and 
to be 
liable 
to employ-
ment in 
Rny part of 
DeIhL 
Circums_ 
tance, 
under 
which 
police 
oftlcer of 
subordi-
T'!f1te 
rank may 
resign. 
• 
is reasonably suspected to be guilty of misconduct, pending an investiga-
tion or enquiry into such misconduct. 
(5) An Inspector of Police may suspend any police officer below the 
rank of Su~Inspector of Police, who is reasonably suspected to be guilty 
of,r misconduct, pending an investigation or enquiry into such misconduct. 
22. When any officer passes an order of awarding a punishment of 
dismissal, removal from service, reduction in rank, forfeiture of ser-
vice, reduction in pay. withholding 'of increments or fine, he shall record 
such order or cause the same to be recorded together with the reasons 
therefor, in accordance with the rules. 
23. An appeal against any order of punishment passed against a 
police officer under section 21 or the rules thereunder [not being an 
order of punishment under clause (c) of sub-section (2) of that section] 
shall lie-
10 
(a) where the order is passed by the Commissioner of Police, 15 
to the Administrabr; 
(b) where the order is passed by an Additional Commissioner 
of Police, to the Commissioner of Police; 
(c) where the order is passed by a Deputy Commissioner of 
Police, Additional Deputy Co-mmissioner of Police, Principal of the 20 
Police Training College or S~hool. Assistant Commissioner of Policp. 
or any other officer of equivalent rank, to the Additional Commis-
si'orter of Police. 
24. Every police officer not on leave or under suspension shall for all 
purposes of this Act be deemed to be always on duty and any 25 
,"lice officer or any number or body of police officers allocated for duty 
in any part of Delhi may. if the Commissioner IOf Police so diredc;, at 
any time. be employed on police duty in any other part of Delhi for so 
long as the services of the police officer or number or body of police 
officers may be required in !Ouch other part of Delhi. 30 
,25. (1) Resignatit:>n of any police officer of subordInate rank mav 
be accepted only by the officer empowered to appoint (the oftlcer so em-
powered' to appoint being hereafter in this section referred to as the 
appointing authority) oftlcers of such subordinate rank. 
(2) A police officer of subordinate rank who intends bo resign from 35 
police service shall give to the appointing authority notice in writing 
to that effect and shall not be permitted to withdraw himself from dutv 
unless he has been granted permission to resign by such authority and 
two ml':>nths have elapsed from the date on which he tendered his resig-
nation: ' 4 0 
Provided that the appointing authority may at his discrethn, permit 
• 'Head Constable or a constable to withdraw himself from duty on his 
crediting to the Government two months' p.ay in lieu of notice, 
(3) A Head Constable or a constable who has agreed to serve for 
any specific period may not be permitted to resign before the expiry of 4S 
that period. 
(4) Inspectors, Sub-Inspect)rs or Assistant Sub-Inspectors of Police. 
whOle appointments in\Tolve traininf at zrny Police Training College or 

·9 
Police Training School may not be permitted to resign within three 
years from the date of their successfully completing the training. 
(5) No police officer of subordinate rank whose resignation has been 
accepted by the appointing authority shall be permitted to withdraw 
S from duty until he has fully discharged all debts, due from him as such 
police officer to Government or to any police fund and has surrendered 
his certificate of appointment, arms, accoutrements, uniform and all 
other Government property in his possession and has also rendered a 
. complete account of all Government money and property for which he 
10 is responsible. 
(6) NotWithstanding anything contained in this section if any police 
officer of subordinate rank tenders his resignation on medical grounds 
and produces a certificate signed by the police surgeon or any other 
medical officer authorised by the Administrator in this behalf declaring 
IS him to be unfit by reason of disease or mental or physical incapacity for 
further service in the police, the appointing authority shall forthwith 
permit him to withdraw from duty on his discharging, lOr giving a 
~ntisfactory security for the payment of, any debt due from him as such 
police officer to Government or to any police fund: 
20 Provided that he shall forthwith return the certificate of appoint-
ment, arms, accoutrements, uniform and all other Government pro-
perty in his possession before he is permitted to withdraw from duty. 
(7) If any such police officer of subordinate rank resigns or withdraws 
himself from the duties of his office in contravention of this section, he 
2S shall be liable on the orders of the appointing authority to rorfeit all 
arrears of pay then due to him in addition to the penalty to which he 
may be liable under section 22 or nny other law for the time being in 
force. 
(8) Every such police officer on leaving the service in the Delhi police 
?o a~ aforesn id shall be given by the appointing authority a Discharge 
Certificate in such fOTIn as may be prescribed. 
26. (1) Every person who for any reason ceases to be a police officer 
shall forthwith deliver to the officer empowered by the Commissioner of 
Police, the Additional Commissioner of Police, Deputy Commissioner of 
3S Police, Principal of the Police Training College or of the Police Training 
School, Arlditbnal Deputy Commissior,er of Police or any other officer 
of equivalent rank to whom such officer is subordinate, to receive the 
same, his certificate of appointment and the arms, accoutrements, cloth-
ing and other accessories which have been provided to him for the per-
40 formance of duties and functions connected with his office .. 
(2) (a) Any Metropolitan Magistrate and, for special reasons which 
shall be recorded in writing at the time, the Commissioner of Police, 
Additional Commissioner of Police, Prin'Cipal of the Police Training Col-
lege or of the Police Trainit'g School or a Deputy Commissioner. Addi-
45 tional Dpputy Commissioner or an Assistant Commissioner of. Police may 
issue a warrant to search for and seize wherever they be found, any 
certific.1te, arms, accoutrements, clothing or other accessories not deli-
v~,:red under sub-section (1). 
Certifi-
cate, 
arms, etc., 
to be deli-
vered by 
perSOn 
ceasing 
tobea 
police 
officer. 

Occupa-
liun of, aa4 
liability 
to vacate, 
premises 
provided 
for police 
officers. 
Power tit 
make 
regula-
tions for 
regulat-
ing 
of trafHe 
and for 
preserva-
tion of . 
order in 
public 
places,. 
10 
(b) Every warrant so issued shall be executed by a police oftlcer or, 
if the Metropolitan Magistrate or the police officer issuing the warrant so 
djrects, by any other person in the same manner as if it were a warrant 
for a search issued under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973. 2 of 1974. 
(3) Nothing in this section shall apply in relation to any article which S 
under the orders of the Commissioner of Police has become the property 
ot; the person to whom the same was provided. 
Z1. (1) A police officer occtlpying any prpmises provided by the Com-
missioner of Police for his residence shall-
(a) occupy the same subject to such terms and conditions as 10 
may, by general or special order, be specified by the Commissioner 
of Police; and 
(b) notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time 
being in force, vacate the same on his ceasing to be a police officer 
or whenever the Commissioner of Poli~e or any officer authorised by IS 
the Administrat.or in thi.s behalf considers it, for reasons to be re-
corded in writing, necessary and expedient to require him to do so. 
(2) If. any person who is bound or required under sub-section (1) to 
vacate any premi.ses fails to do so, the Administrator or the officer au-
thorised in this behalf by the Administrator may order such person to .20 
vacate the premises and may direct any police officer with such assist-
ance as may be necessary to enter upon the premises and remove there-
from any person found therein and to take possession of the premises 
and deliver the same to any person specified in the direction. 
CHAPTER IV 
POLICE REGlTL.'\TIONS 
28, (1) The Commissioner of Police may. by notification in the Ofticial 
:i;t.I~ette. make regulations to provide for all or any of the following mat-
ters, namely:-
(a) licensing and controlling persons offering themselves fol' 30 
employment, outside railway stations and other places where pas-
sengers arrive, for the carriage of passenge,rs' baggages and fixing 
an!! providing for the. enfor,cement of a scale o~ charges for the 
labour of such pereons so employed; 
(b) regulating traffic of all kinds in streets and other public 35 
places, and the use of streets and other public places by persons rid-
ing, driving, cycling, walking or leading or accompanying cattle, so 
as to prevent danger, obstruction or inconvenience to. the public; 
(e) regulating the conditions under which vehicles may remain 
,s1;W1ding in st~ts and other public places, and the use of streets as 40 
h~ting places for vehicles .01" cattle; 
(d) specifyinJ[ the number and position of lights to be used on 
vehicles in streets anc! the hours between which such lights should 
be UIISCi; 
<e) UCeD8 tQg. Cl)nt.~I.lfn« or prohibiting the erection, exhibitio~' 45 
n"ation or retention of any sign, gevjce or representation for the 
• I 

5 
10 
IS 
20 
30 
35 
40 
45 
purpose of advertisement, which is visible against the sky trom sOMi 
point in any street and is hoisted or held aloft over any land, build-
ing or structure at such height as may be specified in the regulations, 
having regard to the traffic in the vicinity, and the likelihood of 
such sign, device or repr~entation at that height being a distraction, 
or causing obstruction, to such traffic; . 
(t) specifying certain hours of the day during which cattle shall 
not be driven, or, as the case may be, driven only in accordance with 
such regulations, along the streets, or along certain spedfied streets; 
(g) regulating the leading, driving, conducting or conveying of 
any elephant or wild or dangerous animal through or in any street; 
(h) regulating and controlling the manner and mode of convey-
ing timber, scaffold poles, ladders, iron girders, beams or bars, boil-
ers. or other unwieldy articles through the streets, and the route and 
hours for such conveyance; 
(i) licensing, controlling or, in order to prevent obstruction, in-
convenience, annoyance, risk, danger or damage to the residents or 
passengers in the vicinity, prohibiting the carrying in streets and 
public places of gunpowder or any other explosive substance; 
(j) prohibiting, except along certain specified streets and during 
specified hours and subject to such conditions as may be specified in 
that behalf, the exposure or movement in any street of persons 
or animals suffering from contagious or infectious diseases, the 
carcasses of animals or parts of such carcasses or corpses of per-
sons deceased; 
(k) specifying certain hours of the day during which ordure or 
offensive matter or objects shall not be taken from or into houses or 
buildings in certain streets or conveyed through such streets except 
in accordance with such regulations; 
(l) setting apart places for slaughtering animals, the cleaning 
of carcasses or hides, the deposit of noxiou.~ or offell~h, ... matter and 
for obeying calls of nature; 
(m) in cases of existing or apprehended epidemic or infectious 
disease of men or animals, the cleanliness and disinfection of premises 
by the occupier thereof and residents therein and the segregation 
and management of the persons or animals diseased or supposed to 
be diseased, as may have been directed or approved by the Admini-
strator, with'8 view to prevent the disease or check the sprf'.a4 
~hereof. 
(n) directing the closing or disuse, Wholly or for certain pur .. 
poses, or limiting to certain purposes only, the use of any source, 
supply or receptacle of water and providing against pollution of the 
same or of the water therein; 
(0) licensing, controlling or, in order to prevent obstr\1Ctiort, in-
convenience, annoyance, risk, danger or damage to the residents or 
passengers in the vicinity, prohibiting the playing of mUSiC, the beat.o 
Ing lof drums, tom-toms or other instruments and the blowing 01" 
BOunding (If horns or other noisy instruments in or near streets (If 
other public placesj 

· . 
12 
(p) regulating the conduct of or behaviour or action of pet-
IODs oonstitu.ting assemblies and processions on or along the streets 
and specifying in the case of processions, the routes by which, 
the order in which, and ,the times at which, the same may pass; S 
(q) prohibiting the hanging or placing of any cord or pole across 
a· street or part thereof, or the making of a projection or structure 
~ as· to obstruct traffic or the free access 01 light and air; 
(r) prohibiting, except in accordance with such regulations, the 
placing of building materials or other articles' or the fastening or 
detention of any horse or other animals in any street or public place; 10 
(8) licensing, controlling or, ir: order to prevent obstruction, In-
conveItience, annoyance, risk, danger or damage to the residents or 
passengers in the vicinity" prohibiting-
(i) the illumination of streets and public places and the 
exteriors of building abutting thereon by persons other than ser- IS 
vants of Government or Corporation or other Municipal officers 
duly authorised in that behalf, 
(ii) the blasting of rock or making excavations in. or near 
streets or public places, 
(iii) t.he using of a loudspeaker in or nenr any public place 20 
or in any place of public entertainment; 
(t) closing certain streets or places temporarily, in cases of· dan-
ger from ruir:ous buildings or other cause, with such exceptions as 
shall appear reasonable; 
(u) guarding against injwy to person and prop~rty in the con- 25 
struction, repair and demol,ition of buildings, pb "fu 'ms and other 
structures from which danger may arise to passen~er;, neighbours or 
the public; 
(v) prohibiting the setting of fire to or burning of any straw or 
other matter, or lighting a bonfire or wantonly discharging a fire-ann 30 
or air-gun, or letting off or throwing a fire work or, sending up a fire 
bailoon or rocket in or upon a street or within fifty feet of a street 
or building or the putting up of any post or other thing on the side 
of or across a street for the purpose of affixing thereto lamps or other 
contrivances for illumination except in accordance with regulations 35 
in this behalf; 
(w) regulating the hours during which and the manner in 
which any place for the dispoflal of the dead, any dharmashala, 
village-gate or other place of public resort may be used, so as to 
secure the equal and appropriate application of its advantages and 40 
accommodation and to maintain orderly conduct amongst those who 
l'e51Ol"t thereto; 
(x) (i) 1icen~ing or controlling places of public amusement or 
public entertainment; 
(ii) prohibiting the keeping of places of public amusement or 4S 
public enter,tainment or assembly, in order to prevent obstruction, 
inconvenience, annoyance, risk, danger or damage to the residen~ 
or passengers in the vicinity; and 

(iii) regulating the means of entrance and eXit at places of pub-
lic amusement or public entertainment or 8Sl'5embly and providing 
for the maintenance of public order and the prevention of disturbance 
thereat; 
5 (y) (i) licensing or controlling in the interest of public order, 
decency or morality or in the interest of the general public (with 
such exceptions as may be specified in such regulations), musical, 
dancing, mimetic or theatrical or dther performances for public am-
usement, including meZas; 
10 (ii) regulating in the interest of public order, decency or mora-
lity or in the interest of the general public, t;Il..e employment of arti.$tg 
and the conduct of the artists and the audience at such performances; 
(iii) prior scrutiny of 9llch performances and of the script3 in 
respect thereof, if any, and granting of suitability certifica~ there-
15 for subject io conditions, if any, by a Board appointed by the Admi-
nistrator for the purpose, either for the whole of Delhi or for the 
area concerned or by an Advisory Committee constituted by the Com-
missioner of Police (the members of the Board or the AdviSOry Com-
mit~ being persons who in the opinion of the Administrator or, as 
20 the case may be, the Commissioner, possess knowledge of, or experi-
ence dn, literature, the theatre and other matters relevant to such 
scrutiny), provision for appeal against the order or decision of the 
Board or the Advisory Committee to an appellate autho-
rity, its appointment or constitution, its procedure and other matters 
25 ancillary thereto, and the fees (whether in the rorm of court-fee 
stamps or otherwise) to be charged for the scrutiny ot such perfor-
mances or scripts, for applications for obtaining such certiftcates 
and f'Or i;suing duplicates thereof and in respect of such appeals; 
(iv) regulating the hours during which and the places at which 
30 such performances may be given; 
(z) regulating or prohibiting the sal~ of any ticket or pass for 
admission, by whatever name called, to a place of public amuse-
ment; 
(za) registration of eating houses, including granting a certi-
3S ficate lof registration in each case, which shall be deemed to be a 
wrItten permission required and obtained under this Act for· keeping 
the eating house, and annual renewal of such registration within a 
specified period; 
(zb) prescribing the procedure in accordance with which ally 
40 licence or permission sought to be obtained or required under this 
Act should be applied for and fixing the fees to be charged for any 
such licence or permission: 
Provided that nothing in this section and no licence or certificate of 
registration granted under any regulation made thereunder shall autho-
45 rise any person to import. export, transport, manufacture, sell or 

Power to 
give 
directions 
lathe 
public. 
possess any liquor, or in1nxicating drug, in respect of which a lieene!, 
pennit, pass or authorisation is required under any law relating to prohi-
bition which is for the time being in force. 
(2) The power to make regulations under clause (b) of sub-seclion 
(1) shall be subject to the contml of the Administrator and the power 5 
to make ;regulations under the other clauses ~f that sub-section shall 
be subject to the previous sanction of the Administrator. 
(3) The power of making regulations under this section shall 
be subject to the condition I)f the regulations being made, after 
previous publication and for the purposes of section 23 of the r 0 
General Clauses Act, 1897 such regulations shall be deemed to be 
rules; and every regulation made, under this section, shall also be pub-
lllshed in the locality affected t.hereby Lyaftixing copies thereof in 
conspicuous places near to the building, structure, work or place, as the 
case may be, to which the same specially relates or by proclaiming the 
same by the beating of drum or by advertising the same in such local r 5 
newspapers in Hindi, Urdu and English, or in two or more of these 
languages, as the Commissioner of Police may deem fit, or by any two or 
more ot these means, or by any other means he may think suitable: 
Provided that any such regulation may be made without previous 
publication if the Commissioner of Police is satisfied that circumstances 20 
eXlst which render it necessary tilat such regulation shOUld be brought 
into force at once. 
(4) If any regulation made under this section relates to any matter 
with respect to which there is a provision in any law, rule or by~law 
of the Corporation or uf any other muni.c.ipal or local auth.ority in rela- 25 
\.10n to public health, convenience or safety of the locality such 
regulation shall be subject to such law, rule or bye-law. 
2,9. The Commissioner of Police and, subject to the Of'ders, if any, 
made by the Commissioner of Police, every police officer not inferior in 
rank to an Inspector, may from time to time as occasion may arise, but 30 
n{)t so as to corttravene any regulation made under section 28 or any 
law, rule, 01' bye-law referred to in sub-section (4) of that section, give 
all such orders either orally or in writmg ~ may be necessary to-
(a) direct the conduct of, and behaviour or action of persons 
constituting pI'1ocessions or assemblies on or along streets; 35 
(b) specify the routes by which and the times at which any 
such processions may pass or shall not pass; 
(c) prevent obstructions-
(i) on tPe occasion of all processions and assemblies; and 40 
(ii) in the neighbourhood of all places of worship during 
the time of worship; and . 
(iii) in all cases When any street or public place or place 
of public resort may be thronged or liable to be obstructed; 
(d) keep order on, and in, all streets, and at, and within, public 45 
bathing and washing places, fairs, temples, mosques, gurdwaras, 
churcbesand all other places of public resort or publlc worship; 
• • 
J I 
10 of 1.,. 

IS 
(e) regulate and control the playing of music, singing or the 
beating of drums, tom-toms and other instruments and the blowing 
or sounding of horns or other noisy instruments in, and near, any 
street or public place; 
5 U) regulate and o~ntrol the Use of loudspeakers in residential 
areas, streets, near any public places and places of public amuse-
ment or public entertainment; or 
(g) make reasonable orders consequential to, and in further-
ance of, any order made under this section. 
10 30. (1) The Commissioner of Police may, whenever and for such 
time as he shall consider necessary for the pr:eserv:l\lion of plJ.hlic peace 
or public safety, by notification publicly promulgated or addressed to 
individuals, prohibit, in relation to the whole of Delhi or any part 
thereof,- ' 
15 (a) the carrying of arms, cudgels, swocds, spearS!, bludgeons, 
guns, knives. sticks or lathis, or any other article, which is capable 
of being used for causing physical violence; 
(b) the carrying of any corrosive substance or explosives; 
(c) the carrying, collection or preparation Of stones or other 
20 missiles or instruments or means of casting or impelling missiles; 
(d) the exhibition of persons or corpses; 
(e) the public utterance of cries, singing of songs or playing of 
music; or 
(1) the delivery of harangues, the use of gestures or II)imetic re-
25 presentations, and the preparation, exhibition or dissemination of pic-
tures, symbols, placards or any other subject or thing wbicp may, 
in the opinion of the Commissioner of Police. offend agailllSt decency 
or morality or undermine the security of the State.' 
(2) If any person goes armed with any such article as is referred to 
30 In clause (a) of sub-section (1) or carries any corrosive substance or 
explosive or m~ssile or instrument in contravention of any prohibition 
under that sub-section, the article, corrosive substance or explosive or 
missile shld] be liable to be seized from him by any pollee offi·cer .. 
(3) The Commissioner of Police may, by notification publicly promul-
35 ~ated, prohibit any assembly or procession whenever aJ)d for sueD time 
as he considers such prohibition to be necessary for . the preservation of 
the public 'order. 
40 
(4) No notification Pfomlllgated under sub-section (3) shall rerrlPin iP 
force for more than fifteen days from the promulgation thereof: 
Providoo that if the Administrator considers it necessary 9:1 to do 
for the preservation of the public order, he may, bv order published in the 
Official Gazette, direct that such notificationshaU remain in force for 
such further t>eriod not exceeding six months from the date on which it 
would have, but for such order, expired as he may spedfy in the said 
45 order. 
Power to 
prohibit 
certain 
acts for 
preven-
tion ot 
disorder. 

Police to 
provide 
against 
disorder, 
etc., at 
places of 
public 
amuse-
ment or 
public 
assembly 
or meet-
ing. 
Power to 
prohibit, 
etc., con-
tinuance 
of music, 
sound or 
noise. 
3L (1) For the purpose of preventing serious disorder or breach of 
the law or manifest and imminent danger to the persons assembled 
at any place of public amusement 'Or at any assembly or meeting to 
which the public are invited or which is open to the public, any police 
officer of the rank of Assistant Sub-Inspector and above, present at such S 
place of public amusement, or such assembly or meeting, may subject 
to such rules, regulations and orders as may have been lawfully made, 
give such reasonable directions as 11:> the mode of admission of the 
pu; llic to, and for securing the peaceful and lawful conduct of the 
proceedings and the maintenance of the public safety at, such place 10 
of Jmusement or such assembly or meeting as he thinks necessary and 
all persons shall be bound to conform to every such reasonable 
direction. 
(2) Every p'llice officer shall ha,ve free access to every place of 
pUblic amusement, assembly or meeting for the purpose of giving effect 15 
to the provisions of sub-sectIon (1) and to any' dim'ection made 
thereunder. 
32. (1) If the Commissioner of Police is satisfied from 'the report of 
an .officer in charge of a Police Station, or other information received 
by him, that it is necessary to do so in order to prevent annoyance, 20 
disturbance, discomfort or injury, or risk of annoyance, disturbance, dis-
comfort or injury, to the public or to any person who dwells, or occupies 
property, in the vicinity, he may, by written order, issue such directions 
as he may consider necessary to ~my person for preventing, prohibitin'g, 
conflroll'ing or regulating- 25 
(a) the incidence or continuance in any street, open space or 
any other premises of-
(i) any voca] or instrumental music; 
(ii) sounds caused by the playing, beating, clashing, blow-
ing or use in any manner whatsoever of any instrument, appU- 30 
ance or apparatus lOr contrivance which is capable of pro-
ducing or reproducing sound; or 
Ciii) use of loudspeaker or other apparatus for amplifying 
any musical or other sound at such pitch or volume as may 
cause disturbance to others, or 3! 
(b) the carrying ion, in any premises, of any trade, avocation 
or operation resulting in or attended with noise: 
Provjded that no directions shall be issued to any person under 
clause (b) without giving to such person an opportunity of being 
heard in the ma-tter. 40 
(2) The Commissioner t~f Police may. either on his own motion or 
on the application of any person aggrieved by an order made under 
sub-section (1), either rescind, modify or alter any such order: 
Provided that before any such application is disposed of, the Com-
missioner 'of Police shall afford to the applicant an opportunity of 4S 
appearing before him either in person or by counsel and showing cause 
against the order and shall, if he rejects any such application either 
wholly or in part, record the reasons for such rejection. 
$ 

11 
a3. (1)' In' ord.,t to preveh~' OJ' luppress any riot fit ~v. cUs~ .. 
bance of peace , the Commissionel' of Police may temporarily close or 
take possession of any building or other place and may exclude all or 
any persons therefrom, or may allow access thereto to such persons 
S only and on such terms as he shall deem expedient and all persons 
concerned shall be bound to conduct themselves in accordance with 
such orders as the Commissioner of Police may make and notify in exer-
cise of his powers under this section. ' 
(2) If the lawful occupant of such building or place sufferll any 
10 lOllS or injury by reason of the action taken under sub-section (1), he 
shall be entitled, on an application made therefor to the competent 
authority within one month from the date of such action, to receive 
reasonable compensation for such loss or injury, unless such action was 
in the opinion of such competent authority rendered necessary either 
rs by the use to which such building or place was put, or intended to be 
put, or by the misconduct of persons having access thereto. 
(3) In thel event of any dispute in relation to the amount of com-
pensation payable under sub-section (2) or the person to whom sw:h 
amount shan be payable, the matter shall be referred by the competent 
20 authority to the District Collector whose decision thereon shall be 
final. 
34. (1) In any case of an actual or intended religious or ceremonial 
or corporate display or exhibition or organised assemblage in any street 
or public place, as to which or the conduct of, or partiCipation in, 
i..u. J 
orderf~ 
preven-
tion of . 
riot, etc. 
Mainten-
25 which, it shall appear to the competent authority that a dispute or 
contention exists, which is likely to lead to grave disturbance of the or cererno-
ance of 
order at 
religioUi 
peace, Ithe competent authority may give such orders as to the con-
duct of the persons concerned towards each other and towards the 
public as it shall deem necessary and reasonable under the circum-
30 stances, regard being had to the apparent legal rights and to any 
established practice of the parties and of the persons interested and 
all persons concerned shall obey such orders. 
(2) Every such order shall be published in the locality or place 
wherein it is to operate. 
35 (3) Every order under sub-section (1) shall be subject to any 
Judgment, decree, injunction or order made by a court having jurisdiction, 
and shall be rescinded or altered on its being made to appear to the com-
petent authority that such order is inconsistent with a judgment, decree, 
injunction Or order of such court. 
40, 35. (1) Whenever it shall appear to the Commissioner of Police 
that any place in Delhi (being a place where on account of a pilgrimage, 
fair or other such occurrence, large bodies IOf persons have assembled 
or are likely to assemble) is visited or likely to be visited' with an 
outbreak of any epidemic disease, he may in consultation with the 
45 Corporation or mUnicipality within the local limits of the jurisdiotion 
whereof such place is situated take such special measures and may by 
a public notice prescribe such regulations to be observed by residents 
of the said place and persons present thereat or repairing thereto or 
returning therefrom as he deems necessary to prevent the outbreak ot 
so IUch disease or the spread thereof. ~ 
nial 
display. 
etc. 
Commis-
sionerot 
pollce 
may take 
special 
measures 
to prevent 
outbreak 
of epide-
mic 
diseare at 
fairs, etc. 

Power to 
reserve 
street or 
other 
public 
place for 
public 
purpose 
and 
power to 
authorise 
erecting 
of bar_ 
riera in 
streets. 
Power to 
make 
l·eauIa. 
tions pro-
hibiting 
oisposal 
t-f the 
ciead 
except at 
places 
eet apart. 
Employ-
ment of 
additional 
;M)1ice to 
keep 
peace. 
is 
ti> ~. ~nses 1ncurred by the Commissioner of Police itt r.-peot 
bf the arrangements for Ilanitation and the preservation of order at or 
about the place of assembly referred to in sub-section (1) may be 
recovered from the Corporation 01' the municipality concerned. 
36. (1) The Commissioner of Police may, by public notice, tempo- S 
rarily reserve for any public purpose any street or other public place 
and prohibit persons from entering the area so reserved, except on 
such condi~ons as may be specified by him. 
(2) The Commissioner of Police may, whenever in his opinion such 
action is necessary,- 110 
(a) authorise such police officer as he thinks fit to erect 
barriers on any street for the purpose of stopping temporarllJ 
vehicles driven on such street so as to satisfy himself that the pro-
visions of any law £Or the time being in force have not been con-
travened in respect of any such vehicle Or by the driver or the IS 
person in charge of such vehicle; and 
(b) make such orders as he deems fit for regulating the use 
of such barriers. 
3'7. (1) The Commissioner of Police may, from time to time, make , 
regulations prohibiting the disp.)sal of the dead, whether by cremation, 20 
burial or otherwise at places other than those set apart for such 
purpose: 
Provided that no such regulations shall be made in respect of any 
area for which places have not been so set apart: 
Provided further that the Commissioner of Police or any officer lS 
authorised by him in this behalf may, in his discretion, on an appli-
cation made to him by any person, grant to such person permissIon to 
dispose of the corpse of any deceased person at any place other than a 
place so set apart, if in his opinion such disposal is not likely to cause 
obstruction to traffic or disturbance of the public peace or is not objec- 30 
tionable for any other reason. 
.(2) A:oy regulations made under sub-section (1) shall specify the 
places set apart for the disposal of the dead of different communities or 
sections of communities. 
(3) All such regulations shall be deemed to be rules for the pur- 35 ' 
poses of section 23 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 and shall be subject 10 of 1891. 
to the condition IOf previous publication and the date to be specified 
under clause (3) of that section shall not be earlier than two months 
from the date on which the draft of the proposed regulations is 
published. 40 
CHAPTER V 
SPECIAL MEASt1BES FOR MAINTENANCE OF PUBLIC ORDER AND SECURITY' OF 
STATE 
38. (1) The Commissioner of Police may, on the application of any 
penon, depute any additional number of police to keep the peace, to 45 
preserve order, to enforce any of the provisions of this Act or of any 
otlaer law in respect of any particular class or classes of offences or to 
perform any other duties imposed on the pollee ~t any place in Delhi. 
$ 

r .. -- 19 
" ..-.v .. -..... 
(2) Such additional police shall be employed at the cost (which 
shall be determined by the Commissioner of Police in accordance with 
the rules made in this behalf) of the person making the application, 
but shall be subject to the orders of the police authorities! and shall be 
S employed for such period as the Commissioner of Police considers 
necessary. 
(3) If the person upon whOSe application such additional police are 
employed shall at any time make a written requisition to the Commis-
sioner of Police for the withdrawal of the said police be shall be 
10 relieved from the cost thereof at the expiration of such period not 
exceeding olle week from the date of the delivery of such requisition 
as the Commissioner of Police shall determine. 
(4)' Where there is any dispute as to the amount to be paid by way 
of cost, the Commissioner of Police shaIl, on an application made in 
15 that behalf by the aggrieved party, refer the matter to the District 
Collector, whose decision thereon shall be final. 
39. (1) If in the opinion of the Administrator any area in Delhi is 
in a disturbed or dangerous condition or the conduct of the inhabitants 
or of any particular section or class of the inhabitants of such area 
Employ_ 
ment ot 
additional 
Police in 
cases ot 
special 
danger 
20 renders it expedient to employ temporarily additional police in the 
area, he may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify the area 
(hereafter in this section referred to as the disturbed area)' in which, 
and the period for which, the additional police shall be employed and 
thereupon the Commissioner of Police shall depute such number of 
to public 
peace. 
2S additional poliCe officers as he considers necessary, in the disturbed 
area: 
Provided that the period so specified may be extended by the 
Administrator from time to time, if ill h~ opinion it is necessary so 
to do in the interests of the public. 
30 (2) On the issue of a notification unde.r sub-section (1), the 
Administrator may require the District Collector, or any other authority 
specified by the Administrator, to recover, whether in whole or in 
part, the cost 00 such additional police generally from all persons who 
are inhabitants of the disturbed area or specially from any particular 
35 section or class of such persons, and in such proportion as the Adminis-
trator may direct. 
(3) It ~haJI be lawful for the Administrator to exempt, hy order 
in writing, and for sufficient reasons, any person from liability to bear 
any portion of the cost of such additional police. 
40 Explanation.- In this section and in sectiOn 41, the expression 
"inhabitants", ,when used in relation to any disturbed area, includes 
persons who themselves or by their agents or servants occupy or hold 
land or other immovable property within such area and landlords who 
themselves or by their agents or, servants collect rent from holders or 
45 occupants ~ land in such area notwithstanding that they do Dot act"'" 
"JI)' reside the.n~ 

Employ-
ment of 
, additional 
police at 
large 
work 
and 
when 
apprehen_ 
sion 
regarding 
behaviour 
fJf em.. 
ployeel 
exiltl. 
Compen-
sation for 
injury 
caused by 
unlawful 
assembly 
how reco-
verable. 
Dispqttr 
1A reglU'd 
to cost of 
deputini 
additional 
police or 
compeJ1ll-
tlon under 
tfl~ion .~. 
20 
40. (1), Whenever it appears to the Administrator or to the eompe-
tent authority that-
(a)' any large work which is beinl. carried on or any public 
amusement which is belD,( conducted in any place is likely to 
" 
impede the traffic or to attract a large number of people; or S 
(b) the behaviour or a reasonable apprehension of the 
behaviour of the persons employed on any railway, canal or other 
public work, or in or upon any manufactory or other commercial 
concern, under construction ot' in operation at any place necessi-
tates the employment of additional police at such place, 10 
the Administrator, or: the competent authority, as the case may be, 
may depute such number of additional police to the said place for so 
long as the necessity to employ the additional police shall appear to 
the Administrator or the competent authority to continue. 
(2) Such additional police shall be employed at the cost of the IS 
person by whom the work. public amusement, manufactory or concern 
is being constructed, conducted or carried on and the said person shall 
pay the cosb therefor at such rates as the Administrator or the compe-
tent authority, as the case may be, shan :from time to time require. 
oil. (1) When any loss or damage is caused to any property or when .20 
death results or grievous hurt is caused to any person or persons, by 
anything done in the pr:osecution of the common object of an unlawful 
assembly, the Administrator may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
specify the area (hereafter in this section called the "disturbed area") 
in which, and the date on which or the period during which, such un- 25 
lawful assembly was, in his opinion, held. 
'(2) On the issue of a notification under sub-section (1), the District 
Collector may, after such inquiry as he deems necessary, determine the 
amount of the compensation which, in his opinion, shOuld be paid to 
any person or persons in respect of the loss or damage or death or 30 
grievous hurt aforesaid. 
(3) The amount of the compensation shall be deemed to be a 
flne imposed under this sectilon, and shall be payable by the inhabitants 
of the disturbed area. 
(4) It shall be lawful for the District Collector to exempt, by order 35 
in writing and for sufficient reasons, any person from liability to pay 
any portion of the compensation amount. 
U. In the event of any dispute relating to the cost payable under 
aection 39 or section 40 or the compensation determined under section 41 
or the person or persons or the section or class of persons by whom or 40 
the proportion in which such cost or compensation should be paid, 
the matter shall be referred by the Collector, or the Administrator 01' 
the competent authority, as the case may be, on an application made 
in that behalf by the aggrieved party, to the ClU~ :MetropoUtan 
I4ql1~~1 whOle dedtt~ t~eOQ·ahall be ~~ 43 
I 

2 of 1974. 
21 
43. Any amount payable under section 38, section 39, section 40 or 
aetion 41 shall be recovered in the same manner as if it were an arrear 
., land revenue. 
Reeo~ 
of 
amoUDt 
payable 
under 
sect.ion 
38, 39, 40 
or 41. 
". (1) Amounts payable u,der section 38, section 39, section 40 or Collector 
S section 41 shall, when recover .:d, be credited to the Government. to award 
compen-
(2) The District Collector shall pay, from the amounts recovered lIation. 
by him as compensation payable under section 41, such amount as 
he deems just and proper by way of compensation to any person who 
has suftered loss or damage to property or grievous hurt or to the 
10 legal heirs of any person who died, by reason of anything done in the 
prosecution of the common object of the unlawful assembly. 
(3) No compensation shall be paid under this sectil()n, except when 
a claim has been made therefor within forty-five days from the date 
of the notification referred to in sub-section (1) of section 41 and the 
15 District Collector is satisfied that the claimant, where the claim is by 
the person who suffered the loss, damage lor grievous hurt, or the 
deceased, where the claim is by the legal heirs of such deceased, ha.s 
been free from blame in connection with the occurrence which led to 
the loss, damage, grievous hurt or death. 
20 (4) The compensation payable to any person under sub-section (Z) 
shall not in any way be capable of being assigned or charged or be liable 
to attachment or'to pass to any person other than ,the person entitled to 
it by operation of law, nor shall any claim be set off against the same. 
(5) No civil suit shall be maintainable in respect of any loss, damage 
25 or grievous hurt for which compensation has been granted under this 
section. 
45. Without prejudice to the provisions contained in section 43, all 
amounts payable under section 39 Or section 41 shall be recoverable in 
the manner provided in sections 421 and 422 of the Code of Criminal 
30 Procedure, 1973, as if each such amount were a fine imposed on an offen-
der by a court. 
46. Whenever it appears to the Commissioner of Police that the 
movement or encampment of any gang or body of persons in any part 
of Delhi is causing or is calculated to cause danger to person or property 
3S or alarm or reasonable suspicion that unlawful designs are entertained 
by such gang or body of persons or by members thereof, the Commis-
sioner of Police may, by order addressed to the persons appearing to be 
the leaders or chief men of such gang or body of persons and published 
by announcement or beat of drums, or otherwise as the Commissioner 
40 :!o,lice thinks fit direct the members of such gang or body of person&-
(a) to so conduct themselves as shall seem necessary in ordel' 
to prevent violence and alarm; or 
(b) to disperse and to remove themselves beyond the limits of 
~. Of any ,.n ~oof, wtthin .uch ~e .. the CO~Q_ 
Recovery 
of 
amounts 
payable 
under 
sectiona 
39 and 41. 
Disperaal 
of gan,. 
and 
hodies of 
persona. 

Removal 
of per. 
son, 
about to 
commit 
offences. 
Removal 
or per. 
sons con· 
victed of 
certain 
offences. 
22 
of Police shall specify and not to enter D~lhi t)r the part thereof, 
as the case may be, from which they were directed to remove them-
selves. 
47. Whenever it appears to the Commissioner of Police-
(a) that the movements or acts of any person are causing 01' 5 
are calculated to cause alarm, danger or harm to person or property; 
or i 
(b) that there are reasonable grounds for believing that SUch 
person is engaged or is about to be engaged in the commission of an 
offence involvin~ force or violence or an offence punishable under 10 
Cbapter XII, Chapter XVI, Chapter XVII or Chapter XXII of the 
Indian Penal Code or under section 290 or sections 489A to 489E 45 of 1860. 
(both inclusive) of that Code or in the abetment of any such offence; 
or . 
(c) that such person- IS 
(i) is so desperate and dangerous as to render his being at 
large in Delhi or in any part thereof hazardous to the community; 
or 
(ii) has been found habitually intimidating other persona 
by acts of violence or by show of force; or 20 
(iii) habitually commits affray or breach of peace or riot. or 
habitually makes forcible collection of subscription or threatena 
peop-Ie for illegal pecuniary gain for himself or for others; or 
(iv) has been habitually passing indecent remarks on wo· 
men and girls, or teasing them by overtures; 25 
and that in the opinion of the Commissioner of Police witnesses are not 
willing to come forward t:> give evidence in public against such person 
by reason of app'rehension on their part as regards the safety of their 
ret'son or property, the Commissioner of Police may, by order in writing 
duly served on such person, or by beat of drum or otherwise as he thinks 30 
tit, direct such person to so conduct himself as shall seem necessat'y in 
order to prevent violence and alarm or to remove himself outside Delhi or 
anv part thereof, by such route and within such time as the Commi ... 
sioner of Police may spf'('i~v and not to 'enter or return to Delhi or oart 
thereof, as the case mny be, from which he was directed to rem'lVe 35 
himself. 
Explanation,.-A person who durin~ a period within one year im-
mediately preceding the commencement of an action under this section 
ha!'; been found on not less than three occasions to have committed or 
to have been involved in any of the acts referred to in this section _shall 40 
be deemed to have habitually committed that act. 
48. If a person has been convicted-
(a) of an offence under Chapter XII, Chapter XVI or Chapter 
XVII of the Indian Penal Code; lOr 45 of 1880. 
(b) of an offence under section 3 or section 4 of the Delhi Public 45 
Gamb1in~ Act. 195fi. or under section 12 of that Act in so far as it Delhi Act 
relates to satta gamblin~ or on two or more occasions under any 9 at 1M 
other provision of that Act (includ:nlZ sectipn 12 qf ~~t Act ill I)~ 
far IlJ It doet AG$ relatf W .att. ,amblin,); DJ 

104 of 1. 
54 of 185Jl. 
5~of 196~ 
Punjab 
AetNo.1i 
of 1955. 
1 of 1878. 
2 of 1930. 
23 of 1940. 
Bombay 
AetNo. 
to of 1980. 
5 
10 
15 
(c) ot any oftenee under the Suppression of Immoral Traffic hl 
\V omen and Girls Act, 1956; or 
(d) of any offence under section 25, section 26, section 27, section 
28 or section 29 of the Arms Act, 1959; or 
(e) of any oftence under section 135 of the Customs Act, 1962; or 
(f> of any offence under section 61, section 63 or section 66 of 
the Punjab Excise Act, 1955. as in force in Delhi; or 
(,9) on two Or more occasions of an offence under-
(i) the Opium Act, 1878; or 
(it) the Dangerous Drugs Act, 1930; or 
(iii) the Drugs und Cosmetics Act, 1940; or 
(it) section 11 of the Bombay Prevention of Begging Act, 
1959, as in force in Delhi; or 
(h) on three or more occasions of an offence under section 105 
or section 107 of this Act; 
the Commissioner of Police may, if he has reason to believe that such 
person is likely again to engage himself in the commission of any of the 
offences referred :to in this section, by order in writing, direct such per-
son to remove himself beyond the limits of Delhi or any part thereof, by 
20 such route and within such time as the Commissioner of Police may 
specify and not to enter or returll to Delhi or any part thereof, as the 
case may be, from which he was directed to remove himself. 
49. Any direction made under section 46, section 47 or section 48 not 
to enter Delhi or any part thereof, shall be for such period as may be 
25 specified therein, and shall in no case exceed a period of two years from 
the date on which it was made. 
so. (1) Before an order under section 46, section 47 or section 48 is 
made against any person, the Commissioner, of Police shall by notice 
in writing infonn him of the general nature of the material allega.tions· 
30 against him and give him a reasonable opportunity of tendering an ex" 
planation regarding them. 
(2) If such person makes an application for the examination of any 
witness to be produced by him, the Commissioner of PoliCe shall grant 
such application and examine such witness, unless for reasons to be 
35' recorded in writing, the Commissioner of Police is of opinion that such 
application is made for the purpose of causing vexation or delay. 
(3) Any written explanation put in by such person shall be filed 
with the record of the case. 
(4) Such person shull be entitled to be represented in the proceeding 
40 before the Commissioner of Police by a counsel. 
(5) (a) The Commissioner of Police may for the purpose of securing 
the attendance of any person against whom any order is proposed to be 
made under section 46, section 47 or section 48 require such person, bY 
order in writing, to appear before him and to furnish a security bond 
45 with or without sureties for attendance during the inquiry. 
Period Of 
operation 
of order, 
under 
seetion 46, 
47 or 48. 
Hearinl 
to be 
given 
before 
order 
under 
section 
46, 47,ot 
48 is 
passed. 

Appeal 
against 
orders 
under 
section 
46,47 or 
48. 
, ~ .. 
(b' Tlii proviJlotlS of sectiOl1l 119 to 124 (boti11neluslve' of t}je Codd 
()f Criminal Procedure, 1973, shall, so far as may be, apply in relation to 2 rJll97i 
the order under clause .Ca) to furnish security bond. 
(6) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions, the Commissioner 
of Police, while iSsuing notice to any ~rson under sub-section (1) may S 
issue a warrant for his arrest and the provisions of sections 70 to 89 
(both inclusive) of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, shall, so far as 2 of 1974. 
may be, apply in relation to such warrant. 
(7) The provisions of section 445, section 446, section 447 or section 
448 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, shall, so far as may be, 10 2 of 197" 
apply in relation to all bonds executed under this section. 
51. (1) Any person aggrieved by an order made under section 46, 
section 47 or section 48 may appeal to the Administrator within thirty 
days from the date of the service of such order on him. 
(2) An appeal under this section shall be preferred in dUFlicate in 15 
the form of a memorandum, setting forth concisely the grounds of ob-
jection to the order appealed against, and shall be accompanied by that 
order or a certified copy thereof. 
(3) On receipt of such appeal, the Administrator may, after giving 
a reasonable opportunity to the appellant to be heard either personally 20 
Or by a counsel and after such further inquiry, if any, as he may deem 
necessary, confirm, vary or set aside the order appealed against: 
Provided that the order appealed against shall remain in force pend-
ing the disposal of the appeal, unless the Administrator otherwise 
directs. i 25 
(4) The Administrator shall make every endeavour to dispose of an 
appeal under this section within a period of three months from the date 
of receipt of such appeal 
(5) In calculating the period of thirty days provided, for an appelll 
undel.' this sec'don, the time taken for obtaining a' certified copy of the 30 
order appealed against, shall be excluded. 
52. An order passed by the Commissioner of Police under section 46, 
section 47 or section 48 or the Administrator under section 51 shall no' 
be called in question in any court except on the ground-
(a) that the Commissioner of Police or the Administrator, U 3S 
the case may be, had not followed the procedure laid down in sub-
section (1), sub-section (2) or sub-section (4) of section 50 or in 
section 51, as the case may be; or 
(0) that there was no material before the Commissioner of 
Police or the Administrator, as the case may be, upon which he could 40 
have based his order; or 
(c) in the case of an order made under section 47 Or an order 
in appeal therefrom to the Administrator under section 51, the 
Commissioner of Police or the Administrator, a8 the case may be, 
was not of the opinion that witnesses were unwilling to c:ome for- 4S 
ward to give evidence in p~blic against the person a,alnst whoa 
wch order haa been made. J ' '-

, 
53. If a person to whom a direction has been issued under section U, 
.ection 47 or section 48 to remove himself from Delhi or any part there-
of-
(a) fails to remove himself as directed; or 
(b) having so removed' himself enters Delhi or any part there-
of within the period specified in the oreier, otherwise than with the 
permission in writing of the Commissioner of Police under section 54, 
the Commissioner of Police may cause him to be arrested and removed 
in police custody to such place outsid-e Delhi or any part thereof as the 
10 C-ommissioner of Police may in each case specify. 
54. (1) The Commissioner of Police or any other police officer 
specially empowered by the Administrator in that behalf may, by 
order in writing, permit any person, in respect of whom an order under 
section 46, section 47 or section 48 has been made, to return to DeIhl 
IS or any part thereof, from which he was directed to remove himself, for 
such temporary period and subject to such conditions as may be 
specified in such order and may require him to execute a bond with 
or without surety for the due observance of the conditions impos-ed. 
(2) The Commissioner of Police may at any time revoke any such 
20 permission. 
(3) Any person who with such permission returns to Delhi or any 
part thereof shall observe the conditions imposed, and at the expiry 
of the tempJrary period for which he was permitted to return, or on 
the revocation of such permission before the expiry of such temporary 
25 period, shall remov-e himself outside Delhi or any part thereof, as the 
case may be, and shall not return thereto within the unexpired portion 
of the per~od specified in the original order made under section 46, 
section 47 or section 48 without a fresh permission. 
(4) If such person fails to observe any of the conditions imposed, 
Or to remov·e himself accordingly or having so removed himself enters 
30 or returns to Delhi or any part thereof, as the case may be, without 
fresh permission, the Commissioner of Police may cause him to be 
arrested and removed in police custody to such place outside Delhi or 
part thereof as the Commissioner of Police may in each case specify. 
35 55. Every person against whom an order has been made under 
section 46, section 47 or section 48 shall, if so required by the Com-
missioner of Police, allow his measurements and photograph to be taken 
by a police officer in the prescribed manner. 
56. (1) If any person as aforesaid when required to allow his 
40 measurements or photograph to be taken resists or refuses to allow the 
taking of such measurements or photograph, it shall be lawful to use 
all necessary means to secure the taking thereof. 
. (2) Resistance to or refusal to allow the taking of measurements 
Procedure 
on failure 
of person 
to leave 
the area 
and his 
entry 
therein 
niter 
removal 
'~empo­
rary per. 
mmionto 
enter and 
conse. 
quences 
of non· 
obser_ 
vallee of 
conditions 
of such 
permis_ 
sion. 
Takin, 
measure· 
ments and 
photo_ 
graphs, 
etc., of 
perwns 
against 
whom an 
order 
under 
section 48, 
47 or 48 
is made. 
Res-ist_ 
nnee to 
the taking 
Cli mea· 
suremf'!nt!l, 
Etc • 

Banning 
of use 
lit dress, 
etc., re. 
IIlmbling 
uniform 
vf armed 
forces. 
Constitu. 
tion Of 
nefence 
St~cieties. 
26 
or tpootographs under this Act shall be deemed to be an offence wader 
section 186 of the Indian Penal Code. 
(3) Where an lorder under sect!0n 46, section 47 or section 48 is set 
aside in appeal, all measurements and photographs (including nega-
tives) taken under this section shall be destroyed or made over to the 5 
person against whom such order is made. 
57. (1) If the Administrator is satisfied that the wearing in public, 
by any member of any body, or association or 'Organisation, of any dress 
or article of apparel resembling any uniform. required to be worn by 
a member of the Armed Forces of the Union or by a member of -any 10 
pulice force or of any force constituted by or under any law fDr the 
time being in force, is likely to prejudice the security of the State or 
the maintenance of public order. he may, by a general or special order, 
prohibit or restrict the wearing, or display, in public of any such dress 
or article of apparel by any member 'Of such body or associatioon or IS 
organisation. 
(2) Every general 'Or special order under sub-section (1) shall be 
published in the manner prescribed for the publicatiDn of a public notice 
under section 142. 
Expla1l4tion.-For the purposes of this section a dress or an article 2.0 
of apparel shall be deemed to be worn or displayed in public if it is worn 
or displayed in any place to which the public have access. 
58. (1) It'or thl;! protection of persons, the security of property and 
the public safety in any locality the Commissioner of Police may 
constitute voluntary bodies (hpreafter in this section referred to al 25 
Defence Societies) in the prescribed manner. 
(2) The Commissioner of Police or any officer of a Defence Society 
may at any time call up officers subordinate to him or any member 
of a Defence Society for training or to discharge any of the duties 
undet" this AC't as.qigned to them. 30 
(3) Every officer or member of a Defence SOCiety shall-
(a) 'on appointment receive a certificate in such fGrm as may 
be specified or approved by the Adminisltrator in this behalf; and 
(b) when called up for duty have the same powers, pri-
vileges and protection as are vested in a police officer appointed 3S 
under this Act. 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time 
being in force, an officer or member of a Defence Society shall not be 
disqualified for being chosen as, or for being, a member of-
(a) the Delhi Metropolitan Council or the Municipal CorporatlOD 4') 
of Delhi; or 
(b) any other local authority, 
b)' reason o,f the fact that he is a member or officer of such Society. 
45 oll880. 

• 
27 
CHAPTER VI 
EXECUTIVE DUTIES AND POWERS OF POLICE OFFICERS 
59. (1) It shall be the duty of every police officer to ensure compliance 
with the provisions of ,this Act or any rule, regulation or order made 
5 thereunder and for that purpose such police officer may,-
(a) warn persons who from ignorance fail to comply with any 
pl'1OV'ision of this Act or any rule, regulation or order made there-
under; 
(b) require any per80n acting or about to aCt contrM'Y to any 
10 provisdon of this Act or rule. regulation or order made thereunder, 
to desist from so doing; 
(e) subject to the provisions of sub-secfions (2) and (3), arrest 
nny person contravening any provi~ion of this Act or any rule, 
regulation o~ order made thereunder, where such contravention is 
IS an offence punishable under this Act; 
20 
30 
35 
(d) seize any object used, or about to be used, in contravening, 
or in contraven.tion of, the provisions of this Act or any rule, 
regulation or order made thereunder, where such contravention Is an 
oft'eonce punishable under thi!, Act. 
(2) A police officer shal1 not arrest any person under-clause (c) of 
sub-section (1) without a warrant issued by a Metropolitan Magistrate, 
unless such person-
(a) has contravened any regulation made under clause (b) of 
sub-section (1) of section 28; 
(b) has contravened any order or notification made under sec-
tion 29, sub-sC'ction (1) or sub-section (2) of section 30, section 32, 
section 47, section 48 ('If sub-setion (1) of setion 57; 
(e) commits in the presence of such police officer n,n offence 
punishable under section. 97, sub-section (1) of section 108, clause 
(a), (b) or (c) of section 110 or sub-section (2) of section 113 in 
respect of Ithe contravention of any order made under 1lection 33 or 
section 34; 
(d) has committed, or is reasonably suspected to have committed, 
an offence punishable under section 100 in relation to any dwelling 
house, private premises or any other land or ground attached thereto: 
PrOvided that the person in possession or having charge of that 
dwelling house, private premises or land or ground complains of the 
commission of such offence; 
(e) has committed, or is reasonably Stlspp.cted to h&ve committed 
an offence punishable under section 101, section 102 or clause (c) of 
sub-section (2) of section 113; 
(I) commits in his presenCe in any street or public place any 
non·co,gnizable offence punishable under this Aot or an'y- rule or 
regulation made thereunder jf such person-
45 (i) after being warned by the police officer persists in com-
mitting such offence; or 
(ii) refuses to accompany the police offl~f."l' t~ " police station 
on bein~ required so to !:lo, ., 
f'.J &... 
Duty of 
police 
officer to 
enforce 
provisions 
Of the 
Act. 

Other 
duties of 
a police 
officer. 
28 
• 
(3) The Commissioner of Police or any other police officer especiaDy 
empowered in this behalf by the Commissioner of Police may arrest 
wi·thout a warrant issued by a Metrc'politan Magistrate any person who 
has committed an offence punishable under section 92. 
60. It shall be the duty of every police officer- S 
(a) promptly to serve every summons and obey and execute 
every warrant or other order lawfully issued to him by the competent 
authority and to comply with all lawful commands of his superior; 
(b) to the best of his ability, to obtain intelligence concerning 
the commission of cognizable offences or designs to commit such 10 
offences and to lay such information and to take such other steps 
consistent with law and with the orders of his superiors as shall be 
best calculated to bring offenders to justice and to prevent the com-
mission of cognizable and, within his view, of non-cogniza6le offences; 
(c) to prevent to the best of his abiUty the commission of public IS 
nuisances; 
(d) to apprehend without unreasonable delay all persons whom 
he is legally authorised to apprehend and for whose appreliension 
there is' sufficient lI'eason; 
(e) to aid any other police officer when called upon by such other 20 
police ofticer or in the case of need in the discharge of the duty of 
such other police officer, in such ways as would be lawful and reason-
able on the part of the offtcer aided; 
(f) to prevent the breach of the public peace; 
(9) to afford every assistance within his power to disabled or 2S 
helpless persons in the streets; 
(h) to take charge of intoxicated persons and of lunatics at large, 
'W!lo appear dangerous Or incapable of taking calfe of themselves; 
(i) to take prompt measures to procure necessary help for any 
person under arrest or in custody, who is wounded or sick and w1illst 30 
guarding or conducting any such person to have due regard to lila 
condition; 
(;) . to arrange for the proper sustenance and shelter of every 
person who is under arrest or in custody; 
(k) in condUcting searches, to refrain from needless rudeness 35 
and the causing of unnecessary annoyance; 
(l) in dealing with women and children, to act with strict regard 
to decency and with reasonable gentleness: 
(m.) to use his best endenvours to prevent any loss or aamage by 
h; ~ 
(n) to use his best ende:\vour~ to avert any accident or dan',er 
to the public; . 
(0) to regulate and control th~ trafftc in the streets, to prevent 
obatructions therein and to t.be best of his ability, to prevent the 
contravention of any n~le. reg1l1ati.ot'). or (It''deJ' ml'Jde under ~bis 4S 
, I 

2011974. 
5 
10 
29 
Act or any other law in force for observance by the public in or near 
the streets; 
(p) to keep orcl~r in the streets and at and within public bathing 
and washing places, fairs, temples and all other places of public resort 
and in the neighbourhood of places of public worship; 
(q) to regulate resort to public bathing and washing places and 
all other places of public resort, to prevent overcrowding there and 
to the best of his ability, to prevent the contravention o·f any regula-
tion Or order lawfully made for observance by the public at such 
place; and 
(r) to discharge such other duties as are imposed upon him by 
any law for the time being in force. 
61. SUbject to the provisions of this Act and Ithe rules, regulation&l 
and orders made thereunder, every police officer may, for the purpose of 
15 dis::harging any of the duties referred to in section 59 or section 60 enter 
without a warrant and inspect any place of public resort which he has 
reason to believe is used as a place for the storing, sale or consumption Of 
intoxicating drinks or narcotics or a place for reso!'t of loose and disorderly 
characters. 
20 52. When in a street or a place of public reso·rt a person is in possession 
or suspected to be in possession of any ar:ticle which a police ofticer in 
good faith suspects to be stolen property, such police officer may seall'ch 
such person and may reqUire an account in relation to any article found 
in his possession and should the aCCQunt given by the possessor be mani-
25 festly false or suspicious, may detain such article after giving to the 
possessor a receipt in the prescribed form and report the facts to a Metro-
politan Magistrate who shall thereupon proceed according' to tbe provi-
sions of sections 457. 458 and 45P of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973. 
83. (1) The Administrator may, by notifiCation in the Official Gazette, 
30 declare any specified service to be an essential service to the community. 
(2) A declaration made under sub-section (J) shall remain in force for 
one month in the first instance, but may be extended from time to 
time by a like notification. 
(3) Upon a declaration being made under sub-section (1) and so long 
35 as it remains in force, it shall be the duty of every police officer to obey 
any order given by any superior officer in relation to any. employment in 
.connection with the serviCe specified in the declaration. 
64. A police officer of a rank superior to that of a constable may 
perform any duty assigned by law or by a lawful order to ,any officer 
40 subordinate to him, and in the case of any duty imposed on sucn subordi-
nate, a superior may aid, supplement, supe-rsede, or prevent any action of 
such subordinate by his own action or that of any person lawfully acting 
under his command or authority, whenever the same shall appeall' neces-
sary or expedient for giving more complete or convenient effect to the 
45 law or for avoiding any iI1fringemept thereof. 
Power to 
enter 
places of 
public 
resort. 
Power to 
search 
suspected 
peraons 
in street, 
etc. 
Emer-
gency 
duties of 
police. 
SUl'e-
rior police 
officer 
may him-
self per-
forme 
duties 
imposed 
on a 
~ubordi­
nate 
()ft\cer· 

Persons 
bound to 
('omply 
with the 
reasonable 
directions 
or police 
olficer. 
Police to 
take 
charge of 
uncla1m_ 
edpro_ 
perty. 
Procedure 
for dis. 
posalof 
property 
taken 
('hargeot 
:Jnder 
aectiOn 88. 
Delivery 
of pro. 
perty to 
perscm· 
~ntl~le(l. 
30 
65. (1) All persons shall be bound to comply with the reasonable 
directions given by a police officer in the discharge of his duties under this 
Act. 
(2) Where any person resists, refuses or fails to comply with any 
direction referred to in sub-section (1), a police officer may, without pr~ 5 
judice to any other action that he may take under any other provision of 
,this Act or any other law for the time being in force, remo',e such 
person and either produce him before a Metropolitan Magistrate or, in 
trivial cases, release him when the occasion which necessitated the removal 10 
has ceased to exist: 
Provided that the person so removed shall in all cases be produced 
briore the Metropolitan Magilrtrate or rel~ased, as the case may be, within 
a period of twenty-four hours of such removal. 
CHAPTER VII 
POWERS IN RELATION TO UNCLAIMED PROPERTY 
66. (1) It shall be the duty of every police officer to take temporM'Y 
charge-
(a) of all unclaimed property found by, or made over to, him; and 
(b) of all property found lying in any pub1ic street, if tlie owner 
15 
or person in charge of such property, on being directed to remove the 20 
same, refuses or fails to do so. 
(2) The police officer taking charge of the property under SUb-section 
(1) shall furnish an inveniory thereof to the Commissioner of Police. 
67. (1) Where any property has been taken charge of under sub-section 
(1) of section 66, the Commissioner of Police shall isSUe a proclamation 25 
specifying the articles of which such property consists and requiring that 
any person who may have a claim thereto shall appear before him or 
some other officer whom he au,thorises in thiS behalf and establiih. his 
claim within six months from toe date of such proclamatlon. 
(2) If the property, or any part thereof, is subject to speedy and natural 
decay or consists of livestock or if the property appears to be of the value 30 
of less than ·fifty rupees, it may forthwith be sold by auction under the 
orders of the Commissioner of Police and the net proceeds of such sale 
shall be dealt with in the same manner as is hereinafter provided for 
the disposal of the said property. 35 
(3) Where any person who has a claim to the property is required by 
the proclamation under sub-section (1) to appear before the other officer 
authorised by the Commissioner of Police in that behalf and establisli hi, 
claim, such officer shall forward the record of the proceedings hE'fore him 
with his findings thereon to the Commissioner of Police. 
68. (1) The Commissioner of Police on being satisfied of the title ot 
any claimant to the possession or administra,tion of the property specified 
in the proclamation issued under sub-section (1) of section 67 order the 
same to be delivered to him. after deduction or payment of fne expenSe! 
incurred by the Delhi police in the seizurf> ~~o detention thereof. 
40 

lor 18'74. 
31 
(2) The Commissioner of Police may, at his discretion, before making 
any order under sub-section (1), take such security as he may think 
Proper from the person to whom the said property is to be delivered and 
nothing hereinbefore con4;$led shall affect the right of any person to 
5 recover the whole or any part of the same from the !>'erson to whom it may 
have been delivered pursuant to such order. 
69. (1) If no person establishes his claim to such property within the 
period specified in the proclamation, the property, or such part thereof as 
has not already been sold under sub-section (2) of section 67, may be sold 
10 by auction under the orders of the Commissioner of Police and tfie pro-
ceeds thereof shall be credited to the Government. 
(2) If any claim is made to any proceeds credited under sub-section 
(1) to the Government and if such claim is established, whether 
wholly or to any extent, to the satisfaction of the prescribed au.thority, the 
IS Administrator shall pay to the claimant the amount determined in tha~ 
behalf by the prescribed authority. 
20 
(3) The form and manner in which claims may be made under sub-
section (2) and the procedull"e for dealing with such claims and all otlier 
matters connected therewith shall be such as may be prescribed. 
CHAPTER VIII 
~PECIAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO EXERCISE OF POWERS UNDER THE OODE OF 
CRIMINAL PROCEDURF, 1973 
70. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette and subject to such conditions and limitations as may be sped· 
25 fied therein. empower-
3S 
(a) the Commissioner of Police to exercise and perform in rela-
tion to Delhi the powers and duties of an Executive Magistrate and 
of a District Magistrate under such of the provisions of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973, as muy be specified in the notification; 
(b) any officer subordinate to the Commissioner of Police (not 
being' an officer below the rank of an Assistant Commissioner of 
Police) to exercise and perform in relation to such areas in Delhi 
as may be specified in the notification the powers and duties of an 
Executive Magistrate unde.r such of the provisions of the said Code 
as may be specified in the notification. 
(2) Every officer subordinate to the Commissioner of Police shall, in 
the t:xercise and performance of any powers and duties which he is 
empowered to exercise or pedorm under sub-section (l), be suhject to 
40 the general control of the Commissioner of Police in the same manner 
and to the same extent as an Executive Magistrate appointed under 
soodon 20 of the said Code would be subject to the general control of 
the District Magistrate appointed under tbat section. 
(3) The Commissioner of Police or any officer subordinate to him 
shall not be subject in the exercise and performance! of any powers and 
45 duties which he is empowered to exercise 9nd perform under sub-section 
(1), to the general control of the District Magistrate appointed under 
section 20 of the said Code. 
(4~ The provisions OIf this section shall have effect notwithstanding 
811ythiuJ{ contained in the said Code. 
In default 
of claim. 
pl'operty 
to be at 
disposhl 
oiGo-
vernment. 
ment 
Power of 
Central 
Govern. 
ment to 
authorise 
Commis_ 
sioner of 
Police and 
ct'rtain 
other 
officers to 
exercise 
powers of 
DiEtrict 
Magis. 
tratesand 
Executive 
Magis-
trates 
under the 
Code of 
Criminal 
Froce. 
dure. 
1973. 

Notifica-
tion. 
under 
~ection 70 
to be laid 
before 
Parlia-
ment. 
Eeferen_ 
ces to 
Judicial 
Magis_ 
trate of 
the First 
Class in 
::;ections 
11l8, 109 
and 110 
c,f the 
Code of 
Criminal 
Proce-
dure, 1973 
not to be 
construed 
as refe_ 
rences 
to an 
Executive 
M~is­
trate. 
Powers 
with 
regard to 
offences 
underAct 
II of 1960. 
32 
11. Every notification made by the Central Government under section 
70 shall be laid, as soon as it is made, before each House of Parliament 
while it is in session for a total period of. thirty days which may be com-
prised in one session or in two or more successive sessions and if, 
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 5 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modifi-
cation in the notification or both Houses agree that the notification 
should not be made, the notification shall thereafter have effect only in 
such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, 
that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to 10 
the validity of anything previously done under that notification. 
72. (1) The notification of the Government of India in the Ministry 
of Home Affairs No. S.O. 224(E), dated the 30th March, 1974, under 
section 478 of the Code 01 Criminal Procedure, 1973, shall cease to have ::! ot lS7t. 
efted and accordingly references to a Jucial Magistrate of the First 15 
Class in ~ections 108. 109 and 110 of the said Code shall cease to be cons-
trued in respect of Delhi as references to an Executive Magistrate. 
(2) All proceedings, under the said sections, pending before any 
Executive Magistrate immediately before the cesser of operation under 
sub-section (1) of the notification referred to therein shall, upon such 20 
cesser of operation, stand transferred to the Metropolitan Magistrate 
who would have jurisdiction if such proceedings had been instituted 
after such cesser of operation. 
(3) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), the provisions of 
section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897. shall apply to the cesser of 25 ~O of 18"'. 
operation of the notification referred to in sub-section (1) as if such cesser 
of operation of the notification were a repeal of an enactment by a Cen-
tral Act. 
CHAPTER IX 
SPECIAL POWERS UND~:R THE PREVENTION OF CRUELTY TO ANIM,\.LS ACT, 1960 30 
73. (1) When in respect of an' animal an offence punishable under sub-
section (1) of section 11 or section 12 of the Prevention of Cruelty to 
Animals Act, 1960 has been committed, or when there is a reasonable 
ground for suspecting that such offence has been committed, a police 
oftlcer may- 3S 
(a) take the animal to the Metropolitan Magistrate, or 
(b) if the accused person so requires, take the animal to a vet(;-
rinary ofticer specified by general or special order by the Adminis-
trator in this behalf: 
Provided that the police officer may, instead of taking the animal 40 
to a veterdnary officer, take the animal for detention in a dispensary, 
or in any suitable place approved by the Administrator by general 
'Jr special order and the animal shall thereupon be detained there until 
its production before a Metropolitan Magistrate, or 
(c) take the animal to an infirmary appointed under section 35 45 
of the said Act for treatment and detention therein, pending direc-
tion of a Magistrate under sub-section (2) of that section, or 
(d) when the animal is in such physical condition that it cannot 
be taken to a veterinary officer or a Metropolitan Magistrate, draw 
c 

up a n!pOrt of' the condition of the animal in the preseftOl!' of :~o or 
more!11'eIIpcctable persons ~iblng such wound, sores, fractAn'es, 
bruises, or other marks ot injury as may be found on the body 'of. 
the animal: 
S Provided that the police officer may take the animal for detention in 
a dispensary or any suitable place approved by the Administrator by 
general or special order and the animal shall thereupon be detained there 
until its production before a Metr&)tOlttan Magistrate. 
(2) Where an animal Is detained in a dispensary, infirmary or othel 
10 place under sub-section (1), the animal shall be produce<i before,. a 
1'4etropolitan Magistrate with the least possible delay and in any case 
Witbin a period not exceeding three days from the date on whiCh it was 
so detained. 
74. When the animal is brought before a Metropolitan Magistrate 
IS under section 73, the Magistrate may direct the animal to be returned 
to the person from whose possession it was taken on such person giving 
security to the satisfaction of the Metropolitan Magistrate binding him-
self to produce the animal when required or may direct that the animal 
shall be sent for treatment and care to an infirmary and be detained 
20 there as provided in section 35 of the Prevention Qf Cruelty to Animals 
19 or 196Q Act, 1960 or may make such order as he thinks fit regarding the disposal or 
custody or production of the animal. 
75. The veterinary officer before whom an animal is brought under 
section 73 shall with all convenient speed examine the same and draw up 
25 a report of such examination and a copy of the report of such examina-
tion shall be delivered free of. charge to the accused person if he applies 
for it. 
7,6, When under section 73, a police officer takes an animal for deten-
tiOij. in a dispensary or infirmary or other place before its production 
30 bebe a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Metropolitan Magistrate cUrects 
Hs ,further detention in an infirmary, sub-sect.ions (3) to (7) (both inclu-
sive~ of ,section 35 of the Prevention of Cruelty to Ar.imals Act" 1960 
shall, as far as may be, apply in relation to the detention of the aniJ;Qal 
(including the cost of transport, maintenance and treatment of the 
35 animal) in the dispensary, infirmary or other place. 
'1.7. When a police officer in good faith suspects that any animal being 
employed in any work or labour is, by reason of any sOTe, unfit to be 
so employed, he may require the person in charge ,ofi such animal to 
unsaddle or unload it for the purpose of ascertaining whether any sore 
40 exists and, if any person refuses to do so, such police officer may himself 
unsaddle or unload the animal or may cause the same to be unsaddled 
or unloaded. , 
78. Any police officer may arrest, without a warrant from a Magis-
uate, any pel'Elon committing in his presence any oftence punishable 
46 under clauses (4) to (m) (both inclusive) of SUD-6ection (1) of section 
11 o~ the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960. 
Powers ot 
Metro-
politan 
Magis. 
trate to 
return 
animal to 
person 
from 
whose 
possession 
it was 
token. 
Veteri-
nary 
officer to 
eJl;amine 
the. 
animal. 
Animal to 
be dealt 
with 
underAct 
59 of 1960. 
Power of 
police 
officer to 
unsaddle 
animal 
or to 
unload it. 
Arrest 
without 
warra\1t 
in case of 
certain 
offences 
under 
Act 59 of 
1960. 

Provi. 
sions of 
Clulpter 
to be in 
alidition 
to 1hepro. 
visions of 
Act 59 of 
1960. 
n:ue. 
garding 
the rules 
01 the 
road. 
Causing 
obt,truc. 
tion or 
milchid 
by animal. 
Expolln, 
animal 
for hire, 
lale, .te. 
Causin' 
any obs-
truction 
in a streel 
- .... -~ 
34 
71. The provisions of this Chapter shall be in addition to, and not in 
derogation of, the provisions of the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 
1960. 
CHAPI'ER X 
OI'FENCES AND PUNISHMENTS 
80. No person shall-
(a) when driving a vehicle along a street (except in cases of 
actual necessity or of some other sufficient reason for deviation) fail 
5 
to keep on the lett side of sueh street and when passing any other 
vehicle proceeding in the same direction fail to keep on the right 10 
side of such vehicle; or 
(b) leave in any street or public place insufficiently tended or 
secured any animal or vehicle. 
81. No person shall cause obstruction, damage, injury, danger, alarm 
or mischief in any street or public place- IS 
(i) by misbehaviour, negligence or ill-usage in the driving, 
management, treatment or care of any animal or vehicle; or 
(ii) by driving any vehicle or animal laden with timber, poles 
or other unwieldy articles through a street or public place contrary 
to any regulation made in that behalf. 20 
82. No person shall in any street or public place expose for hire or 
sale any animal or vehicle, clean any furniture or vehicle, or clean or 
groom any horse or other animal except at such times and places as the 
competent authority permits, or shall train or break in any horse or 
other animal or make any vehicle or any part of a vehicle or (except 2S 
when as a result ot any accident repairing on the spot is unavoidable) 
repair any vehicle or part of a vehicle, or carry on therein any manu· 
facture or operation so as to be a serious impediment to traffic or serious 
annoyance to residents in the vicinity or to the public. 
83. No person shall cause obstruction in any street or public place- 30 
(a) by allowing any animal or vehicle, which has to lie loaded 
or unloaded, or take up or set down passengers, to remain or stand 
in the street or the public place longer than may be necessary for 
such purposej or 
(b) by leaving any vehicle standing or fastening any cattle in 35 
the street or the public place; or 
(c) by using any part of a street or public place as a 'halting 
place for vehicles or cattle; or 
(d) by leaving any box, bale, package or other things whatso-
ever in or upon a street for an unreasonable length of time or eon· 40 
trary to any regulation; or 
(e) by exposing anything £.or sale or setting out anything for 
we in or upon any stall, booth, board, cask, b'uket or in any other 
way whatsoever. 

It. No person Shan drive, ride, load, propel or leave Oii any footway 
any animal or vehicle other than a perambulator or fasten any animal 
tn such a way that the animal can stand across or upon such footway. 
85. No person shall, in contravention of any regulation made by the 
5 Commissioner of Police,-
(a) exhibit any mimetic, mus:cal or other performances of such 
a nature as may attract crowds; or 
ObgtrilcS 
in, a 
footway. 
CauEmg 
cbstruc. 
tian 
and anno--
yance by 
pCl"lof_ 
(b) carry or place bulky advertisements, pictures, figures 
emblems in any street or public place. 
or mancl's, 
ctc. 
10 whereby any obstructton to passengers or annoyance to the residents in 
the vicinity may be occasioned. 
86. No person shall slaughter any animal, clean a carcass or hide, or 
bathe or wash his ,person in or near to and within sight of a stree+ or 
public place, except at a place set apart for the purpose, so as to cause 
15 annoyance to the neighbouring residents or to passers-by. 
87. No person shall in any street or public place-
(a) negligently let loose any horse or other animal, so as to 
cause danger, injury, alarm or annoyance; or 
(b) suffer a ferocious dog to be at large without a muzzle; or 
(c) set on or urge a dog or other animal to attack, worry or put 
in fear any person or horse or other animal. 
88. No person shall bathe or wash in, or by the side of. a pUblic well. 
tank or reservoir not set apart for such purpose by order of the com-
petent authority, or in, or by the side of, any pond, pool, aqueduct, part 
25 of a river, stream, nullah or other source or means of water supply in 
which such bathing or washing is forbidden by order q£ the competent 
authority. 
89. No person shall defile or cause to be defiled the water in any 
place set apart for the purpose by the order of the competent authority 
30 nullah or other source or means of water supply, so as to render the same 
less fit for any purpose for which it is set apart by the order of the com-
petent authOrity. 
90. No person shall obstruct or incommode a person bathing at a 
place set apal1t; for the purpose by the order of the competent authority 
35 under section 88 by wilful intrusion or by using such place for any pur-
pose for which it is not so set apart. 
91. No person shall wilfully and indecently expose his person In any 
street or public place or place of public 'resort or within sight of, and 
In such manner as to be seen from, any street or public place or place 
40 of public resort, whether from within any house or bullding or not, or 
use indecent language or behave indecently or riotously or In a dfsor-
derly manner in a street or public place or place of public resort or in 
~ny office, police station or station house. 
Iioing 
cftcmlVe 
acts in 
or near a 
stre(.t 01' 
public 
place. 
Letling 
lc('se 
horse, etc., 
and I:uffer_ 
i(lg fero-
(;IJUS doiS 
to be at 
large. 
Batmr.g 
1)1' wash-
~ng in 
places 
D(lt let 
apartftJr 
~hose 
purpl.lf.es. 
Defilin, 
water in 
public 
wellS, 
etc. 
Obstruct. 
ing 
bathera. 
Behaving 
indecentl, 
in public. 

Obstruet. 
ing or 
annoying 
pa3sen. 
gers in 
the 
street. 
Mlsbeha-
viourwith 
ftttent to 
provoke a 
breach 
of the 
peace. 
Prohibi-
tion 
against 
flying 
kites, etc. 
Commit-
tinl 
nuisance 
in or 
near 
street, etc. 
Disregard 
of notice 
in public 
bullding. 
Penal· 
ties fOl: 
offences 
uDder 
sections 
80 to 96. 
- Penalty 
for 
failure 
to keep 
in 
;conftne-
'ment 
cattIr, etc. 
, p~, ,No person shall wilfully 'p~,press, hustle or: ~bst~ct. aqy pas. 
~ri~ a street or, public place or by viplent lJloy.~en~f ffienac;t.ng 
g~tures, wanton penlonal annoyan~e, ~reIlm.i,ng, ~out.ing, ~y 
frightening horses or cattle or otherwise, disturb the p:ubHc peace or 
order. S 
93. No person shall use in any street or public place any threatening, 
abusive or insulting words or behaviour with intent to provoke a breach 
, of t~e pea.ce or whereby a breach of the peace may be occasioned. 
94. No person shall fiy a kite or any other thing 9:> as to cause danger, 
injury or alarm to persons, animals or property. 10 
95. No p'erson shall in or near to any street, public place or place of 
pu blic resort-
(a) commit a nuisance by easing himself; or 
(b) having the care or custody of any child under seven years 
of age, suffer such chUd to commit a nuisance 86 afore~aid; or IS 
(c) spit or throw any dust, ashes, refuse or rubbish 80 as to 
cause annoyance to any passer-by. 
96. No person shall, in any court, police station, police office or build-
ing occupied by Government or building occupied by any local body, 
.. moke, or spit in contravention of a notice, by the competent authority 20 
in charge of such place, displayed in such court, police station, police 
office or building. 
97. Any person who contravenes any of the provisions of sections 80 
to 96 (both inclusive) shall, on conviction, be pUnished with fine which 
may extend to one hundred rupees, or, in default of payment of such 25 
fine, with imprisonment for a term not exceeding eight days. 
88.(1) Whoever allows any cattle which are his property :or in his 
charge to stray in any street or to trespass upon any pubUc or . private 
property shall on conviction be punished-
(a) for the first offence, with ,imprisonment for a teru'f' which 30 
may. extend to one month, or with fine which may extend to three 
huildreci rup~, or with bo.th; arid 
(b) for the second or subsequent offence, with imprisonment for a 
term. which may· extend to six months~ or With fine whim may ex-
!tend to ftve hundred rupees,or with both. 35 
(2) The Metropolitan Magistrate trying an offenceunderl;lub-section 
(l) may order- .". , 
, . , 
, (4) that: tile accused shall ,pay such ,com.pens,.,.tiQIl-~ot"ex~na 
two hundred and fifty rupe~l!,as such MagisFate ~~s,rei:sonable 
11 

2 of 1974. 
· ... 
to any person for any damage Pl'Pved to ha~e been caused to his pro-
,~ or the. produce of Ills l~nd by t~ ~ttle lmder. ¢he control of 
the accused trespassing on his land; and 
(b) that the cattle in respect of which the offence has been corn-
S rnit.tA!d. shall be forfeited to the Government. 
(3) Any compensation awarded under sUb-section (Z) may be :recover-
ed as if it were r ... fine imposed under this section. 
(4) It shall be the duty of every police officer and ilt shall be lawful 
for any other person to seize and take to any cattle pound for confine-
10 ment therein any cattle found straying in any street or trespassing upon 
any pri~ or public property. 
(5) Any fine imposed under this section may, without prejlldice to 
any otbelr'means of recovery provided by law, be recovered by sale of 
all or any of the cattJe in. respeci of which the offence WB$ committed, 
IS wh~her they are the property of the person convicted of the offen~~ or 
were only in his charge when the offence was committed. 
(6) Notwithstanding anything contaJined in the CQde of Criminal Pro-
cedure, 1973, the or:e'1ce punishable under this section shall be cognizable. 
99. Whoever in any place cruelly beats, goads, overworks, ill-treats or 
20 tortures or causes, or procures to be cruelly beaten, goaded, overworked, 
:ill-treated or tortured, any animal £hall, on conviction, be punished with 
imprisonment which may extend to one month, or Wlith filne which may 
extend to one hundred rupees, or with both. 
100. Whoever without satisfactory excUse wilfully enters or remains 
2S in or upon any dwelling-house or premises or land. or ground attached 
thereto, or on any ground, bUllding, monument or structure belonging to 
Government or used for public purposes, or on any vehicle, shall, on con-
vfrction, whether he causes any adual damage or not, be punished w~th 
imprisonment which may extend to seVE'n days or with fine whi.ch/ may 
30 extend to one hundred rupees, or wli.1.h both. 
101. Whoever knowingly gives or causes to be! gll\TeD a false alarmj 
of fire to the fire brigade of the' Government or the Corporation ora mu-
niCipality or to any officer or fireman thereof, whether by means of a 
street fire alarm, statement, message or otherwise, or with in~t- to give 
35 J;ucQ. false alann wilfully breaks the glass of, or otherwise damages, a 
. strE;et flre alann, shaLl, on conviction, be' Pllnished wilth imprisonment for 
a term which may extend to three months or with fine which may extend 
to one hundred rupees, or with both. 
40 
45 
102. Whoever is found between sunset and sunrise-
(a) anned with any dnngerous instrument with intent to com-
mit an offence; or 
(b) having his face covered, or othenvie disguised with in-
tent to commit an offence; or 
(c) in any dwelling-house or other building, or on ~y vehicle, 
without ~in8 ablesa;tiEiactprJly to accoullt for his presenc~ the~; or 
Funlsh-
ment for 
cruelty to 
animals. 
Wilful 
trespass. 
False 
alarm 
of fire 
or damage 
to fire 
alarm . 
Being 
found 
under sus-
picious 
cirCUMS-
tances 
between 
sunset 
and Bun-
rise. 

Possession 
of pro-
perty of 
which nO 
satisfac-
tory 
accOUht 
can be 
given. 
Omission 
by pawn-
brokers, 
etc., to 
report to 
police 
possession 
or tender 
of pro-
perty sus-
pected to 
be atolen. 
Mellinl, 
etc., of 
pro~ 
referred 
to in 
secUoD 
104. 
(d) lying or loitering in any street, yard or other place, being Ii 
reputed thief and without being able to give a satisfactory account of 
himself; or 
(e) having in his possession without lawful excuse (the burden 
of proving which excuse shall be on such person) any implen\eIlt of S 
house breaking, 
shall, on conviction, be punished with imprisonmeut for a term which 
may extend to three months. 
103. Whoever has in his possession or conveys in any manner, or 
offers for sale or pawn, anything which there is rea60n to believe is stolen 10 
property or property fraudulently obtained, shall, if he fails to account 
for such possession or act to the satisfaction of the Mettrop(llitan Magis--
trate, on conviction, be punished with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to three months or with fine which may extend to one hundred 
rupees, or with both. IS 
104. Whoever being a pawn-broker, dealer in second hand property, 
or worker in metals, or reasonably believed by the Commissioner of 
Police to be 9Ilch a person, and having received from a police officer writ-
ten or printed information in relation to any propeqty suspected to have 
been transferred by any offence roenllioned in section 410 of the Indian 20 
Pella} Code or by any offence punishable under section 417, &ection 418, 45 of 1860 
section 419 or section 420 ().f the said Code, is found in possession, or, after 
~he receipt of such infonnation, comes into possession ~ has an offer, 
either by way of sale, pawn, exchange, or for cU8'tody, alteration or other-
Wise howsoever, made to him, of proper,ty answering the description con- 2S 
tamed in such information, shall, unless-
(i) he forthwith gives information to the Commissioner of 
POIlice, or at. a police !tation of such possession or offers and takes 
all reasonable means to ascertain and to give information as afore-
said of the name and address of the person from' whom the p06Se3- 30 
sion or offer was received, or 
(ii) the property, being an article of common wearing alJpare1 
or otherwise, is incapable of identification from the written or print-
ed information given and has been in po way concealed after the 
receipt oJ. such information. 35 
011 conviction, be punished with fine which may extend to fifty rupees 
in respect of each such article of property so in his possession or offered 
to him. .. 
105. Whoever havj,ng received such information as is referred to in 
section 104 alters, melts, defaces or puts away or causes or suffers to be 40 
alter~ melted, defaced or put away, without the previolls permiSSion 
of the police, any such property as is referred to in that section ehall" 
on proof that the same was stolen property within I the meaning of section 
410 of the Indian Penal Code or propetrty in respect of which any offence 45 of 11180 
purushable under section 417, section 418, section 419 o~ section 420 of 4S 
,ne said Code has been committed, be punished with imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to three years or w:lth fine, or with both. 

39 
186. Whoever takes from any child, not appearing to be above the age 
of fourteen years, any ,"icle whatsoever as a pawn, pledge or security 
for any sum of money lent, advanced or delivered to such child or with-
out the knowledge and consentt; of the owner of !the article buys from such 
S child any article whatsoever, shall, on conviction, be punished with fine 
which may extend to one hundred rupees. 
107. Whoever, being the keeper of any place of public amusement or 
public entertainment, knowingly permits or suffers drunkenness or 
other disorderly behaviour or any gambLng whatsoever, in such place, 
10 ahall. on conviction, be punished with fine which may extend to one 
hundred rupees. 
108. (1) Whoever by any fraud or unlawful device or malpractice in 
playing at or with cards, dice or other game or in taking part in the 
stakes or wagers, or in betting on the sides or hands of the players, or in 
15 wagering on the event of any game, sports, pastime or exercise, win., 
from any other person, for himseU or any other or others, any sum of 
money or valuable thing, shall be deemed to have committed the offence 
• of 1860. of cheating within the meaning of section 415 of the Indian Penal Code, 
and be liable to punishment accordingly. 
20 (2) Whoever assembles with others, or joins any assembly, in a street 
assembled for the purpose of gambling or wagering shall, on conviction, 
be punished with fine which may extend to fifty rupees or may be re-
leased after a due admonition. 
109. Whoever contravenes, disobeys, opposes, or fails to conform to 
25 an order under section 27 requiring him to vacate any premises, shall, on 
conviction be punished with imprisonment which may extend to three 
months or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees or with 
both. 
110. Save as provided in section 112, whoever contravenes, or abets the 
30 contravention of, any regulation made under section 28 or any of the 
conditions of a licence issued under such regulation shall, on conviction, 
he punished-
(a) if the regulation was made under clause (b) of sub-6eCtion 
(1) of section 28 providing for the prohibition of the sale, or ex-
3S posure for sale, of any goods on any street or portion thereof so as 
to cause obstruction to traffic or mnconvenience to the public-
(i) for the first offence, with imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to one month, or with fine which may extend to 
two hundred rupees, or with both, and 
40 (ii) for any subsequent offence, with imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to six months and with fine which may 
extend to five hundred rupees; 
('b) if the regulation was made under clause (d), (h). (i) or (j), 
sub-clause (i) or (ii) of clause (8) or clause (v) of sub-section 
45 (1) of section 28, with irnprisonmen~ for a term which may extend to 
eIght days, or with fine whIch may extend to fifty rupees. or with 
both; 
Twna 
pledle 
from 
child. 
Suffering 
disorderly 
conduct 
at places 
Of public 
amuse-
ment, etc. 
Cheatin, 
at lames 
and ,am-
bling 
in street. 
Penalty 
for'dis-
obedience 
to order 
under 
section 27. .. . \, . :t-.. 
Penalty 
for con-
travenin, 
regula-
tions, 
ctc., un-
der sec-
tion 28. 

Liability 
of lieen-
cee of 
place of 
public 
amuse_ 
meDtol' 
entertain-
ment for 
acts of 
servants. 
. Pebalty 
for not 
obtaining 
licence 
in res-
pect of 
place of 
public 
entertain-
ment or 
certlftcate 
of regis-
tratiOn in 
respect 
of eatinl 
houSe 
or for 
hot re-
newing 
SUCh 
Ueence 
Or certi-
ficate 
within 
prescrib-
ed period. 
Penalties 
for contra-
vention of 
orders, 
etc., un-
der sec-
tions 
29, 3{), 31, 
32,33 and 
16. 
40 .. ~,~ .. __ .. 
(e) :if the regulation was made under 'clause (0) or (p)of,.b-
Metlon (1) of section 28, with fine whicll may extend to two bund ... 
red rupe~; and 
(d) if the te~on was made under any clause of wb-section 
(1) of section 28 and for the contra:vention of which no penalty Is S 
provided under clause (a), (b) or (c) of t!Iis section, with ftne 
which may extend to fifty rupees. 
111. The holder of a licence granted under I this Act in respect of a 
place of public amusement or public entertainm~ shall be responsib1e, 
8S well as the actual offender for any offence under section 110 committed 10 
by his servant or other agent acting with his express or itnplied perinis-
mon on his behalf as Jf he hjm~elf had commitlted the same, unless! he 
establishes that all due and reasonable precautions were taken by him to 
Pl'event the commission of 9Uch offence. ' 
11Z. (1) Whoever fails to obtain a licence under thi~ Act in Tlespecl IS 
of a place of public entertainmen't or a certificate of registration there-
under in respect of any eating house, or to renew the licence or the 
certificate, as the case may be, within the prescribed period shaU, on con-
viction, be punished with fine which may extend to fifty rupees. 
(2) Any court trying any such offence shall in addition direet that 20 
the person keeping the place of pUblic entertainment, or the eating house, 
in respect of which the offence has been committed shall close such place, 
or eating house until he obtains a licence or fresh licence, or a certificate 
of regiguation or fresh certificate of registration, as the caSe may be, in 
respect thereof and thereupon su<.'h person shall forthwith comply with 25 
such direction. 
(3) If the person fails to comply with any such direction, he shall, on 
conviction, be punished with imprisonment for a term which may ex-
tend to one month or with fine which may ex~end to two hundred rupees 
01' with both. 30 
(4) Without prejudice to any action taken under sub-section (3) , on 
the failure of such person to comply with the direction of the court, any 
police officer authoriSed by the Commissioner of Police, by an order in 
writing, may take or cause to be taken such steps and use or cause to 
be used such force as may, in the opinion of such Oftleer, be reasonably 3S 
neCessary for seeming compliance with the court's direction. 
113. (1) Whoever contravenes, disObeys, opposes or faUs to conform 
to any order given by. police officer under section 29 shall, on convic-
tion, be punished with fine which may extend to two hund.red rupees. 
(2) Whoever contravenes a notification or an order made under sec- 40 
tion 30, section 32, section 33 or section 34 or abets the contravention 
thereof shall, on conviction be punished-
(eI) if the said notification or order was made under sub-section 
(1) of section 30 or under section 33 or section 34. with i~prilOn. . . 
I 

4i 
ment for a term which shall not be less than four months but which 
may extend to one year, and shall also be liable to fine: 
Provided that the court may, for adequate and su1Hcient reasons 
to be mentioned in the judgment, impose a sentence of imprison-
S ment for a term of less than four months; 
(b) if the said order was made under sub-section (2) of section 
30, with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one 'month, 
or with fine which may extend to one hundred rupees, or with both; 
(c) if the said notification was made under 8ub~section (3~ of 
10 section 30, with fine which may extend to one hundred rupees; or 
(d) if the said order was made under section 32,with imprison-
ment for a term which may extend to three month&, or with fine 
which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both. 
(3) Whoever' !opposes or fails to conform to any direction given by a 
IS police officer under section 31, shall, on conviction, be punished with the 
which may extend to two hundred rupees. 
114. Whoever contravenes, or abets the contravention of, any regula-
tion, nC)tice or order made under section 35, sectd<m 36 or section 37 
shall, on conviction, be punished with imprisonment which ~y extend 
20 to three months, or with fine which may extend to two hundred rupees, 
or with both. 
115. Whoever opposes or fails to conform to any direction issued under 
section 46, section 47 or section 48 or abets ine opposition to, or the 
failure to conform to, any such dire:::tion shall, on conviction, be punished 
25 with imprisonment which shall not be less than four months but which 
may extend to one year and shall also be liable to fine: 
Provided tha:t the court may, for adequate and special reasons to be 
mentioned in the judgment, impose a sentence of imprisonment for a 
term of less than four months. 
30 11ft Without prejudice to the power to arrest and remove a person 
in the circumstances, and in the manner provided in section 53, any 
person who- . 
(a) in contravention of a direction issued to him under section 
46, section 47 or section 48 enters or returns without permissic;m to 
35 Delhi, or any part thereof, as the case may be, from which he" was 
directed to remove himself; or 
(b) enters Qr returns to Delhi or any part thereof with per-
mjssion granted under sub-section (1) of section 54, but fails, COjD.-
trary to the provisions thereof, to remove himself outside suc,h. ~ea 
40 at the expiry of the temporary period for which he was permitted to 
enter or return or on the earlier revocation of such permission, or 
having removed himself at the expiry of such temporary period Of on 
revocation of the permission, enters or returns thereafter, without 
fresh permission, 
45 shall, on conviction, be punished with imprisonment for a term which 
shall not be less than six months but which may extend to two years and 
shall also be liable to fine: 
provided that the court may, for adequate and special reasons to be 
m£'ntioned in the judgment, impose a sentence of imprisonment for a 
50 term of less than six months. 
Penalty 
for cop-
tra ventioo 
Of re,vJa· 
tiona,etc. 
made 
ur,der 
sectioll8 
35, 36 and 
37. 
Penalty 
fOr con. 
travention 
of direc-
tions 
under· 
section 46, 
47 or 48. 
Penalty 
for enter-
ing with. 
out per-
mission 
area from 
whiCh a 
personia 
directed 
to reanov. 
himse-If 
or over-
staying 
when pet. 
mitted tg 
return 
tempo-
rarily. 

Penalty 
for con-
travention 
Of orders 
under 
section 57. 
Penalty for 
opposing 
or not 
eomplying 
with 
direction 
giverl under 
clause (b) 
of sub-
section 
(1) of 
section 59. 
Penalty 
for eon-
travening 
directlobs 
under 
section 
65. 
Dan,erOl111 
perform-
ances. 
N~lect or 
refusal to 
serve .. 
special 
police 
officer. 
Penalty 
for 
making 
18l1e 
state-
ment, 
etc., and 
tor mis-
conduct of 
police 
of!lcer •. 
42 
i17. Whoever contravenes any order made Wider sectJ.onS7 shall; oH 
conviction, be punished with imprisonment for a term which may ex-
tend to three years, or with fine, or with both. 
118. Whoever opposes or fails forthwith to c()lllply with any reasona· 
ble requisition made by a police oftlcer under clause (b) of sub-section 5 
(1) of section 59, or abets the opposition thereto or failure to comply 
therewith, shall, on conviction, be punished with imprisonment for a 
term which shall not be less than four months but which may extend 
to one year and shall also be liable to fine: 
Provided that the court may, for adequate and special reasons to be 10 
mentioned in the judgment, impose a sentence of imprisonment for a 
term of less than four months. 
119. Whoever opposes or fails to conform to any direction given by 
any police officer under section 65 or abets the opposition or failure to 
conform to such direction shall, on conviction, be punished with fine 15 
which may extend to fifty rupees. 
120. ,(1) No person shall without the previous permission of the Com-
missioner of Police and except in accordance with any conditions subject 
to which such permission is granted, hold or give in any place which is 
likely to cause an assembly of persons, any performance in which or 20 
durina which he buries himself under ground or seals himself in any 
room or receptacle or other thing, in such manner as to prevent all access 
of air to him and for such time as would ordinarily result in death by 
suffocation. 
(2) If any person oontravenes or attempts to contravene the provisions '15 
of su~section (1), he shlll, on conviction, be punished with imprison-
ment for a term which may extend to one year or with fine, or with both. 
(8) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Pro-
cedure, 1973, thq offence punishabJe unde:rthis section shall be coglliza~ 2 of 1974. 
ble. 30 
121. Any person, who having been appointed Ito be a special PQli.ce 
officer under section 17 shall without sufficient cause neglect or refuse 
to serve as such or to obey any lawful order or direction that may be 
given to him for 'the performance of his duties as such special police officer, 
shall, on conviction, be punished with fine which may extend to fifty 35 
rupees. 
lZZ. (a) Any person who makes a false statement or uses a false 
document for the purpose of obtaining employment or release from' em~ 
ployment as a police officer, or 
(b) any police officer who-
(i) is guilty of cowardice, or 
(<<t) being a police officer of subordinate rank, resigns his office 
or withdraws himself from duties thereof in contravention of section 
25, or 

I 
(iii) is guilty of any wilful breach or neglect of any prOVIsIon 
of law or of any rule or regulation or any order which he is bound 
to observe or obey, or 
(iv) is guilty of any violation of duty for which no punishment 
is expressly provided by any other law in force, 
shall, on conviction, be punished with imprisonment for a tenn which 
may extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to one hund-
red rupees, or ,,"tth both. 
~Zanation.-A police officer who being absent on leave fails without 
10 reasonable cause to report himself for duty on the expiration of such 
leave shall, for the purpose of sub-clause (it;) of clause (b), be deemed 
to withdraw himself from the duties of his office within the meaning of 
eection 25. 
1%3. Any police officer, who wilfully neglects or refuses to deliver up 
15 his certificate of appointment or of office or any other article, in accor-
dance with the provisions of sub-section (1) of section 26 shall, on con-
viction, be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend 
to one month, or with fine which may extend to two hundred rupees, 
or with both. 
20 124. Any police officer who-
(a) without lawful authority or reasonable cause enters or 
searches, or causes to be entered or searched, any building, vessel, tent 
or place; or 
(b) vexatiously and unnecessarily seizes the property o~ any 
2.5 person; or 
(c) vexatiously and unnecessarily detains, searches or arrests 
any person; or 
(d) offers any unnecessary personal violence to any person in 
his custody; or 
30 (e) holds out any threat or promise not warranted by law, 
shall, for every such offence, on conviction, be punished with imprison-
ment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may 
extend to five hundred rupees, or with both . 
....... 
125. Any police officer who vexatiously and unnecessarily delays the 
3.5 forwarding of any person arrested to a Magistrate or to any other 
authority to whom he is legally bound to forward such person, shall, on 
conviction, be punished with imprisonment for a term which may ex-
tend to six months, or with fine whic~ mar e~tmd to five hundred rupees, 
orwJtb. both, 
Penalty 
for 
failure t.) 
deliver 
up certl. 
deate of 
apPOint. 
meat or 
other 
article. 
Vexatious 
entry, 
searrh, 
arrest. 
etc., by 
pollee 
officer. 
Penalty 
forvep-
Lious del., 
in for-
wardini 
a perROn 
~rTe151.~ 

Penalty 
for un_ 
authori!>ed 
use uf 
police 
unifc..rDls. 
Power to 
make re-
gulatiolls 
regarding 
carrying 
weapons 
without 
authorlty. 
I'rosecu. 
tion for. 
certain 
offences 
against 
this Act 
to De in 
the dillCre-
tien of 
Delhi 
police. 
Summary 
tJi'lJ)o~al of 
I."ertam 
C3ses. 
Frosecu_ 
tion for 
offences 
menta not 
affected. 
Offences 
by CCJln. 
pa'~" 
P6. If any perSbn not being a member of the Delhi police wears, 
w~tbout the permission of an officer authorised by the Administrator in 
this behalf by general or special order, the uniform of the Delhi pOlice 
or any dress having the appearance or bearing any Of the distinctive 
marks of that uniform, b.e shall, on conviction, be punished with fine • 
which may extend to two hundred, rupees. 
lZ1. (J) The Commi9Sioner of Police may, by notification in the 
omcial Gazette, make regulations to provide that no person, other thaD 
a member of the armed forces of the Union acting as such or a poUee 
olf\cer, shall go armed with any sword, spear, bludgeon, gun or other 
offensIve weapon or with any expl06ive or corrosive substance in oy 
s~ee.t or public place unless so authorised by such authority as may be 
speci,1ied in such regulations. 
(2) Any regulation made under sub-secti'On (1) may provide that 
10 
any person who goes armed in contravention of such regulation shall IS 
be liable to be disarmed by any police officer and the weapon or sub· 
stance so seized shall be f<>rfeited to the Government, unless 
redeemed within two months by payment of such fine, not exceeding 
five hundred rupees, as the Commissioner of Police imposes. 
128. It shall not, except in obedience to a rule, regulation or order 
made by the Administrator or by the Commissioner of Police, be 
incumbent IOn the Delhi police to prosecute for an offence punishable 
under section 97, section 104, sub-section (1) of section 113, section 114, 
section 119 or section 121 when such offence has not occasioned serious 
mischief and has been promptly desisted from on a warning being given. 
1Z9. {1) A eourt taking cognizance of an offence punishable 
under section 97, or und'er clause (a), (b) or (c) of section 110 may 
state upon the summons to be served 'on the accused person that he 
may, by a specified date, prior to the hearing of the charge plead 
gui1ty to the charge by registered letter and remit to the coun BUch 
sum not exceeding one hundred rupees in the case of an offence punish-
able under section 97 and in any other case rupees fifty, as the court may 
specify. 
20 
25 
30 
(2) Where an accused person pleads guilty and remits the sum 
epecified in the summons, under sub-section (1), no further proceedings 35 
in respect of the offence shall be taken against him. 
IH. Subject to the proviSions contained in section 300 of the Code of 
Cririlfbal Procedure, 19'73, nothing in this Act shall be eon~trne~ topl'e- 2 aU",. 
vent any person from being prosecuted and punished under any other 
law for anything made punishable by this Act or from being prosecuted 40 
aIlcl, p~ under this Act for anything made punishable under .BY 
other law. 
131. (l) Where an offence under this Act has been committed 
by a company" every person who at the time the offence was 
committed, was in charge of, and w~s$relpQl1sible to, the cO~·... 4~ 

5 
45 
the conduct of the business of the oompany, as well as the company~ 
thall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be 
proceeded against and punished accordingly: 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any 
such person liable to any punishment provided in this Act, if 
he proves that the offence was committed. without his knowledge or 
that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such 
offence. 
(2) Notwithstandiug anything contained in sub-section (1), where 
10 an offence under this Act has been committed by a company and 
it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or that the commission of the offence is attributable to, 
any neglect on the part of any director, manager, secretary or other 
ofRcer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other 
I~ oftlcer shall also be deemed. to be guilty of that offence and shall be 
liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly. 
Ezplanation.-F'or the purposes of this section,-
(a) "company" means a body corporate, and includes a firm 
or other association of individuals; and 
.20 <b> "director", in relation to a firm, means a partner in the 
firm. 
CHAPTER XI· 
MISCELLANEOUS 
132. An fees paid for licences or pennissions granted under this Act, 
25 and all sums paid for the service of processes by police officers 
and all rewards, forfeitures and penalties or shares thereof, which are by 
law payable to police ofRcers as informers slum, save in so far as any 
such fees or sums belong under the provisions of any ehactment for the 
tiine being in force to any local authority be credited to the Government: 
30 Provided. that with the sanction of the Administrator or under any 
rule made by the Administrator in that behalf, the whole or any partio n 
of any such reward, forfeiture or penalty may fOT special services, be 
paid to a police ofRcer or be divided amongst two or more ~lice officers. 
133. Any order or notification published or issued by the Adminis-
3S trator or by the Commissioner of Police or any other police officer under 
any provision of this Act, and the due publicaltion or issue there~ 
of may be proved by the production of a copy thereof in the Official 
Gazette, or of a copy thereof signed by the Administrator or Commissioner 
of Police or other police officer, as the case may be, and by him certified 
4;) to be a true copy of an original published or issued according to the pl'Q-
Visio~~ of this Act applicable thereto. 
Disposal 
of fees, 
rewards, 
etc. 
Method of 
proviDi 
orders and 
notifiea-
tiona. 

Rules, 
tions or 
orders 
not invali-
dated by 
defect of 
form or 
irregula-
rity in 
procedure. 
Presump-
tion in 
prosecu. 
tions for 
con~rl:lven­
tion Of 
order 
made 
wlder 
section 
46,47 or 
48. 
Oftlcers 
holding 
("harges 
ot, or suc. 
ceeding to, 
vacancies 
competent 
to exer-
cise 
pow .... 
Forfeiture 
of bond 
entered 
into by 
p~rson. 
under 
SUb.ReC-
tion (1) 
of section 
54. 
No police 
officer to 
be liable 
to penalty-
or damage 
for nct 
done in 
lood 
faith in 
PUt5lla.:e 
tdcMir. 
46 
1M. No rule, regulation, order, direction, adjudication, inquiry or 
notification made or published and no act done under any provision of 
'this Act w any rule or regulation made under this Act, or in substan-
tial conformity with the same, shall be deemed. illegal, void, invalid S 
or insufticient by reason of any defect of form or any irregularity 
of procedure. 
135. Notwithsta~ding anything contained in any law for the time be-
ing in force, in a prosecution for an offence for the contravention of an 
order made under section 46, section 47 or section 48 on the production of 1') 
an authentic copy of the order, it shall, until the contrary is proved by 
the accUsed, be presumed-
(a) that the order was made by the authority competent under 
this Act to make it; 
(b) that the authority making the order was satisfied that the J 5 
grounds on, or the purpose for, which it was made existed, and that 
it was necessary to make the same; and 
(c) that the order was otherwise valid and in conformity with 
the provisions of this Act. 
136. Whenever in consequence of the office of the Commissioner· of 
Police, Additional Commissioner of Police or any other police officer be- 20 
coming vacant, any officer holds charge of the post of such Commissioner 
of Police, Additional Commissioner of Police or other' police officer or 
succeeds, either temporarily or permanently, to tha.t post, such officer 
shall be competent to exercise all the powers and perform all the duties 2 
respectively conferred and imposed by or under this Act on the 5 
Commissioner of Police or on such Additional Commfssioner of Poli<:e or 
other police officer, as the case may be· 
137. If any person permitted to enter or return to the ar'ea from which 
he was directed to remove himself under sub-section (l) of section 54, 30 
fails to observe any condition imposed under that sub·section or by the 
bond executed by him thereunder, his bond shall be forfeited and any 
person bound thereby shall pay the penalty thereOf or show cause to the 
satisfaction of the court why such penalty should not be paid. 
138. No police officer shall be lia.ble to any penalty or to payment of 
any damages on account of an act done in ~ood faith in pursuance of or 3S 
purported to be done in purs'lance of any duty impos~ny authority 
conferred on him by any provision t()f this Act or any other law 
for the tirn.e being in forc~ 9r an¥ Tule, re~ulation, order or ~irection mad, 
or gfv~n ~,reunder~ 

45 of 1-. 
, ,~ . 
189( No public servant or person duly appointed Or authorised shall be 
liable to any penalty or to payment of any damages for giving effect in 
good faith to-
(a) any order or direction issued with apparent authority by the 
S Administrator or by a person empowered in that behalf under this 
Act; 01" 
(b) any rule or regulation made under It his Act. 
Explanation.-In this section, the expression "public servant" has the 
meaning assigned to it in section 21 of the Indian Penal Code. 
10 140. (1) In any case of alleged offence by a police officer or other per-
son, or of a wrong alleged to have been done by such police officer or 
other person, by any act done under colour of duty or authority or in 
excess of any such duty or authority, or wherein it shall appear to the 
court that the offence or wrong if committed or done was of the charac-
15 ter aforesaid, the prosecution or suit shall not be entertained and if en-
tertained shail be dismissed if it is instituted, more than three months 
after the date of the act complained of: 
Provided that any such prosecution against a P;Olice officer or other 
person may be entertained by the court, if instituted with the previous 
20 sanction of the Administrator, within one year f:rom the date of the 
offence. 1 -
(2) In the case of an intended suit on account ot such a wrong All 
aforesaid, the person intending to sue shall give to the alleged wrongdoer 
not less than one month's notice of the intended suit with sufficient des-
l5 cription of the wrong complained. of, and if no such notice has been given 
before the institution of the suit, it shall be dismissed. 
(3) The plaint shall set forth that a notice as aforesaid has been serv-
ed on the ,defendant and the date of such service and shall state what 
tender of amends, if any, has been made by the defendant and a copy 
30 0If the said notice shall be annexed to the plain,t endorsed or accom.., 
panie<i with a declaration by the plaintiff of the time and manner of ser-
vice thereof. 
141. (1) Any licence or written permission granted under the provi-
sions of /this Act sh&ll specify the period and locality for which, and the 
conditions and restrictions subject to which, the same is granted, and 
35 IShall lbe given under the signature of the competent authority. 
(2) Any licence or written Fermiss.ion granted. under this Act may 
at any tAme be suspended or revoked by the competent authorirty if any 
of its condiltions or restrictions are infringed or evaded by the person 
to whom it has been granted, or if such person, is convicted of any offence 
.to with respect to any matter to which such licence or permission relates. 
(3) When any such licence or written permission is suspended or re-
voked, or when the period for which the same was granted has expired, 
the persons to whom the same was granted shall, for all purposes of thiS 
No {:Iubllc 
servant 
liable as 
aforesaid 
for givin& 
effect in 
good 
faith to 
any rule, 
regulation, 
order or 
direction 
issued 
with ap_ 
parent 
authority. 
Bar to 
suits and 
prosecll" 
tiona. 
Licer,,!es 
LInd 
Written 
permis-
sions to 
speCify 
condiuons. 
etc., and 
to be 
signed. 

Public 
notice. 
hovr to be 
liven. 
Con&ent, 
etc., of a 
competent 
authority 
maybe 
proved by 
writmi 
Under its 
si{lGature. 
Signature 
on notices, 
etc.,msy 
be itamp-
ed. 
Persons 
interested 
maYbeek 
to ar!rlul, 
reverq 
or alter 
any rule 
(,If Clrdtn'. 
~c~, ~ ~ to j;)e w).tho~~ a licence or wrt~ten petmiss.ipn, Until th' 
q~ for suspendilli or revoking the same is canceqed, or ~til the ame 
is renewed, as the case may be. 
(4) Every person to whom any such licence or written permission has 
been granted shall, while the same remains in force, at all reasonable S 
.lffies, produce the same, if so required by a police officer. 
Explanatipn.-For tile purposes of this section any such iniringeme~t 
or evasion by, or convictiqn of, a servant or other agent acting on behalf 
of the person to whom the licence or written permission has been grant-
ed shall be deemed to be infringement or evasion or, as the case may be, 10 
conviction of, the person to whom such licence or written permission has 
been granted. 
142. Any nOlt.ifi.cation which may be publicly promulgated., public 
notice required to be given, order required to :be notified puolicly or 
prO(:lamatJ.on requir~ to be issued under any of the provisioll3 of this Act 15 
shall be in WrltlOg, under the slgnature ot a competent authority and 
shall 'be published In the locality to be affected thereby, by affixing copies 
thereof III conspicuous public places, or by proclaiming the Same! WIth 
beat of drums or by actvertising, the same in such local newspapers in 
Hindi, Urdu or EngJish, as the competent authority may deem nt, or by 20 
any two or mQre of these means and by any other means it may thinki 
suitable. 
143. Whenever under this Act, the doing or the omitting to do .any-
~hing or the validity of anything depends upon the consent, approval., 
declarad~n, opinion or satisfactlOn of tht: competent authori.ty, a written 2S 
docwnent signed by the competent authority, purporting to conveyor set 
forth such consent. approval, declaration, opmion or satisfaction shall be 
sulftcient evidence thereof. 
144. Every licence, written permission, notice or other document, not 
being a summons or warrant or search warrant, required by this Act 30 
or by any rule or regulation made thereunder, to bear the signature o~ 
the Comm.i.ssion81'! of Pcilice, shall be deemed to be properly signed if it 
bears a facsimile of his signature stamped thereon. . 
1~. (1) In the case of any rule or order made by the AdminiatratQr 
under an authority conferred ·by this Act and requiring the public ot 
a parrt4icular class of persons to perform some duty or act, or to conduct 35 
or order themselves or those under their control lin a manner therein. 
ideecribed, i~ shall be competent for any person interested to apply to! 
the Administrator by a memorial to annul, reverse, or alter ~ rule or 
order aforesaid on the ground of its being unlawful, oppressive Or unre a- 40 
sonable. ' . 
(2) After such an application as aforesaid and the rejectiQIl thereof, 
w.holly or in part or atter the lapse of four months without an answer to 
such application Or a decision thereon published by the Admin.istr~t~, 
It shall be competent for the person interested and deeming the rule or 45 
order to be contrary to law to institute a suit in the princip'al civil eourt 
of original jurisdiction against the Administrator for a declaration that 
the rule or order is UDlawful either wholly or in part. 
I • 
, I 

49 
(3) Where in any sua instituted under sub-section (2) or on appeal 
therefrom, the court adjudges a rule or order to be unlawful, the rule or 
order shall be annulled or so altered as to make it conformable to law. 
146. (J) The Commissioner of Police shalL exet'lCise all powers and 
5 discharged all functions which may be exercised or discharged ;by a Dill· 
trict Magistrate under the Acts Mentiolned in Schedule I including the 
rules made thereunder .. 
(2) The Commissioner of Police may authorise any Additional Com-
missioner of Police, Deputy Commissioner of Police or Additional Deputy 
10 Commissioner of Police to exercise any of the powers or discharge any of 
the functions of the Commissioner of Police mentioned in sub-section (1) 
in accordance with the general or spec:al orders of the Administrator. 
(3) The powers and functions of a District Magistrate under the 
Sarais Act, 1867, shall be exercised and discharged by the Administrator 
[5 or such officer as the Administrator may, by notification in the Officlll 
22 of 1867. Gazette, authorise in this behalf. 
147. (1) The Administrator may make rules for carrying out the pur-
poses of this Act. 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the fore-
20 going power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following mat· 
ters, namely:-
(a) recruitment to, and the pay, allowances and all other con-
ditions of service of the members ::>f, the Delhi police under clause 
(b) of section 5; 
25 (b) the manner of publication, under sub-section (2) of section 
17, by the Commissioner of Police, of the names of special police offi-
cers appointed under that section; 
(e) awarding of any of the punishments referred to in sub-sec· 
tion (1) or sub-section (2) of sectio,n 2'1 to any police officer or sub-
30 ordinate rank; 
35 
40 
45 
50 
(d) procedure for awarding punishments under section 22; 
(e) form of Discharge Certificate under: sub-section (8) of section 
25; 
(f) determination of the cost of employing additional police 
under sub·section (2) of section 38; 
(g) manner of ':.aking measuremen',s and photograph under section 
55 of persons against whom an order has been made under section 
46, section 47 or section 48; 
(h) manner of constituting Defence Societies under sub-section 
(1) of section 58; 
(i) form of receipt to be given in respect of any article detained 
under section 62; 
(j) the authority to whose satisfaction claims are to be estab-
lishe\l under sub-section (2) of section 69 and the form and manner 
in which claims may be. made under that sub-section, the procedure 
. fpr dealing with such claims and all other matters connected there-
with under sub-section (3) of that section; 
(k) payment to ~ny police officer or division among two or more 
police officers the whole or aoy portion of any reward, forfeiture or 
penalty, under the proviso to section 132; 
Power .. ot 
Commis. 
!iioner of 
POIJl'e 
under 
other 
Acta. 
P(;,wer to 
make 
rulp.:i'. 

Notifica-
tion of 
rules and 
regu-
lations 
in the 
Official 
Gazette 
and laying 
of Irules 
and regu-
lations. 
Cesser of 
operation 
of certain 
enact-
ments and 
savings. 
50 
0) any other matter which has to be, or may be, prescribed, 
or provided for by rules, under this Act. 
148. (1) Every rule and regulation made under this Act shall be 
made by notification in the Official Gazette. 
. (2) Every rule and regulation made under this Ordinance shall be 5 
laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, 
while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be com-
prised in one session or in two or more successive seE1ons, and If, before 
the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the succes-
sive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modifl.cation in 10 
the rule or regulation, as the case may be, or both Houses agree that the 
rule or regulation should not be made, the rule or regullWtion shall there-
after have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as! the 
case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall 
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under IS 
that rule or regulation. 
(3) Every rule and regulation made under this Act shall also 
be laid before the Metropolitan Council of Delhi. 
141. (1) On the commencement of this Act the enactments specified 
in Schedule II shall cease to be in force in Delhi; 20 
Provided that-
(i) all rules and standing orders made (including !he Punjab 
Police Rules, as in force in Delhi), appointments made, powers con-
ferred, orders made or passed, directions and certificates issued; 
consent, permit, permission or licence given, summons or warrants 25 
issued or served, persons arrested or detained: or disoharged on bail 
or bond, search warrants issued, bonds forfeited and penalties incur-
red under any such enactment shall, in so far as they are consistent 
with this Act, be deemed to have been respectively made, con-
ferred, passed, given, issued, served, arrested, detained, dilcharged, 30 
furieited or incurred under this Act. 
(ii) all references in any enactment to any of the provi-
sions of the enactments so ceasing to be in force shall, in relation to 
Delhi, be construed. as references to the cOI'tesponding provisions Qf 
this Act. 35 
(2)1 The cesser of operation under sub-section (1) of an enactment 
specified in SChedule II shall not affect-
(a) the validity, invalidity, effect or consequence of anything 
done or suffered to be done th«eunder before the commencement 
of this Act; 40 
(b) any right, privilege, obligation or liability already acqujred, 
accrued or incurred the~el1nder before such 'Commencernen~; 
(c) any penalty, forfeiture or punishment inCUrred or inftictec:l 
in reapect of any act thereunder before such commencemen.t; 
(4) any investigation, legal proceeding or remedy in Iespect 45 
of such right, privilege, obligation, liability, penalty, forfeiture or 
punishment; or 
(e) any legal proceeding thereunder pending in any cCJl11't or 
before any oftlcer immedIately before such commencement or any-
thing done or suffered, to be done in the course of such proceedmga, 50' 

Ord. 
2 of 1978. 
5 
10 
15 
20 
51 
and any such proceeding or any appeal or revisional proceedings 
arising out of such proceeding shall, save as otherwise expressly 
provided in section 150 be instituted, continued or disposed of, as 
the case may be, as if this Act had not been enacted. 
150. Without prejudice to the provisions contained in section 149,-
(a) the police force functioning in Delhi immediately before 
the commencement of this Act (hereafter in this section referred 
to as the existing police force) shall, on such commencement, be 
deemed to be police force constituted under this Act and every 
member of the existing police force holding the office mentioned in 
column (1) of Schedule 1111, immediately before such commence-
ment, shall be deemed to be appointed, on such commencement, to 
the office mentioned in the corresponding entry in column (2) of 
that Schedule; 
(b) all proceedings (including proceedings by way of investi-
gations) pending before any police officer of the existing poEce 
force, immediately before the commencement of this Act 
shall on $1ch commencement be deemed to be proceedings pending 
before him in his capacity as the holder of the office to which be 
is deemed to be appointed under clause (a) and shall be dealt with 
accordingly; 
(c) where any power or function which may be exercised or 
discharged under any law by a District Magistrate or Executive 
Magistrate immediately before the commencement of this Act 
25 has been conferred on the Commissioner of Police 01' any other 
police officer by or under this Act, all proceedings in relation 
to or arising from the exercise of such! power or the discharge of 
such function pending immediately before IUch conferment before 
the District Magistrate, or the Executive Magistrate, as the case 
30 may be, shall, on the conferment of such power or function On the 
CommilliOller OIl Police or other police ofticer stand transferred to 
the Commissioner of Police or other police officer, as the case 
may be, and the officer to whom such proceedings stand so trans-
ferred shall either proceed de novo or from the stage of such trans-
35 fer. 
151. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act in consequence of the transition to the said prOVISIOns 
from the provisions ot the enactments mentioned in Schedule II, the 
Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, .make 
40 such provisions .. appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removing 
the difficulty: 
Provided that no such notification shall be' issued after the expiry 
of t.wo years from the commencement of this Act. 
(2) Every notification issued under this section shall, as soon as 
45 may be after it is issued, be laid before each House of Parliament. 
Police 
force func-
tioning in 
Delhiim_ 
mediately 
tefore 
the Cum-
mcnce_ 
ment Of 
this Act 
to be 
df'em~d 
to be 
polico: 
force 
'!onstitut. 
~d I.:nder 
this Act. 
Power to 
remcY'e 
diffil'ul~ 
tiell. 
152. (1) The Delhi Police Ordinance, 1978 is hereby repealed. Repeal 
and 
(2) Notwithstanding such a repeal, anything done or any action saving. 
taken under the Ordinance so repealed shall be deemed to have beeD 
clone or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act. 

53 
SCHEDULE I 
[See section 146 (1)] 
PART I 
CENTRAL ACTS 
1. The Press and Registration of Books Act, 1867. 
2. The Indian Explosives Act, 1884. 
3. The Indian Lunacy Act, 1912. 
4. The Poisons Act, 1919. 
5. The Police (Incitement to DisaffecLon) Act, 1922. 
6. The Cinematograph Act, 1952. 
7. The Suppression of Immoral Traffic in Women and Girls Act, 1956. 
8. The Arms Act, 1959. 
9. 'nlIe Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 198Q. 
PART II 
DELHI ACTS AND ACTS EXTENDED TO DELHI 
1. The Madras Restriction of Habitual Offenders Act, 1948, as ill force 
in Delhi. 
2. The Pl,mjab Security of State Act, 1953, as in force in Delhi.· 
3. The Madras Dramatic Performances Act, 1954, as in force in Delhi. 
4. The Delhi Public Gambling Act, 1955. 
5. The Bombay Prevf!ntion of Begging Act, 1959, as in force in Delhi. 
"Year Ne. 
SCHEDULE II 
(Su section 149) 
Shon title 
5 
10 
15 
20 
V 
IV 
The Police Act, 1861. 25 
1951 XXIl 
!,;ection 40 of the Punjab Laws Act, 1872, as in 
force in Delhi. 
The provisions of the Bombay Police Act, 1951, as iD 
force in Delhi. 

5 
53 
SCHEDVLE III 
(See section 150) 
Designation of Officer in the Delhi 
Police 
Posts to which the officers of the 
Delhi Police shall be deemed to 
be appointed 
-------------------_._ .. _ .... _._--....... _. __ . __ .-.. 
I. Inspector General of Police. Commissioner of Police. 
2. Deputy Inspector General of Police. Additional Commissioner of Police. 
3. Superintendent of Police. Deputy Commissioner of Police. 
10 4. Assistant Inspector General of Police. Deputy Commissioner of Police. 
S. Additional Superintendent of Police. Additional Deputy Commissioner of 
Police. 
6. Assistant Superintendent of Police. Assistant Commissioner of Police. 
7. Deputy Superintendent of Police. Assistant Commissioner 0 f Po Ike. 
______________________ .0--- .. -_._ ..... --_.- . _ 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The duality inherent in the police-magistracy system as provided 
in the Police Act, 1861 inhibit the police in quickly responding to 
~ituations and effects their efficiency in their primary task of crime c<m-
trol and maintenance of law and order. Alter considering all aspects of 
the matter and in the interest Of improvement of the efficiency of the 
police in the Capital city, it was felt that the balance of advantage would 
be in favour of a change-over to the Police Commissioner system which 
avoids such duality and which has been working effiCiently in Bombay, 
Calcutta and Madras and other metropolitan cities such as Hyderabad, 
Bangalore, Ahmedabad, N agpur and Poona. 
2. The Delhi Police Ordinance. 1978, was, therefore, promulgated to 
f:lcilitate the change-over to the Police Commissioner system, The Ordi-
nance 1s main.1y based on the Bombay Police Act, 1951 with some modifi-
cations to suit the reqllil'ements of Delhi. It provides for the appointment 
of a Commissi~ner of Police and the vesting in him, subject to the control 
of the Administrator, of the direction and supervision of the police force 
in Delhi. Under the Ordinance, the Commissione~ of Police maybe 
empowered by the Central Government by notification in the' Official 
Gazette to exercise and perfonn. in relation to Delhi the powers and duties 
of an Executive Magistrate and of a District Ma.gi!ftrate under .uch of 
the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 as may be specified 
in the notification. Similarly any officer subordinate 10 the Commissioner 
of Police, being an officer not below the rank Of an Assistant Commis-
sioner of Police, may be empowered by the Central Government by noti-
fication in the Official Garr.e'tte to exercise and perform the powers and 
duties of an Executive Magistrate under such of the provisions of the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 and in relation to such areas in Delhi 
as may be specified in the notification. The Ordinance empowered the 
Commissioner of Police 1b exercise the powers of a District Magistrate 
under the Acts specified in Schedule I thereto. 
3. The other important featUres of the Ordinance are the following:-
(a) The CommisSioner of Police will have power to make regu-
lations for regulating traffic of all kinds', licensing and controlling of 
places of public amusement or public entertainment or prohibiting 
the carrying of gun-powder or any other explosive substance in pub-
lie places, directing the closing or disuse of any S'Ource, supply or 
receptacle of water and providing against pollution of the same or of 
water therein, regulating the conduct of assemblieS' and processions, 
etc. 
('b) The Commissioner of Police will have power to disperse 
gangs and extern bad charac:tel1!l and habitual offenders. 
(c) The CommiSlllioner of Police will have certain powers to 
prevent cruelty to animals. 
S4 

55 
(d) Creation of certain new offences with respect to disregarding 
ruJes of the road, causing obstruction or mischief by animals, causing 
obstruction in streets, doing offensive acts in or: near a street or public 
place, behaving indecently in public and annoying passengers in 
streets, etc. 
~. The Bill seeks to replace the said Ordinance. The note on clauses 
explain the various provisions of the Bill. 
NEW DELHI; DHANIK LAL MANDAL. 
The 19th July, 1978. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF THE 
CONSTITt.mON OF INDIA 
(Copy of letter No. U-1101415178-UTL, dated the 14th July, 1978 from 
Shri Dhanik Lal Mandal, Minister of State in the Ministry of Home 
Affairs to the Secretary, Lok Sabha). 
The President, having been infonned of the subject matter of the 
Bill to amend and cOnsolidate the law relating to the regulation of the 
police in the Union terriory 'Of Delhi, recommends to Lok Sabha the 
consideration of the said Bill under clause (3) of article 117 of the Cons-
titution. 

• 
Notes on c14uses 
Clau.se 2.-This clause contains definitions of certain terms and ex-
pressions used in the Bill. 
Ctauses 3 to 1S.-These clauses, corresponding to sections 3 to 5, 7, 9, 
10 tQ 12A, ]4'.0 16,20 to 22 of the Bombay Police Act, 1951, relate to orga-
nisation, superintendence and control of the police force. 
There shall be one police force for the whole of Delhi. The officers 
and subordinate ranks of the p:>lice force shall be liable for posing to any 
branch of the force including the Delhi Armed Police. The superinten-
dence of -the police force will vest in the Admin'istra'tor who may, by 
general or special order, determine the size and organisation of the fQrce 
and powers, functions and duties of the police. The recruitment to, and 
the pay, allowances and all other conditions of service of~ha members 
of, the police force (other than those belonging to the Indian Police Ser-
vice or the Delhi, Andaman and Nicobar Islancis Police Service) shall be 
governed by rules to be made by the Administrator. 
The Administrator shall appoint a Commissioner of Police for the 
direc don and supervl.<;'ion of the PGlice force. He will exercise and per-
fonn such powers, duties md functions as are specified by or under this 
Bill. One or more Additional Commissioners of Police may be appoiTh~ed 
by the Administrator. The Additional CommissiQller of Police will assist 
the Commissioner in the exercise of his powers and perfonnance of his 
duties in such manner and to slIch extent as may be specified by the 
Administrator. He shall also exercise such powers and perform such 
duties of the C()mmissioner within such local limits as the Adminis-
trator may specify. 
The Administrator may appoinl Deputy Commissioners of Police, 
Additional Deputy Commissioners of Police and Assiitant Commissioners 
qf Police. The powers ond duties of these officers and the local limits of 
their jurisdiction may be specified by the Commissioner of Police subject 
to any general or special order of the Administrator. The Principal of 
the Police Training School shall be appointed by the Administrator. He 
shall be a police officer not below the rank of Deputy Commissioner of 
Police. He shall exercise such powers and' duties as may be assigned to 
him, by· the Commissioner of Police, for the proper functioning of that 
School. The Administrator may establish a Police Training College and 
appoint a police :>fficer of appropriate rank to be its Principal. The Com-
missioner of Police WIll assign to the Principal of the Police Training 
College such power!' and duties as he deems fit for the proper adminis-
~ration of that College. 
Subject to the control of the Administrator, the Omlmissioner of Police 
shall constitute police districts, divide such districts into police sub-divi-
~ions, specify the police gtptions in each sub-division and define the limits 
and extent of such police districts, police sub-divisions and police s~atiQnS. 

57 
Each police district, police sub-division and pOlice lJta'tion will, respectiv&-
Iy, be under the charge of a Deputy Commissioner of Police, Assistant 
Commissioner of Police and Inspector of Police. A Deputy Commissioner 
of Police may be assisted in the discharge of his duties by one or more 
Additional Deputy Commissioners of Police. 
The Inspectors of Police are to be appointed by the Additional Com-
missioner of Police and S'Ub-Inspectors of Police and o~her officers of 
subordinate rank will be appointed by the Deputy Commissioner of 
P~ice, Additional Deputy Commissioner of Police, Principal of the Police 
Training College or Police Training School or any other police officer of 
equivalent rank. Every officer of the rank of Inspector and below shall 
receive a certificate of appointment to be issued under the seal 01. such. 
officer, and shall be in such form, as the Admin.istra1tor may specify. The 
certi~ate shall become null and void when the officer to whom it is issued 
ceases to belong to the Delhi police and shall remain inoperative when 
such officer is suspended. 
The powers, functions and privileges of a police officer will remain 
suspended when the officer is under suspension but such officer shall con-
tinue to be subject to' the control of the ~me authorHlies to which he 
would have been subject but for his suspension. 
Clauses 15 and 16 specify th~ general powers of the Commissioner' 
of Police and his authority to investigate and regulate matters of accounts 
connected with the Delhi police. Clauses 17 and 18 relate to appointment 
of special p(11ice officers and addition&l police officers by the Commissioner 
of Police in certain circumstances. 
Clauses 19 to 27.-Thest' clauses, corresponding to sections 23 to 31 of 
the Bombay Police Act, 1951 deal with the regul:a!tion, OQntml and disci-
pline of the Delhi police. Clause 19 empowers the Commissionel'\ of 
Police to frame regulations, subject to the orders of the Administrator. 
for the administration of the police. 
Clause 20 empowers the Commissioner to can for returns, reP9.rts and 
statements from his subordinates on any s'1lbject connected with the pre-
vention and detection of crime, etc. Clause 21 specifies the penalties that 
may be imposed on police officers of subordinate rank and the officers 
c'lmpetent to impose such penalties. Clause 22 Jays down the procedure 
for «·.Yarding punishments. Clause 23 provides jor an appeal from certain 
orders of punishment passed against police officers and specifies the appel-
late authoriti~. 
Clause 24 provides t.ha~ poJice officers shall be dremed to be always 
on duty and be liable to be employed in any part of Delhi. 
Clause 25 lays down the circumstances under which a police officer of 
subordinate rank may resign and the procedure for acceptin!! such resig-
nation. Clause 26 enjoins that the certiflcate, arms, etc., issued t.o a policE' 
officer shall be delivered up by him on ceasing to be a police officer. If 
the certificate. arms, etc., are not so delivered, any Metropolitan Magistrate 
or a police offiC'er specified in sub ·clause (2) (a) of tnat clause may issue 
a warrant for the sejzure thereof and such warrant shall be executed as 
if it were a search warrant for a search issued under the Code of Criminal 
Procedure. 1973. The proviSion of this cl~u$e will not apply in relation to 

any article which has becometh.e property of the person concemed by 
virtue of orders issued by the Commi9Sioner of Police~ Clause· 27 deals 
with occupation ofjand liability to vacate, premises pl-Qvided for police 
otftcers by the Commm.ioner of Police. If any person to '...,hom. ,~he prea 
mises have been allotted fails to vacate the same when he is bound or 
required to do so, he may be ordered to vacate the premises by the Ad-
ministrator or any other 'officer authori~ by the Administrator and 
any police officer may be directed to enter upon the premises, with such 
assistance as may be necessary, and remove therefrom any person found 
therein and to take possession of the premises and deliver the same to 
the person specified in the direction. 
Clauses 2S to 37.-These clauses, c?rresponding to sections 33, 36, 37, 
41, 38 to 40, 43, 34 and 35 of the Bombay Police Act, 1951, empower the 
Commislsioner of Police to--
(a) make regulations for controlling traffic and preservation of 
qrder in public places, etc.; 
(b) give directions to public as. to thecond,uct of, and behaviour' 
or action of persons constituting processions or assemblies on or along 
streets, 'specify the routes by which and the time 8It which any such 
procession may pass or shall not pass, etc.; 
(c) prohibit the carrying of 8rms, cudgels, swords, bludgeons, 
guns, knives, sticks or lat,his or any other ~tic1e capable of being 
used for causing physical violence, corrosive subgtance or explC'l",ives, 
etc., for the preservation of public peare or public safety. Arms, etc., 
winch are carried in contravt;ntion of such prohitbition are liable to 
be seized; 
(d) prohibit any assembly or procession whenever v.nd for such 
time as he considers necessary for the preservlation of public order. 
Such prohibition sh~l1 not remain in force for more 'than fifteen days 
but the Admini~trator may extend the opera~ion thereof for such fur-
ther period, not exceeding six months from ',the date on which. jt would 
have otherwise expired as he may spectfy; 
(e) prevent, prohibit, etc., continuance of music, sound 'or noise, 
use of loudspeaker, etc.; 
(f) close or take possession of any building or other place for pre-
vention or suppression of any riot or grave disturbance of peace; 
(,g) take special measures to prevent out-break of epidemic dise-
ases at fairs, etc.; 
(h) reserve street or other public place for a public purpose and 
a\lithOlrise the erection of barriers in streets; 
(i) make regulations prohibiting disposal of the dead except at 
places set apart for sueh purp:lSe. ' 
Clause 3'1 empowers any police officE"l' of the rank 'Of Assistant Sub-
Tnspector and above present at a place of ~ublic amusemen~ or assembly 
or meeting to give rea!anable direttion~ for securing the peaceful and 
lawful conduct of thE proceedings and the maintenance of the public 
safety. " 1 l' ,- r 

59 
Under clause 34 the competent authority may give necessary and rea-
sonable orders as to the conciuct of persons where; a dispute or contention 
exists as to an actual 01' intended religious or ceremonial or corporate dis-
play, etc., in any street or public place or as to the conduct of, or partici-
pation in, such display. Butwhile giving such orders, regard shall be had 
to the apparent legal rigHts and to any established practice of the parties 
and of the persons interested. 
Clauses 38 to 58.-These clauses, corresponding to sections 47, 50, 48, 
51, 551 to 62, 63A and 63B of the Bombay Police Act, 1951, provide for 
special measures being taken for maintenance of public order and! secu-
rity of the State. 
Clauses 38 and 391 provide for the employmeilit of additional police to 
keep peace and in cases of special danger to public peace. Clause 40 pro-
vides for the employment of additional police at large works and when 
apprehension regqrding behaviour of employees exists. 
Clauses 41· to 45 deal with award ot compensation for injury caused 
by unlawful assembly, recovery thereof from persons participating in 
such assembly, disputes as to cost of deputing additional police or com-
pensation, etc. 
Clauses 46 to 48 empower the Commissioner of Police to disperse gangs 
and body of persons cauSing or are like1y to cause danger to person. or 
property, etc., removal of persons about to commit offences M persons 
convicted of ceI1tain offences if they are likely to engage again in the 
commission of any such offence. These provisions are based on sections 
55, 56 and 57 of the Bomlbay Police Act, 1951 supplemented by the provi-
sions of 'the Rajasthan Control of Goondas Act, 1975. 
A direction made under the provisions envisaged in clauses 46, 47 or 
48 shall remain in operation. for such period not exceeding two years as 
may be specified therein. Clause 50 lays down the procedure to be follow-
ed in making an order under clause 46, 47 or 48. Clause 51 provides for 
appeals from such orders to Admihistrator and lays down the procedure 
for preferring such appe~ 
Clause 52 provides that an order passed by the Commissioner of Police 
under clause 46, 47 or 48 or an order in appeal made by the Administrator 
shall net be called in question in any court except on certain grounds spe-
cifi£'d in that clauS'e. 
Clau.se 53 authorises the CQlIllllissioner of Police to cause the arrest 
and removal to a, place outsl.~e Delhi or any part thereof, of any person 
who fails to obey a direction i&'Sued under clause 46, 47 or 48 or enters 
into the area from which he was directed to remove himself otherwise 
than with the permission at the Commissioner of Police in writing under 
clause 54. 
i . 
Clau.se 54 relates to gJ:&nt of terp.~rary permission for externees to 
enter the area from ~hich they ~ere directed. to remove themselves and 
the consequences ·of non-obiervance of the conditions of such permissiM. 
Clauses 55 a'nd 56 (new provisions) provide for taking the measure-
ment p.nd photograph· of anrperson against. whom an order under clause 
46; 47 ~ 481 has been'rnad.e and- the eOIllequences of resistance to taking! 
of measurements and photbgraph. 

Clause 57 empowers the Administrator, in the interest of the security 
of the State or the m&intenance of public I')rder, to ban use of dress, etc., 
resembling uniform d Armed Forces or of any police fqrce. 
Clause 58 provides for the constitution of Defence Societies by Com-
missioner of Police for the protectiOjIl of persons, security of propel1~y and 
the public safety in any 'locality. 
Clauses 59 to 65.-These clauses, corresponding to sections 71, 70, 80 (1), 
81, 64, 66, 67, 98, 97, 68 and 69 of 'the Bombay Police Ad:, 1951 specify the 
following executive duties and powers of police officers:-
(a) duty of police officer to enforce provisions of the Bill includ-
ing the circumstances in which a police officer may arrest without 
warrant; 
(b) other duties of a police officer; 
(c) power to enter without warrant places of public resort for 
the purpose of discharging his duties referred to in clause 59 or 60; 
(d) power to search suspected persons in street, etc.; 
(e) emergency duties of police when the Administrator declares 
any specified service 'to be an essential &ervice to the community; 
(f) competence of a superior police officer to perform duties 
imposed on a subordinate officer; 
(g) obligation of the public to comply with reasonable direc-
tions of police officers and consequences of non-compliance. 
Clauses 66 to 69.-These clauses, corr.esponding to sections 82 (1), 85-, 
86 and 87 of the Bombay Police Act, 1951 empower the police to take charge 
of unclaimed property and lay down the procedure in regard 11:0 its 
disposal. 
Clauses 7() to 72.-These are Rpecial provisions relating to exercise of 
powers under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973. 
The Central Government may, by nCitification in 'the Official Gazette, 
authorise the Commissioner of Police to exercise the powers of a District 
Magistrate and Executive Magistrate under such provisions of the Code 
of Criminal Procedure, 1973, as may be specified in the notification. By 
a similar notification the Central Government may authorise any offlcer 
subordinate to the Commissioner of Police (not being an offlcer below 
the rank of an Assistant Commissioner of Police) to exercise the powers 
of an Executive Magistrate under such provisions of that Code as may 
be specified in the notification. SucR notifications are to be laid before 
the Houses of Parliament. 
In pursuance of a resolution passed by Parliament, as envisaged in 
section 478 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, the Central Govern-
ment had, by notification, directed 'that references to Judicial Magistrates 
in sections 108, 109 and 110 of that Code shall, in relation to Delhi, be 
CQll!trued as references to Executive Magistrates thereby making the 
powers 'confelTed by those seQtions exercisable by Executive Magistrates 
in Delhi. Cla.use 72 of the Bill seeks to repeal the aforesaid notification 
with the result that the powers under sections 108, 109 and 110 of the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 will revert- to Metropolitan Magistrates 
in Delhi. 

61 
Clauses 73 to 79.·-'1'hese clauses, co.rresponding to sections 74 to 79 
of the Bombay Police Act, 1951, vest Borne special powers in the police 
ofticers in relation to offences under the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals 
Act, 1960. These provisions shall be in addition to, and nqt in derogation 
of, the provisions of that Act. 
Clauses 80 to 13l.-These clauses, corresponding 'to sections 99 to 113, 
115 to 122, 124, 126 to l31A, 133 to 142, 143A to 149A, 123, 151, 1MA and 
152 of the Bombay PoliCt: Act, 1951, specify the offences under the Bill and 
the penalties therefor. The Bill creates 'the following offences, namely:-
(1) disregarding the rules of the road (clause 80); 
(2) causing obstruction or mischief by animal in street or public 
place (clause 81); 
(3) e"1X>6ing animal for hire, sale, etc., in street or public place 
(clause 82); 
(4) causing any obs'truction in a street (clause 83); 
(5) obstructing a footway (clause 841); 
(6) causing o.bstruction to, and annoyance by, performances, etc. 
(clause 85); 
(7) doing offensive acts in or near a street or public place (clavse 
86); 
(8) letting loose horse, etc., and suffering ferocious doge; to be 
at large (clause 87); 
(9) bathing or washing in places not set apart for those purposes 
(clause 88); 
(10) defiling water in public wells, etc. (clause 89); 
(11) obstructing bathers at places set apart for bathing (clause 
00) ; 
(12) behaving indecently in public (clause 91); 
(13) obstructing or annoying passengers in the street (clause 92.); 
(14) misbehaviour with intent to provoke a breach of the peace 
(clause 93); 
(15) flying kite or any other thing so as to cause danger, injury 
or alarm Ito persons, animals or property (clause 94); 
(16) committing nuisance in or near street, etc. (clause 95); 
(17) disregard of notice in public building (clause 96); 
(18) failure to keep in confinement cattle, etc. (clause 98); 
(19) cruelty to animals (clause 99); 
(20) wilful trespass (clause 100); 
(2.1) giving false alarm of fire or causing damage to street flre 
alarm (clause 101); 
(22) being found under suspicious circumRtances between sunset 
and sunrise (clause 102); 

(23) possession of property of which no satisfactory account can 
be given (clause 103); 
(24) omission by pawnbrokers, etc., to report to police possession 
or tender of property suspected to be stolen (clause 104); 
(25-) melting, etc., of property suspected to be "tolen (clause 105); 
(26) 'taking pledge from "hild (clause 106); 
. (27) suffering disorderly conduct at places of public amusement, 
etc. (clause 107); 
(28) cheating at games and gambling in street (clause 108); 
(29) disobedience of order under clause 27 (clause 109); 
(30) contravention of regulations, etc., under clause 28 (clause 
llU): 
(31) not obtaining licence in respect of place of public entertain-
ment or cerMficate of registration in respect of eating house, 0Ir not 
renewing such licence or certificate within the prescribed period 
(clause 112); 
(32) contr-avention c:Jf orders, etJc., ·tmder clauses 29 to 34 (clause 
113) ; 
(33) contravention of regulations, etc., under clauses 35 to 37 
(clause 114); 
(34) contravention of directions under clauses 46 to 48 (clause 
115) ; 
(35) entering without pennission area from which a person is 
direcled ito remove himself or overstaying when permitted to return 
temporarily (clause 116); 
(36) contravention of orden. under clause 57 (clal13e 117); 
(37) opposing or not complying with directiqn given under clause 
59(l)(b) (clause 118); 
(38) contravening directions under clause 65 (clause 119); 
(39) holding or giving dangerous performances without previous 
permission (clause 120); 
(41) neglect or refusal to serve as .special police officer (clause 
121)~ 
(41) making falSe Staternent, etc., and misconduct by police 
officez:s (elau.e 122); 
(~ ·iailJU'e tod4'liwr up' cel'ti.6oate cdappQinftnen.t ·or other 
article in accordance wLth the provisions of clause 26 (1) (clause 123); 
, ., I 
(4:t) vexatious entry, search, arrest, etc., by police officer (clause 
124); ,; I " 
(44) vexatious delay in forwarding a Person arrested (clause 
125); 
(45) unauthorised use of J.lQlice unifonns (clause 126); 
Cla.u.se 127 empowers the Commissioner of Police to make regulations 
regarding the carrying of arms, etc., by persons other than members of 

the armed forces of the Union and police oificers. The regulatioos may 
provide for the forfeiture of such arms also. 
Under clause 128 when an offence punishable under clause 97, 104, 
113 (1), 114, 119 or 121 bas not occasioned serious mischief ancL has been 
promptly desisted from 0I1'l a warning being given, it is not incumbent on 
,the police to prosecute the offender. 
Clall:;es 129 to 131.-Clause 129 provides for summary disposal of 
certain offences in cases where the accused persons plead. gUilty. Clause 
130 is of a clarifying nature. Clause 131 deals with offences by 
companies. 
Clauses 132 to 145.-These clauses, corresponding to sections 153, 155 
to 166 of the Bombay Police Act, 1951, deal with miscellane()us matters 
and are self-explanatory. 
Clause 146 and Schedule I.-The Commissioner of Police is tOI exercise 
all powers and discharge all functions of a District Magistrate under the 
Acts mentioned in Schedule I and the rules made thereunder. Any 
Additional Commissioner of Police, De-puty Cwnmissioner of Polire or 
Additional Deputy Commissioner of Police may be authorised by the 
Comntissioner, in accordance with the general or special orders of the 
Administrator,to exercise any such power or function. 
Clause 147.-This clause empowers the Adminlistrator to make rilles 
for carrying ou~ the purposes of this Bill. 
Clause 148.-This clause requires that every rule or regnlation to be 
made under this Bill shall be notified in the Official Gazette and shall be 
laid before bOth the Houses of Parliament and the Me~ropo1itan COIUncil 
of Delhi. 
Clause 149 and Schedule JI.-:-This clause seeks to repeal the laws spe-
cified in S':!hedule II and contains suitable saving provisions. 
Clau.'!c 150 and Schedule III.-This clause provides that the police offi-
cers specified in column (1) of Schedule III shall be deemed to have 
been appointed to, the posts specified in column (2) thereof. AccordingJy, 
the Inspector General of Police will become Commissjoner of Police, 
Deputy Inspector General of Police will become Additional Cnmmissioner 
Of Police. Superintendents of Police and Assistant Inspectors General of 
Police will become Deputy Commissioners of Police, Additional Superin-
tendents of Police will become Adcliti<?nal Depu'ty Commissioners of Police 
and Assistant Superintendents of P<,1iceand Deputy Superintendents of 
Police will become Assi~t Commissioner'S of Police. The police force 
constftuted under the Police Ac':., 1861 shall be deemed to have been 
constituted under this Bill. 
Clause 151.-This clause gives the Central Government the power to 
remove, by order, difficulties, if any, in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act in consequence of the transition from the provisions of the 
enactment.s mentioned in Schedule II. 
Clause 152.-This clause provides for the repeal of the Delhi Police 
Ordinance, 1978 and the saving of, actions ~aken thereunder. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 5 of the Bill pl"<\vides for the constitution of the police force for 
Delhi and clauses 6, 7, 8, 9 and 12 deal with the appoin'tment of a Com-
missioner of Police and other officers and subordinate ranks of that poJice 
force. Under clause 150 of the Bill, the police foI'<.'e functioning in Delhi 
immediately before the co,mmencement of the ACt shall, on such com-
reen.cement, be deemed to 'be the police force constttuted under the Act. 
Therefore, no additional expenditure is anticipated on account of these 
provisions. 
2. Clause 17 of the Bill provides for the appointment of special police 
officers and clause 18, read with clauses 38, 39' and 40 of the Bill, deals 
with the appointment of additional police officers. It is not possible to 
estimate the expenditure that may have to be incurred on account of the 
appointment of special police officers and additional police officers as they 
are to be appointed only if and when ·the contingencies contemplated inl 
those provisions OtCcur. 
3. Sub-clause (1) of clause 33 of the Bill empowers the Commissioner 
of PoJice to temporarily close or take possession of any building or Qther 
place in certain circumstances. Under sub-clause (2) of that clause, if 'the 
lawful occupant of such building or place suffers any losS' or injury by 
reason of the actiQn taken under sub· clause (1), h~ shall be entitled to 
receive reasonable compensation for such loss or injury unless such aa~ion 
was in 'the opinion of the competent authority rendered necessary either 
by the use to which sllch building or place was put or intended! to be 
put C\l' by the misconduct of persons having acct-ss 'thereto. Compensation 
will have Ito be paid only if any need arises for temporarily closing down 
or 'taking possession of any buikUng or other place and therefor~ it is not 
possible to estimate the expenditure tha,t will have to be incurred on this 
account. 
4. Under clause 41 of the Bill when any loss or damage is causedl to 
any property or when death results or grievous hurt is caused :0 any 
person or persons hy anything done in the prosecution of th.e common 
object of an unlawful a:rnembly in a!1y disturbed area, tho Districl Col-
lector may determine the amount of the compensation which should be 
paid to any person or persons in respect of Ithe l~ or damage or death 
or grieVS¥1S hurt and S1lch amount shall be payable by the inha.bi'tant~ 
of the disturbed area. The amount so recovered is to be credited to !the 
Government, under sub-clause (1) of clause 44 of the Bill. From the 
amount so recovered, the District Collector shall pay, under sub-clause (2) 
of clause 44, such amount as he deems just and proper by way of compen-
sation to any person who has suffered loss or damage to property I)r grie-
vous hurt or to the legal heirs of any person who died by reason of any-
lthing done in the prosecution of the common object qf the unla.wful as-
sembly. As the compensation will he paid out of 'the amounts recovered 
undET clause 41 of the Bill, there will be no expenditure from the Conso-
lidated Fund Oif India on this account. 

5. Clause 70 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to confer, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, on the Commissioner of Police 
powers and duties of an Executive Magistrate and of a District Magis:,rate 
under such of the provisions of the Code ot Criminal Procedure, 1~73. 
as may be- specified in the notifiCation. By a similar notification unde.r 
that clause, the Central Government may confer on any officer subordinate 
to .'the ComIilissioner of Police not being an Qfticer' below the rank of: an 
Assistant Commissioner of Police) the powers and duties of an Executive 
Magistrate under such provisions of 'that Code as may be specified in the 
notification. Under clause 146 (1) of the Bill the powers of :1 District 
Magistrate under the Acts mentioned in Schedu,le I are conferred on the 
Commissioner of Folice. As a result of tha;e provisions part of the staff 
at present functioning under the District Magistrate will have to be trans'" 
teiTed to the Delhi' police organisation. Besides some adcri1lional ~taff may 
also have to be provided to the Commis!;ioner of Police. . . . ~ . 
6. Under clause 72 of the Bill, the powers under sections 108, .109 and 
110 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973; which. are at present being 
exercised by an Executive Magistrate, would, after the commencement of 
the Act. be exercised by the Metropolitan Magistrate in· Delhi. This 
woula necessitate the creation of some additIonal posts of· Metropolitan 
Magistral~es. 
7. The additional expendilture that would hav~ to be. in~llrred on 
account of the provisions referred to in paragraphs !) B.nd 6 is likely to. be 
Rs. 4,36,579 'per annum: As against thjs certain pos'.s of Additional Di ... 
trict Magistrates and Sub-Divisional Magistrates, which would be render'" 
eel surplus as a result of the enactment of ,the provisions of the Bill. are 
proposed to be surrE:ridered and this wculdr~suh in a 'saving of'·Rs. 1.70 
lakhs per annum. The net additional expenditure on aecount of these 
provisions is therefore, likely to be Rs. 2,66,579 per: ~nnuin. 
8. No. other recurring or non-recurring expenditure is likely to be in-
volved if the DiU is enaeted and brought into force. , 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 147 of the Bill empowers the Administrator 'to make rules for 
c:arryine out the purposes of the proposed legislation. Sub-clause (2) of 
the clause catalogues the various matters with respect to which rules may 
be made. 
2. Clause 19 of the Bill empowers the Commissioner of Police to make 
regulations ~t inconsistent with the Act or any other law for the time 
being in force, for the administration of the police. The details of 'the 
matters in regard. to which such regulations may be made are enumerated 
in the clause. Sub-clause (1) of clause 28 of the Bill empowers the Com-
m..issjoner of Police to make regulations to provide for all or any of the 
1Datters mentioned in that clause. 
3. S'ub-clause (1) of clause 35 of the Bill empowers the Commissioner 
of Police to prescribe regulations to be observed by the residents of any 
plnce in Delhi which is visited Ql' likely to be viSted with an outbreak 
of any epidemic disease in order to prevent the oultbreak. r)f such disease 
or othe spread thereof. Sub-Clause (1) of clause 37 of the Bill confers on 
the Commissioner of Police the power to make regulations prohibiting the 
tii..qposal of the dead, whether by creme.tion, burial or otherwise at places 
other than those set apart for such pUl'JK'se. 
4. Under sub-clause (1) of clause 127, the CommisaiQner of Police may 
make regulations to provide that no person, other than a member of 'the 
armed forces of the Union acting as such or a police oftlcer, shall go armed 
with sword, spear, bludgeon, gun t'Il' other offensive weapon or with! any 
ezploiive or· CoITOsive IJUbBtance in any street or pubUc place unless so 
authorised by such authority as may be specified in such I'f'gulations. The 
regulations made ullder this sub-clause may also provide for the conse-
quences of the contraven~iOll of such regulation includ1ng the forfeiture 
of the weapon. 
5. The matters with respect to which the rules or regulations referred 
to above may be made are matters of procedure or of de~an and it may 
not be possiblp. to provide for them in the Bill itself. M'kJiIeover under 
clause 148 the rules and regulations will have to be laid before each House 
of Parliament and they will be subject b scrutiny of Parliament. 
fl. The delegation of legislative power under the provisions of the Bill 
referred to above is, therefore, of a norma] character. 

Memorandum RegCllrding the modificaticms contained in the Bill to 
TepZace the Delhi Police Ordinance, 1!r78 
The Bill contains certain mo.difications of a minor nature. These are 
dealt with in the following paragraphs. 
2. Section 19 of the Ordinance provides for two different fonn of sub-
ordinate legislation, namely. regulations and orders to be made by the 
Commissioner of Police. As there can be no difference between the two 
forms in ,the context, the reference to orders has been omitted as unneces-
sary (t)ide clause 19 of the Bill). 
3. Section 23 of the Ordinance, which provides {or appeals from orders 
of plfnishment, has been modified to cover appeals from orders passed 
by the Commissioner of Police (vide clause 23 of the Bill). 
4. Section 147 (2) of the Ordinance has been amplified to spell out 
expressly the various matters in regard to which rules may be m.ade 
['Vide clause 147 (2) of the Bill]. 
5. The other modifications are of a purely formal, drafting or conse-
quen,tial nalure. Amongst these, mention may be made of changes made 
. with a view to making the arrangement of certain provisions or groups 
of provisions of the Bill more logical. In section 59 (2) of the Ordinance 
[clause 59(2) of the Bill], the clauses have been re-arranged. In section 
113 of the Ordinance (clause 113 of the Bill), ,the sub-sections have been 
re-arranged. Sections 115 to 125 have been slightly re-arranged in the 
Bill- section 115 being clause 119,. section 125 being clause 118, sections 
116 to 118 being clauses 115 W. 117 respectively, and sections 119 to 124 
being clauses 120 to 125. 

LOK SABHA 
, , 
A 
BILL 
to amend and consolidate the l~w relating to the regulation of the police 
in the Union territory of .DelhI. 
(Shri Dhanik wZ Ma.ndal, 
~MiniBter ~ StGte in the 
. Min.iBtry oj Home Affair.,) 