1
Bill  No. 120 of  2019
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019
By
SHRI RAJIV PRATAP RUDY, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of  the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2019.
2. In article 83 of the Constitution, in clause (2), for the words, "shall continue for five
years", the words "shall continue for a minimum period of two and half years and a maximum
of five years" shall be substituted.
3. In article 172 of the Constitution, in clause (1), for the words, " shall continue for five
years", the words " shall continue for a minimum period of two and half years and a maximum
of five years" shall be substituted.
4. After article 326 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely:—
"326A. The Central Government shall, in consultation with the Election Commission,
within six months from the date of coming into force of the Constitution (Amendment) Act,
2019, by notification in the official Gazette, determine extending or curtailing the duration of
5
10
Short title.
Amendment
of article 83.
Amendment
of article 172.
Insertion of
new article
326A.
Two phase
elections.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
the term of the State Legislative Assemblies so that the elections are held in two phases and
within two and half years with the next elections to the House of the People, in the following
manner:—
(a) in the first phase, elections to all the State Legislative Assemblies whose term
is likely to end within one or two years of the next General Elections to the House of the
People shall be held simultaneously; and
(b) in the second phase elections to all the remaining State Legislative
Assemblies shall be held within two and half years after the constitution of the next
House of the People.".
5

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Constitution of India has vested in the Election Commission of India the
superintendence, direction and control of the entire process for conduct of elections to
Parliament and Legislature of every State. However, frequent elections across the country
have placed Indian Polity perennially in an election mode. This hampers long-term policy-
making because every decision of the State/Central Government is seen as a reason for
seeking votes.
On an average, the country witnesses election to about five to seven State Assemblies
every year. Adding to it is the elections to the third tier of Government i.e., Panchayati Raj
Institutions and Municipal Bodies in rural and urban areas respectively, bye-elections etc.
This has substantially increased the number of elections in any given year. With multiple
elections, the model code of conduct is in force for most of the time, which prevents the
Government from initiating new projects and ultimately slows down development work. It
affects stability and economic development.
Besides the Lok Sabha elections in 2014, elections were held to about fifteen State
Assemblies during March 2014- May 2016. In 2014 alone, elections were held in March - May
(Lok Sabha, Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, Odisha and Sikkim), September - October (Haryana,
Maharashtra) and November - December (Jharkhand and Jammu Kashmir) timeframes. As
noticed, the elections to State Assemblies were announced within a month of concluding
elections to other State Assemblies. This would not only end up negatively impacting
administrative and developmental activities in the poll bound States/regions but also
substantially increase the cost of conducting elections to the largest democracy in the
world.
In lieu of this, the Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and
Justice submitted its report on the "Feasibility on Holding Simultaneous Elections to House
of People (Lok Sabha) and State Legislative Assemblies" in December 2015.
The Committee report suggested that the holding of simultaneous elections to
Lok Sabha and State Assemblies would reduce:—
(1) the massive expenditure that is currently incurred for the conduct of separate
elections;
(2) the policy paralysis that results from the imposition of the Model Code of Conduct
during election time;
(3) impact on delivery of essential services; and
(4) burden on crucial manpower that is deployed during election time.
The Election Commission is of the view that simultaneous elections to the House of
the People and State Assemblies will give enough time for the elected incumbent Government
to formulate policies and implement programs continuously for a longer period without any
interruptions caused by imposition of model code of conduct. In fact, the Election Commission
has favoured holding simultaneous elections to the Lok Sabha and State Assemblies. However,
it is for all the political parties to come together on board for holding of such synchronized
elections in India.
Accordingly, the Bill proposes that elections be held in two phases. Elections to some
Legislative Assemblies could be held along with General Elections to Lok Sabha at the end of
the term of Lok Sabha and Elections to remaining Legislative Assemblies be held during the
mid-term of Lok Sabha. The synchronization shall be done by the Central Government within
six months from the date of coming into force of this Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2019 in
consultation with the Election Commission.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RAJIV PRATAP RUDY
June 12, 2019.
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * * * * *
83. (1) * * * * * * * *
(2) The House of the People, unless sooner dissolved, shall continue for [five years]
from the date appointed for its first meeting and no longer and the expiration of the said
period of five years shall operate as a dissolution of the House: Provided that the said period
may, while a Proclamation of Emergency is in operation, be extended by Parliament by law for
a period not exceeding one year at a time and not extending in any case beyond a period of
six months after the Proclamation has ceased to operate.
* * * * * *
172. (1) Every Legislative Assembly of every State, unless sooner dissolved, shall
continue for 1 [five years] from the date appointed for its first meeting and no longer and the
expiration of the said period of five years shall operate as a dissolution of the Assembly:
Provided that the said period may, while a Proclamation of Emergency is in operation, be
extended by Parliament by law for a period not exceeding one year at a time and not extending
in any case beyond a period of six months after the Proclamation has ceased to operate.
* * * * * *
4
Duration of
Houses of
Parliament.
Duration of
State
Legislatures.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—685LS(S3)—25-06-2019.