As nnaOOUCED IN !.oK SAlmA oit 
23tiu'j~Ul 
Bill No. 120 of 1981 
THE COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR-GENERAL'S (DUTIES, POWERS 
AND CONDITIONS OF SERVICE) AMENDMENT BILL, 1007 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Comptroller and Auditor-General's (Duti~s, Powers 
and Conditions of Service) Act, 1971. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-eighth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Comptroller and Auditor-General's 
(Duties, Powers and Conditions of ~rvice) Amendment Act, 1987. 
5 2. In the Comptroller and Auditor--General's (Duties, Powers and 
S6 of 1971. Conditions of Service) Act, 1971 • (hereinafter referred to as the principal 
Act) I in section 6,-
(a) in sub-sections (6A) and (6B), the provisos shall be omitted, 
and shall be deemed to have been omitted with effect from the 1st 
10 day of January, 1986; 
(b) after sub-section (6B) , the following sub-section shall be 
I inserted, namely:-
"(6C) NotWithstanding anything contained in the foregoing 
provisions of this section, a person who demits office [whether, 
Short 
title. 
.Amend-
ment of 
section 
6. 

OmissiOD 
of sec-
tion 7. 
Amend-
mentol 
aection9. 
in ally manner specified in sub-section (8) or by resignation] as 
the ComptroUer and Auditor-General after the commencement 
of the Comptroller and Auditor-General's (Duties, Powers and 
Conditions of Service) Amendment Act, 1987, shall, on such 
demission, be entitled to- 5 
(a) a pension which is equal to the pension payable to 
a Judge of the SupN'me Court,-
(i) if such person is a person referred to in sub-sec-
tion (1) or sub-sedion (3), in accordance with the provi-
sions of Part m of the Schedule to the Supreme Court 10 
Judges (Conditions of Service) Act, 1958 (hereafter in 41 of 1958. 
this Act referred to as the Supreme Court Judges Act), 
as amended from time to time; and 
(ii) if such person is a person referred to in sub-
section (4), in accordanCe with the provisions of Part I 15 
of the Schedule to the Supreme Court Judges Act as 
amended from time to time; 
(b) such pension including commutation of pension), 
fami~ pension and gratuity as are admissible to a Judge of 
Supreme Court under the Supreme Court Judges Act and the 20 
rules made thereunder, as amended from time to time. 
3. Section 7 of the principal Act shall be omitted. 
4. In section 9 of the principal Act, for the opening paragraph, the 
following shall be substituted, namely:-
"Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the conditions of ser- 25 
vice relating to travelling allowance, provision of rent-free resi-
dence and exemption from payment of income-tax on the value of 
such rent-free residence, conveyance facilities, swnptuary allowance, 
medical facilities and such other conditions of service as are for the 
time being applicable to a Judge of the Supreme Court Imder Chapter 30 
IV of the Supreme Court Judges Act, and the rules made thereunder, 
shall, so far as may be, apply to a serving or retired Comptroller and 
Auditor-General, as the case may be;". 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Article 148 (1) of the Constitution provi~s that there shall be a Comp-
troller and Auditor-General of India who shall be appointed by the 
President by warrant under his hand and seal and shall only be removed 
from office in like manner and on the like grounds as a Judge of the 
Supreme Court. Under clause (3) of the $laid article, the salary and 
other conditions of service of the Comptroller and Auditor-General shall 
be such as may be determined by Parliament by law. In pursuance of 
this provision. the Comptroller and Auditor-General's (Duties, Powers 
and Conditions of Service) Act. 1971 was passed by Parliament in 1971. 
Under this Act. the Comptroller and Auditor-General is entitled to 
receive the 'Same salary as a Judge of the Supreme Court while his other 
conditions of service relating to pension. contribution to }:rovident fund, 
etc., have been determined by the provisions of that Act. 
2. The Constitution has given great importance to the office of the 
Comptroller and Auditor-General. There is parity of status between 
the Comptroller and Auditor-General and the Supreme Court Judge in 
many cases. The status of the office of the Comptroller and Auditor-
General is unique in our federal set up. he being a common functionary 
for both the Union and the States. It is, therefore, necessary and pro-
per that the Comptroller and Auditor-General is given the same condi-
tions of ~ervice and facilities as are provided to a Judge of .the Supreme 
Court other than the tenure and the leave facilities. 
3. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 
NEW DELm; 
The 12th November, 1987. N. D. TIWARI. 
3 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 2 of n~e Bill seeks to amend section 6 of the Act by omitting 
the provisos to s'ub-sections (6A) and (6B) with effect from the 1st 
January, 1986 and also to insert a new sub-sec1ion (6C) therein. The 
effect of the omission of the provisos is to remove the <:)CHing of the 
maximum pension of R::;. 20,400 per annum in respect of pension pay-
able with effect from 1-1-1986 to a Comptroller and Auditor-General 
who bas retired after t.he CO!"1mencement of the Comptroller and Audi-
tor-Gener~l's (Duties. Power and Conditions of Service) Amendment 
Act, 1984. The new sub-sectic'll (6C) seeks to extend the pensionary 
benefits as admissible to a Judge of the Supreme Court under the Supre-
me Court Judges (Conditions of S~!'Vice) Act, 1958 to a Comptroller and 
Auditor-General on re+irl~M('nt. The maxirnt'm pension payable to a 
retired Judge of the Supreme Court ::;s p::-ovided in that Act is presently 
Rs. 54,000 per annum. The omission of the ceiling of Rs. 20,400 from 
1-1-1986 is estimated ~o involve an ac'.r!itional expenditure of Rs. 24,900 
per annum in respect of one comptroller and Auditor-General who has 
retired and is surviving. A Comptroller and Auditor-General who 
retires after the Commencement of ~he proposed amendment will be-
come entitled to a maximum additional pension of Rs. 33,600 per 
annum. 
Clause 4 of the Bin seeks to extend certain other conditions of 
service admissible to a Judge of the Supreme Court (o~her than leave 
and tenure) such as rent-free accomrno:iation. free furniture at residence, 
electricity and water chat'~s. staff car. sumptuary allowance, etc., to the 
Comptroller and Auditor-General. The additional recurring expendi-
ture on these perquisites is estimated to be Rs. 30 000 per annum and 
the additional nf')n-recurring expenrliture is estimated to be Rs. 38,500. 
The other conditions of service which are now extende:i to the Com-
ptroller and Auditor-General will Also include leave travel concession 
as admissible to a Judge of the Supreme Court. It is, however, not 
possible to quantify the exact additional expenditure involved on this 
account nt this stage. 
The Bill will not involve any I)the!' ~xpenditure, either ~curring or 
non-recurring. 

2 of 1984. 
2 of 1984. 
ANNEXURE 
ExTRACTS FROM THE COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR.GENERAL'S (DUTIES, PowERs 
AND CONDmO:iS OF SERVICE) ACT, 1971 ' 
(56 OF 1971) 
• ... ... • ... 
6. (1) ... ... • ... • 
(6A) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing provisions 
of this section, a person referred to in sub-section (1) who demits omce 
[whether in any manner specified in sub-section (8) or by resignation] 
as the Comptroller and Auditor-General after the comme~ment of the 
CGmptroller and Aucitor-General's (Duties, Powers and Conditi()nsCif 
Service) Amendment Act, 1984, shall, on such demis'ion, be entitled 1;0-
(a) the pension to which he would have been entitled under 
the rule.~ of the ~ervice to which he belonged by reckoning his 
een'ice 1."; the Ccmp!roller and Audi.tor-General as continuing 
approved service counting for pension in such Service; and 
(b) a special pension of seven hundred rupees per annum in 
resped of e::Jch c(lmpleted year of service as the Comptroller and 
Auditor-General. 
Provined tha.t the ap,grerrate of the amount'l payable to him under 
c1~wse (n) and clause (0) of this sub-section shall in no case exceed a 
sum of twenty thOllC:;'lnd and four hundred rupees per annum. 
(6B) Notwithstandinr,- anything confruned in the foregoing provi-
sions of this section. )'t ner-son refel'rf>(~ to in sub-section (.1) who demit'S 
office rwhether in :my manner specinl"d in sub-section (8) or by resig-
nation] as th~ Comntroller Ilnd Auciitor-General after the commence-
ment of the ('omntrl'111f>r :mr! Aurlitor-Genertl.l's (Duties, Powers and 
Conditions o"! Service) Amendment Act, 1984. shall, on such demission, 
be entitled to-
'(IIl the pension payabJQ to him in respect of any previous 
service under Government; and 
(b)' a snecial pension ('If seven hundred rupees per annum in 
resnect of each completen. year of service as the Comptroller and 
Auditor-General: I I 
Provider!. that the art~l'ef'!ate of the Ilmoun~ nayable to him under 
clause '(Iff) :mri clal1'le (0) of thic; sub-section shall in no case exceed It 
S11m o~ twpntv tho11S:lnrl anr! four hundred rupees per Anntim. Ilnd such 
snm 'Shall i.,duoe the a~P,Te~ate of all other nensiom'l, if any, payable 
to him 8nr1 the commuterl portion, if any, of hIs pension, 
Pension. 

Commu. 
tation of 
pension. 
Other 
condi· 
tiona of 
eervice. 
• • * • • 
7. The Civil Pensions (Commutation) Rules for the time being in 
force shall, with such adaptations as may be made therein by the Presi-
dent, apply to a person who-had held office 3! the Comptroller and Audi-
tor-General. ; . , . . ~ 
• • • • • 
9. Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, the other condi-
tions of service of a person holding office as the Comptroller and Audi-
tor-General including his emoluments during any period of duty out of 
India and his travelling allowance while travelling on duty, shall be 
determined by the rules for the time being applicable to a member of 
the Indian Administrative Service holding the rank of Secretary to the 
Government of India: 
Provided that nothing in this section shall have effect so liB to give 
a person, who immediately before the date of assuming office as the 
Comptroller and Auditor-General, was in the service of Government, 
less favourable terms in respect of any of the matters aforesaid than 
those to which he would be entitled as a member of the Service to which 
he belonged, his service as Comptroller and Auditor-General being 
trea~ for the purpose of this proviso as continuing service in the Ser-
vice to which he belonged. . 
• • • • • 

LOKSABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Comptroller Cld Auditor-GeneraJ.'s (DutieS!, 
Powers and Conditions of Service) Act, 1971. 
(Sh7'i N. D. Tiwari, Minister of ,F'inance and 
Minister of Commerce.) 