‘As INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

17 DEC 1945

BILL No. 120 of 1999

THE NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR THE AGED BILL, 1999 ”
By
Suet SusHi. Kumar SHINDE, M.P.
A
BILL

to provide for securing a life with dignity, peace and security to the aged and for
their welfare and for matters connected therewith.

Beit enacted by Parliament in the Fiftieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1). This Act may be called the National Commission for the Aged Act, 1999.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires.—

(a) "Aged" means any person being a citizen of India, above the age of sixty.
years;

Short title,
extent and
‘Comatience-
ment.

Definitions.


Formulation
of National
Policy for
Aged.

‘National
Commission

for the Aged.

Functions of

the Commis-

sion.

2
(b) "appropriate Government" means the State Government in respect of |
State and the Central Government in all other cases;

(c) "indigent" means an aged person who because of any age related infirmity
or disability is incapable to earn his livelihood, nor has any source of livelihood;

(४) “National Policy" means the National Policy for the Aged, as provided
under Section 3;

(९) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and

(f) "Regulatory Authority" means Regulatory Authority appointed under
Section 7.

3. The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, lay down a
National Policy for the Aged in consultation with the National Commission constituted
under Section 4 to secure to the aged, besides freedom from want, a sense of participation
in community life, self-fulfilment and dignity of life.

4. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, set
up a Commission to be called the National Commission for the Aged.~

(2) The National Commission shall consist of the following, namely:—

(a) the Union Minister of Social Justice and Empowerment who shall be the
Chairman of the National Commission;

(b) the Secretary to the Union Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment
who shall be the ex-officio Secretary to the National Commission;

(०) the Union Ministers of Health and Family Welfare, Labour and Finance,
the Deputy Chairman of the Planning Commission and the Chairman of Central
Social Welfare Board as the ex-officio members of the National Commission;

(व) three members of Parliament, two from the Lok Sabha and one from the
Rajya Sabha who shall be elected by the respective House of Parliament as members
of the National Commission for a period of one year;

(e five members of the National Commission to be appointed by the Central
Government in the manner as may be prescribed.

5. The National Commission shall perform all or any of the following functions
namely:—

(J) to evolve a National Policy for securing to the aged, besides freedom from
want, a sense of participation in community life and fulfilment to lead a life with
dignity and for harnessing the reserve of wisdom, maturity of mind and experience”
available amongst the aged, in the service of the nation;

(2) to lay down schemes and programmes to achieve the objectives set out
in clause (1);

(3) to create and generate funds for financing welfare schemes for the
aged;
(4) to evolve and float health insurance schemes for the aged thro
appropriate Financial Institutions and Insurance Companies;

(5) to promote a network of Old-Age Homes through the approp
Governments;

(6) to lay down Old Age Pension Schemes and its operation thro
appropriate Governments;


(7) to make a review of the provisions of the Indian Penal Code, insofar as
they relate to the aged, so as to ensure due peace and security of life and to secure 10
them a life with dignity and to suggest amendments thereto;

(i) to monitor the working of various policies, programmes and schemes
laid down by it, and to issue directives for proper implementation of the
National Policy laid down under clause (1);

(i) to lay down norms for recognition and registration of Voluntary
Organisations and trusts engaged in welfare of the aged.

6. The National Commission shall meet at least once in every six months.

7. (1) The appropriate Government shall by notification in the Official Gazette,
appoint a Regulatory Authority for each territorial division, created for the purpose;

(2) It shall be the duty of the Regulatory Authority—

(a) to maintain a Register of the Aged, residing in its territorial jurisdiction,
classifying them in three categories, namely,—

(i) the aged who are employed or engaged in any vocation or profession;

(ii) the aged who wish to be employed in any vocation, profession or
other work, including social and honorary work; and

(iii) the aged who are destitute, needing economic, social support and
care including health care.

(b) to evolve plans and programmes with the approval of appropriate
Government to aid and advise the aged seeking employment or engagement in
productive and constructive channels in the best interests of the society and the
nation, with or without the help of employment exchanges;

(c) to utilise their services in bodies where public interest needs to be
represented or protected, on a voluntary basis keeping in view the knowledge,
experience and background of such Aged persons;

(d) to ensure due implementation of the plans, programmes annd schemes laid
down by the National Commission; and

(e) to operate Old Age Pension Schemes as provided for by the appropriate
Government under section 8.

8. The appropriate Government shall lay down an Old Age Pension Scheme for
rendering financial aid to each Aged indigent person and the amount of pension payable
to such persons every month shall be linked with the cost of living Index and shall be
so fixed as to ensure to decent living.

9. Every Aged person shall have the right to receive free medical aid in such

manner as may be prescribed.

10. To provide and secure due place in society to the aged, the appropriate
Government shall—

(a) reserve adequate number of seats for the Aged in Panchayats and local
bodies;

(b) ensure adequate representation of the Aged persons in different welfare
and social bodies, like Social Welfare Boards and Consumer Protection Fora at
Central and State levels;

Meeting of
National
Commission.

Appointment of
Regulatory
Authority.

Old Age

pension
scheme.

Free medical
aid,

Measures to
secure due
place in society
for Aged
persons.


(Old Age Fund

Right of aged
persons to be
‘supported by
their children

Power to make
mules.

4

(0 provide training and other assistance to the Aged for securing |
employment, vocation and social service opportunities. पक

(d) reserve at least five per cent of all housing units constructed u
various Welfare Housing Schemes;

(e) provide free travel facilities by rail, road, or inland waterways in
transport, to the aged, in such manner as may be prescribed;

(f) Provide for recreational tours, including religious pilgrimages like
to the aged, in such manner as may be prescribed.

(g) to provide facilities for Yoga and Sports for the aged, in such
as may be prescribed;

(h) provide for interest free loans for housing and self-employment needs.

वा, The appropriate Government may provide for an Old Age Fund for pay!
of old age pensions and for implementing other schemes for the Aged, under this

12. The aged parents shall have the right to be supported by their children, |
accordance with the social and economic status of their family, enforceable through

Regulatory Authority, who for that purpose shall have the powers of 2 Judicial

13. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
rules for carryinng out the purpose of this Act.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

One of every 10 persons on earth is over 60 years of age. In India over 6 per cent of
the population is over 60 years which is likely to grow up to 10 per cent by 2016 A.D,

In view of the fast growing population of the world, the United Nations has declared
the year 1999 as the International Year of the Older People. The Government of India has
formulated a comprehensive National Policy for the Old (sixty plus) persons to help them
in last phase of their life. This policy document, outline a series of proposals for providing
social and economic security and dignity of life to the aged and it has also mooted the idea
of observing the year 2000 as the National Year for the Older Persons.

It appears from this formulation that the national policy so formulated seeks to
address only the economic needs of sustenance of the aged. It fails to recognise the enormous
store of wisdom, intelligence and experience available amongst the aged, which can go a
long way in contributing to the development of the society. The policy really falls too
short of the UN Principles for Older Persons [resolution (6/9 1)] adopted by the UN General
Assembly in 1991 calling upon world Goverhments to incorporate them into national
programmes. The 18 principles adopted under the Resolution called for action in many
areas including:

Independence: Older persons should have access to food, water, shelter,
clothing, health care, work and other income-generating opportunities, education,
training, and a life in safe environment.

Participation: Older persons should remain integrated into community life
and participate actively in formulation of policies affecting their well-being.

Care: Older persons should have access to social and legal services and to
health care so that they can maintain an optimum level of physical, mental and
emotional well being. This should include full respect for dignity, beliefs, needs
and privacy.

Self-fulfilment: Older persons should have access to education, cultural, spiritual
and recreational resources and be able to develop their full potential.

Dignity: Older persons should be able to live in dignity and security, be free
of exploitation and physical or mental abuse and be treated fairly, regardless of age,
gender and social or ethnic background.

‘The necessary provisions are, therefore, be made in conformity with the UN
Declaration. Provisions should not only be made to provide economic independence to
the aged, but also to ensure that they remain integrated into community life and actively
participate in the formulation of policies for their own well-being. so that they can have
access to educational, cultural and recreational resources to develop their potential to the
full, and to lead a life with dignity and security.

Apart from the National Policy and programme for the aged, the Bill seeks to
provide not only for economic freedom from want of food, water, shelter, clothing and
health care but also to ensure to them active participation in community life and
opportunities for self-fulfilment and to lead a life with dignity.

Hence this Bill.

New DELHT, SUSHIL KUMAR SHINDE
November 17, 1999


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 4 of the Bill provides for constitution of a National for the
Aged. Clause 5 provides for generation of funds for financing schemes for Aged and
promotion of network of old-Age homes. Clause 7 of the Bill provides for appointment of |
a Regulatory Authority. Clause 8 provides for old Age pension. Clause 9 provides for free _
medical aid to the Aged. Clause 10 provides for training, suitable employment, vocation,
free travel facilities etc. to the Aged persons. Clause 11 of the Bill provides for creation of |
an Old Aged Fund.

The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated
of India. It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees Ten
will be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.

A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of about rupees Five crore is also likely
be involved.


MEMORANDUM ON DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 13 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purpose of the Bill. The delegation of legislative powers is of a normal character,
as the matters to be prescribed are of detail only.


LOK SABHA.

A
BILL
to provide for securing a life with dignity, peace and security

to the aged and for their welfare and for matters
connected therewith.

है (Shri Sushil Kumar Shinde, M.P.) श्र |
MaiP(PLU)MRND—2077LS—3-12-1999.