1
THE PROMOTION OF CYCLING AND PROVISION OF COMPULSORY
DEDICATED CYCLE CORRIDOR ALONG MAJOR ROADS
AND HIGHWAYS BILL, 2016
By
SHRI RAJESH RANJAN, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the promotion of cycling by way of giving incentives to the employees by
employers including Government, providing subsidy on purchase of bicycles
to the general public and for the provision of compulsory dedicated
cycle corridor along major public roads and highways in the
country and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Promotion of Cycling and Provision of Dedicated
Cycle Corridor along Major Roads and Highways Act, 2016.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
Bill No. 120 of  2016
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint and different dates may be appointed for different—
(a) provisions of this Act;
(b) areas; and
(c) roads or highways.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases the Central Government; and
(b) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
it shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to promote eco-friendly and healthy
practice of cycling and provide dedicated cycle corridors along major roads and highways
passing through its territorial jurisdiction in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions contained in sub-section (1),
the appropriate Government may for the purposes of this Act,—
(a) provide subsidy to the general public for purchasing bicycles;
(b) give incentives and attractive cycle allowance to its employees for using
bicycles while commuting to office and back home;
(c) consider giving tax exemptions to promote cycling;
(d) provide and construct dedicated cycle tracks along arterial streets, main
roads and highways;
(e) make provision for compulsory cycle lanes along all major roads including
flyovers;
(f) prepare and implement bicycle master plans for major cities and urban areas;
(g) focus on the bicycle as a mode of transport;
(h) ensure that cycle tracks are not taken over for unauthorised parking by
motor vehicles or to become dumps for waste; and
(i) make such other provisions as it may deem necessary and expedient for the
purposes of this Act.
4. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may make such order or give such direction, not inconsistent with the provisions
of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or expedient for the removal of the difficulty and
any such order shall be final and binding.
5. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force regulating any of the matters dealt with in this Act.
6. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the States and Union Territories for implementing
the provisions of this Act.
7. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
Definitions.
Act to
supplement
other laws.
Appropriate
Government
to promote
cycling and
provide
dedicated
cycle
corridors.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
These days environmental pollution is the hot topic of debates on television channels,
newspapers, magazines and other fora. The National Capital Region (NCR) have been dubbed
as one of the most polluted region in the world. The Judiciary has observed that we are living
in the gas chamber. In an effort to meet the twin objectives of limiting vehicular pollution and
curbing road congestion Delhi Government wants to promote cycling by giving subsidy for
bicycle purchases. But unfortunately Delhi's urban culture refuses to recognize the bicycle
as a mode of transport. This is mainly because there is lack of cycle readiness of the capital
and NCR roads. There are only a few dedicated lanes for cycling and even they are not fit for
cycling for various reasons. The streets are also dangerous for cyclists because buses and
cars do not respect their rights. Cycles are not given way on main roads and they are often
at risk when attempting to evade the heavy flow of traffic. This kind of situation prevails not
only in the National Capital and NCR but throughout the country.
This situation exist despite the fact that our country is the second largest bicycle
producing country in the world after China and this 1.5 billion dollar industry produced
nearly 15.5 million bicycles in 2012-13 that is 10 percent of the total bicycles manufactured
globally and employed about one million people. But despite these figures cycling as an
alternative mode of urban transport has not really taken off in our country. Around half a
century ago almost sixty per cent or road trips in the National Capital involved bicycles but
today experts reckon they constitute at best four per cent of the city's commuters.
However, it is not the case everywhere. Some cities across the globe have made it
easier to ride bicycles. Ten famous cities of the globe which have bicycle lanes, dedicated
bicycle only paths and drivers who are generally more than willing to share the road are
Copenhagen and Amsterdam in Denmark; Utrecht and Eindhoven in Netherlands; Strasbourg,
Nantes and Bordeaux in France; Malmo in Sweden; Antwerp in Belgium and Seville in Spain.
Germany has recently become the first nation in the globe to start cycle highways with all the
necessary facilities. There are separate lanes, each lane is 13 feet wide with provision to
overtake. There are no red lights along the highways and bicycle rider can ride at high speed
as he desires.
The success of odd and even car number formula in the National Capital has again
proved that where there is a will there is a way. Promoting cycling to contain environmental
pollution is also possible for which several steps are needed to be undertaken.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RAJESH RANJAN
April  13, 2016.
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides, inter alia, giving a subsidy to general public for purchasing
bicycles and giving of incentives to employees for communting by bicycles.
Clause 6 makes it mandatory for the Central Government to provide adequate funds to
the States and Union territories for implementing the provisions of the Bill. The Bill, therefore,
if enacted will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that
a sum of rupees one lakh crore will be involved as recurring expenditure per annum from the
Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees two lakh crore is also likely to be involved for
creation of assets throughout the country.
5

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 7 of the Bill  gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
6

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the promotion of cycling by way of giving incentives to the employees by
employers including Government, providing subsidy on purchase of bicycles
to the general public and for the provision of compulsory dedicated
cycle corridor along major public roads and highways in the
country and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Rajesh Ranjan, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—317LS(S3)—02.05.2016.