x

AS INTRODUCED IN 1.06 SABHA

11 AUG 5८७0

Bill_No. 120 of 2000

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000
By
Shar Vitas Murrensvar, M.P.
A
BILL
farther to amend the Constitution of India.

Be itenacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2000.

2. In clause (2) of article 103 of the Constitution of India, for the words "Election
Commission", the words "Electoral Advisory Body" shall be substituted.

3. After article 324 of the Constitution of India, the following article shall be inserted,
namely:—

"3244, (1) There shall be set up an Electoral Advisory Body consisting of
the Chairman of the Council of States, the Prime Minister, the Chief Justice of
India, the Speaker of the House of the People, the Leaders of Opposition in both
the Houses of Parliament, the Chief Election Commissioner and an eminent
jurist to be appointed by the President.

Short title.

Amendment
of article 103.

Insertion of
new article
324A.

Electoral
Advisory
Body


2

(2) The Chairman of the Council of States shall be the Chairman of the Electoral
Advisory Body.

(3) The Electoral Advisory Body shall formulate the electoral policy and shall have
the power to review decisions taken by the Election Commission in the discharge of its
functions.

(4) The Election Commission may refer any matter to the Electoral Advisory Body,
with respect, to elections.

(5) The decision taken by the Electoral Advisory Body shall be final.

(6) The annual report of the Electoral Advisory Body giving the detailed report of
its functioning during the year shall be laid on the Table of each House of Parliament.

(7) The Electoral Advisory Body shall be provided with necessary staff for its
functioning from both the Secretariats of the Parliament.”.

10



ee

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The role of the Election Commission during 110, 12th and 13th Lok Sabhas has
invited adverse comments by all political parties and public in general. The Chief Election
Commissioner refused to take collective decisions and took number of controversial
decisions where Supreme Court had to intervene and clipped the wings of the Chit
Commissioner. The decisions of the Election Commission have been both cri
acclaimed by the political parties, groups depending upon their political ideologies. The
wisdom and equity shown by the Election Commission by staggering election process of
13th Lok Sabha for more than five months and deferring poll results for more than one
month has also received adverse comment across wide spectrum of media and general
public. This is not a happy situation.

Article 324 of the Constitution vests in the Election Commission the power of
superintendence, direction and control of elections which is inherently an administrative
power. The Election Commission cannot encompass policy decisions which impinge on
the functions of the executive and legislature. Even the judicial intervention had to be
sought to resolve certain controversial decisions of the Commission. This has created an
unsavoury and anomaious situation.

The time has come to review the provisions of the Part XV of the Constitution, An
"Electoral Advisory Body” consisting of Chairman of the Council of States, the Speaker
of the House of People, the Leader and Opposition Leader of the House of People.
Opposition Leader of the Upper House, Chief Justice of India, the Chief Election
Commissioner and an eminent jurist to be appointed by the President to review the decisions
of the Election Commission. It will enhance transparency and credibility of the role of the
Election Commission and provide free, fair elections in the country which are sina-qua-
non of any democracy.

The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.

New Deut; VILAS MUTTEMWAR
July 11, 2000.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 3 of the Bill provides for setting up of an "Electoral Advisory Body" consisting
of Chairman of the Council of States, the Leader of the House, the Chief Justice of India,
the Speaker of the House of People, the Leader and the Leaders of Opposition of both
Houses of Parliament, the Chief Election Commissioner and an eminent jurist to be
appointed by the President. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from
the Consolidated Fund of India in respect of the eminent jurist to be appointed. It is likely
to involve a recurring expenditure of about rupees five lakh per annum.

It is also likely to involve a non-recurring expenditure of about rupees three lakh.


ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
103, (1) * * * * * * * *

(2) Before giving any decision on any such question, the Presideat shall obtain the
opinion of the Election Commission and shall act according to such opinion.

कं * * * * * *


further to amend the Constitution of India.

LOK SABHA

A

BILL

(Shri Vilas Muttemwar, MP)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—1708LS—18-07-2000,

कक 4-4८2.6५५%-०.