1
THE SCHEDULED TRIBES AND OTHER TRADITIONAL FOREST
DWELLERS (RECOGNITION OF FOREST RIGHTS)
AMENDMENT BILL, 2019
By
DR. KIRIT PREMJIBHAI SOLANKI, M.P.
A
BILL
to amend the Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition
of Forest Rights) Act, 2006.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the SeventiethYear of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional Forest
Dwellers (Recognition of Forest Rights) Amendment Act, 2019.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No. 121 of  2019
Short title and
commencement.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In section 2 of the Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers
(Recognition of Forest Rights) Act, 2006 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in
clause (c), for the words "primarily reside in", the words "primarily reside in or in the close
proximity of forests" shall be substituted.
3. In section 3 of the principal Act, after sub-section ( 2), the following sub-sections
shall be inserted, namely:—
"(2A) The Central Government shall ensure—
(i) provisions of developmental requirements such as food, fibre,
education, health and communication for the forest dwelling Scheduled Tribes;
and
(ii) that the land requirements from the forest land for developmental
facilities in forests or in the proximity of forests are provided to the forest dwelling
Scheduled Tribes.
(2B) Notwithstanding any custom or usage, the Central Government shall ensure
that the female members of the Scheduled Tribes are vested with equal rights and
special provisions are made for female-headed households and widows."
4. In section 4 of the principal Act, for sub-section (5), the following sub-sections shall
be substituted, namely:—
"(5) Save as otherwise provided, no member of a forest dwelling Scheduled
Tribe shall be evicted or removed from forest land under his occupation until:—
(a)  the recognition and verification procedure is completed;
(b) a resettlement or alternatives package, which provides a secure
livelihood to the affected individuals or communities and fulfils the requirements
of affected individuals or communities under the National Rehabilitation and
Resettlement Policy, has been prepared and communicated;
(c) the free informed consent of the Gram Sabhas of the area concerned
and of the affected individuals to the resettlement and the package provided has
been obtained in writing; and
(d) facilities and land allocation at the resettlement location are complete
as per the promised package.
(5A) Notwithstanding anything in sub-section (5), the affected individuals or
the community shall have right to their original habitation if they are not satisfied with
the rehabilitation."
5. In section 6 of the principal Act, after sub-section (8), the following proviso shall be
inserted, namely:—
"Provided that the Sub-Divisional Level Committee, the District Level Committee and
the State Level Monitoring Committee shall also have members from the forest dwelling
Scheduled Tribes which shall not be less than one-half of the total members of such
committees and there shall be provision to include adequate number of elected representatives
and persons of disadvantaged communities as members of those committees.".
Amendment
of section 2.
Amendment
of section 3.
Amendment
of section 4.
Amendment
of section 6.
5
2 of 2007.
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Forest
Rights) Act, 2006 is an extremely important piece of legislation that gives due recognition to
the customary and traditional forest rights of tribal communities.
The need is to strengthen the protective measures introduced by the Act to recognize
and uphold the traditional and customary forest rights of Scheduled Tribes in India. The Bill
seeks to ensure an explicit commitment towards the rehabilitation and compensation of
Scheduled Tribes and make the processes and systems more robust. The Bill also requires
the Central Government to ensure that all the developmental requirements of Scheduled
Tribes are met out.
The amendment of the definition of "forest dwelling Scheduled Tribes" to include
those who reside not just in but also in close proximity to forests is also necessary. Also, the
Sub-Divisional Level Committee, the District Level Committee and the State Level Monitoring
Committee are required to have at least one-half of their total members from the forest
dwelling Scheduled Tribes.
Hence, this Bill.
New Delhi; KIRIT PREMJIBHAI SOLANKI
June 6, 2019.
3

4
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE SCHEDULED TRIBES AND OTHER TRADITIONAL FOREST DWELLERS
(RECOGNITION OF FOREST RIGHTS) ACT, 2006
(2 OF 2007)
* * * *
2. * * * *
(c) "forest dwelling Scheduled Tribes" means the members or community of the
Scheduled Tribes who primarily reside in and who depend on the forests or forest lands for
bona fide livelihood needs and includes the Scheduled Tribe pastoralist communities;
* * * *
3. * * * *
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 (69 of
1980), the Central Government shall provide for diversion of forest land for the following
facilities managed by the Government which involve felling of trees not exceeding seventy-
five trees per hectare, namely:—
(a) schools;
(b) dispensary or hospital;
(c) anganwadis;
(d) fair price shops;
(e) electric and telecommunication lines;
(f) tanks and other minor water bodies;
(g) drinking water supply and water pipelines;
(h) water or rain water harvesting structures;
(i) minor irrigation canals;
(j) non-conventional source of energy;
(k) skill upgradation or vocational training centres;
(l) roads; and
(m) community centres:
Provided that such diversion of forest land shall be allowed only if,—
(i) the forest land to be diverted for the purposes mentioned in this sub-section
is less than one hectare in each case; and
(ii) the clearance of such developmental projects shall be subject to the condition
that the same is recommended by the Gram Sabha.
* * * *
Definitions.
Forest rights
of Forest
dwelling
Scheduled
Tribes and
other
traditional
forest
dwellers.

5
4. * * * *
(5) Save as otherwise provided, no member of a forest dwelling Scheduled Tribe or
other traditional forest dweller shall be evicted or removed from forest land under his
occupation till the recognition and verification procedure is complete.
* * * *
6. * * * *
(8) The Sub-Divisional Level Committee, the District Level Committee and the State
Level Monitoring Committee shall consist of officers of the departments of Revenue, Forest
and Tribal Affairs of the State Government and three members of the Panchayati Raj
Institutions at the appropriate level, appointed by the respective Panchayati Raj Institutions,
of whom two shall be the Scheduled Tribe members and at least one shall be a woman, as may
be prescribed.
* * * *
Recognition
of, and vesting
of, forest
rights in forest
dwelling
Scheduled
Tribes and
other
traditional
forest dwellers.
Authorities to
vest forest
rights in forest
dwelling
Scheduled
Tribes and
other
traditional
forest dwellers
and procedure
thereof.

MGIPMRND—462LS(S3)—25.06.2019.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to amend the Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition
of Forest Rights) Act, 2006.
————
(Dr. Kirit Premjibhai Solanki, M.P.)