Short title,
extent  and
commence-
ment.
Bill No. 121 of 2009
THE PROHIBITION ON USE OF CASTE OR
RELIGIOUS TITLE  BILL, 2009
By
SHRI L. RAJAGOP AL, M.P.
A
BILL
to prohibit the use of caste name or title relating to caste or religion as prefix or
suffix with names by the citizens and for matters connected therewith or
 incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixtieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the  Prohibition on Use of  Caste or Religious Title
Act, 2009.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(i) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government
of that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Definitions.
5

2
(ii) "document" includes letter head, name plate, visiting card, educational
certificate or paper relating to rights in or over property; and
(iii) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. No person, or body of individuals or association or institution shall write or
indicate caste or any title relating to his caste or religion with his name on any document.
4. No establishment, organisation or institution, whether owned or controlled by
the appropriate Government, or a private company or institution, whether incorporated or
not, shall require any person to write or indicate his caste or any title relating to his caste
or religion in any of its documents or forms prescribed for the purposes of admission in
educational institutions, grant of scholarship or employment.
5. The provisions of this Act shall not apply to,—
(i) any person who writes or indicates the name of his caste or title of his
caste or religion in the form prescribed for the purpose of applying for or obtaining
caste certificate from the competent authority of the appropriate Government; and
(ii) any competent authority who requires any person to write or indicate his
caste or any title relating to his caste or religion in the form prescribed for the
purpose of issue of caste certificate to any person belonging to a Scheduled Caste
or a Scheduled Tribe or any Other Backward Classes.
Explanation— For the purpose of this section competent authority means
such officer or authority, as the appropriate Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, appoint as the competent authority for the purposes of issuing
caste certificates.
6.  After the commencement of this Act, no person shall give a name to a new born
baby which signifies his caste or any title relating to his caste or religion.
7.  No document which has been issued or made prior to coming into force of this
Act shall be void on the ground of inconsistency with the provisions of this Act.
8. Whoever acts in contravention of the provisions of this Act shall be punished
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months or with fine which may
extend to twenty-five thousand rupees or with both.
9. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is
made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty
days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and
Prohibition on
use of caste
name or title
relating to
caste or
religion.
Organisations
or institutions
not to require
any person to
state his caste
name or title
relating to his
caste or
religion in any
of their
documents.
Exemptions.
Prohibition
on use of
caste name or
title relating
to caste or
religion with
the names of
new born
baby.
Saving of
documents
issued or made
prior to the
commence-
ment of the
Act.
Penalty.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30

3
if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive
sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the
Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything
previously done under that rule.
5

4
STA TEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
India is a secular country. Our Constitution aims to establish a classless and casteless
society. Even after six decades of independence, our dream of a casteless and classless
society remains a dream. The cherished objectives cannot be achieved unless there is a
legislative framework to prohibit the use of caste name or any title relating to caste or
religion in the names as prefix or suffix by the citizens. From time to time, the casteism and
the religious fundamentalism raise their ugly head and hampers the endeavour to build up
a homogenous society. The divisive forces are continuously trying to divide the country
along caste and religious lines by fomenting caste and religious feelings of the citizens.
The use of caste titles, caste names and religious titles in all of their forms should be
discouraged in order to strengthen the secularism and build up a homogenous society.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; L. RAJAGOPAL
November 18, 2009.

5
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLA TION
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of detail only. The delegation of
legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.

GMGIPMRND—5068LS(S5)—08.12.2009
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to prohibit the use of caste name or title relating to caste or religion as prefix or
suffix with names by the citizens and for matters connected therewith or
 incidental thereto.
————
(Shri L. Rajagopal, M.P .)