1
THE PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES (EQUAL OPPORTUNITIES,
PROTECTION OF RIGHTS AND FULL PARTICIPATION)
AMENDMENT BILL, 2012
By
SHRI  ARJUN  MEGHWAL,  M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Persons with Disabilities (Equal Opportunities, Protection of
Rights and Full Participation) Act, 1995.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-third  year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.   ( 1) This Act may be called the Persons with Disabilities (Equal Opportunities,
Protection of Rights and Full Participation) Amendment  Act, 2012.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central  Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 121  of  2012
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
2. In section 2 of the Persons with Disabilities (Equal Opportunities, Protection of
Rights and Full Participation) Act, 1995 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), after
sub-clause (vii) of clause (i), the following sub-clause shall be added, namely:—
"(viii) albinism oculocutaneous ( surajmukhi);".
3.  In section 33 of the principal Act, —
(a) for the words "three per cent.", the words "five per cent." shall be substituted;
 (b) for the brackets, figure and words "(iii) locomotor disability or cerebral  palsy,",
the following shall be substituted, namely:—
“(iii) locomotor disability or cerebral palsy;
(iv) mental retardation;
(v) albinism oculocutaneous ( surajmukhi),".
Amendment
of section 2.
Amendment
of section 33.
5
1 of 1996.
10

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Persons with mental retardation are not insane persons. They can do simple repetitive
jobs under sheltered conditions provided by the appropriate Government. Therefore, they
need to be encouraged and given economic security by providing reservation to them in
jobs under the State.
There are people who suffer from disease of albinism which is a genetic defect. People
with oculocutaneous albinism have white or pink hair, skin and iris  colour as well vision
problem. But they are not given facilities like others who suffer from low vision or blindness.
The Persons with Disabilities (Equal Opportunities, Protection of Rights and Full
Participation) Act, 1995 provides for reservation of posts in Government jobs for persons
with blindness or low vision, hearing impairment, locomotor disability or cerebral palsy.
However, there is no provision for reservation of  posts  for persons suffering from mental
retardation or "oculocutaneous albinism" also known as ' surajmukhi' in Hindi. The Bill,
therefore, seeks to amend section 33 of the Act with a view to providing that one per cent.
each of  vacancies shall be reserved in every establishment for persons suffering from
"mental retardation" and "albinism oculocutaneous".
N
EW DELHI; ARJUN  MEGHWAL
November 5, 2012.
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES (EQUAL OPPORTUNITIES, PROTECTION
OF RIGHTS AND FULL PARTICIPA TION) ACT, 1995.
(ACT NO. 1 OF 1996)
*******
CHAPTER  I
PRELIMINARY
*******
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
*****
(i) ‘‘disability’’ means—
(i) blindness;
(ii) low vision;
(iii) deprosy-cured;
(iv) hearing impairment;
(v) locomotor disability;
(vi) mental retardation;
(vii) mental illness;
*******
 CHAPTER  VI
E
MPLOYMENT
*******
33. Every appropriate Government shall appoint in every establishment such
percentage of vacancies not less than three per cent. for persons or class of persons with
disability of which one per cent. each shall be reserved for persons suffering from—
(a) blindness or low vision;
(b) hearing impairment;
(c) locomotor disability or cerebral palsy,
in the posts identified for each disability;
Provided that the appropriate Government may, having regard to the type of work
carried on in any department or establishment, by notification subject to such conditions, if
any, as may be specified in such  notification, exempt any establishment from the provisions
of this section.
*******
4
Definitions.
Reservation
of posts.

GMGIPMRND—3247LS(S3)—19.11.2012.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Persons with Disabilities (Equal Opportunities, Protection of
Rights and Full Participation) Act, 1995.
————
(Shri Arjun Meghwal, M.P.)