1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017
By
SHRI OM BIRLA, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2017.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In article 84 of the Constitution, for clause (b), the following clause shall be
substituted, namely,—
“(b) is, in the case of a seat in the Council of States, not less than twenty-eight
years of age and, in the case of a seat in the House of the People, not less than
twenty-one years of age; and”.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 121 of  2017
5
10
Amendment of
article 84.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The minimum age of voting in the country is eighteen years, which means that a
person of eighteen years of age is mature enough to select a candidate from his or her
constituency in the interest of the country. Some surveys indicate that youth is observing
some sort of indifference towards active politics. Though our country has approximately
sixty five per cent population below the age of 35 years, less than ten per cent youth
represent house of the People or the Council of States. By the year 2020, India would be the
country with maximum youngest population in the world. On the contrary, the average age
of members of Parliament is above sixty years. It is, therefore, necessary that the youth get
adequate representation in nation building.
If the minimum age limit for contesting an election is reduced, the youth will be
encouraged to take part in elections. It will also contribute to a healthy communication
between youth and politicians. If the youth are encouraged, they can play a defining role in
the development of the country.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend article 84 of the Constitution with a view to redule
the qualifying age for being chosen as a Member of the House of the People and the
Council of States.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; OM BIRLA
July 3, 2017.

3
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * *
84. A person shall not be qualified to be chosen to fill a seat in Parliament unless he—
(a) is a citizen of India, and makes and subscribes before some person authorized in
that behalf by the Election Commission an oath or affirmation according to the form set out
for the purpose in the Third Schedule;
(b) is, in the case of a seat in the Council of States, not less than thirty years of age
and, in the case of a seat in the House of the People, not less than twenty-five years of age;
and
(c) possesses such other qualifications as may be prescribed in that behalf by or
under any law made by Parliament.
* * * * *
Qualification
for membership
of Parliament.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Om Birla, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—985LS(S3)—19-07-2017.