AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 121 of 2024
THE HINDU RELIGIOUS PLACES OF WORSHIP (PROHIBITION
OF MARKETING , SLAUGHTERING , TRADING , COOKING ,
SERVING AND CONSUMPTION OF MEAT AND OTHER
NON-VEGETARIAN FOOD) BILL, 2024
By
SHRI DAMODAR AGRAWAL, M.P.
A
BILL
to prohibit marketing, slaughtering, trading, cooking, serving and
consumption of meat and other non-vegetarian food within
100 square metre area from the places of Hindu religious
worship and for matters connected therewith
or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic
of India as follows:–
1. (1) This Act may be called the Hindu Religious Places of Worship
Sanctity (Prohibition of marketing, Slaughtering, Trading, Cooking, Serving
and Consumption of Meat and other non-Vegetarian Food) Act, 2024.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may,
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
5
Short title,
extent and
commencement.

2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “animal market” means a market place or sale-yards or any
other premises or place to which animals are brought from other places
and offered or displayed for sale or auction and includes animal fairs
and cattle pounds, duly licensed or recognized under any Act or any
other law for the time being in force or any rules or regulations made
thereunder;
 (b) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the
Government of that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
 (c) “beef” means flesh of the cattle in any form whose slaughter is
prohibited under any Union or State Act;
(d) “consumer” means a person who purchase and receive food in
order to meet his personal needs;
(e) “consumption” means the act of consuming food in any form
including solid, liquid and gaseous state;
(f) “cooking” means the act of preparing something as food by the
application of heat;
(g) “devalya” means a place by whatever designation known, used
as a place of public religious worship and dedicated to or for the benefit
of or used as of right by the Hindu community or any class of section
thereof, as a place of public religious worship and also includes any
cultural institution or mathh or mandap or library connected with such a
place of public religious worship;
(h) “ingredient” means any substance, including a food additive used
in the manufacture or preparation of food and present in the final product,
possibly in a modified form;
 (i) “local area” means any area, whether urban or rural, notified by
the appropriate Government, to be a local area for the purposes of
this Act;
(j) “marketing” means any audio or visual publicity, representation
or pronouncement made by means of any light, sound, smoke, gas, notice,
circular, label, wrapper, invoice or other documents;
 (k) “meat” includes the flesh or other edible parts of animals (usually
domesticated cattle, swine, fish, beef and sheep) used for food, including
not only the muscles and fat but also the tendons and ligaments;
 (l) “place of worship” means a temple or devalya or any other
place of Hindu religious worship of any denomination or any section
thereof, by whatever name called;
(m) “premise” includes any residential, religious and commercial
place including house, shop, stall, hotel, restaurant, airline services and
food canteens, place or vehicle or vessel where any article of food is
sold or manufactured or stored for sale;
(n) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(o) “religious officer” means the officer appointed under section 7;
(p) “sale” with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions,
means the sale of any article of food, whether for cash or on credit or
2
Definitions
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

by way of exchange and whether by wholesale or retail, for human
consumption or use, or for analysis, and includes an agreement for sale,
an offer for sale, the exposing for sale or having in possession for sale
of any such article, and includes also an attempt to sell any such article;
(q) “slaughter” means killing by any method whatsoever and includes
maiming and inflicting of physical injury which in the ordinary course
shall cause death;
(r) “trading” means any transfer of property in goods by one person
to another, whether for cash or on credit, or by way of exchange, and
whether wholesale or retail, and includes an agreement for sale, and
offer for sale and exposure for sale; and
(s) “vegetarian” means a person who consumes  fruits, vegetables,
grains and nuts exclusively and not the meat, fish or any other products
in which animal flesh is being used.
3. No person shall directly or indirectly market, slaughter, trade, buy, cook,
serve and consume any meat, non-vegetarian products or beef products in
any premise in any form within 100 square meters of  hindu religious place of
worship.
4. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, appoint or declare any person as Religious Officer for carrying
out the purposes of this Act for such local areas as may be specified in
that notification.
(2) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and
conditions of services of Religious Officer appointed or declared under
sub-section (1) shall be such as may be prescribed.
5.  No person shall be eligible for the appointment of Religious Officer
under section 4 unless he–
(a) is Graduate in any stream of education;
(b) has completed the age of twenty-five years;
(c) posses good moral character;
(d) is not involved or booked in any criminal activity;
(e) worship, preaches, practices or follows hindu religion;
(f) is a vegetarian and has declared his eating preferences on an
affidavit; and
(g) is the resident of the local area.
Prohibition of
marketing,
slaughtering,
trading,
cooking,
serving and
consumption
of meat and
other non-
vegetarian
products.
Appointment
of Religious
Officer.
Qualification
for Religious
Officer.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
3

6. (1) For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this Act, a police
officer not below the rank of Sub-Inspector or a Religious Officer or any
person authorized in this behalf by the appropriate Government, shall have the
power to enter and inspect any premises within the local limits of jurisdiction
of such persons where he has reason to believe that an offence under this Act
has been or is likely to be committed.
(2) Every person in occupation of any such premises as specified under
sub-section (1) shall allow the police officer not below the rank of Sub-
Inspector or Religious Officer or the person authorized in this behalf by the
appropriate Government, as the case may be, such access to the premises as
he may require for the aforesaid purpose and shall answer any question put to
him by such police officer or religious officer or the person authorized in this
behalf by the appropriate Government, as the case may be, to the best of his
knowledge and belief.
(3) A police officer not below the rank of Sub-Inspector or
Religious Officer, as the case may be, upon access to the premises under sub-
section (2), seize any vehicle, conveyance and cattle, if he is of the opinion
that such vehicle, conveyance or cattle are being used in contravention with
the provisions of this Act.
(4) After the seizure of any vehicle, conveyance or cattle under
sub-section (3), such police officer shall report such seizure without
unreasonable delay before the Judicial Magistrate of 1st Class:
Provided that the authority or officer, other than police officer, seizing
such vehicles or conveyance or cattle, shall maintain the seized cattle and
hand over any other material, vehicles or persons detained to the jurisdictional
police station alongwith complaint and such Officer-in-charge of Jurisdictional
police officer shall report such seizure without unreasonable delay before the
judicial magistrate of 1st class.
(5) On receipt of the report under sub-section (3), the Judicial magistrate
may, on being satisfied that there is enough material to presume that a
prima-facie offence under this Act has been committed or intended to be
committed, release the seized materials including vehicle or conveyance except,
to the satisfaction of the Court, pending disposal of the criminal proceedings
instituted in respect of the alleged offence.
(6) The expenditure incurred on the maintenance of the seized cattle shall
be recovered from such persons as may be prescribed.
(7) The cattle seized under this section may be handed over to an institution
established under section 9 of this Act or any existing gaushala or similar
institution after value assessment by the Animal husbandry and Veterinary
Department of the appropriate Government.
7. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, no person accused of
any offence punishable under this Act shall, if in custody, be released on bail or
on his own bond unless the public prosecutor has been given an opportunity of
being heard on the application for such release.
Power to
enter, inspect,
search, seizure
and detain.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
4
Restriction on
bail.

8. On conviction, the vehicle or any conveyances or bank guarantee so
furnished and cattle so seized under this Act shall stand forfeited to the
appropriate Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
9. The appropriate Government may establish or direct any local authority
or permit society registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860, or
Indian Trust Act, 1882 or non-profit company established under the provisions
of section 8 of Indian Companies Act, 2013 to establish an institution including
gaushalas at such places as may be deemed necessary for taking care of the
seized cattle and to be housed thereto in such manner as may be prescribed.
10. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Bhartiya Nagrik Suraksha
Sanhita, 2023 the police officer not below the rank of superintendent of police,
if has reason to believe that any person who is accused of an offence under
this act and against whom a warrant has been issued, has absconded or
concealing himself so that such warrant cannot be executed, the names and
the photograph of such person may be published at some prominent places in
locality where the accused ordinarily resides or to a public places.
11. (1) Whoever contravenes any of the provisions contained in this Act
shall be guilty of an offence punishable with imprisonment for a term which
shall not less than three years but which may extend upto eight years and with
fine, which shall not be less than three lakh rupees but may extend upto five
lakh rupees or with both:
Provided that after considering facts and circumstances of a case and
after hearing the Public Prosecutor on the question of sentence, the trial court
may, for the reasons to be recorded in writing, impose lesser punishment than
the minimum prescribed penalty under this section.
(2) Whoever after conviction of an offence under this Act is again found
to be guilty of an offence under this Act, shall be punished with double the
punishment provided for the said offence for the second and subsequent
conviction.
12. Whoever abets any offence punishable under this act or attempts to
commit any such offence shall be punishable with the punishment provided in
this Act for such offences.
13. (1) Any person aggrieved by any order passed under section 11 and
section 12 may, within thirty days from the date of receipt of such order appeal
to the sessions judge having jurisdiction over the area in which the property, to
which such order relates, has been seized.
(2) The sessions Judge may, after giving the persons affected a reasonable
opportunity of being heard, pass such order as it deems fit.
14. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Bhartiya Nagrik Suraksha
Sanhita, 2023, all offences under this act shall be cognizable and non-bailable.
15. Subject to such conditions as may be prescribed, this Act shall not
apply to the places where a No Objection Certificate has been obtained from
the place of worship.
16. The Central Government shall render religious, scientific and
technical advice and assistance to respective State Governments and
Union territory administrations if so, required to achieve the purposes
of this Act.
Forfeiture of
vehicle, etc.
Establishment
of an
institution
including
Gaushalas for
taking care of
cattle.
Publication of
photographs
etc. of
absconding
offenders.
Abetments  and
attempts.
Penalties.
Appeals.
Offences to be
congnizable.
Exemptions.
Central
Government to
render religious,
scientific and
technical
advice.
21 of 1860
2 of 1882
18 of 2013
46 of 2023
46 of 2023
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
5

17. (1) The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made
by Parliament by law in this behalf, provide financial assistance to the
States and Union territories to meet the expenses for creating
infrastructure to prohibit slaughtering, trading, cooking and
consumption of meat with in 100 square meter area from the hindu
religious places of worship.
(2) The Central Government before releasing the money undersub-section (1) shall ensure that State Governments and Union territoryadministrations have complied with the provisions of this Act.
18. All Religious Officers and other persons exercising powers under this
Act shall be deemed to be public servants within the meaning of section 37 of
the Bhartiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023.
19. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall be instituted against
any person for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done
under this Act or the rules made hereunder.
20. The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official gazette,
delegate to any officer of the appropriate Government all or any of its powers
or functions under this Act.
21. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation
of any other law for the time being in force.
22. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official
gazette, make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing
power such rules may provide for–
(i) the places of worship, or festival for slaughter of cattle in pursuance
of this Act;
(ii) rules for proper management and conditions and fees for registration
of institution established under section 9;
(iii) the manner of forfeiture of the vehicle or any conveyance or
animal to appropriate Government under section 8;
(iv) competent authority and its power and function; and
(v) any other matter which is or may be prescribed.
(3) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be
laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament,
while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised
in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry
of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both
the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be;
so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice
to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
(4) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid,
as soon as may be after it is made, before the State Legislature.
Central
Government to
provide financial
assistance to
States and
Union
territories.
Officers
exercising
power under
this act to be
deemed to be
public servants.
Protection of
persons acting
in good faith.
Act not in
derogation of
any other law.
Functions of
Delegation.
Power to make
rules.
45 of 2023
6
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Ahinsa, the law of non-injury, is the Sanatan Dharma’s (Hinduism) first
duty in fulfilling religious obligations to God and God’s creation as defined
by Vedic scripture. All of our actions, including our choice of food, have
Karmic consequences. According to ancient Hindu scriptures, non-violence
is the most important virtue. For this reason, millions of Hindus are lacto-
vegetarians, as it is a diet that lessens harm to animals. It lies at the top of
the hierarchy of Hindu dietary practices and is rooted in Indian customs. By
involving oneself in the cycle of inflicting injury, pain and death, even
indirectly by eating other creatures, one must in the future experience in
equal measure the suffering caused.
Food is the source of the body’s chemistry, and what we ingest affects
our consciousness, emotions and experiential patterns. If one wants to live in
higher consciousness, in peace and happiness and love for all creatures, then
he cannot eat meat, fish, shellfish, fowl or eggs. By ingesting the grosser
chemistries of animal foods, one introduces into the body and mind anger,
jealousy, anxiety, suspicion and a terrible fear of death, all of which are locked
into the flesh of the butchered creatures. For these reasons, vegetarians live
in higher consciousness and meat-eaters abide in lower consciousness.
In Sanatan Dharma, the importance of purity and satvikta is considered
to be special in worship. In such a situation, cutting of animals near a temple,
hanging them in the open for publicity, buying, selling, making and eating meat
destroys, purity and satvikta in worship. The worship of people who believe in
Sanatan Dharma is destroyed due to coming in contact through seeing, smelling,
hearing all the above mentioned acts.
Therefore, it is very important to ban 100 square meters area of
Devalya or hindu religious places of worship and religious institutions for
marketing, slaughtering, trading, cooking, serving and consumption of meat
and other non-vegetarian items.
Hence this Bill.
  NEW DELHI;      DAMODAR AGRAWAL
July 24, 2024.
7

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for appointment of a Religious Officer for
carrying out the provision of this Act. Clause 16 provides for rendering of
religious, scientific and technical advice and assistance to the State
Governments and Union territory Administrations. Clause 17 provides that
there shall be paid such sums of money out of the Consolidated Fund of India,
every year, as Parliament may be due appropriation provide, as special financial
assistance to the States and Union territories of India to meet the costs of
implementing of law, as may be undertaken by the States and Union territories
with the approval of the Union Government. The Bill, therefore, on enactment,
will involve expenditure out of the Consolidated Fund of India. As the sums of
moneys which will be given to the States and Union territories as special
financial assistance by appropriation by law made by Parliament will be known
only after the plans to be implemented by the State Government and Union
territories Administrations with the approval of Government of India are
identified, it is not possible at present to give the estimates of recurring
expenditure, which would be involved out of the Consolidated Fund of India
at this stage.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be incurred from the Consolidated
Fund of India.
8

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGA TED LEGISLA TION
Clause 22 of this Bill empowers the appropriate Government to make
rules for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters
of details only, the delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal
character.
9

LOK SABHA
A
BILL
to prohibit marketing, slaughtering, trading, cooking, serving and
consumption of meat and other non-vegetarian food within
100 square metre area from the places of Hindu religious
worship and for matters connected therewith
or incidental thereto
(Shri Damodar Agrawal, M.P.)