AS INTRODUCED iN LOK SABHA

1 Alo cw

Bill No, 121 of 2000

THE FOREST CONSERVATION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000

By

Suri 50800 Moutre, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980.
Beit enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as foliows:—
1, This Act may be called The Forest Conservation (Amendment) Act, 2000. Short title.
69 of 1980, 2. In section 2 of the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 (hereinafter referred to as the Amendment

principal Act),— of section 2.
5 ( in Explanation, in clause (a), the words “or medicinal plants” shall be omitted.

(ii) the existing Explanation shall be numbered as clause (7) thereof and after clause
(7) as so numbered, the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—

“(2) In this section, the expression forest land or portion thereof shall not
include bushes grown naturally.”,


2

Insertion of new 3, After section 2 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
section 2A. namely:—

Forest land con- “2A. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or any other law relating
taining medici- to forests for the time being in force, no forest land or any portion thereof containing

ee medicinal plants shall be used for any forest or non-forest purpose.

or non-forest
Purpose.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

‘The Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 is a very effective legislation to save forests.
The Act helps to ensure adequate forest cover in the country in order to maintain ecological
balance and to sustain rain fall. Over the years certain difficulties have been experienced
in implementation of provisions of this Act. Though it is ensured that Act is enthusiastically
implemented it some times results in hampering of developmental works. Even bushes
grown naturally are considered as forest and lengthy formalities like getting approval of
the Government have been order of the day.

Medicinal plants in the country are rare and they ought to be protected at any cost.
Therefore, it is proposed that no forest land containing medicinal plants shall be used for
any purpose what so ever.

Hence this Bill.

New Deut; SUBODH MOHITE.
July 10, 2000


ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980
(Act No. 69 oF 1980)

« * * x के. * «

2, Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force
in a State, no State Government or other authority shal! make, except with the prior approval
of the Central Government, any order directing—

0) * * *

(iv) * * *

“Explanation.—For the purpose of this section “non-forest purpese’’ means

the breaking up or clearing of any forest land or portion thereof for—

(a) the cultivation of tea, coffee, spices, rubber, palms, oil-bearing plants,
horticultural crops or medicinal plants;

(0) any purpose other than reafforestation,

but does not include any work relating or ancillary to conservation, development

and management of forests and wild life, namely, the establishment of check-posts, fire

lines, wireless communications and construction of fencing, bridges and culverts, dams,
waterholes, trench marks, boundary marks, pipe-lines or other like purposes.’.

* * * * * * *



=
BILL
further to amend the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980.

'
(Shri Subodh Mohite, M.P)
e 7