As In rroaucep in Lok SABHA

45 AUG 20.

Bill No. 121 of 2005

THE INTER-STATE RIVER WATER REGULATORY AUTHORITY
BILL, 2005
By
Suri Monan Sincx, M.P.
A
BILL

to provide for the constitution of an Inter-State River Water Regulatory Authority for the
distribution of inter-State river water and for matters connected therewith or incidental
thereto,

Be itenacted by Parliament in the Fifty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—

1. (J) This Act may be called the Inter-State River Water Regulatory Authority Act,
2005.

(2) It extends to the whole of India.

(3) Itshall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—

(i) “Authority” means the River Water Regulatory Authority cofistituted under
section 4;

Short title,
extent and
commencement.

Definitions.


ee

(ii) "inter-State river" means a river which originates in one State and flows into one
more States or a river which has a tributary originating or flowing in another State.

Inter-State _ 3. From and on the date of commencement of this Act, all inter-State rivers shall
rivers to be in under the exclusive jurisdiction of the Central Government and it is hereby declared that

aa sate State shall have any control on any inter-State river

Central
Government. "
Inter-State 4, The Central Government shall constitute an Inter-State River Water R

River Water Authority.
Regulatory

Authority.

ret ict 5. (1) The Authority shall consist of the following:— »_
of the १
Authority (é) a Chairperson, who shall be a retired Chief Justice of Supreme Cou t;
(ii) four other members who are retired and have held high positions in’

Ministries of Water Resources and Energy of the Central Government. ,

(2) The Chairperson and the members of the Authority shall be appointed by
President on the recommendation of the Central Government |

(3) The members of the Authority shall hold office for a term of three years from
date of their appointment or until they attain the age of sixty-five years, whichever is ear

Central 6. The Central Government shall appoint such number of officers and staff:

Government considers necessary for the efficient functioning of the Authority.
to appoint :

officers and

staff of
Authority.
Functions of 7. The Authority shall perform the following functions,—
SY: (i) prepare a data base which shall include,—
(a) water resources available in each of the States, and
(5) the population and the water requirement of each State, along
requirements of drinking water, irrigation, power, etc.
(ii) holding discussion with the State Governments regarding their requiren
(iii) recommending to the Central Government the allocation of inter-Stater
water to each State;
(iv) advising the Government with regard to water harvesting policy;
> (v) rendering expert advice to the State Governments regarding suitable meti
of water harvesting and drainage;
(vi) assess the requirement of funds of each State for water-harvesting
review the requirement on request of the State concerned;
(vii) recommending to the Central Government about the release of fun
each State for water harvesting in rivers under its jurisdiction; and
(viii) any other work relating to water resource management that may be assi
to it by the Central Government from time to time. :
Central 8. On the basis of recommendations by the Authority, the Central Government sha
Government to oF ea
३6674 8 (i) distribute water of the inter-State rivers to each State; and
or yc (ii) release funds to each State for water harvesting.
Authority.
Power to 9. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make ul

make rules. carry out the provisions of this Act.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

As aresult of smaller States being constituted in the country, the number of rivers passing

through another State or States from the State of their origin has increased. Usually, the practice

is that the upstream States store the river water at its originating point and the neighbouring

downstream States do not get adequate water for their needs. During monsoon, water is released

in the river by the State of its origin, as a result of which, the downstream States have to face the
_ devastations caused by floods. In dry season, people of downstream States suffer from droughi

conditions. Water is one of the principal reasons of dispute amongst different States. Therefore,

it has become necessary to bring all inter-State rivers under the exclusive jurisdiction of the
Central Government. The Central Government should undertake the exercise of water sharing

through a regulatory authority keeping in view the needs of various States. In addition, providing

resources for water harvesting to States that are faced with floods and drought is also very

important. ;

Hence the Bill. |

NEw DELHI; MOHAN SINGH
July 18, 2005.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the constitution of a River Water Regulatory Author
Clause 5 provides that the Central Government shall appoint the Chairperson and
members of the Authority. Clause 6 provides for the appointment of officers and staff
efficient functioning of the Authority. Clause 8 provides for allocation of resources to SI
for implementing water harvesting policies framed by the Authority. The Bill, therefor
enacted, 15 likely to involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estime
that a recurring expenditure of rupees two hundred crore is likely to be involved per ant

A non-recurring expenditure of rupees fifty crore is also likely to be involved



MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out :
the purpose of the Bill. As the rules will relate.to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.


LOK SABHA
A
BILL

to provide for the constitution of an Inter-State River Water Regulatory &
Authority for the distribution of inter-State river water and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.

. ‘8 7

(Shri Mohan Singh, MP)

MGIPMRND—2542LS(S1)—18.08.2005.