of 197 •. S 
BI11 No. m ... 1981 
THE OIL INDUSTRY (DEVELOPMENT) AMENDMENT BILL, 1181 
It. 
BILL 
to amend the Oil Indmtry (Development) Act, 1974-
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Tbirty-seCDnd Year of the Republic of India aCJ follows: - . 
1. This Act may be called the Oil Industry (Development) Amend- Short m.ent Act, 1981. tille. 
2. In the Schedule to the Oil Industry (Development) Act, 1974, in Amend-S1. No. 1 relating to crude oU, for the entry in the third column, the mentof entry "Rupees three hundred per tonne." shall be substituted. the Sche-dule. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Oil Industry (Development) Act, 1974, provides 'tor the estaB-
lishment of a Boa'l'd, called the "Oil Industry Development Board", for 
the development of the oil industry and for that purpose to levy 
a crllty of excise on crude oil and natural gas and for matters con-
nected therewith. Sub-section (1) of section 15 Of the said Act, inteT 
alia, empowers the Central Government to levy and collect a duty of 
excise on the crude oil at such rate, not exceeding the rate set forth in 
the Schedule to the Act, that is rupees one hundred per tonne, as the 
Central Government may, by notification in the Oftkial Gazette, 
specify. According to the proviso to sub-section (1) ot said section 15, 
the auty of excise in respect of the crude oil is to be levied at the rate 
of rupees sixty per tonne until the rate is specified by notification. By 
issue of a notification on July 13, 1981, the Central Government specified 
that the rate of duty of excise in respect of the crude oU would be at 
the rate of rupees one hundred per tonne, which is the maximum rate 
at which the duty of excise may be collected. 
2. It has now been decided to increase the above referred te 
maximum rate of duty on crude oil to rupees three hundred per tonne. 
For the purpose of levy and collection the rate shall be specified from 
time to time by notification under sub-section (1) of said section 15. 
3. The Bill seeks to achieve the above object. 
NEW DBLm; P. C. SlitI'HI. 
The 10th September, 1981. 
\ 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACT FROM THE On. INDUSTRY (DE\'ELOl'MENT) ACT, 1974 
(47 OF 1974) 
• • • 
THE SCHEDULE 
[See section lS(l)] 
-------- --.-.---
81. No. 
J. Crude oil 
• 
Name or item 
• • 
--------_ .. _-
• • 
The maximum ratIO at 
which duty oresdlO may 
becoUected 
Rupees one hundred per tonne. 
• • 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
.. " 
to amend the Oil Industry (Development) Ad, 1974. 
($hri P. C. Sethi, 
Minister of Petroleum. ChemicGll 
And Fertilizer •. ) 