1
Short title
and
commencement.
THE STATES AND UNION TERRITORIES REORGANISATION
COMMISSION BILL, 2019
By
DR. SHASHI THAROOR, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of a States and Union Territories Reorganisation
Commission to recommend the reorganisation of States and Union territories to the
Central Government through periodic review of demands of new States or Union
territories on the basis of administrative efficacy and related grounds and for
 matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the States and Union Territories Reorganisation Commission
Act, 2019.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill  No. 122 of  2019
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires.—
(1) ‘Commission’ means the States and Union Territories Reorganization
Commission constituted under section 3;
(2) ‘Census of India’ means the census taken by the Central Government under
the Census Act, 1948;
(3) ‘prescribed’ means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(4) ‘State’ means a State specified in the First Schedule I to the Constitution; and
(5) ‘Union territory’ means any Union territory specified in the First Schedule to
the Constitution and shall include any other territory comprised within the territory of
India but not specified in that Schedule.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
a Commission, to be known as the States and Union Territories Reorganisation Commission,
to exercise the powers conferred upon, and to perform the functions assigned to it under
this Act.
(2) The Central Government shall constitute the Commission as mentioned under
sub-section (1) after the completion of the census of India.
4. (1) The Commission shall consist of a Chairperson and two members to be nominated
by the Central Government, with at least one expert from the field of law or the field of
economics and one person with experience in public administration.
(2) The Central Government shall provide the Commission with a Secretary and such
officers and employees as may be necessary for the efficient functioning of the Commission
under this Act.
(3) The Chairperson and every member shall hold office for a period of three years from
the date on which he enters upon his office.
(4) The Chairperson or any member may, by writing under his hand addressed to the
President, resign his office.
(5) The Central Government shall remove a person from the office of Chairperson or a
member if that person—
(a) becomes an undischarged insolvent;
(b) is convicted and sentenced to imprisonment;
(c) becomes of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court;
(d) refuses to act or becomes incapable of discharging his functions;
(e) has, in the opinion of the Central Government, so abused his position as a
member, so as to render a person’s continuance in office detrimental to public interest.
(6) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of
service of the officers and other employees of the Commission shall be such as may be
prescribed.
5. (1) The Commission shall, recommend to the  Central Government on the desirability
for reorganisation of States and Union territories within two years of its Constitution.
(2) The Commission shall, while recommending on the reorganisation of States and
Union territories under sub-section (1), take into consideration the following—
(i) administrative efficacy;
(ii) national unity and security;
(iii
) economic interests;
(iv) geographical position;
Functions of
the
Commission.
Definitions.
Constitution
of the States
and Union
Territories
Reorganisation
Commission.
Composition
and Term of
the
Commission.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
37 of 1943

3
(v) population;
(vi) aspirations of the people;
(vii) cultural homogeneity;
(viii) financial cost of reorganisation; and
(ix) any other factors as may be prescribed.
(3) The Commission shall perform such other functions with regard to the reorganisation
of States and Union territories as may be assigned to it by the Central Government.
6. (1) The Commission shall, prepare once in every year, in such form and at such time
as may be prescribed, an annual report giving a true and full account of its activities and
submit a report to the Central Government.
(2) A copy of the report received under sub-section (2) shall be laid, as soon as may be
after it is received, before each House of Parliament.
(3) A copy of the report received under sub-section ( 1) of section 5 shall be laid, as
soon as it may be received, before each House of Parliament.
(4) The Central Government shall, within two years after the receipt of the report under
sub-section (1) of section 5, cause to be laid an Action Taken Report on the recommendations
of the Commission, including the acceptance or rejection of such recommendations, before
each House of Parliament.
7. The Commission shall have the power to call upon and secure the assistance of any
office or agency of the Central Government or a State Government or a Union territory
Administration for carrying out the functions assigned to it under this Act.
8. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Report of the
Commission.
Powers of the
Commission.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
India is the embodiment of diversity. A country so rich and diverse in its culture and
topography, it is more often equated to a continent than a country. The unity and strength of
the country lies in its promotion of individual interest as much as the national interest.
At the beginning of the creation of the country, stability of the nation was of prime
importance. In order to reduce religious tensions that had recently engulfed the country
during the partition and to create stable units by agreeing to the demands of the people,
States were organized on the basis of languages. It was based on the report of the States
Reorganisation Commission created on 22nd December, 1953 by the then Prime Minister of
India, Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru, for the “objective and dispassionate” study “so that the
welfare of the people of each constituent unit as well as the nation as a whole is promoted”.
Half a century later, in the year 2000, three new States of Uttarakhand, Chhattisgarh
and Jharkhand were created for socio-political reasons of development of backward regions
of larger States. Later, in 2014, the State of Andhra Pradesh was bifurcated, respecting the
wishes of the people and other considerations of the region.
The constant bifurcation and reorganisation of States confirms that such issues shall
be omnipresent in a country of such diversity. It is pertinent to create a mechanism for
reorganisation of States that takes into account economic and financial viability, administrative
efficacy, unity of the nation, cultural history, attitude of the people and so on. A pre-planned
consistent study of reorganization of States on the basis of these factors will ensure informed
decision-making that will lead to efficient stable units rather than knee-jerk reactions. Keeping
true to the words of Nehru Ji, it will be an objective and dispassionate process for the welfare
of both the people and the country.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SHASHI THAROOR
June 6, 2019.
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of this Bill provides for establishment of the States Reorganisation and Union
Territories Commission. It also provides for appointment of a Chairperson, members, a
Secretary and other Officers and employees to the Commission. The Bill, therefore, if enacted,
would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring
expenditure of about ten crore per annum from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one crore is likely to be involved.
5

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of this Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
6

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of a States and Union Territories Reorganisation
Commission to recommend the reorganisation of States and Union territories to
the Central Government through periodic review of demands of new States
or Union territories on the basis of administrative efficacy and related
grounds and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Dr. Shashi Tharoor, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—773LS(S3)—27-06-2019.