AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 122 of 2022
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022
By
SHRI HIBI EDEN, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India
as follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2022.
2.  In article 81 of the Constitution for the words, “subject to the provision of
article 331”, the words, “subject to the provisions of article 331 and 330A”,  shall be
substituted.
Short title.
5
Amendment
of article 81.

3. After article 330 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted,
namely:—
“330A. Notwithstanding anything in article 81, the President may, if he is of
opinion that the LGBT community is not adequately represented in the House of
the People, nominate not more than two members of that community to the House
of the People.”.
4. In article 170 of the Constitution, for the words, “subject to the provisions of
article 333”, the words, “subject to the provisions of article 333 and 333A”, shall be
substituted.
5. After article 333 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted,
namely:—
“333A. Notwithstanding anything in article 170, the Governor of a State may,
if he is of opinion that the LGBT community needs representation in the Legislative
Assembly of the State and is not adequately represented therein, nominate one
member of that community to the Assembly.”
6. In article 366 of the Constitution, after clause (15), the following clause shall be
inserted, namely: —
“(15A) ‘LGBT community’ means a group of person belonging to lesbian,
gay, bisexual, transgender.”.
Insertion of
new article
330A.
15
5
10
2
Representation
of the LGBT
community in
the House of the
People.
Amendment of
article 170.
Insertion of new
article 333A.
Representation
of the LGBT
community in
the Legislative
Assemblies of
the States.
Amendment of
article 366.

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The representation of lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT) people in
Lok Sabha, and Legislative Assemblies is yet to be made. There is an established
literature arguing that the representation of minorities in legislative forums improves
the realization of their policy preferences and the position of the group within the
country as a whole. However, LGBT communities has been left behind in such
representation.
If the inclusion of LGBT persons in legislature happens it will be an indicator of
the strength of democracy. Without some visible inclusion of the faces and voices of
the historically marginalized sections, it is unlikely that the interests of such groups
will be at the forefront of decision makers’ minds.
The path for right to representation for LGBT group needs a combination of
courage and political wisdom. There is clear evidence to suggest that the inclusion of
marginalized groups is correlated with policy benefits for that group. The presence of
LGBT persons in legislative forums aids in breaking down intolerance and in building
alliances that cut across pre-existing cleavages within society.
Hence this Bill
     NEW DELHI; HIBI EDEN
11 March, 2022.
3

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to insert a new article 331A to the Constitution with a
view to provide representation of LGBT community in the House of the People.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India. It is estimated that about rupees five crore will be incurred per annum
from the Consolidated Fund of India.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.
4

5
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
 *   *  * *
81.(1) Subject to the provisions of article 331 the House of the People shall
consist of—
(a) not more than five hundred and thirty members  chosen by direct election
from territorial constituencies in the States, and
(b) not more than twenty members to represent the Union territories, chosen in
such manner as Parliament may by law provide.
(2) For the purposes of sub-clause (a) of clause (1),—
(a) there shall be allotted to each State a number of seats in the House of the
People in such manner that the ratio between that number and the population
of the State is, so far as practicable, the same for all States; and
(b) each State shall be divided into territorial constituencies in such manner that
the ratio between the population of each constituency and the number of
seats allotted to it is, so far as practicable, the same throughout the State:
Provided that the provisions of sub-clause (a) of this clause shall not be
applicable for the purpose of allotment of seats in the House of the People to
any State so long as the population of that State does not exceed six millions.
(3) In this article, the expression “population” means the population as ascertained
at the last preceding census of which the relevant figures have been published:
Provided that the reference in this clause to the last preceding census of which
the relevant figures have been published shall, until the relevant figures for the
first census taken after the year  have been published, be construed,—
(i) for the purposes of sub-clause (a) of clause (2) and the proviso to that
clause, as a reference to the 1971 census; and
(ii) for the purposes of sub-clause (b) of clause (2) as a reference to the census.
 *   *  * *
170. (1) Subject to the provisions of article 333, the Legislative Assembly of each
State shall consist of not more than five hundred, and not less than sixty, members
chosen by direct election from territorial constituencies in the State.
(2) For the purposes of clause (1), each State shall be divided into territorial
constituencies in such manner that the ratio between the population of each
constituency and the number of seats allotted to it shall, so far as practicable, be the
same throughout the State.
Explanation.—In this clause, the expression “population” means the population
as ascertained at the last preceding census of which the relevant figures have been
published:
Provided that the reference in this Explanation to the last preceding census of
which the relevant figures have been published shall, until the relevant figures
for the first census taken after the year have been published, be construed as a
reference to the census.
Composition
of the
House of
the People.
Composition
of the
Legislative
Assemblies.

(3) Upon the completion of each census, the total number of seats in the Legislative
Assembly of each State and the division of each State into territorial constituencies
shall be readjusted by such authority and in such manner as Parliament may by law
determine:
Provided that such readjustment shall not affect representation in the Legislative
Assembly until the dissolution of the then existing Assembly:
Provided further that such readjustment shall take effect from such date as the
President may, by order, specify and until such readjustment takes effect, any
election to the Legislative Assembly may be held on the basis of the territorial
constituencies existing before such readjustment:
Provided also that until the relevant figures for the first census taken after the
year have been published, it shall not be necessary to—
(i) the total number of seats in the Legislative Assembly of each State as
readjusted on the basis of the 1971 census; and
(ii) the division of such State into territorial constituencies as may be readjusted
on the basis of the census, under this clause.
 *   *  * *
366. In this Constitution, unless the context otherwise requires, the following
expressions have the meanings hereby respectively assigned to them, that is to say—
 (1) * * * *
 (2) * * * *
 (3) * * * *
 (4) * * * *
 (5) * * * *
 (6) * * * *
 (7) * * * *
 (8) * * * *
 (9) * * * *
(10) * * * *
(11) * * * *
(12) * * * *
(13) * * * *
(14) * * * *
 (15) “Indian State” means any territory which the Government of the Dominion
of India recognised as such a State;
*   *  * *
Definitions.
6

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
 further to amend the Constitution of India.
—————
(Shri Hibi Eden, M.P .)