1
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
THE  FOREST (CONSERV ATION) AMENDMENT  BILL,  2009
By
SHRI HANSRAJ GANGARAM AHIR, M.P.
A
BILL
 further to amend the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixtieth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Forest (Conservation) Amendment Act, 2009.
   ( 2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. After section 3B of the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980, the following section shall
be inserted, namely:—
"3C. Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 2 and 3, when a forest
land or any part thereof, measuring not more than forty hectares, is required for any
work relating to irrigation or mining, the clearance for the deforestation of the forest
land may be given by the District Collector in whose jurisdiction the forest area falls:
Provided that a list of all such cases of deforestation under the provisions of
this section shall be furnished to the Union Ministry of Environment and Forests for
information and record at the end of every year.".
Short title
and
commence-
ment.
Insertion of
new section
3C.
Bill No. 122  of  2009
Clearance for
deforestation
for irrigation/
mining
projects by
District
Collector.
69 of 1980.
5
10

2
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 puts certain restrictions on the clearance of
the forest land for non-forest purposes. Though section 2 of the Act lists certain
exceptions to this rule these exceptions do not include irrigation projects needed for
the betterment of farmers or mining related activities. Due to the restrictions, farmers
are finding it difficult to have sufficient water for their fields. The foodgrain production
is going down. It has resulted in increasing incidence of malnutrition, starvation and
suicide among farmers. On the other hand, the farmers living in non-forest areas do not
suffer any such restriction. Irrigation projects can easily be implemented there. To
remove this discrimination, it can be provided that irrigation projects in forest areas,
covering an area of  not more than 40 hectares, can be cleared at the level of District
Collector. It will not only ensure quick disposal of irrigation projects but the
transparency will also be maintained. Such a step will prove to be immensely helpful for
farmers and their standard of  living will also be improved.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; HANSRAJ GANGARAM AHIR
November 5, 2009

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980.
————
(Shri Hansraj Gangaram Ahir, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—5026LS(S5)—08-12-2009.