  AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No.  122  of 2021
THE  COMPULSORY PERIODICAL DESILTATION OF DAMS,
RESERVOIRS AND RIVERS BILL, 2021
By
DR. NISHIKANT DUBEY , M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the compulsory periodical desiltation of dams,
reservoirs, rivers and such other water bodies and an insti-
tutional mechanism by establishing a National Authority
to ensure timely and periodical desiltationof such water
bodies in the country to increase  their water holding
capacity and ensure smooth flow of water which will
 reduce the incidence of floods and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
 BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-second Year of the Republic of India
as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Compulsory Periodical Desiltation of Dams,
Reservoirs and Rivers Act, 2021.
(2)  It extends to the whole of India.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
5

(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
 (a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State, and in all other cases, the Central Government;
 (b) “Authority” means the National Desiltation Authority of India established
under section 3;
 (c) “Dam” means any artificial barrier and its appurtenant structure constructed
across rivers or tributaries thereof to impound or divert water which also include
barrage, weir and similar water impounding structures;
 (d) “desiltation” means removing of sediments of rocks and clay deposited by
flowing stream of water in a river, dams and other water bodies;
 (e) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
 (f) “reservoir” in relation to a dam shall mean any spread of water impounded
by such a dam.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, within a period of sixty days from the date
of commencement of this Act, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish for the
purposes of this Act, an Authority to be known as the National Desiltation Authority
of India for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) The Authority shall be a body corporate, by the name aforesaid, having
perpetual succession and a common seal with power to acquire, hold and dispose off
properties, both movable and immovable, and to contract, and shall, by the said name,
sue or be sued.
(3) The headquarters of the Authority shall be at Deoghar in the State of
Jharkhand and the Authority may also establish offices at other places in India.
(4) The Authority shall consist of a Chairperson, a Deputy Chairperson and
four other members having such qualifications and experience to be appointed by the
Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed;
(5) The salaries and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of
service of the Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson and other members shall be such
as may be prescribed;
(6) The Authority shall have its own Secretariat headed by a Secretary and
such number of officers and staff as may be necessary for the efficient functioning
of the Authority.
(7) The salaries, allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of
service of the Secretary, other officers and staff shall be such as may be prescribed.
(8) The Authority shall comply with such directions, as may, from time to
time, be given to it by the Central Government.
(9) The Authority shall meet at such times and places and shall observe such
rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings in the
manner as may be prescribed.
2
5
10
Establishment
of National
Desiltation
Authority of
India.
15
20
25
30
35
40
Definitions.

4. (1) The Authority shall —
(i) prepare a list of dams, reservoirs and rivers in the country and chalk
out a programme for desiltation of each of these dams, reservoir and river;
(ii) prescribe norms for desiltation, prioritisation of works, proper
surveillance and inspection;
(iii) ensure that every dam, reservoir and river undergoes desiltation
process at least once in every five years.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions, contained in
sub-section (1), the Authority shall make all endeavours to,—
(a) make provision for machinery, vehicles and necessary infrastructure
required for desiltation works;
(b) hire services of experts in the field of desiltation works in consultation
with Dredging Corporation of India;
(c) suggest measures for the use of silt which will be generated after the
desiltation works;
(d) make provisions for safety, emergency action plan and such other
measures, as may be prescribed, during the desiltation works undertaken by the
Authority.
5. It shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to extend requisite help,
manpower and assistance to the Authority, as and when required by it.
6. (1) The Authority shall prepare once in every year, in such form and at such
time as may be prescribed, an annual report  giving a true and full account of its
activities during the previous financial year and submit a copy thereof to the Central
Government.
(2) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, cause the annual report
to be laid before each House of Parliament.
7.  The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament
by law in this behalf, provide to the Authority by way of grants such sums of money as
may be required for the effective implementation of the provisions of this Act.
8. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any
other law, for the time being in force dealing with the subject matter of this Act.
9. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is
made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of
thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or
the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in
the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may
be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice
to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Appropriate
Government to
extend required
help to the
Authority.
Act to
supplement
other laws.
5
10
15
Power to make
rules.
20
25
30
35
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Annual
Report.
Functions of
the Authority.
40
3

4
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Our country has many rivers and there are several cities and villages near their
banks. These rivers give much required water for drinking and other purposes and for
irrigation purposes to grow crops in major parts of the country. On many rivers, dams
have been constructed to generate hydro-power to meet the power demands of our
vast nation. The water stored in these dams is also used for drinking and irrigation
purposes.
Similarly, large number of reservoirs have been constructed across the country
which store rainwater which is used for drinking and other purposes. For instance,
Jharkhand is at large dependent on nearby reservoirs for its daily water supply and so
is the case of other States also.
However, the holy rivers which provide water for our lifeline also bring havoc
and destructions through floods. One of the main reasons for flooding of these rivers
is deposit of huge quantities of silt in their bed which reduces their water holding
capacity resulting in floods.
Similarly, large quantities of silt deposited in dams and reservoirs across the
country which has substantially reduced their capacity to hold water in them. As a
result, for instance, when summer approaches the water level in reservoirs goes down
substantially resulting in severe water crisis and this happens almost every year.
Since the rivers, dams, reservoirs and big water bodies in the country are never
desilted, the situation is becoming from bad to worse. Floods are causing huge losses
of human lives, properties, crops, livestock and bring miseries to the people year after
year. Similarly, huge deposits of silt in dams and reservoirs is causing severe water
crisis for drinking as well as irrigation purposes. Hence, it has become utmost necessary
to carry out  periodical desiltation of rivers, dams and reservoirs in the country. It is
felt that every river, dam and reservoir must be desilted once in every five years. For
this purpose, an Authority be established at the national level to ensure desiltation of
these water bodies as per time schedule.
Hence, this Bill.
     NEW DELHI;                NISHIKANT DUBEY
January 15,  2021.
PRESIDENT’S RECOMMENDA TION UNDER ARTICLE 117(3)
OF THE CONSTITUTION
[Copy of letter No. P-22021/1/2021-Comm(SPR)/1270 dated 22 September, 2021
from Shri Gajendra Singh Shekhawat, Minister of Jal Shakti to the  Secretary General,
Lok Sabha].
The President, having been  informed of the subject matter of the Compulsory
Periodical Disiltation of Dams, Reservoirs and Rivers Bill, 2021 by Dr. Nishikant Dubey,
Member of Parliament, recommends to the House, the consideration of the Bill under
clause (3) of article 117 of the Constitution.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of National Desiltation
Authority of India. Clause 7 makes it mandatory for the Central Government to provide
required funds to the Authority. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of India. However, at this stage it is not possible to
quantify the amount but it is estimated that a sum of rupees fifty thousand crore will
involve as recurring expenditure per annum from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees one lakh crore will also be
involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.
5

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGA TED LEGISLA TION
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the
delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.
6

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
to provide for the compulsory periodical desiltation of dams, reservoirs, rivers and
such other water bodies and an institutional mechanism by establishing a
National Authority to ensure timely and periodical desiltation of such
waterbodies in the country to increase their water holding capacity
and ensure smooth flow of water which will reduce the
incidence of floods and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Dr. Nishikant Dubey, M.P.)