Bm No. 132 of 1"2 
THE AGRICULTURAL REFINANCE 
CORPORATION BILL: 1962 
(As INDODUCIID IN LoK SABRA 
ON STH DECEMBER, 1962) 

niB AGRICULTURAL REFINANCE' CoRPORAtiON 
B' 'IU.,' 1M 2' ..... -., yu 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CIiAPTERI 
CLAUBU 
1. Short title, extent and commeneement. 
2. Definitions. 
EsTABLISHMENT AND CAPITAL 01' TIlE AGRICULTURAL RumAIfCil CODOaA-
TlOB 
3. Establishment and inoorporaticm of Agricultural Reftnance 
Corporation. 
4. omeas and' agencies. 
~. Share capital and shareholders. 
6. Guarantee by Central Government. 
7. Shares of Corporation to be deemed ~ be MCUriM. ,for 
certain purposes. 
8. Register of shareholders. 
cHAPTEltM 
9. Management. 
10. Board of directors. 
11. Term of oftlce and retirement of diredon aDd 'parma at 
fee; to' them; 
12. Disqualifications. 
13. Vacation and resignation of oftiee by dfreetoi'l. 
14. Mafuf.giitg ditector .. 
0) 
2277 (B) LS-l. 

(ii) 
CLAUS. 
15. Casual vacancies in the oftlee of ma"IPftI direet01'. 
16. Meetings of Board. 
17. Committees of Corporation. 
, 'I\'~ 
.. 
18. Member of Board or committee then!Of not to vote In eertata 
cases. 
CHAPTER IV 
FuNDS AND BUSINI'SS or TId CORPORAftOIII' 
19. Central Government to make a loan of five croree of nape8-
20. Borrowings by Corporation. 
21. Loans in foreign currency. 
22. Business which the Corporation may transact. 
23. Limit of accommodation. 
24. Power to impose conditions for aecommodatiMl. 
25. Power to call for repayment before agreed period. 
26. Deposit accounts and investments. 
CHAPI'ER V 
ACCOUNTS .um At11m' 
27. Preparation of balance-sheet, etc., of Corporation. 
28. Disposal of profits. 
29. Special deposit. 
30. Audit. 
31. General meetings. 
32. Returns. 
CHAPTER VI 
MISCELLANEOUS 
33. Power of Central Government to give c:tirection •. 
34. Staff of Corporation. 
35. Corporation to have access to recorda.. 
" 36. Act'18af 1891 to apply to books of Corporati.oD. 
37. Liquidation of Corporation. 
38. Indemnity of directors. 
39. Defects in appointment not to invalidate aets, etc. 
40. Protection of action taken Wlder the Ad. 

( iii ) 
CLAV_ 
.u. Declaration of fidelity and secrecy. 
"2·. Provisions relating to income-tax and lUPer-tax. 
43. Delegation of powers. 
«. Penalties. 
45. Offences by companies. 
46. Powers of Board to make regulations. 
47. Amendment of certain enactments. 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE.-Dr.cLARATION OF P!DBLITY AND HCUCY. 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE.-AMBNDMBNT OF CIlRTAIN IlNACTMBIII'TS • 
• 

" .~ ~ .. 
BUI No. 122 or 1"2 
'! THE AGRICULTURAL REFINANCE CORPORATION 
< BILL,I962 
(As IImIODUCm IN Lolt SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
to provide few the establishmmt of a Corporation for granting mediu.m 
' .. and long term C1'edit b.y way of refinance or otherwise, for 'the 
~ • . d~t,elopinent of .agricultu.re and for other matters connected there-
.', with or 'incidental thereto. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirteenth Year of the Republic 
.oIlIldie as follows:-
, CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
5 . 1 .. (1) This Act may be called the Agricultural Refinance Corpora- 8bon title, 
tion Act 1962. eztcnt aDO , COIDmence-
(2) It extends to the whole of India . .. . " " . 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Govern-
ment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint . 
IDeOt. 
. ::;'1 'r. (10 Z. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "agriculture" includes animal husbandry, dairy farming, 
.:: ; ~ture; pOultry fliMniri.g and stock' breeding; . . ", . "." ... ' .' . 
(b) "Board" means the Board of directors of the Corporation; 
(c) "central land mortgage bank" means the principal land 
iiS " 1·tnm1gage: bank' in' a State' which is' registered, or deemed to be 
registered, under the Co-operative Societies Act; 1912 or !tny other 

law for the time being in force in any State relating to co~l'a­
tive societies and the primary object of which is the providiD, of 
long term finance for agricultural development: 
Provided that in addition to such principal land mortgage 
bank in a State or where there is no such bank in a State, the ~ 
State Government may, with the previous approvtd of the 
Reserve ~nk, declare anyone or more land mortgage banks 
registered or deemed to be registered as aforesaid and caJTylng 
on the business of providing long term finances for agricultunl 
development in that State to be a central land mortgage bank « 10 
banks within the meaning of this definition; 
(d) "co-operative society" means a society registered', Of 
deemed to be registered, under the Co-operative Societies Act, 
1912 or any other law for the time being in force in any State s of IIr •• 
relating to co-operative societies; JS 
(e) "Corporation" means the Agricultural Refinance Cor-
poration established under this Act; 
</) "eligible institution" mean~ 
(i) a central land mortgage bank or a State co-operative 
bank or a scheduled bank, being in each case a shareholder 20 
of the Corporation; and 
(ii) a co-operative society (other than a eentral led 
mortgage bank or a State co-operative bank) approved by 
the Reserve Bank in this behalf; 
(g) "Life Insurance Corporation" means the Life Insurance ~.s 
Cerporation of India established under section 3 of the Life 
Insurance Corporation Act, 1956; 
(h) "prescribed" means prescribed by regulations made 
under this Act; 
(i) "Reserve Bank" means the Reserve Bank of India con- 30 
stituted under the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934; s of It,.. 
(;) "scheduled bank" means a bank for the time being indueS· 
ed in the Second Schedule to the Reserve Bank of India Aet, 1834.; 
and 
(k) "State co-operative bank" has the same meanil1l U III JS 
the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934. 

t 
CHAPTER II 
ZwrABLISKMENT AND CAPITAL OF THE AGRICULTURAL REFINANCZ CORPORA .. 
TION 
3. (1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may ~!i.bmcnt 
• by notification in the Official Gazette appoint, there shall be estab- :.v.:~ 
lished for the purposes of this Act a Corporation to be known as the ~~twal 
Agricultural Refinance Corporation. c!~ioA. 
(2) The Corporation shall be a body corporate with the name 
aforesaid, having perpetual succession and" a common seal with power, 
10 subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of 
property, and to contract, and may by that name sue and be sued. 
.. The Corporation shall 8tablish its head office in Bombay and oe:..ad 
may, with the previous approval of the Reserve Bank, establish ofBeeB "C I. 
or a"endes in other places in India. 
15 5. (1) The authorised capital oJ the Corporation shall be twenty- :=re..:!caI 
five crores of rupees divided into twenty-five thousand fully paid-up bolden. 
shares of ten thousand rupees each of which five thousand shares 
of the total value of five crores of rupees shall be issued in the first 
instance, apd the remaining shares may, with the sanction of the 
~o Central Government, be issued from time to time by the Corporation 
as and when the Corporation may deem fit. 
-
(2) Of the capital issued in the first instance and before such date 
as may be notified by the Central Government in the Official Gazette 
in this behalf-
, r (a) the Reserve Bank shall subscribe for two thousand five 
hundred shares; 
(b) central land mortgage banks and State co-operative 
banks may subscribe for one thousand five hundred shares; 
(c) scheduled banks, the Life Insurance Corporation, insur-
30 ance and investment companies and such other classes of financial 
institutions as may be notified by the Central Government in the 
Oftlcial Gazette in this behalf may subscribe for one thousand 
_hares. 
(3) The allotment of shares to the institutions mentioned in clauses 
35 (b) and (c) of sub-section (2) shall be made by the Board in accord-
ance with the regulations made in this behalf: 
Provided that no such institution shall be allotted more than ten 
per cent. of the shares reserved for the class of institutions to which 
it belongs. 

Guarantee 
~ Central 
Govern-
ment. 
Sham of 
Corporation 
to be 
deemed to 
be Iccuritie. 
for certain 
purposes. 
4 
(4) If any shares referred to in clause. (b) and (e) of sub-section 
(2) remain unaUotted, they shall be subscribed for by the Reeerve 
Bank: 
Provided. that the Reserve Bank may dispose of the· shares. 8ub-
scribed for by it in pursuance of thi. sub-section, to any instiMioD"Si" 
mentioned in clauses (b) and (e) of sub-section (2), 80 howey., .' 
that-
(i) the institutions referred to in the said clause (b) shall, 
not together hold more than one thousand five hundred shBres~ : 
and the institutions referred to in the said clause (e) ahalIno\" '10' 
together hold more than one thousand shares, and 
(ii) no institution shall hold more than ten per cent. of the 
shares reserved for the class of Institutions to which it belemgs. 
(5) If and when the remaining shares or any part thereof are 
issued, the Reserve Bank shall, and the institutions referred to in!S 
clauses (b) and (c) of sub-section (2) may, subscribe for such' 
shares in the same proportion as for the first issue and the proviaioDi 
ofaub-sections (3) and (4), except clause (ii) of the proviso to JUb.' 
section (4), shall also apply to such shares. 
(6) Shares of the Corporation shall not be transferable except- 20 
(a) to the institutions specified in clauses (a), (b) and ,(e) 
of sub-section (2), and 
(b) in accordance with the regulations made in this behalf. 
6. Shares of the Corporation shall be guaranteed by the Central 
GoYemm.eat as to the I'epayment of the prin.eipal ... the 'payment 2S 
of;a minimum aDDual dividend at sueh rate a. may be 8ud Ity, rthe 
C.ual GOVet'lUDeftt by Ilotificaticm in the Official. Goette at the 
ti .. ,of issuiJaethe shares. 
7. Not"ithstanding anything contained in the Acts hereinafter 
mentioned in this section, the shares of the Corporation shall be 30 
deemed to be included among the securities enumerated in section 
20 of thelndian Trusts Act, 1882., and be also deemed to be apprQvld ~ of 18b. 
securities for the ,purposes of the -1nsuraru:e Act, 1938 alld the Bank- " .. of 1938. 
ing Companies Act, 1949. 10 of 194'. 

s 
10 
IS 
5 
8. (1) The Cqrporation shall maintain as its head office a register Resistor of 
of the shareholders and shall enter therein the following particulars lhareholdcn. 
so far as they may be available, namely:-
(i) the names and addresses of the shareholders and a state-
ment of the shares held by each shareholder, distinguishing each 
share by its denotfng number; 
(ii) the date on which each person is entered as a share-
holder; 
(iii) the date on which any person ceases to be a share-
holder; and 
(iv) such other particulars as may be prescribed. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or in any 
other law for the time being ill force, no notice of any trust, express, 
implied or constructive, shall be entered on the register maintained 
under sub-section (1) or be receivable by the Corporation. 
CHAPl'ERm 
MANAGEMENT OF THE CORPORATION 
9. (1) The general superintendence, direction and management of ~::.ae­
the affairs and business of the Corporation shall vest in a Board of 
20 directors which may exercise all such powers and do all such act. 
and things as may be exercised or done by the Corporation. 
(2) The Board. in discharging its functions. shall act on businesl 
principles with due regard to public interest. 
10. The Board of directors shall consist of the following, namely: - Board of 
.; djrcctol'l. 
(a) a Deputy Govemar of the Reserve Bank nominated by 
that Bank, who shall be the Chairman of the Board; 
(b) a director nominated by the Reserve Bank; 
(c) three officers of the Central Government nominated 
by that Government: 
(d) one director elected in the prescribed manner by such 
40 of the central lana mortgage banks as are shareholders of the 
Corporation; 

8 
(e) one director elected in the prescribed manner by such 
of the State co-operative banks as are sharehcl<fers of the Cor-
poration; 
(1) one director elected in the prescribed manner by the 
Life Insurance Corporation, scheduled banks, insurance and in- 5 
vestment companies and other financial institutions, which are 
shareholders of the Corporation; and 
(g) a managing director to be appointed by the Reserve 
Bank and, except in the case of the first appointment, after 
consultation with the Board: 10 
Provided that on the first constitution of the BOkrd, the 
directors referred to in clauses (d), (e) and (1) shall be nomi-
nated by the Central Government and the directors 80 nominated 
shall, for the purposes of this, Act, be deemed to be elected 
directors: 15 
Provided further that the directors so nominated shall hold 
office until the conclusion of the first annual general meeting of 
the Corporation. 
Term of 11. (1) A .nominated director shall hold office during the pleasure 
~=.::! CIt' of the authority nominating him. 20 
directon and 
payment of (2) An e~ected director, other than a director deemed to be elect-
feel to them. ed under the first proviso to section 10, shall hold office for four 
years: 
Provided that an elected director shall continue in office until 
his successor has been elected and shall also be eligible for Il"e-elec-25 
tion but shall not hold office for more than two consecutive terms. 
(3) A casual vacancy in the office of an elected director shan be 
filled by election and a director so elected shall hold office for the 
unexpired portion of the term of his predecessor: 
Provided that no casual vacancr occurring within three months 30 
of the date of expiry of the normal term of oftlce of an elected direc-
tor .need be filled under this sub-section. 
(4) Directors shali be paid such fees and allowances aa may be 
prescribed for attending the meetings of the Board or of any of its 
committees and for attending to any other work of the Corporation: 3S 
Provided that no fees shall be payable to the Chairman, manag-
ing director or to any other director who is an oftlcer of the Govem-
ment or ef the Reserve Bank. 

7 
lZ. No person shall be a director who- Disqualifi-
cations. 
(a) except in the case of the managing director, is a sala-
ried official of the Corporation; or 
(b) is, or at any time has been, adjudicated insolvent or has 
5 suspended payment of his debts or has compounded with his 
creditors; or 
10 
(c) is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a compe-
tent court; or' 
(d) is or has been convicted of any offence which, in the 
opinion of the Central Government, involves moral turpitude. 
13. (1) If a director-
(0) becomes subject to any of the disqualifications 
tioned jn section 12; or 
VaCation and 
rcsignation 
gf officc by 
men- directors. 
(b) is absent without leave of the Board from more than 
IS three consecutive meetings thereof, 
his seat shall thereupon become vacant. 
(2) Any director elected under clause (d), or clause (e) or 
clause <f) of section 10 may resign his office by giving notice thereof 
in writing to the Board and, on such resignation being accepted, shall 
20 be deemed to have vacated his office. 
25 
It. (1) The managing director ~hall-
(a) be a whole-time officer of the Corporation; 
(b) perform such duties as the Board may entrust or dele-
gate to him; 
(c) hold oftlce for such term. not exceeding five years as 
the Reserve Bank may at the time of appointment specify and 
be eligible for re-appointment; and 
(d) receive such salary and allowances and be governed by 
such terms and conditions of service as the Board, with the 
previous apprpval of the Reserve Bank, may determine: 
Provided that the first managing director shall receive such 
salary and allowances and begovemed by such terms and con-
ditions of service as the Reserve Bank may determine. 
Managinl 
director. 

a 
(2) The Reserve Bank may at any time, after consultation with 
the Board, remove the managing director from office. 
Casual 15. If the managing director is by infirmity or otherwise rendered 
~c:anoffiiea ~ incapable of carrying out his duties or is absent on leave or other-
..:u..~ wise, in circumstances not involving the vacation of his appoint- 5 
direc:tar. ment, the Reserve Bank may, after consultation with the Board, 
appoint another person to act in his place during his absence. 
Meetinl8 of 16. (1) The Board shall meet at such times and places and shall 
Baud. observe such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of 
business at its meetings as may be prescribed. (0 
(2) The Chairman, or, if for any reason he is unable to attend 
any meeting, any other director elected by the directors present at 
the meeting shall.preside at the meeting of the Board. 
(3) All questions which come up before any meeting of the 
Board shall be decided by a majority of votes of the members 15 
present and voting, and, in the event of an equality of votes, the 
Chairman or, in his absence, the person presiding, shall have a 
second or casting vote. 
Committeel 17. (1) The Board may constitute an Executive Committee con-
ol Corpora. silting of such number of directors as may be prescribed. ~ tioa. 
(2) The Executive Committee shall discharge such functions as 
may be prescribed or may be delegated to it by the Board. 
(3) The Board may constitute such other committees, whether 
consisting wholly of directors or wholly of other perSQDS or partly 
of directors and partly of other persona as it thinks fit and for such 25 
purposes 8S it may decide. I 
(4) A committee constituted under this section shall meet at 
such times and places and shall observe such rules and procedure in 
regard to the transaction of business of its meetings as may be· 
preSCl"ibed. I 30 
(5) The members of a committee (other than the directors ·of the 
Board), shall be paid by the Corporation such fees and allowances 
as may be prescribed for attending its meetings and for attending 
to any other work of the Corporation. 

9 
18. A director of the Board or a member of a committee who has Member of 
any direct or indirect pecuniary interest in any matter coming up Board !,r 
for consideration at a meeting of the Board or a committee thereof, ~::r;~ 
shall, as soon as possible after relevant circumstances have come to to yo~c in 
5 his knowledge, disclose the nature of his interest at such meeting and :::n 
the disclosure shall be recorded in the minutes of the Board or the 
committee, as the case may be, and the director or member shall 
10 
not take any part in any deliberation or decision of the Board or the 
committee with respect to that matter. 
CHAPTER IV 
FUNDS AND BUSINESS OF THE CORPORATION 
19. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made Central Go-
by Parliament by law in this behalf, make to the Corporation an vemmcnt to • makea loan IDterest.free loan of five crores of rupees, repayable in fifteen equal of five 
15 annual instalments commencing on the expiry of a period of fifteen crore8 of 
years from the date of receipt of the loan: rupecs. 
Provided that the Central Government may, on a request being 
made to it by the Corporation, increase the number of instalments or 
alter the amount of any instalment or vary the date on which any 
20 instalment is payable. 
2S 
30 
3S 
ZOo (1) The Corporation may, for the purpose of carrying out its Borrowinsl 
functions under this Act, with the previous approval of the Central :~~?!~. 
Government-
(a) issue and sell bonds and debentures carrying interest, 
which bonds and debentures shall be guaranteed by the Central 
Government as to the repayment of principal and payment fd 
interest at such rates as may be fixed by the Central Govern. 
ment at the time the bonds or debentures are issued; 
(b) borrow money from the Reserve Bank repayable on 
the expiry of fixed periods not exceeding eighteen months 
from the date of the making of the loan or advance, against the 
security of stocks, f1;lnds and securitj~s (other than immov· 
able property) in which a trustee is authorised to invest trust 
money by any law for the time being in force in India; 
(c) borrow money from the Central Government and from 
any other authority or organisation or institution approved by 
that Government, on such terms and conditions as may be 
agreed upon; and I 
(d) accept from the Central Government, a State Govern-
ment, a local authority, a central land mortgage bank, a State 

Loans 
foreign 
currency. 
10 
c()-()perative bank, a SCgeduied bank or any person, deposits re-
payable after the expiry of n Vriod nhich sho.lI not be less 
than twelve months from the date of the making of the deposit 
and on such other terms as the Corporation may, with the prior 
approval of the Reserve Bank, fix. S 
(2) The amount of loan granted by the Central Government 
under section 19 and outstanding, together with the amount of 
bonds and debentures issued under clause (a) of sub-section (1) and 
outstanding, the amounts borrowed by the Corporation and out-
standing under clauses (b) and (c) of that sub-section and· the 10 
• amount of depOSits accepted under clause (d) of that sub-section, 
shall not at any time in the aggregate exceed twenty times the 
amount of the paid-up share capital and the reserve fund of the 
Corporation. 
in 21. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Foreign Ex- IS 
change Regulation Act, 1947, or in any other law for the time being 7 of 1947· 
in force relating to foreign exchange, the Corporation may, for the 
purpose of granting loans and advances to eligible institutions, 
borrow, with the previous consent of the Central Government, foreign 
currency from any bank or financial institution in India or else- 20 
whereJ 
(2) The Central Government may guarantee loans taken by 
the Corporation under sub-section (1) as to the repayment of prin-
cipal and the payment of intere§t thereon and other incidental 
charges. 25 
(3) All loans and advances made to eligible institutions out of 
foreign currency borrowed under sub-section (1) shall be granted 
in Indian currency and shall be repayable by such institutions in 
Indian currency. 
(4) Any loss occurring or profit accruing in connection with any 30 
borrowing of foreign currency under sub-section (1) for the purpose 
of granting loans or advances to any eligible institution or its re-
payment, on account of any fluctuations in the rates 9f exchange 
shall be reimbursed by, or paid to, the eligible institution. 
Bu,iness ft. (1) The Corporation may provide such financial assistance 35 
weohkh . the to eligible institutions as it considers necessary for promoting the rporatlon . 
may trBruI- development of agriculture in India and shall not-
act. 
(a) trans"ct any busine~ except for that pu~e, and 

11 
(b) grant, except as hereinafter provided, loans and advances 
otherwise than by way of refinance: . 
(2) No institution other than an eiigible institution shall be 
entitled to assistance under sub-section (1). 
5 (3) Subject to- the provisions of sUb-sections (1) and (2), the 
Corporation may transact the several kinds of business hereinafter 
specified, namely:-, 
(a) the granting of loans and advances by way of refinance 
to an eligible institution mentioned in sub-clause (i) of clause 
10 (1) of section 2, repayable within a period not exceeding twenty-
five years from the dates on which they are granted; 
(b) the granting of loans and advances otherwise than by 
way of refinance to an eligible institution mentioned in sub-clause 
(ii) of clause </> of section 2 repayable within a period not ex-
IS ceeding twenty-five years from the dates un which they are 
granted; 
(c) the subscribing to the debentures of any eligible insti-
tution repayable within a period not exceeding twenty-five 
years from the dates on which they are issued: 
20 Provided that repayment of principal and payment of in-
terest thereon are fully and unconditionally guaranteed by 
Government; 
(d) the guaranteeing, with the prior approval of the Cen-
tral Government and on such terms and conditions as may be 
2S agreed upon, of deferred payments in connection with the pur-
chase of capital goods from outside India, 
(i) due from an eligible institution mentioned in sub-
clause (ii) of clause (I) of section 2; or 
(ii) due from any other person and guaranteed to the 
3') Corporation by one of the eligible institutions mentioned in 
sub-clause (i) of clause (I) of section 2; 
(e) acting as agent for the Central Govenunent or a State 
Govemment in the transaction of any business with ail eligible 
institution in respect of loans and advances granted or to be 

Limit of 
accommoda-
tion. 
12 
Jl'anted, or debentures subscribed for or to be subscribed for, by 
such Government; and 
(1) generally, the doing of all such matters and things as 
may be incidental to or consequential upon the discharge of its 
functions u.nder this Acl. 5 
(4) No accommodation shall be granted under clauses (a), (b) 
and, (d) of sub-section (3) to an eligible institution unless it is 
fully and unconditionally guaranteed as to the repayment of prin-
cipal and payment of interest by Government: 
Provided that no such guarantee shall be required in cases in 10 
which an eligible institution makes available other security to the 
satisfaction of the Board: 
Provided further that any sums received by a scheduled bank in 
repayment or realisation of loans and advances refinanced either 
wholly or partly by the Corporation shall, to the extent of the accom- 15 
modation granted by the Corporation remaining outstanding, be 
deemed to have been received by the scheduled bank in trust for the 
Corporation, and shall accordingly be paid by such scheduled bank 
to the Corporation. 
(5) The Corporation shall not grant any loan or advance on the 20 
security of its own shares, bonds or debentures or for the purpose 
of providing working capital. I 
(6) The Corporation may receive, for the rendering of any of the 
services mentioned in sub-section (3), such commission or other 
consideration as may be agreed upon. 25 
(7) If any question arises whether a transaction undertaken by 
the Corporation is for the purpose of providing finance or refinance 
for the development of agriculture in India, the matter shall be re-
ferred to the Reserve Bank and the decision of the Reserve Bank 
thereupon shall be final 30 
23. The Corporation shall not, without the prior approval in writ-
ing of the Reserve Bank, enter into any transaction under clause 
(a) or clause (b) or clause (c) of sub-section (3) of section 22 involv-
ing an amount exceeding fifty lakhs of rupees. 
Power to ~- 24. In entering into any transaction under section 22 with an 35 
p'0lle c:rnd1- eligible institution, the Corporation may impose such conditions as tlona.o . • accommoda- It may think necessary or expedIent for p.rotecting the interests of 
don. the Corporation. I 

., 
13 
25, Notwithstanding anyth~ng to the contrary contained in any POWer to c:aJJ 
agreement, the Corporation may, by notice in writing require any for repay-
el'g'bl ' tit t' h" 'ment before ,lIe Ins u Ion to w lch It has granted any loan or advance to .,reed 
discharge forthwith in full its liabilities to the Corporation: _ period. 
5 (a) if it appears to the Board that false or misleading infor-
mation in any material particular was given in the application 
for the loan or advance; or 
10 
(b) if the eligible institution has failed to comply with any 
of the terms of its contract with the Corporation in the matter of 
the loan or advance; or 
(c) if there is a reasonable apprehension that the eligible 
institution is unable to pay its debts or that proceedings for 
liquidation may be commenced in respect thereof; or 
(d) if for any reason it is necessary to do so to protect the 
IS interests of the Corporation, 
26, All moneys belonging to the CorpoMtion which may not for Depoeit 
the time being be required by it shall be invested in promissory ::f::' t-
notes, stock or securities of the Central Government and all other IIIIcDII. 
moneys shall be deposited with the Reserve Bank or wi1lh any agency 
20 of the Reserve Bank or, in consultation with the Reserve Bank, with 
a State co-operative bank or a scheduled bank, 
CHAPTER V 
ACCOUNT AND AUDIT 
;!! . 
27, (1) The balance-sheet and accounts of the Corporation shall be Pret::ticll 
2S prepared and maintained in such form and manner as may be pres- :~t. e:::;-of 
cribed, Corpo:'at~. 
(2) The Board shall cause the books and accounts of the COr'!>Qra-
tion to be balanced and closed as on the thirtieth day of June, each 
year. 
!.IIO . 28 (l) The Corporation shall establish a reserve fund by transfer- Dispoealof 
~ . , ~~ 
ring such sums as it may deem fit out of its net annual profits before 
declaring a dividend, 
(2) After making provision for bad and doubtful debts, deprecia-
tion of assets and all other matters whic;h ~re usually provided for by 

= 
14 
~~rs, the Corporation may out of its net annual profits declare a. 
dividend: '. ; . t 
Provided that for so long as the reserve fund is less than the' paid-
up share capital of the Corporation and until there have been repaid 
to the Central Government such sums, if any, as that Government S 
may have paid under the guarantee given in pursuance of section 6 
or under any guarantee given in pursuance of sub-section (1) of 
section 20 or sub-section (2) of section 21, the rate of such dividend 
shall not exceed the rate guaranteed by the Central Government 
under section 6. 10 
29. (1) For a period of fifteen accounting years. foJ)owiI;l.g the 
accounting year during which the Corporation is established, all 
cUv,fpends accruing on the shares of the Corporation held by the 
~enre Bank shall, ir.stead of being paid to that Bank, be held by the 
C'orporation as a special deposit in a separate account and no interest 1$ 
shall be payable on such deposit. 
(2), On the expiry of the period referred to in sub-~ctiob (1), the 
Corporation shall, if so required by the Reserv'e Bank, pay to it the 
said special deposit and in c~se the Reserve Bank does not require 
the same to be paid to it, continue the said special deposit on:'Such ao 
temis and on such conditions, including payment of iriterest;' and 'for 
such period .as may be mutually agreed upon between theCorporatlon 
and the Reserve Bank. 
(3) No shareholder of the Corporation other than the Reserve 
Bank shall have any claim to the special deposit referred to in sub- 2, 
netion (1). 
MIlk. 30. (1) The affairs of the· Corporation shall be audited by an 
auditor duly qualified to act as auditor under sub-sectio,n (1) of sec-
tiQn ~. of the Companies Act, 1956, who shall be app~dnted by the I of ItS'. 
~~rd with, the previous approval of the Reserve' Bank and Ihall 30 
receive such remuneration from the Corporation as the BOBrd may, 
with the approval of the Reserve Bank, fix: 
Provided that tpe first auditor shall be appointed by the Reserve 
Bank within one month from the establishment of the Corporation on 
such tenns and conditions as the Reserve Bank may determine. 35 
(~) The auditor so appointed shall hold office from the conclusion 
pJ.a~ annual general meeting of the Corporation until the conclusion 
of the next annual general meeting: 
: . Provided tha,t the first auditor shall hold office until the conelueion 
of the first annual general meeting. 
40 

is 
(3) . The awiitor shall be supplied with a copy of the annu"'. 
balance-sheet qf the Corporation and it shall be his duty to examine 
it together with the accounts and vouchers relating thereto and he 
shll11 have; a list delivered to him of all books kept by the Corporation 
5 and shall at all reasonable times have access to the books, accountl, 
vouoben and other documents of the Corporation. 
(4) .The auditor. may, in relation to the accounts of the Cot"pOl'a-. 
tion, examine any director of the Board or any officer or employee .of 
the Corporation, and shall be entitled to require from the officers· of 
10 the Corporation such information and explanation as he may think 
necessary for the performance of his duties. 
(5) The auditor shall make a report to the Corporation upon the 
annual Palance-sheet and accounts examined by him and in. every 
such re~t he shall state whether in his opinion the balance-sheet.iI 
15 a full and fair balance-sheet containing all necessary particulars and. 
p~~rly drawn up so as to exhibit a true and fair view of ~he ISt~~~i 
of affairs of the Corporation and in cage he had called for any exp~~'I' 
nation or information from the Board, whether it has been given ali!! 
whether it is satisfactory. 
:ao (6) Without prejudice to anything contained in the preceding sul?:-
sections, the Central Government may at any time ·appoint the ComJr, 
troller and Auditor-General of India to examine and report upq~' 
the accounts of the Corporation, and any e~penditure incurred by 
him in con~tion with such examination and report !lIhall be payable 
2$' by the Corporation to the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India; 
31. (1) A 'general meeting shall be held annually (hereinafter GeaeRI 
referred to as the annual general meeting) at a place in India ........ 
where there is an office of the Corporation within three months 
from the date .on which the annual accounts of the Corporation are 
30. closed, and any other general meeting may be convened by the 
Board at any other time. 
Ptovidt!d that the Central Government may extend the time wt~l\­
in which 'any annual general meeting shall be held, by a period not 
exceeding one month. 
55. (2). .The shareholders present at the annual general meeting shall 
be entitled to discuss the annual accounts, the report of the .Board 
on the working of the Corporation throughout the year and the 
auditor', report GIn the annual balance-sheet and accounts. 

leturD8~ 
18 
32. (1) The Corporation shall furnish, from time to time, to the 
Central Government and to the Reserve Batlk such returns as the 
Central Government or the Reserve Bank may require, 
(2) The Corporation shall furnish to the Central Government and 
the Reserve Bank within fifteen days of the conclusion of the an- 5 
nual general meeting in respect of any year, a copy of its balance-
sheet as on the close of that year together with a profit and loss 
account for the year and a report of the working of the Corporation 
during the year, and copies of the said balance-sheet, profit and loss 
account and report shall be published in the Official Gazette and 10 
shall be laid before each House of Parliament. 
CHAPTER VI 
MISCELLANEOUS 
~o,,~ of 33. In the discharge of its functions under this Act, the Corpora-
o:.ctnment tion shall be guided by such directions in matters of policy involving IS 
~~ IP~ public interest as the Central Government may after consulting the 
. treet na. Reserve B~k give to it in writing, and if any question arises whether 
the direction relates to a matter of policy involving public interest, 
the decision of the Central Government thereon shall be final. 
Sta1fof . M. (1) The Corporation may appoint such number of staff as it 20 
Corporation. considers necessary or desirable for the efficient performance of its 
functions and determine the terms and conditions of their appoint-
ment and service. 
Col'p<!ration 
to haft 
8CCeII to 
re:orda. 
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (1), it shall 
be lawful for the Corporation to utilise, and for the Reserve Bank 2S 
to make available the services of, such staft of the Reserve Bank on 
s1.tCh terms and conditions as may be agreed upon between the Cor-
poration and the Reserve Bank. 
35. (1) The Corporation shall have free access to all such records 
of an eligible institution or any person availing of a loan or advance 30 
from such eligible institution perusal whereof may appear to the 
Corporation to be necessary in connection with the providing of fin-
ance or other assistance to such eligible institution or the refinancing 
of the loan or advance made to such person by the eligible institution. 
(2) The Corporation may require any eligible institution or person 35 
referred to in sub-section (1) to furnish to it copies of any of the 
records referred to in that sub-section and the eligible institution or 
the person, as the case may be, shall be bound to comply with such 
requisHfon. 

." 1'1 
38. The Corporation shall be deemed to be a bank for the pur- Act 18 of 
poses of the Bankers' Books Evidence Act, 1891. 1891 to apply to books 
of Cor-
poration. 
37. No provision of law relating to the winding up of companies Li uidation 
or corporations shall apply to the Corporation, and the Corporation o~ ~rpora-
5 shall not be placed in liquidation save by order of the Central Gov- tlon. 
emment and in such manner as it may direct. 
38. (1) Every director shall be indemnified by the Corporation Indemnity 
against all losses and expenses incurred by him in, or in relation to, of directors. 
the discharge of his duties, except such as are caused by his own wil-
10 ful act or default. 
(2) A director shall not be responsible for any other director or 
for any officer or other employee of the Corporation or for any loss 
or expenses resulting to the Corporation from the insufficiency or 
deficiency of value of, or title to, any property or security acquired 
IS or taken on behalf of the Corporation or the insolvency or wrongful 
act of any debtor or any person under obligation to the Corporation 
or anything done in good faith in the execution of the duties of his 
office in relation thereto. 
31. (1) No act or proceeding of the Board or of any committee of Dcf~. in 
20 the Corporation shall be questioned on the ground merely of the :~~~~::'l 
existence of any vacancy in, or defect in the constitution of, the Board Udate actR, 
or committee or on the ground of any director or member of any etc. 
committee having acted or taken part in any proceeding in contraven-
tion of section 18., 
25 (2) No act done by any person acting in good faith as a director of 
the Board or as a member of a committee of the Corporation shall be 
deemed to be invalid merely on the ground that he was disqualified 
to be a director or that there was any other defect in his appointment. 
40. No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Corpora- Protection 
30 tion or any director or any officer of the Corporation or any other per- ~~e~~~er 
son authorised by the Corporation to discharge any functions under the Act. 
this Act for any loss or damage caused or likely to be caused by any-
thing which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance 
of this Act. 
35 41. Every director, auditor, officer, or other employee of the Cor- Declara~it't1 
f h R B k h . of fidehty poration or any employee o. t e eserve an, w ose serylces are and secrecy. 
utilised by the Corporation under sub-section (2) of section 34, shall, 
before entering upon his duties, make a declaration of fidelity md 
secrecy in the form set out in the First Schedule to this Act. 

Provisions 
relating to 
income-tax 
and super-
tax. 
Delegation 
of powe·s. 
Penalties. 
Offences by 
companies. 
is 
42. Any sum paid by the Central Government under the. ·lUaraD-
tee given in pursuance of section 6 or, under any guarantee given 
in pursuance of sub-section (1) of section 20 or sub-section (2) of 
section 21 shall not be treated as the income, profits and rains of the 
Corporation, and any interest paid by the Corporation on deben- S 
tures or bonds or on foreign currency borrowed ·under sub-section 
(1) of section 21 out of such sum shall not be treated for the purpose 
of income-tax or super-tax as expenditure incurred by it: 
Provided that in the case of any shareholder sucla portion of • 
dividend as has been paid out of any such sum advanced by the 10 
Central Government shall be deemed to be his ·income from interest 
on securities declared to be income-tax free within the meaaiDg of 
clause (i) of section 86 of the Income Tax Act, 1961. 
43. The Board may, by general or special order, delegate to any 
committee of the Board or to the Chairman or managing director or 15 
any other officer of the Corporation, subject to such conditions and 
limitations, if any, as may be specified in the order, sucJl of its powers 
and duties under this Act as it may deem necessary. 
44. (1) Whoever in any return, balance-sheet, or other document 
or in any information required or furnished by or under or for the 20 
purposes of any provision of this Act, wilfully makes a statement 
which is false in any material particular, knowing it to be false, or 
wilfully omits to make a material statement, shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and shall 
also be liable to fine. 25 
(2) If any person fails to produce any book, account or other docu-
ment, or to furnish any statement or information which, under the 
provisions of this Act, it is his duty to produce or furnish, he shall 
be punishable with a fine which may extend to two thousand rupees 
in respect of each offence and in the case of a continuing failure, with 30 
an additional fine which may extend to one hundred rupees for every 
day during which the failure continues after conviction for the first 
such failure. 
45. (1) Where an offence has been committed by a company, every 
person who, at the time the offence was committed, was·in 'charge of, 135 
and was responsible to the company for the conduct of the ·business 
of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be.guilty 
of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished 
accordingly: 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render 40 
any such person liable to any punishment provided in this Act, if h1! 
430h96l. 

19 
proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that 
he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such 
offence. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where 
5 an offence under this Act has been committed by a company and it 
is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any 
-director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such 
director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to 
10 be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded agains\ 
and punished accordingly. 
Explanation.-for the purposes of this section-
(a) "company" means any body corporate and includes a 
firm or othw association of individuals; and 
IS (b) "director", in relation to a firm, means a partner in the 
firm. 
46. (1) The Board may, with the previous approval of the Reserve Powcn of 
Bank, make regulations not inconsistent with this Act to provide for =d ~~gu_ 
all matters for which provision is necessary or expedient for the pur- l.tions. 
zo pose of giving effect to the provisions of this Act. 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the 
. foreioing power, such regulations may provid~ for-
(a) the manner in which and the conditions subject to which 
the first allotment of shares of the Corporation shall be made; 
25 (b) the manner in which and the conditions subject to which 
the shares of the Corporation may be held and transferred, and 
generally all 'matters relating to the rights and duties of the 
shareholders; 
(c) the holding and conduct of elections under this Act, 
30 including the final decision on doubts or disputes regarding the 
validity of elections; 
(d) the manner in which general meetings shell be con-
vened, the procedure to be followed thereat and the manner in 
which voting rights may be exercised; 
(e) the fees or allowances that may be paid to the direc~ors; 
(f) the times and places of the meetings of the Board or of 
any committee constituted under this Act and the procedure to 

20 
be followed at such meetings including the quorum necessary 
for the transaction of business; 
(g) the number of directors constituting the Executive Com-
mittee, end the functions that such committee shall discharge; 
(h) the functions which any other committee may discharge 5 
under this Act; 
(i) the fees and allowances that may be paid to the mem-
bers of a committee other than directors; 
(;) the manner and terms of issue and redemption of bonds 
and debentures by the Corporation; 10 
(k) the conditions which the Corporation may impose in 
granting loans Wld advances; 
(I) the manner and conditions subject to which the Corpora-
tion may borrow in foreign currency; 
(m) the form and manner in which the balance-sheet and 15 
the accounts of the Corporation shall be prepared or maintained; 
(n) the forms of returns and statements required under this 
Act; 
(0) the duties and conduct, salaries, allowances and condi-
tions of service of officers and other employees; 20 
(p) the establishment and maintenance of provident or other 
benefit funds for" employees of the Corporation; and 
(q) generally, the efficient conduct of the affairs of the 
Corporation. 
(3) Any regulation which may be made by the Board under this 25 
Act may be made by the Reserve Bank within" three months of the 
establishment of the Corpomtion; and any regulation so made may 
be altered or rescinded by the Board in the exercise of its powers 
under this Act. 
(4) No regulations made under this Act shall have effect until 30 
they are published in the Official Gazette. " 
(5) All regulations made under this Act shall be placed before 
each House of Parliament. 
Amcnd~cnt 47. The enactments specified in the Second Schedule to this Act 
~ta. shall be emended in the manner provided therein. 35 

THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
(See section 41) 
Decl4ration of fidelity 4nd secrecy 
I do hereby declare that I will faithfully, truly and to the best 
5 of my akill and ability execute and perform the duties required of 
me as director, auditor, officer or other employee (as the case may 
be) of the Agricultural Refinance Corporation and which properly 
relate to the oftice or position held by me in the said Corporation. 
I further declare that I will not communicate or allow to be com-
10 municated. to any person not legally entitled thereto any infonnation 
relating to the aftairs of the Agricultural Refinance Corporation or 
to the affairs of any person having any dealing with the said Cor-
poration; nor wUl I allow any such person to inspect or have access 
to any books or documents belonging to or in the possession of the 
15 Agricultural Refinance Corporation and relating to the business of 
the said Corporation or the business of any person having any deal-
ing with the said Corporation. 
-
Sigft.ed before me. 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE 
(See section 47) 
A meftdmen.tl of oert4i" enactment.. 
PART I 
(Signature.) 
AJ.mmMENTS TO 'ftDl RI:savI: BANK or INDIA Ar:r, 1934 (2 OF 1934:) 
Amendmentl 
1. In aect10n 2, for clause (4), substitute the f01low1ng clauset, 
umely:-
'(4) "Agricultural Reftnanee Corporation" means the AgrI-
cultural Refinance Corporation establlshed under section 3 • af 
30 the Agricultural Rlaflna.nee CoJ1)Oration Aot, I9&!; 
• 

22 
(CIa) "the Bank" means the Reserve Bank of India consti-
tuted by this Act;'. 
2. In section 17,-
(4) after clause (4D), insert the following clause, namely:-
"(4E) the making to the Agricultural Refinance Cor- S 
poration of loans and advances repayable on the expiry of 
tbfed periods not exceeding eighteen months from the date 
of the making of the loan or advance, against the security of 
stocks, funds and securities· (other than immovable· proper-
ty) in which a trustee is authorised to invest trust money 10 
"by any law for the time being in force in India."; 
(b) in clause (SA), after the words "the capital of", inaert 
the words "the Agricultural Refinance Corporation,". 
PAIlT n 
~ TO THE INDU8'l'ItIAL Dlaru liS AcT, lM7 (14 01" 1947) IS 
In section 2, in sub-elause (i) of clause (a). after the words ''to 
any industrial dispute concerning" insert the words ''the Agricultural 
Refinance Corporation established under section 3 of the Agricultural 
Refinance Corporation Act, 1962, or". 

STAtliMENT OF OBiocTS AND REASONS 
The question of establishing an independent statutory Corporation 
for facilitating the proviSion of term credit for agricultural develop-
ment has been under consideration for some time. The new institu-
tion is intended to assist projects which cannot ordinarily be financed 
by·estabUshed agencies suebas the apex co-operative and land mort-
gage banks, either because the amounts involved in each individual 
scheme or project are very large or because the period for which 
credit is necessary is relatively long. The new Corporation will be 
predeminantly a refinancing agency, proViding the necessary resour-
ces .for· these purposes to other· primary lenders. 
2. It has been considered desirable, in view of the important role 
whieh the·new corporation is expected to play in promoting'the deve-
lopmeat of agriculture and other allied activities, that its duties, rights 
and obligations should be prescribed clearly by law: The Bill is in-
tended to gCve effect to the arrangements which have been proposed in 
connection with the establishment of the Corporation. The notes on 
clauses explain in detail the various provisions of the Bill 
NBWDELm; MORARJI DESAI. 
Tha'2ge~ November, 1.962. 
23 

Note. on clawu 
Clause 2 defines the words and expressions used in the Bill. Agri-
culture, in accordance with the deftni1ion for the purposes of the Bill. 
will include animal husbandry, dairy farming, piscicUlture, poultry 
farming and stock breeding. Eligible institutions will normally be the 
State co-operative and the State land mortgage banks and they will be 
entitled to the facility of refinance in respect of" loans or advances 
made by thenl, but it will be open to the Corporation, with the appro-
val of the Reserve Bank, to treat any co-operative society as an eligible 
institution for the purpose of granting loans or advances directly to it. 
Clauses 3 and 4 provide for the establJsbment of the Corporation, 
the location of its head office at Bombay, and the other offices or 
agencies of the Corporation 
Clauses 5 to 7 provide fer the capital structure, the allotment of 
shares and the ownership of the Corporation. The authoriied capital 
will be RI. 25 crores. . 
A sum of Ri. 5 crores out of the Corporation's authorised capital 
will be issued and paid-up in the first instance. Fifty per cent. of the 
capital thus issued and paid-up will be allotted to the Reserve Bank. 
An amount not exceeding thirty per cent. may be allotted, on applica-
tion, to State co-operative and land mortgage banks, while an amount 
not exceeding twenty per cent. may be allotted to scheduled banks, the 
Life Insurance Corporation, insurance and investment companies and 
other financial institutions. Shares which are not taken up within 
the respective categories, by the institutions for which they are 
intended will be allotted. to the Reserve Bank in addition to its 
normal fifty per cent. share, but such shares, acquired in excess of its 
statutory minimum holdings, may be transferred by the Reserve 
Bank at a later stage to the institutions which are eligible to_, 
or to become, shareholders of the Corporation, within the quotas 
earmarked for each category, so long as the effect of such transfers is 
not to increase the holding of any individual institution beyond ten 
per cent. of the total value of the shares intended for the category to 
which it beloags. 
Any issue of capital, after the initial amount of Rs. 5 crares hu 
been allotted and paid-up, will be offered in the proportions in which 
the initial issue was intended to be allotted, but the ceiling for share-
holding by any individual institution will not be enforced at th!a 
81l 18. 

25 
Clat&BeB 6 and '1 provide for the shares of the Corporation being 
guaranteed by the Central Government as to the repayment of the 
principal and the payment of dividends at a rate to be determined by 
the Central Government. Clause 7 provides that the shares of the 
Corporation shall be deemed to be trustee securities or approved 
securities for the purposes of the Trusts Act, the Banking Com-
panies Act and the Insurance Act 
Clause 8 provides for a register of shareholders to be maintained 
by the Corporation and also makes it clear that notices of trusts in 
respect of the shares shall not be receivable by, or bind, the Corpora-
tion. 
Clauses 9 to 15 provide for the Board of Directors of the Corpora-
tion. The Corporation will have nine directors with a Deputy 
Governor of the Reserve Bank as the Chairman. Three nominees of 
the Central Government, one nominee of the Reserve Bank, one 
elected director each representing the State co-operative banks, the 
State land mortgage banks, 6lld all the other financial institutions 
which are shareholders, will be ordinary directors. A managing 
director will be appointed with the approval of the Reserve Bank. The 
provisions regarding the terms of office and qualifications for appoint-
ment as directors are based generally on the corresponding provisiOns 
relating to the State-associated banks and the deposit insurance cor-
poration. 
Clauses 16 to 18 provide for meetings of the Board of directors and 
its committees, subject to the regulations which are to be made for 
the purpose. It has been provided that interested directors shall not 
participate at these meetings. 
Clause 19 provides for the grant of an interest-free loan of Rs. 5 
crores to the Corporation for a period of fifteen years. It is intended 
that the investment income on this amount should be available to 
the Corporation for enabling it to meet its expenses durinS this 
period. 
Clause 20 provides for the borrowing of money by the Corporation 
(8) by the issue of bonds or debentures, (b) from the Reserve Bank 
against trustee. securities for periods not exceeding eighteen months 
and (c) from the Central Government or other institutions approved 
by the Government and for the acceptance of deposits from the 
public for fixed periods of twelve months or more. The total amoWlt 
baITowed under clauses 19 and 20 is not to exceed. twenty times the 
paid-up capital and reservea. 

26 
Clawe 21 provides for the borrowing of money !n foteiiJl cur .. 
rency by the C01'p9ration against the guarantee of the Ceatral 
Government. 
Clause 22 provides that the Corporation shall grant assistance to 
eligible institutions only for the purpose of promoting agricultural 
development. The assistance provided by the Corporation will nor-
mally be in the form of refinance against loans or advances granted 
by the State co-operative, State land mortgage and scheduled banks 
for periods not exceeding twenty-five years or in the form of subs-
criptions to the debentures of land mortgage banks for similar periods, 
Dut in certain exceptional cases, direct assistance to co-operative 
societies recognised by the Corporation for this purpose with the 
approval of the Reserve Bank may also be granted. 
The· amounts due to the Corporation from institutions which are 
assisted by it will be guaranteed by the State Governments 
~Deerned. 
CZaUH 23 restricts the amount of the assistance granted by the 
Corporation in connection with any individual transaction to B.s. 50 
lakhs. 
Cl4v.res 24 and 2S provide for the grant of powers to the Corpora-
tion to impose suitable conditions in regard to its loaDS or to call up' 
its loans before the due dates, if it is considered necessary or ex-
pedient to do so. 
Clause 26 provides for the investment of the surplus funds of the 
Corporation in securities of the Central Government and for the 
other funds with the Reserve Bank or with co-openltive or sche-
duled banks approved by the Reserve Bank. 
Clauses 27 and 28.--Clause 27 provides for the preparation of 
ballfUlce-sheets as at the end. of the co-operative year, i.e. at the end 
of June and Clause 28 provides for the grant of a dividend from ·out 
of the surplus profits of the Corporation and for the restriction: of 
the rate of this dividend while any amount remains due to be paid 
to the Central Government on account of its guarantee. 
Clause 29 provides for the dividends accruing to tAe Reserve 
Bank during a period of fifteen years to be deposited free of interest 
with 'the Corporation and fOr the continuance or return of the deposit 
after that period. The intentfon is to permit the grant of ways and 
meant··assistance to the Corporation and to enable it to utilise for its 
own purposes the 'investn1ent income on account of t.he&e.f\IDda. 

27 
Clau.ses 30 to 32 make the usual provisions regarding audit, in-
cluding a special audit by the Comptroller and Auditor-GeneNl in 
case this becomes necessary. the holding of a general meeting and the 
submission of the accounts and the annual report to the Central 
Government and Parliament. 
ClaUle 33 enables the Central Government to give directions to 
the Corporation in regard to matters of policy involving the public 
interest. 
Clauses 34 to· 36 aM 38 to 40 provide for the recruitment of staft, 
8eftS8 to records essential for the Corporation's purposes, the grant to 
the Corporation of the facllities available under the Bankers' Books 
Evidence Act, the indemnity C)f directors, and the protection or ¥.Uda-
tion of action taken by the Corporation. 
C'l4use 37 provides that the Corporation cannot be taken into 
liquidation except in accordance with the orders of the Central 
Government. 
Cla:u.se 41 and the First Schedule provide for declarations of 
fidelity and secrecy on the part of the directors and employees .. 
Cla.use42 makes it clear that any amount received by the Cor-
poration from the Central Government in pursuance of the Central 
Government's guarantee shall not be treated as income, profits or 
gains of the Corporation for the purposes of income-tax or super-tax. 
Cla:uses 43 to 45 provide for the delegation of powers by the Board 
of directors of the Corporation and for penalties in respect of 
offenees, including offences by companies. 
Clawe 46 provides for regulations to be made by the Board of 
Directors of the Corporation in order to carry out the purposes of the 
Act. 
Clause 47 and the Secemd Schedule provide for consequential 
amendments of the Reserve Bank of india Act, 1934, and for an 
amendment of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 in order to make 
it clear that the appropriate Government in relation to any industrial 
dispute involving the Corporation will be the Central Government 

-
Fi1l4n.cia1 Memora:ndum. 
Clause 6 of the Bill provides that the shares of tire proposed Cor-
poration shall be guaranteed by the Central Government as to the 
repayment of principal and the payment of a minimum annual divi-
dend at such rate as may be fixed by the Central Government. Clause 
19 provides that the Central Government may after due appropriation 
by law grant an interest-free loan to the Corporation of a sum not 
exceeding Rs. 5 crores. Sub-clause (1) (a) of clause 20 provides that 
the bonds and debentures issued by the Corporation shall be guaran-
teed by the Central Government sub-clause 1 (e) of that clause pro-
vides for the grant of further loans, if necessary, by the Central 
Government to the Corporation and sub-clause (2) of clause 21 pro-
vides that the Central Government may in addition guarantee loans in 
foreign currency obtained by the Corporation from any financial insti-
tution. Clause 42 makes it clear that any sums which may have to be 
advanced to the Corporation by the Central Government for ensuring 
the repayment of any principal or dividend guaranteed by the Gov-
ernment will not attract income-tax. 
2. While provision will have to be made in pursuance of clause 19 
for the grant of an interest-free loan of Rs. 5 crores to the Corpora-
tion by the Central Government, it is not clear at this stage whether 
any further loans will be necessary or whether any payments will 
be necessary C?n account of any guarantees by that Government . 
• 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE RESERVE BANK OF INDIA ACT, 1934 (2 OF 1934) 
• • • • 
2. In this Act, unless there is enything repugnant in the subject Definition,. 
or context,-
(a) "the Bank" means the Reserve Bank of India constituted 
by this Act; 
• • • • 
17. 
• • • • 
(8A) the purchase an~ sale of shares in, or the capital of the 
Deposit Insurance Corporation, the State Bank or any other 
bank or financial institution notified by the Central Government 
in this behalf; 
• • • • 
EXTRACT FROM THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947 
(14 OF 1947) 
• • • • 
Business 
which the 
Bank may 
tfansact. 
. 2. In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject Definitiens. 
or context,-
(a) "appropriate Government" mean&-
(i) in relation to any industrial dispute concerning the 
Deposit Insurance Corporation established under section 3 
of the Deposit Insurance Corporation Act, 1961, or any in-
dustry carried on by or under the authority of the Central 
Government or by a nillway company or concerning any 
such controlled industry as may be specified in this belialf 
29 
2277 (B) LS-5. 

30 
by the Central Government or in relation to an industrial 
dispute concerning a banking or an insurance company, a 
mine, an oil-field, or a major port, the Central Government, 
and 
(ii) in relation to any other industrial dispute, the State 
Government; 
• • • • 

LOK SABRA 
A 
BIll 
to provide for the establishment of a Corporation for granting 
. medium and long term credit by way of refinance or other-
wise, for the development of agriculture and for other 
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
The President has, in pursuance of clauses (1) and (3) of 
article 117 and clause (1) of article 274 of the Constitution of 
India, recommended to Lok Sabha, the introduction and consi-
deration of the Bill. 
M. N. KAUL, 
Secretary. 
(Shri Morarji Desai, 
Minister of Finance.) 