THE COMMISSION FOR FIXATION OF PRICES OF ESSENTIAL
COMMODITIES BILL, 2010
By
DR. RAGHUVANSH PRASAD SINGH, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of a Commission to fix the prices of essential commodities
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first Year of  the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  This Act may be called the Commission for Fixation of Prices of Essential
Commodities Act, 2010.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(i) "agricultural commodities" include paddy, wheat, pulses, bajra, jowar, millet,
madwa, maize, soyabean, sugarcane, cotton, oilseeds, jute, spices or horticultural
produce, which is used for human consumption;
Short title.
Bill No. 122 of 2010
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Definitions.
5

2
Constitution
of the
Commission
for Fixation
of Prices of
Essential
Commodities.
(ii) "Commission" means the Commission for Fixation of Prices of Essential
Commodities constituted under section 3;
(iii) "essential commodities" means essential commodities defined in clause (a)
of section 2 of the Essential Commodities Act, 1955;
(iv) "manufactured goods" means all goods and items that have been
manufactured by use of machinery run by use of electricity and are meant for the use
and consumption of the consumers; and
(v) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1)  The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
a commission to be known as the Commission for Fixation of Prices of Essential Commodities
to exercise the powers conferred upon, and to perform the functions assigned to it under
this Act.
(2) The Commission shall consist of:—
(i)  a Chairperson who shall be a retired judge of the Supreme Court;
(ii)  five members of Parliament, of whom three shall be from the House of the
People and two shall be from the Council of States, to be nominated by the presiding
officers of the two Houses;
(iii)  three members representing farmers;
(iv)  three members representing the industrial sector;
(v)  three economists who shall be nominated by the Central Government; and
(3)  the Secretary to the Government of India in-charge of the Department of Consumer
Affairs shall be the ex-officio Secretary to the Commission.
(4)  The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of the
service of the Chairperson, members and Secretary of the Commission, shall be such as
may be prescribed.
(5)  The head office of the commission shall be at New Delhi.
(6) The Central Government shall provide such number of officers and staff to the
Commission as are required for its efficient functioning.
(7)  The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of the
service of the officers and staff of the Commission, shall be such as may be prescribed.
4. (1)  The Commission shall perform the following functions:—
(a)  determine the retail prices of agricultural commodities subject to the condition
that the retail price of a commodity during a year is not increased by more than six per
cent. of its price during the previous year;
(b)  determine the retail prices of the manufactured goods subject to the condition
that the retail price of a manufactured good shall not be more than one and a half time
of their cost of production;
(c)  payment of remunerative prices to the farmers for their produce in consultation
with the Commission for Agricultural Costs and Prices; and
(d) monitor the supply of foodgrains and other essential commodities and
recommend appropriate action against the persons found guilty of hoarding,
profiteering and black marketing of essential commodities.
(2)  The Commission shall monitor the supply of foodgrains and other essential
commodities and recommend appropriate action against the persons found guilty of hoarding,
profiteering and black marketing of essential commodities.
Functions of
the Commis-
sion.
10 of 1955.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(3) In discharge of its functions under the Act, the Commission shall consult the State
Governments and such other agencies as it thinks fit.
(4) The Commission shall, as often as it may consider necessary, send a report
containing its recommendations to the Central Government.
5. The Central Government shall determine the maximum retail prices of essential
commodities including the agricultural commodities and the manufactured goods on the
basis of the recommendations of the Commission.
6. Any person who charges or demands a price more than the maximum retail price
determined by the Central Government under section 5, shall be treated as guilty of
contravening an order made under section 3 of the Essential Commodities Act, 1955 and shall
be punished in accordance with the provisions of section 7 of that Act.
7. The provisions of this Act and rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force.
8. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force dealing with any of the matters dealt with in this Act.
9. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Maximum
retail prices of
essential
commodities
to be
prescribed by
the Central
Government.
Penalties.
10 of 1955.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Act to
supplement
other laws.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
25

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Presently the common man is severely affected by rapidly rising prices of essential
commodities. Efforts being made by the Government in this regard are turning out to be
ineffective. As a result, people are dissatisfied on this issue as this affects their quality of life.
The determination of prices of essential commodities depends on the market factor. The
Government has no control over it. Owing to this fact, people with vested interest are making
huge profits while the common man is facing difficulties. There is no balance in the price
between the agricultural commodities produced by the farmers and the goods manufactured
in factories. Though minimum support price for certain agricultural products is fixed by the
Government, even then the farmers are compelled to sell their produce at a low price. It is the
middlemen who garner huge profits by selling the agricultural produce at very high prices.
On the other hand, the manufacturers, acting as a cartel, arbitrarily inflate the prices of
the goods manufactured in factories and Government has no control over it.
Therefore, constitution of a Commission for Price Rise Control and Fixation of Rates of
Commodities at the national level comprising of representatives of farmers, industrialists,
economists and the public representatives will go a long way in curbing the price-rise. The
Commission has to formulate a system wherein increase in retail prices will not be more than
six per cent in one year between the sowing of the next crop and the retail prices of the
products manufactured in factories should not be more than one and a half times of its cost.
This policy is also in tune with what was propounded by Dr. Ram Manohar Lohia.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; RAGHUVANSH  PRASAD  SINGH
July 30, 2010.
4

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the constitution of a Commission for Fixation of Prices
of Essential Commodities. It also provides for salary and allowances of the Chairman, members
and Secretary of the Commission. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of rupees ten
crore would be involved.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.
5

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of detail only. The delegation of
legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.
6

GMGIPMRND—4775LS(S3)—30-10-2010.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of a Commission to fix the prices of essential commodities
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh, M.P.)