a

AS INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA

Bill No. 83 of 2006

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2006

Suri Gurupas Dascupta, M.P.
A
BILL
Jurther to amend the Constitution of India.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2006.

2. In article 85 of the Constitution, in clause (7), the following proviso shall be added
at the end, namely:—

“Provided that each House of Parliament shall sit and transact business for a
minimum of one hundred days in a calendar year.”.

Short title.

Amendment
of article 85.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Over the years, it has been observed that the number of sittings of the two Houses of
Parliament are decreasing. India is the largest democracy in the world and Parliament is the
only institution where the problems of the people are raised and discussed thereby ensuring
accountability of the Government to the people. If the trend of curtailing the number of
sittings of the two Houses continues, it will have an adverse impact on our democracy.

After independence, during the initial years, Parliament used to meet for an average of
hundred and twenty days in a calendar year. Thereafter, it came down to one hundred days
a year, and at present, the number of sittings is less than one hundred. For instance, this year
the Houses had only fifty-seven working days during the Budget and Monsoon Sessions
and the Winter Session has only twenty working days. Thus during the current year, Parliament
will have only seventy-seven sittings.

Thus in order to uphold our democratic values and to ensure effective representation
and redressal of problems of the people, it is necessary that a reasonable minimum number of
sittings of both the Houses are fixed. Taking into account all these facts, it is proposed to
amend the Constitution to ensure that the Parliament sits for at least one hundred days in a
calendar year.

Hence the Bill.

New DELHI; GURUDAS DASGUPTA
November 6, 2006.


ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

* * * * *

85. (1) The President shall from time to time summon each House of
Parliament to meet at such time and place as he thinks fit, but six months
shall not intervene between its last sitting in one session and the date
appointed for its first sitting in the next session.

(2) The President from time to time -
(०) prorogue the Houses or either House;
(6) dissolve the House of People.

* * * * *

w

*

Sessions of
Parliament, pro-
rogation and
dissolution,


LOK SABHA

A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.

(Shri Gurudas Dasgupta, MP)

MGIPMRND—3245LS—16.11.2006.