-' 
-.-~ I 
-
IDK BABItA. 
CORRIGENDA 
to 
THE WATER (PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF POLWTION) 
CESS BILL, 1977 
'-7b be/As introduced in 10k sabha 7 
1. Page 4, line 31,-
~ ", he II 
2. Page 7, line 30,-
f2.!:. ''pullutants'' Dta&1 "pollutants" 
3. Page 8, line 23,-
,t2l:.. "male" ~ ''made'' 
NEW DELHI; 
November 11 • 1977 
Kartika 20, ffi99TSakaJ 
( 

lofl"'" 
As IlfI'RODUCED IN LoK SAlIBA ON 
" 
.; . . , 
" Bill No. I. 01 1m ' 
i ; 
. THE WA'.l'ER, (PREVEWTION A~ CONTROL OF POLLl1TI~ 
CEES BIlL, 19'77 ' " 
A 
BILL 
to pr017ide for the levy. and collection of " cess on water c'?nB.uffled. ,b.v. 
persons carrying on certain industries and by local authOrities, with 
" view to augm.e-nt the reSOU7'ces of the Cent7'al Boarll cmd tIN, B:tate 
Boards for the prevention. and cont7'ol of wate7' pollution ccmsti~ 
unck>r the Wate7' (Pret1ention and Control of PollutiOtl) Act, 1974. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-eighth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
L (1) This Act may be called the Water (Prevention and ConVOl 
of PQllution) CetIB Act, 1977. f,,: 
5. (2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and' 
~. ") 
': (!) stib~. to the provi.~ons o~::sub-seotfon (2), it )~ppii", U'I allt0.8" 
;:1' St~~'tO .""hifT~,~e· Wate,r (Pr~v~t'01;l apd Control of P~~tiQn), A,ctl . 
'1'~ ",.~~. ai¥\:'the Unron.;.te~,rltor.{e~. ','j" 
10 t", (4)nlt malt 'COttle Into force: 'on such date all the eentratb~n. 
ment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
15 
, t. In this Act, unl~ tbe context Ojtherwise require",-
(0) "local authority" means a mwticipai corporation 01' a iDuD'" 
cipal council (by whatever name calJed) or a cantonment board or' 
any other boPy, entrusted with the duty of supplying watel- under 
·the lew by or under whk!hit is constituted; 
(b) "prHcribeci" meaIl$ prescribed by rules made under tb\'. 
Short 
title, 
extent, 
appJ.lc:a. 
fIlon and 
com-
mence-
meni:. 
,. 

LeV)' 
and col-
lection 
of cell. 
A1Bxing 
of 
meters. 
• I 
~7:., 
ret~"'" 
(c) "specified industry" means any industry specified in Sche-
dule I; I 
(d) words and expressions used but not defined in this Act and 
defined in the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 
shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in that Act. 
3. (l) There shall be levied and collected a cess fqr the purposes 
of the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 and utilisa-
tion thereunder. 
(2) The cess under sub-section (1) shall be payable by-
(01) every person carrying on any specified industry; and 
(b) every local authority, 
S 
10 
and shall be calculated on the basis 01. the water consumed by such per-
son or local authority, as the case may be, for any of the purposes speci-
fied in column (1) of Schedule II, at such rate, not exceeding the rate 
specified in the corresponding entry in column (2) thereof, as the Cen- 1 S 
tral Govemmeut may, by notification in the Official Gazette, from time 
m'tfme, SI"!cify. 
) 
(3) WherE." any local authority supplies water to any person carrying 
on any specified industry or' t~ any other local authority and sUCh per-
190n OIl" other local authority is liable to pay cess under sul>-seation (2) 20 
in respect of the water so supplied, then, notwithstanding anything con-
tamed in that rub-section, the local authority first mentioned shall not 
be1iable to pay such cess in respect of such water. ' 
E:rpIlanatlion.~For the purposes of this section and section 4, "con-
Sumption of WR.ter" includes supply of water. 2S 
4. (1) For the purpo.1ie of measuring and recording the -quantity of 
water consumed, every person carrying on any specified indu.9try,and 
every local authority shall affix meters of such standards and at such 
plaoes as may be prescribed and it shall be presumed that the .quantity 
indicated by the meter has been consumed. by such perso1l or local ~uth()oo 30 
rity, as the case may be, until the contrary is proved ' 
(2) Where any person or local authority fails to affix any meter" 
as required by sUb-section (1), the Central Government shall, after 
nob to SUCh person or local authority, as the case maybe, cau~ such, 
meter to be afYix'ed and the cost of such meter together w;J,th the cost for 3S 
aftbdng the meter may be recovered from such person or local authority' 
by the :CentraI Government in the same manner as an an"eal", of land G : 
revenue. 
5. Every person carrying on any specified industry and eveO" ~al 
autbQrlty, liable to pay the cess under section a, shall furnish such returnsl, 40 
ift cBUch form, at such intervals and containing such partieulal"S to such 
ofBcer or authoritYI as may be prescribed. " ,,' ' , 
6. (1) The officer or authority to whom or which the' return· 1I 'has 
~ furnished ,under section 5 shall. after making 0., causing to be made 
sUch inquiry as he or it thinks fit and after satisfying Wimself or itself 45 
that the particulars stated in the return, fire cOfl'~t, Py order, assess 
8 of 19'14. 
6 of 197"-

8 of 1974. 
I 
~. ~~~ of cess payable by the concerned person carrying on any .,.. 
¢.ft!I:l.lnd)¥try ()l' localauthQrity, as the case may be. " ,'.: 
" (2) An order of assessment made UDder sub-seemon (1) shall speclf1 
tJie dltte Within. whleh·thecessshall be pald to the State GovemmeMJf:' 
\ .. , • 't 
S (3,), ~. copy each of the order of assessment made ~ ~tioD 
(1) shall be sent to the ~n~, as the caae may be, to the local autJlo. 
rity concerned and to the State Government. 
(.) '..,.., State Government shall, through such of . its OIlten I 01' 
aathorift.,. as may be sllecified by it in this behidf by notlftc: .. tion ID ~~ 
110 om~ial Gazette, ~oIIect the cess from t~e person or local authorlf7 Da1l1. 
to pay the IRme ~nd pay the amount so collected to the' Central' CoV8i1l-
ment in such manner and within such time as may bel prescribed. 
7. Where any person or local authority, liable to pay thie Cells under 
this Act, mstals any plant fot the treatment of sewage or trade eftbent, 
IS such' ~rson or 10eal authority shall, from. such date as may be preserlb-
ed,'be entitled to a rebate of seventy per cent of the cess payable'by 
IJllCIh person or, as the case may be, local authDr:lty. ' 
•. The proceeds of the cess levied under section 3"shallfirat be 
'CNditedto the Coosolideted Fund of India and the. Central GC'VerIlrD)eIl.t 
20 may, if Parliament, by appropriation made by law in this behalf, eo pr0-
vides, pay to the Central Board and every State Board, kom. time , iO 
time, frcml out of ~uch proceeds, after deducting ·the expenses on collec-
tion, such sums of money as it may think fit for being utilised, under 
the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974: 
25 Provided that while detenninling the sum. 01. money to. be paid to 
.aIly !State 'Board un.ch!tr this section, the Central Government au haw 
regard'to the amount of eess collected by the State Govemment cOllcem-
,ed. under sub-section (4) of section 6. 
If' , 
E~lana.tion.-F~ the purposes of this section, "State Board" includes 
30 a Joint Board, if any, constituted under section 13 of the Water (Preven-
,t:,.'., .... ~ 
, ~ I ( , , . \1 
'J', 
I:) 
Credit- l, 
ingpro-
ceect. of 
ce. to 
CoDIOll-
dated 
Fund 01 
India 
, and 
appUca· 
tlon 
thereot. 
8 of 19'1'. tion and Conkol of Pollution) Act, 1974. 
, I.' Any officer or authority of the State Government speciallyelil- Power 01. 
powered in this behalf by that Government may,- '·1,' enk7'. 
35 
. .' 
«(I) with such assistance, if any, as he or it may thiftk fit, ..... 
at any reasonable time any place which he or it considers it neces-
sary to enter for carrying out the purposes of this Act including the 
I" testing of the correctness of the meters affixed under s~tiOn 4;' . ' . 
': I, (b) do within such place anything neceaary ·for ~ proper 
discharge of his or its duties uncter this Act; and 
40 " ,(c) exercise such other powers as may be prescribed . 
. ,; 10. If any person carrying on any specified industry or any local 81Ith.o-
rity fails to pay any amount of cess payable under section 3 to the State 
. ~e:r:nment within the date specified in the order ot ass~S8ment made 
Wider section 6, such person or local authority, as the case ma1~be','ShaU 
45 be liable to pay interest at twelVe per cent. per annUln 9n the ainount 
, to be' p~d from the date on which such payment is due tUi. such 8moant 
is actually paid. . . ., 
Inten.t 
payabl8 f ___ 
Ia· .... • ! 
m_toa 
eeu. 

Penalty 
for non-
'PIIYJDent 
01_ 
within 
the speci-
fted 
time. 
Reco-
vert 'Of 
amount 
due 
uader 
the Act. 
4 
'11. If anyatilount of cess payable by any ~rson cattytngo'n 8t1Y 
specified industry or any local authority unlter section '3 is not paid to 
tbe S~te Governmenii within ijle date specified in the order of; assess-
mS·made ·under ~ion 6, it shall be deemed to be in arrea1S aDd thf 
authority pr~cribed in this behalf may, after such inquiry as it deems 5 
1i't/1mpose bii :such person or, as the case may be,local auftlorlty, a 
~alty ~hot exceeding the amount of cess in arrears:! I • 
. Provicled that before imposing any such penalty, SlUch person or, as 
t~ ~ may be, the local authority shall be given a reasonable;oppol"" 
~u:nfty ¥ 'bein" ~~atd and if after such hearing the sairi; -ituthol'ity Is saUs- If) 
n~ !~t, the. def~ult was for any good and' sufllclent reason, no penalty 
sb811 be imposed under this section. ' 
12. Any amoun.t due under this Act (incl~g any interest or pell8lty 
pay,tblc under section 1() or section 11, as ,the case ~y be) froul aq,y 
~ carrying on any specified industry or from any local authori*Y 15 
may be recovered by the Central Government in ,the same manner as rID 
arrear of land revenue. 
lS.(li)Any person or local authority aggrieved by anorc\er of as.sa-
!n8\t:made'un_ 'section 6 or by an order imposing penalty made u.-r 
teetion t1 may,·rwithin such time as may be prescribed, appeal to such.2O 
,authority ill such fonn and in such manner as 'may be prescribed. 
(Z) Every appeal preferred under sub-section (1) shall be accom-
panied by such fees as may be prescnibed. 
'. 1(3) After, the receipt of an appeal under'sub-section 1(1), ·tbe~pel· 
~\ 'late IlRhority'shall, after giving the appellant an opportunity oVbeu.g 25 
·hlUd·in the matter, dispose of the appeal as expeditioUSly as :pqraible~ 
Penalty. 
(4) Every order passed in appeal under this section shall be ftnal aJd 
. Shall not be called in question in any court of law. .' 
14. (1) Whoev«, being under an obligation to fwonlsh·. retumunder .·~·I. 
this Act, furnishes any return knowing, or having reason to believe, the 30 
same to b£ false, ~ shall be punishable with imprisonment which may 
extend to six months or with fine which may extend to one thousand 
.Npees or With.both. 
(2) Whoever, being liable to pay cess under this Act, wilfully or in 
tentionally evades or attempts to evade the peyment of such cess. shall 35 
be punishable with impTisonment which may extend to six mOritha or 
'Witb ·fine which may extend to one thousand rupees or with both. 
~ 
'(3) No court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable under 
this section save on 8 complaint made by or under the authority of the' 
CeiI1tral Government. , , 40 
15.(1) Where, an offence under this Act has been committed .bY "8 
'com~y, every person wlu>, at the time the offence was committec!, waa 
. tneharge· of, ~. was responsible to, the company for the conduct o~ tile. 
bus1D.ea. of the • company, as well as the com~ny, sluill be deemed to 
be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded apinit and 45 
punished accordingly: 

5 
?ro~d tJaat nothing contained in this sub-section sball render any 
such person liable to any punishment, if he pmves that the offence was 
committed without his knowledge or that he exercised aD' due diligence 
Ito prevent the ,commission of 'such offence. 
S (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (i), where an 
,offence under this Act has been ,committed by a company and it is proved 
that the offence has been committed with the consent or comti~8IlCe of, 
or is attributable to any neglect on . the part of, any directqr, managet, 
secretary or' eSther officer of the company, such director, manager, secre-
10 tary or other o:fficer ,alaall also be deemed to be guilbr.of that.QfteDc:t and 
ahall be Uable to be ,proceeded 'against anc\ punished accordingly. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section,-
(a) "company" means any body corporate and ,includes a fti1n 
or o~her association of indivi<iuals; and 
IS (b) "director", in relation to a finn, meanS a partner in 'the 'fln,l •. 
16., (1) The Central Government may, by notiftcatlonJA the-IOtllalal 
Gazette. add to Schedule I any industry having' regard to tire c0nsUmp-
tion of water in the carrying on of such industry and 'the ,~t 
discharge thereof resulting in pollution of any stream and thereupon 
20 Schedule I shall, subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), be deemed 
to be amended accordingly. 
(2) Every such notification shall be laid before each House of Par-
liament, if it is sitting, as soon as may be after the issue of the natiflcatlO1l, 
and if it is not sitting, within seven days of its re-assembly and the 
2S Central Government shall seek the approval of Parliament to the no tift-
cation by a resolution moved within a period of fifteen days beginning 
with the day on which the notification is so laid before the House ot 
the People, and if Parliament makes any modification in the rut..i.ftcation 
or directs that the notification should cease to have effect, the notification 
30 shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, 
as the case may be, but without prejudice to the validity of anything 
previously done thereunder. 
17. (1) The Central Government may make rules for carrying out 
the purposes of this Act. 
3S (2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such 
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:-
(a) the standards of the meters to be aftixed and the places at 
which such meters are to be affixed under sub-section (1) of sec-
tion 4; 
40 (b) the returns to be furnished under section 5, the form in 
which and the intervals at which such returns are to be furnished, 
the particulars which sUCh returns shall contain and the officer or 
authority to whom or which such returns shall be (1lmis~ed; 
(c) the manner in which and the time within which the cess 
45 collected shall be paid to the Central Government under IUb-aec-
tion (4) of section 6; 
(d) the date from which any person or local authority liable to 
pay cess shall be entitled to the rebate under section 7; 
(e) the powers which may be exercised by the oftlcer or authe-
So rity under section 9; 
Pow .. to 
amend 
Schedule 
L 

",' 
6 
(1). the authority which may impose penalty under sectiOh 11; 
.• (g) the authority to which an appeal may be filed under sub-
section (1) of section 13 and the time w:ithin which and the form 
and manner in which such appeal may be filed; 
. (h) .. the fees which shall accompany an appe.al under sub-section S 
(2) 'of section 13; and 
(i) any other matt~r which has to be or may be prescribed. 
;J • ", 
(3) Every rule made under !this Act shall be laid, as· soon· as mSf be 
after it is made, befqte;-ea.ch HOUse of Parliament while it is in session 
for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session 10 
or in two or more successive sessions and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions 
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any ml)dification in ,the rule or 
both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as IS 
the ·case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment 
s'h4l1 be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
UDder that rule. 

SCHEDULE I 
[See section 2(c)] 
.' 1. Ferrous metallurgieal industry. 
2. Non-ferrous metalIU!'gical industry. 
S. t. 3. Mi~g indust~y. . 
4. Ore ,processing industry. 
, 6. Petroleum industry. 
6. Petro-ehemical'1ndustry. 
7. Chemical industry. 
.JI 
,r;') 
10 8. Ceramic 'industry. 
IS 
20 
, 9. Cement industry. 
; 1 , 1 • ~ 
10. Texti,le industry. 
11. Paper industry. 
12. Fertilizer industry. 
13. Co~l (including coke) industry. 
14. POWel.·, (thermal and diesel) generating i~dustry. 
15. Processing of anima10r vegetable products indUStry. 
Pu!'pose for which 
water is consumed 
(1) 
SCHEDULE II 
(See sectiOft 3.) 
- . Maximum rate' 
(2) 
" 
1. Industrial cooling, spraying in mine Three-fourths of a paisa, per 
kilo litre. I • , ' , pits or boiler feed. 
25 ,2. Domestic purpose. 
" 
,a. Processing whereby water gets pol-
luted and the pollutants are easily 
bio-degradable. 
4. Processing whereby water gets pol-
301 luted IJ.nd the pullutants are not 
easily bio-degradable and are toxic. 
One paisa. per kilo litre. 
Two paise, per kilQ, titre. 
" 
Two and a half paise, per Idlo 
litre: 
--- ------------ ----
" . , , , '. ' , , 
7 

STATE~ENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Water (Prevention and CODotrol of Pollution) Act, 1974 has been. 
enacted by Parliament under article 252 of the Constitution with a view 
to control the pollution of rivers and streams which has assumed consi-
derable importance and urgency in recent years as a res\llt of inoreasing 
industrialisation and urbanisation. The Act is intended to ensure that the 
domestic and industrial affluents are not allowed to be dis~harged into 
water courses without adequate treatment. This Act is now in force in 
fifteen States and in all Union territories. The other remaining States 
are also likely to adopt the Act in the near future; 
2. According to the provisions uf the Act, the Central Government 
and the State Governments have to provide funds to the Central Board 
and State Boards for prevention and control of water pollutign respec-
tively, for implementing the provisions of the Act. However, due to 
pressure on the limited resources, the S'tate Governments are not able to 
provide adequate funds to the State Boards for their effective function-
ing. It is, therefore, proposed to levy a cess on local authorities which 
are entrusted with the duty of supplying water under ·the law by or 
under which they are constituted and on certain specified industries. The 
cess proposed to be levied will be on the basis of the water consumed by 
such local authorities and industries. The cess -will be collected by the 
State Governments concerned and will be paid to the centrt.Govern-
ment and the Central Government, after due appropriation m by Par-
liament by law, will pay, having regard to the amount of ces collected 
by the concerned State Governments, such sums of money as it may 
think fit to the Central Board and the State Boards. 
3. The present Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 
NEW Dwu; SIKANDER BAKHT. 
The 23'rd August, 1977. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 Or THE 
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. H-l1018/1/74-EPC, dated the 31st October, 1977 
from Shri Sikander Bakht, Minister of Works and Housing and Supply 
and Rehabilitation to the Secretary, Lok Sabha.] : . 
The President having been informed of the subject matter of the 
proposed Bill t<l provide for the levy and collection of a' cess on Water 
consumed by persons' carrying on certain industries and by local 
authorities with a view to augment the resources at the Central Board 
and the State Boards for the Prevention and Control of Water Pollution 
constituted under the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 
1974, recommends, the introduction of the Bill in, and consideration 
thereof by, Lok Sabha under article 117 (1) and (3) of the Constitution. 
S 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
The Bill provides for the. Jevy . of a celli on water eonsumed by per-
sons carrying on, specified industries and local authorities 'entrusted with 
the duty of .upplyilli waWr under the Jaws by or under whieh they are 
constit~ted. Under iUb-c1a\lle (4) of clause 8 of the Bill, the eess is to 
be. collected by the State Governments ami the State Governments are 
to pay the cess so collected to the Central Government in such manner 
and within such time as may be prescribed. 
2. Under clause 8 of the Bill, the proceeds of the cess levied and col-
lected will first be credited to the Consolidated Fund of [ndia and the 
Central Government may. if Pa·rliament by appropriation made by law 
in this behalf, so provides, pay to the Central Board and every State 
Board, from time to time, from out of such proceeds, after deducting th? 
~xpenses of collection. such sums of money as it may think fit for being 
11tiIised for the purposes of the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollu-
tion) Act, 1974. The Central Government, in relation to Union terri-
tories, and the State Governments will have to incur expenditure to-
wards the collection of the cess. The expenditure incurred by the State 
Governments will have to be reimbursed by the Central Government. 
Th~ exact expenditure to be incurred by the Central Government I\nd the 
State Governments (which is of a recurring nature) cannot be estimat-
ed at this stage. but it is not likely to exceed Rs. 1.40 lakhs in a year. 
3. No non-recurring expenditure is anticipated at present. 
9 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 17 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make 
rules for carrying out the purposes of the proposed legislation. Sub-
clause (2) of the clause catalogues the various matters with respect to 
which rules may be made. The matters with respect to which rules 
may be made under the clause are matters of procedure and detail and 
can hardly be provided in the Bill itself. 
2. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal charac-
ter. 
10 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the levy and clUection of a cess on water consumed by 
persons carrying on certain industries and by local authorities, 
with a view to augment the resources of the C"entral Board and the 
State Boards for the prevention and control of water pollution 
constituted under the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) 
Act, 1974. 
(Shri Sikancler BoJcht, JIliaiateT of Worka CIftCI Houaift9 CIftCI SuppllI 
caacI RehabiUtotioA) 