Bill Ro. lie oIl8U 
THE CINEMATOGRAPH (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1952 
[As INTRODUCED IN THII HoUSE OF THE PEoPLE] 
A 
BILL 
10 amend 'he O~h Act, 1962 
BE it enacted by Pa.rliament &s follows :-
1. Short tltle.-This Act may be called the Cinematograph (Amend-
ment) Act, 1952. 
2. Amendment of ¥etton 8 Act UXVII of 1H2.-In section 6 of the 
Cinema.tograph Act, It}52 (hereina.fter referred to &s the p..>incipal Act.), is 
the proviso shall be omitted. 
3. Iuert10n of new lectlon 8A. In Act XXXVII of 1982.-After section 
e of the principal Act, ~ht' following section shall be inserted, namely:-
··OA. In/ormation and documents to be given to diBtributors and 
t:chibitors with respect to certified film.~.-Any person who delivers 10 
any c.ertified film to tilly distributor or exhibitor shull, in such manner 
as may be prescribed. notify to the distributor or exhihitor, as the 
case mny be, the titl!", the IAngth of the film, the number and the 
nature of the ce.!'tificate granted in respect thereof and the conditions, 
if any, subject to which it has been so grllnted. and any ot,her parti- US 
cula-rs respecting the film which may he prescribed." 
4. Amendment of section 7, Act XXXVII of 1952 . ....:..J!'or sub-I'ection (1) 
of section 7 of the principal Act, the following sub-section shall he substi-
tuted, nomely:-
"(1) If any person-
(a) exhibits or pcrmits to be exhibited in any place-
(i) Ilny film othcr than a film whieh has l)('en certified 
by the Board us suitable for unrestrictt~d public exhibition or 
for public exhibition restricted to adults and which, when 
exhibit~cl, displays the prescribed ma.rk of the Board and has 25 
not been altered or tampered with in fLDy way since such 
mnrk was affixed theret·o, 

.10 
II 
2 
• (ii) any film, which haa been certified by the Board as 
suitable for publio emibition restricted to adults, to any 
person who is not an adult, or 
(b) without lawful authority (the burden of proviog ",hlch 
shall be 00 him), alt-ers or tampers with in any way tJ.Uy film 
after it has been certified, or 
(0) fails to comply with the provision contained in section 
6A or with any order made by the Central Government or by the 
Board in the exercise of any of the powers or functions conferred 
on it by this Act or the rules made thereunder, 
he shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to three 
months. dr with fine which may extend to one thousand l'upees, or with 
both, and in the case of & continuing offence with a further fine 
which may extend to one thousand rupees for each day during which 
the offence continues. 

• STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Cinematograph Act, 1952, re-enacted the provisions of the 1918 
Act sellarating matters relating to sanctioning of cinematograph films for 
.exhibition, which is a' Union subject, from matters relating to licensing 
and regulation of cinemas, which is a State subject. However, certain 
-defects have been noticed in the course of actual administration, which 
it is necessary to rectify in the interests of effective enforcement of the 
provisions of the Act. 
Under the proviso tc section 6 of the Act notice has to be given to 
the person who has been granted o.ce.rtificate to show cause as to why 
t,he film should not be uncertified before such nn order is issued by the 
Central Government. This provi8ion serves no useful purpose. .on the 
tOther hand, the procedure for giving notice entails such a delay that the 
very object of unce.rtiftcation is dAfeated. It is therefore proposed to 
.delete the proviso. 
A number of cases in which films have been exhibited with portions 
not passed by the Central Board of Film Censors have been brought to 
the notice of Government; in certain cases, portions ordered to be removed 
have been reinserted. Such int6!'polat,iol1s are all too easy in the case of 
films. It is therefore necessary to recaat the penalty clause so as to 
cover tampering with certified films after certification and to ensure 
transmission of complete information rela.ting to the certificate' to the 
distributor and the exhibitor. It is also proposed to enhance the penalty, 
'8S, at present, it is inadequate as a deterrent. 
NBW DBLIII; 
B. V. DSKAR. 
The 14th NOfl6mblf, 1952. 

• ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE CINEMATOGRAPH AOT, 1952 (XXXVII OF 1952). 
•••.•••• II< .* .. '.. . .•• * 
. Section 6 i. 
8. Power of Oeatr&l Gov8lJUIlent to modify orden UDder I8CtiOD. , or 
.ection a.-Notwithstanding onytiling contained in this Part, the Central 
Government may. of its own motioll by notification in the Official Gnzette, 
direct that-
(a) 0. certified film shall be deemed to be an uncertified ,film in 
ths whole or any part of India, or 
(b) a film in respect of which a "U" certificate has been granted, 
shall be deemed to be a film in respect of which an •• A" certificat& 
has been granted: 
Provided that before notification of such direction the person to whom 
the certificate was issued shall be given 0. fortnight '8 notice to show cause 
88 to why such n direction be not notified. 
Be'ction 7(1) 
7. Penalties for contraventtou of t.hI.I Part.-(l} If any person exhibits, 
or permits to be exhibited in Bny place.- .. 
(a) any film other than a film which has been certified by the-
Boarel 8S suitable for unrestricted public exhibition or for public 
exhibition restricted to adults and which when exhibited displays the 
prescribed mark of the Board Rnd has not been altered or tampered 
with in any wily Rine'e such mllrk was affixed thereto, or 
(b) any film, which has been certified by the Board as suitable 
for public exhibition reRtricted to adults, to any person who is not 
an ndult. 
hE' Rhall be punishable with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, 
and in the case of a continuing offence with a further fine whioh may 
extend to one hundrltd rupt1el! for PR('h day during which the offence 
continues. 
• • • • • 

BILL 
to amend the Cinematograph Aot, 1952. 
(SAri B. V. lrukcw. 
M '""ister lor InJortt&Gticm ,,"" Br~.,) 
GIP:D-LAD-907 PS-J3.11olt-l.500 