1
THE MULTI-STATE CO-OPERA TIVE SOCIETIES
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010
A
BILL
to amend the Multi-State Co-operative Societies Act, 2002.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first Y ear of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Multi-State Co-operative Societies (Amendment)
Act, 2010.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint and different dates may be appointed for different provisions
of this Act and any reference in any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall
be construed as a reference to the coming into force of that provision.
2. In the Multi-State Co-operative Societies Act, 2002 (hereinafter referred to as the
principal Act), in section 5, in sub-section (1),—
(i) in clause (a), the word "and" occurring at the end shall be omitted;
(ii) in clause (b), for the words "co-operative principles", the words "co-operative
principles; and" shall be substituted;
Short title
and
commencement.
Amendment
of section 5.
39 of 2002.
Bill No. 123 of  2010
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5
10

2
(iii) after clause (b), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
"(c) it gives an undertaking  that, after its registration as multi-State
co-operative society under this Act, it shall make available its products and
services to its members:
   Provided that the multi-State co-operative societies which have
already been registered shall also comply with the provisions of this
clause. ".
3.  In section 7 of the principal Act,—
  (a)  in sub-section (2),  the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
 "Provided that the Central Registrar may, for reasons to be recorded in
writing, extend the said period of four months to five  months.";
 (b)  in sub-section (3),—
(i) for the words "a period of four months from the date of receipt of
application for registration", the words, brackets and figure "a period specified
for disposal of application under sub-section ( 2)" shall be substituted;
(ii) in the second proviso,  for the words "a period of four months" the
words "the period" shall be substituted.
4.  In section 10 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 2), in clause ( a), for the word
"address", the words and brackets "address (including electronic-mail address)" shall be
substituted.
5.  In section 11 of the principal Act, in sub-section (7), the following proviso shall be
inserted, namely:—
"Provided that the Central Registrar may Register the amendments with such
modifications as may be necessary to bring them in conformity with the provisions of
this Act.".
6.  In section 17 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section ( 1), after clause ( c), the following clause shall be inserted,
namely:—
"(d) decide, with the approval of the Central Registrar, to wind up or
convert itself into any other legal entity and to transfer its assets and liabilities
in whole or in part to such legal entity.";
(b) in sub-section (3), after the word "amalgamation" the words " or winding up
or conversion" shall be inserted;
(c) in sub-section (7),—
(a) after the words "formed by division", the words "or winding up or
conversion into any other legal entity" shall be inserted;
(b) after the words "and the bye-laws thereof",  the words "or permit
winding up of the society or conversion of it into any other legal entity, as the
case may be" shall be inserted;
(d) after sub-section (9), the following sub-sections, shall be inserted, namely:—
"(10) The provisions of  this section and section 18 shall, as far as may
be, apply to a multi-State co-operative society which decides to wind up or
convert into any other legal entity as they apply in the case of amalgamation of
a co-operative bank with any other co-operative bank.
(11) The Central Government may for the reasons to be recorded in writing,
notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, issue such directions on such
matters relating to winding up or conversion into any other legal entity, as it
may deem fit.".
Amendment
of section 7.
Amendment
of section 10.
Amendment
of section 11.
Amendment
of section 17.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
7.  In section 21 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section (1), after the words "or to a co-operative society", the words
"or to any other legal entity" shall be inserted;
(b) in sub-section (3),—
(i) after the words "or two or more co-operative societies" the words "or
converts itself into any other legal entity" shall be inserted;
(ii) after the words "registration of the new societies", the words "or its
conversion into any new legal entity" shall be inserted;
(c) after sub-section (4), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
"(5) The Central Registrar may cancel the registration of a multi-State
co-operative society, if he has reasons to believe that,—
(a)  the registration was obtained by misrepresentation of facts,
submission of false or misleading information, suppression of material
facts or fraud; or
(b)  the number of members or the number of societies or the number
of persons as the case may be, have been, at any time reduced below the
number of members or societies or persons as specified in sub-section
(2) of section 6:
Provided that no registration shall be cancelled without providing an
opportunity of being heard to the multi-State co-operative society.".
8.  In section 22 of the principal Act, in sub-section (5), for clause (c), the following
clause shall be substituted, namely:—
"(c) The co-operative society shall cease to be as such under the law relating to
co-operative societies in force in the State, from the date of registration of amendment
of its bye-laws under sub-section ( 3) by the Central Registrar and the Registrar of
Co-operative Societies referred to in clause (b) shall make an order to this effect, within
a period of one month from the receipt of the copy of certificate under clause (b).".
9.  In section 25 of the principal Act, in sub-section (4) ,—
(a) for the words "four months" at both the places where they occur, the words
"six months" shall be substituted;
(b) for the words "refusing admission to the applicant"  the words  "accepting
admission to the applicant" shall be substituted;
(c) after the proviso, the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
"Provided further that the administrator or administrators, as the case
may be, appointed under this Act to manage the affairs of a multi-State
co-operative society shall not admit any new member to such society without
the prior approval of the Central Registrar.".
10.  In section 28 of the principal Act, for the words "unless he has made the payment
to the society in respect of membership, or" the words "unless he has made payment in
respect of all dues to the society including the payment in respect of membership or availed
such minimum level of services or" shall be substituted.
11. In section 29 of the principal Act,-—
(a) in clause ( d), for the words "such society", the words "such society; or"
shall be substituted;
(b) after clause (
d), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
Amendment
of section 21.
Amendment
of section 22.
Amendment
of section 25.
Amendment
of section 28.
Amendment
of section 29.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
"(e) he fails to  avail the products and services made available by such
multi-State co-operative society as specified in the bye-laws.".
12. In section 30 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), for the words "for a period of
one year from the date of such expulsion", the words "for a period which shall not exceed
three years but shall not be less than one year, from the date of such expulsion, as may be
specified in the bye-laws" shall be substituted.
13. In section 32 of the principal Act, after the proviso the following proviso and
Explanation shall be inserted, namely:—
‘Provided further that unless the bye-laws provide otherwise, a member may
exercise his vote at a meeting by electronic form in such manner as may be prescribed.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section, "electronic form" with reference
to information means any information generated, sent, received, or stored in media,
magnetic, optical, computer  memory, micro film, computer generated micro fiche or
similar device.'.
14. In section 35 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section (1), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
"Provided that the multi-State co-operative society may refund full or
part of the share capital held by the Government who shall accept such
redemption.";
(b) in sub-section ( 2),  for the words "on the face value of the  shares" the
words " on the face value or book value  of shares, whichever is higher" shall be
substituted;
(c) after sub-section (2), the following Explanation shall be inserted, namely:—
'Explanation.— For the purposes of this sub-section, "book value" means
the value of the shares as shown in the books of account taking into account
the total share capital, free reserves and surpluses.'.
15. In section 38 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 3), after the  proviso  the
following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
"Provided further that such administrator shall not represent the co-operative
society or other multi-State co-operative society in such meetings beyond a period of
six months.".
16. In section 41 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section (3), for the second and third provisos the following provisos
shall be substituted, namely:—
 "Provided further that the board may co-opt two directors, in addition to
twenty-one directors specified in the first proviso, having experience in the
field of banking, management and finance or having specialisation in any field
relating to the objects and activities undertaken by such multi-State co-operative
society:
Provided also that so co-opted directors shall not have power to vote in
the election of the office bearers or represent the multi-State co-operative society
in any other multi-State co-operative society:
Provided also that a person who has lost in election to the board shall not
be co-opted as director in the board on casual vacancy or otherwise:
Provided also that one seat shall be reserved for the Scheduled Castes or
the Scheduled Tribes and two seats for women in the board of a multi-State
co-operative society consisting of individuals as members and having members
from such class or category of persons:
Amendment
of section 30.
Amendment
of section 32.
Amendment
of section 35.
Amendment
of section 38.
Amendment
of section 41.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

5
Provided also that the functional directors in a national co-operative
society, who are officers of such society (other than the chief executive of the
rank of director or above), shall also be the members of the board in accordance
with its bye-laws and such members shall be excluded for the purpose of counting
the total number of directors in the first proviso.";
(b) after sub-section (3), the following sub-sections  shall be inserted, namely:—
‘(4) Every member of a board of multi-State co-operative society who,
whether directly or indirectly, is concerned or interested in a contract or
arrangement or proposed contract or arrangement, entered into or to be entered
into, by or on behalf of such society shall disclose the nature of his concern or
interest and that of his relatives at a meeting of the board.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this clause, the term "relative" with
reference to an individual means the spouse, brother, sister and all lineal
ascendants and descendants of such individual related to him either by marriage
or adoption.
(5) No director of a multi-State co-operative society shall, as a director, be
present in the discussion of, or vote on, any contract or arrangement entered
into, or to be entered into, by or on behalf of such society, if he is directly or
indirectly concerned or interested in the contract or arrangement.
(6) The board of a multi-State co-operative society shall be collectively
responsible to the general body of the society.’.
17. After section 41 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
‘41A. (1) If the Central Registrar at any time, is of the opinion that a multi-State
co-operative society has become sick, it may,  by order, declare such society as a sick
co-operative society.
  (2) Where a multi-State co-operative society is declared sick under sub-section
(1), the Central Government may, on the recommendation of Central Registrar, constitute
an interim board for a maximum period of five years consisting of experts in the field
of co-operation, management, finance, accountancy and in other areas relating to
such multi-State co-operative society for the purpose of preparing and implementing
a scheme for rehabilitation or revival of such multi-State co-operative society.
(3) The board of directors of such multi-State co-operative society, after
constitution of interim board, shall not function and discharge its functions as such:
Provided that the board of directors shall cease to exist on the completion of its
term.
(4)  The Central Registrar, if at any time during which the interim board has been
constituted, is of the opinion that the society has become viable, it may dissolve such
interim board and thereafter the board of directors existing before constitution of
interim board shall function as per provisions  of this Act.
Explanation. — For the purpose of this section "sick co-operative society"
means a multi-State co-operative society being a society registered under the
provisions of this Act which has at the end of any financial year accumulated losses
equal to or exceeding total of its paid-up capital, free reserves and surpluses and has
also suffered cash losses in such financial year and the financial year immediately
preceding such financial year.’.
Insertion of
new section
41A.
Constitution
of interim
board.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

6
18. In section 43 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),—
(a) in clause (c), for the words "general meeting", the words "general meeting;
or" shall be substituted;
(b) after clause (c), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
"(d)  to make contribution to the co-operative education fund referred to
in clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 63 or Co-operative Rehabilitation and
Reconstruction Fund established under section 63A; or
  (e) to file the statutory returns within the time specified under section
120.".
19. In section 45 of the principal Act,—
(a) for  sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be substituted,  namely:—
"(1) The Central Government may, by notification, appoint an Authority
to be known as the Co-operative Election Authority for conduct of elections for
such societies as may be prescribed and the superintendence, direction and
control of preparation of electoral rolls for, and the conduct of election of such
multi-State co-operative societies shall be vested in returning officer as may be
appointed by the Election Authority and the returning officer shall discharge
such function under the control of the Election Authority in such manner as
may be prescribed:
Provided that where such Authority has not been appointed in respect of
a multi-State co-operative society, the   elections to the boards of such society
shall be conducted by the existing board of such society.’’;
(b) in sub-section (5), after the proviso the following provisos shall be inserted,
namely:—
"Provided further that the term of office bearers shall be co-terminus with
the term of board of directors:
Provided also that only elected or nominated members of the board shall
be eligible to be elected as chairman or vice-chairman or president or vice-
president of the board:
Provided also that the  board may fill a causal vacancy of the members of
the board by nomination out of the same class of members  in respect of which
the casual vacancy has arisen, if the term of office of the board is less than half
of its original term.";
(c)  in sub-section (6), the following proviso and Explanation shall be inserted,
namely:—
"Provided that the Central Registrar may, for the reasons to be recorded
in writing, extend said period of ninety days up to one year.
Explanation.—  For the purpose of this proviso, the period of one year
specified therein shall be reckoned from the date on which the election became
due and any period for which such elections were stayed by any tribunal or
court shall be excluded.";
(d) for sub-section ( 7), the following sub-sections shall be substituted,
namely:—
"(7) No person shall be eligible to be elected as a member of the board or
office bearer of a multi-State co-operative society unless he is an active member
of the general body of that society.
Amendment
of section 43.
Amendment
of section 45.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

7
Explanation.— For the purpose of this sub-section "active member"
shall mean any  member  availing such minimum level of services  or products of
the society as may be specified in the bye-laws of the society.
(7A) A member of the board or office bearer of a multi-State co-operative
society shall cease to be such member or office bearer if he ceases to be a
member of general body of that society.";
(e)  in sub-section (8), after the words "by the Central Registrar" the words "or
the Election Authority" shall be inserted.
20.  In section 49 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), for clause (m),  the following
clauses shall be substituted, namely:—
  "(m) to elect president and vice-president of the multi-State co-operative society
from amongst the elected or nominated members of the board in accordance with the
bye-laws of the multi-State co-operative society; and
(n) to take such other measures or to do such other acts as may be prescribed
or required under this Act or the bye-laws or as may be delegated by the general
body.".
21.  In section 50 of the principal Act,—
(a)   in sub-section (1), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
"Provided that where the chairperson or president of a multi-State co-
operative society fails to fix a date of the meeting of the board, the Chief Executive
shall,  on receipt of requisition from one-fourth of the directors, convene the
meeting of the board.";
(b) in sub-section (3),  after the words "meeting of the board", the words  "the
vice-chairperson and in the absence of both," shall be inserted;
(c) after sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
"(4) The quorum for a meeting of the board of directors of a multi-State
co-operative society shall be one-third of its total strength and the participation
of the directors by video-conferencing or by other electronic means shall also
be counted for the purpose of quorum under this sub-section.".
22.  In section 52 of the principal Act, in clause ( j), for the words "thirty days", the
words "forty-five days" shall be substituted.
23.  In section 53 of the principal Act, for sub-section (1), the following sub-sections
shall be substituted, namely:—
"(1) The board may constitute an Executive Committee, and such other
committees or sub-committees as may be specified in the bye-laws of the multi-State
co-operative society.
(1A) The board shall constitute an audit and ethics committee in accordance
with bye-laws which shall meet once in three months.".
24.  After section 63 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
'63A. (1) The Central Government shall establish a fund to be called the Co-
operative Rehabilitation and Reconstruction Fund (hereafter in this section referred
to  as the "Fund " ’.
Amendment
of section 49.
Amendment
of section 50.
Amendment
of section 52.
Amendment
of section 53.
Establishment
of Co-
operative
Rehabilitation
and
Reconstruction
Fund.
Insertion of
new section
63A.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

8
(2)  There shall be credited to the Fund the following amounts, namely:—
(a) a multi-State co-operative society registered under this Act shall credit
0.005% to 0.1% of its turnover, subject to a maximum of Rs. 3.00 crores per year,
as may be prescribed;
(b) grants and donations given to the Fund by the Central Government,
State Government and other National and International agencies approved by
the Government from time to time for making contribution to this Fund;
(c) the interest or other income received out of the investment made from
the Fund.
 (3)  The Fund shall be utilised for rehabilitation and strengthening of sick co-
operative societies referred to in section 41A.
 (4)  The Central Government shall by notification in the Official Gazette, specify
an authority or committee, with such members as the Central Government may appoint,
to administer the Fund, and maintain separate accounts and other relevant records in
relation to the Fund in such form as may be prescribed in consultation with the
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
 (5)  It shall be competent for the authority or committee appointed under sub-
section (4) to spend moneys out of the Fund for carrying out the objects for which
the Fund has been established.
25.  In section 67 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section (1), after the second proviso, the following proviso shall be
inserted, namely:—
 "Provided also that the multi-State co-operative society doing the banking
business shall be governed by directions issued by Reserve Bank of India in
this behalf.";
(b) in sub-section (3),—
(a) for the words “twenty-five per cent. of its paid-up share capital” the
words “its paid-up share capital, free reserves and surpluses” shall be
substituted;
(b) the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
‘‘Provided that the multi-State co-operative society doing the
banking business shall be governed by directions issued by the Reserve
Bank of India or any other  authority competent to do so under any law
for the time being in force in this behalf.”.
26.  In section 70 of the principal Act, in sub-section (7), in clause (a),  for the proviso
the following proviso  shall be substituted, namely:—
"Provided that where such vacancy is caused by the resignation or death of an
auditor, the vacancy shall be filled by the board out of the panel of auditors approved
by the Central Registrar.".
27.  In section 73 of the principal Act,  after sub-section (5), the following sub-section
shall be inserted, namely:—
"(6) The Central Government may, by notification, lay down auditing and
accounting standards to be adopted by multi-State co-operative societies or class of
multi-State co-operative societies:
Provided that multi-State co-operative societies doing the banking business
shall adopt accounting and auditing standards if any laid down by Reserve Bank of
India  in this behalf:
Amendment
of section 67.
Amendment
of section 70.
Amendment
of section 73.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

9
Provided further that until such auditing standards are laid down, auditing
standards specified by the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India shall be deemed
to be the auditing  and accounting standards.".
28.  In section 77 of the principal Act,—-
(a) in sub-section (1), the proviso shall be omitted;
(b) after sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
"(1A) The Central Government may order for a special audit of a multi-
State co-operative society where the Central Government or a State Government
holds any share capital or shares in such multi-State co-operative society.".
29.  In section 78 of the principal Act, for sub-section (1), the following sub-sections
shall be substituted, namely:—
"(1) Where on a scrutiny of any document filed by a multi-State co-operative
society or otherwise, the Central Registrar is of the opinion that any further information
or explanation or any further documents relating to the multi-State co-operative society
is necessary, he may, by a written notice, require the multi-State co-operative society—
(i) to furnish in writing such information or explanation; or
(ii) to produce such documents,
within such reasonable time, as may be specified in the notice.
(1A) If the Central Registrar is satisfied on the basis of information available
with or furnished to him or on a representation made to him by any person that the
business of a multi-State co-operative society is being carried on for a fraudulent or
unlawful purpose, he may, after informing the multi-State co-operative society of the
allegations made against it by a written order, call on the multi-State co-operative
society to furnish in writing any information or explanation on matters specified in the
order within such time as he may specify therein, and  hold such inquiry as he deems
fit:
Provided that the Central Government may, if it is satisfied that circumstances
so warrant, direct, the Central Registrar or an inspector appointed by it for the purpose,
to hold an inquiry under this sub-section.
(1B)  The Central Registrar may, on a request from a federal co-operative to
which a multi-State co-operative society is affiliated or a creditor or not less than one-
third of the members of the board or not less than one-fifth of the total number of
members of a multi-State co-operative society, hold an inquiry or direct some person
authorised by him by order in writing in this behalf to hold an inquiry into the
constitution, working and financial condition of a multi-State co-operative society:
Provided that no inquiry under this sub-section shall be held unless a notice of
not less than fifteen days has been given to the multi-State co-operative society.".
30. In section 84 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section ( 1),  for the words "such dispute shall be referred to
arbitration", the words "such dispute shall be referred to the Central Registrar" shall
be substituted;
(b) after sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
"(1A)  The Central Registrar may, on receipt of the reference of dispute
under  sub-section ( 1),—
(a) decide the dispute himself; or
(b) transfer it for decision to such  person and upon such terms and
conditions  as may be specified,
Amendment
of section 77.
Amendment
of section 78.
Amendment
of section 84.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

10
and the order passed under this sub-section shall be final and binding on the
multi-State co-operative societies and other concerned parties and shall not be
called in question in any court:
Provided that the Central Registrar may, at any time after transferring the
dispute under clause (b) and after recording the reason for doing so withdraw
the dispute so transferred and decide the dispute himself.
Explanation.—  For the removal of doubts, it is clarified that power to
decide dispute under this section includes the power to pass interim order;
(c) in sub-section (3), —
(a) for the word "arbitration", the words "Central Registrar" shall be
substituted;
(b) for  the word  ‘‘arbitrator’’, the words, brackets, letters and figures
"Central Registrar or person authorised by him under clause (b) of sub-section
(1A)" shall  be substituted;
(d) sub- sections (4) and (5) shall be omitted.
31.  In section 94 of the principal Act,—
(a) in the opening paragraph,  after the words and figures "section 83 or" the
words  and figures  "section 84 or" shall be inserted;
(b) after clause (c), the following clause shall be  inserted,  namely:—
"(d) where the decision or order provides for  recovery on account of the
default in contribution to the co-operative education fund referred to in clause
(b) of sub-section ( 1) of section 63 or Co-operative Rehabilitation and
Reconstruction Fund established under section 63A, the Central Registrar shall
issue the certificate of recovery and forward it to any other authority for execution
according to the law for the time being in force for the recovery  as arrears of
land revenue.".
32.  In section 103 of the  principal Act, after sub-section (1),  the following provisos
shall be inserted, namely :—
"Provided that the said multi-State co-operative society shall submit an
application for registration and such information to obtain the certificate of registration
from the Central Registrar as provided in this Act:
Provided further that in case all the successor States take necessary steps to
divide or  reorganise the said multi-State co-operative society into State co-operative
Societies to confine their objects, services and the members to respective States
within such period as may be prescribed, such society shall not be deemed to be a
multi-State co-operative society under the provisions of this Act and the Central
Registrar may cancel the registration of such multi-State co-operative society by an
order in writing.".
33.  In section 104 of the principal Act,—
(a)  in sub-section (1),—
(i) after the words "making a false return", the words "or failing to file
returns" shall be inserted;
(ii) for the words "two thousand rupees" the words "five thousand
rupees" shall be substituted;
(iii) for  the words "extend to ten thousand rupees", the words "extend to
fifty thousand rupees" shall be substituted;
Amendment
of section 94.
Amendment
of section
103.
Amendment
of section
104.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

11
(b) in sub-section ( 2), for the words "five thousand rupees", the words "ten
thousand rupees" shall be substituted;
(c) in sub-section (3), —
(i) after the word and figures "section 89", the words and figures "or to a
person required  to file return under section 120" shall be inserted;
(ii) for  the words "two thousand rupees", the words "five thousand
rupees" shall be substituted;
(iii) for  the words "five thousand rupees", the words "ten thousand
rupees" shall be substituted.
34.  Section 106 of the principal Act shall be numbered as sub-section (1) thereof and
after sub-section (1),  so numbered the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
"(2) Every multi-State co-operative society shall appoint a Co-operative
Information Officer to provide, on application made to him and on payment of such
fee as may be prescribed, information about the affairs and management of the society,
within thirty days from the date of receipt of application.
(3) Every multi-State co-operative society shall also appoint a Chief Information
Officer who shall hear and dispose of any complaint regarding the non-supply of
information by the Co-operative Information Officer within the time specified in sub-
section (2).
(4) Any person, aggrieved by the order of the Chief  Information Officer, may
file an appeal before the Central Registrar whose decision thereon shall be final:
Provided that the Central Registrar may impose penalty on the officers
responsible for non-furnishing of information to the amount of two hundred and fifty
rupees for each day of delay above the specified period.
(5)  The manner of appeal, the time within which such appeal may be filed and
the procedure of appeal shall be such as may be prescribed.’’.
35.  In section 108 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), in clause (i), after the words
"Central Registrar", the words "or any person authorised by him in this behalf" shall be
inserted.
36.  After section 120 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
"120A. (1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Act, and
without prejudice to the provisions contained in the Information Technology Act,
2000, the Central Government may, from such date as may be prescribed,  require that-—
(a) such applications, balance sheet, return, or any other particulars or
document as may be required to be filed or delivered under this Act or rules
made thereunder, shall be filed in the electronic form and authenticated in such
manner as may be  prescribed;
(b) such document, notice, any communication or intimation, as may be
required to be served or delivered under this Act, shall be served or delivered
under this Act in the electronic form and authenticated in such manner as may
be prescribed;
(c) such applications, balance sheets, returns, registers, bye-laws or any
other particulars or documents and returns filed under this Act or rules made
thereunder shall be maintained by the Central Registrar in the electronic form
and registered or authenticated, as the case may be, in such manner as may be
prescribed;
Amendment
of section
106.
Amendment
of section
108.
21 of 2000
Filing of
applications,
documents,
inspections,
etc. in
electronic
form.
Insertion of
new section
120A.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

12
(d) such inspection of the bye-laws, balance sheets, returns or any other
particulars or documents maintained in the electronic form, as is otherwise
available for inspection under this Act or rules made thereunder, may be made
by any person through the electronic form in such manner as may be prescribed;
(e) such fees, charges or other sums payable under this Act or rules made
thereunder shall be paid through the electronic form and in such manner as may
be prescribed.
(2)  The Central Registrar shall register change of registered office, amendment
of bye-laws, issue certificate of registration, register such document, issue such
certificate, record notice, receive such communication as may be required to be
registered or issued or recorded or received, as the case may be, under this Act or
rules made thereunder or perform duties or discharge functions or exercise powers
under this Act or rules made thereunder or do any act which is by this Act directed to
be performed or discharged or exercised or done by the Central Registrar in the
electronic form in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) The Central Government may also provide that the electronic form for the
purpose in this section shall be exclusive or alternative or in addition to the physical
form in such manner as may be prescribed.
Explanation.—  For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that the rules
made under this section shall not relate to imposition of fines or other pecuniary
penalties or demand or payment of fees or contravention of any of the provisions of
this Act or punishment therefor.
(4) The Central Government may, by notification, frame a scheme to carry out
the provisions of sub-section ( 1) through the electronic form.’’.
37.  In section 124 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),—
(a) after clause (g), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
"(ga)  the manner of exercising vote in electronic form under the proviso
to section 32";
(b) after clause (j), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
"(ja)  the co-operative societies for which the election shall be conducted;
(jb)  the functions to be discharged and the manner in which those are
to be discharged by the returning officer";
(c) after clause (m), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
"(ma)  other measures or acts under clause ( n) of sub-section ( 2) of
section 49";
(d) after clause (r), the following clauses  shall be inserted, namely:—
"(ra)  the turnover under clause ( a) of sub-section (2) of section 63A;
(rb)  the form in which the accounts or other relevant records shall be
maintained under sub-section (4) of section 63A";
(e) after clause (w), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
"(wa)  period within which the multi-State Co-operative society shall
devide or reorganise under the proviso to sub-section ( 1) of section 103;
(wb)  the fee under sub-section (2) of section 106;
 (wc)  the manner, time and procedure of appeal under sub-section (
5) of
section 106;";
Amendment
of section
124.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

13
(f) after clause (x), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
"(xa)  the documents, notice,  etc.,  required to be filed or delivered, or
served in electronic form under  sub-section (1) of section 120A;
(xb)  the manner of electronic form under sub-section (2) of section 120A;".

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The Multi-State Co-operative Societies Act, 2002 repealing the earlier law, that is, the
Multi-State Co-operative Societies Act, 1984 was enacted with a view to consolidating the
provisions relating to the Multi-State Co-operative Societies registered with objects not
confined to one State and serving the interests of members in more than one State, to
facilitate the voluntary formation and democratic functioning of co-operatives as people’s
institutions based on self-help and mutual aid and to enable them to promote their economic
and social betterment and to provide functional autonomy. The Multi-State Co-operative
Societies Act, 2002 came in force with effect from the 19th August, 2002.
2. With the passage of time and developments in the co-operative movement in the
country, certain difficulties have been experienced by the Multi-State Co-operative Societies
in the implementation of the Multi-State Co-operative Societies Act, 2002. Conference of
the State Co-operative Ministers was held on the 7th December, 2004 to, inter alia, ascertain
the difficulties experienced by the Multi-State Co-operative Societies. In pursuance of the
resolution passed in the said conference, a High Powered Committee or  Co-operatives was
constituted under the Chairmanship of Shri S.G . Patil.
3. In view of the recommendations made in the Report of aforesaid High Powered
Committee and suggestions received from the co-operative sector and other stake holders
and considering the importance of Multi-State Co-operative Societies in the national economy
and the experience gained during the last eight years of implementation of the Multi-State
Co-operative Societies Act, 2002,  it has been felt that the said Act should be amended to
keep the legislation in tune with the changing economic policies and to facilitate the Multi-
State Co-operative Societies to take advantage of the new and emerging opportunities and
to keep pace with other economic entities and facilitate raising of resources by the Multi-
State Co-operative Societies more efficiently and effectively by making appropriate
provisions for promoting their functional autonomy.
4. The Bill proposes to amend the Multi-State Co-operative Societies Act, 2002, inter
alia, to—
(a) make the management of these co-operative societies more responsible to
the members and accountable by making provision for ( i) constitution of Interim
Board, (ii) accounting standards, ( iii) constitution of Audit and Ethics Committee;
(iv) calling for information or explanation by the Central Registrar of the Multi-State
Co-operative Societies, (v) Special Audit;
(b) strengthen the provision relating to election of the members of the Board of
the Multi-State Co-operative Societies;
(c) make provisions for broad based representation in the Board of the Multi-
State Co-operative Societies by providing reservation for the Scheduled Castes, the
Scheduled Tribes and women;
(d) take certain measures which would facilitate the building of self-reliant,
democratic and professionally efficient co-operative institutions;
(e) bringing transparency in the functioning of the Multi-State Co-operative
Societies by making provision for appointment of Co-operative Information Officer,
Chief Information Officer for providing information about the affairs and management
of the Multi-State Co-operative Societies and also make provision for appeal.
14

15
5. The Notes on clauses appended to the Bill explain the provisions of the Bill in
detail.
6. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
NEW DELHI;  SHARAD PAW AR
the 22nd October, 2010.

Notes on clauses
Clause 2.—This clause seeks to amend section 5 of the Multi-State Co-operative
Societies Act, 2002 relating to the Multi-State Co-operative Societies which may be registered.
It is proposed to amend sub-section (1) of the aforesaid section, inter alia, to impose
an obligation upon the Multi-State Co-operative Societies to give an undertaking to the
effect that it shall make available its products and services to its members, after its registration
as multi-State co-operative society under the Multi-State Co-operative Societies Act, 2002.
Clause 3.—This clause seeks to amend section 7 of the Multi-State Co-operative
Societies Act, 2002 relating to registration of the Multi-State Co-operative Societies.
It is proposed to amend the aforesaid section to extend the period for disposal of
application for registration from four months to five months after recording reasons therefor.
Clause 4.— This clause seeks to amend section 10 of the Multi-State Co-operative
Societies Act, 2002  relating  to  bye-laws of the Multi-State Co-operative Societies.
It is proposed to amend sub-section (2) of the aforesaid section to include electronic-
mail address in the address of the society.
Clause 5.—This clause seeks to amend section 11 of the Multi-State Co-operative
Societies Act, 2002 relating to amendment of bye-laws of the Multi-State Co-operative
Societies.
It is proposed to amend sub-section ( 7) of  the aforesaid section to provide for
registration of amendments with such modifications as may be necessary to bring them in
conformity with the provisions of the Act.
Clause 6.—This clause seeks to amend section 17 of the Multi-State Co-operative
Societies Act, 2002 relating to amalgamation or transfer of assets and liabilities or division
of Multi-State Co-operative Societies.
It is proposed to amend the aforesaid section, inter alia, to enable the Society to
decide, with the approval of the Central Registrar, to wind up or convert itself into any other
legal entity and to transfer its assets and liabilities in whole or in part to such legal entity.
Clause 7.—This clause seeks to amend section 21 of the Multi-State Co-operative
Societies Act, 2002 relating to cancellation of registration certificate of Multi-State
Co-operative Societies.
It is proposed to amend the aforesaid section, inter alia, providing for cancellation of
registration if such registration has been obtained by misrepresentation of facts, submission
of false or misleading information, suppression of material facts or fraud; or the number of
members or the number of societies or the number of persons as the case may be, which
have been at any time reduced below the number of members or societies or persons as
specified in sub-section (2) of section 6 of the principal Act.
Clause 8. —This clause seeks to amend section 22 of the Multi-State Co-operative
Societies Act, 2002 relating to conversion of a co-operative society into a Multi-State
Co-operative Society.
It is proposed to amend sub-section ( 5) of the aforesaid section to provide that the
co-operative society shall cease to be as such under the law relating to co-operative societies
in force in the State, from the date of registration of amendment of its bye-laws by the
Central Registrar and the Registrar of co-operative societies of the State shall make an order
to this effect, within a period of one month from the receipt of the copy of registration
certificate.
16

17
Clause 9.—This clause seeks to amend section 25 of the Multi-State Co-operative
Societies Act, 2002 relating to persons who may become members of the Multi-State
Co-operative Societies.
It is Proposed to amend sub-section (4) of the aforesaid section to extend the period
for disposal of application for admission as a member of the society from four to six months
and providing for that the administrator or administrators, as the case may be, appointed
under this Act to manage the affairs of a multi-State co-operative society shall not admit any
new member to such society without the prior approval of the Central Registrar.
Clause 10.—This clause seeks to amend section 28 of the Multi-State Co-operative
Societies Act, 2002 relating to exercising the rights by members.
It is proposed to amend the aforesaid section to provide that the member shall not
exercise his rights unless he has made payment in respect of all dues to the society including
the payment in respect of membership or availed   minimum level of services as may be
specified in the bye-laws.
Clause 11.—This clause seeks to amend section 29 of the Multi-State Co-operative
Societies Act, 2002 relating to disqualifications for being member of a Multi-State
Co-operative Society.
It is proposed to amend the aforesaid section to provide that failure to avail the
product and services made available by the society as specified in its bye-laws may render
a person ineligible for being a member of the society.
Clause 12.—This clause seeks to amend section 30 of the Multi-State Co-operative
Societies Act, 2002 relating to expulsion of members.
It is proposed to amend sub-section ( 2) of the aforesaid section to extend the time
period from one to three years as may be specified in the bye-laws from the date of expulsion
of the member for being eligible for re-admission as member.
Clause 13.—This clause seeks to amend section 32 of the Multi-State Co-operative
Societies Act, 2002 relating to manner of exercising vote.
It is proposed to provide that the member may also exercise his vote at a meeting
through electronic form.
Clause 14.— This clause seeks to amend section 35 of the Multi-State Co-operative
Societies Act, 2002 relating to redemption of shares in Multi-State Co-operative Society.
It is proposed to amend sub-section ( 1) and sub-section (2) of the aforesaid section
to provide that the society may refund full or part of the share capital held by the Government
who shall accept such redemption on the face value or book value of shares, whichever is
higher.
Clause 15.—This clause seeks to amend section 38 of the Multi-State Co-operative
Societies Act, 2002 relating to constitution, powers and functions of general body.
It is proposed to amend sub-section ( 3) of the aforesaid section with a view to
provide that the administrator shall not represent the co-operative society or other multi-
State co-operative society beyond a period of six months.
 Clause 16.—This clause seeks to amend section 41 of the Multi-State Co-operative
Societies Act, 2002 relating to board of directors of Multi-State Co-operative Societies.
It is proposed to amend sub-section (3) and  insert sub-sections (4), (5) and (6) in the
aforesaid section to specify the field of expertise for the co-opted directors and to provide
reservation of seat for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes and women in the
board of the society. It is also  proposed to provide that the director shall disclose the
nature of his concern or interest and of that of his relatives at the meeting of the board of the
society and he shall not be present in the discussion of or vote on any contract or arrangement
in which he is concerned or interested.

18
 Clause 17.—This clause seeks to insert section 41A after section 41 of the Multi-
State Co-operative Societies Act, 2002.
It is proposed to insert the aforesaid section to provide for the constitution of interim
board for rehabilitation or revival of sick society.
Clause 18.—This clause seeks to amend section 43 of the Multi-State Co-operative
Societies Act, 2002 relating to disqualification for being a member of the board of Multi-
State Co-operative Society.
It is proposed to amend sub-section ( 2) of the aforesaid section with a view, inter
alia, to provide that default by members in making contribution to the Co-operative Education
Fund or Co-operative Rehabilitation and Reconstruction Fund and filing the statutory
returns within the specified time shall render them ineligible for being elected as members of
the board.
Clause 19.—This clause seeks to amend section 45 of the Multi-State Co-operative
Societies Act, 2002 relating to elections of members of the board of Multi-State Co-operative
Societies.
It is proposed to amend the aforesaid section to provide, inter alia, that the Central
Government shall appoint Co-operative Election Authority for conduct of elections in the
society. It also seeks to provide that the term of office bearers shall be co-terminus with the
term of board of directors and only elected or nominated members of the board shall be
eligible to be elected as Chairman or Vice-Chairman or President or Vice- President of the
board. It further seeks to provide that the board may fill a causal vacancy of the members of
the board by nomination out of the same class of members in respect of which the casual
vacancy has arisen, if the term of office of the board is less than half of its original term. It
also seeks to provide for extension of period for conduct of election by the Central Registrar
from ninety days up to one year. It also seeks to stipulate that no person shall be eligible to
be elected as a member of the board or office bearer of a multi-State co-operative society
unless he is an active member of the general body of that society.
Clause 20.—This clause seeks to amend section 49 of the Multi-State Co-operative
Societies Act, 2002 relating to powers and functions of the board of Multi-State Co-operative
Society.
It is proposed to amend sub-section ( 2) of the aforesaid section with a view to
empower the board to elect President and Vice-President of the society from amongst the
elected or nominated members of the board.
Clause 21.—This clause seeks to amend section 50 of the Multi-State Co-operative
Societies Act, 2002 relating to meetings of the board of Multi-State Co-operative Society.
It is proposed to amend the aforesaid section to provide for convening of meeting of
the board by the chief executive on receipt of requisition from one-fourth of the directors. It
also provides for quorum of the meeting of the board of directors and participation of the
directors through video conferencing or through other electronic means to be counted for
the purpose of quorum.
Clause 22.—This clause seeks to amend section 52 of the Multi-State Co-operative
Societies Act, 2002 relating to powers and functions of the Chief Executive.
It is proposed to amend the aforesaid section with a view to extend the period for
presentation of the draft, annual report and financial statement for the approval of board
from thirty to forty-five days.
Clause 23.—This clause seeks to amend section 53 of the Multi-State Co-operative
Societies Act, 2002 relating to the committees of the board of Multi-State Co-operative
Society.

19
It is proposed to amend sub-section ( 1) and insert sub-section (1A) in the aforesaid
section with a view to empower the board to constitute executive committee and other
committees or sub-committees.  It also seeks to provide that the board shall constitute an
audit and ethics committee.
Clause 24.—This clause seeks to insert section 63A after section 63 of the Multi-
State Co-operative Societies Act, 2002.
It is proposed to insert the aforesaid section with a view to provide for establishment
of Co-operative Rehabilitation and Reconstruction Fund.
Clause 25.—This clause seeks to amend section 67 of the Multi-State Co-operative
Societies Act, 2002 relating to restrictions on borrowing by the Multi-State Co-operative
Society.
It is proposed to amend the aforesaid section to provide that the multi-State co-
operative society doing banking business shall be governed by the directions issued by
Reserve Bank of India.  It also seeks to remove the existing restriction on borrowings by the
society to the extent of only twenty-five per cent. of its paid-up share capital and proposes
to  allow the society to raise resources to the extent of its paid-up share capital, free reserves
and  surpluses.
Clause 26.—This clause seeks to amend section 70 of the Multi-State Co-operative
Societies Act, 2002 relating to appointment and remuneration of auditors.
It is proposed to amend sub-section (7) of the aforesaid section to empower the board
to fill up the vacancy of auditor caused by the resignation or death of auditor from out of the
panel of auditors approved by the Central Registrar.
Clause 27.—This clause seeks to amend section 73 of the Multi-State Co-operative
Societies Act, 2002 relating to powers and duties of auditors.
It is proposed to insert sub-section (6) to the aforesaid section to provide for laying
down of auditing and accounting standards by the Central Government.
Clause 28.—This clause seeks to amend section 77 of the Multi-State Co-operative
Societies Act, 2002 relating to the power of the Central Government to direct special audit in
certain cases.
It is proposed to amend sub-section ( 1) and insert sub-section ( 1A) in the aforesaid
section to empower the Central Government to order for special audit where Central or State
Government holds share capital or shares.
 Clause 29.—This clause seeks to amend section 78 relating to inquiry by the Central
Registrar.
It is proposed to amend sub-section (1) and insert sub-sections (1A) and ( 1B) in the
aforesaid section to empower the Central Registrar to call from the society any information
or explanation and documents.  It also provides for holding of enquiry by the Central
Registrar if it is found that the business of the society is being carried on for a fraudulent or
unlawful purpose.
Clause 30.—This clause seeks to amend section 84 of the Multi-State Co-operative
Societies Act, 2002 relating to reference of disputes.
It is proposed to amend the aforesaid section, inter alia , to provide that any of
dispute shall be referred to the Central Registrar instead of arbitrator and that the Central
Registrar on receipt of the reference of dispute may decide the dispute himself or transfer it
for decision to such person and upon such terms and conditions as may be specified.
Clause 31.—This clause seeks to amend section 94 of the Multi-State Co-operative
Societies Act, 2002 relating to execution of decisions etc.

20
It is proposed to amend the aforesaid section to provide that in case of default, the
contribution to the co-operative education fund shall be recovered as land revenue.
Clause 32.—This clause seeks to amend section 103 of the Multi-State Co-operative
Societies Act, 2002 relating to co-operative societies functioning immediately before
reorganisation of States.
It is proposed to amend sub-section ( 1) of the aforesaid section to provide for
cancellation of registration by Central Registrar of the deemed multi-State co-operative
society if all the successor States take necessary steps to divide or reorganise the said
multi-State co-operative society into State co-operative societies.
Clause 33.—This clause seeks to amend section 104 of the Multi-State Co-operative
Societies Act, 2002 relating to offences and penalties.
It is proposed to amend the aforesaid section to increase the amount of penalty for
the specified offences.
Clause 34.—This clause seeks to amend section 106 of the Multi-State Co-operative
Societies Act, 2002 relating to copies of bye laws etc. to be made open to inspection.
It is proposed to insert sub-section ( 2) to the aforesaid section to provide for
appointment of Co-operative Information Officer, Chief Information Officer for providing
information about the affairs and management of the society and also make a provision for
appeal.
Clause 35.—This clause seeks to amend section 108 of the Multi-State Co-operative
Societies Act, 2002  relating to inspection of books of accounts, etc. of Multi-State Co-
operative Societies.
It is proposed to amend sub-section ( 1) of the aforesaid section to provide for
inspection of books of accounts, etc. of the society by Central Registrar or any person
authorised by him on his behalf.
Clause 36.—This clause seeks to insert section 120A after section 120 of the Multi-
State Co-operative Societies Act, 2002.
It is proposed to insert the aforesaid section to provide for filing of applications,
documents, etc. in electronic form.
Clause 37.—This clause seeks to amend section 124 of the Multi-State Co-operative
Societies Act, 2002 relating to the power of the Central Government to make rules.
It is proposed to amend sub-section ( 2) of the aforesaid section to include certain
specified matters under the provision of power to make rules.

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 13 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules to provide
for the manner of exercising vote in electronic form.
2. Clause 19 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for
specifying ( a) the co-operative societies for which the elections shall be conducted by
the Cooperative Election Authority; ( b) the function to be discharged and the manner
in which those are to be discharged by the returning officer appointed by the Election
Authority.
3. Clause 24 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules to provide
for (a) the percentage of turnover of a multi-State co-operative society to be credited to
the Co-operative Rehabilitation and Reconstruction Fund; and ( b) the form for
maintenance of separate account and other relevant records in relation to the Fund in
consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
4. Clause 32 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to specify the period
within which all the successor States shall take necessary steps to divide or re-organise
the multi-State co-operative societies into State co-operative societies to confine their
objects, services and the members to respective States.
5. Clause 34 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules to specify
(a) the fee for obtaining information from the Co-operative Information Officer about
the affairs and management of the society; and ( b) the manner, time for filing and
procedure of appeal.
6. Clause 36 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules ( a) to
specify a date and the manner of authentication of application and other documents to
be filed or delivered in electronic form, ( b) for the manner of authentication of the
document and notice, etc. served or delivered in the electronic form, ( c) the manner for
registration or authentication of applications, balance sheet, etc. maintained by the
Central Registrar in electronic form, ( d) the manner of inspection of bye-laws, balance
sheet, etc. to be made through the electronic form, ( e) the manner of payment of fees,
charges or other sums through the electronic form, ( f) the manner of performing duties
or discharging functions or exercising powers or doing any other  act to be performed
or discharged or exercised or done by the Central Registrar in the electronic form, and
(g) the manner to provide the electronic form to be exclusive or alternative or in addition
to the physical form.
7. The matters in respect of which rules may be made under the aforesaid
provisions are matters of procedure and administrative detail and it is not practical to
provide for them in the Bill itself. The rules made under this Bill are also required to be
laid before Parliament. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal
character.
21

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE MULTI-STATE CO-OPERATIVE SOCIETIES ACT, 2002
(39 OF 2002)
*****
5. (1) No multi-State co-operative society shall  be registered under this Act, unless,—
(a) its main objects are to serve the interests of members in more than one State;
and
(b) its bye-laws provide for social and economic betterment of its members
through self-help and mutual aid in accordance with the co-operative principles.
*****
7. (1) *****
(2) The application for registration shall be disposed of by the Central Registrar within
a period of four months from the date of receipt thereof by him.
(3) Where the Central Registrar refuses to register a multi-State co-operative society,
he shall communicate, within a period of four months from the date of receipt of the application
for registration, the order of refusal together with the reasons therefor to the applicant or
applicants, as the case may be:
Provided that no order of refusal shall be made unless the applicants have been given
a reasonable opportunity of being heard:
Provided further that if the application for registration is not disposed of within a
period of four months specified in sub-section (2) or the Central Registrar fails to communicate
the order of refusal within that period, the application shall be deemed to have been accepted
for registration and the Central Registrar shall issue the registration certificate in accordance
with the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder.
*****
10. (1) * * * * *
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of  the  foregoing power, such
bye-laws may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the name, address and area of operation of the society;
*****
11. (1) * * * * *
(7) If, on receipt of application under sub-section (5), the Central Registrar is satisfied
that the proposed amendment—
(a) is not contrary to the provisions of this Act or of the rules;
(b) does not conflict with co-operative principles; and
(c) will promote the economic interests of the members of the multi-State co-
operative society,
he may register the amendment within a period of three months from the date of receipt
thereof by him.
*****
17. (1) A multi-State co-operative society may, by a resolution passed by a majority of
not less than two-thirds of the members, present and voting at a general meeting of he
society held for the purpose,—
*****
Multi-State
co-operative
societies
which may be
registered.
Registration.
Bye-laws of
multi-State co-
operative
societies.
Amendment
of bye-laws of
a multi-State
co-operative
society.
22
Amalgamation
or transfer of
assets and
liabilities, or
division of
multi-State
co-operative
societies.

23
(3) The resolution of a multi-State co-operative society under sub-section (1) or sub-
section (2) shall contain all particulars of the transfer or division or amalgamation, as the case
may be.
*****
(7) On receipt of an application for the registration of new societies formed by division
in accordance with the resolution passed under sub-section (1) or of a new society formed
by amalgamation in accordance with the resolution passed under sub-section (2), the Central
Registrar, on being satisfied that the resolution has become effective under sub-section (6)
shall, unless for reasons to be recorded in writing he thinks fit to refuse so to do, register the
new society or societies, as the case may be, and the bye-laws thereof.
*****
21. (1) Where the whole of the assets and liabilities of a multi-State co-operative
society are transferred to another multi-State co-operative society or to a co-operative society
in accordance with the provisions of section 17, the registration of the first-mentioned multi-
State co-operative society shall stand cancelled and the socity shall be deemed to have been
dissolved and shall cease to exist as a corporate body.
*****
(3) Where a multi-State co-operative society divides itself into two or more multi-State
co-operative socieites or two or more-co-operative societies in accordance with the provisions
of section 17, the registration of that society shall stand cancelled on the registration of the
new socieites, and that society shall be deemed to have been dissolved and shall cease to
exist as a corporate body.
*****
22. (1) * * * * *
(5)( a) * * * * *
(c) The Registrar of Co-operative Societies referred to in clause ( b) shall thereupon
make an order directing that the society had, as from the date of registration by the Central
Registrar, ceased to be a society under the law relating to co-operative societies in force in
that State.
*****
CHAPTER IV
M
EMBERS OF MULTI-STATE CO-OPERATIVE SOCIETIES AND THEIR DUTIES, RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES
25. (1) * * * * *
(4) Every application for admission as a member of a multi-State co-operative society
shall be disposed of by such society within a period of four months from the date of receipt
of the application, and the decision of such society on the application shall be communicated
to the applicant within fifteen days from the date of such decision:
Provided that if the application is not disposed of within the period aforesaid, or the
decision is not communicated within a period of fifteen days of the expiry of the aforesaid
period of four months, the multi-State co-operative society shall be deemed to have made a
decision, on the date of expiry of such period, refusing admission to the applicant.
*****
28. No member of a multi-State co-operative society shall exercise the rights of a
member, unless he has made the payment to the society in respect of membership, or has
acquired such interest in the society, as may be specified in the bye-laws.
29. No person shall be eligible for being a member of a multi-State co-operative society
if—
*****
Cancellation
of registration
certificate of
multi-State
co-operative
societies in
certain cases.
Persons who
may become
members.
Members not
to exercise
rights till due
payment
made.
Disqualifica-
tion for
member of a
multi-State
co-operative
society.
Conversion of
a co-operative
society into a
multi-State
co-operative
society.

24
(d) he has made any default in payment of any amount to be paid to the multi-
State co-operative society under the bye-laws of such society.
30. (1) * * * * *
(2)  No member of the multi-State co-operative society  who has been expelled under
sub-section (1) , shall be eligible for re-admission as a member of that society, for a period
of one year, from the date of such expulsion.
* * * * *
32. Every member of a multi-State co-operative society shall exercise his vote in person
and no member shall be permitted to vote by proxy:
Provided that a multi-State co-operative society or a co-operative society or any other
institution which is a member of any other multi-State co-operative society may, subject to
the provisions of sub-section ( 3) of section 38 and the rules, appoint its representative to
vote on its behalf in the affairs of such multi-State co-operative society.
* * * * *
35. (1) Shares held in a multi-State co-operative society by any of the authorities
referred to in clauses ( c) to ( g) of sub-section ( 1) of section 25 shall be redeemable in
accordance with the bye-laws of such multi-State co-operative society and in a case where
the bye-laws do not contain any provision in this regard, in such manner as may be agreed
upon between the multi-State co-operative society and such authority.
(2) The redemption of shares referred to in sub-section (1) shall be on the face value of
the shares.
* * * * *
CHAPTER  V
D
IRECTION AND MANAGEMENT OF MULTI-STATE CO-OPERATIVE SOCIETIES
38. (1) * * * * *
(3) Where in any meeting of the general body or the board of a multi-State
co-operative society, a co-operative society or another multi-State co-operative society is to
be represented, such co-operative society or other multi-State co-operative society shall be
represented in such meeting only through the Chairperson or the president or the Chief
Executive or a member of the board of such co-operative society or other multi-State
co-operative society, as the case may be, if such member is so authorised by the board and
where there is no board of such co-operative society or other multi-State co-operative society,
for whatever reasons, through the administrator, by whatever name called, of such
co-operative society or other multi-State co-operative society:
Provided that where the bye-laws of a multi-State co-operative society provide for
representation of other institutions in any meeting of general body or the board of such
multi-State co-operative society, such institutions shall be represented through its nominee.
* * * * *
41. (1) * * * * *
(3) The board shall consist of such number of directors as may be specified in the bye-
laws:
Provided that the maximum number of directors in no case shall exceed twenty-one:
Provided further that the board may co-opt two directors in addition to twenty-one
directors specified in the first proviso:
Manner of
exercising
vote.
Redemption of
shares.
Expulsion of
members.
Board of
Directors.
Constitution,
powers and
functions of
general body.

25
Provided also that the functional directors in the national co-operative societies shall
also be the members of the board and such members shall be excluded for the purpose of
counting the total number of directors specified in the first proviso.
* * * * *
43. (1) * * * * *
(2) A person shall not be eligible for being elected as member of board of a multi-State
co-operative society for a period of five years if the board of such multi-State co-operative
society fails—
* * * * *
(c) to prepare the financial statement and present the same in the annual general
meeting.
* * * * *
45. (1) The conduct of elections to the board of a multi-State co-operative society shall
be the responsibility of the existing board.
* * * * *
(5) The term of office of the elected members of the board shall be such, not exceeding
five years from the date of elections, as may be specified in the bye-laws of a multi-State
co-operative society:
Provided that elected members shall continue to hold office till their successors are
elected or nominated under the provisions of this Act or the rules or bye-laws and assume
charge of their office.
(6) Where the board fails to conduct election of the members of board, the Central
Registrar shall hold the election within a period of ninety days from the date when such
election became due.
(7) No person shall be eligible to be elected as a member of the board of a multi-State
co-operative society unless he is a member of the general body of that society.
(8) The expenses for holding election by the Central Registrar shall be borne by the
multi-State co-operative society.
* * * * *
49. (1) * * * * *
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers, such powers shall
include the power—
* * * * *
(m) to take such other measures or to do such other acts as may be prescribed or
required under this Act or the bye-laws or as may be delegated by the general body.
50. (1) The Chief Executive shall convene the meetings of the board at the instance of
the chairperson or president of the multi-State co-operative society.
* * * * *
52. The Chief Executive shall under the general superintendence, direction and control
of the board, exercise the powers and discharge the functions specified below, namely:—
*****
(j) present the draft annual report and financial statements for the approval of
the board within thirty days of closure of the financial year;
* * * * *
53. (1) The board may, subject to such conditions as may be prescribed, constitute an
Executive Committee and other committees or sub-committees as may be considered
necessary:
Disqualifica-
tions for being
a member of
board.
Elections of
members of
board.
Powers and
functions of
board.
Meeting of
board.
Powers and
functions of
Chief
Executive.
Committees of
board.

26
Provided that other committees or sub-committees, other than the Executive Committee
shall not exceed three.
*****
67. (1) A multi-State co-operative society may receive deposits, raise loans and receive
grants from external sources to such extent and under such conditions as may be specified
in the bye-laws:
Provided that the total amount of deposits and loans received during any financial
year shall not exceed ten times of the sum of subscribed share capital and accumulated
reserves:
Provided further that while calculating the total sum of subscribed share capital and
accumulated reserves, the accumulated losses shall be deducted.
*****
(3) A multi-State co-operative society may issue non-convertible debentures or other
instruments subject to the provisions of any law for the time being in force to raise resources
for the fulfilment of its objects to the extent of twenty-five per cent. of its paid-up share
capital.
*****
CHAPTER VIII
A
UDIT, INQUIRY, INSPECTION AND SURCHARGE
70. (1) * * * * *
(7) (a) The multi-State co-operative society may fill any casual vacancy in the office of
an auditor; but while any such vacancy continues, the remaining auditor or auditors, if any,
may act:
Provided that where such vacancy is caused by the resignation of an auditor, the
vacancy shall only be filled by the multi-State co-operative society in general meeting.
*****
77. (1) Where the Central Government is of the opinion—
(a) that the affairs of any multi-State co-operative society are not being managed
in accordance with self-help and mutual aid and co-operative principles or prudent
commercial practices; or with sound business principles; or
(b) that any multi-State co-operative society is being managed in a manner likely
to cause serious injury or damage to the interests of the trade, industry or business to
which it pertains; or
(c) that the financial position of any multi-State co-operative society is such as
to endanger its solvency,
the Central Government may at any time by order direct that a special audit of the multi-State
co-operative society's accounts for such period or periods as may be specified in the order,
shall be conducted and may by the same or a different order appoint either a chartered
accountant as defined in clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 2 of the Chartered Accountants
Act, 1949 or the multi-State co-operative society's auditor himself to conduct with special
audit:
Provided that the Central Government shall not order for special audit of a multi-State
co-operative society's accounts if that Government or the State Government either by itself
or both hold less than fifty-one per cent. of the paid-up share capital or of the shares in such
multi-State co-operative society.
*****
Appointment
and remunera-
tion of
auditors.
Restrictions
on borrowing.
Power of
Central Govern-
ment to direct
special audit in
certain cases.
38 of 1949

27
78. (1) The Central Registrar may, on a request from a federal co-operative to which a
multi-State co-operative society is affiliated or a creditor or not less than one-third of the
members of the board or not less than one-fifth of the total number of members of a multi-
State co-operative society hold an inquiry or direct some person authorised by him by order
in writing in this behalf to hold an inquiry into the constitution, working and financial
condition of a multi-State co-operative society:
Provided that no inquiry under this sub-section shall be held unless a notice of not
less than fifteen days has been given to the multi-State co-operative society.
*****
CHAPTER IX
S
ETTLEMENT  OF  DISPUTES
84. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force, if any dispute other than a dispute regarding disciplinary action taken by a
multi-State co-operative society against its paid employee or an industrial dispute as defined
in clause (k) of section 2 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947] touching the constitution,
management or business of a multi-State co-operative society arises—
(a) among members, past members and persons claiming through members, past
members and deceased members, or
(b) between a member, past members and persons claiming through a member,
past member or deceased member and the multi-State co-operative society, its board or
any officer, agent or employee of the multi-State co-operative society or liquidator,
past or present, or
(c) between the multi-State co-operative society or its board and any past board,
any officer, agent or employee, or any past officer, past agent or past employee, heirs
or legal representatives of any deceased officer, deceased agent or deceased employee
of the multi-State co-operative society, or
(d) between the multi-State co-operative society and any other multi-State
co-operative society, between a multi-State co-operative society and liquidator
of another multi-State co-operative society or between the liquidator of one multi-
State co-operative society and the liquidator of another multi-State co-operative society,
such dispute shall be referred to arbitration.
*****
(3) If any question arises whether a dispute referred to arbitration under this section is
or is not a dispute touching the constitution, management or business of a multi-State co-
operative society, the decision thereon of the arbitrator shall be final and shall not be called
in question in any court.
(4) Where a dispute has been referred to arbitration under sub-section ( 1), the same
shall be settled or decided by the arbitrator to be appointed by the Central Registrar.
(5) Save as otherwise provided under this Act, the provisions of the Arbitration and
Conciliation Act, 1996 shall apply to all arbitration under this Act as if the proceedings for
arbitration were referred for settlement or decision under the provisions of the Arbitration
and Conciliation Act, 1996.
******
CHAPTER XI
E
XECUTION OF DECREES, ORDERS AND DECISIONS
94.  Every decision or order made under section 39 or section 40 or section 83 or
section 99 or section 101 shall, if not carried out,—
*****
Inquiry by
Central
Registrar.
Reference of
disputes.
14 of 1947
Execution of
decisions, etc.

28
CHAPTER XIII
SOCIETIES  WHICH  BECOME  MULTI -STATE  CO-OPERATIVE  SOCIETIES
CONSEQUENT  ON REORGANISATION  OF  STATES
103. (1) Where, by virtue of the provisions of Part II of the State Reorganisation Act,
1956 or any other enactment relating to reorganisation of States, any co-operative society
which immediately before the day on which the reorganisation takes place, had its objects
confined to one State becomes, as from that day, a multi-State co-operative society, it shall be
deemed to be a multi-State co-operative society registered under the corresponding provisions
of this Act and the bye-laws of such society shall, insofar as they are not inconsistent with
the provisions of this Act, continue to be in force until altered or rescinded.
*****
CHAPTER XIV
O
FFENCES AND PENALTIES
104. (1) A multi-State co-operative society or an officer or member thereof wilfully
making a false return or furnishing false information, or any person wilfully or without any
reasonable excuse disobeying any summons, requisition or lawful written order issued under
the provisions of this Act, or wilfully not furnishing any information required from him by a
person authorised in this behalf under the provisions of this Act, shall be punishable with
fine which shall not be less than two thousand rupees and which may extend to ten thousand
rupees.
 (2) Any employer who, without sufficient cause, fails to pay to a multi-State co-
operative society the amount deducted by him under section 60 within a period of fourteen
days from the date on which such deduction is made shall, without prejudice to any action
that may be taken against him under any other law for the time being in force, be punishable
with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees.
(3) Any officer or custodian who wilfully fails to hand over custody of books, accounts,
documents, records, cash, security and other property belonging to a multi-State co-operative
society of which he is an officer or custodian, to a person entitled under section 54, or
section 70, or section 78, or section 79, or section 89 shall be punishable with fine which may
extend to two thousand rupees and in the case of a continuing breach, with a further fine
which may extend to five thousand rupees for every day during which the breach is continued
after conviction for the first such breach.
******
106.  Every multi-State co-operative society shall keep a copy of the rules and its bye-
laws and also a list of its members, open to inspection free or charge at all reasonable times,
at the registered address of the society.
108. (1) The book of account and other books and papers of every multi-State co-
operative society shall be open to inspection during business hours—
(i) by the Central Registrar, or
(ii) by such officer of the Government as may be authorised by the Central
Government in this behalf:
Provided that such inpection may be made without giving any previous notice
to that society or any officer thereof;
*****
124. (1) * * * * *
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely :—
*****
Co-operative
societies func-
tioning imme-
diately before
reorganisation
of States.
37 of 1956
Offences and
penalties.
26 of 1996
Copies of
bye-laws, etc.,
to be open to
inspection.
Inspection of
books of
account, etc.
of multi-State
co-operative
society.
Power to
make rules.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to amend the Multi-State Co-operative Societies Act, 2002.
————
(Shri Sharad Pawar, Minister of Agriculture, Consumer Affairs,
Food and Public Distribution)
GMGIPMRND—4951LS(S3)—02-11-2010.