THE  SCULPTORS,  ARTISTS  AND ARTISANS OF
RURAL  AREAS  WELFARE  BILL, 2009
By
SHRI G. S. BASAV ARAJ, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the welfare of sculptors, artists and artisans in rural areas and
 for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixtieth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Sculptors, Artists and Artisans of Rural Areas
Welfare Act, 2009.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “artisan” means any person engaged in making useful, decorative or artistic
items manually from leaves or weeds or bamboo or any other material by traditional
means in rural areas for earning his livelihood;
Definitions.
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
Bill No. 123 of 2009
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5
10

2
(b) “artist” means any person who earns his livelihood by performing arts
including music, dance, drama, play, singing to entertain public or displaying of his
paintings or artistic skill to public in rural areas;
(c) “Board” means the National Sculptors, Artists and Artisans of Rural Areas
Welfare Board set up under section 4;
(d) “Fund” means the National Scupltors, Artists and Artisans of Rural Areas
Welfare Fund set up under section 3;
(e) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(f) “sculptor” means any person engaged in carving of statues or making of
decorative pieces or any other useful items from clay, cement, stone or any other
material in rural areas for earning his livelihood.
3. (1) The Central Government shall set up a fund to be known as the National
Sculptors,  Artists and Artisan Welfare Fund.
(2) The Central Government and State Governments shall contribute to the Fund in
such proportion, as may be prescribed.
4. (1) The Central Government shall set up a Board to be known as the National
Sculptors, Artists and Artisans of Rural Areas Welfare Board.
(2) The Board shall consist of following members, namely,—
(a) the Union textile minister who shall be its Chairman, ex-officio;
(b) five members representing the Non-Governmental Organisations working
for the welfare of Sculptors, Artists and Artisans in rural areas, to be appointed by the
Central Government; and
(c) five members representing the Sculptors, Artitsts and Artisans in rural
areas, to be appointed by the Central Government.
(3) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service of,
members of the Board shall be such as may be prescribed by the Central Government.
5. (1) The Board shall administer the fund for the welfare of Sculptors, Artists and
Artisans of rural areas.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision, the fund shall also
be used for,—
(a) payment of compensation to the next of kin of the Sculptors, Artists and
Artisans in the event of death during work;
(b) payment of premium for life insurance;
(c) payment of old age pension;
(d) payment of disability allowance;
(e) provision of free health care facility to Sculptors, Artists and Artisans and
their family members;
(f) housing facility at subsidized rate; and
(g) financial assistance for Sculptors, Artists and Artisans production and
marketing of their products and organization and advertisement of events.
6. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
Setting up of
the Sculptors,
Artists and
Artisan
Welfare Fund.
Setting up of
National
Sculptors,
Artists and
Artisans of
Rural Areas
Welfare
Board.
Functions of
the Board.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive session aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modifications in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
5

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Sculptors, Artists and Artisans working in the rural areas are living in a miserable
condition. The benefits of development have not reached them. In the age of globalisation
and information technology, it has become very difficult for these people to earn their
livelihood. Several generations of these Sculptors, Artists and Artisans have spent their
whole life to keep alive these traditional arts and for providing other useful articles and
entertainment to the community. Despite public recognition, these people are not able to
meet the both ends due to meagre income.
In rural areas, the traditional folk arts are popular means of entertainment. But with the
invasion of television, it is increasingly becoming difficult for them to earn their livelihood.
Even today, these people are engaged in preserving our traditional art. Government should
come forward to provide assistance to these folk artists so that they can lead a dignified life.
In view of the miserable condition of these artists, it is the duty of the Government to
provide social security and other financial assistance to them by formulating and implementing
appropriate policies for their welfare.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; G. S. BASA VARAJ
November 16, 2009.
4

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for setting up of a fund to be known as the National Fund
for the Welfare of Sculptors, Artists and Artisans in the rural areas. Clause 4 of the Bill
provides for setting up of a Board to administer the National Fund for the Welfare of Sculptors,
Artists and Artisans in the rural Areas.
Therefore, the Bill, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund
of India. It is likely to involve an annual recurring expenditure of rupees five hundred crore.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.
5

6
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 6 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the puposes of the Bill.
As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of legislative power is of
a normal character.
6

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the welfare of sculptors, artists and artisans in rural areas and
 for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri G.S. Basavaraj, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—5108LS(S5)—08-12-2009.