1
THE INDIAN POST OFFICE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019
By
SHRIMATI SUPRIYA SULE,  M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Post Office Act, 1898.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1). This Act may be called the Indian Post Office (Amendment) Act, 2019.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No. 123 of 2019
Short title and
commencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. After chapter II of the Indian Post Office Act, 1898, the following Chapter and
sections thereunder shall be inserted, namely:—
“CHAPTER IIA
COMPREHENSIVE COVERAGE OF POST OFFICES
6A. (1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by
notification, appoint, there shall be constituted, for the purposes of this Chapter,  an
Authority, to be known as the Post Offices Comprehensive Development Authority to
ensure comprehensive coverage of post offices in the country.
(2)  The Authority shall consist of,—
(a) Minister of State, Union Ministry of Communications—ex-officio
Chairperson;
(b) Chairman and Managing Director, Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited
(BSNL), Union Ministry of Communications—ex-officio Vice-Chairperson;
(c) Secretaries to the Union Ministries of Communications, Electronics
and Information Technology, Finance and Statistics and Programme
Implementation—ex-officio Members; and
(d) Chairperson, State Bank of India—ex-officio Member.
(3) The Central Government shall appoint such number of officers and staff as
it considers necessary for the functioning of the Authority.
(4) The salary, allowances and terms of conditions of services of officers and
staff of the Authority shall be such, as may be prescribed.
6B. (1) The Authority shall meet at such times and places and shall observe
such rules of procedure in regard to transaction of business at its meetings as may be
prescribed.
(2) The expenditure incurred by the Chairperson, vice-chairperson and the
members to attend meetings shall be borne by their parent organisations.
6C. (1) The Authority shall discharge such functions as may be necessary to
ensure comprehensive coverage of Post Offices in the country and formulate a policy,
within one year of its constitutions, to be put in action to achieve this objective.
(2)  Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub-section ( 1), the
Authority shall,—
(a) undertake a baseline study to collect comprehensive data about the
current state of post offices in the country and various facilities available there
which shall be completed within one year of the constitution of the Authority;
(b) recommend to the Central Government to establish post offices in
every village having population of more than one thousand;
(c) recommend to the Central Government to provide all those
comprehensive set of facilities in rural area post offices which are available in
post offices situated in urban areas;
(d) formulate guidelines to establish post offices as implementing agencies
to deliver various services in rural areas;
(e) formulate guidelines to ensure post offices to act as intermediaries
promoting connectivity in villages which shall include,—
(i) digital, telecom and internet connectivity in rural areas and
complete computerisation of post offices;
Insertion of
new Chapter
IIA.
Constitution
of Post
Offices
Comprehensive
Development
Authority.
Meetings of
the Authority.
Functions of
the Authority.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(ii) financial inclusion by providing core banking facilities
including Automated Teller Machines (ATMs) services in all post
offices;
(iii ) formulation of policy guidelines to mandate the
institution of Post Payment Banks in all post offices which accepts
deposits of upto rupees one lakh; and
(iv) enable Post Payment Banks to act as an interface between
Government and citizens and serve as a tool to deliver direct benefit
transfer services to citizens in rural areas;
(f) recommend to the State Governments to recognise post offices
as enrolment centres for citizens to obtain voter card, pan card and other
identity cards and household enrolment of in-house drinking water and
electricity connections;
(g)  frame guidelines for modernising the existing post offices which
shall include,—
(i) making all the post offices disable friendly;
(ii) to upgrade the existing post offices and include all facilities
prescribed herein;
(iii) setting up grievance redressal cells and call centres for
resolving customer related complaints;
(iv) facilitating e-commerce parcel delivery through post
offices by proposing e-commerce booking centre at every post
office;
(v) establishing passport seva kendras at every post office
headquarters at block level; and
(vi) setting up Passenger Reservation Counters (PRS
counters) at every post office in rural areas with population of more
than one thousand;
(h) frame guidelines to promote use of banking facilities by women
in rural areas through post offices which shall include,—
(i) opening of all women post offices at block level; and
(ii) recommending higher interest rate for deposits and fixed
deposits done in post offices in the name of women and girl child;
(i) ensure effective functioning of the post offices which shall
include,—
(i) mandating long operational hours for post offices;
(ii) prescribing harnessing of solar power through solar panels
installed on post office terraces as an alternate source of power in
rural areas with connectivity issues;
(iii) directing the postmaster to employ local citizens in cases
of shortage of manpower; and
(iv) recommending to the Central Government that extra work
force deployed at the post offices may be included in the rural
developmental works undertaken under Mahatma Gandhi National
Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS); and
(j) such other activities as may be prescribed by the Central
Government, from time to time.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
6D. (1) The Authority shall prepare once every year a report containing
statement of its annual accounts and the summary of its activities and schemes it has
undertaken during the previous year.
(2) A copy of the report shall be forwarded to the Central Government which
shall cause the report to be laid before each House of Parliament as soon as it is
received.
Annual
report.
5

5
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Making the rural economy self sufficient by equipping it with telecom and internet
connectivity, banking and other comprehensive set of facilities compared to the urban
areas is required today. With more than 1,54,000 post offices across the country and with
89.9 per cent. of them being concentrated in rural areas, post offices are proposed to be the
implementing agencies delivering these services in rural areas.
The Bill formulates that every habitation with population of more than one thousand
should have a post office, which would act as an intermediary promoting connectivity in
villages. The Bill provides for certain facilities including secure network connectivity (digital
and internet) for computerisation of post of fices. The Bill also provides for Automated
Teller Machines, core banking facilities in all post offices. Every post office is also mandated
to have a Post Payment Bank which accepts deposits of up to rupees one lakh and provides
direct benefit transfer services  to citizens, by acting as an interface between the Government
and citizens. The Bill proposed post offices to facilitate enrolment of citizens for voter
identity cards, pan cards, other identity cards   and household enrolment for in-house
drinking water and electricity connections.
The Bill also proposes to make all post offices accessible to differently-abled. The
post office premises will also be directed to accommodate grievance redressal cell and a call
centre to resolve any customer related complaints. To facilitate  delivery of parcels of
e-commerce, every post office is proposed to accommodate an e-commerce booking centre.
Extending such goods delivery service to rural and backward areas will also generate income.
At the block level, the Bill proposes to establish post office passport seva kendras
mandatorily in every block. Such passport Kendras will aid the youth in the rural areas
aspiring to study or work abroad. At present, there are only two hundred and eighty post
offices across the country with centers to facilitate railway ticket reservation. The Bill
formulates provision for compulsory Passenger Reservation Counters at every post office
in a rural habitation with more than one thousand population. To promote use of banking
facilities by women in rural areas, the Bill provides for all women post offices to be opened
at block level with the provision of higher interest rate for deposits and fixed deposits made
in post offices in the name of women or girl child.
In terms of functionality, the post offices are directed to be operational for long hours
and the solar power through the solar panels installed on their building terraces. Additional
work hours are proposed to be adjusted in the one hundred work days quota under Mahatma
Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS). Thus any additional
work done at the post offices is proposed to be considered as developmental works under
MGNREGS.
The Bill thus endeavours to enable rural dwellers access to basic services of decent
internet and telecom connectivity, and  overall development of banking infrastructure in
rural areas.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SUPRIYA  SULE
June 6, 2019.

6
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill vide proposed section 6A provides for the constitution of Post
Offices Comprehensive Development Authority to ensure comprehensive coverage of post
offices in the country. It also provides for appointment of such number of officers and staff
for its functioning. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve recurring expenditure of around
five hundred crore rupees per annum from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of around rupees one hundred crore is also
likely to be involved.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Post Office Act, 1898.
————
(Shrimati Supriya Sule,  M.P .)
MGIPMRND—774LS(S3)—27-06-2019.