Bill No. 123 of 1958 _ .. _ .. _.-
THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 1958 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA ) 

Bm No. la, of 1"& 
THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 1958 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
further tID amend the Representation of the People Act, 1950, and 
the Representation of the People Act, 1951. 
BE it enacted. by Parliament in the Ninth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
PART I 
PRELIMINARY 
5 1. This Act may be called the Representation of the People ShOrt title. 
(Amendment) Act, 1958. 
PART II 
AMENDMENTS 01' TIlE REPRESENTATION 01' THE PEoPLE ACT, 1950 
Z. In section 3 of the Representation of the People Act, 1950 AmeDdment 
10 (hereinafter referred to as the 1950-Act), for sub-section (I), the ofteerion 3· 
following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:-
"(/) The allocation of seats in the House of the People 
shall be as Ihown in the First Schedule.". 
3. Section 3A of the 19M-Act shall be omitted. Omillion of 
lec:tion lA. 
J S 4. For section 7 of the 1950-Act, the following seetion shall be Subatltution 
eel el of new aec:-substitut , nam y:- don {or leO-
tion 7. 
"7. The total number of seats in the Legislative Assembly Total 
of each State specified in the first column of the Second Sche- ~=~ ~ 
dule, to be filled by persons chosen by direct election, shall be LetriIIadw 
A ......... -

2 
the number specified in the second column thereof opposite to 
that State.". 
Amf en~rnent 5. As from the 1st day of January, 1959, in section 14 of the o .ectlon 14. . 
1950-Act, In clause (b), for the words, figure and letters "the 1st day 
of March" the words, figure and letters "the 1st day of January" 5 
shall be substituted. 
~e:=~~t . 6. In section 17 of the 1950 Act, the words "in the same State" 
17. shall be omitted. 
~f~!~u8t!~~ 7. For section 19 of the 1950-Act, the following section shall be 
tion for 8ec- substituted, namely: - 10 
tion 19. 
Conditions 
of reaia-
tration. 
Amendment 
of .«non 20. 
Substitution 
of new sec-
tion for lee-
don 22. 
('orrecti(>D 
of entrieI in 
electoral roU 
"19. Subject to the foregoing provisions of this Part, every 
person who--
(a) is not less than twenty-one )"ears of age on the 
qualifying date, and 
(b) is ordinarily resident in a constituency, 15 
shall be entitled to be registered in the electoral roll for that 
constituency. ". 
8. In, section 20 of the 1950-Act, sub-section (1) shall be omitted. 
9. For !;ection 22 of the 1950-Act, the following section shall be 
substituted, namely:- 20 
"22. If the electoral registration officer for a constituency, 
on application made to him or on his own motion, is satisfied 
after such inquiry as he thinks fit, that any entry in the electoral 
roll of the constituency-
(a) is erroneous or defective in any particular, 25 
(b) should be transposed to another place in the roll 
on the ground that the person concerned has changed his 
place of ordinary residence within the constituency, or 
(c) should be deleted on the ground that the person 
concerned is dead or has' ceased to be ordinarily resident in 30 
the constituency or is otherwise not entitled to be registered 
in that roU, 
the electoral registration officer shall, subject to such general 
or special directions, if any, as may be given by the Election 
Commission in this behalf, amend, transpose or delete the 3S 
entry.'I'. J,. 
Omit~ioD of· ' 10. Section 24 of the 1950-Act shall be, oJYlitted. 
SectiDD l4>, 

5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
a 
11. After section 30 of the 1950-Act, the following sections 
be inserted, namely:-
h 11 Insertion of 
s a ncw'scctioila 
"31. If any person makes in or in connection with-
31 and 32 
aftcr lection 
30. 
(a) a claim or an application for the inclusion 
electoral roll of his name, or 
Makins of 
falac dcc:\ara-
in an tions. 
(b) an objection to the inclusion therein, or an appli-
cation for the exclusion or deletion therefrom, of the name 
of any other person, 
a statement or declaration in writing which is false and which 
he either knows or believes to be false or does not believe to be 
true, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both. 
! ' 
32. (1) If any electoral registration officer, assistant electoral Bre~ch of 
registration officer or other person required by or under this Act inffic~~~~! 
to perform any official duty in connection with the preparation, tion wit~ the 
revision or correction of an electoral roll or the inclusion or ex- ~fc~~r~l~ 
elusion of any entry in or from that roll, is without reasonable toral rolla.· 
cause guilty of any act or omission in breach of such official 
duty, he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five 
hundred rupees. 
(2) No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against any 
such officer or other person for damages in respect of any such 
act or omission as aforesaid. 
(3) No court shall take cognizance of any offence punish-
able under sub-section (1) unless there is a complaint made by 
order of, or under authority from, the Election Commission or 
the Chief Electoral Officer of the State Concerned.". 
12. In the First Schedule to the 1950-Act, the whole of Part I, the AmIIndmcnt 
word and figures "Part II" and the words "as subsequently consti- ~~J~t 
30 tuted" shall be omitted. ' 
13. In the Second Schedule to the 1950-Act, the words, letters Amendment 
and figures "as constituted on the 1st November, 1956", the whole of s~~~~nd 
column 2, and the words "As subsequently constituted or partially , 
re-constituted" shall be omitted and column 3 shall be re-numbered 
3S as column 2. 
PART III 
AMENDMENTS OF THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE ACT, 1951 
14. In section 2 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 Amcn~cDt 
. f f d h 1 1 A . b of SectlOD a (herema ter re erre to as t e 95 - ct), 10 clause (d) of su -sec- , , 
40 tion (1), the words "or in the electoral college of a Union territory" 
shall be omitted. 

"'~t 15. In section 7 of the 1951-Act, for clause (d), the following 
., sectIOn 7. clause shall be substituted, namely:-
"(d) if there subsists a contract entered into in the course 
of his trade or business by him with the appropriate Govern-
ment for the supply of goods to, or for the execution of any 5 
Amendment. 
or sectiOD 8. 
works undertaken by, that Government;". 
II. In section 8 of the 1951-Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1), clauses (c) and (d) shall be omitredj 
(b) sub-section (2)· shall be omitted. 
Amendment 
of section 9. 
17. In section 9 of the 1951-Act, sub-section (2) shall be omitted. 10 
AmezUmcQt 
of sectiun 34-
18. In section 34 of the 1951-Act, in sub-section (1) ,-
(a) the word "and" shall be added at the end of clause 
(a) ; 
(b) the word 'and' at the end of clause (b), and the 
whole of clause (c) shall be omitted. 15 
AmeDdment 18. In section 39 of the 1951-Act, in sub-section (2), for the 
ohection 39. word and figures "section 34", the words, brackets, letter c.nd 
figures "clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 34" shall be 
substituted. 
Aiaendmcot ZOo In section 50 of the 1951-Act, for th'e word "candidate" 20 
.election SO. wherever tt occurs, the words "contesting candidate" shall he 
substituted. 
ADamdment 21. In section 52 of the 1951-Act, in the second proviso, the 
of section 52. words, brackets, figures and letter "or a notice of retirement from 
the contest under sub-section (2) of section 55A" shall be omitted. 25 
Quablion 
of sec:tioD 
ZZ. Section 55A of the 1951-Act shall be omitted. 
~~Ddmalt Z3. In section 56 of the 1951-Act, in the proviSO, for the words 
of section". "a constituency", the words "a parliamentary or assembly consti-
A .. endment 
of sectiun 60. 
tuency" .hall be substituted. 
24. In section 60 of the 1951-Act, in clause (a) ,-
(a) sub-clause (ii) shall be omitted; 
(b) in sub-clause (iv), the brackets and ftgur~s II (ii)" 
shall be omitted. 
Sub!ututlon 25. For section 61 of the 1951-Act, the following 
of new sec- • 1 section shall 
lion for lec- hoe substItuted, name y:-
lion , •• 
Spat pr0-
cedure for 
plC"cntina 
J)Cr'IOI1Ition 
of elcc:tort. 
"61. With a view to preventing personation of electors 
provision may be made by rules made under this Act-
(a) for the marking with indelible ink of the thumb 
35 

5 
of Jg~o. 10 
5 
or any other finger of every elector who applies for a 
ballot paper or ballot papers for the purpose of voting at 
a polling station before delivery of such paper or papers 
to him; 
(b) for the production before the presiding officer 
or a polline officer of a polling station by every such eldore 
as aforesaid of his identity cards before the delivery of a 
ballot paper or ballot papers to him if under rules made fu 
that behalf UDder the Representation of the People Act, 
1950, electors of the constituency in which the polling station 
is situated have been supplied with identity cards with or 
without their respective photographs attached thereto; and 
(c) for prohibiting the delivery of any ballot paper 
to any person for voting at a polling station if at the time 
IS such person applies for such paper he has already such a 
mark on his thumb or any other finger or does not produce 
on demand his identity card before the presiding officer 
or a polling officer of the polling station.". 
26. In section 64 of the 1951-Act, for the word "candidate", Ammdmeat 
20 the words "contesting candidate" shall be substituted. oflection 64. 
27. In section 67A of the 1951-Act, the word, figures and AmendmeDt of leCtioa letter "section 55A" shall be omitted. 61 A. 
28. In section 90 of the 1951-Act, in sub-section 
lowing Explanation shall be inserted, namely:-
(3), the fol- Amendment of wc:tioa 
"Explanation.-An order of the Tribunal dismissing an 
election petition under this sub-section shall be deemed to be 
an order made under clause (a) of section 98.". 
29. In section U6A of the 1951-Act,-
90· 
Amenc:lmeDt 
ofsect10D 
(a) in sub-section (4), after the word and figures "section 116 A. 
107", the words "and a copy of the stay order shall immediately 
be sent by the High Court to the Election Commission" shall be 
inserted; 
(b) after sub-section (5), the following sub-section shall be 
inserted, namely:-
3S "(6) As soon as an appeal is decided, the High Court 
shall intimate the substance of the decision to the Election 
Commission, and as soon as may be thereafter, shall send 
to the Election Commission an authenticated copy of the 

Amendment 
of section 
II7. 
Amendment 
of s .. ction 
II9 A. 
Amendment 
of section 
UI. 
Am.encbnent 
of,ection 
UZ. 
Amendment 
of section 
123. 
6 
decision; and upon its receipt, the Election Commission 
shall-
(a) forward copies thereof to the authorities to 
which copies of the order of the Tribunal were forward-
ed under section 106, and 5 
(b) cause the decision to be published in the 
gazette or gazettes in which that order was published 
under the said section.". 
30. In section 117 of the 1951-Act, the words "the Secretary to" 
shall be omitted. 10 
31. In section 119A of the 1951-Act, the words "the Secretary 
to" shall be omitted. 
32. In section 121 of the 1951-Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words and figures "within a 
period of six months from the publication of such order under 15 
section 106", the words "within a period of one year from the 
date of such order" shall be substituted;. 
(b) in sub-section (2), for the words "six months", the 
words "one year" shall be substituted. 
33. In section 122 of the 1951-Act, in the proviso, for the words 20 
and figures "within a period of six months from the date of publi-
cation of such order under section 106", the words "within a period 
of one year from the date of such order" shall be substituted. 
34. In section 123 of the 1951-Act,-
(a) for clause (1), the following clause shall be substituted, 25 
namely:-
.. (1) 'Bribery', that is to say,-
(A) any gift, offer or promise by a candidate or his 
agent or by any other person of any gratification, to 
any person whomsoever, with the object, directly or in- 30 
directly of inducing-
(a) a person to stand or not to stand as, or to 
withdraw from being a candidate at an election; or 
(b) an elector to vote or refrain from voting at 
an election, 35 
or as a reward to-
(i) a person for having so stood or not stood. 
or for having withdrawn his condidature; or 

5 " 
10 
20 
'1 
(ii) an elector for having voted or refrained from 
voting; 
(B) the receipt of, or 'agreement to receive, any 
gratification, whether as a motive or a reward-
(a) by a person for standing or not standing as, 
or for withdrawing from being, a candidate; or 
(b) by any person whomsoever for himself or 
any other person for voting or refraining from 
voting, or inducing or attempting to induce any elec-
tor to vote or refrain from voting, or any candidate 
to withdraw his candidature. . 
ExpZanation.-For the purposes of this clause 
the term 'gratification' is not restricted to pecuniary 
gratifications or gratifications estimable in money 
and it includes all forms of entel'tainment and all 
forms of employment for reward but it does not 
include the payment of any expenses bona fide 
incurred at, or for the purpose of, any election and 
duly entered in the account of election expenses 
referred to in section 78.". 
(b) in clause (4), the words "or retirement from contest" 
shall be omitted. 
35. In section 134 of the 1951-Act, in sub-section (3) ,- Amcrdment 
of section 
(a) the words "Electoral Registration Officers, A~istant 134· 
25 Electoral Registration Officers", 
43 of 1950., : 
(b) the words "the preparation of an electoral roll", and 
(c) the words and figures "or by or .under the Representation 
of the People Act, 1950" shall be omitted. 
36. In section 136 of the 1951-Act, in sub-section (3), the words Amr encl;ment 
. 0 sectIon 30 and figures "or, by or under the RepresentatIon of tile People Act, 136. 
43 of Ig'J. ' 1950" shall be omitted. 
3' 
37: For section 158 of the 1951-Act, the following section shall be Substitution 
b t 't t d 1 . o( new !U S 1 U e • name y.- ,('ction (or 
section Is8. 
"158. (1) The deposit made under section 34 or under that sec- Return or 
tion read with sub-section (2) of section 39 shall either be return- fortidcida!ture,o( can te I 
ed to the person making it or his legal representative or be forfeit- deposit. 
ed to the appropriate authority in accordance with the provisions 
of this section. 

8 
(2) Except in cases hereafter mentioned in this section, the 
deposit shall be returned as soon as practicable after the result 
of the election is declared. 
(3) If the candidate is not shown in the list of contesting 
candidates, or if he dies before the commencement of the poll, S 
the deposit shall be returned as soon as practicable after the 
publication of the list or after his death, as the case may be. 
(4) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (3), the deposit 
shall be forfeited if at an election where a poll has been taken, 
the candid.ate is not elected and the number of valid votes polled 10 
by him does not exceed one-sixth of the total number of valid 
votes polled by all the candidates or in the case of election of 
more than one member at the election, one-sixth of the total 
number of valid votes so polled divided by the number of mem-
bers to be elected: 15 
Provided that where at an election held in accordance with 
the system of proportional repreaentation by means of the single 
transferable vote, a candidate is not elected, the deposit made 
by him shall be forfeited if he does not get more than one-sixth 
of the number of votes prescribed in this behalf as suf!lcient to 20 
secure the return of a candidate. 
(5) Notwithstanding anything in sub-sections (2), (3) and 
(4),-
(a) if at a general election, the candidate is a contesting 
candidate in more than one parliamentary constituency or 2S 
in more than one assembly constituency, not more than one 
01 the deposits shall be returned., and the others shall be 
forfeited; 
(b) if the candidate is a contesting candidate at an 
election in more than one council constituency or at an 30 
election in a council constituency and at an election by the 
members of the State Legisla~ive Assembly to fill seats in 
the Legislative Council, not more than one of the deposits 
shall be returned, and the others shall be forfeited.". 

STATEMENT 07 diUECTS Alm UASONS 
jheobject of the present Bill is to CIIr1"Y out c:erta1h ~ddliata 
In the Representation of the People Acta, 1150 aud 1951, whieh are 
considet:ed necessary in the light. ofUle further expetierlce ·gamed 
by the &ection Commission and the Government in tl?-e v.:orkins., of 
these two Acts since their last Btnendrnlmts ih 1958. The ~tor 
the principal changes pto'pdied in the BUl *te IiVeti in til .. NOfesoa 
clauses. 
Nsw Dm.io. 
rli 20th NoVtmibir, 1958. 
R. M. HA'JAIlNA VIS. 
• 

Notes on clauses 
Clauses 2 and 12.-These two clauses seek to amend s~tion 3 ana 
the' First Schedule to the 1950-Act as after the second general elec-
tions Patt'l of the First Schechile showing allocation of seats in the 
House of the' People as first constituted has become unnecessary . 
.. 
Clause 3.-:-By this clause section 3A of the 1950-Act is proposed 
tc! t)e ()Illitted. astha·~ section.which provided for reservation of seats 
in the House of the People for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled 
Tribes in the quondam Part C States of Delhi, Himachal Pradesh, 
Vindh~. Pfadesh and'Manipur is now spent as a consequence of t~e 
reorganisation of States. Provisions for reservation of seats for 
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in the House of the People 
and the State Legislative Assemblies are now contained in the Deli-
mitation of Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies Order, 1956. 
Clause 4 and 13.-After the second general elections references 
to total number of seats in the Legislative Assemblies as constituted 
on the 1st November, 1956 have become unnecessary. It is accord-
ingly proposed to amend section 7 and the Second Schedule to the 
1950-Act suitably by these two clauses. 
Clause 5.-This clause seeks to change the qualifying date in rela-
tion to the preparation of n!vision of the electoral rolls for an assem-
bly constituency from the 1st of March to the 1st of January. 
The electoral rolls are prepared or revised by electoral registration 
oftlcers and assistants electoral registration oftlcers who are invari-
ably revenue officers. As the financial year closes on the 31st of 
March, these officers always remain extremely busy with their reve-
nue collEction work for two or three months beginning from March 
and are unable to give adequate attention to the preparation or revi-
sion of electoral rolls with the result that such preparation or revi-
sion is considerably delayed and it often happens that the final publi-
cation of the rolls cannot be done till after the close of the year. 
This affects the holding of bye-elections, specially bye-el~ctions which 
fall due in the second-half of the year. The bye-elections have either 
to be put off till the electoral rolls are revised or to be held on the 
buls of the old inaccurate rolls. To get over this unsatisfactory 
state of affairs it is proposed to change the qualifying date by amend-
ing section 14 (b) of the 1950-Act. 

~.; 
11 
Clauses 6, 8 and 9.-Complaints about inaccuracies in electoral 
rolls quite often come to the Election Commission. Inaccuracies in el~­
toral rolls occur principally in two ways .. In the fixst place, some-
times the names of dead and non-resideiltelectors continq.e in elec-
toral rolls long after they have died or ceas~ to reside in the cons-
tituency. At present electoral registration officers have not the 
power to' exclude from the electoral rolls the names of dead or non-
resident electors at any time. This can be done only cinceat the 
time of the annual revision of the rolls. By clause 9 of the Bill it, 
is proposed to substitute a new section for section 22 giving· power 
to electoral registration officers to exclude' from the electoral rolls 
the names of dead or non-resident electors at any time; This power, 
however, shol'lld not be unreStricted and should be exercised: sub-
ject to such special or general directions 'as the ·ElectioriCommission 
may issue from time to time.'· . . 
In the second place,' another ~eason for inaccuracies in the el~­
toral rolls is that the name of the same ~rson may appear. in l'JlQre 
than one place in the electoral roll for the same constituency or. ip 
the electoral rolls of more constituen~ies ,than ,one· in the .same State.. 
This defect is due to a great extent to the existing provisions o~ sec-
tion 20 (1) of the 1950-Act which gives an artificial meaning to the 
expression 'ordinarily resident': 'There is n·o reason why any person 
should be entitled to be registered as a voter at all merely on the 
ground that he owns or possesses a house in a par"ticutar locality, 
although he may not be resident in that locality in, the ordinary 
sense of the term, It is accordingly proposed hy clause 8' of the Bill, 
to omit sub-section (1) of section 20 of the 1950-Act. Sufficient 
provisions exist in the law for the safeguarding of interests of persons 
who are compelled by the exigencies of the offices they hold to stay 
away from their homes, After the> omission of sub-'section (1) of 
section 20, it will not be necessary to retain ·the word!;l 'in· the ~8me 
State' occurring in section 17 of the 1950-Act, By clau~ 6 of . the 
Bill these words are therefore proposed to be 6mitted. ' 
CZause 7.-At present under section .19 of the 1950-Act. ordinary 
residence in a constituency on the qU2.lifying date is a condition 'pre- . 
cedent to the inclusion of a person's name in' the electoral rolf of· 
that ~onshtuency, In. Iilctual ,practice it is hardly possible for t.he 
electoral registration officer to satisfy himself that an elector w'as a 
resident on a particular date in a constituency. There is. no reasOn 
why ordinary residence in a constituency should be made relatable to , 
a particular date.. This is not required' even by' the Constitution. -
Under article 326 only the age of the citizen is related to a particuiar' 
dat~, that is to say, a citizen wtio is ~n'ot less than twenty-on~'yors 

of age on such date as may be fixed in that behalf by or under law 
(that is, the qualifying date) is entitled to be' registered as a vot~r. 
But' there is no such provision in reiation to ordinary reSidence. By 
this clause it is accordin8ly proposed' to amend section 19 suitably so 
as to make only the age 'of an elector relatable to the qualifying -daie 
but not his residence 1ri the constituency. ' '. 
Clause lO.-By this clause it is proposed to omit ~tion ~ af th~ 
195,O-Act as that section is' now 'spent. " ,', , 
.' .. 1'.'" "t,_ "".". ,. "...... ..' ~. ""','. 
~ttB,~ 11~--<;~ ~ay~ ~ in w~cl\ f~l~ stMt~~~pts and 
d~~~p,~ ¥y~ ~ ~~, ~y. pmo~ in conn~ijon with inclqs!pn 
o~ e~c~~o,q o~ ~~ i¥, o~ ~C?~ ~l~oral ro~s. ~)' new s~tipn 31 
p~~ tp be ~~ in ~~ 1~~~ct by cl~l1$e 11 su~ f~ $tat~ 
~~~ ~ 4~1.~~()~ ~~ ~i\d~ ~~~le. 
~Qn 1M of the liSl-Act provides for the breadl of official 
duty in connection with elections. Though electoral registration 
officers and assistant electoral registration officers are mentioned in 
that section, theSe oftlceni have practically no official duty to perform 
under that Act. It Is, therefore, considered that' 'breach of ofticial 
duty by these categories of officers should be provided for in the 
1950-Act. This is proposed to be done by new section 32 as in 
cla~' 11. ' 
~~~~~ ~4" a,mt IBc-ln ~e Union territories of Hima~hal Pl'a~~.1\, 
~~u.r ilA~ ~ri~~a th~ e~ect~ l1l~~~rs of the territorial coun~U .. 
co~q~~, ~~~ th~ T~rrito~ial Councils Act, 1956 function ~~ the 
el~~ffi"~l. co~~ge for the J>u~se of elections to th~, Council o~ S~~ 
fro~ tho~ ~rritories; and in tlW Union te~ritory of Delhi the, co~-
C~~~~$: ~~ the ~~l~ M~1Wl 'Co~r~tion a~~ teD" pe.rso~, el~~ 
fr~~ tlw lt~w ~ and. C~tonmen~ a~e.,s form the elector~~ co,l-
le~., 'l'h~refo~~ th'7:e is J?.o ~l~t.i.~J;\ UIlde.r, the 1951·Act to rul ~ 
~i or, ~~W in ~ of th~ ~le;c.~ral college:; f~om any el~to~ 
cOJiege c~~tue,oq:. ~,W,'~f~ 'or in the ~e;c.toral colleae of ~_ 
Union terit9ry' occurring i9: section 2(1) (d) and the wbole, of 
claUse (c) of ~~~ 34,(1) o~ th;e. l~l-Act are, ~fore. UIU1~S­
sary and proposed to be omitted by clauses 14 and 18. 
Clquaes 15, 16 and 17.-Th~ languaae of section 7 (d) of the 19P1-
Act . which provides ~or disQualification' in case of contracts ~th the 
aOve~ent is wide and 'va~,e enoug~ to bring any kind or cate.s0ry 
of contract within its scope and it has been a fruitful source of elec-
t~on cUSPutesin "the p8.st:' Persons who only occasionally broad~ 
any'tant from the rad,io station or contribute any article to any Gov-
emmcmi publication 'may COllle within the mischief of this section. 
Itt.': ~ccorctin,ly-- propoSeQ to' r~raft' section 7 (cij in a s~ple:rand 
-I ." ". .. • ,,, , .. ,,',' , 
mor,e ra~~ WJA7, &0 ~ t,o b~, wttl;1i:J:llts,~ only two Q'8~ 

1_ 
gories of coptract~ ~qt~ into by ~ ~S'm with tb, Govti'1Ull~ ia 
the eo~~ of ~is trade or b\¢ness. Tl}.~ tWQ cattgoJies are c:GDr 
~for the supply of ~ and coqtracta fOl' the ~fCUUon at,aD, 
works. 
By way of COJl~u'n.i"l AJnendmenta clau ... (c) and (d) of sub-
section (1) of aec~o~ ~. ~b-secUoll (2) of ~hat section and sub-eection 
(2) of ~on 9 ~e pro~ 10 be omitted by clauaea 16 and n. 
CIauae lQ.-Section 39 of the 1951-Act does not at presept r,~ 
quire any depoait5 to be made by candidates at an election to ftij 
seets in the Council of States or a State Legislative Council b)' 
members of the Leifslative Assembly of a State or by the members 
of the electoral college of a Union territory. S~ch 1\ pro~ion 
Q'ppears to be necessary in order to prevent the ftling of irrespoIlJible 
and frivolous nomination papers. Accordingly it is pro~' by this 
clause to amend sub-section (2) of section 39 so as to make cla1:1Se (~) 
of ~tion 3f(1) applicable to such elections. 
CtatL8eB 20 and 26.-The amendments proposed in these clauses 
are clarificatory. 
Cla:U.8tS 21. 22 a.n.d 27.-Seciion 5QA. ot the 1951-Act which w~ 
inserted in 1956 has proved in ita working to be most unsatisfactory 
both from the point of view of purity of elections and from the point 
of view of administrative convenience. By c1,~ 2~ it is a~orQ,.\ngly 
prOposed to omit this section. The amendments proposed in cl~u~ 
21 ~ 27 are consequential. . 
Claus, 23.-S~ce tke, n~b,er of VO~f&:, ,Uo~~ tQ a. pollina .... 
tion. ill a CCllmCil constituerwy ~. v~y m\l,c;:l:\ 8.'A~ tb.an th., alloUell 
to a polling station in a parliamentary or assembly constituency.., ... 
eight-hour poll in the former means a considerable waste of ti)ne 
and is quite unnece~y. It is accordingly proposed by this clause 
to aplend proviso to section 56. of the le&l-A.ct so as to make it a~ 
plicable only to parliamentary and asaemJ.ly constituencies. 
ClatL8t 24.- The various classes of persons specified in section 60 
of the 1951-Act can give theil:: vo~ only by postal ballo.t ud Rot 
in any ot,her manner. The persons re,ferr~ to in sub-clause (ii) 
of cla~se, (a) of this ~tion a!"e ap;w~\ other •. tIM Mmisters an4 
Deputy Min,isters of tbeUJlipn ~. i.t bAA. ~ suUeakd to the Elec-
tion Cornmissj,c;>n tb.at they ,,!,ou.ld ~~ to. ~Q~ .pe1'8OnaUy ill their own 
constituencies apd. should not b:e. c()m.~ to give their vo_ by 
POStal ballot. It is accordin&ly: pr~ to omit 8\.lb-clause. (n) of 
cla~ (a) of section ep. ' 
Ctawte 25.-The existiDf provisions of section 81 of the 1951-Aet 
provide far the markin, with indelible ink of the thumb or any qU:w" 

finger of every elector with a view to preventing peI:sonation of elec-
tors at the time of poll. . 'But even this has not been found .to ,be a 
sufficient check for prevention of pers6nation specially in' constiiu
J
-
encies in big cities. It is, therefore, proposed by this clause to intro-
q.uce further provisions in section 61 enabling rules to be made for 
~he production before the presiding or the polHng officer of a polling 
sta~oJ;l, by. every .clector of his identity card 'before the delivery of 
any ballot paper to such elector if under rules made under the 
1950-Act electors of the constituency have been supplied with iden-
tity cards with or without their respective photographs attached 
thereto. ' 
Clause 28.-Doubts have arisen whether otders under section 90 (3) 
can be treated as orders made under section 98 (a). It is accordingly 
proposed by this clause to insert an explanation in sub-section (3) 
of section 90 provided that orders under section 90 (3) shall be 
deemed to be orders under section 98 (a). 
Clause 29.-By this clause it is proposed to amend section 116A 
so as to provide for the prompt intimation being sent by the High 
Courts to the Eelection Commission of stay orders llnd decisions in 
~ppeal, ' 
Clauses 30 and 31.-By these clauses it is proposed to omit refe-
rences to 'the Secretary to the Election Commission' occurring in 
section 117 and 119A, as the question whether deposits made in 
favour o'f the Election Commission and not in favour of the Secretary 
have been validly made, has been fought right upto the Supreme 
Court.' ' 
CLauses 32 and 33.-By these clauses it is proposed to extend the 
period for making an application for payment of costs in an election 
case out of security deposits, from six months to one year. The 
amendment proposed by clause 33 in section 122 is consequentiaL 
Clause 34.-1n a recent case the Supreme Court on an interpreta-
tion ot clause (1) of section 123 of the 1951-Act has held that accep-
tance of gratification is not included in the definition of ,the ,corrupt 
practice of 'bribery. Formerly, acceptance of gift or, gratification 
was a minor corrupt practice under section 124 (3) but that ent'ire 
section was 'omitted by the last amendment of the Act wiU-~ the 
result that'acceptance of gift is no longer a corrupt pr{ictice. It is 
propose i by this clause to amend section 123 (1) so as to include ac-
ceptance of gratification within the corrupt practice of bribery as 
ther.e is,,no r~son. why ~uch aceeptance, should not be regarc:ied as 
bribery. 

, 
Clauses 35 and 36.- The amendments proposed in these clauses 
are consequential on the proposed insertion of new section 32 in the 
19M-Act by clause 11 of ,the Bill ... 
Clause 37.-Sub-section (2) of section 158 of the. 1~51-:l\ct does 
not indicate how the number of votes polled by a. candid,ate·,and the 
total' number of votes polled by all the candidates are to be counted 
at an election held in accordance with the system of proportional 
representation by means of the single transferable vote. Section 158, 
therefore, requires amendment in this respect. In the next place, 
where the marking system of voting is adopted at an election in a 
two-member assembly or parliamentary constituency and a voter 
records both his votes on one single ballot paper, the rule in existin, 
sub-section (3) of section 158 does not give the intended result. For 
all these purposes section 158 ,has ,been redrafted as in this clause. 

By claWM; 25 Of the Representation of the People (Alnenament) 
Btll, lea, seeticin 61 of the Representation of the People Ad, 1981, 
is sbugnt to 'be amended to provide for the production of identity 
caras at the time of voting by voters to whom such cards have been 
iSSued in accordance with rules made in this behalf under the Repre-
smaiioil of the P~ple Act, 1950. The introduction of the system 
df lcieiHitY cards Wbuld involve 'ex"penditure out of the Consolidtltecl 
Fttiia of InHia as on a rough estimate the cost of preparation of 
an tdMtity el.td wfth ph6'fogi'aph will be near about Re. O' 75, 
although sueh CdSt in the caSe of an identity card without 
qhotogtaph Will tie very much less. It Ii, however, not possible to 
give an estimate of the total amount of expenditure involved in any 
year on this account as that would depend upon the number of cona-
tituencies selected by the Election Commission for this purpose in 
any year and the number of voters therein. 
The expenditure involved in the issue of identity cards will, as 
in the c:aae of other expenditure relating to elections, be shared bet-
ween the Central Government and the State Governments on a 
50:00 bu1a. 
16 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS nOM THE REPRESENTATION OP nul PEOPLE ACT, 1950 
(~ or 1850) 
• .. • • 
PART II 
AI.I.ocATION or SEATS .un> DELIKlTATION OF CONSTITt1UCIES 
Th~ House oj th~ P~opl~ 
3. (1) The allocation of seats in the House of the People as first Allocation 
constituted under the Constitution shall be as shown in Part I of the tl!"e8if~~: 
First Schedule and the allocation of seats in the House of the People of the 
as subsequently constituted shall be as shown in Part II of that Peep •. 
Schedule. 
• .. ... • 
3A. (1) Of the seats in the House of People allotted by Part I ~OD 
of the First Schedule to each of the States of Delhi, Himachal Pra- ~~e setJ~U: 
desh and Vindhya Pradesh, one shall be reserved for the scheduled of t~e Peo-
castes; and of the seats so allotted to each of the States of Manipur ~~l~r c!~~­
and Vindhya Pradesh, one shall be reserved for the scheduled tribes. !:l'~ed 
... ... • .. . • • tribes in 
cert_ 
Union tel'" The State Legislative Assemblies ritories. 
7. The Total number of seats in the Legislative Assembly of each Total 
State specified in the first column of the Second Schedule, to be nUJD~.er, of 
filled by persons chosen by direct election shall,- i:iJ:c'i~~e 
Assemblies. 
(a) in respect of that Aasemblyas constituted on the 1st 
of November, 1956,be the number specified in the second column 
thereof opposite to that State; and 
(b) in respect of that Assembly as subsequently constitu-
ted, or in the case of the Legislative Assembly of Andhra Pra-
desh as partially reconstituted under the provisions of section 
29 of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956, be the number speci- 31 of 1~,6.·. 
tied in the third column th.ereof opposite to that Stat~ . 
.. ... ., • • 
17 

Definitions. 
No peraan 
to be re-
listered in 
more thaD 
one con-
stituency. 
Conditions 
of re-
li~ttation. 
Meanilll of 
"ordinarily 
resident" . 
18 
PART III 
ELECTORAL ROLLS FOR ASSEMBLY CONSTITUENCIES 
14. In this Part. unless the cont(;!xt otherwise requires,-
(a) "constituency" means an Assembly constituency; 
(b) "qualifying date", in relation to the preparation or re-
vision of every electoral roll under this Part, means the 1st day 
of March of the year in which it is so prepared or revised . 
• • • • 
17. No person shall be entitled to be registered in the electoral 
roll for more than one constituency in the same State. 
• • • • 
19. Subject to the foregoing provIsIOns of this Part, ·every per-
son who, on the qualifying date-
(a) is not less than 21 years of age, and 
(b) is ordinarily resident in a constituency, 
shall be entitled to be registered in the electoral roll for that 
constituency. 
20. (1) Save as hereinafter provided, a person shall be deemed 
to be ordinarily resident in a constituency if he ordinarily resides in 
that constitueney, or owns, or is in possession of, a dwelling house 
therein. 
(2) A person who is a patient in any establishment maintained 
wholly or mainly for the reception and treatment of persons suf-
fering from mental illness or mental defectiveness, or who is de-
tained in prison or other legal custody at any place, shall not by 
reason thereof be deemed to be ordinarily resident therein. 
(3) A m:ember of the armed forces of the Union shall be deemed 
to be ordinarily resident on any date in the constituency in which, 
but for his service in the armed forces, he would have been 
ordinarily resident on that date. 
(4) Any person holding any office in India declared by the Pre-
sident in consultation with the Election Commission to be an office 
to which the provisions of this sub-section apply, or any person who 
is employed under the Government of India in a post outside India, 
shall be deemed to be ordinarily resident on any date in the consti-
tuency in which, but for the holding of any such office or employ-
!1lent, he. would have been ordinarily resident on that date. 
(5) The statement of any such person as is referred to in sub-
section (3) or sub-section (4) made in the prescribed form and 

19 
verified in the prescribed manner, that but for his service in the 
armed forces or but for his holding any such office or being em-
ployed in any such post as is referred to in sub-section (4) he would 
have been ordinarily resident in a specified place on any date, shall, 
in the absence of evidence to the contrary, be conclusive evidence 
of that fact. 
(6) The wife of any such person as is referred to in sub-section 
(3) or sub-section (4) shall, if she be ordinarily residing with such 
person be deemed to be ordinarily resident in the constituency speci-
fied by such person under sub-section (5). 
'" '" * * 
22. (1) The electoral registration officer for a constituency on Com:ction 
d h · f h t· f . tin try'. of entries in application rna e to un or t e corree Ion 0 an eX1S g en m electoral 
the electoral roll of the constituency, shall, if he is satisfied after rolls. 
such inquiry as he thinks fit, that the entry relates to the applicant 
and is erroneous or defective in any particular, amend the entry 
accordingly. 
(2) Any person whose name is entered in the electoral roll of a 
constituency may apply to the electoral registration officer for trans-
posing the entry to another place in the same electoral roll and if 
the electoral registration officer, after making such enquiry as he 
thinks fit, is satisfied that the applicant is entitled to have his name 
shown in that other place, he shall amend the electotal roll accord-
ingly. 
* '" * '" 
24. (1) Subject to the provisions of sf'ctions 16, 17 and 18 every Temporary 
person who has been registered before the 16th day of December, pro,!ilir". 
1956, as a citizen of India under clause (a) of sub-section (1) of aec- ~'f ~r::n:iS~OD 
tion 5 of the Citizenship Act, 1955, shall be entitled to be registered rew~-
in the electoral roll for 8 constituency, if that person on the 1st day :t:izens. 
of March, 1956, was not less than 21 years of age and was ordi-
narily resident in that constituenc~T. 
(2) Every authority registering as citizens of India under the 
said clause (a) persons ordinarily resident in a constituency shall, 
as soon '8S may be after the 31st day of October, 1956, and not later 
than the 31st day of December, 1956, send to the electoral registra-
tion officer for the constituency a list in tpe prescribed form of all 
persons so registered who on the 1st day of March, 1958, were not 
less than 21 years of age. 
(J) Upon receiving a list under sub-section (2), the eleetoral 
registration officer shall, after inquiring into the correctness of Ute 

list in such manner as may be prescribed, direct the inclusion in the 
electoral roll of the names of all persolU iacluded in the list who, in 
his opinion, are entitled to be registered in the electoral roll for 
the constituency under sub-section (1). 
• • • 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
(See section 3) 
PABTI 
• 
Alloc«tion of seats in the Ho'I.IM of the People as first constituted 
u7l.d~ the Constituticm 
Nallle ., State ...... 
'ar, A SUIUI 
I. ADdbnl 
2. Alum 
3. Bihar 
4- Bombay 
,. Mldhya Pradeab 
6. Madrae • 
1. 0I;i ... 
•• Punjab 1 . 
,. Uttar Pradesh 
10. West BoIIIII1 
I'lITt 1l 8t4tu 
I. Hyderabad 
I 
2. Jammu md2Kaahmir 
3. M8dhya Bharet 
... MJlore . 
,. PatiaJa Uld Eut Punjab States Union 
6. Rail8tbm 
7. Saunahtra. . 
B. TranDcore-Cochia 
1'.-('..0 StlJlU 
I. A,mer 
s. Db .. 
3· Coora 
4. J)eIhi 
5. Hlmacbal:Prld..a 
6. Itatch 
Total 
Dumber 
elleeCl 
2 
as 
6 
II 
12 
S 
1;) 
6 
I2 
2 
2 
I 
4 
4 
3 

Name of State or 1J'e88 
21 
Total 
number 
of.eati 
_.-_ .. _--_. ---
7. Mmipur. 
8. Tripura • 
9. Vindhya Pradesb 
10. Andaman and Nicobar Islands 
2 
2 
:I 
6 
dr'IJtJI 
I I. Part B tribal area 1 
TOTAL 497-
-----. --._----------------
I. 
2. 
3· 
~. 
5· 
6. 
7. 
8. 
,. 
10. 
II. 
12. 
13· 
PART II 
Allocation of seats in the Houss of lhe People as subsequently ccmstituted 
• • • 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE 
(S" aec:tion 1) 
• 
Total number oJ ,eats in the Lf!gislative Assemblif!' 
Name of State 
Andhra Pradesh 
Assam 
Bihar -
Bombay 
Kera!. 
Madhya Pradesh 
Madras 
Mysore 
OriSIa 
Punjab 
Ralasthan 
Uttar Pradesh 
Weat Bmp! 
• • • • 
Total number of aeats in the 
Legislative Assembly 
As constituted 
on the lit 
November, 1956 
2 
397 
108 
330 
469 
339 
189 
209 
I~O 
186 
189 
43° 
349 
• 
As subsequently 
con.tituted or 
partially 
reconstituted 
3 
301 
105 
318 
391'i 
12' 
231 
20S 
208 
1~f) 
IS4 
17' 
430 
:&52 
• 

IntelP,eta-
tion. 
EXTRACTS FROM THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEoPLE ACT, 1951 
(43 OF 1951) 
• • • • • • 
PART I 
PltELIMIN ARY 
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
• • • • • • 
(d) "election" meat:ls an election to fill a seat or seats in 
either House of Parliament or in the House or either House of 
the Legislature of a State other than the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir or in the electoral college of a Union territory . 
• • • • • • 
PART II 
QUALIFICATIONS AND DISQUALIFICATIONS FOR MEMBERSHIP 
• • • • • • 
CHAPTER IlL-Disqualifications 
~~~~uf~~ca- 7. A person shall be disqualified for being chosen as, and for being, 
membership a member of eith~r House of Parliament or of the Legislative Assem-
of Pnlia- bi L' I t' C '1 f St t ment or of a y or ~glS a Ive ounCl 0 a a e-
State Leah- • • • 
l.tllre. • • • 
Savinp. 
(d) if, whether by himself or by any person or body of 
persons in trust for him or for his benefit or on his account, he 
has any share or int~rest in a contract for the supply of goods 
to, or for the execution of any works or the performance of any 
services undertaken by, the appropriate Government; 
• • • • • * 
8. ~1) Notwithstanding anything in section 7-
• • • • • • 
(c) a disqualification under clause (d) of that section shall 
not, where the share or interest in the contract devolves on a 
person by inheritance or succession or as a legatee, executor or 
administrator. take effect until the expiration of six months after 
it has so devolved on him or of such longer period as the 
Election Commission may in any particular case allow; 
22 

7 of 1913. 
23 
(d) a person shall not be disqualified under clause (d) of 
that section by reason of his having a share or interest in a 
contract entered into between a public company of which he 
is a shareholder but is neither a director holding an office of 
profit under the company nor a managing agent and the appro-
priate Government; 
• • * * • • 
(2) Nothing in clause (d) of section 7 shall extend to a contract 
entered into between a co-operative society and the appropriate 
Government. 
9· (1) In this Chapter-
(a) "appropriate Government" means in relation to any 
disqualification for being chosen as or for being a member of 
either Hous'e of Parliament, the Central Government, and in 
relation to any disqualification for being chosen as or for being 
a member of the Legislative Assembly or Legislative Council 
of a State, the State Government; 
(b) "public company" means a public company as defined 
in section 2 of the Indian Companies Act, 1913. 
(2) For the avoidance of doubt it is hereby declared that where 
any such contract as is referred to in clause (d) of section 7 has been 
entered into by or on behalf of a Hindu undivided family and the 
appropriate Government, every member of that family shall become 
subject to the disqualification mentioned in th~ said clause; but 
where the contract has been entered into by a member of a Hindu 
undivided family carrying on a separate business in course of such 
busin~ss, any other member of the said family having no share or 
interest in that business shall not become subject to such disqualifi-
cation. 
• • • • • • 
PART V 
CONDUCT OF ELECTIONS 
CHAPTER I.-Nomination of Candidates 
• • • • • • 
Interputa-
(ion, etc. 
34. (1) A candidate shall not be d~emed to be duly nominated for DepOlitl. 
election from a constituency unless he deposits or causes to be 
dleposi ted-
(a) in the case of an election from a Parliamentary consti-
tu~ncy, a sum of five hundred rupees or where the candidate is 

NomiJuItion 
of candi-
datea at 
o:her dec-
tioru. 
a member of a Scheduled Caste or Scheduled Tribe, a sum 01 
two hundred and fifty rupees; 
(b) in the case of an election from an Assembly or Council 
constituency, a sum of two hundred and fifty rupees or where 
the candidate is a member of a Scheduled Caste or Scheduled 
Tribe, a sum of one hundred and twenty-five rupees; and 
(c) in the case of an election from an electoral colleie con-
stituency, a sum of fifty rupees: 
Provided that where a candidate has been nominated by more 
than one nomination paper for election in the same constituency, 
not mo~ than one deposit shall be required of him under this sub-
section . 
• • • • • • 
31. (1) • • • • • 
(2) The provISIOns of sections 31 to 38, excluding sub-sections 
(2) and (5) of section 33 and section 34, shall apply in relation to 
any such election as they apply in relation to an election in any 
constituency: 
Provided that-
(a) any references in the said prOVISIOns to the electoral 
roll of the constituency shall, unless the context otherwise re-
quires, be construed, in the case of an election by the members 
or the elected members of the Legislative Assembly of th£ State, 
as references to the list of members or elected members, aoi the 
case may be, of that Assembly maintained under sub-section (1) 
of section 152, and in the case of an election by the members of 
the electoral college of a Union territory, as references to the 
list of members of such electoral college maintained under sub-
section (2) of that section; 
(b) any references in the said provisions to section 30 shall 
be construed as references to sub-section (1) of this section; 
and 
(c) at the time of presenting the nomination paper, the 
returnini officer may require the person presenting the same 
to produce either a copy of the electoral roll, or part of the elec-
toral roll, in which the name of the candidate is included or 8 
certified copy of the relevant entries in such roll. 
• • • • • * 

CHAPTER n.-Candidates and their Agents 
• '" • • • • 
50. (1) At every election where a poll is taken, each candidate at At'endan~e 
such election and his election agent shall have a right to be present ~~;~ ~S:~is 
at any polling sttition provided under section 25 for the taking of the election I 
poll or at the place fixed under sub-section (1) of section 29 for the ~n!t!~i:S-, 
poll. and perf or-
marce,by 
(2) A candidate or his election agent may himself do any act or ~cti~D~h~f 
thing which any polling agent or the counting agent of such candi- a polli~g 
date, if appointed, would have been authorized by or under this Act ~~~~~i~~ 
to do, or may assist any polling agent or the counting ageat of such agent. 
candidate in doing any such act or thing. 
'" '" '" '" 
CHAPTER III.-General Procedure at Elections 
52. If a contesting candidate dies and a report of his death is Death of 
received before the commencement of the poll, the returning officer ~~~~~~I1. 
shall, upon being satisfied of the fact of the death of the candidate, 
countermand the poll and report the fact to the Election Commission 
and also to the appropriate authority and all proceedings with refer-
ence to the election shall be commenced anew in all respects as if 
for a new election: 
Provided that no further nomination shall be necessary in the 
case of a person who was a contesting candidate at the time of the 
countermanding of the poll: 
Provided further that no person who has given a notice of with-
drawal of his candidature under sub-section (1) of section 37 or a 
notice of retirement from the contest under sub-section (2) of 
section 55A before the countermanding of th~ poll shell be ineligible 
for being nominated as a candidate for the election after such 
countermanding. 
'" '" '" '" • 
"'55A. (1) The provisions of this section shall apply in relation to Retirement 
any election in a Parliamentary or Assembly constituency. from c~Dtest 
at electIOns 
(2) A contesting candidate may retire from the contest by a ill Parlia-
notice in the prescribed form which shall be delivered to the return- ~sc;:.:rt!Jyand 
ing officer between the hours of eleven o'clock in the forenoon and c~nstituen­
three o'clock in the afternoon of any day not later than ten days Cles. 
prior to the date or the first of the dates fixed for the poll under 
clause (d) of section 30 either by such candidate in person or by 
an agent authorised in this behalf in writing by such candidate. 
(3) No person who has given a notice of retirement under sub-
&lection (2) shall be allowed to cancel the notice. 

26 
(4) The returning officer shall, upon receiving a notice of retire .. 
ment under sub-section (2). cause a copy thereof to be affixed to his 
notice board and also to be published in such manner as may be 
prescribed. 
(5) Any person who has given a notice of retirement under sub-
section (2) shall thereafter be deemed not to be a contesting candi-
date for the purposes of section 52. 
(6) Where by reason of any retirement from the contest under 
this section, the nwnber of remaining contesting candidates becomes 
equal to the number of seats to be filled, the returning officer shall 
forthwith declare all such candidates to be duly elected to fill those 
seats and countermand the poll. 
(7) Where by reason of any retirement from the contest at an 
election to which the provisions of section 54 apply. the number of 
remaining contesting candidates qualified to be chosen to fill the 
reserved. seats becomes equal to the number of such seats, the 
returning officer shall forthwith declare all those candidates to be 
duly elected to fill those seats and countermand the poll in so far fiS 
it relates to elections for filling those seats and the procedure laid 
down in section 53 shall be followed for filling the remaining seat 
or seats, if any. 
CHAPTER IV.-The Poll 
Fillina time 56. The Election Commission shall fix the hours during which 
for poll. the poll will be taken; and the hours so fixed shall be published in 
such manner as may be prescribed: 
Provided that the total period allotted on anyone day for polling 
at an election in a constituency shall not be less than eight hours . 
• • • • • • 
Special pro- 60. Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions contained 
ced!lre bfor in section 59, provision may be made by rules made under this Act 
vot~ y 
eertaiJl claa- for enabling-
::.~f per- (a) any of the following persons to give his vote by postal 
ballot, and not in any other manner, at an election in a consti-
tuency where a poll is taken, namely:-
(i) a member of the Armed Forces of the Union to 
whom the provisions of sub-section (3) of section 20 of th'e 
Representation of the People Act, 1950 apply; 43 of 15150. 
(ii) a person holding fmy office in India declared by the 
President to be an. office to which the provisions of sub-
section (4) of that section apply; 
(iii) a person who is employed under the Government 
of India in a post outside India; 

27 
(iv) the wife of any such J!lerson as is referred to in sub-
clauses (i), (ii) and (iii) to whom the provisions of sub-sec-
tion (6) of the said section 20 apply; 
(b) any person subjected to preventive detention under 
any law for the time being in force to give his vote by postal 
ballot, and not in any other manner, at an election in a constitu-
ency where a poll is taken, subject to the fulfilment of such 
requirements as may be specified in those rules. 
61. Provision may also be made by rules made under this Act SedpeCial ... pro-
C ure ,or 
for the marking with indelible ink of the thumb or any other finger preventin, 
of every elector who applies for a ballot paper or ballot papers for rr~:~ 
the purpose of voting at a polling station before delivery of such 
paper or papers to him and for prohibiting the delivery of any ballot 
paper to any person for voting at a polling station if at the time such 
person applies for such paper he has already such a mark on his 
thumb or any other finger so as to prevent personation of electors . 
• • • • • 
CHAPTER V.-Counting of Votes 
64. At every election where a poll is taken, votes shall be counted COUDtiq ., 
by, or under the supervision and direction of, the returning officer, vote •. 
and each candidate, his election agent and his counting agents, shall 
have a right to be present at the time of counting . 
• • • • • 
67A. For the purposes of this Act, the date on which a candidate nate 01 
is declared by the returning officer under the provisions of section =~~ 
53, section 54, section 55A or section 66, to be elected to a House of 
Parliament or of the Legislature of a State shall be the date of 
election of that candidate . 
• • • • • • 
PART VI 
DISPUTES REGAhDING ELECTIONS 
CHAPTER Ill.-Trial of Election Petition.! 
to. (1) • • • • • • • • • • • 
(3) The Tribunal shall dismiss an election petition which does 
not comply with the provisions of section 81, section 82 or section 
117 notwithstanding that it has not been dismissed by the Election 
Commission under section 85 . 
• • • • • • 
Procedure 
before tile 
TTibUDal. 

Appeals 
against 
orders of 
Election 
Tribunals. 
Deposit llf 
security. 
Security (or 
cost of 
appeal. 
28 
CHA.PTER IV A.-Appeals 
116A. (1) • • • • • • • 
* * • • * 
(4) Where an appeal has been preferred against an order made 
under clause (b) of section 98, the High Court may, on sufficient 
cause being shown, stay operation of the order appealed from and 
in such a case the order shall be deemed never to have taken effect 
under sub-section (1) of section 107. 
* * * • * 
CHAPTER V.-Costs and Security for Costs 
117. The petitioner shall enclose with the petition a Government 
Treasury receipt showing that a deposit of one thousand rupees has 
been made by him either in a Government Treasury or in the 
Reserve Bank of India In favour of the Secretary to the Election 
Commission as security for the costs of the petition. 
* • • * • 
119A. Every person who prefers an appeal under Chapter IVA 
shall enclose with the memorandum of appeal a Government 
Treasury receipt showing that a deposit of five hundred rupees has 
been made by him either in a Government Treasury or in the Re-
serve Bank of India in favour of the Secretary to the Election Com-
mission as security for the costs of the appeal. 
.• • • * 
Payment 121. (1) If in any order as to costs under the provisions of this 
o1'co5t8 Ph'd' . f out of art t ere IS a lrectIon or payment of costs by any party to any 
dsecuri.ty d person, such costs shall, if they have not been already paid, be paid eposIts an 
return of in full, or so far as possible, out of the security deposit and the further 
~~~Sits. security deposit, if any, made by such party under this Part, on an 
application made in writing in that behalf within a period of six 
months from the publication of such order under section 106 to the 
Election Commission by the person in whose favour the costs have 
been f.warded. 
(2) If there is any balance left of any of the said security depo-
sits after payment under sub-section (1) of the costs referred to in 
that sub-section such balance, or where no costs have been awarded 
or no application as aforesaid has been made within the said period 
of six months, the whole of the said security deposits may, on an 
application made in that behalf in writing to the Election Commission 
hy the person by whom the deposits have been made, or if such 
person dies after making such deposits, by the legal representative 
of such· person, be returned to the said person or to his legal repre .. 
sentative, as the case may be. 

29 
122, Any order as to costs under the provisions of this Part may Execution of 
b d d b f h "1' 'I t f " I" "d' t" orders as to e pro uce e ore t e prmclpa CIVl cour 0 orIgma JUrIS IC Ion costs. 
within the local limits of whose jurisdiction any person directed by 
such order to pay any sum of money has a place of residence or 
business, or where such place is within a presidency-town, before the 
court of small causes having jurisdiction there, and such court shall 
execute the order or cause the same to be executed in the same 
manner and by the same procedure as if it were a decree for the 
payment of money made by itself in a suit: 
Provided that where any such costs or any portion thereof may 
be recovered by an application made under sub-section (1) of 
section 121, no application shall lie under this section within a period 
of six months from the date of publication of such order under sec-
tion 106 unless it is for the recovery of the balance of any costs which 
has been left unrealised after an application has been made under 
that sub-section owing to the insufficiency of the amount of the 
security deposits referred to in that sub-section. 
PART VII 
CORRUPT PRACTICES AND ELECTORAL OFFENCES 
CHAPTER I.-Cormpt Practices 
123. The following shall be deemed to be corrupt practices for Corrupt 
the purposes of this Act:- practices. 
(1) Bribery, that is to say, any gift, offer or promise by a candi-
date or his agent or by any other person, of any gratification to any 
person whomsoever, with the object, directly or indirectly of induc-
ing-
(a) a person to stand or not to stand as, or to withdraw 
from being, a candidate, or to retire from contest at an election' , , 
(b) an elector to vote or refrain from voting at an election, 
or as a reward to-
(i) a person for having so stood or not stood, or for 
having withdrawn his candidature, or for having retired 
from contest; or 
(ii) an elector for having voted or refrained from 
voting. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this clause the term "gratifica-
tipn" is not restricted to pecuniary gratifications or gratifications 
estimable in money and it includes all forms of entertainment and 
all forms of employment for reward; but it does not include the pay-
ment of any expenses bona fide incurred at, or for the purpose of, any 

Blac:hea 
of official 
duty in 
copoe<:tion 
with 
election •. 
Other 
offenc;a and 
penalties 
therefor. 
30 
election and duly entered in the account of election expenses referred 
to in aectian 78 • 
• • • • • 
(4) The publication by • candidate or his agent or by any other 
person, of any statement of fact which is false, and which he either 
believes to be false or does not believe to be true, in relation to the 
personal eharacter or conduct of any candidate, or in relation to the 
candidature, or withdrawal, or retirement from contest. of any candi-
date, being a statement reasonably calculated to prejudice the pros-
pecta of that candidate's election. 
• • • • • • 
CUAPTE III.-Electoral Offence, 
• • • • • 
1M. (1) • • • • • • • • • • • • • 
• • 
• • 
(3) The persons to whom this section applies are the Electoral 
Registration Officers, Assistant Electoral Registration Ofti.cers, 
returning officers, assistant returning officers, presiding officers, pol-
ling officers and any other person appointed to perform any duty in 
connection with the preparation of an electoral roll, the receipt 
of nominations or withdrawal of candidatures, or the recording or 
counting of votes at an election; and the expression "official duty" 
shall for the purposes of this section be construed accordingly, but 
shall not include duties imposed otherwise than by or under this Act 
or by or Under the Representation of the People Act, 1950. 
• • • • • • 
136. (1) 
• • • • • • ... 
... 
'" 
• • 
(J) For the purposes of this section, a person shall be deemed 
to be on official duty if his duty is to take part in the conduct of an 
election or part of an election including the counting of votes or to 
be responsible after an election for the used ballot papers and other 
documents in connection with such election, but the expression 
"oIicial duty" shall not include any duty imposed otherwise than by 
43 of 19,0. 
or under this Act or by or under the Representation of the People 43 of 1950. 
Act, 1950. 
• • 
• • 
• 
PART X 
MISC!LLANEOUS 
• • 
• • 
• • 
ft..turn or 15S. (1) If a candidate by whom or on whose behalf the deposit 
~=~~ of referred 19 in section 34 has been made withdraws his candidature in 
the manner and within the time specified in sub-section (1) of 
I 

at 
section 37, or if the nomination of any such candidate is rejected, 
the deposit shall be returned to the person by whom it was made 
and, if any candidate dies before the commencement of the poll, any 
such deposit, if made by him, shall be returned to his legal represen-
tative or, if not made by the candidate, shall be returned to the 
person by whom it was made. 
(2) If a candidate nominated under section 32 by whom or on 
whose behalf a deposit has been made under section 34 is not elected, 
and the number of votes polled by him does not exceed one-sixth 
of the total number of votes polled or, in the case of a constituency 
returning more than one member, one-sixth of the total number of 
votes polled divided by the total number of members to be elected, 
the deposit shall be forfeited to the appropriate authority. 
(3) For the purpose of sub-section (2), the number of votes 
polled shall be deemed to be the number of ballot papers, other than 
rejected ballot papers, counted. 
(4) The deposit made by or on behalf of a candidate under section 
34 shall, where it is not forfeited under l!Iub-section (2), be returned 
to such candidate or to the person who has made the deposit on hit 
behalf, as the case may be, after the publication of the result of the 
election in the Official Gazette: 
Provided that if a candidate is duly nominated at a general 
election in more than one Parliamentary constituency or Assembly 
constituency, not more than one of the deposits made by him or on 
his behalf shall be returned, and the remainder shall be forfeiied 
to the appropriate authority: 
Provided further that if a candidate is duly nominated at all 
election in more than one Council constituency not more than one 
of the deposits made by him or on his behalf shall be returned, and 
the remainder shall be forfeited to the State Government . 
• • • • • • 
• 

tOI{ SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Repre~entation of the People Act, 1950, 
and the Representation of the People Act, 1951. 
The President has, in pursuance of clause (3) of article 117 of 
the Constitution of India, recommended to Lok Sabha the 
con~ideration of the Bill. 
• 
M. N. KAUL, 
Secretary • 
(Shri R. M. Hajarn{1'{)is, 
Deputy Minister of Law). 