Bill No. 12) of 1963 
.THE EMERGENCY RISKS (FACTORIES) 
INSURANCE BILL, 1962 
(As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA 
ON sm DECEMBER, 1962) 

LOK SABHA 
CORRIGENDA 
to 
THE EMERGENCY RISKS (FACTORIES) INSURANCE 
BILL, 1962 
(To be/As introduced in Lok Sabha) 
1. Page 3, in the marginal heading to clause 3,-
for "Insu- ance" read "Insu-rance" 
-" 
2. Page 5, in the marginal heading to clause 5,-
for "o'Wne " read "owner" - -
3. Page 9, line 10,- • 
!.2! "scheme" read "Scheme" 
4. Page 10, line 31,-
for "dae" read "date" -
5. Page 11, line 8,-
after "Official Gazette" insert 
NEW DELHI 
Dece~ber 4, ~~6~ Agra ayana 1: ,~~4 (~aka) 
" " , • 

Bill N; •• u3 of 1"2. 
TIlE EMERGENCY RISKS (FACTORIES) INSURANCE 
BIlL, 1962 
(To BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
-
to make provisions for the insurance of certain property in India 
against damage by enemy action. during. the period of 
emerge1l.Cy. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirteenth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
, 1. (1) This Act may be called the Emergency Risks 
Insurance Act, 1962. 
(Factories) Short title, 
extent and 
4lU11tion. 
(Z) It extends to the whole of India. 
(3) It shall remain in force during the period of nperation of the 
Proclamation of Emergency issued on the 26th October, 1962, and 
10 for such further period as the Central Government may, by notifi-
cation in the Oftlcial Gazette, declare to be the period of emergency 
for the purposes of this Act, but its expiry shall not affect anything 
done or omitted to be done before such expiry and section 6 of the 
10 of 1897. General Clauses Act, 1897, shall apply upon the e.J\.-piry of thia Act 
I, as if it had been repealed by a Central Act. 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "buildings" includes foundations, plinths, floors, stair-
cases, tanks, engine and boiler beds, chimneys. flues atld 
boundary walls; 
22M (B) LS.-l 
OeSnilJon,. 

(b) "enemy" means-
(i) any person or country committing external aggres-
lion against India; 
(ii) any person belonging to a country committing such 
aggression; S 
(iii) such other country as may be .declared by the 
Central Government to be assisting the country committing 
such aggression: 
(iv) any person belonging to such other country: 
(c) "factory" means a factory as defined in clause (m) of 10 
section 2 of the Factories Act, 1948; 630fI948. 
(d) "factory buildings" includes all -buildings comprised in 
the factory, and such other buildings (including residential 
• buildings for staff and workmen, hospitals and welfare centres) 
within a radius of two mi1esfrom the main factory building as IS 
are in the same ownership 'or occupation as the factory and are 
used for the purposes of the factory: 
(e) "the Fund" means the Emergency Risks (Factories) 
Insurance Fund constituted under section 7; 
(f) "insurable value" of property means the value of the 20 
property as ascel'tained for the purposes of insurance under this 
Act; 
(g) "occupier" of a factory has the meaning assigned to It 
in clause (11.) of section 2 of the Factories Act, 1948; 6J of t94P. 
(h) "owner" of a factory includes, v.1len parts of the pro. a$ 
perty insurable under this Act in relation to the factory are 
owned by different persons, each such person in respect of the 
part owned by him; 
(i) "property insurable under this Act" means, in relation 
to any factory, the factory buildings and, except where they Sore 30 
for the time beinJit ~oods insurable under the Emersrencv Risks 
(Goods) Insurance Act, 1962, all plant and machinery' in the 
factory, all materials in the factory for Use in the production or 
transmission of motive power, or in the maintenance of plant 
and machinery or in the construction or reconstructioh or maln- 3S 
tenance of factory buildings, and l1,1ch other plant, machinery or 
materials as may be specified in the Scheme; 
< (j) "quarter" means a period of three months commendng 
on the first day of January, April, July or October; 

S 
(k) "the Scheme" means the Emelienc:y 1Usks (Factoriel) 
lnaurance Scbeme made under this Act; 
(l) "emergency risks" means such risks arising from-
(i) action taken by an enemy or action taken in com-
bating an enemy or in repelling an imagined attack by an 
enemy; 
(ii) any explosion or fire which involves any explollvea 
or munitions or other dangerous things required for the pur-
poses of defence against any action of an enemy and whicb 
10 bappens or ia eaused by, through, or in connection with the 
manufacture, storage or transportation of any such explo-
sives, munitions or other dangerous things; 
(iii) measures taken under proper authority to avoid 
the spreading of, or otherwise to mitigate, the consequences 
z, of damage occumng (whether accidentally or not) as- the 
direct result of any such action as is described in sub-clause 
(i) or of any such explosion or fire as is described In sub-
clause (ii); 
(iv) precautionary or preparatory measures taken 
20 under proper authority with a view to preventing or hinder-
ing the carrying out of any attack by an enemy, being 
measures involving risk to property; 
(v) precautionary or preparatory measures involving 
the doing of work on land and taken under proper authority 
25 in any way in anticipation of enemy action, being measures 
involving risk to property; 
(vi) precautionary or preparatory measures taken 
under proper authority with a view to denying facilities to 
an enemy, being measures involving damage to or dimlnu-
30 tion of the value of property. 
CHAPTER II 
EMERGENCY RISKS (FACTORIES) INSURANCE ScHEME 
3. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Bmcr,cDCJ 
Oftlcial Gazette, put into operation a scheme to be called the Emer- ~~)(f:~-
35 gency Risks (Factories) Insurance Scheme, whereby the Central ranee 
Government undertakes in relation to factories the liability· of Scheme. 
insuring property insurable under this Act against emergency risks, 
to the extent provided by or under this Act. 

4 
(2) The Scheme may extend to the undertaking by the Central 
Government in relation to any pel:son ln India of the liability of 
insuring such person against emergency risks in respect of any pro-
perty insurable under this Act which is not owned by him but in 
which he has an Interest, up to the extent of such interest. S 
(3) The Scheme shall be such as to secure-
(a) that the liability of the Central Government as insurer 
shall not extend to more than eighty per cent. of the insurable 
value of the property insurable; 
(b) that any 'liability of the Central Government as insurer 10 
under the Scheme is determined by a policy of insurance issued, 
in the form and in respect of a period not exceeding the period 
specified in the Scheme, by a person acting on behalf of the Cen-
tral Government: 
Provided that the form of policy may be such as to limit the IS 
extent and nature of the indemnity provided by the Central 
Government and to impose conditions subject to which the in-
demnity is provided; , 
(c) that any premium under a policy so issued is payable at 
such rate as may, for the time being, be specified in the Scheme; 20 
(d) thet the amount of anyone premium payable under a 
policy so issued is not less than such sum as may be specified in 
the Scheme. 
(4) The Scheme may provide-
(a) for undertaking in relation to works in course of cons- 25 
truction which, when completed, will become factories, and such 
plant and machinery appertaining to such works as may be 
specified in the Scheme, the same liabilities as are undertaken 
by the Scheme in relation to factories; 
(b) that the payments due under a policy of insurance 30 
issued under the Scheme, may at the option of the Central Gov-
ernment, take either of the following forms, namely:-
(i) payment, within the limits of the liability assumed 
by the Central Government and in such manner and by such 
instalments as the Central Government may think fit, of the 35 
cost necessary to restore the property as far as practicable 
• to the condition in which it existed before the occurrence 
of the damage, or ( 

s 
(ii) compensation, within the aforesaid limits, for the 
loss in value, ascertained on the basis of values and prices 
ruling at the time at which the policy of insurance was taken 
out, or at which the loss occurred, whichever is less, suffered 
5 by the property as a result of the damage, after due allow-
ance has been made for depreciation during the period of 
insurance cover; 
(e) that payments due under a policy of insurance under the 
Scheme may be postponed to any time before the expiry of one 
10 year from the date on which this Act ceases to be in force, or, 
subject to payment of interest at the rate of two per cent. per 
annum from the expiry of the said year, to any later date; 
(d) for making it an express or implied condition of any 
policy of insurance issued under the Scheme-
IS (i) that the owner or occupier of a factory shall comply 
with all regulations or instructions made or issued under 
the authority of Government for safeguarding the property 
against damage from emergency risks, or 
(ii) that, where the Central Government exercises its 
20 option to pay the cost necessary to restore the property to 
its original condition the owner of the factory shall, if so 
required by the Central Government, reconstruct the factory 
or remove the factory to and reconstruct it in another 
fucality. . 
25 (5) Different forms of policies may be specified in the Scheme 
under sub-section (3) in relation to different classes of factories. 
(6) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, add to, amend or vary any Scheme made under this Act. 
4. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Employment 
30 Gazette, employ or authorise the employment of any person to act of .~nt. by 
as its agent for any of the purposes of this Act, and may pay to the ~~vem!e~t 
person so employed such remuneration as it may think fit. • 
5. (1) While the Scheme is in operation, eV,ery owner of a factory, Duty of 
except a factory belonging to Government or a factory exempted t:~;; ot, 
35 under section 15 from the provisions of this Act, shall, by such date m.url 
as may be specified in this behalf by the Central Government by .piNt 1::r -
notification in the Official Gazette, or, in respect of. premises becom- geney r . 
ing a factory or property becoming property insurable under this 
Act after that date or in a case to which sub-section (2) refers, be~ 
40 fore the commencement of the quarter next following that. in which 

6 
the premises become a factory or the property becomes insurable 
under this Act, or as. the case may be, in which the reconstruction of 
the factory is completed. take out a policy of insurance against 
emergency risks issued. in accordance with the Scheme, whereby he 
is insured in respect of all property insurable under this Act, which S 
appertains to the factory for a sum not less than the insurable value 
of such property: 
Provided that where the owner of the factory is not himself the 
occupier of the factory, the occupier of the factory shall, unless the 
owner has already taken out" a policy of insurance as required by this 10 
sub-section, himself take out the policy, and in such a' case the 
occupier shall be deemed. to aetas the agent of the owner and shall 
be entitled to receive from the owner all sums paid as premiums on 
the policy. 
(2) The obligation imposed by sub-section (1) includes, when IS 
the owner of the factory is required. by the Central Government to 
reconstruct a factory which has suffered damage, an obligation to 
take out an additional policy of insurance as required by the sub-
section in respect of the reconstructed factory. 
(3) When a factory in respect of which a policy of insurance 20 
against emergency risks has been 'taken out as required by this 
section is transferred from one owner to another or there is a change 
of occupier of the factory, the policy may be transferred to the new 
owner or occupier and such new owner or occupier shall succeed to 
all rights and liabilities under and in relation to the policy as if the 25 
policy had been in the first instance taken out by him. 
(4) Whoever contravenes the provisions of sub-section (1) or the 
proviso thereto, or, having taken out a policy of insurance as required 
by that sub-section, fails to pay any instalment of premium thereon 
which is subsequently due, shall be punishable with fine which may 30 
extend to two thousand rupees and with a further fine which may 
extend to one thousand rupees for every day after the first on which 
the contravention or failure continues, and such punishment shall 
be without prejudice to any other penalty or liability incurred in 
consequence of such contravention or failure. 35 
(5) Where any offence under sub-section (4) is tried by a 
Presidency magistrate or a magistrate of the ftrst class, 
then, • notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal 
Proce<iure, 1898. the magistrate trying the offence mav pass any f . 50 1st .. sentence authorised by that sub-section. 40 

., 
.. (1) After the date on which the Scheme is put into operation, Ratrictl008 
no person shall, except as a person authorised by the Central Gov- :: =:a 
ernment as its agent to issue policies in pursuance of the Scheme, 'DlU1'lDCc 
carry on the business of insuring factories in India against bUlln .... 
S emergen~ risks in respect of property insurable under this Act. 
(2) Whoever cont~avenes the provisions of sub-section (1) shall 
be punishable with fine which may extend to five thousand ru~B 
and with a further fine which may extend to one thousand rupees for 
every day after the first on which the contravention continues. 
10 7. (1) The Central Government may, ·after due appropriation Emer,ency 
made by Parliament by law in this behalf, transfer in each financial ~~ I<::!o-
year, to a fund to be called the Emergency Risks (Factories) In- rance Puud. 
surance Fund (hereinafter referred to as the "Fund") such sums, as 
may be considered necessary, not exceeding the sums received by 
I S the Central Government by way of insurance premiums under the 
Scheme, or by way of payments made on composition of olences 
under section 13 by way of expenses or compensation awarded by a 
,of 1898. Court, under section 545 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, 
out of any flne imposed in any prosecution under this Act. 
20 (2) There shall be paid from out of the Fund all sums required 
for the discharge by the Central Government of any of its liabilities 
under the Scheme, or for payments by the Central Government under 
IeCtion 10,. or for the payment by the Central Government of the re-
muneration and expenses of agents employed for the purposes of the 
25 Scheme. 
(3) U at any time when a payment is to be made out of the FuDd 
the sum standiII&' to the credit of the Fund is less than the sum re-
quired for the making of that payment, an amount equal to the deft-
ciency Ihall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law, be 
30 paid into the Fund as an advance out of the Consolidated Fund of 
India. 
(4) U at any time the amount standing to the credit of the Fund 
exceeds the !tum which, in the opinion of the Central Government, 
is likely to be required for the making of payments out of the Fund, 
3' the excess shall be disposed of in such maDDer as the Ceatral Gov-
ernment may think flt. 
(5) The Central Government shall prepare in such form and 
manner as may be sPecified in the Scheme and shall publish eit';).er 
annually or at such shorter intervals as may be specified therein, 
"OlD account of all sums received into and paid out of the.Fund. 

8 
CHAPTER III 
MISCELLANEOUS 
Power oj 8. (1) Any person authorised in this behalf by the Central Gov-
Central Go- t f h ft' . . h th ·t .. 1. "ernmcnt to ernmen may, or t e purpose 0 ascer alnmg weer or no -.ue 
r:tain. in- owner or occupier of ~y property required to be insured under this S 
rmauon. Act has taken out a policy of insurance as required by this Act in 
respect of such property, or for the purpose of investigating the in-
sUrable value of any property insured, or required to be, insured, or 
ilroposed for insurance under this Act, or for the purpose of I!stimat-
ing the damage suffered by any property insured under this Act,- 10 
(a, require the owner or occupier of the property, or any 
person carrying on in India the business of fire insurance in res-
pect of the property, to submit to him such accounts, books or 
other documents or to furnish to him such information as he 
may reasonably think necessary, Or I; 
(b) at any reasonable time, enter any premises comprising 
or containing the property, inspect such premises or property, 
and require any person found on such premises who is for the 
tim.e being in charge thereof, or in control thereof, or whom he 
believes to be in possession of information relevant to his in- 20 
vestigation, to produce to him and allow him to examine such 
accounts, books or other documents as he may think necessary, 
or to furnish to him such other information as he may reasonably 
think necessary. 
(2) ~oever wilfully obstructs any person in the exercise of his zs 
powers under this section or fails without reasonable excuse to com-
ply with any demand made thereunder shall, in respect of each oc-
casion on which any such obstruction or failure takes place, be 
punishable with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees. 
(3) Whoever, in i>urporting to comply with his obligations under 30 
this section, knowingly or recklessly makes a statement false in a 
material particular shall be punishable with fine which may extend 
to one thousand rupees. 
(4) Where in any proceedings in respect of a contravention of 
section 5 in relation to any factory, it is proved, in relation to that 35 
factory-
• (a) that a demand for the production of a policy of in-
surance issued in accordance with the Scheme insuring the 
owner or occupier of the factory was duly made under this 
MC~ IP14 wu not ecxnpUed with, and 40 

9 
(b) that the person making the demand was not satisfied 
that there was such a policy in existence, 
it shall be pres,umed, except in so far as the contrary is proved, that 
the said section 5 was being contravened in relation to that factory 
5 at the time when the demand was made and continued to be con-
travened in relation to that factory at all times thereafter. 
9. If any person, for th~ purpose of obtaining for himself or any Puni.hment 
other person any payment in respect of any damage due to the tse~:~­
action of the enemy or under a policy issued in pursuance of the matlon. 
10 scheme- : .. .1 
(a) furnishes any information which he knows to be false 
in a material particular, or recklessly furnishes any information 
which is false in a material particular, or 
(b) with intent to deceive, produces, furnishes, sends or 
IS otherwise makes use of any book, account or other document 
which is false in a material particular, or-
(c) with intent to deceive, withholds any material informa-
tion, , 
he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five thousand 
20 rupees or with imprisonment for a term not exceeding three months 
or with both. j 
100. Where the Central Government require~ the owner of a fac- Payment. to-
tory to remove the factory and to reconstruct it in another locality, ward~f't °df 
rctnOy .. an 
the Centntl Government shall make to such owner out of the Fund reconstrrc-
2S sllch payments, in addition to any sum payable under the policy ~~~~. 
of insurance, as it considers sufficient to defray the cost of the re-
moval and, if necessary, the replacement of any part of the property 
in respect of which no compensation is payable. 
11. (1) Without prejudice to the provis,ions of sub-section (4) Rec:ovefJ of 
30:- of section 5, where any person has failed to insure as, or to the full =:d~ 
amount, required by this Act, and has thereby evaded the payment 
by way of premium of any money which he would have had to 
pay but for such failure, an officer authorised in this behalf by the 
Central Government may determine the amount payment of which 
3S has been so evaded and the amount so determined shall be payable 
by such person and shall be recoverable from him as provided in 
sub-section (2). • 
(2) Any instalment of premium due on a policy of insurance 
issued under the Scheme, and any amount deotermined as payable 
2278 (B) LS-2. .' I 

Limitation 
on prose-
cutions. 
10 
·under Bub-section (1), shall be recoverable as an arrear of land r. 
venue and shall be a first charge on the property in respect of which 
the default was made. 
(3) A person against whom a determiIllfltion is made under SUb--
section (1) may, within the period specified in the Scheme, appeal S 
against such determination to the Central Government whose deci-
sion thereon shall be final. 
12. No prosecution for any offence punishable under this Act 
shall be instituted against any person except by, or with the consent 
of, the Central Government or an authority authorised in this be- 10 
half by the Central Government. 
Composition 13. Any offence punishable under sub-section (4) of section 5 
of oft'cnc::es. may, either before or after the institution of the prosecution, be 
compounded by the Central Government, or by any authority 
authorised in this behalf by the Central Government on payment IS 
for credit to the Fund of such sum as the Central Government or 
such authority, as the case may be, thinks fit. 
Bar~flClal 14. (1) No suit, prosecution or other legel proceedings shall lie 
proc:ccdin.s. against any person for anything which is in good faith done or in-
Power to 
czempt tac:-
toria. 
tended to be done under this Act. 20 
(2) No suit !thall be maintainable in any civil court against the 
Central Government, or a person acting as its agent under section 
4, for the refund of any money paid or purporting to have been paid 
as premium on a policy of insurance taken out or purporting to 
have been taken out under this Act. 25 
15. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the 
Oftlcial Gazette, exempt any class or description of factories 
from the provisions of this Act requiring such factories to be insur-
I ed or to continue to be insured under this Act; but such exemption 
shall not prejudice the infliction of any penalty or the accrual of 30 
any liability incurred before the dae on which the exemption takes 
effect. I: ' 
• (2) II:' granting any exemption under this section the Central 
Government may direct that the exemption shall take effect or be 
deemed to have taken effect on a specified date after or before the 35 
date of the notification. 

II 
16. Where any factory has been insured by any owner or occupier Refund of 
thereof for any period, and before that period has elapsed the prem!ums in Certam cales. 
factory or the factory of that description has ceased, by virtue of 
a notification under sub-section (1) of section 15 to be insurable 
s· under this Act, the person who has insured the factory shall be 
entitled to a proportionate refund of the premium. 
17. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Pee ower of 
om . I G d I h h . " ntTa! Go-cIa azette ec are t at t e provIsIOns of thIs Act and of the Vernment to 
Scheme made thereunder shall apply to the insuring against emer- CXA tend dthc 
• ct~ 
10 gency nsks of- Scheme to 
• undertatmp. (a) the plant and machInery, whether above or below ground, 
35 of 19,3. appertaining to mines as defined in the Mines Act, 1952, build-
ings appertaining to mines and within a radius of two miles 
from the mine excavation and in relation to such plant, rnachi-
15 nery and buildings, such mGterials above ground as would, if 
the mine were a factory, be included in the term "property 
insurable under this Act"; 
(b) derricks, drills and rigs and group gathering stations 
and storage tank of an oil mine, plant and machinery required 
20 for pumping, refining or processing any mineral oil, and pipe 
lines; 
(c) the whole or a specified part of the distribution systems 
of gas supply undertakings generally, or of specified gas supply 
undertakings; 
25 (d) the whole or a specified part of the distribution and 
transmission systems, sub-stations, switch houses and transformer 
houses of electric supply undertakings generally, or of specified 
electric supply undertakings; 
(e) the whole or a specified part of the sluice. houses, valve 
30 houses, water-pipe lines, penstocks and any other plant and 
machinery pertaining to the intake of hydraulic power of hydro-
electric supply undertakings generally, or of specified hydro-
electric supply undertakings; 
(f) standing tea crops in any garden belonging to the owner 
35 of any factory; 
as they apply to property insurable under this Act which appertains to 
a factory. 
(2) In interpreting this Act as applied by notification under 
clause (a) of sub-section (1) to mines, references to the owner of a 
40 factory shall be read as references to the owner or agent of a mine 
35 of 19S2. as defined in the Mines Act, 1952, and references to the occupier. of 
a factory shall be read as references to the agent of a mine as 
defined in that. Act; a~~ in interpreting this Act as applied. by notJ-

~.r!"""', 
fication under any of the clauses of sub-section (1), "property insur-
able under this Act" shall be interpreted as meaning all property to 
which the Scheme is by the said notification declared to apply. 
Power of 18. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the 
Central Go- Official Gazette, direct that the pr::>visions of this Act and of the 5 
:=~~e to Scheme made thereunder shall extend and shall so far as they are ap. 
kt to inland plicable, apply in the same manner as they apply to the insurance of 
Yellel.. property insurable under this Act in relation to a factory, to the in~u-
ranee against emergency risks of inland vessels (including the 
hull, machinery and fittings thereof, fuel carried therein, and stores 10 
carried therein fQl' the use of the crew), being the property of any 
trading corporation or of any body of Port Trustees or Commis-
sioners or of any other person specified in this behalf by the Central 
Government, where such vessels, fuel and stores are not for the time 
being plant or materials insurable in relation to a factory under this 15 
Act and the Scheme thereunder, or goods insurable under the Emer-
gency Risks (Goods) Insurance Scheme made under the Emergency 
Risks (Goods) Insurance Act, 1962. 
(2) In this section, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "inland vessel" means a vessel not ordinarily plying out- ao 
side the limits of the territorial waters surrounding India; 
(b) "vessel" means a vessel the value of which including the 
hull, machinery and fittings but excluding cargo, fuel and stores 
carried for the use of the crew, as ascertained for the purpose of 
insurance under the Scheme, exceeds two thousand and five 25 
hundred rupees, propelled wholly or in part by steam, electrical 
or mechanical power, or adapted for towing by a vessel so propel-
led, and includes any such vessel while used as a place of habi-
tation or for storage of goods but does not include a vessel of 
the type commonly called country craft. 30 
(3) In the application of this Act and of the Scheme m,ade there-
under to the insurance of inland vessels---
(a) the obligation imposed by sub-section (1) of section 5 on 
the owner of a factory shall, iIi the case of a trading corporation 
or body of Port Trustees or Commissioners or any other person 35 
whose inland vessels become insurable under this Act and the 
Scheme thereunder, be an obli~ation imposed on the trading 
corporation, body of Port Trustees or Commissioners or such 
other person to take out by such date as may be specified in 
this behalf by the Central Government by a notification in the 40 
Official Gazette, a policy of insurance against emergency risks 
issued in accordance with the Scheme whereby it is insured in 
rf.spect of all inland vessels (including fuel carried by them and 
mores carried by them for the use of the crE'w) owned by it or 
him, as the case may be, for a sum not less than the insurabl~ 45 
va1ue of such vessels, fuel and $tQr~s; and ~his obli~ation sl}tU to 

13 
the case of a trading corparation incorporated outside India rest 
upon the manager of the principal place of business in India of 
the corporation; 
(b) the prohibition contained in sub-section (1) of section 
5 6 of this Act shall be deemed to include a prohibition of carrying 
on business of insuring inland vessels in India against emer-
gency risks for insurance against which provision is made under 
the Scheme; 
10 
(c) nothing in this Act shall prevent the fixing of a rate of 
premium under or the prescription foc the time being of any 
period or periods for policies issued in connection with the insu-
rance of inland vessels different from any rate fixed under or Power 10 
any periods prescribed for policies issued in connection with the rCClDOlti. Yo 41.-- u ea. insurance of property appertaining to a factory. 
15 19. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of thil 
Act, and in particular, if any doubt arises as to whether a person is 
insurable in respect of any property insurable under this Act, the 
Central Government may, by order, make such directions, not incon-
sistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to ·be necessary 
20 or expedient for the removal of the doubt or difficulty; and the deci-
sion of the Central Government, in such cases, shall be final. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
In view of the present emergency, it is considered desirable tliat 
provision should be made for the insurance of factories and inland 
vessels against the risk of loss or damage as a result of enemy action. 
As the degree of risk which may be involved is necessarily uncertain, 
it will not be possible for the established insurers to cover it in the 
normal course, and the· Scheme will have to be formulated, brought 
into force, and operated on behalf of the Central Government. 
2. The Bill seeks to provide for a Scheme of insurance based on 
premium rates which can be varied within certain limits with refer-
ence to the actual natupe or extent of the risk as it may exist from 
time to time. The various provisions are explained in detail in 
the notes on clauses which are attached to the bill. 
NEW DELHI; MORARJI DESAI. 
The 29th November, 1962 . 
• 
14 

Nates on clauses 
CZauae 1 in effect provides that the bill, when it is passed into 
law, shall come into force immediately in all the States and territo-
ries of India including Jllmmu and Kashmir. The provisions of the 
Act will continue to be in force throughout the period of the present 
emergency and for a reasonable period thereafter. 
Clause 2 defines the words and expressions used in the bill. The 
definition of "enemy" is bas~d on the corresponding definition in the 
Defence of India Bill, 1962. The definition of "emergency risks" is 
based on the provisions of the previous law as it was in force during 
the second world war; it is comprehensive, and includes any risk of 
loss or damage through explosions or through the adoption of 
'scorched earth' or 'denial' measures. Property insurable under the 
Act will include factory buildings, plant and machinery, and materials 
used in or by the factory, but will exclude any goods which are in-
surable under the Emergency Risks (Goods) Insurance Scheme. 
Clause 3 provides for a scheme of insurance of factories within the 
scope of the provisions of the bill to be prepared and brought into 
force by notification at an appropriate stage by the Central Govern-
ment. It is clarified for the avoidance of any doubt that persons in-
terested in any property insurable under the Act may insure that 
property on their initiative, in lieu of the persons who as the owners 
for the purposes of the scheme may be bound or compelled to insure 
the property in the normal course. 
The Central Government's liability as the insurer will be limited 
in each case to eighty per cent of the insurable value of the pro-
perty and may be discharged either by payment in cash or by 
reimbursement of the cost of restoring the factory or other in-
sured property to the condition in which it was before the damage. 
In the event of a factory being reconstructed, the Central Govern-
ment may provide, as a condition of such restriction, that the factory 
shall be removed to some other locality. 'I'he policies of insurance 
will be issued for periods, the duration of which will be determined 
by the Central Government, but the periods of validity of the 
policies may be extended from tlme to time. The premiums will 
be charged at a variable rate which will be determined from time 
to time by the Central Government, after taking into account the 
actual degree of risk which may be involved. 
IS 

Factories in the course of construction will be eiigible for pr()o 
teetion under the scheme, in the same manner and to the same 
extent, as completed factories which are working normally. 
Clause , provides for the appointment of an agent to administer 
the scheme on behalf of the Central Government. 
Clause 5 provides that when a scheme of insurance is notified 
and brought into force, the owner of a factory, of where the owner 
is not himself the occupier, the occ1.lpier acting on his behalf, will 
be compelled to insure the factory and other properties to the extent 
that they are insurable under the scheme. 
In the event of a change in the ownership of a factory during 
the currency of a policy of insurance issued in relation to it, the 
polky. along with the rights and liabilities there under, will be 
transferred to the new owner. 
Clause 6 prohibits private insurers from competing with the 
Central Government in regard to the coverage of the abnormal 
emergency risks for which provision is made in the bill. 
Clause 7 provides for the establishment of an Emergency Risks 
(Factories) Insurance Fund. The Fund is intended to be self-
sufficient, but provision is being made for the Central Government 
to advance to the Fund, if it is temporarily in deficit, any amount 
which may be needed for meeting the expenditure which may be 
chargeable to the Fund, If there is ultimately a surplus in the Fund 
after providing for all the obligations to the policy-holders, 
appropriate provision in regard to the utilisation of the surplus will 
be made by the Central Government. 
Clause, 8 and 9.-Clause 8 provides for the grant of power to the 
Central Government to obtain information or to carry out such in-
spections as may be necessary and Clause 9 provides for penalties 
for furnishing any false information. 
Clause 10 provides that if the Central Government requires any 
factory to be removed to any other locality, the cost of such removal 
will also be paid out of the Emergency Risks (Factories) Insurance 
Fund. 
Clause 11 provides for the recovery of any amount due to the 
Central Government which may remain outstanding, either because 
the .,ayment has been evaded or because it has been in arrears. 
Clause, 12 to 14 contain the usual provisions in regard to the 
limitation of prosecutions, the composition of offences and bar of 

17 
legal proceedings in respect of action taken in good faith under the 
relevant provisions of the bID. 
Clauses 15 and 16.~lause 15 provides for the grant of power 
to the Central Government to exempt factories belonging to any 
particular class, if it is considered necessary or expedient to do so, 
while Clause 16 provides for a proportionate refund of the premiums 
in such cases. 
Clauses 17 and 18 provide for the extension of the scheme of in-
surance so as to cover the plant and machinery and other similar 
equipment of mines, including oil mines, and the properties of gas 
and electricity supply undertakings, and inland vessels. 
Clause 19 provides for· the grant of power to the Central Govern-
ment to remove cWRculties, if any. 
m8 (B) LS-3. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 7 of the Bill provides that an Emergency Risks (Factories) 
Insurance Fund will be established and that an amount not exceed-
ing the amount of the premiums collected under the Scheme of insu-
rance will be paid into that fund after due appropriation by law. The 
degree of risk as a result of enemy action is necessarily uncertain 
and a reasonably accurate estimate of the value of the property in-
surable in accordance with the provisions of the Bill is not also avail-
able. It is not possible, therefore, to anticipate exactly at this stage 
the rate at which premiums may have to be fixed or the amounts 
receivable on account of the Emergency Risks (Factories) Insurance 
Fund. It is envisaged, however, that the rate of premium may not 
exceed four per cent. In two years or two per cent. per annum payable 
in suitable quarterly imtalments. It is also expected that the Scheme 
may not involve any net burden on the Consolidated Fund of India, 
over and above the obligation to transfer to the Emergency Risks 
(Factories) Insurance Fund from out of the Consolidated Fund the 
premiums received under the Scheme. 
The cost of administering the Scheme is expected to amount to 
about Rs. l' 5 lakhs on account of the special ofBcer's arganisation . 
• 
18 

MEMORANDUM ON DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Sub-clause (3) of clause (1) provides that the Central Govern-
ment may by notification in the Official Gazette declare that the 
period of the emergency for the purposes of the Emergency Risks 
(Factories) Insurance Scheme will be extended until some suitable 
date after the expiry of the emergency which has been proclaimed 
by the President under Article 352 of the Constitution. The delega-
tion of power to the Central Government for this purpose is unavoid-
able. 
2. There is no other provision in the Bill which involves any dele-
gation of powers which is not of a routine or normal character. 
19 

LOKSABHA 
A 
BILL 
to make provisions for the insurance of certain property in 
India against damage by enemy action during the .period 
of emergency. 
The President has, in pursuance of clauses (I) and (3) of 
article 117 of the Constitution of India, recommended to 
Lok Sabha the introduction and consideration of the Bill. 
M. N. KAUL, 
Secretary, 
(Shrt Morarji Desai, 
Minister of Finance.) 