1
Bill  No. 124 of  2019
THE INDIAN PENAL CODE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019
By
DR. SHASHI THAROOR, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of  the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Indian Penal Code (Amendment)  Act, 2019.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central  Government  may  by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. Sections 354 and 509 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 shall be omitted.
Short title and
commencement.
Omission of
sections 354
and 509.
45 of 1860.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Section 354 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 criminalizes the act of using force against a
woman with the intent to ‘outrage her modesty’. This section has been used against individuals
who have committed acts of sexual harassment or other sexual crimes against women. However,
the section is premised on the archaic notion of honour and female modesty. Instead of
focusing on the dignity of an individual and penalizing any violation of his or her body, the
law focuses on the so-called modesty of a woman.
Since the law does not define ‘modesty’, the Supreme Court in Rupan Deol Bajaj v.
K.P .S Gill (1996 AIR 309), incorporated the dictionary meaning of the term in Indian
jurisprudence. It held that modesty in relation to a woman means “ womanly propriety of
behaviour; Scrupulous chastity of thought, speech and conduct (in man or woman); reserve
or sense of shame proceeding  from instinctive aversion to impure or coarse suggestions”.
The social expectation of women to be ‘modest’ and the belief that one’s modesty or honour
is violated due to the acts of a criminal, is the manifestation of patriarchal notions of the
female gender.
The Criminal Law (Amendment) Act, 2013 introduced new provisions in the Indian
Penal Code, to address sexual offences such as sexual harassment, voyeurism and stalking.
Since the main purpose of section 354 has been covered by the ambit of these provisions, the
Omission of this section will not adversely affect women survivors of sexual violence. Section
500 of the Indian Penal Code is similar to section 354, as it penalizes acts meant to insult the
modesty of a woman. This section also requires an amendment.
The language employed by the law is not a mere technicality. It is an important indicator
of how society perceives various identities. Therefore, over time, it is important to revise
laws which employ archaic and patriarchal language.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SHASHI THAROOR
June  6,  2019.
2

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860
* * * * *
354. Whoever assaults or uses criminal force to any woman, intending to outrage or
knowing it to be likely that he will thereby outrage her modesty, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not be less than one year but which
may extend to five years, and shall also be liable to fine.
* * * * *
509.Whoever, intending to insult the modesty of any woman,  utters any word, makes
any sound or gesture, or exhibits any object, intending that such word or sound shall be
heard, or that such gesture or object shall be seen, by such woman, or intrudes upon the
privacy of   such woman, shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may
extend to three years, and also with fine.
* * * * *
3
Assault or
criminal force
to woman with
intent to
outrage her
modesty.
Word, gesture
or act intended
to insult the
modesty of a
woman
.

LOK  SABHA
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860
————
(Dr. Shashi Tharoor, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—574LS(S3)—27-06-2019.
————