5
Bill No. 124-F of  2018
THE HOMOEOPATHY CENTRAL COUNCIL
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2018
(AS PASSED BY THE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT—
LOK  SABHA ON  30TH  JULY, 2018
RAJY A  SABHA ON 9TH  AUGUST, 2018)
ASSENTED  TO
ON 13TH AUGUST, 2018
ACT NO. 23 OF 2018

1
THE HOMOEOPATHY CENTRAL COUNCIL
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2018
(AS PASSED BY THE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT)
A
BILL
further to amend the Homoeopathy Central Council Act, 1973.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Homoeopathy Central Council (Amendment)
Act, 2018.
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 18th day of May, 2018.
2. In the Homoeopathy Central Council Act, 1973  (hereinafter referred to as the
principal Act), after section 3, the following sections shall be inserted, namely:—
‘3A. (1) On and from the date of commencement of the Homoeopathy Central
Council (Amendment) Act, 2018, the Central Council shall stand superseded and
the President, Vice-President and other members of the Central Council shall
vacate their offices and shall have no claim for any compensation, whatsoever.
(2)The Central Council shall be reconstituted in accordance with the
provisions of section 3 within a period of one year from the date of supersession
of the Central Council under sub-section ( 1).
Short title
and
commence-
ment.
Power of
Central
Government
to supersede
Central
Council and
to constitute
a Board of
Governors.
Insertion of
new sections
3A, 3B and
3C.
59 of 1973.
Bill No. 124-F of 2018

2
(3) Upon the supersession of the Central Council under sub-section ( 1)
and until a new Council is constituted in accordance with section 3, the Board of
Governors constituted under sub-section ( 4) shall exercise the powers and
perform the functions of the Central Council under this Act.
(4) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette,
constitute a Board of Governors which shall consist of not more than seven
persons as its members, who shall be persons of eminence and of unimpeachable
integrity in the fields of Homoeopathy and Homoeopathy education, and eminent
administrators, and who may be either nominated member or members, ex officio,
to be appointed by the Central Government, one of whom shall be selected by
the Central Government as the Chairperson of the Board of Governors.
(5)The Chairperson and the other members, other than the members,
ex officio , shall be entitled to such sitting fee and travelling and other allowances
as may be determined by the Central Government.
(6) The Board of Governors shall meet at such time and such place and
shall observe such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at
its meetings as is applicable to the Central Council.
(7) Two-third of the members of the Board of Governors shall constitute
the quorum of its meetings.
(8) No act or proceedings of the Board of Governors shall be invalid merely
by reason of—
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Board of
Governors; or
(b) any irregularity in the procedure of the Board of Governors not
affecting the merits of the case.
(9)  A member having any financial or other interest in any matter coming
before the Board of Governors for decision, shall disclose his interest in the
matter before he may, if allowed by the Board of Governors, participate in such
proceedings.
(10) The Chairperson and other members of the Board of Governors shall
hold office during the pleasure of the Central Government.
3B. During the period when the Central Council stands superseded,—
(a) the provisions of the Act shall be construed as if for the words
"Central Council", the words  "Board of Governors" were substituted;
(b) the Board of Governors shall exercise the powers and discharge
the functions of the Central Council under this Act and for this purpose,
the provisions of this Act shall have effect subject to the modification that
references therein to the Central Council shall be construed as references
to the Board of Governors.
3C. ( 1) Without prejudice to the provisions of this Act, the Board of
Governors or the Central Council after its reconstitution shall, in exercise of its
powers and in the performance of its functions under this Act, be bound by such
directions on question of policy, other than those relating to technical and
administrative matters, as the Central Government may give in writing to it from
time to time:
Provided that the Board of Governors or the Central Council, after its
reconstitution shall, as far as practicable, be given an opportunity to express its
view before any direction is given under this sub-section.
Certain
modifications
of Act.
Power of
Central
Government
to give
directions.

3
(2) The decision of the Central Government whether a question is a matter
of policy or not shall be final.’.
3. After section 12B of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
"12C. (1) If any person has established a Homoeopathy Medical College or
any Homoeopathy Medical College has opened a new or higher course of study
or training or increased the admission capacity on or before the date of
commencement of the Homoeopathy Central Council (Amendment) Act, 2018,
such person or Homoeopathy Medical College, as the case may be, shall seek,
within a  period of one year from the said commencement, permission of the
Central Government, in accordance with the provisions specified in the
regulations made by the Central Council.
(2) If any person or Homoeopathy Medical College, as the case may be,
fails to seek permission under sub-section ( 1), the provisions of section 12B
shall apply, as far as may be, as if the Central Government has been refused.".
4. (1) The Homoeopathy Central Council (Amendment) Ordinance, 2018 is hereby
repealed.
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the
principal Act, as amended by the said Ordinance, shall be deemed to have been done
or taken under the principal Act as amended by this Act.
Insertion of
new section
12C.
Time for
seeking
permission
for certain
existing
medical
colleges.
Repeal and
saving.
Ord. 4 of
2018.

A
BILL
further to amend the Homoeopathy Central Council Act, 1973.
————
(As passed by the Houses of Parliament)
MGIPMRND—1663RS(S3)—16-08-2018.