Short title.
THE JUVENILE JUSTICE (CARE AND PROTECTION OF CHILDREN)
AMENDMENT BILL, 2006
A
BILL
to amend the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2000.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  This Act may be called the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children)
Amendment Act, 2006.
2.  In the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2000 (hereinafter
referred to as the principal Act), in the long title, for the words “through various institutions
established under this enactment”, the words “and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto” shall be substituted.
3.  In section 1 of the principal Act,—
(i) in the marginal heading, for the words “and commencement”, the words
“, commencement and application” shall be substituted;
 (ii) after sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
“(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time
being in force, the provisions of this Act shall apply to all cases involving
detention, prosecution, penalty or sentence of imprisonment of juveniles in
conflict with law under such other law.”.
56 of 2000. Amendment
of long title.
AS PASSED BY LOK SABHA ON 02.08.2006
Bill No. 124-C of 2005
Amendment
of section 1.

2
4.  In section 2 of the principal Act,—
(i) after clause (a), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
‘(aa) “adoption” means the process through which the adopted child is
permanently separated from his biological parents and become the legitimate
child of his adoptive parents with all the rights, privileges and responsibilities
that are attached to the relationship;’;
(ii) in clause (d),—
(I) after sub-cause (i), the following sub-clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(ia) who is found begging, or who is either a street child or a working
child,”;
(II) in sub-clause (v), after the word ‘abandoned’, the words ‘or surrendered’
shall be inserted;
(iii) in clause ( h), for the words “competent authority”, the words “State
Government on the recommendation of the competent authority” shall be substituted;
(iv) for clause ( l), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
‘(l) “juvenile in conflict with law” means a juvenile who is alleged to
have committed an offence and has not completed eighteenth year of age as on
the date of commission of such offence;’;
(v) clause ( m) shall be omitted.
5.  Throughout the principal Act, the words “local authority”, “or local authority” and
“or the local authority”, wherever they occur, shall be omitted.
6. In section 4 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the words “by notification in
the Official Gazette, constitute for a district or a group of districts specified in the notification”,
the words “within a period of one year from the date of commencement of the Juvenile Justice
(Care and Protection of Children) Amendment Act, 2006, by notification in the Official Gazette,
constitute for every district” shall be substituted.
7. In section 6 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), the words “or a group of districts”
shall be omitted.
8.  After section 7 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
“7A. (1) Whenever a claim of juvenility is raised before any court or a court is of
the opinion that an accused person was a juvenile on the date of commission of the
offence, the court shall make an inquiry, take such evidence as may be necessary (but
not an affidavit) so as to determine the age of such person, and shall record a finding
whether the person is a juvenile or a child or not, stating his age as nearly as may be:
Provided that a claim of juvenility may be raised before any court and it shall be
recognised at any stage, even after final disposal of the case, and such claim shall be
determined in terms of the provisions contained in this Act and the rules made thereunder,
even if the juvenile has ceased to be so on or before the date of commencement of this
Act.
(2) If the court finds a person to be a juvenile on the date of commission of the
offence under sub-section (1), it shall forward the juvenile to the Board for passing
appropriate orders and the sentence, if any, passed by a court shall be deemed to have
no effect.’’.
9.  In section 10 of the principal Act, for sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall
be substituted, namely:—
“(1) As soon as a juvenile in conflict with law is apprehended by police, he shall
be placed under the charge of the special juvenile police unit or the designated police
Amendment
of section 2.
Omission of
certain
expressions.
Amendment
of section 4.
Insertion of
new section
7A.
Amendment
of section 6.
Procedure to
be followed
when claim of
juvenility is
raised before
any court.
Amendment
of section 10.

3
officer, who shall produce the juvenile before the Board without any loss of time but
within a period of twenty-four hours of his apprehension excluding the time necessary
for the journey, from the place where the juvenile was apprehended, to the Board:
Provided that in no case, a juvenile in conflict with law shall be placed in a police
lockup or lodged in a jail.”.
10.  In section 12 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 1), after the words “with or
without surety”, the words “or placed under the supervision of a Probation Officer or under
the care of any fit institution of fit person” shall be inserted.
11. Section 14 of the principal Act shall be renumbered as sub-section (1) thereof, and
after sub-section (1) so renumbered, the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
“(2) The Chief Judicial Magistrate or the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate shall review
the pendency of cases of the Board at every six months, and shall direct the Board to
increase the frequency of its sittings or may cause the constitution of additional Boards.”.
12.  In section 15 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for clause (g), the following
clause shall be substituted, namely:—
“(g) make an order directing the juvenile to be sent to a special home for a period
of three years:
Provided that the Board may, if it is satisfied that having regard to the nature of
the offence and the circumstances of the case it is expedient so to do, for reasons to be
recorded, reduce the period of stay to such period as it thinks fit.".
13.  In section 16 of the principal Act,—
(i) in sub-section ( 1), for the words “or life imprisonment”, the words “or
imprisonment for any term which may extend to imprisonment for life” shall be
substituted;
(ii) in sub-section (2), for the proviso, the following proviso shall be substitued,
namely:—
 “Provided that the period of detention so ordered shall not exceed in any case
the maximum period provided under section 15 of this Act.”.
14.  In section 20 of the principal Act, the following shall be inserted, namely:—
“Provided that the Board may, for any adequate and special reason to be
mentioned in the order, review the case and pass appropriate order in the interest of
such juvenile.
Explanation.— In all pending cases including trial, revision, appeal or any other
criminal proceedings in respect of a juvenile in conflict with law, in any court, the
determination of juvenility of such a juvenile shall be in terms of clause (l) of section 2,
even if the juvenile ceases to be so on or before the date of commencement of this Act
and the provisions of this Act shall apply as if the said provisions had been in force,
for all purposes and at all material times when the alleged offence was committed.”.
15.  For section 21 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely :—
“21. (1) No report in any newspaper, magazine, news-sheet or visual media of
any inquiry regarding a juvenile in conflict with law or a child in need of care and
protection under this Act shall disclose the name, address or school or any other
particulars calculated to lead to the identification of the juvenile or child nor shall any
picture of any such juvenile or child be published:
Provided that for reasons to be recorded in writing, the authority holding the
inquiry may permit such disclosure, if in its opinion such disclosure is in the interest of
the juvenile or the child.
Amendment
of section 12.
Amendment
of section 14.
Substitution of
new section for
section 21.
Amendment
of section 16.
Amendment
of section 20.
Amendment
of section 15.
Prohibition of
publication of
name, etc., of
juvenile or
child in need
of care and
protection
involved in any
proceeding
under the Act.

4
(2)  Any person who contravenes the provisions of sub-section ( 1), shall be
liable to a penalty which may extend to twenty five thousand rupees.”.
16. In Section 29 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the words ‘‘by notification
in Official Gazette, constitute for every district, or group of districts specified in the
notification’’, the words ‘‘within a period of one year from the date of commencement of the
Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Amendment Act, 2006, by notification in
the Official Gazette, constitute for every district’’ shall be substituted.
17.  In section 32 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section ( 1),—
(i) in clause (iv), the words ‘‘authorised by the State Government’’ shall
be omitted;
(ii) the following proviso shall be inserted at the end, namely:—
“Provided that the child shall be produced before the Committee without
any loss of time but within a period of twenty-four hours excluding the time
necessary for the journey.”;
 (b) in sub-section (2), the words “to the police and” shall be omitted.
18.  In section 33 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section (1), the words “or any police officer or special juvenile police
unit or the designated police officer” shall be omitted;
(b) for sub-section (3), the following sub-sections shall be substituted, namely:—
“(3) The State Government shall review the pendency of cases of the
Committee at every six months, and shall direct the Committee to increase the
frequency of its sittings or may cause the constitution of additional Committees.
(4) After the completion of the inquiry, if, the Committee is of the
opinion that the said child has no family or ostensible support or is in continued
need of care and protection, it may allow the child to remain in the children’s
home or shelter home till suitable rehabilitation is found for him or till he
attains the age of eighteen years.”.
19.  In section 34 of the principal Act, after sub-section ( 2), the following sub-
section shall be inserted, namely:—
“(3) Without prejudice to anything contained in any other law for the time
being in force, all institutions, whether State Government run or those run by voluntary
organizations for children in need of care and protection shall, within a period of six
months from the date of commencement of the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of
Children) Amendment Act, 2006, be registered under this Act in such manner as may be
prescribed.”
20.  In section 39 of the principal Act, for the Explanation, the following Explanation
shall be substituted, namely:—
‘Explanation.— For the purposes of this section “restoration of and protection
of a child” means restoration to—
(a) parents;
(b) adopted parents;
(c) foster parents;
Amendment
of section 29.
Amendment
of section 32.
Amendment
of section 33.
Amendment
of section 34.
Amendment
of section 39.

5
(d) guardian;
(e) fit person;
(f) fit institution.’.
21.  In section 41 of the principal Act,—
(i) for sub-sections (2), (3) and (4), the following sub-sections shall be substituted,
namely:—
“(2) Adoption shall be resorted to for the rehabilitation of the children who
are orphan, abandoned or surrendered through such mechanism as may be
prescribed.
(3) In keeping with the provisions of the various guidelines for adoption
issued from time to time, by the State Government, or the Central Adoption
Resource Agency and notified by the Central Government, children may be
given in adoption by a court after satisfying itself regarding the investigations
having been carried out as are required for giving such children in adoption.
(4) The State Government shall recognize one or more of its institutions or
voluntary organizations in each district as specialised adoption agencies in such
manner as may be prescribed for the placement of orphan, abandoned or
surrendered children for adoption in accordance with the guidelines notified
under sub-section (3):
Provided that the children's homes and the institutions run by the State
Government or a voluntary organization for children in need of care and protection,
who are orphan, abandoned or surrendered, shall ensure that these children are
declared free for adoption by the Committee and all such cases shall be referred
to the adoption agency in that district for placement of such children in adoption
in accordance with the guidelines notified under sub-section (3).”
(ii) for sub-section (6), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
“(6) The Court may allow a child to be given in adoption—
(a) to a person irrespective of Marital status or;
(b) to parents to adopt a child of same sex irrespective of the
number of living biological sons or daughters; or
(c) to childless couples.”;
22.  For section 57 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely :—
“57. The State Government may direct any child or the juvenile to be transferred
from any children’s home or special home within the State to any other children’s home,
special home or institution of a like nature or to such institutions outside the state in
consultation with the concerned State Government and with the prior intimation to the
Committee or the Board, as the case may be, and such order shall be deemed to be
operative for the competent authority of the area to which the child or the juvenile is
sent.”.
23.  In section 59 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), for the words “for maximum
seven days”, the words “for a period generally not exceeding seven days” shall be substituted.
24.  After section 62 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
Transfer
between
children’s
homes, under
the Act, and
juvenile homes
of like nature
within the State.
Amendment
of section 59.
Insertion of
new section
62A.
Substitution of
new section for
section 57.
Amendment
of section 41.

6
“62A. Every State Government shall constitute a Child Protection Unit for the
State and, such Unites for every District, consisting of such officers and other employees
as may be appointed by that Government, to take up matters relating to children in
need of care and protection and juveniles in conflict with law with a view to ensure the
implementation of this Act including the establishment and maintenance of homes,
notification of competent authorities in relation to these children and their rehabilitation
and co-ordination with various official and non-official agencies concerned.”
25.  In section 64 of the principal Act,—
(i) for the words “may direct”, the words “shall direct” shall be substituted;
(ii) the following proviso and Explanation shall be inserted, namely:—
“Provided that the State Government, or as the case may be the Board,
may, for any adequate and special reason to be recorded in writing, review the
case of a juvenile in conflict with law undergoing sentence of imprisonment, who
has ceased to be so on or before the commencement of this Act, and pass
appropriate order in the interest of such juvenile.
Explanation .—In all cases where a juvenile in conflict with law is
undergoing a sentence of imprisonment at any stage on the date of commencement
of this Act, his case including the issue of juvenility, shall be deemed to be
decided in terms of clause ( l) of section 2 and other provisions contained in
this Act and the rules made thereunder, irrespective of the fact that he ceases
to be a juvenile on or before such date and accordingly he shall be sent to the
special home or a fit institution, as the case may be, for the remainder of the
period of the sentence but such sentence shall not in any case exceed the
maximum period provided in section 15 of this Act.".
26.  In section 68 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section ( 1), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
“Provided that the Central Government may, frame model rules in respect
of all or any of the matters with respect to which the State Government may make
rules under this section, and where any such model rules have been framed in
respect of any such matter, they shall apply to the State until the rules in respect
of that matter is made by the State Government and while making any such rules,
so far as is practicable, they conform to such model rules.”;
(b) in sub-section (2),—
(i) in clause ( x), after the words, letter and brackets “sub-section (2)”,
the following words, letter and brackets shall be inserted, namely:—
and the manner of registration of institutions under sub-section
(3)”;
(ii) after clause ( xii), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(xiia) rehabilitation mechanism to be resorted to in adoption under sub-
section (2), notification of guidelines under sub-section ( 3) and the manner of
recognition of specialised adoption agencies under sub-section ( 4) of section
41;”;
(c) sub-section (3) shall be re-numbered as sub-section (4) thereof, and before
sub-section ( 4) as so re-numbered, the following sub-section shall be inserted
namely:—
“(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be
laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it
is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one
Amendment
of section 68.
Amendment of
section 64.
Constitution of
Child
Protection Unit
responsible for
implementation
of the Act.

7
session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree
that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything
previously done under that rule.”.

LOK  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
to amend the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2000.
—————
(As passed by Lok Sabha )
MGIPMRND— 1935LS(S4)—02.08.2006.