 
ASSENTED TO ON 28TH SEPTEMBER, 2023 
 
AND 
 
PUBLISHED IN THE GAZETTE OF INDIA ON 
 
28TH SEPTEMBER, 2023  AS 
 
THE CONSTITUTION (ONE HUNDRED AND SIXTH 
AMENDMENT) ACT, 2023. 
 
 
 
Bill No.124-F of 2023 
 
 
 
 
 
 
THE CONSTITUTION (ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY-EIGHTH 
AMENDMENT) BILL, 2023 
 
 
 
(AS PASSED BY THE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA ON 20TH SEPTEMBER, 2023 
 
RAJYA SABHA ON 21ST SEPTEMBER, 2023) 
 
 
 

Bill No. 124-F of 2023 
THE CONSTITUTION (ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY-EIGHTH AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 2023 
(AS PASSED BY THE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT) 
A 
BILL  
further to amend the Constitution of India.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy -fourth Year of  the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (One Hundred and Sixth  Amendment)  Act, 2023.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, appoint.  
Short title and 
commencement.  

Amendment of 
article 239AA.  
2. In article 239AA of the Constitution, in clause (2), after sub -clause ( b), the following
clauses shall be inserted, namely: — 
“(ba) Seats shall be reserved for women in the Legislative Assembly of the National 
Capital Territory of Delhi.  
(bb) As nearly as may be, one -third of the seats reserved for the Scheduled Castes in the 
Legislative Assembly of the National Capital Territory of Delhi shall be reserved for women.  
(bc) As nearly as may be, one -third of the total number of seats to be filled by direct 
election in the Legislative Assembly of the National Capital Territory of Delhi (including the 
number of seats reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes) shall be reserved for 
women in such manner as Parliament may by law determine.”.  
Insertion of new 
article 330A.  
3. After article 330 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely: —
Reservation of 
seats for women 
in the House of 
the People.  
“330A. ( 1) Seats shall be reserved for women in the House of the People.  
(2) As nearly as may be, one-third of the total number of seats reserved under  clause (2)
of article 330 shall be reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled 
Tribes.  
(3) As nearly as may be, one -third (including the number of seats reserved for women
belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes) of the total number of seats to be 
filled by direct election to the House of the People shall be reserved for women.”.  
Insertion of new 
article 332A.  
4. After article 332 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely: —
Reservation of 
seats for women 
in the Legislative 
Assemblies of 
the States.  
“332A. ( 1) Seats shall be reserved for women in the Legislative Assembly of every State. 
(2) As nearly as may be, one -third of the total number of seats reserved under
clause (3) of article 332 shall be reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Ca stes or the 
Scheduled Tribes.  
(3) As nearly as may be, one -third (including the number of seats reserved for women
belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes) of the total number of seats to be 
filled by direct election in the Legislative Assembly of every State shall be reserved for 
women.”.  
Insertion of new 
article 334A.  
5. After article 334 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely: —
Reservation of 
seats for women 
take effect. 
“334A. ( 1) Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provision of this Part or Part VIII, 
the provisions of the Constitution relating to the reservation of seats for women in the House 
of the People, the Legislative Assembly of a State and the Legislative Assembly  of the National 
Capital Territory of Delhi shall come into effect after an exercise of delimitation is undertaken 
for this purpose after the relevant figures for the first census taken after commencement of the 
Constitution (One Hundred and Sixth  Amendmen t) Act, 2023 have been published and shall 
cease to have effect on the expiration of a period of fifteen years from such commencement.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of articles 239AA, 330A and 332A, seats reserved for
women in the House of the People, the  Legislative Assembly of a State and the Legislative 
Assembly of the National Capital Territory of Delhi shall continue till such date as the 
Parliament may by law determine.  
(3) Rotation of seats reserved for women in the House of the People, the Legislat ive
Assembly of a State and the Legislative Assembly of the National Capital Territory of Delhi 
shall take effect after each subsequent exercise of delimitation as the Parliament may by law 
determine.  
(4) Nothing in this article shall affect any representa tion in the House of the People, the
Legislative Assembly of a State or the Legislative Assembly of the National Capital Territory 
of Delhi until the dissolution of the then existing House of the People , Legislative Assembly 
of a State or the Legislative A ssembly of the National Capital Territory of Delhi.”.  
2 

6. The amendments made to the Constitution by the Constitution (One Hundred and  Sixth
Amendment) Act, 2023 shall not affect any representation in the House of the People, the Legislative 
Assembly of a State or  the Legislative Assembly of the National Capital Territory of Delhi until the 
dissolution   of  the  House of   the People, the   Legislative Assembly of a State or  the  Legislative 
Assembly of the National Capital Territory of Delhi, as the case may be, in existence at the 
commencement  of the said Act.  
 
——— 
The above Bill has been passed by the House s of Parliament in accordance with the 
provisions of article 368 of the Constitution. 
Dated the Chairman. 
———— 
I assent to this Bill. 
Dated the President. 
Amendment not to 
affect reservation in 
the House of the 
People, the 
Legislative 
Assembly of a State 
or the Legislative 
Assembly of the 
National Capital 
Territory of Delhi. 
3 


A 
BILL 
further to amend the Constitution of India. 
————— 
(As passed by the Houses of Parliament) 