... 
LOK SABHA, 
. CORRIGENDA 
to 
THE CIN&. WJRKERS .\ND CINEMA THEATRE IM)RKSRS (REGULATION OF 
EMPLOYMENT) BILL, 1981 
(To be/As introdilced in 10k Sabha~ 
1. Page (i), against 'clause No.6,-
fo.l: "shall" occurring at both the places 
r.e..a.d' "to" 
2. Page ·4, line 49,-
after "as" insert "maY" 
3. Page 5~ in the marginal heading to clause 6,-
!Q1: "shall" occurring at both the places 
'~ "to" 
4. . Page 5, line 1',-
W. ,"or qualified" mad "0 r is qualified" 
5. Page 12, line 14 from bottom,- . 
fQ.r. IIconciliaion" ~ "con'cilia tion" 
NEW DELHI; , 

As INTRODUCED IN Lox SABHA OK 
BiD NO,. 124 Gf 1181 
f.I ,1 I 
EIE CINE-WORKEaS AND CINEMA THEA11tE WD~ERS 
(REGULATION OF EMPLOYMENT) BILL, 1981 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CHAPTER I 
- U17SBS 
1. Short title, extent and comme~cemp.nt. 
2. Definitions. 
CHAPTER II 
Rl:GuLATION OF EMPLOYMENT OF CINE-WORKBRS 
3. Prohibition of employment of cine-worker without 
agreement. 
4. Conciliation officers. 
It Duties of conciliation officers. 
6. Settlement shall be binding and shall be enforced by 
the competent authority. 
7. Constitution of Tribunals. 
8. Disqualification for the presiding officers df Tribunals. 
9. Fillfng of vacancies. 
10. Finality of orders constituting Tribunals, etc. 
11. Reference of disputes to Tribunals. 
12. Procedure and t;?owers of conciUatlon of'Bcers anc! Tri-
bunals. 
13. Duties of Tribunals. 
14. Publication of awards of Tribunals. 
15. Revision. 
16. Application of Act 19 of 1952 to cine-workers. 
17. Penalties. 
18. Offences by companies. 

(if) 
CLAUSES 
19. Cognizance of offences. 
20. Magistrate's power to impose enhanced penalties. 
21. Effect of laws and agreements inconsistent with this 
Chapter. , 
22. Protection of action taken under this Chapter. 
23. Power to exempt in special cases. 
24. Power te make rules. 
CHAPTER III 
lUauLATIOlf OF D4l"LOY.MENT ar cnn:MA THZA'l"D WOIIKD8 
25. Application of Act 19 of 1952. 
26. Application of Act 39 of 1972. 

BW No. UC of 1M1 
~ . 
TSE CINE-WORKERS AND CINEMA THEATRE WORKERS 
(REGULATION OF EMPLOYMENT) BILL, 1981 
BILL 
to provide for the regulation of the conditiDn.B Of employment 
01 certai.n cine-workers and cinema theatre worker, cmc:E 
for matters connected therewith. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in tJ:1e Thirty-second Year of 
the Republic of India as follows:-
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
5 1. (1) This Act may be called the Cine-workers and Cinema SharUm .. 
Theatre Workers (Regulation of Employment) Act, 1981. extent ad 
COIDDl8Dee. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India. meDt. 
(3) It shan corne into force on such date as the Central Gov-
ernment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint; 
10 and different dates may be appointed for di1!eren.t provisions 
of this Act and for different areas. 

Deftnitions. 
I. 
2 .. 
Z. In this Act, unless the aontext otherwise requires,-
(a.) "cinema theatre" means a place which is licenaed 
under Part III of the Cinematograph Act, 1952, or under 37 of 1_. 
any other law for the time being in force in a State for the 
exhibition of n cinematograph film; S 
(b) "cinematograph film" has the same meaning as in 
the Cinematograph Act, 1952; 37 ot 1_ 
(c) "cine-worker" means an individual-
(i) who is employed, directly or through any COD-
tractor or other person, in or in connection with the 10 
production of a feature film to work as an artiste 
(including actor, musician or dancer) or to do any work, 
skilled, unskilled, manual, supervisory, technical, 
artistic or otherwise; and 
(ii) whose remuneration with respect to such IS 
employment in or in connection with the production of 
such feature film does not exceed, where such remUDe-
ration is by way of monthly wages, a sum of one 
thousand rupees per month, and where such remune-
ration is by way of a lump sum, a sum of five thousand2o 
rupees; 
(d) "competent authority" means any authority autho-
rised by the Central Government by notUlcation in the 
Official Gazette to /perform. all or any of the functions of the 
competent authority unner this Act; gs 
(e) "contractor" means a person who furnishes or 
undertakes 'to furnish cine-workers for being employed in 
or in ,connection with the production of a feature ft1m, 
and includes a sub-contractor or agent; 
(J) "feature film" means a full length cinematograph 30 
film produced wholly or partly in India with a format and 
a story woven around a number of characters where the 
plot is revealed mainly through dialogues and not wholly 
. through narration, animation or cartoon depiction, and doe8 
not include an advertisement film; 3S 
(g) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under 
this Act; 
(h) "producer", in relation to a feature film, mean:. the 
person by whom the arrangements necessary for the malt-
ing of such film (including the raising of finances and eIl- 40 
gaging cine-workers for the making of such fUm) are under-
taken; 
(~) "production", in relation to a feature film, includes 
any of the activities in respect of the making thereof; 
(j) "Tribunal" means a Cine-workers Tribunal const!- 4' 
tuted under section 7; 
(k) "wages" means all emoluments which are payable 
to a worker jn accordance with the terms of the contrut 
of' employment in cash, but does not include-
(i) the' caSh value of any foocl eonC!elS'ioD; 50 

(ii) any dearness allowance (that Is to say, all cash 
'payments, by whatever name called, ~aid to a worker 
on account of a rise in the cost of living or on account 
of his being required to work in a place other than the 
5 place where he is normally residing), house rent allow-
ance, overtime allowance, bonus, commission or any 
other similar allowance payable to the worker in res-
pect of his employment or of work done in such em-
ployment; 
10 (iii) any contribution paid or payable by the em-
ployer to any I?ension fund or provident fund or for 
the benefit of the worker under any law for the time 
being in force; 
(iv) any gratuity payable on the termination of 
IS his contract. 
CHAPTER n 
REGULATION OF EMPLOYMENT OF CINE-WOIlKBRS 
3, (1) No person shall be employed as a cine-worker in or in 
connection with the production of any ,feature 1lhn unless,-
20 (0) an agreement in writing is entered into with such 
person by the producer of S'Uch film; or, where such penon 
is employed through a contractor or other person, by the 
, producer of such film and such contractor or other person; 
and 
2S (b) such agreement is registered with the competent 
3S 
45 
authority by t~e producer of such film. 
(2) Every agreement, referred to in sub-section (1) shall,-
(0) be in the prescribed form; 
(b) specify the name of and such other partlculan u 
may be prescribed with respect to, the person to whose 
employment it relates (hereafter in this sub-eection 
referred to as the employee); 
(c) specify the nature of assignment of the employee, 
his hours of work, the wages and other benefits (including 
benefits by way of provident fund, if any), to which he is 
entitled; the mode of payment of such wages and contribu-
,tions to such provldent fund and all other terms and con-
ditions of employment; , 
(d) include, where such employee is employed through 
a contractor or other person, a specific condition to the 
eftect that in the event of the contractor or other person 
failing to discharge his obligations under the agreement to 
the employee with respect to payment of wages or any 
other matter, the producer of the film concerned shall be 
liable to discharge such obligations and shall be entitled to 
,-be reimbursed with respect thereto by the contractor, or 
other person. 
(3) A copy of the agreement referred to in "sub-aeetion 
(1) with respect to the employment of any person 8S a cine-
Prohi1ition of 
employment of 
cine-worker 
without agree-
ment. 

"1 "")0 ? .I -
~ 
worker shall, if such person is entitled to the benefits of provi-
dent tund. und.er secuon lti, also be 1orwarC1ed by tne PL"OUucer 
of the b.lm to the J:teglonal Provident }4~Wld Commissioner COD-
cerned und.er the ~mplOyees' Provlaellt ~'unds ana MIscellaneous 
PrOVlBlOns Act, 1952. 5 19 of 1 .. 2. 
4. The Central Government may, by notifieatiOD in the 
Offimal Lfazette, appolIlt sucn number of persons as i\ thiDka At 
to be conCU18tlOn Olllcers cnarged. Wltn tne duty of meOlatmg 
and promoung the settlement of any diipute (heremafWr 
re1erred to as the dispute) between a cme-worlter ana the pro- 10 
dueer of tbe tilm in, or in connection wnb, wblcb he has been 
empJ.oyed or the contractor or otner persoll ~.nrougb. whom he 
bas Deen so. employed, wIth respect to tne terms and conditi0D8 
or termmauon, 01 employment of such cme-wor:k.er. 
i. (1) Where any dispute exists or is appreilended. the COD- 15 
ciliatiOD otticer may bola concwanon pl'oceedlngs in the pres-
cribed maDDer. 
(2) The conciliatioD officer sball, for the purpose of briDjing 
about a settlement of the d.lSpute, WIthout ae!ay, lIlvestigate tne 20 
Wspute and aU matters atlectmg the merits ana the rlgnt settle-
ment l.1lereof and may cW a.Ll such t.tungs at; he ~ iit jar 
t.Ue purpose 01 ind.UClIlg the partles to come to a fair and ami-
caDle settlement of the ~pute. 
(3) If a settlement 01 the c;iispute or of any of the ma~ers 25 
in chspute IS arrIved at in the course of the conciliatIon proceed-
ings, the conciliation officer shall send a report thereot to the 
Central Government together with a memoramrum of the 
settlement Slgned by the parties to the dispute. 
(4) If no such setUement is arrived at, the conciliation officer 30 
shall, as soon as practicable, after the close of the investigation. 
send to the Central Government a full report setting forth the 
Jteps taken by him for ascertaining the facts a1U\ circumstances 
relating to the dispute and for briDging about a settlement 
thereof, together with a full statement of such facta and dr- 3S 
eumstances and the reasons on account of which, in his opinion, 
a settlement could Dot be arrived at. 
(S) If, OD a constderation of the report reIerred to in sub-
section' (4), the Central Government is satisfied that thel'e ia a 40 
case for reference to a Tribunal, it may make such reference 
under section 11 anc\ where that Government does Dot make 
Ituch a reference, it shall record and communicnte to the parties 
concerned its reasona therefor. 
(6) A report under this section shall be submitted within 4S 
three months of the commencement of the conciliation proceed-
ings or within such shorter period as may be fixed by the 
Central Government: 
Provided that, subject to the approval of the conciliation 50 
Ofti~'. the ti~e for the submission of the report may be extended 
by h penod as i,_tI be agreed upon in writing by an the 
parti~ 0 the dispu\tlit. 

1. of IN7. 
r 
t. Every settlement arrived at in the course of a concilia-
tion proceeding under this Chapter snall be binding on all the 
parties to the diapute and shall not be called in question in any 
court and it shall be the duty of the competent authority to 
5 enforce the terms of the said settlement. 
'1. (1) The Central Govemment may, by notification in the 
0IleIa1 . Guette, constitute one or more Tribunals, to be caned 
the Cbae-workers Tribunals, with headquarters at such place 
as may he speci1ied 1n the notification, for the adjudication ot 
I 0 disputes relating to any matter speeiled in ..,. a,reemeDt 
of the nature referred to in section 3. 
(2) A Tribunal shall consist of one person only to be ap-
pointed by the Central Govemment. 
(3) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as the 
15 presiding officer of a Trib1Dlal unless-
(a) he is, or has been, or qualified to be, a Judge of a 
High Court; or . 
(Ib) he has, for a period of not less than three years, 
heen a District Judge or an Additional District Judce; or 
20 (c) he has held the oftlce of the presiding oflleer of 
25 
an IDdustrlal Tribunal constituted under the Industrial 
Disputes Act, 1947, for a period of not less than two years. 
(4) '1'he Central Government may, if It so thinks fit, appoint 
two persons as assessors to advise the Tribunal In any proceed-
Ings before it. 
S. No person shall be :'lI'lpointed to. or rOTltlnue in, the offtce 
of the presiding officer of a Tribunal. if-
(a) he is not an fndmendent person; or 
(b) he has attained the age of sixty-five years. 
30 9. If, for any reason, a vacancy (other than a temporarv 
absence) occurs in the office of the nrp.si('Hn~ officeT' of a TrI-
hunal. the Central Government shall anpoint anl')ther per!!on in 
accortfllnce with the provisions of this Act to fill the vaCl'lncv, 
Rnd the "roceedin~ mav be c(')ntinue~ before the Tribunal from 
• the stat;!e at which the vacancy is filled. 
3~ . 10, (1) No order of the Central Sovernment Qn'DOinting any 
person as the presidin~ offieer of a Tribunal sbSlll DE! called in 
(fueo!iltfon in anv manner; and no act or proceedinl! before any 
Trihunal shall be called in Question In gnv manner on the 
~ m'ound merely of any defect in the constitution of such TrI-
40 bunal. .-
(2) No settlflm'1ent arriverI at in the roursp. of a concilfatfon 
p1"o"eerIing shall be invalirI hv reMon onlv of th", fact tllal ~eh 
settlement was arrived at After the expiry Cit the period referred 
to in sub-section (6) of section 5. 
45 11. (n Where. on a ('n"si~erqtion (')1 the reMrt referred to 
fn ~'nb~ertfon (4) of section 5. the Centt-al Gnvemment is 
satfsAed that it is neCE"ssarv so to do. it may, bv order in W"Ittn~, 
refer the dispute or any matter apnearinlt t.o be connected with, 
or relevant to, the d:ls-pute, to a 'T'rlbunal for a"rijudicatfon. 
So (!) Where in an order ref~rred tp in ~ub-sectton (1) Of in 
s,ettlement 
shall be binciJne 
and shaU be 
enforced by the 
competent· 
aufihority. 
Constitution Of 
Tribunals. 
DisqualMca-
tion for the 
presiding ofB-
cers of TrL 
bunal •. 
Filling of 
vaeanci •. 
Finality Of. 
orden ~ 
tutin, TrIbu-
nals, etc. 
Refereace of 
dispute. to 
TribuDals. 

Procedure and 
powers of 
ooncntation 
oftlcers aDd 
Tribunals. 
6 
a II\1bsequent order, the Central Government has ~ectftect the 
pemts of dispute for adjudication, the Tribunal shall conftne 
ita adjudication to those points and matters incidental thereto. 
12. (1) Subject to any rules that may be made in this behalf, 
a conciliation officer or a Tribunal shall follow such procedure S 
as the officer or Tribunal may think fit. 
(2) A conciliation officer or a Tribunal may, for the purpose 
of inquiry into any existing or apprehenried dispute, after 
giving reasonable notice, enter any premises 1n the oOC1lQation 
of iatiy party to the dispate. r 0 
(3) Every TI:ibunal shall have the same powers as a~ 
vested in 8 Civil Court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 
1908, when trying a suit, in respect of the following mattel'J· 
namely:-
(a) enforcing the attendance of any penon anoaa" 15 
mining him. on oath i 
(b) compelling the production of doeumentl' 8iici 
m,aterial objects; 
(c) issuing commissions for the examination of· wit-
nesses; and ~o 
(d} in respect of such other matters as may be pres-
cribed; 
i of 1908. 
and every inquiry or investigation by a Tribunal shall be 
deemed to be a judicial· p1:oceeding within the meanlng of 45 ell 1880 
sections 193 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code and the Tribunal 25 . 
shall be neemed to be a Civil Court for the purposes of section 
195 and Chapter XXVI of the Code. of Criminal Procedure, 2 of 1174. 
1973. 
(4) A conciliation officer may call for and inspect any docu-
ment which he has ground for considering to be relevant to 30 
the dispute or to be necessary for the purpose of verifying the 
implementation of any award or carrying out any other duty 
imposeit. on him under this Chapter, and for the aforesaid 
t;lurposes, the conciliation officer shall have the same powers 
as are vested in a Civil Court under the Code of Civil Proce- 35 
dure, 1908, in respect of compelling the pl'oduction of doeu- 5 of ::908. 
menta . 
. (5)· A Tribunal may, if it SO thinks fit, aopoint one or more 
persons having special knowledge of the matter under eonsi- J;;:j 
~eration as assessor or asseasors to advise it in the pl'oceeding 40 
befOile ft. 
(6) A Tribunal may grant to anv party to any pl'Oceedfi1g' 
before· it, such interim or other reliefs (whether subject to any 
c~dJtions or not), including. stay of any order, issue of· any 
injunction or direction in re~ard t.o "ayment of wages or other 45 
amounts payable under the a~eement referred to in section· 3, 
settin~ aside any unilateral termination of contract or the ·drs-
missal of a worker or reinstating a worker, as it deems· just 
and proper in the circumstances of the case: 
Provided that the Tribunal shall not grant any such interim 50 
relief unless all the parties to the proceeding have been served 
with a· notf~e on the application for such interim reUef and 
have been give~ a rc~onable opportunity of bei"g heard; 

7 , 
Provided further that the Tribunal may, having regard to 
'the nature of the interim relief sought and the circumstances 
pf the case, pass appropriate orders granting such interim relief 
as it· deems just and proper in the circumstances of the case 
S before-the notice referred to in the preceding proviso is served 
on .the parties to the proceeding: 
Provided also that where the Tribunal makes any order 
under thp proviso immediately preceding, it shall record the 
reasons fl)r making the order befOl'e complying with the re-
10 quirements specified in the first proviso. 
(7) Subject to any rules that may be made in this behaI:t, the 
awarding of damages in, and the costs of, and incidental to, any 
proceeding before a Tribunal shall be in the discretion of that 
Tribunal and the Tribunal shall have full power to determine 
IS by and to whom and to what extent and subject to what 
conditions, if any, such damages or costs are to be paid, and 
to give all necessary directions for the purposes aforesaid and 
such damages or costs' may, on an application made to the 
Central Government by the person entitled, be directed 
J2(j) to be recovered by that Government in the same manner as an 
arrear of land revenue. 
13, Where a dispute has been referred to a Tribunal tor 
adJudication, it shall hold its prQCeedings expeditiously and 
shall submit its award to the Central Government ordinarily 
5 within a period of three months from the date on which sucIi 
2 industrial dispute is referred to it: 
Provided that in computing the period of three months 
under this section, the period for which the proceeaings before 
the Tribunal have been stayed by any injunction or order shall 
30 be excluded. 
14. (1) Every award of a Tribunal shall, within a period of 
thirty days from the date of its receipt by the Central Gov-
ernment, be published in such manner as that Government 
thinks fit. 
(2) Subject to the provisions of section 15, the award shall 
35 be final and binding on all the parties to the dispute and shall 
not be called in question in any Court in any manner whatso-
ever. 
(3) The award of a Tribunal shall be executed in the same 
40 manner as it it were a decree of a Civil Court. 
Duties of 
Tribunals. 
Publication 
of awards of 
Tribunals. 
15. (1) The High Court may, on the application of any Revision. 
person aggrieved by the award of a Tribunal, call for and 
examine the record of the Tribunal, to satisfy itself as to the 
regularity of the proceeding before such Tribunal or the correct-
ness, legality or propriety of any. awar~ passed therein and if, 
4,5 in any case, it appears to the High Court that any such award 
should be modified, annulled or reversed, it may pass such orders 
accordingly: 
Providpd that where the presiding officer of the Tribunal 
is a Judge of a High Court, such application shall be heard 
50 and disposed of by not less than two Judges of the High 
Court: 

Application Of 
Act 19 of 1952 
to cine-
workers. 
Pemtltles. 
O1!ences by 
companies. 
~ 
Provided further that where the award of the Tribunal 
-provides for the payment by the producer of any fUm or, 88 the 
~ase may be, the contractor or other person of anyamOWlt 
either by· way 'Of compensation to the cine-worker or by way 
'of damages, no such application by the produ~er, contractor (Jr 5 
other person sholl be entertained by the HIgh Court unless 
the applicant deposits with the High Court or with such ot~er 
t:uthority as may be prescribed the amount ordered to be patd: 
Provided also that where, in any particular case, the 
High Court is of opinion that the deposit of any amount J 0 
erdered to be paid would cause undue hardship to the appli-
cant, the High CO".Jrt may dispense with such deposit subject 
to such conditions as it may deem fit to impose 80 as to safe-
guard the interests of the cine-worker concerned. 
(2) Every application to the High Court under Bub-section IS 
(1) shall be preferred within ninety days from the date on 
which the award was passed b~ the Tribunal: 
Provided that the High Court· may, in its discretion, allow 
further time not exceeding one month for the filing of any 
such application, if it is satisfied that the applicant had sum- ItO 
cient cause f01; not preferring the application within the time 
specified in this sub-section. 
(3) In this section, "High Court" means the High Court 
within the local limits of whose jurisdiction, the headquarters 
of the Tribunal is situated, 1t5 
16. The Employees' Provident Funds and Miscellaneous 
Provisions Act, 1952, as in force for the time being, shall 
apply to every cine-worker who has worked in not less than 
five feature films with one or more producers,as if such 
cine-worker were an employee within the meaning of that 30 
Act. 
17. (1) Whoever contravenes the provisions of section 3 
shall be punishable with fine wh~h shall not be less than ten 
thousand rupees but which may extend to fifty thousand 
rupees: 35 
Provided that the Court may, for any adequate and special 
reasons to be mentioned in the judgment, impose a fine of less 
than ten thousand rupees. 
(2) Where any person convicted of an offence under sub-
section (1) is again convicted of an offence under the same 40 
provision, he shall be punishable with fine which ·shall not 
be less than twenty thousand rupees but which may extend 
to one lakh rupees: 
Provided that the Court may, for any adequate and specIal 
reasons to bE: mentioned in the judgment, impose a fine of le8845 
than twenty thousand rupees.· 
18. (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed 
by a company, every person who, at the time the offence was 
committed, was in charge of, and was responsible to, the com-
pany for tbe co$ct of the business of the company, asweU 50 
as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the .offence 

and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished 
accordingly: 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub·section shall 
render any such person liable to any punishment if. he proves 
5 that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that 
he had exercised 'all due diligence to prevent the commission 
Of such offence. 
_ (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub--section (1), 
wnere auy oftmce under this Act has been committed by a 
10 company and it is proved that the offence has been committed 
wi'th the consent or connivance of, or '.; attributable to any 
neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary OT other 
officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or 
other officer shall be deemed to be guilty of that offence and 
15 shall be liable to' be proceeded against and punished 
accordingly. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section,-
(a) "company" means any body corporate and includes 
a firm or other associ'ation of individuals; and 
!20 (b) "director", in relation to a firm, means a partner in 
the firm. 
18. No court shall take cognizance of any offence under this 
Act except on a complaint made by. or with the permission 
in writing of, the Central Government or an officer empowered 
!25 by it in this behalf and no court inferior to that of a Metro-
politan Magistrate Or a Judicial Mag:strate of the first class 
shall try an offence punishable under thi~ Act. 
20. Notwithstanding anythin~ contained in section 29 of the 
Code of Criminal Pro~edure. 1973. it shall be lawful for any 
30 Metropolitan Magistrate or any Judicial Ma~strate of the first 
class to pass any sentence authorised by this Act. 
21. The provisions of this Chapter shall have effect n9twith" 
standing anything inconsistent therewith contained in any 
other law tor the time being. in force or in the terms of any 
35 agreement ~r contract of service. 
n. (1) No spit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall 
He against any competent authority, conciliation officer, or any 
other employee of the Central Government or the presiding 
officer of a Tribunal, tor anything which is in good 'faith done, 
40 or intended to be done, in pursuance of this Act or any rule or 
order made thereunder. 
(2) No sui't or other legal proceedings shall lie against the 
Central Government for any damage caused or likely to be 
caused by anything which is in good falth done or intended 
to be done in pursuance of this Act or any rule or notification 
45 or order made or ISSUed thereunder. 
23. (1) The Central Government may, by notificatfon in the 
Official Gazette, and subject to such conditions .and restrictions, 
Cognizance 
of offences. 
Magistrate's 
power to im.. 
pose enhanced 
penalties. 
Effect of baW8 
and agreements 
inconsistent 
with thic; 
Chapter; 
Protection of 
action taken 
under this 
Chapter. 
Power to 
exempt in 
specra! cases. 

Power too 
make rules. 
Applica-
tion of 
Act 190f 
1952. 
10 
if any, and for such period or periods as may ~ specified i~ 
the notification direct that all or any of the provIsions· of this 
Chapter or the'rules 'made thereunder shall not apply to, or in 
relation to any class of cine-workers or the production of any 
feature fil~ if that Government is satisfied that it is just and 5 
proper so to do having regard to the contents of any feature 
film or the objects for which such film is produced and all other 
relevant circumstances. 
(2) Every notification issued under sub-section (1) shall, as 
soon as may be, s'fter it is issued, be. laid before each House cff' 10 
Parliament. 
24. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the provisiolltS of 
this Chapter. 
(2) In partiCular, and without prejudice to the gnerality 15 
of the foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any 
of the following matters, namely:-
(a) the form in which an agreement may be entered 
into by a producer with a cine-worker under section 3 and 
the other conditions of employment; 20 
(b) the manner in which proceedings may be helel bya 
conciliation officer under sub-section (1) of section 5; 
(e) the procedure to be followed by a concilfation 
officer or Tribunal under section 12; 
(d) the matters referred to in clause (d) of SUb-section 25 
(3) of section 12; 
(e) the damages or costs that may be awarded by a 
Tribunal under sub-section (7) of section 12; 
(f) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, 
prescribed. 3') 
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this 
Chapter shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before 
each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period 
of thirty days which may be comprised in one sessfon or in two 
or more successive sessions,· and if, before the expiry of the 35 
sess;on immediately followi'ng the session or the successive 
sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modifica-
tion in the rule or both Houses agree that the ruie should not 
be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modi-
fled forin. or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however. that¥> 
any such modifiC'Btion or annulment shall be without prejudice 
to the validity Of anything previously ~one under that rule. 
CHAPTER m 
REGULATION oF' E:MPLOYMENT OF CINEMA 'l'\HEATRE WORKERS 
25. The proviosions of the Employees' Provt'dent Funds and 45 
Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952; as in force for the time 
being, shall apply to every cinema theatre in which five or more 
workers are employed <m any day, as i'f such cinema theatre 

ti 
were an establishment to which the aforesaid Act had been 
applied by a notification of the Central Government under sub-
section (3) of section 1 thereof, and as if each such worker were 
an employee within the meaning of that Act. 
7/0 
5 26. The provisions of the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972, as Application of 
in force for the time being, shall apply to and in relation to, Act 39 of urn. 
every worker employed in a cinema theatre in which five or 
more workers are employed or were employed on any day of 
to the preceding twelve months, as they apply to, or in relatiOll to, 
employees within the meaning of that Act. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Ex.isting labour laws do not provide necessary safeguards to low paid 
artistes and technicians engaged in the production of feature ftlms with 
regard to their terms and conditions of employment, payment of wages 
and provision at other amenities. Employees of cinema theatres are 
generally not provided with facilities, such as, gratuity and provident 
fund. It is, therefore, ~roposed to make suitable provisions with 
respect to these matters. The following are the salient features of the 
Bill:-
(i) The Bill would cover all cine-workers as defined therein, 
i.e., an individual who i~ employed directly or through any contrac-
tor or other person in, or in connection with, the production of a 
feature film to work as an artiste and whose remuneration with 
respect to such employment does not exceed, where such remune-
ration is by way of monthly wages, a ·sum of one thO'Usand rupees 
per month and where such remuneration is by way of a lump sum, 
a sum of five thousand rupees. 
(ii) Every producer of a feature film, before engaging cine-
workers mentioned above, will be requirea to enter into a written 
agreement with each one of them in the .prescribed form and the 
agreement shall be registered with the competent authority notified 
under the law and where the worker is entitled to the benefits of 
provident fund under the proposed legislation, a copy of such agree-
ment should also be ceposited with the Regional Provident Fund 
Commissioner concerned. Where the cine-workers are engaged 
through a contractor or other person, the agreement will have to be 
executed by the prot:iucer and such contractor or olher person. 
(iii) A dispute could be raised by the affected workman in case 
of breach .of any of the terms and conditions of the agreement with 
the conciliation officer in the State. In the event df the parties 
failing to arrive at a settlement, the conciliaion officer will report 
to the Central Government about the failure to arrive at a .settle-
ment and the Central Government may refer the dispute to single 
member Cine-workers Tribunals constituted under the law. Subject 
to revision by the High Court, the awards of the Tribunal will be 
final. If any settlement is arrived at before the con.ciliation officer, 
it shall be binding on the parties to the dispute. The above procedure 
for the raising of disputes closely follows the provisions of the 
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947. 
(it') As the object of the legislation is to ensure that the cine-
worker is protected from exploitation as regards the terms and 
conditions of employment without imposing on this creative industry 
too harsh a set of regulations, penalties are proposed only in cases 
where \producer of • feature film fails ~ reglsler the agreement 
\ 12 

7/~ 
i ' J,..".." 
eI1tered into with a worker or when he takes work from a workei 
without executing an agreement. 
(v) It is proposed to apply the Employees' Provident Funds and 
Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952, to such cine-workers as have 
completed assignments in five feature films w~th one or more 
different producers. 
As -1'egal"ds -employees of cinema theatres, it is proposed to make the 
pPO\'isions of the Payment of Gratuity Act, '1972, and the· Employees' 
Pmvident Funds and Milcellaneous Provisions Act, 1952, applicable to 
the -employees ef cinema theatres in which five or more persons are em-
ployed. 
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 
-.-
NEW DELHI; V ASANT SATHE. 
The 14th September, 1981. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117, OF THE 
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
-[Copy of letter No. 313174-FPC Vol. IV, dated the 3rd August, 1981 
from Shri Vasant Sathe, Minister of Information ana Broadcasting to 
the Secretary, Lok Sabha.] 
The President, having been informed of the subject matter at the 
Cine-workers and Cinema Theatre Workers (Regulation of Employ-
ment) Bill, 1981, hereby recommends under article 117 (3) of the Cons-
titution, the consideration by Lok Sabha of the said Bill. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDuM 
SUb-clause (1) of clause 3 of the Bill requires the producer 
.of a feature fUm to enter into an agreement with a cine-worker 
and to register the same with the competent authority before 
such cine-worker is employed by the producer to work in the 
. feature film. "Competent authority" has been defined in sub-
clause (d) of clause 2 of the Bill to mean any authority autho-
rised by the Central Government by notification in the Official 
Gazette to perform all or any of the functions Of the competent 
authority under the provisions of the Bill. It is proposed to 
entrust this function to the Central Labour Commissioner in the 
State concerned. As such, no additional expenditure is likely 
to be involved under this provision. 
2. Clause 4 enables the Central Govemmentto appoint such 
number of persons as it thfuks fit to be conciliation officers 
charged with the duty of mediating in, and promoting the 
settlement of, any dispute which is connected with the terms 
and conditions of employment Of a cin~worker. It is proposed 
to appoint the conciliation officers appointed under the Indus. 
trial Disputes Act as conciliation officers for the purposes of 
the proposed Bill also. No additional expenditure is, therefore, 
likely to be incurred by the appointment of conciliation officer 
under the provisions of the Bill. 
3. Clause 7 empowers the Central Government to consti-
tute one or more Cine-workers Tribunals for the adjudication of 
disputes relating to any matter specified in any agreement of 
the nature ~eferred to in clause 3 of the Bill. It is proposed to 
appoint such Tribunals at Bombay, Calcutta, Madras and Ban-
galore in the first instance and at such other places as may be 
decided by the Central Government from time to time. The 
Tribunal ~haU consist of only one person as the presiding officer. 
The Tribunal will, however, have its own s1l::eleton staff. It is 
estimated that this provision will require an expenditure of 
Rs. 80,000 as non-recurring and Rs. 4,82,400 as recurring. 
4. The Bill does not involve any other expenditure whether 
of a recurring or non-recurring nature. 

)/'-1 
j' , ' 
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 24 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to 
make rules for carrying out the provisions Of Chapter II of 
the Bill, which provides for the regulation of employment of 
cine-workers. The matters in respect of which such rules 
may be made are specified in that cls:use. They, in.tler alia, 
relate to the form in which an agreement may be entered 
into by a producer with a cine-worker, the'manJler in which 
proceedings may be held by a conciliation ofticer and the pr0-
cedure to be followed by him or the Cine-workers Tribunals 
and certain other matters. The matters with respect to which 
rules may be made are matters of procedure or detail. 
2. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a 
normal character. 
15 

.'. 
LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the regulation of the conditions of einployment 
of certain cine-workers and cinema theatre workert and for 
matters conn~ted therewith. 
I , 