Bill No. 124-F of  2020
THE JAMMU AND KASHMIR OFFICIAL
LANGUAGES BILL, 2020
(AS PASSED BY THE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT—
LOK SABHA ON 22ND SEPTEMBER, 2020
RAJYA  SABHA ON 23RD SEPTEMBER, 2020)
Assented to on 26th September, 2020
Act No. 23 of  2020

1
THE JAMMU AND KASHMIR OFFICIAL LANGUAGES BILL, 2020
(AS PASSED BY THE H OUSES OF P ARLIAMENT)
A
BILL
to provide for the languages to be used for the official purposes of the Union territory of
Jammu and Kashmir and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-first Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Jammu and Kashmir Official Languages Act, 2020.
(2) It extends to the Union territory of Jammu and Kashmir.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint:
Provided that the Administrator may appoint different dates for different areas in the
Union territory.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. 124-F of 2020

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “Administrator” means the Lieutenant Governor of the Union territory of
Jammu and Kashmir appointed by the President under article 239 of the Constitution;
(b) “Union territory” means the Union territory of Jammu and Kashmir.
3. With effect from such date as the Administrator may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, appoint in this behalf, the Kashmiri, Dogri, Urdu, Hindi and English languages
shall be the official languages to be used for all or any of the official purposes of the Union
territory:
Provided that the English language may continue to be used, for those administrative
and legislative purposes, in the Union territory for which it was being used before the
commencement of this Act:
Provided further that the business in the Legislative Assembly of the Union territory
shall be transacted in the official language or languages of the Union territory.
4. (1) The Administrator may, for the promotion and development of regional languages
of the Union territory, take necessary steps to strengthen the existing institutional
mechanisms such as the Academy of Art, Culture and languages in the Union territory.
(2) The institutional mechanisms referred to in sub-section ( 1) shall make special
efforts for the promotion and development of Gojri, Pahari and Punjabi languages.
————
Definitions.
Official
languages of
Union territory.
Promotion and
development of
regional
languages.

A
BILL
to provide for the languages to be used for the official purposes of the Union territory of
Jammu and Kashmir and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
________
 (As passed by the Houses of Parliament)
MGIPMRND—890RS—01-10-2020.