As INTRODUCED In Lok SABHA ON

AUG 1990

124 of 1990
a RS
THE RUBBER (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1990

| A
BILL

further to amend the Rubber Act, 1947,

_ Be it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-first Year of the Republic of
lia as follows: —

1. This Act may be called the Rubber (Amendment) Act, 1990. Short

title.

In section 12 of the Rubber Act, 1947, in sub-section (1), for the Amend:
is “fifty naye paise”, the words “two rupees” shall be substituted. ment

section
12,


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The present rate of excise duty on rubber has reached the ceiling of
fifty paise per kilogram fixed under sub-section (1) of section 12 of the
Rubber Act, 1947. These rates have been in vogue since 24th August,
1984. The proceeds of the duty of excise levied under the Act form part
of the Consolidated Fund of India and after being reduced by the cost of
collection and after appropriation by law by Parliament are paid to the
Rubber Board for being utilised for the purposes of the Act. The expendi-
ture by Board during the recent years has increased considerably due to
increase in the plan and non-plan activities of the Board. The Board has
taken up a number of new schemes relating to rubber plantation develop-
ment, rubber development in the eastern and western regions of the
country, besides continuing the existing development activities and
research programmes taken up to expand the rubber production. The
proceeds of duty of excise levied under the Act would, therefore, not be
sufficient to meet the expenditure of the Board in the coming years. It
is thus necessary to strengthen the financial position of the Board. It is.
therefore, proposed to amend sub-section (1) of section 12 of the Act to
provide for a higher ceiling of levy of duty of excise at a rate not exceed-
ing rupees two per kilogram. The actual operative rate of duty will,
however, be fixed at such level as may be sufficient to generate funds to
‘meet substantial part of the budget expenditure of the Board in future.

2. The Bill seeks to achieve the above object.

New Denn;
The 20th July, 1990. ARUN KUMAR NEHRU.


ANNEXURE

Extract FROM THE Rupger Act, 1947

(24 oF 1947)

* हु * * *

12. (1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may,  tmposi-
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, there shall be levied as 8. tionof
cess for the purposes of this Act, a duty of excise on all rubber produced new
| India at such rate, not exceeding fifty naye paise per kilogram of rubber
tubber so produced, as the Central Government may fix. a

% के * कं %


LOK SABHA

A
BILL
further to amend the Rubber Act, 1947.

(Shri Arun Kumar Nehru, Minister of Commerce and |