1
THE ENEMY PROPERTY (AMENDMENT AND V ALIDATION)
SECOND BILL, 2010
A
BILL
further to amend the Enemy Property Act, 1968 and the Public Premises (Eviction of
Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1971.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Enemy Property (Amendment and Validation) Second
Act, 2010.
(2) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, it shall be deemed to have come into force
on the 2nd day of July, 2010.
2. On and from the date of commencement of the Enemy Property Act, 1968 (hereinafter
referred to as the principal Act), in section 5, after sub-section ( 2), the following shall be
inserted and shall be deemed to have been inserted, namely:—
Short title and
commencement.
5
Amendment
of section 5.
Bill No. 124 of 2010
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
34 of 1968.

2
‘(3) The enemy property vested in the Custodian shall, notwithstanding that the
enemy or the enemy subject or the enemy firm has ceased to be an enemy due to death,
extinction, winding up of business or change of nationality or that the legal heir and
successor is a citizen of India or the citizen of a country which is not an enemy, continue
to remain vested in the Custodian till it is divested by the Central Government.
Explanation.—For the purpose of this section, “enemy property vested in the
Custodian” shall include all titles, rights and interest in, or any benefit arising out of,
such property vested in him under the Act.’.
3. After section 5 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted and shall
be deemed to have been inserted, namely:—
“5A. The Custodian may, after making such inquiry as he deems necessary, by
an order, declare that the property of the enemy or the enemy subject or the enemy
firm described in the order, vests in him under this Act and issue a certificate to this
effect and such certificate shall be the evidence of the facts stated therein.”.
4. On and from the date of commencement of the principal Act, in section 6, the
following Explanation shall be inserted and shall be deemed to have been inserted, namely:—
“Explanation.—For the removal of doubts, it is herby declared that for the
purposes of this section, the transfer of any enemy property shall not include any
transfer or any claim of transfer made,—
(a) through oral will or oral gift; or
(b) by concealment of enemy nationality; or
(c) in case the transfer of such property requires the permission of the Reserve
Bank of India or any other competent authority, without such permission; or
(d) without the permission of the Custodian.”.
5. In section 8 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),—
(a) after clause (i), the following clause shall be inserted and shall be deemed to
have been inserted, namely:—
“(ia) fix and collect the rent, standard rent, lease rent, licence fee or usage
charges, as the case may be, in respect of enemy property;”;
(b) after clause (iv), the following clause shall be inserted and shall be deemed
to have been inserted, namely:—
“(iva) secure vacant possession of the enemy property by evicting the
unauthorised or illegal occupant or trespasser and remove unauthorised or
illegal constructions, if any;”.
6. After section 10 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted and
shall be deemed to have been inserted, namely:—
“10A. (1) Where the Custodian proposes to sell any enemy immovable property
vested in him, as referred to in section 8, to any person, he may, on receipt of the sale
proceeds of such property, issue a certificate of sale in favour of such person and
such certificate of sale shall, notwithstanding the fact that the original title deeds of
the property have not been handed over to the transferee, be valid and conclusive
proof of ownership of such property by such person.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force,
the certificate of sale, referred to in sub-section (1), issued by the Custodian shall be
a valid instrument for the registration of the property in favour of the transferee and
the registration in respect of enemy property for which such certificate of sale had
been issued by the Custodian, shall not be refused on the ground of lack of original
title deeds in respect of such property or for any such other reason.”.
Insertion of
new section
5A.
Issue of
certificate by
Custodian.
Amendment
of section 6.
Amendment
of section 8.
Insertion of
new section
10A.
Transfer of
immovable
property
belonging to
enemy.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
7. In section 11 of the principal Act, after sub-section (2), the following sub-section
shall be inserted and shall be deemed to have been inserted, namely:—
“(3) The Custodian, Deputy Custodian or Assistant Custodian shall have, for
the purposes of exercising powers or discharging his functions under this Act, the
same powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908,
while dealing with any case under this Act, in respect of the following matters,
namely:—
(a) requiring the discovery and inspection of documents;
(b) enforcing the attendance of any person, including any officer dealing
with land, revenue and registration matters, banking officer or officer of a
company and examining him on oath;
(c) compelling, the production of books, documents and other records;
and
(d) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or decuments.”.
8. In section 17 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the words “two per centum”,
at both the places where they occur, the words “five per centum” shall be substituted and
shall be deemed to have been substituted.
9. For section 18 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted and
shall be deemed to have been substituted, namely:—
“18. The Central Government may, by general or special order, direct that any
enemy property vested in the Custodian under this Act and remaining with him shall
be divested from him and be returned, in such manner, as may be prescribed, to the
owner thereof or, if the owner is dead, to any lawful heir of the owner in accordance
with the law of succession applicable to that owner, as may be specified in the direction,
and thereupon such property shall cease to vest in the Custodian and shall revest in
such owner or heir:
Provided that any person, claiming to be the lawful heir of the owner, shall
obtain a succession certificate or a declaration to the effect that he is the lawful heir
of the owner from a court of competent jurisdiction in a civil proceeding instituted for
that purpose and the Central Government shall ordinarily accept such certificate or
declaration, as the case may be.”.
10. On and from the date of commencement of the principal Act, after section 18, the
following section shall be inserted and shall be deemed to have been inserted, namely:—
“18A. Any income received in respect of the enemy property by the Custodian
shall not, notwithstanding that such property had been divested or transferred to any
other person, be returned or liable to be returned to such person or any other person
unless so directed by order, by the Central Government.”.
11. After section 18A of the principal Act, [as so insertred by section 10], the following
sections shall be inserted and shall be deemed to have been inserted, namely:—
“18B. No court shall have jurisdiction to order divestment from the Custodian
of enemy property vested in him under this Act or direct the Central Government to
divest such property from the Custodian.
Expalantion.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the courts
shall have jurisdiction to adjudicate whether the property claimed to be vested in the
Custodian is an enemy property or not.
Amendment
of section 11.
5 of 1908.
Amendment
of section 17.
Substitution
of new section
for section
18.
Divesting of
enemy
property
vested in
Custodian to
owner or his
legal heir in
certain cases.
Insertion of
new section
18A.
Income not
liable to be
returned.
Insertion of
new sections
18B and 18C.
Bar of
jurisdiction of
courts in
matters of
divesting.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

4
18C. The Central Government may, by general or special order, direct that any or
all enemy property vested in the Custodian under this Act shall be sold or disposed
of in such manner as may be prescribed.”.
12. On and from the date on which the Enemy Property (Amendment and V alidation)
Second Bill, 2010 receives the assent of the President, in section 20 of the principal Act, in
sub-section ( 3), for the words “five hundred rupees”, the words “ten thousand rupees”
shall be substituted.
13. In section 23 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), after clause (d), the following
clause shall be inserted and shall be deemed to have been inserted, namely:—
“(da) the manner of sale or disposal of the enemy property vested in the
Custodian under section 18C;”.
14. After section 25 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted and
shall be deemed to have been inserted, namely:—
“26. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any judgment, decree or order
of any court, tribunal or other authority,—
(a) the provisions of this Act, as amended by the Enemy Property
(Amendment and Validation) Second Act, 2010, shall have and shall be deemed
always to have effect for all purposes as if the provisions of this Act, as amended
by the said Act had been in force at all material times;
(b) any enemy property divested from the Custodian to any person under
the provisions of this Act, as it stood immediately before the commencement of
the Enemy Property (Amendment and V alidation) Second Act, 2010 shall stand
transferred to and vest or continue to vest, free from all encumbrances, in the
Custodian in the same manner as it was vested in the Custodian before such
divesting of enemy property under the provisions of this Act, as if the provisions
of this Act, as amended by the aforesaid Act, were in force at all material times:
Provided that if the Central Government had, before the commencement
of the Enemy Property (Amendment and Validation) Second Act, 2010, made
any order under section 18, as it stood before such commencement, and the
property had been returned to the owner or such other person, such property
shall, notwithstanding anything contained in this clause, continue to vest in
the owner or such other person, as the case may be:
Provided further that if any enemy property had been otherwise divested
from the Custodian (by an order of a court or without any direction under
section 18) and returned to the owner or his lawful heir before the commencement
of the Enemy Property (Amendment and V alidation) Second Act, 2010,—
(i) in a case where the owner or the lawful heir, as the case may be,
is a citizen of India by birth, such property shall, notwithstanding anything
contained in this clause, continue to vest in such owner or the lawful heir,
if the owner or the lawful heir, as the case may be, furnishes, within six
months from the day on which the Enemy Property (Amendment and
Validation) Second Bill, 2010 receives the assent of the President, evidence
to the satisfaction of the Central Government that he is a  citizen of India
by birth and, in the case of lawful heir, he is the lawful heir of the owner in
accordance with the law of succession applicable to the owner; or
(ii) in any other case, if the Central Government is satisfied, after
causing to be held such inquiry as it deems fit, that the property had been
Disposal of
enemy
property
vested in
custodian by
Central
Government.
Amendment
of section 20.
Amendment
of section 23.
Insertion of
new section
26.
Validation.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

5
returned to the owner or his lawful heir, it shall, notwithstanding anything
contained in this clause, issue a direction under section 18 to the effect
that such property shall  revest in the owner or his lawful heir, as the case
may be;
(c) no suit or other proceedings shall, without prejudice to the
generality of the foregoing provisions, be maintained or continued in any
court or tribunal or authority for the enforcement of any decree or order
or direction given by such court or tribunal or authority directing
divestment of enemy property from the Custodian vested in him under
section 5 of this Act, as it stood before the commencement of the Enemy
Property (Amendment and Validation) Second Act, 2010, and such enemy
property shall continue to vest in the Custodian under section 5 of this
Act, as amended by the aforesaid Act, as if the said section, as amended
by the aforesaid Act was always in force at all material time;
(d) any transfer of any enemy property, vested in the Custodian, by
virtue of any order of attachment, seizure or sale in execution of decree of
a civil court or orders of any tribunal or other authority in respect of
enemy property vested in the Custodian which is contrary to the
provisions of this Act, as amended by the Enemy Property (Amendment
and V alidation) Second Act, 2010, shall be deemed to be null and void and
notwithstanding such transfer, continue to vest in the Custodian under
this Act.
(2) Nothing contained in this Act shall affect any claim made by any person
before any court or other authority against the owner or his lawful heir to whom the
property was or may be returned under this Act and such claim shall be decided in
accordance with law by the court or other authority, as the case may be.”.
15. In the Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1971,—
(a) in section 2, in clause (e), after sub-clause (3), the following sub-clause shall
be inserted and shall be deemed to have been inserted, namely:—
“(4) any premises of the enemy property as defined in clause (c) of section
2 of the Enemy Property Act, 1968.”;
(b) in section 3, in clause (a),—
(i) in the second proviso, the word “and” shall be omitted and shall be
deemed to have been omitted;
(ii) after the second proviso, the following proviso shall be inserted and
shall be deemed to have been inserted, namely:—
“Provided also that the Custodian, Deputy Custodian and Assistant
Custodian of the enemy property appointed under section 3 of the Enemy
Property Act, 1968 shall be deemed to have been appointed as the Estate
Officer in respect of those enemy property, being the public premises,
referred to in sub-clause (4) of clause (e) of section 2 of this Act for which
they had been appointed as the Custodian, Deputy Custodian and
Assistant Custodian under section 3 of the Enemy Property Act, 1968.”.
16. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act during the
period beginning on the date on which the Enemy Property (Amendment and V alidation)
Ordinance, 2010 ceased to operate and ending immediately before the date on which the
Enemy Property (Amendment and V alidation) Second Bill, 2010 receives the assent of the
President, the Central Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make
such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of the Enemy Property Act, 1968, or
Amendment
of sections 2
and 3 of Act
40 of 1971.
34 of 1968.
Power of
Central
Government
to make
transitional
provisions.
34 of 1968.
Ord. 4 of
2010.
34 of 1968.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

6
the Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1971, as amended by this
Act, as may appear to be necessary for removing the difficulty during the said period:
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of six
months from the date on which the Enemy Property (Amendment and V alidation) Second
Bill, 2010 receives the assent of the President.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is
made, before each House of Parliament.
17. Notwithstanding the cessation of the operation of the Enemy Property
(Amendment and V alidation) Ordinance, 2010, anything done or any action taken under the
Enemy Property Act, 1968, or the Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants)
Act, 1971, as amended by this Act, shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the
corresponding provisions of those Acts, as amended by this Act.
4 of 1971.
Ord. 4 of 2010.
34 of 1968.
40 of 1971.
Savings.
5
10

7
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS  AND REASONS
The Enemy Property Act, 1968 was enacted on the 20th August, 1968 to, inter alia,
provide for the continued vesting of enemy property vested in the Custodian of Enemy
Property for India under the Defence of India Rules, 1962 and for matters connected therewith.
2. Of late, there have been a number of  judgments by various courts that have
adversely affected the powers of the Custodian and the Government of India as provided
under the Enemy Property Act, 1968. In view of such interpretation by the courts, the
Custodian has been finding it difficult to sustain his actions under the Enemy Property Act,
1968.
3. In the above circumstances, it had become necessary to amend the Enemy Property
Act, 1968,  with retrospective effect  to, inter alia, clarify the legislative intention. Accordingly,
the Enemy Property (Amendment and V alidation) Ordinance, 2010 was promulgated on the
2nd day of July, 2010, providing—
(a) that the enemy property shall continue to vest in the Custodian till it is
divested by the Central Government, even if the enemy subject or enemy firm ceases
to be enemy due to death, extinction, winding up of business or change of nationality
or that the legal heir or successor is a citizen of India or a citizen of a country which is
not an enemy;
(b) to authorise the Custodian, after making such enquiry as he deems  necessary,
to declare that the property of the enemy or the enemy subject or  the enemy firm vest
in him under the aforesaid Act and issue a certificate to that effect which would be
evidence of the facts stated therein;
(c) that the transfer of any enemy property shall not include any transfer, or any
claim of transfer,  made through oral will or oral gift, or,  by concealment of enemy
nationality, or,  in case the transfer of such property requires the permission of the
Reserve Bank of India or any other competent authority, any transfer without such
permission,  or,  without the permission of the Custodian;
(d) that no court shall have jurisdiction to order divestment from the Custodian
of the enemy property vested in him under the aforesaid Act or direct the Central
Government to divest such property from the Custodian, but the court shall have
jurisdiction to adjudicate whether the property claimed to be vested in the Custodian
is an enemy property or not;
(e) to authorise the Central Government to direct that any or all enemy property
vested in the Custodian under the aforesaid Act shall be sold or disposed of in such
manner as may be prescribed;
(f) that any transfer or any other action taken contrary to the provisions of the
aforesaid Act, as amended by the proposed legislation, would be null and void.
4. In order to have speedy and effective eviction of unauthorised occupants from the
enemy property under the Custodian, the Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised
Occupants) Act, 1971 was also amended by the aforesaid Ordinance so as to declare the
Custodian, Deputy Custodian and Assistant Custodian of enemy property appointed under
the  Enemy Property Act, 1968 as ‘‘Estate Officer’’ in respect of the enemy properties.
5. Further, the Enemy Property (Amendment and Validation) Bill, 2010 was introduced
in the Lok Sabha on the 2nd August, 2010 to replace the Ordinance. This Bill was not
passed by the House of the People. Consequently, the Enemy Property (Amendment and
V alidation) Ordinance, 2010  lapsed on  6th September, 2010.

8
6. It is proposed to withdraw, with the leave of the House,  the aforesaid Bill and to
introduce a fresh Bill titled as “the Enemy Property (Amendment and V alidation) Second
Bill, 2010’’ which, inter alia, provides for the following, in addition to the provisions
mentioned in paragraphs 3 and 4  above, namely:—
(a) that the enemy property will be divested only to the owner or, if the owner is
dead, to any lawful heir and that the claimant shall have to establish, in accordance
with the law, that he is the lawful  heir;
(b) that any enemy property divested from the Custodian to any person under
the provisions of the Enemy Property Act, 1968, as it stood immediately before
2nd July, 2010, shall stand transferred to and vest or continue to vest, free from all
encumbrances, in the Custodian. If, however, the enemy property had been divested
from the Custodian by a valid order made under section 18  prior to 2nd July, 2010 or
where the property had been returned to the owner or his lawful heir by an order of a
court and the Government is satisfied that the property was returned to the owner or
the lawful heir, such enemy property would continue to remain with such persons;
(c) that  nothing contained in this Act shall affect the claim made by any person
before any court or other authority against the owner or his lawful heir to whom the
property was or  may be returned under this Act and such claim shall be decided in
accordance with law by the court or other authority, as the case be;
(d) to empower the Central Government to issue appropriate orders, within a
period of six months from the date on which the proposed legislation receives the
assent of the President, to remove any difficulty which may arise in giving effect to
the provisions of the Act durign the period beginning on the date on which the
Enemy Property (Amendment and V alidation) Ordinance, 2010 ceased to operate and
ending immediately before the date on which the Enemy Property (Amendment and
V alidation) Second Bill, 2010 receives the assent of the President;
(e) to provide that anything done or any action taken under the Enemy Property
Act, 1968, or the Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1971, as
amended by the proposed legislation, shall be deemed to have been done or taken
under the corresponding provisions of those Acts, as  amended by the proposed
legislation.
7. The amendments will come into force from the 2nd day of July, 2010 unless otherwise
provided.
8. The Bill seeks to achieve the aforesaid objects.
N
EW DELHI; P. CHIDAMBARAM.
The 3rd November, 2010.

9
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 11 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section 18C which empowers the Central
Government to make rules relating to the manner in which the enemy property shall be sold
or disposed.
2. The matters in respect of which rules may be made are matters of procedure and
administrative details and it is not practicable to provide for them in the Bill itself. The
delegation of legislative powers is, therefore, of a normal character.

10
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE ENEMY PROPERTY ACT, 1968
(34 OF 1968)
* * * * *
6. Where any property vested in the Custodian under this Act has been transferred,
whether before or after the commencement of this Act, by an enemy or an enemy subject or
an enemy firm and where it appears to the Central Government that such transfer is injurious
to the public interest or was made with a view to evading or defeating the vesting of the
property in the Custodian, then, the Central Government may, after giving a reasonable
opportunity to the transferee to be heard in the matter, by order, declare such transfer to be
void and on the making of such order, the property shall continue to vest or be deemed to
vest in the Custodian.
17. (1) There shall be levied by the Custodian fees equal to two per centum of—
(a) the amount of moneys paid to him;
(b) the proceeds of the sale or transfer of any property which has been vested
in him under this Act; and
(c) the value of the residual property, if any, at the time of its transfer to the
original owner or other person specified by the Central Government under section 18:
Provided that in the case of an enemy whose property is allowed by the Custodian to
be managed by some person specially authorised in that behalf, there shall be levied a fee
of two per centum of the gross income of the enemy or such less fee as may be specifically
fixed by the Central Government after taking into consideration the cost of direct management
incurred by that Government, the cost of superior supervision and any risks that may be
incurred by that Government in respect of the management:
Provided further that the Central Government may, for reasons to be recorded in
writing, reduce or remit the fees leviable under this sub-section in any special case or class
of cases.
Explanation.—In this sub-section “gross income of the enemy” means income derived
out of the properties of the enemy vested in the Custodain under this Act.
* * * * *
18. The Central Government may, by general or special order, direct that any enemy
property vested in the Custodian under this Act and remaining with him shall be divested
from him and be returned, in such manner as may be prescribed to the owner thereof or to
such other person as may be specified in the direction and thereupon such property shall
cease to vest in the Custodian and shall revest in such owner or other person.
20. (1) * * * * *
(3) If any person fails to comply with a requisition made by the Custodian under sub-
section (1) or sub-section ( 2) of section 11, he shall be punishable with fine which may
extend to five hundred rupees.
* * * * *
Levy of fees.
Penalty.
Transfer of
property
vested in
Custodian by
enemy on
enemy subject
or enemy
firm.
Divesting of
enemy
property
vested in the
Custodian.

11
EXTRACT FROM THE PUBLIC PREMISES (EVICTION OF UNAUTHORISED OCCUPANTS) ACT, 1971
(40 OF 1971)
* * * * *
3. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,—
(a) appoint such persons, being gazetted officers of Government or of the
Government of any Union territory or officers of equivalent rank of the statutory
authority, as it thinks fit, to be estate offic ers for the purposes of this Act:
Provided that no officer of the Secretariat of the Rajya Sabha shall be so
appointed except after consultation with the Chairman of the Rajya Sabha and no
officer of the Secretariat of the Lok Sabha shall be so appointed except after
consultation with the Speaker of the Lok Sabha:
Provided further that an officer of a statutory authority shall only be appointed
as an estate officer in respect of the public premises controlled by that authority; and
* * * * *
Appointment
of estate
officers.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Enemy Property Act, 1968 and the Public Premises (Eviction of
Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1971.
————
(Shri P. Chidambaram, Minister of Home Affairs)
GMGIPMRND—5061LS(S3)—09.11.2010.