Bill No. 124 or 1"2 
THE EMERGENCY RISKS (GOODS) 
INSURANCE BILL, 1962 
(As INTRODUCED IN Lox SABHA 
ON STII DECEMBER, 1962) 

Bill No. 121 01 I"Z 
THE EMERGENCY RISKS (GOODS) INSURANCE 
BILL, 1962 . 
(As INTRODUCED IN Lox: SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
to 9M1ce certain provisions fM the insurance of goods in India againat 
damage by enemy action during the period of emergency. 
Bz it enacted by Parliament in the Thirteenth Year of the Re-
public of India as follows:-
CHAPrER I 
PRELIMINARY 
, ,. (1) This Act may be called the Emergency 
Insurance Act, 1962. 
Risks (Gooda) Short IidM 
ateDcaad 
dortlUe .. 
(!) It extends to the Whole of India. 
(3) It shall remain in force during the period of operation of the 
Proclamation of Emergency issued on the 26th October, 1962 and 
10 for such further period as the Central Government may, by notifica-
tion in the Official Gazette, declare to be the period of emergency 
for the purposes of this Act, but its expiry shall not affect anything 
done or omitted to be done before such expiry and section 6 of the 
10 of .197· General Clauses Act, 1897, shall apply upon the expiry of this Act 
I~ as if it had been repealed by a Central Act. 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "enemy" means--
(i) any person or country committing external aggres-
lion against India; 
Dehiti .... 

(ii) any person belonging to a country committing such 
aggression; 
(iii) such other country as may be declared by the Cen-
tral Government to be assisting the country committing 
such aggression; ! S 
(iv) any person belonging to such other country; 
(b) IIgoods" means any materials, commodities or articles 
and includes materials, commodities or articles used in or for 
the construction of any ship up to the time at which the ship 
after construction is launched; 10 
(c) "Scheme" means the Emergency Risks (Goods) Insu-
rance Scheme made under this Act; 
(d) "seller of goods" includes a seller of goods acting as 
an agent; , 
(e) IIsupplier of goods" means a person carrying on a IS 
business in ·the course of which he supplies goods for the pur-
pose of, or in pursuance of, contracts made by him for work, 
labour and materials; i 
(I) "emergency risks" means such risks arising from"':::' 
(i) action taken by an enemy or action taken in com- 20 
bating an enemy or in repelling an imagined attack by an 
enemy; 
(ii) any explosion or fire which involves explosives or 
munitions or other dangerous things required for the pur-
poses of defence against any action of an enemy and which 2S 
happens or is caused by, through, or in connection with, 
the manufacture, storage or transportation of· any such ex-
plosives, munitions or other dangerous things; . 
(iii) measures taken under proper authority to avoi~ 
the spreading of, or otherwise to mitigate, the consequen- 30 
ces of damage occurring (whether accidentally or not) ,as 
a direct result of any such action as is described Jnsuh-
clause (i) or of any such explosion or fire as is described 
in sub-clause (ii); 
(iv) precautionary or preparatory measures taken 35 
under proper authority with a view to preventing or hinde-
ring the carrying out of any attack by an enemy, being 
measures involving a substantial degree of. risk to pro-
perty; 

3 
(v) precautionary or preparatory measures involving 
the doing of work on land and taken under proper autho-
rity in any way in anticipation of enemy action, being 
measures involving a substantial degree of risk to pro-
perty; 
(vi) precautionary or preparatory measures taken 
under proper authority with a view to denying facilities 
to an enemy, being measures involving a substantial 
. degree of damage to or diminution of value of property. 
)0 CHAPTER II 
INSURABLE GOODS AND INSURANCE SCHEME 
3. (1) Subject to the provisions of this section, the following Goods iDaur-
goods shall, in relation to any person carrying on business ~Ie ;oder 
in India as a seller or supplier of goods of any description, e ct, 
.J S be deemed to be goods insurable under this Act, that is to say, all 
good$ situated in India or, consigned from one place in India to 
anoth.er place in India and in transit, being either-
(i) goods of that description, or 
(ii) goods used as material from which goods of that des-
20 . cription are produced or as ingredients or component parts of 
goods of that description: 
35 
Provided that no goods shall be deemed to be insurable under 
this Act-
.' - . (a) fn relation to any person, being the owner of the goods, 
who carries on business as a seller of goods, unless they are 
.owned by him with a view to being sold, or to being used as 
m~terial for the production of goods to be sold, or as ingredients 
or component parts of goods to be sold; 
(b) in relation to any person, being the owner of the goods, 
who oorries on business as a supplier of goods, unless they are 
owhed by him with a view to being supplied for the purpose of, 
-or in pursuance of, a contract made by him for work, labour 
and materials or to being used as material for the production 
-of goods to be supplied as aforesaid, or as ingredients or compo-
.nent parts of goods to be supplied. . 
(2) The Central Government may, by notification in the omcial 
Gazette, direct that goods of any description specified in the not~iica­
tion shall, _ notwithstanding anything contained in this section. h~ 
deemed not to be good~ ~nsu.ra1?l~ under this Act, 

4 
(3) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall apply in relation to goodl 
which are owned by Government or in respect of which the GoY-
ernment is the seller or supplier. 
4.. (1) Save in so far as is otherwise expressly provided in tht. 
Act, any goods, shall, subject to the provisions of this lecticm, be' 
deemed for the purposes of this Act to be owned,-
(a) if the property in the goods is for the time being ftlte4 
in a person in relation to whom they are insurable under thII 
Act, by that person; 
(b) if the property in the goods is not so vested, by any 10 
person in relation to whom the goods are insurable under thIa 
Act and who is for the time being entitled, either unconditional-
ly or conditionally, to have the property in the goods vested in 
him: 
Provided that where-
(i) any goods would, under the foregoing provisions of thtt 
section, be deemed to be owned by a person in whom the pr0-
perty therein is vested otherwise than in the course of a busi-
ness carried on by him in India, or who is entitled to have the 
property therein vested in him otherwise than in the course of 30 
such a business, and 
(ii) any person carrying on business in India II for the 
time being entitled to sell the goods as agent, 
the goods shall be deemed to be owned by the last mentioned per-
8011. a, 
(2) Where in the course of any business a ship is being, or hu 
been, constructed under contract, and the ship or any part thereof 
or any goods appropriated for the construction thereof-
(a) would, apart from the provisions of this sub-section, 
have been deemed for the purposes of this Act to be owned at ,0 
any time by the person from time to time carrying on the busi-
ness, or 
(b) have at any time been accepted, in pursuanee of a 
contract made with him, by the person from time to time ear-
rying on the business, 3' 
. 
then, notwithstanding that they would not, apart from the said ~ 
visions, be deemed for the said purposes to be owned by the perlOn 

, 
from time to time carrying on the business, the ship and any part 
thereof and any goods so appropriated as aforesaid shall, subject 
to the provisions of sub-section (3), be deemed, in 6 case to which 
clause (a) of this sub-section applies, to continue to be owned by 
5 the person from time to time carrying on the business until the 
acceptance of the ship, in pursuance of the contract in question, by 
the person for whom it is being or has been, constructed, and in a 
case. to which clause (b) of this sub-section applies, to be owned 
by the person from time to time carrying on the business at all 
10 times between the acceptance referred to in the said clause (b) 
and the acceptance of the ship as aforesaid by the person for whom 
it is being, or has been, constructed. 
(3) The provisions of sub-section (2) shall apply in relation to 
the construction under contract in the course of a business of part 
IS of a ship, not being part of a ship which is being, or has been, cons-
tructed by the person from time to time oarrying on the business, 
as they apply in relation to the construction of a ship-
(a) with the substitution for references to a ship of re-
ferences to part of a ship; 
20 (b) where the contract for the part of the ship is with the 
person for whom the ship is being constructed, with the substi-
tution for reference~ to the acceptance of the ship under the 
contract in question of references to the acceptance of the ship 
under the contract for the construction thereof; 
25 (c) where the contract for the part of the ship is with any 
other person, with the substitution for references to the accep-
tance of the ship under the contract in question of references to 
the acceptance of the part of the ship under the contract for the 
construction of the part by the person for whom it is being, or 
30 has been, constructed. 
(4) Where the person from time to time carrying on a business 
receives any money, under a policy issued in pursuance of the 
. Scheme, in respect of the loss of or damage to a ship, part of a ship 
or' goods which are deemed to be owned by him by virtue of sub-
35 section (2) or sub-section (3), the money shall be held by him on 
trust for the person who, apart from the provisions of those sub-
sections, wo~ld be deemed for the purposes of this Act to be the 
. owner of the ship, part or goods, subject, however, to any lien or 
charge which would otherwise be enforceable against the ship, part 
40 or goods and subject also to the right to retain out of the money the 
amount· of any expenSes reasonably iRcurred by the first mentioned 

6 
l,>erson in making good any part of the loss or damage which he. is 
liable to make good. 
~rgenc:y 5. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
f,;.:da) Gazette, put into operation a scheme to be called the Emergency 
Scheme. Risks (Goods) Insurance Scheme, whereby the Central Government S 
undertakes in relation to persons carrying on business in India as 
sellers or suppliers of goods, the liability of insurance of such persons 
against emergency risks, to the extent provided by or under this Act, 
in respect of goods insurable under this Act which are from time to 
time ownpd by such persons in the course of such business. 10 
(2) The Scheme may also extend-
(a) to the undertaking by the Central Government in 
relation to any person carrying on business in India as seller or 
supplier of goods, of the liability of insuring such a person 
against emergency risks in respect of goods insurable under this IS 
Act which are not owned by him but in which he has an interest 
arising in the course of that business; 
(b) without prejudice to the provisions of clause (a) of this 
sub-section, to the undertaking by the Central Government, in 
relation to a person carrying on any business in India, of the ZO 
liability of insuring such a person agaj~st emergency risks' in 
respect of-
(i) any goods situated in India which are in his posses-
sion, otherwise than under a hire purchase agreement, for 
the purposes of that business, 25 
(ii) any goods situated in India which are subject to a 
mortgage, pledge or charge in his favour held by him in the 
course of that business, 
being in either case goods which are not owned by him but 
which are insurable under this Act in relation to the person .. by 30 
whom they are owned; 
(c). to the undertaking by the Central Government, in re-
lation to a person carrying on any business in India, of the 
liability of insuring such person against emergency risks in res-
pect of any goods situated in India, which· having been sold in 35 
India, for export from India, are in his possession for the purpose 
.of such export and are goods which were prior to such sale in-
surable under this Act in relation to the person by whom they 
were then owned; . 

S 
10 
IS 
(d) to the undertaking by the Central Government, in ~ 
lation to any person carrying on any business in India as a sellet 
or supplier of goods, of the liability of insuring such a person 
ag&inat emergency risks in respect of goods imported into India 
through any port of India, while such goods are situated at such 
port or are in transit to a place in India . 
. (3) The Scheme shall be such as to secure-
(a) that the liability of the Central Government as insurer 
shall not extend to more than eighty per cent. of the insurable 
value of the property ins\H'able; 
(b) that any liability of the Central Government as insurer 
under the Scheme is determined by a policy of insurance 1ssued, 
in the form and in respect of a period not exceeding the period 
specified in the Scheme, by a person acting on behalf of the 
Central Government: 
Provided that the form of policy may be such as to limit the 
extent and nature of the indemnity provided by the Central 
Government and to impose conditions subject to which the in-
demnity is provided; 
20 (c) that any premium under a policy so issued is payable at 
such rate as may, for the time being, be specified in the Scheme; 
and 
(d) that the amount of anyone premium payable under a 
policy so issued is not less than such sum as may be specified in 
2S the Scheme. 
(4) Different forms of policies may be specified under sub-section 
(3) in relation to different descriptions of goods. 
(5) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
'Gazette, add to, amend or vary any Scheme made under this Act. 
30 6. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official &1plopDeJlt 
. Gazette, employ or authorise the employment of any person to act ~!f:~o~ 
as its agent for any of the purposes of this Act and may pay to the crnmcnt. 
person so employed such remuneration as it may think fit. 
CHAPTER III 
.H COMPULSORY INSURANCE 
7. (1) While the Scheme is in operation, no person shall, after !.'!~!rto 
u ....... lnaur-
~ Nch· date as may be specified in this behalf by the Central Govern- ante com-
ment by notification in the Official Gazette, carry on any business in puIaory. 

India as a seller or supplier of goods, unless, in respect of any gooda 
insurable under this Act which are for the time being owned by him 
in the course of that business, there is in force a policy of insurance 
against emergency risks issued in accordance with the Scheme, 
whereby he is insured in respect of such goods for a sum not less than , 
the value thereof for the time being: 
Provided that the Scheme shall not restrict the carrying on of 
business as aforesaid by any person, if and so long as the value of all 
goods insurable under this Act which are for the time being owned 
by him within one and the same Presidency town or district in the 10 
course of that business does not exceed fifty thousand rupees. 
(2) Whoever contravenes the provisions of this section shall be 
punishable with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees and 
with further fine which may extend to five hundred rupees for every 
day after the first on which the contravention continues. I' 
Oml .. ion to 8. (1) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (2) of 
::~~: ~~ t~o section 7, where any person has failed to insure as, or to the full 
the fuU amount, required by this Act, and has thereby evaded the payment 
amount. by way of premium of any I money which he would have had to pay 
but for such failure, an officer authorised in this behalf by the 20 
Central Government may determine the amount payment of which 
has been so evaded and the amount so determined shall be payable 
by such person and shall be recoverable from him as an arrear of 
land revenue and shall be a first charge on the goods in respect of 
which the' default was made. 25 
(2) A person against whom ~ determination is made under sub-
section (1) may, within the period specified in tha Scheme, appeal 
against such determination to the Central Government whose de-
cision thereon shall be final. . 
Resbicti'?D' 9. (1) After the date on which the Scheme is put into operation, 30 
: :rrz:!fn no person shall, except as a person authorised by the Central Gov-
insurance ernment as its agent to issue policies in pursuance of the Scheme, 
buaineaa. carry on any business of insuring persons carrying on business in 
India as sellers or suppliers of goods against emergency risks in res-
pect of goods insurable under this Act which are from time to time 3' 
owned by such persons in the course of such business as is last men-
tioned. 
(2) Whoever contravenes the provisions of sub-section (1) shall 
be punishable with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees 
and with further fine which may extend to one thousand rupees for 40 
every day after the first on which the contravention continues. 

J of 11,1. 
10. (1) The Central Government may, after due appropriation Bme~lency 
made Ity Parliament by law in this behalf, transfer in each .finaDeial = ~~Oda) 
,ear to a fUDd to be called the Emergency Risks (Goods) Insurance Pund. 
Fund (hereinafter referred to as the "Fund") such sums, as llJay be 
~ CODSidered necessary, not exceeding the sums received b)' the, Central 
Government by way of insurance premiums under the Scheme, or 
by way of payments made on composition of offences under section 
15 or by way of expenses or compensation awarded by a court, 
under section 545 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, out 01 
10 any fine imposed in any prosecution under this Act. 
(2) There shall be paid from out of the Fund all sums required 
for the discharge by the Central Government of any of its liabilities . 
. UDder the Scheme or for the payment by the Central Government of 
the remUDeration and expenses of agents employed for the purposes 
I S of the Scheme. . " 
(3) If at any time when a payment is to be made out of the Fund, 
the sum standing to the credit of the Fund is less than the sum ~­
quired for the making of that payment, an amount equal to the deft-
ciency shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law, be 
20 paid into the Fund as an advance out of the Consolidated Flmd of 
India. 
(4) If at any time the amount standing to the credit of. the Fund 
exceeds the sum which, in the opinion of the Central Government, 
is likely to be required for the making of payments out of the Fund, 
2S the excess shall be disposed of in such manner as the Central Gov-
. emment may think fit. 
(5) The Central Government shall prepare, in such fonn and 
manner 8$ may be specified in the Scheme and shall publish either 
annually or at such shorter intervals as may be specified therein; .:n 
30 account of all sums received into and paid (Jut of the Fund. 
CHAPTER IV 
MISCELLANEOUS 
11. (1) AIJ.y person authorised in this behalf by the Central Gov~ Powe· of 
ernment may, for the purposes of ascertaining whether or not the =tC:v-
35 requirements of this Act have been complied with,- ob~in infor-mation. 
(4) require any person carrying on in India the business of 
fire insurance or of a seller or supplier of goods to submit t5 him 
IUch accounts, books or other documents or to' fUrnish to him 
such information as he may reasonably think necessary,' or 
2276 (B) LS-2 

(b) at any reasonable time. enter any premises oecupied by 
any penon carrying on in India the business of a seller or sup. 
plies' of goods tor the purposes of that business Rnd may Inspect 
the premises and require any person found therein ~bo il for 
the time being in charge thereof, or in control of the business , 
carried on therein. to produce to him and allow him to examlDe 
weh a~unts, books or other documents as may relate to the 
business carried on in the premises and to furnish to him such 
other information as he may reasonably require for the purpose 
of ascertaining whether or not, and, if so. to what extent, the 10 
person carrying on the business is insured under the Scheme 
in respect of goods owned by him in the course of that busineu, 
and of ascertaining the value of any goods insurable under the 
Scheme which are. or were at any relevant time. owned by him 
in the course of that business and the maximum amount which J' 
would be recoverable in respect of any such goods under a polley 
issued under this Act. 
. (2) Whoever wilfully obstructs any person in the exercise of hi. 
powers under this section or fails without any reasonable excuse to 
l'Omply with a demand made thereunder, shall. in respect of each 20 
occasi~n on which any such obstruction or failure take5 place, be 
P\1l1ishable with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees. 
(3) Whoever, in purporting to comply with his obligations under 
this section, knowingly or recklessly makes a statement· false in a 
material particular, shall be punishable with fine which may extend 2' 
to one thousand :rupees. 
(4) Where in any proceedings in respect of a contravention ot 
... etion 7 in relation to any business, it is proved, in relation to that 
i)usinen-
(cz) that a demand for the production of a policy of huuranee ~o 
i •• ued in accordance with the Scheme insuring the person 
earrying on the business was duly made under this section and 
was not complied with, and 
(b) that the person making the demand was not satisfied 
that there was such a policy in existence, 
it shall be presumed, exeept in so far as the contrary is proved, that 
tb\? said aection 7 was being contravened in relation to that businetl 
at the time when the demand was made and continued to be con-
traveBed in relation to that business at all times thereafter. 

II 
-. ~ ... ,.- :' --... _-,..--
12. If any person, for the purpose of obtaining for himalf or any Punil!-eat 
other person any payment in respect of .any damage due to UteI:he fnr!:! 
aetion of the enemy or under a p'Jlicy issued in purs~DCe of the ~Iion; 
Scheme,-
, (a) furnishes any information which he know:i to be falH 
in a material particular, or recklessly furnishes any information 
which is false in a material particular; or 
(b) with intent to deceive, produces, furnishes, tendl or 
otherwise makes use of any book, account or other document 
10 which it false in a material particular, or 
(c) with intent to deceive, withholds any mate1'"ial informa-
tion, 
he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to Ave thou.and 
rupees, or with imprisonment for a term not exceeding three months. 
IS or with both. 
13. (1) Where goods of any description have been insured by a Retl'~ of. 
seller or supplier of goods for any period, and before that period has =i'~ 
elapsed the goods of that description have ceased, by virtue of a 
notification under sub-section (2) of section 3 to be goods insurable 
20 under this Act, the person who has insured such goods shall be 
entitled to a proportionate refund of the premium. 
(2) No suit shall be maintainable in any civil court againrt the 
Central Government or any person acting as the agent of the Central 
Government under section 6 for the refund of mOMY paid or pur-
25 porting to have been paid as premium in respect of any policy issued 
or purporting to have been issued under this Act. 
14. No prosecution for any offence punishable nnder this Act UmiwtiOft 
shall be instituted against any person except by. or with the consent ::.I"OIeCtI-
of, the Central Government or an authority authorised in this behalf 
)0 by the Central Government. 
15. Any offence punishable under sub-section (2) of section 7, eaa.o.ition 
or aub-seclion (2) of section 9 may. either before or after the institu- of off_. 
tion of the prosecution, be compounded by the Central Government 
or by any authority authorised in this behalf by the Central Go",. 
35 ernment, on payment for credit to the Fund of such sum as the 
Central Government or such authority, as the case may be, thinks ftt 
II. No suit, prosecution, or other legal proeee<iings lhall 1M liar of ill" 
against the Central Government or against any person for anythmc proeeecli ..... 
which is in ,oad faith done or intended to be done under thil Act • ...... . '. 

I2 
PowerJUr.,ri- 17. If any dtfticulty arises in giving effect to the provilionl of 
:uyti:... this Act, and in particular, if any doubt arises as to whether a person 
Is insurable in rE.'spect of any goods under this Act, the Central Gov-
ernment may, by order, make such provision or give such direction, 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be S 
necessary or expedient for the removal of the doubt or difficulty; 
and the order of the Central Government, in such cases, shall be 
final. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
In view of the present emergency, it is considered desirable that 
provision should be made for the insurance of goods against the risk 
of loss or damage as a result of enemy action. As the degree of risk 
which may be involved is necessarily uncertain, it will not ,be p0s-
sible for the established insurers to cover it in the normal course, 
and the scheme will have to be formulated, brought into foree and 
operated. on behalf of the Central Government. 
2. The Bill seeks to provide for a scheme of insurance baaed on 
premium rates which can be varied within certain limits with 
reference to the actual nature or extent of the risk as it may exist 
from time to time. The various provisions are explained in detail 
in the notes on clauses which are attached to the Bill. 
MORARJI DESAI. 
NEW DzLHI; 
The 29th November, 1962. 

Nates on cl4.U8eS 
Cla.tue 1, in effect provides that the Bill, when it is passed into 
law, shall come into force immediately in all the States or territories 
of India including Jammu and Kashmir. The provisions of the Act 
will continue to be in force throughout the period of the present 
emer~ency and for a reasonable period thereafter. 
Cla.use 2 defines the words and expressions used in the Bill, The 
definition of "enemy" in sub-clause (a) .is based I)n the correspond-
ing definition in the Defence of India Bill, 1962. Thp. deftnition of 
"emergency risks" is based mainly on the provisions of the previous 
law as it was in force during the second world waf, and inc:1uc:les 
clam ages caused by explosions or by the adoption of "searched. earth" 
or "denial" policies. 
Cla.use 3 makes it clear that the property insurable under the 
provisions of the Bill will be goods held in India for purposes of sale 
in the course of business, but provides that good!; which are in 
transit from any place in India to any other place in India will, 
throughout the period of such transit. be insurable in accordance 
with the provisions of the Bill. 
Goods belonging to or sold or supplied by Government will not 
be illlUrable. Sub-elause (2) also provides that goods which are 
not normally insurable or which we.re not insured for similar rlsb 
during the last war may be excluded from the list of goods insurable 
under the Scheme. 
Cla.use 4 provides for the ownership of goods, and consequently 
for the liability or obligations in regard to them to be determined 
in the event of doubt. The intention is that if there is anv dUIl-
eulty about determining the question whether goods have ve~ted in 
any penon at the time of insurance, the real owner, or his agent if 
such an agent is entitled to sell the goods, shOUld be the person 
entitled to the rights or liable for the obligations, as the case may be. 
under the various provisions of the Sill. 
Clmue S provides for a scheme of inSUrance of good •. within the 
IeDpe of the proviSions of the Bill, to be prepared and brought into 
fore. by notification at an appropriate stage by the Central Gov-
ern.wnent. It is clarifted for the avoidance of any doubt that persons 

interested in, or entitled to the possession of, any insurable loads 
in the course of their buainess, or persons to whom nny insurable 
.oocia have been pledged, mortgaged, hypothecated. or otherwise 
eharged, may insure the goods, on ,their initiative, in lieu of the 
persons who as the pre6umed owners for the purpolf:s of the Scheme 
may be bound or compelled to insure the goods in the normal coutle. 
Goods which are in the process of being exported from, or Import-
ed into, India will be insurable at the stages at which and for the 
periods for which they are, or become, situated in India. 
The Central Government's liability as the insurer under the 
scheme will be limited in each case to eighty per cent. of the iDlur-
able value of the goods. The policies of insurance will be iuuecl 
for comparatively short peri0d6, the duration of which will be deter-
mined by the Central Government, but the periods of validity will 
be extended from time to time. The premiums will be charged at 
a variable rate, which will be determined from time to time by the 
Central Government aft~~· taking into account the actual degree of 
risk which may be involved. 
Goods will normally be insurable under the Scheme only if tbe 
risk of Joss or damage is considerable vide the note. under clause 7. 
Clause 6 provides for the appointment of an agent to administer 
the scheme on behalf of the Central Government. 
C1aUBe.s 7 and 8.-Clause 7 provides that when a IICheme of insur-
ance is notified and brought into force, every person who in the 
course of his business is a seller of goods will be compelled to insure 
such goods to the extent that they are insurable under the scheme. 
Clause 8 provides for the determination and recovery of any pay. 
ment due to be paid to the Central Government on this account if 
it has been evaded or is in arrears. 
Goods, which being located in any district are of the value ot 
Rs. 50,000 or less, ar~ not compulsorily insurable in accordance with 
the provisions of the Scheme. 
Clause 9 prohibits private insurers from competing with the 
Central Government in regard to the coverage of the abnormal 
emergency risks for which provision is made in the Bill. 
Clause 10 provides for the establishment of an Emergency Riala 
(Goods) Insurance Fund. The fund is intended to be selt.suftleient, 
but provision is being made for the Central Government to advance 
to the fund, it it is temporarily in deficit. any amount which may 

16 
be needed for meeting the expenditure which may be chargeable to 
the fund. If there is ultimately a surplus in the fund, after ~ 
vision has been made for all the obligations to the poUcy.holders, 
appropriate arrangements in regard to the utilisation of the IlUl'plua 
will be made by the Central Government. : 
Clauses 11 and 12.-Clause 11 provides for the grant of power to 
the Central Government to obtain information or to carry out such 
inspections as may be necessary, and Clause 12 provides for penal-
ties for furnishing any false information. 
Clause 13. provides for the refund of premiums in the case of goods 
. which are insurable under the provisions of the Bill at the time that 
a policy of insurance is issued but which are subsequently excluded 
during the currency of the insurance policy from the scope of the 
insurance scheme. 
Clauses 14 to 17 contain the usual provisions in regard to the 
limitation of prosecutions, the composition of offences, bar of legal 
proceedings in respect of action taken in good faith, and power to 
.~ove difficulties, if any. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 10 of the bill provides that an Emergency Risks (Goods) 
Insurance Fund will be established and that an amount not exceed-
ing the amount of the premiums collected under the scheme of 
insurance will be paid into that fund after due appropriation by 
law. The degree of risk as a result .of enemy action is necessarily 
uncertain and a reasonably accurate estimate of the value of the 
property insurable in accordance with the provisions .of the Bill is 
not also available. It is not possible, therefore, to anticipate exactly 
at this stage the rate at which premiums may have to be fixed or the 
amounts receivable on account of the Emergency ~rsk8 (Goods) 
Insurance Fund. It is envisaged, however, that the rate of premium 
may not exceed three fourths of one per cent. of the insurable value 
per quarter, to begin with. It is also expected that the scheme 
may not involve any net burden on the Consolidated Fund of India 
over and above the obligation to transfer to the Emergency Risks 
(Goods) Insurance Fund from out of the Consolidated Fund the 
premiums received under the scheme. 
The Coat of administering the scheme is expected to amount to 
about Rs. 1· 5 lakhs on account of the special ofBcer's organisation. 

MEMORANDUM ON DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Sub-clause (3) of clause (1) provides that the Central Govern-
ment may by notification in the Official Gazette declare that the 
pP.riod of the emergency for the purposes of the Emergency Risks 
(Goods) Insurance Scheme will be extended until some suitable date 
after the expiry of the emergency which has been proclaimed by the 
President under Article 352 of the Constitution. The delegation of 
power to the Central Government for this purpose is unavoidable. 
2. There is no other provision in the Bill which involves any dele-
gation of powers which is not of a routine or Donna! charaeter . 
• 
II 

LOK SARHA 
A 
BILL 
to make certain provisions for the insurance of goods in India 
against damage by enemy action during the period of 
emergency. 
The President has, in pursuance of clauses (I) and (3) of article 
II, of the Constitution of India, reQlIDmended to Lok 
Sabha the introduction and consideration of the Bill. 
M.N. KAUL, 
Secretary. 
(S"" Murarji Desai, 
Min's,. u/ Finance.) 