3 of 1982. 
, . ~s INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA ON 
"1 L ., '" ~ 1992 
BUI No. 124 )' 1982 
,'. THE SUGAR CESS (AMENDMENT) BILL,1982 
A 
BILL " . 
to amend the Sugar Cess Act, 1982. 
BII! it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-third Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
, 
1 .. (1) This Act may be called the S'uga'r Cess (Amendment) Act, 1982. Short 
title 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government and 
:; may, by notitlcation in the Official Gazette, appoint. com-
-' f 
to 
2. In section 3 of the Sugar Cess Act, 1982, in sub-section (1),---: 
(a) for the werth "teD rupees", the words "fifteen rupees" shall 
lie "stitated; 
~ ,.... . 
(0) in the proviso, for the words "flve rupees'-, the words 
~" .. ",pees",~ be substituted. 
. ! : ',,1 
mence. 
ment. 
Amend-
mentof 
sectiob 
3. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
It has been decided by the Government to build and maintain bUft'et" 
stocks of sugar with a view to stabilizing sugar price and the ups anal 
downs in the sugar industry. The salient features of the scheme are as 
follows: 
(a) Initially the size of the buffer ~tocks would be five lakh 
tonnes to be built out of the non-levy sugar. 
(b) The buffer stocks quantity would be' kept as sequestered 
stocks with the sugar mills and the share of each mnt pl'~rated to 
its production. 
(c) For the quantity of buffer stocks, hundred per' ~~'. b~n](.. 
credit W'buld be provided. In addition, the mills would be ~mpen­
sated for holding the buffer stocks by providing to them some &o1&~ 
costs and interest charges. 
(d) Funds would be raised to pay the compensation to the 
sugar mills by providing for the levy of additional cess on sugar. 
Instead of having separate legislation and machinery for the levy of 
such additional cess and the administration of the funds raised thereby, 
it is p~oposed to avail of the provisions of the Sugar Cess Act. W82 and 
the'Sugk DevelOpment Fund Act, 1982 for the purpose by making 
• • suitable amendmen~ therein. 
2. Under the Sugar Cess Act, 1982" cess may be levied on sugar 0)' 
noUpcation at a rate not exceeding ten rupees per quintal and pending; 
the issue of such a notification, such cess is leviable at the ra~ of flvtr. 
rupees per quintal. For the purpose of securing the additional fundS: 
needed in connection with the maintenance of the buffer stocks of sugar, 
it is proposed to increase the maximum rate at' which cess maybe If!vied 
under that Act by notification from rupees ten per quintal 'td rwp:ees 
fifteen per quintal. It is also pr~posed to increase the rate at which 
cess may be levied petii:lfng the issuebf a notification'in that behalf from 
rupees five per quintal to ~pees fourt~n,per quintal. The a94itional 
cess which will be leviod p~' a Ifesult of. theSe arn~dment~ will have a 
marginal effect on the consumer who will be more tlian compensated bv 
the protection he will get. as a result of the maintenance of buffer !\tClC:ka 
of rugal", from-repeated price" flu.ctuations. 
a. The Bill. seeks. to ,achieve, the, apove ,0bjecL 'k 'Provision ,·,lread:Y" 
exists in the Sugar Development Fund Act, 1982 for creditinct ,ptJhe-
Moceeds of the ('ess as reduced bv the cost of collectiDTI to the SUJ{8l" 
Development Fund'. '!'hat Fund wnI be aplied,' fri a~ditfon 'tb, the' 
exiRtinll pnrnoses of rehabilitation I'Inrt mod~;satfon dr su~ar' ta~;. 
etc,. for defravinct some holdinq costs and interest chap~es to the sunr 
mills in connection with the building up and maintenance of buffer 
stock!' of su~r. 
Nr::w DELHI; RAO BTRENDR~ amOlf 
7'he 2nd October. 1982. 

• LOK SABHA 
CORRIGE~M 
to 
THE SUGAR CESS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1982 
(To be/As introduced in Lok Sabh~) 
Page 2. line 1. from the bottom.-
!2£ "aplied" read "applied" 
NEW DELHI: 
October1.l. 1982 
AsvIria-19, 19d4{Saka) 

PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDA'I'r()N'~ UNDER AR!l'tCLE 117 OF THE 
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Co~y o'l letter No. 14.:5/82$:1 (A), dated the. 2nd OCtbber, 1ml! 
from nao Bfrendra Stngtl, Minister of' Agriculture- and- Rtrraf Develop-
ment t(~ the Secretary; LokSabha.] , 
TI\@/ President, ha~nl' beft informed: of' the subjeC!t .. matter of- the· 
Sugar Cess (A:Meadmtnt) Bill; 1912, recommtmds the' introduedoJf( aRdt· 
consideration of' the Bill: irf· Lok SAWa UIIdw' article; 117 (l)·an~ (&)\';01· 
the Consrttutfon. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
The Bill seeks to amend the Sugar Cess Act, 1982 to increase the 
maximum rate at which cess may be levied on sugar by notification under 
the Act from rupees ten per quintal to rupees fifteen per quintal and 
also to increase the rate at which cess may, pending the issue of such 
notification, be levied from rupees five per qUintal to rupees fourteen 
per qUintal. It is estimated that the additional cess which may be col-
lected at the said rate of rupees fourteen per quintal is likely to be of 
the order of about 51 crore rupees. As the cost of collection is being 
calculated as a percentage of the cess collected, and as this percentage 
is not likely to exceed one per cent.. the additional expenditure by way 
of cost of collection may be of the order of rupees 51 lakhs per year. 
2. The Bill does not involve any other expenditure, whether of a 
recurring or non-recurring nature. 
. ... ~; ... 
4 

ImposJ,. 
tim of 
CHa. 
• 
ANNEXURE 
EX'l"RACT FROM THE SUGAR CESS A~, 1982 
(3 OF 1982) 
• • • • 
3. (1) There shall be levied and collected as a cess, for the purposes 
of the Sugar Development Fund Act, 1982, a duty of excise on all sugar 
produced by any sugar factory in India, at such rate not exceeding ten 
:rupees per quintal of sugar, as the Central Government may, by noti-
fic(ltion in the Official Gazette, specify from time tQ time: 
Provided that until such rate is specified by the Central Gover .lment, 
the duty of excise shall be levied and collected at the rate of five rupees 
per quintal of sugar. 
• • • ... • 
. \ 
) 
5 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to amend the Sugar Cels Act, 1982. 
(Roo Bfrmdra Singh, 
Minuter at Agriculture 
cmd Rum Development.) 