1
THE COTTON GROWERS
(REMUNERATIVE PRICE AND WELFARE) BILL, 2009
By
SHRI HANSRAJ GANGARAM AHIR, M.P .
A
BILL
to provide for the remunerative price for the produce of the cotton growers, insurance of
cotton crop free of cost and for their overall welfare and for matters connected
therewith.
B
E  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixtieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Cotton Growers (Remunerative Price and Welfare)
Act, 2009.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “cotton grower” means any person who cultivates cotton; and
(b) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. 124  of 2009
 TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Definitions.
5

2
3. (1) It shall be the duty of the Central Government to procure the entire cotton crop
produced in the country through an agency to be set up for the purpose.
(2) The Central Government shall fix the price of cotton every year after taking into
consideration,—
(i) the increase in the price of cotton seeds, pesticides, fertilizers and other
inputs;
(ii) total investment of the cotton growers; and
(iii) such other factors as may be prescribed.
4. The Central Government shall take all necessary steps to export the surplus cotton
produced during a year in the country.
5. The entire cotton produced by the cotton growers shall be compulsorily insured
free of cost by the Central Government against natural calamities, fall in the yield of
cotton, fall in the price of cotton and such other eventualities as may be prescribed.
6. (1) The Central Government shall set up a fund to be known as the Cotton Growers
Welfare Fund.
(2) The Central Government and the State Governments shall contribute to the
fund in such ratio as may be prescribed.
7. The Cotton Growers Welfare Fund shall be used for the following purposes,
namely:—
(a) to provide financial assistance to cotton growers for purchasing cotton
seeds, pesticides and fertilizers, and in cases of low yields of cotton or loss of their
crops due to rains, storms, floods, hailstorms and drought;
(b) to pay compensation to the next of kin of cotton growers in the event of their
death;
(c) to pay life insurance premium on behalf of the cotton growers;
(d) to provide free health facilities to cotton growers and their families;
(e) to provide assistance to the cotton growers in the event of disability; and
(f) for such other purposes as may be prescribed by the Central Government.
8. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official  Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days,
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if,
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses
agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under
that rule.
Procurement
of cotton and
fixation of its
remunerative
price.
5
Export of
surplus
cotton.
Insurance.
Cotton
Growers
Welfare Fund.
Utilisation of
the Fund.
Power to
make rules.
10
15
20
25
30
35

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Cotton is a commercial crop. It is cultivated in various States in the country. Cotton
growers are facing problems, as they are not getting remunerative price for their produce.
Cotton growing has become a non-profitable agricultural activity due to increase in the
prices of cotton seeds, fertilizers and pesticides and other inputs. But the prices of cotton
produce have not increased in the same proportion. Cotton growers have to go for loans as
the investment in the cultivation has gone up. This has led to the indebtedness of cotton
growers and when they are unable to repay loans they take the extreme step of  committing
suicide.
Moreover, there is no certainty of sale of cotton grown by them. There is a growing
demand of Indian handloom textiles in the world. Therefore, the production of cotton should
be increased. But, due to inadequate remunerative price for cotton, the aggrieved cotton
growers are forced to abandon cotton farming in favour of other crops.
In the State of Maharashtra, the State Government used to procure cotton by giving
bonus under a guarantee. Under that arrangement, the Cotton growers used to get
remunerative price. But now the State Government has discontinued this scheme thereby
compounding the problems of cotton growers.
The Government is required to provide remunerative price and also immediate relief to
cotton growers in the event of natural calamities like storm, heavy rains, drought, hailstorm
and flood so that cotton growers can feel respite. There is an urgent need to enact a law,
which can ensure Government assistance to cotton growers in the event of fall in prices or
damage to their crops. Therefore, setting up of a fund for cotton growers and provision of
insurance scheme for them will certainly prove to be beneficial for them. An agency is also
required to be set up by the Central Government to procure the cotton produce.
The Bill, if enacted, will protect the interests and promote the welfare of the cotton
growers in the country.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI;
November 5, 2009. HANSRAJ GANGARAM AHIR

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for procurement of cotton from cotton growers by an
agency to be set up by the Central Government and fixation of remunerative prices for
cotton by the Central Government. Clause 5 provides for compulsory free insurance by the
Central Government of cotton crop against natural calamities. Clause 6 provides for setting
up of a Cotton Growers Welfare Fund to which the Central Government and the
State Governments shall contribute in such ratio, as may be prescribed.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund
of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about  rupees two thousand crore will
be involved per annum.
A non-recurring annual expenditure of about rupees five hundred crore is also likely
to be involved.
4

5
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill.
As the rules relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of legislative power is of a
normal character.

LOK SABHA
lok sabha————LOK   SA
A
BILL
to provide for the remunerative price for the produce of the cotton growers, insurance of
cotton crop free of cost and for their overall welfare and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Hansraj Gangaram Ahir, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—5021LS(S5)—08-12-2009.