AS INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

, १) aug 200

Bill No. 124 of 2000
THE MERITORIOUS STUDENTS (ASSISTANCE IN HIGHER
STUDIES) BILL, 2000
By
Suet Haniptat CHAUDHARY, M.-P.
A
BILL

to provide for loan facilities to meritorious students for pursuing their higher studies
and for matters connected therewith.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. (7) This Act may be called the Meritorious Students (Assistance in Higher Stud-
ies) Act, 2000.

(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force at once.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:—

(a) “bank” means any nationalised bank and includes any financial institu-
tion which is owned by or under the control of or where fifty one percent of shares
are held by the Central Government or receiving aid from the Central Government;

(b) “higher studies” means and includes courses in medicine, engineering or
management or any professional course in any field or vocation or research in any
field from any recognised college or a university or an institution;

Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.

Definitions.


Banks to
Provide loan to
meritorious
students

Application
for loan,

Amount of
Joan.

‘Terms and
conditions of
sanction and
repayment of
loan,

Power to make
mules,

(c) “meritorious student” means a student who has secured a riinimum of
Seventy-five percent marks in the higher secondary examination; and

(4) “prescribed” means Prescribed by rules made under this Act.

3. All meritorious students shall be provided with loan from the Banks for Pursuing
their higher studies:

Provided that the loan shall be sanctioned only 10 such a student whose family
income from all sources is not more than ten thousand rupees per month.

Explanation:—For the Purpose of this section, “family” means husband, wife and
their dependent children,

4. () Any student who fulfills the provisions of section 3 and who wishes to pursue
higher studies may make an application to the concerned branch of any bank.

(2) An application made under sub-section (/) shall be disposed of within one month
from the date of receipt thereof,

S: (1) The loan shall be payable to the eligible student tll he completes the course
for which the loan is applied for.

(2) The amount of loun Payable shall cover the entire Cost of education which shall

Is

include course fees, study materials, hostel fees, if any, and any other related expenditure”

in connection with the education,

(3) The Bank shall make the Payment directly to the Head of the college or univer-
sily Or institution where the student is studying.

6. (1) The loan shall be given to an eligible student without any security or guaran-
tee:

Provided that the Bank may demand from the student such details and documentary
Proof, as it may deem fit, before sanctioning the loan,

(2) The loan shall be recovered from the students in qual monthly instalments with
simple interest at the rate of five Percent per annum immediately after the student gets a
Job on completion of his study:

Provided that the loan shall be repaid within four years from the date of getting job,

7. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.

20

25

30


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

‘The University Grants Commission has decided to stop the funding of institutions
of higher studies and has asked them to be self-supporting. Consequently, the institutions
have taken recourse to hike in course fees for their sustenance. The meritorious students
who come from the lower income strata of society are unable to afford this hike in fees
and are, therefore, deprived of higher studies. This will have a adverse effect on the nation
building activity.

It is, therefore, necessary that banks extend concessional financial assistance
nominal rate of interest to meritorious students to enable them to pursue their studies
unhindered and contribute to nation building.

The Bill seeks to achieve above objectives.

New ऐसा; HARIBHAI CHAUDHARY
April 18, 2000


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to
ut the purposes of the Bill. These rules will relate to

of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal charac

make rules for carrying

matters of detail only. The delegation
ter.


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

facilities to meritorious st
and for matters conn

10 provide for loan

ected therewith.

(Shri Haribhai Chaudhary, M.P)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—1 SPOLS—28.07-2000,