AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

Bill No. 124 of 1999

THE POPULATION STABILISATION BILL, 1999

By
Dr. ५. Sarosa, M.P.

A

BILL
to provide for population stabilisation measures for promoting small family
norm and for matters connected therewith,
Be itenacted by Parliament in the Fiftieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (J) This Act may be called the Population Stabilisation Act, 1999.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.

(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, —

“appropriate Government" means the Central Government in relation to Union
territories and the State Government in relation to a State.

Short title, extent
and commence-
ment.

Definition.


Limit on
number of
children.

Amendment of
the Representa-
tion of the

People Act,
1951

Incentive for
adopting small
family norm.

Compulsory
subject in
schools.

Age for
marriage

Constitution of
National
population
stabilisation
fund.
Utilisation of
fund.

Persons serving
in Government
offices,
undertakings/
organisation of
Government not
10 have more
than one child

3. Any person—

(a) who has more than one living child shall :
a period of one year from the date of commencement of this Act; and

(6) who has no child on the date of commencement of this Act, shall not
procreate more than one child.

4. After section 8A of the Representation of the People Act, 1951, the following
section shall be inserted, namely:—

“8B. (1) 8 person shall be disqualified if he procreates more than one child:

Provided that the person shall not be disqualified if he, within a period of one year
from the date of commencement of the Population Stabilisation Act, 1999, procreates
another living child and thereby the number of living children of that Person increases to
two. है

(2) The disqualification referred to in sub-section (1) shall not apply in case of
persons having more than one child on the date of commencement of the Population
Stabilisation Act, 1999.

5. If either the husband or the wife in the case of a married couple who have only one
child on the date of commencement of this Act, voluntarily undergoes sterilisation, the
appropriate Government shall provide them with the following benefits, namely:-—

(0 supply of essential commodities such as wheat, milk, sugar, groceries and
such other essential commodities as may be prescribed at concessional rates;

(ii) free education including higher education;
(iii) suitable employment after completion of education; and
(iv) house site at concessional rates.

6. The appropriate Government shall introduce a compulsory subject relating to
population control in all educational institutions for alll children who have attained the
age of fifteen Years irrespective of course they are pursuing.

7. No marriage shall be solemnised between a male who is less than twenty five years
of age and a female who is less than twenty two years of. age.

8. (1) There shall be constituted a fund to be called the National Population
Stablisisation Fund by the Central Government.

(2) The Central Government and every State Government shall contrihute to the
fund in such ratio as may be prescribed.

9. The fund constituted under section 8 shall be utilised for the following purposes,
namely:—

(i) giving of national population stabilisation award to the State Government
or Union territory which has recorded the least population growth during the year,

(ii) giving of award to a person or an organisation which in the opinion of the
Central Goverment has contributed in awakening the public towards ‘importance of
Population stabilisation and adopting of various methods for population control; and

(iii) giving wide publicity through print and electronic media regarding need
for population stabilisation.

10. (7) Any person who is serving in connection with the affairs of the Union Govern-—
ment or in any undertaking or organisation under the control of the Union Government
and who has only on ing child or who has not procreated any child or who is unmarri
on the date of coming into force of this Act, shall give an undertaking that he shall
Procreate more than one living child.



2

(2) Any person violating the provisions of sub-section (1) shall be subject to such
| may be determined by the Central Government

11. Any person who is running his own company, firm, society or corporation, if
lates the provisions of section 3,—

(a) shall not be allowed to avail of any loan or facility of any kind from any
Government company or financial institution;

(b) shall not be entitled to undertake any contract with any financial institu-
tion, Government company of the Central Government; and

(c) shall not be entitled to have facilities of drawing ration from public distri-
bution system and cooking gas from a Government company.

12. Any person violating the provisions of this Act shall be punished with rigorous
isonment for a term which shall one year and with fine which shall be not less than
tupees five thousand.
13. The provisions of this Act shall apply notwithstanding anything contained to
the country in any other law for the time being in force.
14. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the provisions of this Act.

Disincentives for
violation of the
provisions of the
Act.

Punishment for
violation of pro-
visions of the Act.

‘Act to have over-
riding effect.

Power to make
rules.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Itis projected that by the turn of the Century India shall have three out of the ten |
populous cities of the world, and half the population of these cities would be living in
slums under squalid conditions. Actually, without massive public contributions for sewer-
age, water treatment, air pollution control and perspective planning, living conditions in
all urban areas will progressively deteriorate.

The need to accommodate the future needs within the nation's natural capabilities
and resources has given rise to unparallel transformation of human values, social institu-
tions and economic structures. The break-down of civic amenities due to over-crowding,
law and order situation, unemployment and widening of the gap between the haves
have nots has progressively created an explosive situation. Agricultural land holdings are
fast becoming small and uneconomical, the need for housing are far beyond the available
finances and educational facilities are hopelessly inadequate to meet with the existing
demands let alone the future ones. There is no balance between population growth and the
infrastructure and available opportunities. 1

In a world moving towards working out an optimum human carrying capacity of
given regions, based on a population, resource and development inter-relationship in
already densely populated nation like India can hardly expect to achieve a quality of life
by adding further to her numbers.

The provisions of the Bill are, therefore, the most effective method to achieve the
targeted goal.

The laudable goals spelt out in the Directive Principles of State Policy in the Consti-
tution of India can best be achieved if the population explosion is checked. Continuous —
pregnancies badly affect the health of a woman. The population explosion has added to the -
poverty of the people and increases the crime rate also. All round progress made by the
country has almost been brought to nought by this single factor. Every additional child
born above the projected rate of population growth is a liability on the scarce resources |
of the nation. Time has come where taking of some strong measures has become essential
and if such measures are not taken at the earliest the future generations may not forgive us
for this lapse.

The Bill seeks to address to this urgent problem through certain measures.

New DELut; V.SAROJA
November 4, 1999,


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 5 of the Bill provides for certain benefits to be given to those who undergo
sterilisation voluntarily. Clause 6 provides for introduction of compulsory subject relat-
ing to population control in all educational institutions. Clause 8 provides for establish-
ing National Population Stabilisation Fund to which the Central Government shall also
contribute, The Central Government shall have to incur some expenditure for implement-
ing the provisions of this Bill in respect of Union territories. The State Governments will
incur expenditure in respect of their State out of their respective consolidated funds. The
Bill, therefore, will involve an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees five hundred
crore out of the Consolidated Fund of India.

A non-recurring expenditure is of about rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 14 7
out the provisions of the Bill. As the rules to be made relate to matters of detail only, the
delegation of legislative power is of a normal character. 3


LOK SABHA

(Dr. ४ Saroja, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—2353LS—6-12-99._