1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015
By
SHRI ANANDRAO ADSUL, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2015.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In article 16 of the Constitution, after clause ( 4B), the following clauses shall be
inserted, namely:—
“(4C) Notwithstanding anything in this article, there shall be reserved seats in
educational institutions and in services under the State for persons belonging to the
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No.  125  of  2015
Amendment
of article 16.
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(4D) The number of seats reserved in educational institutions under clause (4C)
shall bear, as nearly as may be, the same proportion to the total number of seats, as the
population of the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes, as the case may be, bears
to the total population of the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes.
(4E) The number of seats reserved in services under clause (4C) shall bear, as
nearly as may be, the same proportion to the total number of seats, as the population
of the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes, as the case may be, bears to the total
population of the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes in the country, in case of
services under the Central Government, and in the State, in case of services under the
State Government.”.
5
10

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Despite reservation, the condition of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes
has not improved much. Moreover, the percentage of  reservation which was determined
long ago has not been revised upwardly, though their population has increased manifold.
Therefore, it is proposed to amend the Constitution with a view to increase the percentage of
reservation of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in proportion of their
population.
N
EW DELHI; ANANDRAO ADSUL
March 11, 2015.

4
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * * * * *
16. (1) There shall be equality of opportunity for all citizens in matters relating to
employment or appointment to any office under the State.
* * * * * *
(3) Nothing in this article shall prevent Parliament from making any law prescribing, in
regard to a class or classes of employment or appointment to an office under the Government
of, or any local or other authority within, a State or Union territory, any requirement as to
residence within that State or Union territory prior to such employment or appointment.
* * * * * * * *
Equality of
opportunity
in matters of
public
employment.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Anandrao Adsul, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—294LS(S3)—28-04-2015.