As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

Rare

25 NOV «०५०

Bill No. 125 of 2005

THE PROVISION OF SOCIAL SECURITY TO OLD PERSONS
BILL, 2005

By
Suri K. S. Rao, M.P.

A ढ़
BILL

to provide for social security to old persons living below poverty line and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. (7) This Act may be called the Provision of Social Security to Old Persons Short title,
Act, 2005. extent and

commencement.
5 (2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force at once.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— Definitions.

(i) “appropriate Government". means a State Government or the Central
Government, as the case may be;

10 (ii) "old person" means a person who has attained the age of sixty years;


Government to
conduct survey
of oid persons.

Government to
set up welfare
homes.

Payment of
pension.

Old Persons:,
Welfare Fund.

Expenditure to be
met out of the
fund.

Power to make
rules.

2

(dit) “person living below poverty line" means an old person whose annua
income from all sources is within such parameters as may be fixed by the Centra

Government from time to time to determine a person to be living below poverty
line; and |

(iv) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.

3. (1) The appropriate Government shall conduct a survey of all ol
persons living below poverty line in its jurisdiction. |

(2) After the completion of such survey, the appropriate Government
shall enter the names and other details as may be prescribed of the old persons it
its jurisdiction in a register to be maintained district-wise and update the sar ८
from time to time.

(3) if name of any old person has been left out he may, by himself or throug
any voluntary organisation, working for the welfare of old persons, apply to the
appropriate Government for inclusion of his name in the register in such manner a!
may be prescribed.

(4) After conducting such enquiry as it deems fit, the appropri
Government shall include his name in the register. ।

4. (1) The appropriate Government shall, as soon as possible, but not late
than six months from the date of commencement of this Act, set up a welfare
home for old persons in every district.

(2) The appropriate Government shall provide the following facilities in
every welfare home set up for the welfare of old persons,—

(a) food and clothes free of cost;
(5) free medical treatment and health check up;
(c) recreational facilities; and

(d) any other facility which may be prescribed by the appropriate
Government.

3. Every old person shall be paid a monthly pension of rupees thr ६
hundred by the appropriate Government.

6. The Central Government shall, in consultation with the State Government:
and by notification in the Official Gazette, establish a fund to be known as hi
Old Persons Welfare Fund which shall consist of: .

(a) grants made by the Central Government and State Governm ats,
in such ratio, as may be prescribed:

Provided that the share of the Central Government shall not be les
than seventy-five per cent of the total grants made to the fund; and

(5) any monies received as contribution or donation from i
individual or organisation in India or abroad. =
7. The expenditure involved in implementing the provisions of this Act shall be
met out of the fund constituted under section 6. -

8. The Central Government may, by-notification in the Official Gazette, mak
rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

it is the primary duty of any welfare State to take care of its citizens especially of those
who are under-privileged and belong to weaker sections of the society. India is the second
most populous country in the world, with 72 million persons above sixty years of age as per
census figures of the year 2001. The number of senior citizens is on the rise due to improve-
ment in health care. But the deteriorating conditions of the elderly persons has become a
national concern in the absence of any social security system for them. In our country there
are millions of senior citizens who are left to fend for themselves with no support from their
kith and kin nor from the State. They are a neglected lot. They cannot afford good health
care or food for several reasons. They suffer silently. In order to minimize their hardship, it
is the duty of the State to assist them. The Bill seeks to make an attempt to provide social
security to senior citizens by way of free health care, free of cost accommodation, free food
and a pension. Initially this facility is meant only for old persons living below poverty line.

The Bill seeks to achieve the above objective.

New DELHI, | | K. 5. RAO
July 26, 2005


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 3 of the Bill provides that appropriate Government shall conduct a surve
old persons and. maintain a register to that effect. Clause 4 provides for the setting
welfare homes for old persons. Clause 5 provides for payment of monthly pension tot
Clause 6 provides for setting up a fund to implement the provisions of the Act. Some
butions and donations are also expected. Nevertheless, it is estimated that an annual
ring expenditure of about rupees two thousand crore may be involved from the Consolid:
Fund of India |

A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one thousand crore is also likely
involved from the Consolidated Fund of India by way of setting up-of old persons ho
creation of facility therein


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 8 uf the Bill empowers the Central Government to frame rules for carrying out
the provisions of the Bill. The delegation of legislative power is of a normal character since
the rules will relate to matters of detail only.


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for social security to old persons living below poverty line and for matters —
connected therewith or incidental thereto

%

(Shri K. S. Rao, M.P)

MGIPMRND—3073LS(S3)—11-11-2005.