8W No. 12$ of I,S8. 
THE SECURITIES CONTRACTS (REGULA~ 
TION) AMENDMENT BILL~. 1'58 
(As INTRODUCBD IN LoK SABHA) 

420( 19.56. 
..-1 
Bill No. 125 of 1958 
THE SECURITIES CONTRACTS (REGULATION) 
AMENDMENT BILL, 1958 
(As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
to amend the Securities Ccmtracts (Regulation) Act, 1956. 
BE it enacted by I\lrIiament in the Ninth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:-
]. This Act may be called the Securities Contracts (Regulation) Short title. 
Amendment Act, 1958. 
5 2. After section 7 of the Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act, Insertlo.!ttof 
1956 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), the following ~~~ on 
10 
IS 
20 
section shall be inserted, namely:-
"7A. (1) A recognised stock exchange may make rules or POW«I:J 
emend any rules made by it to provide for all or any of the follow- =r ex-
ing matters, namely:- chank&crulto . mae e8 
(a) the restriction of voting rights to members only in res~ictiDg 
f th votmg respect 0 any matter placed before e stock exchange at rishts. etc. 
any meeting; 
(b) the regulation of voting rights in respect of any 
matter placed before the stock exchange at any meeting so 
that each member may be entitled to have one vote only, 
irrespective of his share of the paid-up equity capital of the 
stock exchange; 
(c) the restriction on the right of a member to appoint 
another person as his proxy to attend and vote at a meeting 
of the stock exchange; 
(d) such incidental, consequential and supplementary 
matters as may be necessary to give effect to any of the 
matters specified in clauses (a), (b) and (c) . 

(2) No rules of a recognised stock exchange made or amend-
ed in relation to any matter referred to in clauses (a) to (d) of 
sub-section (1) shall have effect until they have been approved 
by the Central Government and published by that Government 
in the Official Gazette and, in approving the rules so made or 5 
amended, the Central Government may make such modifications 
therein as it thinks fit, and on such publication, the rules as 
approved by the Central Government shall be deemed to have 
been validly made, notwithstanding anything to the contrary 
contained in the Companies Act, 1956.". 101 of 1956. 
Amendment 3. Section 28 of the principal Act shall be .re-numbered as sub-
olleman 28. section (1) thereof and after sub-section (1) as so re-numbered, the 
following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-
"(2) The Central Government may, by notification in the 
Officiol Gazette, declare that all or any of the provisions of this 15 
Act shall not apply to any such international financial institution 
or financial institution set up in a country outside India as may 
be specified in the notification or any person who has effected 
any transaction with or through the agency of any such institu-
tion, either generally or for such period as may be specified.". 20 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
One of the most common methods of raising funds in capital 
exporting countries, like the United States, United Kingdom and 
Canada, is the issue of convertible bonds or bonds with share warrant& 
attached. It is usual for foreign financial corporations to make an 
ordinary loan to a company and also obtain by separate contract an 
option (not from the Company itself but from the principal share-
holder or shareholders) to buy shares of the company at a price 
agreed when the contract is made. Doubts may arise whether such 
contracts would be legal in view of section 13 of the Securities Con-
tracts (Regulation) Act, 1956. Further, section 20 of the Act whjch 
makes options in securities illegal may also apply to the option'J 
involved in such contracts. From the very nature of such contracts. 
they are not speculative in character and it was not the intention of 
the Act to hamper the operations of foreign financial corporations. 
It is, therefore, proposed to amend section 28 of the Act so as to 
empower the Central Government to exempt such financial corpora-
tions from all or such of the provisions of the Act as it thinks fit. 
2. The provisions contained in the Companies Act. 1956, which are 
designed to govern and regulate the affairs of companies in general, 
are unsuitable, in a large measure, to incorpo:mted stock exchanges 
recognised under the Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956. It 
is thus necessary to specifically empower such recognised stock 
exchanges to make such provisions in their constitutions as would 
satisfy their requirements, by a suitable amendment to the Securities 
Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956 which would override the Companies 
Act. It is, therefore, proposed to empower recognised stock exchanges 
to make rules restricting voting rights to members only, restricting 
the right to appoint proxies and introducing the principle of one 
member-one vote. 
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 
MORARJI DESAI. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 28th N o",mber, 1951. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
The proposed section 7A sgught to be iaserted by clause 2 ot the 
Bill empowers a recognised stock exchange to make rulas in rt$pec~ 
of certain matters specUied therein. They relate to tl\e regulation of 
voting rights ()f the members of the stock exchange. These ere 
matters which are ordinarily provided for in the rules of the ~k 
exchange. As these rules would be inconsistent with the prQvisions 
of the Companies Act, 1~, a specific pt'oviSoion has been made in sub-
section (2) of section 7A that if such rules are approved by the Central 
Government and published in the Official Gazette, they shall have 
effect, notwithstanding anything contained in the Companies Act. 
Having regard to the nature of functions ~fOl'med by recognised 
stock exchanges, such rules are essential. There would, however, be 
different rules for different stock exchanges and it would not be 
possible to provide for such matters in the enactment itself. In these 
circumstances, the rule-making power is of a normal character. 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACT FROM THE SECURITIES CONTRACTS (REGULATION) ACT, 1958 
(No. 42 OF 1956) 
• • • • 
28. The provisions of this Act shall not apply to the Government, Act D~ to 
the Reserve Bank of India, any local authority or any corporation set =, :-
up under a special law or any person who has effected any transaction 
with or through the agency of any such authority as is referred to in 
this section . 
• • • • 

LOKSABHA 
A 
BILL 
to amend. the Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956. 
(Shri Morarji Desai, Minister of Financt.) 