THE  FLOOD CONTROL BILL, 2009
By
SHRI G. S. BASAVARAJ, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the setting up of a National Flood Control Board to suggest measures to
control floods and for matters connected therewith.
WHEREAS entry 56 of List I—Union List of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution
provides for regulation and development of Inter-State rivers and river valleys to the extent
to which such regulation and development under the control of the Union is declared by
Parliament by law to be expedient in the public interest;
And W
HEREAS a lot of havoc is caused by floods every year in almost all parts of the
country;
And WHEREAS it is expedient in the public interest to take effective measures for flood
control;
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixtieth Y ear of the Republic of  India as follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Flood Control Act, 2009.
Bill No. 125  of 2009
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title.

2
2. (1) The Central Government shall set up a Board to be known as the National Flood
Control Board (hereinafter referred to as the Board).
(2) The head office of the Board shall be at New Delhi.
3. (1) The Board shall consist of:—
(a) a Chairman, who shall be an expert dealing with flood control, to be appointed
by the Central Government;
(b) one representative each from every State Government and Union territory,
who shall be expert on flood control measures, to be nominated by the Central
Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of
the Chairman and other Members of the Board shall be such as may be prescribed.
4. The Central Government shall make available to the Board such number of officers
and staff as may be required for efficient functioning of the Board.
5. The functions of the Board shall be—
(a) to identify the areas which are prone to floods;
(b) to suggest measures for flood control;
(c) to make a time bound plan for inter-linking of rivers which are prone to floods
with the ones which are not so;
(d) to suggest measures for the development of land in areas which are prone to
floods;
(e) to deploy flood forecasting system in such areas which are prone to floods
and warn the inhabitants in those areas to move out to safer places in case floods are
forecast in an area;
(f) advise the State Governments as to preventive and rehabilitation measures
during floods; and
(g) advise the State Governments for proper storage of rain water and construction
of dams.
6. The cost of taking up of the flood control measures as suggested by the Board shall
be borne by the Central Government and the State Governments in such ratio, as may be
determined by the Board.
7. (1) The Board shall make recommendations to the Central Government as to flood
control measures.
(2) It shall be the duty of the Central Government to implement the recommendations
of the Board:
Provided that where it is felt necessary that any  recommendation cannot be implemented
due to any reason, the Central Government may, to be recorded in writing, inform the Board
accordingly.
8. The Board shall prepare every year, in such form as may be prescribed, an annual
report giving a true and full account of its activities during the previous year and copies
thereof shall be forwarded to the Central Government and the Government shall cause the
same to be laid before each House of Parliament.
Setting up of a
National Flood
Control Board.
Composition of
the Board.
Provision of
officers and
staff for the
Board.
Functions of
the Board.
Cost to be
borne by
Central and
State
Governments.
Recommendations
to the
Government.
Annual Report.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
9. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of the Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in once session or in two or more successive sesssions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case  may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Power to
make rules.
5
10

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
India is the land of many great rivers. Floods occur in almost all river basins of the
country. The water resources of the country are not being fully utilized. Every year there are
floods which cause immense loss of life and property. Whereas in some parts of the country
there are floods, there is drought in other parts. The national resources are damaged by
floods. This problem needs to be addressed urgently to mitigate the effects of floods.
Therefore, it is expedient in the public interest to evolve an integrated and scientific
approach to the flood control problems and to draw out a national plan fixing priorities for
implementation in the future.
The Bill seeks to provide the setting up of National Flood Control Board to suggest
measures to prevent and control floods in the country.
N
EW DELHI; G. S. BASA VARAJ
November 16, 2009
4

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides for setting up of a National Flood Control Board. Clause 3
provides for the composition of the Board. It further provides for salary and allowances to
Chairman and Members. Clause 4 provides that the Central Government shall provide officers
and staff to the Board. Clause 6 provides that the expenditure on flood control measures
suggested by the Board shall be borne by the Central Government and State Governments.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of
India. It is likely to involve a recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore per
annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.
5

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISTLATION
Clause 9 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to frame rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill.
The rules will relate to matters of detail only and as such the delegation of legislative
power is of a normal character.
6

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the setting up of a National Flood Control Board to suggest measures to
control floods and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri G. S. Basavaraj, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—5022LS(S5)—08-12-2009.