1
THE COMPENSATORY AFFORESTATION FUND (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2019
By
DR. KIRIT PREMJIBHAI SOLANKI, M.P.
A
BILL
to amend the Compensatory Afforestation Fund Act, 2016.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Compensatory Afforestation Fund (Amendment) Act,
2019.
(2). It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 125 of  2019
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. After section 6 of the Compensatory Afforestation Fund Act, 2016 (hereinafter
referred to as the principal Act), the following section shall be inserted, namely:—
"6A. The National Authority or the State Authority, as the case may be, before
authorising any expenditure from the National Fund or the State Fund, as the case may
be shall ensure that—
(a) the free informed consent of the Gram Sabhas of all villages within
whose customary, traditional or revenue boundaries the proposed activity or
project to be executed, or the consent of members of Gram Sabha who exercise
any forest right under any law for the time being in force, within the area proposed
for the project has been obtained in writing; and
(b) The rights recognised or conferred under the Scheduled Tribes and
Other Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Forest Rights) Act, 2006, have
not been violated.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, the terms "Gram Sabha"
and "Village" shall have the same meaning as assigned to them in clauses ( g)
and (p) of section 2, respectively of the Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional
Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Forest Rights) Act, 2006.
3. In section 14 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), after clause (vii), the following
clause shall be added at the end, namely:—
"(viii) formulate policy proposals to encourage community led afforestation.".
4. In section 17 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), after clause (ii), the following
clause shall be added at the end, namely:—
"(iii) formulate policy proposals to encourage community led afforestation.".
5. In section 19 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), after clause (xi), the following
clause shall be added at the end, namely:—
"(xia) ensure that there is no violation of any right recognised and vested under the
Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Forest Rights) Act,
2006 and that the informed consent of the relevant Gram Sabha has been taken before
fulfilling the tasks of compensatory afforestation, catchment area treatment plan and/or any
other site specific scheme.".
Insertion of
new section
6A.
National and
State
Authority to
utilise the
monies from
National Fund
or State Fund
on certain
conditions.
Amendment
of section 14.
Amendment
of section 17.
Amendment
of section 19.
2 of 2007.
5
10
15
20
25
30

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The Compensatory Afforestation Fund Act, 2016 was enacted to provide for the
establishment of funds for undertaking compensatory afforestation, artificial regeneration
and protection of forests.
While this Act is undeniably an important one, since its implementation, it has been
found that the provisions of this Act are not in consonance with the rights conferred under
the Scheduled Tribes and Other Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Forest Rights) Act, 2006. It
also seeks to ensure that the prior informed consent of Gram Sabha or village is obtained
before utilising money by the Authorities from the funds for compensatory afforestation.
The need is to correct this anomaly and ensure that the traditional rights of the Adivasis
and forest dwellers are protected and that the Gram Sabhas concerned are consulted by the
Forest Department before undertaking any activity related to Compensatory Afforestation.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Compensatory Afforestation Fund Act, 2016 with a
view to ensure that rights recognised under the Scheduled Tribes and Other Forest Dwellers
(Recognition of Forest Rights) Act, 2006 are protected.
Hence, this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; KIRIT PREMJIBHAI SOLANKI
June 6, 2019.

4
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE COMPENSATORY AFFORESTATION FUND ACT, 2016
* * * * *
14. (1) The governing body of the National Authority shall—
* * * * *
(vii) formulate such procedures for delegation of financial and administrative powers
to the National Authority and State Authorities as may be notified by the Central Government.
17. (1) The governing body of a State Authority shall—
* * * * *
(ii) review the working of the State Authority from time to time.
* * * * *
19. (1) The executive committee of a State Authority shall—
* * * * *
(xi) maintain and update public information system on the State Authority and present
all information on its transaction in the public domain;
* * * * *
Powers and
functions of
National
Authority.
Powers and
functions of
State
Authority.
Functions and
powers of
executive
committee of
State
Authority.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to amend the Compensatory Afforestation Fund Act, 2016.
————
(Dr. Kirit Premjibhai Solanki, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—775LS(S3)—27-06-2019.