20 of 1963. 
As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA ON 
8m No. 125 of 1978 
THE GOVERNMENT OF UNION TERRITORIES (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 197'8 
A 
BILL 
f~L1·th£r to a~nd the Government of Union TerritOTies Act, 1963, the 
Remesentation of the People Act, 1950 and the Delhi Development 
Act, 1957. 
HE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-ninth Year of the Repuh 1ic 
of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Government of Union Territories Short title 
(Amendment) Act, 1978. and 
commence.. 
5 (2) It shall come int:> force on such date as the Central Govern- ment. 
10 
ment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
z. In section 1 of the Government of Union Territories Act, 1963 
(hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in sub-section (2), be-
fore the third proviso, the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:-
"Provided also that it shall come into force in the Unio;, 
territory of Delhi on such date, being a date not earlier than tht: 
date of commencement of the Government of Union Territorie~ 
(Amendment) Act, 1978, as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint: ". 
Amend-
ment of 
section l. 
15 3. In section 2 of the principal Act, in subo-section (1), in clause (h), Amend-
after the words "Union territories of", the word "Delhi", shall be :~~i~:; 
inserted. 

Amend. 
mentof 
section 3. 
Insertion 
of new 
lections 
43E and 
43 F. 
Special 
provision 
:regarding 
delimita-
tion of 
consti-
tuencies 
of Legis-
lative 
Assembly 
of Delhi. 
2 
, -,_,1 
4. In section 3 o'f the principal Act,-
(i) for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be 
substituted, namely:-
"(2) The total number of seats in the Legislative Assemb- 5 
ly of a Union territory to be filled by persons chosen by direct 
election shall be fifty-six in the case .)f the Legislative Assemb-
ly of the Union territory of Delhi and thirty' in the case of 
the Legislative Assembly of any other Union terr.itory."; 
(ii) in sub-section (3), the words' "ther than the Union terri-
tory of. Delhi" shall be inserted at the end; 10 
(iii) in sub-sections (4) and (6), after the words "Union territor-
ies of", the word "Delhi," shall !be inser'ed; 
(iv) in sub-section (5), the following Explanation shall be 
inserted at the end, namely:-
'Explan4tion.-In this sub-section, the expression "popula- 15 
tion" means the population as ascertained at the last preceding 
census of which the relevant figures have been published: 
Provided that the reference in this Expkmation to the 
"last preceding census of which the relevant figures have been 
published" shall, until the relevant figures for the first census 20 
taken after the year 2000 have been published, be construed as 
a reference to the 1971 census.'. 
5. Afteor section 43D of the principal Act. the following sections shall 
be inserted, namely:-
'43E. (1) The prOVlSlons of secti6ns 39 to 43 (both inclusive) as 
shall not apply to the delimitation of constituencies for the pur-
poses of any elections to the Legislative Assembly of the Union 
territory of Delhi. 
(2) The Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly Constitu-
encies Order, 1976, in so far as it relates to the Metropolitan Council 30 
for the Union territory d Delhi, shall continue to be in force for the 
purpose of elections 10-
(a) the Legislative Assembly of the Union territory of 
Delhi deemed to be duly constituted for that territory under 
section 54B; and 3S 
(b) every Legislative Assembly of that Union territory 
to be constituted after the commencement of the Governrnt"nt of 
Union Territories (Amendment) Act, 1978, 
as if every constituency provided for the purpOSe of elections to the 
Metropolitan COlUlocil were an assembly constituency o£ ~e same 40 
Dame for the purpose of elections to the Legislative Assembly of the 
,union territory of Delhi and the seat reserved in any consti-
tuency of the Metropolitan Council for the Scheduled Cast~s 
were a seat reserved in the assembly constituency of the same 
name for those castes. 45 
Explanation.-In this .section and in section 54B, "Delimitation 
of Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies Order. 1976" rneaDii 

3 
43 of 1950. 
the Order of the Election Commission referred to in sub-section (1) 
of section 8 of the Representation of the People Act, 1950. 
66 of 
1957. 
5 
43F. Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing pro-
visions of this Part or in any other law, until the relevant figures 
for the first census taken after the year 2000 have been published. 
it shall not be necessary to readjust the division of each Union 
territory into territorial constituencies and any refe'rence to the 
latest census figures in this P"rt shall be construed as a referenct: 
to the relevant figures fOT the 1971 cef,sus.'. 
Special 
provision 
as to 
readjust-
ment of 
terri-
torial 
consti-
tuencies. 
10 6. In section 44 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), after the Amend_ 
second p'roviso, the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:- :;~~:~ 
15 
20 
'Provided also that in the Union territory of Delhi, every 
decision taken by a Minister or by the Council of Ministers with 
respect to law and order including organisation and ~iscipline of 
the police force in that Union terr~tory or with respect to any matter 
concerning New Delhi shall be subject to the concurrence of the 
AdministratJf. and nothing in this sub-section shall be construed 
as preventing the Administrator in case of any difference of opinion 
between him and his Ministers from taking any action with respect 
to the matters aforesaid as he, in his discretion, considers necessary. 
Explanation.-In the foregoing proviso, "New Delhi" means the 
area within the boundaries described in the First Schedule to the 
Delhi Municipal Corporation Act, 1957.'. 
7. After section 54A of the principal Act, the following section shall 
25 be inserted, namely:-
Insertion 
of Aew 
section 
54B. 
19 of 11166. 30. 
'54B. (1) In this section, "constituency" means a constituen('y 
provided Wlder the Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly 
Constituencies Order, 1976, for the purpose of elections to the 
Metropolitan COWlcil of Delhi constituted under the Delhi Ad· 
ministration Act. 1966. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act (including 
provisions relating to the strength and composition of the Legisla,tive 
Assembly 0:£ the Union territory of Delhi), until the Legislative As-
sembly of the Union territory of Delhi to be constituted after the 
commencement of the Government of Union Territories (Amend-
ment) Act, 1978, has been duly constituted and summoned to meet 
for the first .session under and in accordance with the provisions of 
this Act, the following provisions shall apply in relation to the Legis-
lative Assembly of the Union territory of Delhi, namely:-
Prgvision4 
as to 
provisional 
Legisla-
tive 
Assembly 
of Delhl 
35 
40 
45 
(a) every constituency in existence immediately before the 
commencement of the Government of Union Territories 
(Amendment) Act, 1978, shall, on and from such commence-
ment, be deemed ta be an assembly constituency of the 
same name for the purpose of elections to the Legislative Assem· 
bly of the Union territory of Delhi under this section; 

Amend_ 
ment Of 
Act 43 of 
1950. 
Amend-
ment Of 
Act 61 of 
1957. 
ftepeal. 
~ .•• -' .. '"'1'1' 
4 " 
(b) the seat reserved in any constituency for the Sche-
duled Castes in the Union territory of Delhi shall be reserved 
in the assembly constituency of the same name for those 
castes; 
(c) every person wh:> immediately before such commence- 5 
ment is a member elected from a constituency to fill a seat 
in the Metropolitan Council for the Union territory of Delhi 
shall, on and from such commencement, represent the assembly 
constituency o! the same ~ame in the Legislative Assembly and 
shall be deemed b have been elected to the Legislative Assemb- 10 
ly fr:>m that constituency; 
(d) this Act shall have effect as if sub-section (3) of section 
3 provided for nomination by the Central Government of not 
more than five persons, not being persons in the service of 
Government, to be members of the Legislative Assembly of the 15 
Union territory of Delhi and every person who immediately 
bebre the commencement of the Government of Union Terri-
tories (Amendment) Act, 1978, is a member nominated to the 
Metropolitan Council for the Union territory of Delhi by the 
Central Government shall be deemed to have been nominated 20 
by the Central Government to the Legislative Assembly, 
and accordingly. on the commencement of the Government of 
Union Territories (Amendment) Act, 1978, the Legislative Assemb-
ly of the Union territory of Delhi shall, without any further action 
or step being taken in this behalf, be deemed to be duly constituteci 25 
and the other provisions of this Act, so far as may be, apply in 
relation to a Legislative Assembly functioning under this section as 
they apply in relation to a Legislative Assembly constituted under 
and in accordance with the provisiOns of Part II. 
(3) The period of five years referred to in section 5 shall, in 30 
the case of the Legislative Assembly functioning under this section, 
be deemed to have commenced on the 28th June, 1977.'. 
8. In the Representation of the People Act, 1950,-
(i) in section 27A,-
(a) sub-section (3) shall be omitted; 
(b) in sub-section (4), after the words "Union territorit!s 
of", the word "Delhi," shall be inserted; 
(ii.) in the Second Schedule, under the heading "II. UNION 
TERRITORIES", after entry 1, the following entry shall be insert-
ed, namely:-
"1A. Delhi .. .. 56 g .. to. 
9. In the Delhi Development Act, 1957, in section 3, in 8ub-section (3), 
for clause (1). the following clause shall be substituted, namely:-
3S 
"(f) three representatives of the Legislative Assembly of 
Delhi to be elected by the members of that Assembly from among 45 
themselves;". 
10, As from the commencement of the principal Act in the Union 
territory of Delhi, the Delhi Administration Act, 1966, shall stand re-
pealed and the Government of India, Ministry of Horne Affairs Order 
19 of 1966. 

43 of 1951. 
3 of 1951. 
'.,,~. S 
No. F. 10I54166-SR, dated the 7th January, 1967, relating to the appli-
cation of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 for elections to the 
Metropolitan Council of Delhi, shall cease to have effect: 
Provided that the provisions of Part II of the Representation of the 
5 Pe~le Act, 1951, shall not apply to any election which has been held 
uefore the commencement of the principal Act in the Union telTitory 
of Delhi or to any election petition arising out of such election and any 
such petition shall be tried and all matters in connection with such 
election or such election petition- snaU-bE.' regulated in accordance with 
10 the provisions of the law in force immediately before such commence-
ment. 

STATEMENT OF O!3JECTS AND REASONS 
In view of the demands for modifications in the existing Constitutional 
and administrative al'rangements in the Union territory of Delhi, it is 
proposed to constitute a Legislative Assembly and a Council of Ministt:rs 
for that Union territory. The Bill seeks to amend the Government of 
Union Territories Act, 1963 (hereinafter referred to as the Act) suitably 
for this purpose. 
2. While bringing Delhi within the purview of the Act, it is proposed 
that there should be no nomination to the Legislative Assembly of that 
Union territory. Accc>rdingly, section 3(3) of the Act is being made 
inapplicable to Delhi. 
3. Considering the importance of New Delhi as the seat of the Central 
Government and the police and law and order in the national capital, it 
is proposed to amend section 44 of the Act to provide that any decision 
taken by the Council of Ministers in Delhi with respect to these subjects 
will require the concurrence of the Administl"8jtor. 
4. It is further proposed to provide that the Metropolitan Council of 
Delhi including the nominated members thereof shall function as the 
provisional Legislative Assembly of that Union territory for the re-
mainder of the duration of the Metropolitan Council, on the lines of 
similar provisions made in the Act in respect of certain Union territories 
at the time of its enactment. 
5. Consequent on the proposals mentioned above, the Bill seeks· to 
repeal the Delhi Administration Act, 1966, and to make certain amend-
ments in the Representation of the People Act, 1950 and in the Delhi 
Development Act., 1957. 
6. The opportunity to amend the Act is also proposed to be availed of 
to bring the provisions thereof in line with the provisions of articles 
170 (2) and 332 of the Constitution, to provide that it shall not be neces-
sary to readjust the division of each Union territory into territorial 
constituencies or the representation of the Scheduled Castes and She-
duled Tribes therein, until the relevant figures for the first census 
taken after the year 2000 have been published. 
7. The Bill seeks to cchieve the above objects. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF THE 
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. U-ll01411 I 78-U'TL, dated the 2nd August, 1978 
from Shri S. D. Patil, Minister of State in the Ministry of Home Affairs 
to the Secretary, Lok Sabha.] 
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the 
Bill further to amend the Government of Union Territories Act, 1963, 
the Representation of the People Act, 1950 and the Delhi Development 
Act, 1957, recommends under clauses (1) and (3) of article 117 of the 
Constitution the introduction in, and consideration by, Lok Sabha of 
the said Bill. 
6 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
By virtue of the amendment proposed in clause 3 of the Bill, the Union 
territory of Delhi will have a Legislative Assembly as provided in section 
3 of the Government of Union Territories Act, 1963 and a Council of 
Ministers as provided in section 44 of that Act. 
2. The expenditure on the administration of the Union territory which 
is at present being met directly from the Consolidated Fund of India 
exceeds the revenue from the territory. Hence, as envisaged in section 
47 (1) of the Government of Union Terr~tories Act, 19fi3, it will be neces-
sary to give financial assistance to the territory by way of grants and 
loans every year from the Consolidated Fund of India. The quantum of 
this assistance may vary from year to year depending on the size of the 
development programme and the revenue of the territory. Based 011 thE' 
Budget estimate of 1978-79. the quantum oti such assistance is likely to be 
of the order of about Rs. fifty-four crores, to begin with. 
3. The Legislative Assembly of Delhi will have 56 seats to be filled by 
direct election from the same territorial constituencies from which Mem-
bers of the Metropolitan Council have been elected. Since the number 
of elected Members of the Metropolitan Council is also 56, no additional 
expenditure is involved on account of holding elections in the future to 
constitute the Legislative Assembly under the Act. 
4. The provisions of the Bill referred to in paragraph 1 above will in· 
volve expenditure as under:-
(i) Salaries, etc., of Ministers and their staff Rs. 8.00 lakhs 
(ii) Salaries, etc., of Speaker, Dy. Speaker Rs. 2.75 lakhs 
(iii) Salaries, etc., of MLAs. Rs. 4.50 lakhs 
(i'.') Other expenses of Assembly Secretariat Rs. 11.86 lakhs 
Total Rs. 27.11 lakhs. 
.- . __ ._--_.--.- ---
An expenditure of the order of Rs. 18.50 lakhs per annum is even now 
being incurred in respect of the &alary and allowances of Executive 
Councillors, Chairman, Deputy Cha· rmsn and Members of the Metro-
politan Council and Council Secretariat. The additional recurring ex-
penditure involved will, therefnre. be about Rs. 8.61 lakhs. In addi~ion. 
the Law Department of the Delhi Admin:stration will have to be 
strengthened by creation of additional posts involving an expenditure 
of about Rs. 3 lakhs per annum. The total additional expenditure. if the 
Bill is enacted into law, is estimated to be about Rs. 11.61 lakhs. 
The Bill will not involve any non-recurring expenditure. 
7 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to include the Union . territqry of Delhi 
alao along with the other Union territories referred to in clause (h) of 
sub--section (1) of section 2 of the Government of Union Territories Act, 
1963 (hereinafter referred to as the Act). In consequence of this, the 
provisions of the Act will apply to the Union territory of Delhi. 
Section 33 of the Act empowers the Legislative Assembly of the Union 
territory of Delhi to make rules for regulating its procedure and con-
duct of business and provides that such rules relating to financial busi-
ness may be made by the Administrator in consultation with the Speaker 
and with the approval of the President. Section 46 'of the Act provides 
for the rules regarding the transaction of bUsiness with the Ministers 
being made by the President and empowers the Administrator to make 
rules prescribing the manner of authenticating the orders issued in his 
name. Section 47 (3) of the Act provides for rules regarding the custody, 
etc;, of the Conso1ida~ed Fund being made by the Administrator with the 
approval of the President and seCtion 48 (3) of the Act empowers the 
Administrator to make similar rules regarding 'the Contingency Fund 
of the Union territory. The rules to be made under the aforesaid secjons 
of the Act in relation to the trnion territory of Delhi are of a procedural 
nature. The delegation of legislative power is thus of a llormal 
character. .~ . 

ANNEXURE 
LXTRACTS FROM THE GOVERNMENT OF UNION TERRITORIES ACT, 1963 
(20 OF 1963) 
• • • • • 
1. (1) • • • • • 
(2) It shall come into for~e on such date as the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint: 
Provided that it shall come into force in the Union territory of Mizo-
ram on such date, being a date not earlier than the date of commence-
8a of 1971. ment of the Government 01. Unlon Teorritories (Amendmen~) Act, 1971 
as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
appoint: 
Provided further that it shall come into force in the Union territory 
of Arunachal Pradesh on such date, being a date nQ~ earlier than the 
date of commencement of the Government of Un on Territories (Amend-
ment) A':.:t, 1975, as the Central Govzrnment may, by notification in the 
Ufficbl Gazette, appoint: 
• • • • 
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context o1.herwisq requires,-
(h) "Union territory" means any of the Union territories of 
Goa, Daman and Diu, Pondicherry, Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh. 
• • • • • 
3. (1) • • • • • 
(2) The total number of seats in the Legislative Assembly of a Union 
I~erritory to be filled by persons chosen by direct elect.ion shall be thirty. 
(3) The Central Government may nominate not more '~han th,'ee per-
sons. not being perscns in 'the service of Government, to be membei'3 of 
the LeghdRtive Assembly of a Union territory. 
(4) Seats shall be reserved for the Scheduled Castes in the Legisla-
tive Assemblies of the Union te!'!'itories of Goa, Daman and Diu and 
Pondiehp.rry, ~md fer the Scheduled TribES in the LegislativQ AEtie:nbly 
of the Union territory of Goa, Daman and 'Diu. . 
(5) The number of seats reserved for the scheduled castes or the 
Scheduled Tribes in the Legislative Assembly of any Union territory under 
sub-section (4) shall bear, as nearly as may be, the same proportion to 
the total number of seats in the Assembly as the po,pulation of the Sche-
duled C'asiies in the Union territory or of the Scheduled Tribes in the 
Union territory, as the case may be, in respect of which seats are IJO 
reserved, bears to the total population of the Union territory, 
Shol't title 
~lnd com-
mence_ 
ment. 
Defini-
tions and 
interpre-
tation. 
Legisla_ 
tive As-
semblies 
fllr Union 
t.·'rritories 
r.nd their 
f'ornposi. 
tion, 

Co",ncil 
of Minis_ 
ters. 
Constitu-
tion of 
eiectoral 
colleges 
for the 
filling of 
:;eats in 
the Coun-
cil of 
States 
allotted 
to Union 
territo_ 
ries. 
(6) Notwithstanding any':hing in the foregoing provlslons of this 
section, the provisions relating to.he reservation of seats for the Sche-
duled Castes and the; Scheduled Tribes in the Legislative Assemblies of 
I~he UniQIl territories of Goa, Daman and Diu and Pondicherry: shall 
cease to have effect on the same date on which the reservation of seats 
for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in the House of '~he 
People shaH cease to have effect under article 334: 
Provided that no~hing in this sub-section shall affect any represen\ta-
tion in the Legislation Assembly of a Union IterrItory until the dissolu-
tion of the then existing Assembly . 
• • • • • 
44. (1) There shall be a Council of Ministers in each Union territory 
with the Chief Minister at the head to aid and advise the Administra-
tor in the exercise of his f-unptions in relation to matters with respect 
to which the Legislative Assembly of the Union territory has power to 
make laws except in so far as he is required by or under this Act to 
act in his discretion or by or under any law to exercise any judicial or 
quasi-judicial func!ions: 
Provided that, in case of diffel'ence of opinion between the Adminis-
trator and his Minis~E'rs on any matter, the Administrator shall 
refer it to the President for decision and act according to the decision 
given thereon by the President, ond pending such decision it shall be 
(omp'etent for the AdministI'ator in any case where the matter is in his 
opinion so urgent that it is necessary for him to take immediate action, 
to take such action or to give such direction in the matter as he deems 
necessary: 
Provided further that in the Union territory of Mizoram every deci-
sion taken by a Minister or by the Council of Ministers in relation to 
any matter concerning any area comprised in any autonomous district in 
the Union territory under the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution shall 
be subject to the concurrence of the Administrator and nothing in this 
sub-section shall be construed as preventing the Administrator in case 
of any diffeI'ence of opinion between him and his Ministers from taking 
su h action in respect of the administration of such area as he, in his 
discretion considers necessary. 
• • • • • 
EXTRACTS FROM 'I !JE REI'R'!:SFN'fATION 01'" THE PEOPLE ACT 1950 
(43 OF 1950) 
• • • • • 
Z7A. (1) • ., • • 
(3) The electoral college for the Union territory of Delhi shall consist 
of the elecied members of the Mstropolitan Council constituted for that 
terx'itory UDder the Delhi Administn.tion Act, 1966. 18 of 19&6. 

28 of 1963. 
I J 
(4) The electoral college for each of the Union territories of Arunachal 
Pradesh, Mizoram and Pondicherry shall consist of the elected members 
of the Legislative Assembly constituted for that territoI'y under the Gov-
ernment of Union Territories Act, 1963. 
• 
• 
3. (1) 
• 
• • • 
EXTRACTS FROM TIlE Dum D2VELOPMFNT ACT, 1957 
(61 OF 1957) 
• • 
• • • 
• 
• 
• • 
• 
• 
• • 
(3) The Authority shall consist of the following members, namely:-
• • • • • 
(f) as and when the Metropolitan Council for the Union terri-
tm-y of Delhi is const:tuted. three repre!lentatives of th8l~ Council to 
be elected by the members of the Council from among themselves, 
and un.il that Council is comi,'.i.uted, three representatives of the 
Interim Metropolitan Council to be elected by the members of the 
Interim Metropolitan Council from am(ln~ themselves; 
• • • • • 
l'he Delhi 
Develop-
ment 
Authority. 

LOK SABRA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Government of Union Territories Act, 1963, the 
Representation of the People Act, 1950 and the Delhi Development 
Act, 1957. 
(Shri S. D. Patil, 
Minister of Sta.te in the 
Ministry of Home ADa.irs.) 