1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2014
By
SHRI P.P. CHAUDHARY, M.P .
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2014.
2. In the Seventh Schedule to Constitution,—
(i) in List II-State list, entry 17 shall be omitted; and
(ii) in List III-Concurrent List, after entry 32, the following entry shall be inserted,
namely:—
"32A. Water, that is to say, water supplies, irrigation and canals, drainage
and embankments, water storage and water power subject to the provisions of
entry 56 of list I.”.
Short title.
Amendment
of the
Seventh
Schedule.
Bill No. 125 of   2014
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Life is impossible without water. All living beings including human, animals and plants
need water for their survival. Therefore, it is desirable that requisite amount of water is
available without any hindrance for drinking and irrigation.
Around ninety-seven per cent. of the water on the Earth is salty water and only three
per cent. is fresh water; slightly over two thirds of this fresh water is frozen in the form of
glaciers and polar ice caps. The remaining unfrozen fresh water is found mainly as ground
water.
Ground water is a renewable resource, yet the world's supply of ground water is
steadily decreasing with the depletion of water table, most prominently in Asia and North
America. It is still not clear that how much natural renewal balance of fresh water is available
or whether ecosystem will be threatened for want of fresh water in near future. The framework
for allocating water resources to water users where such a framework exists is known as
water rights.
At present, water is a State subject and is considered as primary responsibility of the
State Governments.
The Bill seeks to amend that Seventh Schedule to the Constitution with a view to
transfer entry 17 of List II-State List pertaining to 'Water', to List III-Concurrent List so that
the Parliament and the Central Government can also play their due role for conservation and
sustainable use of water to meet the growing needs of the society.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; P . P. CHAUDHARY
November 12, 2014.
2

3
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
******
List II-State List
******
17. Water, that is to say, water supplies, irrigation and canals, drainage and embankments,
water storage and water power subject to the provisions of entry 56 of List I.
******

GMGIPMRND—2714LS(S3)—26-11-2014.
LOK  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
—————
(Shri P.P . Chaudhary, M.P.)