1
THE RIGHTS OF PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017
By
SHRIMATI POONAM MAHAJAN , M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016.
BE  it enacted by the Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (Amendment)
Act, 2017.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the Schedule to the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016 after para 4, the
following para shall be inserted, namely:—
"4A. Epidermolysis bullosa that is, a group of disorders in which congenital
malformation caused by genetic conditions causes the skin to be very fragile and to
blister easily.
Forms of epidermolysis shall include:
(i) Epidermolysis bullosa dystrophica;
(ii) Epidermolysis bullosa simplex;
(iii) Epidermolysis bullosa letalis.".
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 125 of  2017
Amendment
of the
Schedule.
49 of 2016.
5
10
15
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Clause (zc) of Section 2 defines specified disability in term of disabilities mentioned in
the Schedule to the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016. It has been observed that
many children in India are suffering from various types of epidermolysis bullosa which is a
congenital malformation that cause the skin to be very fragile and to blister easily. Blisters
and skin erosions form in response to minor injury or friction thereby requiring rigorous
skin care. The 10th revision of the International Statistical Classification of Diseases and
Related Health Problems classifies epidermolysis bullosa into three types namely
epidermolysis bullosa dystrophica, epidermolysis bullosa simplex and epidermolysis
bullosa letalis.
Depending on the form of condition, symptoms include alopecia (hair loss), blisters
around the eyes and nose, blisters in or around the mouth and throat causing feeding
problems or swallowing difficulty, blisters on the skin as a result of minor injury or temperature
change, blistering that is present at birth, dental problems such as tooth decay, hoarse cry,
cough or other breathing problems and nail loss or deformed nails.
Children in India afflicted with epidermolysis bullosa have been subjected to prejudice
and various forms of discrimination. Moreover, they are deprived of educational
opportunities, thereby violating the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons
with Disabilities. The Bill seeks to safeguard dignity and grant equality of opportunity to all
those children who are suffering from various strains of epidermolysis bullosa.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; POONAM MAHAJAN
July 3, 2017.

3
ANNEXURE
THE RIGHTS OF PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES ACT, 2016
(49 OF 2016)
THE SCHEDULE
[See clause (zc) of section 2]
SPECIFIED DISABILITY
* * * *
4. Disability caused due to—
(a) chronic neurological conditions, such as—
(i) "multiple sclerosis" means an inflammatory, nervous system disease
in which the myelin sheaths around the axons of nerve cells of the brain and
spinal cord are damaged, leading to demyelination and affecting the ability of
nerve cells in the brain and spinal cord to communicate with each other;
(ii) "parkinson's disease" means a progressive disease of the nervous
system marked by tremor, muscular rigidity, and slow, imprecise movement,
chiefly affecting middle-aged and elderly people associated with degeneration
of the basal ganglia of brain and a deficiency of the neurotransmitter dopamine.
(b) Blood disorder—
(i) "haemophilia" means an inheritable disease, usually affecting only
male but transmitted by women to their male children, characterised by loss or
impairment of the normal clotting ability of blood so that a minor would may
result in fatal bleeding;
(ii) "thalassemia" means a group of inherited disorders characterised by
reduced or absent amounts of haemoglobin;
(iii) "sickle cell disease" means a hemolytic disorder characterised by
chronic anemia, painful events, and various complications due to associated
tissue and organ damage; "hemolytic" refers to the destruction of the cell
membrane of red blood cells resulting in the release of hemoglobin.
* * * *

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016.
————
(Shrimati Poonam Mahajan, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—991LS(S3)—20-07-2017.