s 
As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA ON 
Btl No. 125 01 1990. 
THE ARMED FORCES (JAMMU AND KASHMIR) 
SPECIAL POWERS BILL, 1990 
A 
BILL 
to enable certain special powers to be conferred upon me.m~8 of the 
anned forces in the disturbed areas in the State of Jam11llU cmd 
Kashmir. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in ~e Forty-first Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Armed Forces (Jammu and Sbort 
Kashmir) Special Powers Act.. 1990. title, 
(2) It extends to the whole of the SUite of Jammu and Kashmir. 
extent 
aad 
~m­
(3) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the MIl day of _eDee. 
July, 1990. aleDt. 
t. In this Act, unless the context cf.herwise requtres,- Deft ... 
(II) uanned forces" means the military forces and the air forces tlo •. 
to operating as land forces and includes any other armed forces of the 
Union so operating; 
(b) "diJturbeQ area" meena an area which it for the tim. being 
declared by notification under I8<ltion 3 to be a diaturbed area; 

Power to 
declare 
areas to be 
di8tUrb~ 
areas. 
Special 
powers 
ef tke 
Armed 
F.rces. 
2 
(c) all other words and expressions used herein, but not defined 
and defined in the Air Force Act, 1950, or the Army Act, 1950, shall 
have the meanings respectively assigned to them in those Acts. 
3. If, in relation to the State of Jammu and Kashmir, the Governor 
of that State or the Central Government, is of opinion that the whole or 5 
any part of the State is in such a disturbed and dangerous condition that 
the use of armed forces in aid of the civil power is necessary to prevent-
(a) activities involving terrorist acts directed towards overawing 
the Government as by law established or ,striking terror in the people 
or any section of the people or alienating any section of the people or 10 
adversely affecting the harmony amongst different sections of the 
people; 
(b) activities directed towards disclaiming, questioning Or dis-
rupting the sovereignty land territorial integrity of India or bringing 
about cession of a part of the territory of India or secession of a part of 15 
the territory of India from the Union or causing insult to the Indian 
National Flag, the Indian National Anthem and the Constitution of 
India, 
the Governor of the State or the Central Government, may, by notifica-
tion in the Official Gazette, declare the whole or any part of the State to 20 
be a disturbed area. 
ErpZanation.-In this section, "terrorist act" has the same meaning as 
in gxplanation to article 248 of the Constitution of India as applicable to 
the State of Jammu and Kashmir. 
4. Any commissioned officer, warrant officer, non-commissioned officer 25 
or any other person of equivalent rank in the armed forces may. in a 
disturbed area,-
(a) it he is of opmlOn that it is necessary so to do for the 
maintenance of public order, after giving such' riue warning as he 
may consider necessary. flre upon or otherwise use force, even to 30 
the causing of death, against any person who is acting in contra-
vention of any law or order for the time being in force in the 
disturbed area prohibiting the assembly of five or more persons 
or the carrying of weapons or of things capable of being used as 
weapons or of fire-arms, ammunition or explosive suhtltances; 35 
(b) if he is of opinion that it is necessary so to do, destroy 
any arms dump, prepared or fortit\ed position or shelter from which 
armed attacks are made or are likely to be made or are attempteti 
45 of 1950. 
46 of 1950. 
to be made, or any structure used as a training camp for armed 
volunteers or utilised as a hide-.out by armed gangs or absconders 40· 
wanted for any offence; 
(c) arrest, without warrant. any person who has committed a 
cognizable offence or against whom a .reasonable suspicion ex:lIts 
.that he haS committed or is about to commit a cognizable offmee 
.and may use such force as may be necessary to effect the arred; 45 
(d) enter and search, without warrant, any premises to make 
any such attest as aforesaid or to recover any person believed to be 
wrdngfuUy restrained or confined or any property reasonably sus-
pected to be stolen property or any arms, ammunition or explosive 
, 

3 of 1990. 
3 
substances believed to be unlawfully kept in such premises, and 
may for that purpose use such force as may be necessary, and 
seize any such property. arms. ammunition or explosive substances; 
(e) stop, search and seize any vehicle or vessel reasonably sus-
specteci to be carrying any person who is a proclaimed offender. or 
any person who has committed a non-cognizable offence, or against 
whom a reasonable suspicion exists that he has committed or is 
about to commit a non-cognizable offence, or any person who is 
carrying any arms. ammunition or explosive substance believed to 
10 be unlawfully held by him, and may, for that purpose, use such 
force as may be necessary to effect such stoppage, search or seizure. 
as the caSe may be. 
5. Every person making a search under this Act shall have Power 
the power to break open the lock of any door.. almirah. safe. box, cUP-pt search 
15 board, drawer, package or other thing. if the key thereof is withheld. to includo 
powers 
6. Any person arrested and taken into custody under this Act 
and every property. arms, ammunition or explosive subs~nce or any 
vehicle or vessel seized under this Act, shall be made over to 
the ofticer-in-charge of the nearest police station with the least possible 
20 delay, together with a report of the circuJ1l!tances occasioning the 
arrest. or as the case may be. oC'Casioning the seizure of such property, 
arms. ammunition or explosive SUbstance or any vehicle or vessel, as 
the case may be. 
7. No prosecution, suit or other legal proceeding shall be instituted, 
25 exeept with the previous sanction of the Central Government. against 
any person in respect of anything done or purported to be done in 
exercise of the powers conferred by this Act. 
8. (1) The Armed Forces (Jammu and Kashmir) Special J'Qwers 
Ordinance, 1990. is hereby repealed. 
30 (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action ~ken 
under the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or taken 
under the corresponding provisions of this Act. 
to break 
open 
Jocks, 
etc. 
Arrestect 
persons 
and 
seized 
property 
to be 
made 
over 
to the 
police. 
Flrotee· 
tien of 
persons 
acting 
in gOOd 
faith 
under 
this 
Act. 
Repeal 
and 
saving. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
With the advent of summer and melting of snow the tendency of 
the militants and subv~ive elements of the valley to ,et across the 
border for smuggling of arms. ammunition and explosives and training 
in subversive activities is on the increale. The aecur:lty forces deployed 
have to pursue the infiltra~rs and nab them inside the valley. Concert-
ed and co-ordinated efforts by the State police and security forces to 
intercept the infiltra'tors. search for and take action againlt arms dumps 
by the militants and subversive elements are required SO as to counter 
the designs of the secessionist elements. In ~e context of the prevailing 
situation in the valley, it was found necessary to empower the security 
fQrces with additional powers to asair. the civil administration in con-
taining the terrorism. To meet this situation the Armed Forces (Jammu 
and Kashmir) Special Powers Ordinance, 1990 (3 of 1990) was promul-
gated on the 5th July, 1990. 
2. The Bill seeks ~o replace the above mentioned Ordinance. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 31st July, 1990. , MUFTI MOHAMMED SAYEED. 

LOX SABRA 
E3" , 
A 
BILL 
to enable certain special powers to be conferred upon membe1'l of the 
armed forces in the disturbed areas in the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir. 
(Shri. Mufti Mohammed Scryeed, Mimster of Bome Affair.,) 