1
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 125 of 2016
THE STATE OF ARUNACHAL PRADESH (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016
By
SHRI NINONG ERING, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the State of Arunachal Pradesh Act, 1986.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the State of Arunachal Pradesh (Amendment) Act, 2016.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. After section 29 of the State of Arunachal Pradesh Act, 1986, the following sections
shall be inserted, namely:—
"29A. On and from the commencement of the State of Arunachal Pradesh
(Amendment) Act, 2016, the provisions of sections 18 to 29 (both inclusive) shall not
apply to the State of Arunachal Pradesh and the common High Court shall be the High
Court for the States of Assam, Mizoram and Nagaland.
Insertion of
new sections
29A to 29L.
Non-
applicability of
sections 18 to
29 (both
inclusive) to
the State of
Arunachal
Pradesh.
5
69 of 1986.
10
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
29B. (1) On and from the commencement of the Arunachal Pradesh (Amendment)
Act, 2016, there shall be a High Court for the State of Arunachal Pradesh to be called
the High Court of Arunachal Pradesh.
(2) The principal seat of the High Court of Arunachal Pradesh shall be at Itanagar.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 2), the Judges and
division courts of the High Court of Arunachal Pradesh, may sit at such other place or
places in the State of Arunachal Pradesh, other than their principal seat as the Chief
Justice of the High Court of Arunachal Pradesh may, with the approval of the Governor
of the State of Arunachal Pradesh, appoint.
29C. (1) Such of the Judges of the common High Court holding office immediately
before the commencement of the State of Arunachal Pradesh (Amendment) Act, 2016,
as may be determined by the President, after ascertaining their option shall, on such
commencement, cease to be the Judges of the common High Court and become Judges
of the High Court of Arunachal Pradesh.
(2) Every person who by virtue of sub-section (1) becomes a Judge of the High
Court of Arunachal Pradesh shall, except in the case where any such person is appointed
to be the Chief Justice of the High Court of Arunachal Pradesh, rank in the High Court
of Arunachal Pradesh according to the priority of his appointment as Judge of the
common High Court.
29D. The High Court of Arunachal Pradesh shall have, in respect of any part of
the territories included in the State of Arunachal Pradesh, all such jurisdiction, powers
and authority as, under the law in force immediately before the commencement of the
State of Arunachal Pradesh (Amendment) Act, 2016, is being exercised in respect of
that part of the said territories by the common High Court.
29E. The law in force immediately before the commencement of the State of
Arunachal Pradesh (Amendment) Act, 2016 with respect to the custody of the seal of
the common High Court shall, with the necessary modifications, apply with respect to
the custody of the seal of the High Court of Arunachal Pradesh.
29F. The law in force immediately before the commencement of the State of
Arunachal Pradesh (Amendment) Act, 2016 with respect to practice and procedure in
the common High Court shall, with necessary modifications, apply in relation to the
High Court of Arunachal Pradesh and accordingly, the High Court of Arunachal Pradesh
shall have all such powers to make rules and orders with respect to practice and
procedure as are, immediately before the commencement of the State of Arunachal
Pradesh (Amendment) Act, 2016, exercisable by the common High Court:
Provided that any rules or orders which are in force immediately before the
commencement of the State of Arunachal Pradesh (Amendment) Act, 2016 with respect
to the practice and procedure in the common High Court shall, until varied or revoked
by rules or orders made by the High Court of Arunachal Pradesh, apply with the
necessary modifications in relation to the practice and procedure in the High Court of
Arunachal Pradesh as if such rules or orders were made by the High Court of Arunachal
Pradesh.
29G. The law in force immediately before the commencement of the State of
Arunachal Pradesh (Amendment) Act, 2016 with respect to the form of writs and other
processes used, issued or awarded by the common High Court shall, with the necessary
modifications, apply with respect to the form of writs and other processes used, issued
or awarded by the High Court of Arunachal Pradesh.
29H. The law in force immediately before the commencement of the State of
Arunachal Pradesh (Amendment) Act, 2016 relating to the powers of the Chief Justice,
Single Judges and division courts of the common High Court and with respect to all
matters ancillary to the exercise of those powers shall, with the necessary modifications,
apply in relation to the High Court of Arunachal Pradesh.
Establishment
of separate
High Court for
the State of
Arunachal
Pradesh.
Judges of High
Court of
Arunachal
Pradesh.
Jurisdiction of
High Court of
Arunachal
Pradesh.
Custody of seal
of High Court
of Arunachal
Pradesh.
Practice and
procedure in
the High Court
of Arunachal
Pradesh.
Forms of writs
and other
processes.
Powers of
Judges.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

3
29I. The law in force immediately before the commencement of the State of
Arunachal Pradesh (Amendment) Act, 2016 relating to appeals to the Supreme Court
from the common High Court and the Judges and division courts thereof shall, with the
necessary modifications, apply in relation to the High Court of Arunachal Pradesh.
29J. (1) Except as hereinafter provided, the common High Court shall, as from the
commencement of the State of Arunachal Pradesh (Amendment) Act, 2016, have no
jurisdiction in respect of the State of Arunachal Pradesh.
(2) Such proceedings pending in the common High Court immediately before the
commencement of the State of Arunachal Pradesh (Amendment) Act, 2016 as are
certified, whether before or after that day, by the Chief Justice of that High Court,
having regard to the place of accrual of the cause of action and other circumstances, to
be proceedings which ought to be heard and decided by the High Court of Arunachal
Pradesh shall, as soon as may be after such certification, be transferred to the High
Court of Arunachal Pradesh.
(3) Nothwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (1) and (2) or in section
29B, but save as hereinafter provided, the common High Court shall have, and the
High Court of Arunachal Pradesh shall not have, jurisdiction to entertain, hear or
dispose of appeals, applications for leave to the Supreme Court, applications for review
and other proceedings where any such proceedings seek any relief in respect of any
order passed by the common High Court before the commencement of the State of
Arunachal Pradesh (Amendment) Act, 2016:
Provided that if after any such proceedings have been entertained by the common
High Court, it appears to the Chief Justice of that High Court that they ought to be
transferred to the High Court of Arunachal Pradesh, he shall order that they shall be so
transferred, and such proceedings shall thereupon be transferred accordingly.
(4) Any order made by the common High Court—
(a) before the commencement of the State of Arunachal Pradesh (Amendment) Act,
2016, in any proceedings transferred to the High Court of Arunachal Pradesh by virtue of
sub-section (2); or
(b) in any proceeding with respect to which the common High Court retains jurisdiction
by virtue of sub-section (3),
shall, for all purposes, have effect, not only as an order of the common High Court but
also as an order made by the High Court of Arunachal Pradesh.
29K. For the purposes of section 29I,—
(a) proceedings shall be deemed to be pending in a Court until that Court has disposed
of all issues between the parties, including any issue with respect to the taxation of the costs
of the proceedings and shall include appeals, applications for leave to appeal to the Supreme
Court, applications for review, petitions for revision and petitions for writs; and
(b) references to a High Court shall be construed as including references to a Judge or
division Court thereof, and references to an order made by a Court or a Judge shall be
construed as including references to a sentence, judgement or decree passed or made by
that Court or Judge.
29L. Nothing in sections 29B to 29K (both inclusive) shall affect the application to the
High Court of Arunachal Pradesh of any provisions of the Constitution, and the provisions
of these sections shall have effect subject to any provision that may be made on or after the
commencement of the State of Arunachal Pradesh (Amendment) Act, 2016 with respect to
the High Court of Arunachal Pradesh by the Legislature of Arunachal Pradesh or other
authority having pwoer to make such provisions.".
Procedure as to
appeals to
Supreme Court.
Transfer of
proceedings
from common
High Court to
the High Court
of Arunachal
Pradesh.
Interpretation.
Saving.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
A separate and permanent High Court for Arunachal Pradesh is demanded by the
people of the State from long time now. Although there exists a bench of Gauhati High Court
at Itanagar but due to escalating burden of pending cases and myriad historical facts, a
separate high court should be established in Arunachal Pradesh very soon.
When the State of Arunachal Pradesh Act, 1986 provided for a common High Court,
the population and dynamics of administration of the State was very different from the
present times. Now the State faces many problems such as law and order, border management,
illegal activities, insurgency, inter-State disputes, etc. which have raised number of cases at
a rapid rate. In order to have a proper and time bound justice to the people, a separate High
Court of Arunachal Pradesh is required now which will meet the needs and aspirations of the
people. This will help them in getting justice timely without making unnecessary expenditures.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; NINONG ERING
February 16, 2016.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides for establishment of separate High Court in the State of
Arunachal Pradesh.
The expenditure on establishment of separate High Court in the State of Arunachal
Pradesh including recurring expenditure will be met out of Consolidated Fund of the State of
Arunachal Pradesh.
5

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the State of Arunachal Pradesh Act, 1986.
————
(Shri Ninong Ering, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—67L(S3)—03.05.2016.