WK SABHA 
CU RR I GE NO i1. 
to 
THE -NATIUtlJ\L rANK FLR '~\'iUC~LT~;.{E ".tID RUR'\L DEVELOPMENT 
BILL, 19~1 
(To be/As introduced in Lok S~bha) 
-
1. Page 1, in the Long Title,-
i££ "NaNtional" !£1!.S! "Nation~l" 
2. ~ Page 2, line 34,-
~ tt Of" relip "for' 
3. Page 4, line 19,-
ill H of" ~ " f 0 r" 
4~ -Page 13~ line 47,-
"re shedu ling- read 
~-
II rescheduling" 
5 • P age 14, 1 i ne 34 , -
!Eo! "Fund S·I read tlFund" 
-
6. Page 14.-
afte r line 48, inser!- -
I' (2), nO guarantee Or security referred 
to therein shall he required in llny ciise ll 
7 • Page 17, line 14,-
1fter "co-Operative" insert "b<1nk" - -
,.' 
n. Page 18, line 7,-
for "t.he" re:'ld "this" - -
9. Page 19, line 29,-
f2! ·sub-sectio~N ~ "sub-sectionsr 
10. Page 20, line 10, 
.:tfter "expiry oft! inrsert "a period Ofll 

As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABKA ON 
7/ ; 
, .( 
" 
Bill No. l25 of lUI 
THE NATIONAL BANK FOR AGRICULTURE AND RURAL 
DEVELOPMENT BILL, 1981 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSIS 
CHAPTER I 
PBa,l'M1"MARY 
CLAt18lS 
1. Short title, extent and commencement. 
2. Defini~ODl. 
CHAPTER II 
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE NATIONAL BANK FOR AGIIlCt1JhUU AND BUlAt. 
DEVELOPMENT AND CAPITAL THERilOF 
3. Establishment and incorporation cif National Bank for AId-
culture and Rural Development. 
4. Capital 
CHAPTER III 
MAN'AGtl\,H .. "NT OF THE NATIONAL BANE. 
5. Management. 
6. Board of Director!':. 
7. Term of office of Chairman and other directors, retirement aDd 
payment of fees. 
8. Term of office of Managing Director and whole-time c1frwctoa, 
conditions of service, etc. 
9. Disqualifications. 
10. Vacation and resignation of office by directors. 
11. Casual vacancy in the office of Managing Director. 
12. Meetings of Board. 
13 •. Committees of National Bank. 
14, Advisory Council 
15. Member of Board or Committee thereof not to participate In 
meetings in certain cases. 
CHAPTER IV 
TRANSFER OF BUSINESs TO THE NATIONAL BANK 
16. Transfer of assets and liabilities of Agricultural ReftDa~ aDd 
Development Corporation. 
17. Dissolution of the Corporation and repeal of Act 10 of 1963. 
18. Tr~sfer of business from Reserve Bank. 

(ii) 
CHAPTER V 
BORROWINGS BY THE NATIONAL BAlat 
CLAUSES 
19. Borrowings by the National Bank. 
20. Borrowings in foreign currency. 
CHAPTER VI 
CREDIT. FUNCTIONS OF THE NATIONAL BANK 
21. Production ami marketing credit. 
22. Conversion loan for production credit. 
23. Rescheduling of loans to artisans, small-scale industries, etc. 
24. Investment credit..,....m~um term. 
25. Other investment credit. 
26. Purchase and sale ot s.\lares. 
27. Loans to State Governments for share capital COI:l.tribution. 
28. Security for credit. 
29. Amounts and securities to be held in trust. 
30. Direct loans. 
31. Commission. 
32. Issue of guarantees. 
33. Power to impose conditions for accommodation. 
34. Power to call for repayment before agreed period. 
35. National Bank to have access to records. 
36. Validity of loan or advance not to be questioned. 
37. National Bank not to grant loans or advances against its oym 
bonds or debentures. 
CHAPTER VII 
OTHER i'UNlCTIONS OF THE NATIONAL B.uo:: 
. .38. Other functions of National Bank. 
39. Incidental powers. 
40. Deposits and investments. 
41. Credit information. 
CHAPTER VIII 
FUNDS, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT 
42. National Rural Credit (Long Term Operations) Fund. 
43. National Rural Credit (Stabilisation) Fund. 
44. Research and Development Fund. 
45. Reserve Fund and other Funds. 
46. Preparation of balance-sheet, etc., of National &ok. 
47. Disposal of surplus. 
48. Audit. 
49. Returns. 

CLAVSJ13 
(Iii) 
CHAPTER IX 
STAFF 
50. Sta1f of National Bank. 
CHAPTER X 
MISCELLANEOUS 
51. Obligation as to fidelity and secrecy. 
52. Defects in appointment not to invalidate acts, etc. 
53. Protection of action taken under the Act. 
54. Indemnity of directors. 
55. Exemption from income-tax, etc. 
56. Penalties. 
57. Offences by companies. 
?itj 
58. Bankers' Books Evidence Act, 1891, to apply in relation to 
National Bank. 
59. Liquidation of National Bank. 
60. Power cYf Board to make regulations. 
61. Amendment of certain enactments. 
62. Power to remove difficulty. 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE. 
THE. SECOND SCHEDULE. 

Bill No. 125 of 1981 
THE NATIONAL BANK FOR AGRICULTURE AND RURAL 
DEVELOPMENT BILL, 1981 
A 
BILL 
to establish a .bank to be know.n as the NaNtional Bank for Agriculture and Rural 
Development for providing credit for the promotion of agriculture, nnall. 
scale industries, cottage and village industries. handicrafts and other rural 
crafts and other allied economic activities in rural areas with a view to 
promoting integrated rural development and securing prosperity of rural areas, 
and for malters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
BE it enacted by ParJiamtmt in the Thirty-second Year of the Republic of 
. India as follows:-
CHAPTER I 
PRl!:LIMINARY 
5 1. (1) This Act may be called the N,ational Bank for Agriculture and Rural 
Development Act, 1981. 
(2) It extends to the ,whole of India. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as lhe Central Government may, 
by,.Dotifica'ion in the Official Gazette, appoint, and different dates' may· be 
10 appointed for different provisions of this Act, and any refereDCe in any provision 
to the commencement of this Act shalt be construed as a reference to the coming 
into force of that p~vision. 
15 
20 
2. In' this Act unless the context otherwise requires,-, ' 
(a) "agriculture~' includes ,animal husbandry, forestry, dairy and 
'. poul:ry farming, pisciculture, and other allied activities, whether or not 
undertaken jointly with agriculture and the expression "agricultural 
operations" shall be construed accordingly. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this clause, "pisciculture" includes 
the development of fisheries, both inland and marine, catching of fish and 
aD activities connected therewith or incidental thereto; 
Short 
title, 
extent and 
com-
menceo-
meht. 
Deftnl-
tions. 

2 
(b) "Agricultural Refinance and Development Corporation" means 
the Corporation established under section 3 of the Agricultural Refinance 
and Development Corporation Act, 1963, and renamed under section 3A 10 of 1983. 
of that Act as the Agricultur.al Refinance and Development Corporation~ 
(c) "Board" means the Board of Directors of the NatianaJ Bank; 5 
(d) "central co-operative bank" means the principal co-operative 
society in a district in a State, the primary object of which is the financing 
of other co-operative societies in that district: 
Provided that in addition :0 such principal sOciety in a district, or 
where there is no such principal society in a district, the State Government 10 
may declare anyone or more co-operative societies carrying on the business 
of financing other co-operative societies in that district to be also or to be 
a central co-operative bank or central co-operative banks within the mean-
ing of this definition; 
(e) "Chairman'" means the Chairman of the Board appointed under 15 
section 6; 
(I) "co-operative society" means a society registered, or deemed to be 
registered, under the Co-operative Societies Act, 1912 or any other law 
relating to co-operattve societies for the time being in force in any State; 
(g) "crops" includes products of agricultural operations; 
(h) "director'" means a director' appointed under section 6; 
20 
(i) "industry in the tiny and decentralised sector" me,ans industrial 
concerns in the tiny and decentralised sector and "industrlal' COIlCel'D"· in:' the 
tiny a~d decentralised sector" means an industriat concern in whiCh the 
investment in machinery and plant is not in excess of rupees two lalmw or 25 
such higher ,amount as the CC!Dtral Government may specify by notification 
in this behalf having regard to trends in industrial development· and' other 
~ , 
2 of 1912. 
relevant factors; .. l, 
(i) "Managing Director'" means the ManagiD'g Director appoinMd 
under section 6; 3D 
(k) "marketing of crops" includes the prOCessing of crops prior to 
marketing by any agricultural prociuoers or any organisation of such 
producers; 
(I) "National Bank" me,ans the National Bank of Agriculture and 
Rural Development estabJ.ished under section 3; 35 
(",)"nGtification" means a notifica'ion published illl the Official 
OueUe; 
(n) "ptimiu'y rural credit society" means a co-opomr.ve societyr by 
wbateter nanie called;:"'" 
(1) which has as its object or business the provision of fIliIrIdtCiS fO 
accommodatioJ1 to itsmembel'5fot agricuhuro'or apiculSUl!81operatiOlls 
or for the marketing of crops, or for rural development; and 
(2) the bye.laws of wbicb do not permit ,admission of any other 
co-operative society as member: 
Provided that this sub-clause shall not apply to the adtriiSsk*, as 4-5 
a member, of a co-opel"iltive society, which is a Stllte~ve bank 
or a central co-operativ<: bank by reason of such bank sobsc~ to 

~ 5 
21 of 1976. 
10 
I 
15 
2 of 1934. 20 
2 of 1934. 
35 
3 
the abare capital of the co-operative sOciety O\1t of fODds provided by 
, the State GOJernment for the pllIpose; 
(0) "prescribed" means prescribe<iby .regulations ~de 'uod~r this 
Act; 
(p) "regional rural bank'" means a regional rural bank established 
under section 3 of the Regional Rural Banks Act, 1976; 
(q) "rural development" me,ans development of rural are~ through 
any activities conducive to such development. 
Explonation.-For the purposes of tbis" cjausc.-
(a) activities conducive to development of rural ,areas ~ncIude 
activities relating to production of goods or provision of serviCes in 
rural areas 'and activities for the ~motion of cottage and village indus-
tries, industry in the tiny and d~ntralised sector and small-scale 
industry and handicrafts and other ruralcraftsj 
, (b) "rur,al area" means the area comprised in any village and 
includes the area comprised in any town, tbe,population,of w~ich jloes 
DOt exceed ten thousand or such other figure as the R~erve, l:nMJk ,pijly 
specify irom time to time; 
(r) "Reserve Bank" means the ReserVe Bank of India constituted 
under section 3 of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934; 
(I) "sche4uled ~~" means a bank' for tlte time lbeigg in~~ed jn the 
Second Schedule to the Reserve Bani of India Act, 1934; 
(t) "~mall-sc8Ie industry" means industrial concerns in the small scale 
sector and "industrial concern in the sman scale sector'" means an industrial 
concetn-
(0 in which the investment in m,a~ aud plant is DOt in 
excess of rupees twenty lakhs or. such higher amOUllt as the Central 
Government ,may spe<!ify by notification in this behalf having regard 
to trelDds in industrial development and other relevtUlt factors. aDd 
(u). which is not an industri,al concern in the ~y aQd .. ~tnl­
lised sector; 
(u) "State co-operative bank" means the prinCipal co-operative society 
.in ,.a State, the primary object of which is the financing of other ~alive 
societies in the State: . 
Provided that in addition to such princip,al society in a State. or where 
there is no such principal society in a State, the State GovemmeDt may 
declare anyone or more co-operative societies carrying on business in that 
State to be also or to be a St,ate co-operative bank or State co-opecative 
banks witbin the meaning of this definition; 
(v) "State land development bank" means the co-operative 1000ety 
which is the principal land development bank (by whatever nameca11ed) 
in a St,ate and which has as its primary object the providing of long-term 
ftnancefor agricultural development: 

Establish· 
ment and 
incorpora-
tion of 
National 
Bank for 
Agricul-
ture and 
Rural 
Develop-
ment. 
Capital. 
Manage_ 
ment, 
4 
ProvIded that, in .addition to such principal land development bank in 
a State, or where there is no such bank in a State, the State Government 
may declare any co-operative society carrying on business in thaL State and 
authorised by the bye-laws of such co-operauve society to provide long-term 
finance for agnculLural development LO be a,l:;o or to be a State land deve- 5 
lopment bank within the meanmg of this dcJ.initionj 
( w ) words and expressions used herein and not d\!fined. but defined 
in the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, shall have the meaDings respectively 
assigned to them in that Act; , 
(.t) words and expressions used herein and DOt defined either in this 10 
Act or'in the Reserve BIlDk. of India Act, 1934, but defined in the Banking 
R.epJlation Act, 1949, shall have the meaoings respectively ,aaSiFed to tbem 
in the Banking ReaulatioD Act, 1949. 
EsTABLlSHMBNT OF THE NATIONAL BANK FOR AGRICULTUR.E AND RURAL 
DEVELOPMENT AND CAPlT AL THEREOF 
I. ll) With effect from such date as the Central Government m,ay, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, there shall be established for the 
purposes of this Act, a bank to lx: known ,as the National Bank of Agriculture 
and Rural Development. 
l2) The Bank shall be a body corporate with the name aforesaid baving 
perpetual succession and a common seal with power, subject to the provisions of 
this Act, to acquire, hold and dispOSe of property and to contract, and may by 
that ~e sue and be sued. 
20 
(3) The head office of the National Bank shall be at Bombay .or at such 25 
other place as the Central Government may, by notification, specify. 
(") The Natio~al Bank may establish offices, ·branches or agencies at any 
place in India, and with the previous approval of the Central Government and 
in consultcltion with the Reserve Bank, at any place outside India. 
4. (1) lbe aIpitaI '" tile Natioaal BalIk s.... be ODe buDdred. "0I'III 01 30 
~ , _I 
Pnmded tbII die Ceatral Govemmeat may, in cousultatioD with the Reserve 
BaD .... by noti&cation, bu:rease tbe said capibl up to five b1lDdred crores of 
rapeea. " " ~,,,,-,_t 
(2) TIle capital Of tile National Bank sbal be subscribed to by the Central 35 
Govel'lllllellt and die Reaerve Bank in equal proportions. 
CHAPTER III 
MANAGEMENT OF THE NATIONAL BANK 
5, (1) The general superintendence, direction and management ~ the affairs 
and business of the Na:ional Bank shall vest in a Board of Directors, which shall 40 
exercise all powers and do .all acts and things which may be exercised or done 
by the National Bank. 
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Board in discharging its func-
tions, sball .act on ·business principles with due regard to public interest. 
2 ol. 1934, 
2 of 1984. 
10 of 1949, 

5 
(3) Subject to the proviSions of sub-sectiQll (J) and save as otherwise 
proYide'd in the regulations made under this Act, tbe Man. DirectQ1' sb2IJ 
also have powers of general superintendence, direction and management of the 
aIaifs aid eusinesl of the National Bank and may also exercise '811 powers and 
5 do all acts and thin. wbioh may rhe exercised or done by the Nati01'lal Bank. 
('4) Amy 1rilole-tbne director appointed under sub-section (3) of section 6 
shall assist the Managing Director in the discharge of his functions under gUb.: 
section (3) andperforrn such /Juties as the Bo.ard may entrust or deJesate to him. 
(5) In the discharge of his powers and fUIlCtions under sub-section (3), t'he 
10 Manqfng Dir~or shaH follow such directions as the CbaiIman may p. 
, (6) In the discharge of its functions under this Act, the National Bank shell 
be guided by such di~ctiODs ill matters of policy involving public iaterest aatbe 
Central Government, in consultation with the Reserve Bank, or the Reserve Bank, 
n19y, p in writing. 
15 6. (1) The 'Board of Directors of the National Bank shaD consist of the Board of 
following, lIlamely:- Directors. 
(a) a Otairman; 
(b) two directors from amongst experts in rural economics, 1'lIIIal. 
development, handicrafts and other rural crafts, viUage and cottage indus-
~o tries and small-scale industries or in any other ma~ter, the specialk'n<M'te8ge 
or professional experience in which is conSidered by the Central Goverl1. 
mont as useful to the Natio'na) Bank; 
(c) three directors out 6f whom two sha1l be person~ With experience 
.in the working of co-operative banks and one shaJI be a person with 
85 ~xperience In .the working of commercial banb; 
(d) three directors from out of the directors of the Reserve Bank; 
(e) three directors from amongSt the officials of the Central 
Government; 
" 
(f) two directors from amOdg!lt the officials of the State GovetdllM!!ItS; 
and 
(,) a Managing Director. 
(:2) 'l1II.Qu.umsn aod other directors shan be appointed by the -Central 
~t in consUltation with the Reserve Bank: 
Provided th.'3t· the Central Government shall also consult the Board with 
S5 rep.rd. ,to ,any appoiritment (except appointment .to the first Board) to the office of 
Mam!8ina Director, 
(3;) Where the Central Government is satisfied. in cOJ¥u1tation with the 
RtletVt Bank and the Board, that it is necessary so to do, it may appain,t one 
or more whole-time directors with such designations ,as may be deemed appt o-
-co priate by that Government and any whole-time director so appointed shall also 
be a melIlber of the Board: 
Provided that consultation with the Board shall not be necessary in the case 
of the ,appointment of a whole-lime director to the first Boarel. 

TenD 01 
ofIkfeof . 
Cbalrman 
aDdo1ber 
direCtot8, 
retire-
mClbtud 
payment 
at feeS. 
Term of 
oftI.ce of 
MaDal-
inl 
Director 
aDd 
whole-
time 
director!.!, 
condi-
tions of 
8ervice, 
etc. 
,' ... '" 
7. (J) The Chairman shaH hold office for such term not exceeding five yean 
and strall receive such salary and allowances as the Central Government may, at 
the time of appointment, specify: 
Provided that the Chairman shall notwithstanding the expiration of his term 
continue to hold office until his successor enters upon his office. 
5 
(2) 'The directors appointed under clauses (b) to (0 of sub-section (I) of 
section 6 shall hold office for a term of three years: 
Provided th,at such director shall notwithstanding the expiration of bis term 
continue to hold office until his successor enters upon his office. 
(3) The Cen:ral Government may, in consultation with the Reserve Bank, 10 
remove the Chairman or any other director referred to in sub-section (2) at any 
time before tbe expiry of his term of office after giving him a reasonable. 
0PlK>rtunity of showing cause against the proposed removal. 
(4) The Chairman and the directors refer.red to in sub-sec1ion (2) shall.be 
paid such fees and allowances as may be prescribed for attending the meetings 15 
of the Board or of any of its committees and for attending to any other work of 
the National Bank: 
Provided that no such fee shall be payable to the Chairman or any other 
director, who is an officer of the Government or a director or officer of tbe Reserve 
Bank. 20 
•. (J) The Managing Director and any whole-time director appointed under 
sulHection (3) of section 6 sball,-
(a) hold offiCe for such term not exceeding five 'Years as the Centra] 
Govemment may, at th~ time of appointment, specify; 
(b) receive such s.alary and allowances and be governed by such terms 25 
and. conditions of service as the Board may, with the previous approval of 
the Central Government a;nd in consultation with the Reserve Bank, 
determine: 
Provided that the Managing Direc'or and any such whole-time director 
appqinted to the first Board shall receive such salary .and allowances and be 30 
governed by such tenm and conditions of service as the Central Government may, 
in consultation with the Reserve Bank, determine. 
(2) The Central GoveJ'lnment may, in consultation with the Reserve Bank, 
remove the Managing Director or any whole-time direc'or appointed under sub-
section (3) of section 6 at any time before the expiry of his term of-offiCe, after 35 
giving him a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the proposed. 
removal. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in su~section (J) or sub-sectlon 
(2), tbe Central Government shall have the right to terminate the term of oftlce 
of the Managing Director or of any whole-time director appoi'llted under sub- 40 
aection (3) of section 6 at a·ny time before the expiry of the term fixed under 
sub-section (1) by givmg him notice of not less than three months i'll writing or 
three month!."" salary and allowances in lieu of such notice: 
Provided that the Central Government shall, before terminating tbe term of 
omce of the Managing Director or ,any wl1ole-time director appOinted under sub- 4!S 
~ection (:1) pf section 6, consult the Reserve Bank. . 

5 
~~-''''-- ........ ~""""-'''~'''''''' 
'9. (1) No persOJi shall be a director who-
.' • 
(a) is of unsound mind and stands so declared by ,a competedt routt; 
01' ... -.... . , 
(b) is or has been convicted of any offence which, iO the opinion of 
the Central Government, involves moral turpitude; or 
(c) is, or at any time has been, adjudicated insolvent or has suspend-
ed payment of his debts or has compounded with his creditors. 
(2) The appointment as director of any person who is a Member of Parlia-
ment or the Legislature of any State shall, unless within two months of the 
10 date of hi. appointment he ceases to be such member, be void on the expiry 
of the said period of tWO months and if any director is elected or nOlll.idtett as 
a Member of Parliament or of any State Legislature he shall cease to be a 
director as from the date of such election or nomination, as the case may be. 
10. (1) If a director-
(CI) becomes subject to 8Ily of the disqualifications mentioned in sec-
tion 9; or 
(b) is absent without teave of the Board for more than three con-
secutive meetings thereof, 
his seat shall thereupon become vacant. 
... -...:... 
gO (2) Any director may resign his office by giving notice thereof in writing to 
the Central Government, and on his resignation being accepted by the CeDte,aI 
Government or if his resignation is not sooner accepted, on the expiry of three 
months from the receipt thereof by the Central Government, he shall be deemed 
to have vacated his office. 
25 11. If the Managing Director is by infirmity or otherwise rendered incap· 
able of carrying oUt his duties or is absent on leave oc otherwise, in circums-
tances Dot involving the vacation of his appointment, the Central Government 
may, after consultation with the Reserve Bank and the Board, appoint an-
other pcrsoD.to act in his place as Managing Director during his abseoec. 
. ,;':.~ .. -.-",.~ 
U. (l) The Baaed shall meet at such times and places and shall observe 
30 such rules of procecluce in reprd to the transaction of business at its meetiqs 
as may be preec:ribed. 
(2) The Chairman of the Board, or, if for any reason he is unable to at-
tend any meeting, any other director nominated by the Chairman in this be-
half, aDd in the absence of such nomina,lioo, any other director ,elected by 
35 the directors present at the meeting, IIhall preside at the meeting Of tht" Iloard. 
40 
(3) All questions which come up before any meeting of the Boaed shall be 
decided by a majority of votes of the directors present and voting, and in the 
event of aD equality of votes, the Chairman, or, in his ,absence, the penon 
presidiDl. shall have a second Or casting vote. 
13. (l) The Board may constitute an Executive Committee consistiD& pf such 
number of directors as may be prescribed. 
(2) The Executive Committee shall discharge such functions as may be pres:-
cribed or may be delesated to it by the Board. 
I, 
DilQuaU-
fications. 
Vacation 
and 
resigna-
tion of 
otlice by 
directors. 
Casual 
vacancy 
in the 
ot'Ilce ot 
Manacinl 
Direetor . 
Meetings 
of Board. 
-. 
Commit-
tees of 
National 
Bank. 

Advisory 
Council. 
Member 
D! 
SQud 
Or Com-
mit.~ 
t2:i~ 
not to 
partici-
pate in 
meetines 
in certain 
cases. 
Transfer 
of assets 
and 
liabilities 
of Agri-
cultural 
Refinance 
aDd 
Develop':' 
ment 
Corpora-
tion. 
8 
(3) The Board lIHly constitute such other committees, whether consisting 
wholly of directors or wholly of other persons or partly of directors and partly 
qt,~,paIIOIIIi as.it thiDbJit and-,for swm pII1p06ee as it may ~ and every 
committee so constituted shall discharge such functions as may be deletated to 
it by the Board. 5 
(4) The Executive CoDunittce shall meet at such times andp1agea and shall 
observe such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its 
meetings, as may be prescribed. 
(5) The times and places at which any committee constituted under ~ub­
section (3) shall meet, the rules of procedure whicb such committee sbaIl observe 10 
in. regard to the trauaaction of busmeu at its. meetings, and the feea.eQd a,lJpw-
ao~s whic~ may be paid to the members of s~h committee ior _ndin&.tbe 
mce~ of the committee .and IDr 6ttendina to 'iUl)' other work of \Pe Natiooal 
BUk shan be such as m,ay be specifie4 by that Ban~ 
14. (1) The ~d shall ~tute an Advilory Counoil COD&istiag, of SIIIJh 15 
number of directors and such other persons who, in the opinion of the Board, 
have special know1edce of all'iculture, agricultural credit, co--operation and' rural 
economics, small-scale industries, vi1l8.l¥ and cotta&e .iru;lustries IQId handic11lfts 
and other rural crafts or have special knowledge and appreciatiQ~ of. ~ coun-
try's overall developmental policies and in particular ovenill monetary and credit !aO 
polioics, wbich is conaidered by tho Board M useful· to the National Bank. 
. (2) The Advisory Council shall advise the National Bank in such matteB 81 
may be referred to the AdviSOry Council b)' tho NatioaaJ. Bat .. . DIIIf __ 
char&e such other functions as may be entrusted or delepted to the Advisory 
Coonen by the NetionaJ.BaBt. 15 
(3) A member of the Advisory Council shall hold office fOf such. term not 
e~, Ave years as the National B~ may u, and r.~c such. _ aud 
allowances as may be prescribed for attending the meetinp of the Adv~ Coon-
ciland for attendiD& to any other work of the National Bank. 
(4) Tho Advisory Couocil sball.meet at' sUMUmes and .~s ~ sbIll ob- SO 
~e. such r_ of procedure in roprd to transaction of busiDcwJ at it. ... t-
UW. _ DJa)' be ptelCribed. . 
U. A director of tQo Board or 6 member of aConuaiUee, wllo-hJII. any ~ 
or indiJeIt;;J*UDiaq. iDtcreIt ill : any' mUter· comina·up for· 0GDJideaticD 8t,~ meet-
iDa. of. tho Board or a Committee thereof, shall, as soon 88 posSible after role- 35 
v.- ~ __ e QIJIBe ;to.hiskmwiedp, disdole u.atulo IOf his Jblereat 
.... ""'Ctio& aDdtb.e.di~ .. sballrbe.recorded in theo~s.of·tbe:BoaI, 
or the Pommittee, as the case may be, and the director or. .MO' •• .sball. DCIt, take 
any part in any deliberation or decision of the Board or the Committee with r. 
peel to that matter. 
CHAPTBRIV 
TRANSFEIl OF BUSINESS TO THE NATIONAL BANK 
l6. (1) On 8Uc8 date aa the Central Go\!Cll'DII1oeD&, in cooaultation witl1 the 
ResCIVo Baok may, by notifi.catign, appoint, the enUre undC1'l8k:illg. of. ~AID­
~al RefrDulce and Development Corporation (hereafter in this C ..... 45 
rdcrrccl to 88 the "Corporation") i.ncludio& all buaiaes8, property, ~a,ad 
liabiU~, rights, interests, privileges and obJi&ations of whatever o,ature, shall 
stand trusferced to and vest in the National Bank. 
(2) As compensation for the transfer ~ the undertaking of the Corporation 
to d10'~ BILDk UIld&t ,U1MCCItiea (:1), the NaaioD:al:s.ok shaJ.lwitlliD sa 50 
mOlltbJ from the date appointed under that sub.teotion· (hereafter, in this .. 

I 
r~ 
»01 UNa. 
~ 
10 of 1963. 
9 
tion referred to as the appointed date) pay to the shareholders of the Corpora-
tU;m a sum equal to the total paid-up oapital of the Corporation as on the date 
immediately preceding the appointed date . 
. (3) The amount of compensation payable under sub-section (2) to the sharl!-
holders of the Corporation shall be apportioned among the shareholders in pro-
5 portion to lIieir contributions to the p.aid-up capital of the Corporation as on the 
date immediately precediag the appointed date. 
ExpJanation.-f·or the purposes of this sub-section, ""shareholders of the 
Corporation"" means shareholders of the Corporation whose names appear, on 
the register of shareholders maintained under section ~ of the Agricultural Refi-
10 nance and DevelOpment Corporation Act, 1963, on the date immediately pre-
cedinS the appointed date. 
" 
(4) The National Bank shull also p,ay to the shareholders of the Corporatica 
fef.errcd to in sub«ction (2) an amount calculated at th.e rate at which the shares 
of the Corporation were gua1'anteed as to the payment. of minimum dividcDd 
15 under section 6 of the A&ricultural Refinance IWld Development Corporation Act, 
19,63, for the period, if any, thet has expired in the accounting year of the Cor-
poration before the appointed date and this amount the National Bank shall 
distribute to the shareholders of the Corporation referred to in sub-section (2) 
20. in proportion to the shares held by such shareholders on the date immedi,ate1y 
preceding the appointed dale and at the rate at wbich such shares were guaran-
teed as ,to the payment of minimum dividend. 
(5) All contracts, deeds, bonds, agreements, powers of attorney, &rants of 
lep! representation and other instruments of whatever oot~ subsi.&tiDa or bavin& 
25 effect immediately before the appointed date and to which the Corporation is a 
party, or which are in favour of th.e Corporation, shall be of as full force end 
dect apiDst or in favour of the NatiOnal Bank, as the case may be, and may be 
enforced or acted upon as fully and effectually as if instead of the Corporation the 
National Baok. had been a party thereto, Of as if they had been in favour of the 
NatioJlal Bank. 
30 (6) If. iIDme4iately before the appointed date, any suit, ~ppcal Cf other 
!opt pl'QCcOdin, of whatever nature, is pendina, by or aaaiDst the Co~tWn, 
tho SIIDD &ball nQt abatc, be ctiscontinued or be inlUlY way ploj\ldici.ally ~ 
by reason of the transfer to the NatioaaJ. Bank of thcundertekiDg of the;axpo. 
35 ~on. or of ~ contained in this Act, but the suit, appeal or other proceed- • 
in, ~. be continued, prosecuted and enforCed, by or agatnst the Natioilal Bank. 
1'1 Oa'·the date appainted under lub-sootioo(l.) of aectioa 16,-
(d) the Corporation sha:ll stand dissol'fed; and 
(b) tho A&ricultural Reftoance and Development Corporation Act, 
1963, shall stand repealed. 
18. (1) On such date as the Central Government may, in consultation with 
the Reserve Bank, by notification, appoint, the assets and liabilities with the 
Resme BIDk retati8a1D-
Dissolu-
tion of 
the Cor-
poration 
and 
repeal 
of Act 
10 of 
1963. 
Transfer 
of 
business 
from 
(a) the National Agricultural Credit (Long Term Operations) Fund Reserv~ 
2 of 1934. 45 
estabHlhed and mainUlined under section 46A of the Reserve Bank of India Bank. 
Act, 1934; aDd 

Borrow-
1Dp by 
the 
Ifatlol\al 
.. ~ 
l_. , ...... _. 10 
(b) the National Agricultural Credit (Stabilisation) Fund established 
and maintained under section 46B of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, 
shall stBndtnulsferred to the National Bank and form part of the National 
Rural Credit (Long Term Operations) Fund referred to in section 42 and the 
National Rural Credit (Stabilisation) Fund referred to in section 43, respectively. 5 
2 of 1934. 
(2) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, in consulta~ 
tion with the Reserve Bank, by notification, appoint, the loans and advances 
which the Reserve Bank has granted to State c~operative banks and regional rw::aI 
banks under section 17 [except sub-clause (a) of clause t 4)] of the Reserve 
Bank of India Act, 1934, and which the Reserve Bank may specify by a general 
or special order, shall, as far as may be, become and be deemed to be loans and 10 2 of 
advances granted by the National Bank under section 21, and the NatioD8l Bank 
shall repay to the Reserve Bank, the amount of such loans and advances on such 
terms end conditions as the Central Governmellt may specify, in consultation 
with the Reserve Bank. 
(3) All ri&hts, liabilities, interests, privileges· and obligations of whatever 15 
nature (including the rights and obligations arising by way of purchase, sale and 
rediscount of any bills of exchange and promissory notes) of the Reserve Bank in 
relation to any asset or liability referred to in sub-section (l) or any loan or· 
advance referred to in sub-section (2) shall stand transferred to and vest in the 
National Bank on the date on which such asset or liability stands transferred to !ZO 
the National Bank under sub-section (1) or, ,as the case may be, 
such loan or advance becomes under su~section (2) a loan or advance granted 
by the NatioD8l Bank. 
( 4) All contracts, deeds, bonds, agreements, powers of attorney, grants of 
legal representation and other instruments of wh.atever nature relating to an, !25 
asset or liability referred to in sub-section (1) and subsisting or having effect im~ 
mediately before the date appointed under that sub-section or relating to any 
loan or advance referred to in sub-section (2) and subsisting or having effect 
immediately before the date appointed under that sub-section shall be of as full 
force and effect against, or in favour of, the Natiooal Bank, as the case may be, 30 
and may be enforced or acted upon as fully lIIDd effectually as if instead of the 
R.eaerve Bank, the National Bank had been a party thereto, or as if they ~ 
beon in favour of the National Bank. 
(5) If, immediately before the date appointed under sub-section (l) or sub-
section (2), as the case may be, any suit, appeal or other legul procecdinp of 
whatever nature relating to any asset or liability referred to in sub-section (1) 35 
or fJ.Dy loan or advance referred to in sub-section (2) is pending, by or againSt 
the Reserve Bank, the same shall not abate, be discontinued, or be in any way 
prejudicially affected by reason of the transfer to the National Bank of such asset 
or liability under sub-section (l), or as the case may be, such loan or adwnce . 
becoming under su~section (2) a loan or advance granted by the National Bank, 40 
~r of anythina contained in this Act, but the suit, appeal or other proceedings 
may be continued, prosecuted and enforced, by or against the National Bank. 
CHAPTER V 
BORROWINGS BY THE NATIONAL BANK 
It. The National Bank may, for the purpose of carrying out its functions 45 
under this Act,-
(a) Iss. and seD bonds and debe .. tuns canying intere!t, whida bonds 
-.I debeatures sW be ~ci by die Centtal Govemment as to the 
repa)~ 01 priDdpII .. d payment of interest at such rates as may be 
19H. 

11 "-7 '(0 
-' 
• 
5 
10 
fixed by the Central Govemment iD consultation with the Reserve BalIk at 
die dme tbe bonds Or debentures are issued; 
(b) borrow money from the Reserve Bank repayable on delD"clnd 01' OD 
the expiry of fixed periods not exceeding eighteen months from the date of 
the making of the loao or advance, on such :erms and conditions includiJDg 
the ,terms relating to security and purpose as may be specified by the 
Reserve Bank; 
(c) boft'OW money from the Central Government and from 88y other 
.... orlty or organisation. or institution approved by that Govemmeat, on 
sueh terms and condltfous as may he agreed upon; 
(d) accept from the Central Goverament, a State Government, a local, 
autbority, a State land development bank, a State co-opentlve bank or .. 
scheduled bank or .... y person approved by the Central CwOvernmcnt in this 
behalf, deposits repayable after the expiry of a period which shlll1 not In! 
aay case he less than twelve months from file making of such deposit aIut 
on sueh other tenus as die NatiOnal Bank may, with the prior'appl'o~1 of 
the Reserve Bank fix; and· 
(e) receive gifts, grants, donations or benefactions from Government 
or any other source. 
20 20. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Foreign Exchange Regn-
46 of 1973. lation Act, 1973, or in any other law for the time being in force relating to foreign 
exchenge, the National Bank may borrow, with the previous approval of the 
Central Government snd in consultation with the Reserve Bank, foreign currency 
from any bank or financial institution io India or elsewhere. 
25 (2) 11Ie Cen~1 Govemment 'may gUM'8Iltee;' loans takea by die NIIdD • 
.. • nk under su~tion (1) as to the repayment of principal and the paymea.t 
.. "'. of Interest thereon and other incidental chafJes. 
CHAPTER VI 
CREDIT FUNCTIONS OF THE NATIONAL BANK 
30 11. (1) The National Bank may provide by way of refinance, loans and 
advances., repayable on demand Qr on the expiry of fixed periods not exceeding 
eighteen months, to State co-operative banks, regional rural banks. or to any 
financial institution or to any class of fiooncial institutions, which are approved 
by the Reserve Bank in this behalf, for financing-
35 (I) agricultural operations or the marketing of crops, or 
(Ii) the marketing and distribution of inputs necessary for agriculture 
or rural development, or 
(iii) any other activity for the promotion of or in the field of agricul-
ture or nlTat development, or 
40 (Iv) hOI1(1 fide commercial Or trade transactions, or 
(v) the production or marketing activities of artisans or of smaIJ-scale 
industries, industries in the tiny and decentralised sector. vil1age and cottage 
industries 01' of those engeged in the field of handicrafts and other rural 
crafts. 
45 (2) The National Bank may make Joans and advances under sub-section (]) 
against the security of-
(/) stocks, funds and securities other than immovable property, in 
Borrow-
ings in 
foreign 
currency. 
Produc-
tion and 
market-
ing 
credit. 

Conver-
sion loan 
for pro-
duction 
credit. 
12 
which a trustee is euthorised t() invest trust money by any law for thetimc 
being in force; 
(ii) promi88Ofy notes supported by documents of title to goods, such 
documents bavingbeen transferred, assigned or pledged to the boITOWina 
institution as security for a loan or adwnce made for any of the putposes 5 
specified in su1Hection (1); 
Provided that the National Bank may, whenever it considers it necesll81)' 10 
to do, accept, in lieu of the actual assignment of any ·such 5eCUrity in favour of 
the National Bank, a declamtion in writing from the borrowing i.nstitution,-
(a) stating that it holds such documents of title to goods as may be set 10 
out in the declaration; and 
(b) containing such other particulars QS may be required by the ~~tio­
nal Bank. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in Bub--section (2), the National . 
Bank may in its discretion grant a loan or advance- 15 
(a) to any State co-opcrative bank if the loan or advance is fully 
guaranteed for repayment of principal and interest by Government; 
(b) to any State co-Qperati.ve bank which is a scheduled bank, if the 
loan or advance is secured either b~ a bill of exchange or promissory note 
execoted by the central co-opcrative bank and a~d in favour of the 20 
State co-operative bank. 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (2) and (8), the 
National Bank may alSo make loons and advances ropayable on demaAd or on 
the expiry of fixed periods not exceeding eighteen months against pronUssol)' 
notes of a State co-operative bank or a regional: rural bank or an institution ap~ 25 
proved under sub-section (J); 
Provided that the borrowing institution furnishes a declaration in writing, set-
ting out the pUrpose for which it has made loaDB and advances and such other 
par.ticulars as may be required by the National Bank. 
U. Where the National Bank is satisfied that owing to <irotlgbt,famine or 30 
other natural calamities, military operations or enemy action, any Stak c0.-
operative bank, regionral rural bank or any such financial illltitDtion or any .ftn~ 
ancial institution falling under any such class of financial institutions, as may be 
approved by the Reserve Bank in this behalf, requires assistance under this sec-
. tion, it may provide to such bank or institution su~h financial assistan~ as it may 35 
deem fit by way of making loans and advances repayable on the e~ptry of fixed 
peIiods not e~ceeding seven years and on such terms and conditions as may be 
specified in this behalf by the National Dank: 
Provided that loans and advances may be made under this section only for 
the purpOse of enabling the borrowing bank or institution,- 40 
(i) to pay any dues tQ the National Bank for credit extended for ftn~ 
a.ncing agricultural operations or the marketing of crops under c1au.e (I) 
of sub-section (1) of section 21, or 
(in to malee to central co-operative banks"or ,primary rural credit 
societies, loans or 'advances repayable on the expiry of fixed periods 1lot 45 
being 1ess than eighteen months and not exceeding seven years,by way of 
reimbursement of loans and advances rpade by such co-opc.rative banks or 
• 

IS 
lOcleties for agricultur~ or agricultural operations, or for reimbursement of 
such loans or advances which have been converted into loans or advances 
repayable on expiry of fixed periods not being less thun eighteen months 
and not exceeding seven years from the date of conversion: 
5 Provided fur.ther that no loan or advance shall be made under this section 
&0 a State co-opcrative bank unless \'Iuch loan or advance is fully guaranteed as 
to the repayment of the principal and payment of interest, by the State Govern-
ment. 
23. Where the NatioD81 Bank is satisfied that owing to unforeseen circums-
10 taJ,lCes the rescheduling of any loans and advances made to artisans, small-scale 
industries, industries in the tiny and decentralised sector, village and cottage 
industries and those engaged in the field of handicrafts and other rural crafts; by 
any State co-operative benk, regional rural bank or any such financial institution 
or any financial institution falling under such class of financial institutions. as may 
15 be approved by the Reserve Bank in this behalf, h'm; become necessary, it may 
pi-ovide to such bank or institution such financial assistance as it may deem fit 
by way of loans and advances repayable on the expiry of fixed periods not being 
less than eighteen months and not exceeding seven years against such securities 
all, may be specified in this behalf by the National Bank: 
20 
Provided thet no loan or advance shall be made under this section to a State 
co-operative bank unless such loan or 'advance is rully guaranteed as to the repay-
ment of the principal and payment of interest, by the State Government but such 
guarantee may be \Wived by the National Bank if other security to the satisfac-
tion of the National Bank is furnished, Or if, for reasons to be recorded by it in 
25 writing, the National Bank is satisfied that the guarantee or other security is not 
necessary. 
24. The National Bank shall provide such financial assistance as it may con-
sider necessary by way of making ,to State co-operative banks, regional rural 
banks, loans and advances repayable on the expiry of fixed periods not being 
'less toon eighteen months· and not exceeding seven vears against such securities 
30 as may be specified, in this behalf, by the National Bank and such loans or ad-
vances may be made for agriculture, roml development or such other purposes 
as the National Bank may, from time to ~ime, determine: 
Provided that no loan or advance shall be made under this section to a State 
oo-operative bank unless such loan or advance is fuUy guaronteed as to the repay-
34 ment of ·the principal and payment of interest, by the State Government but such 
guarantee may be waived by the National Dank, if other security to the satisfac-
tion of the Natioool Bank is furnished, or if, for reasons to be recorded by it in 
writing, the National Bank is satisfied that the guamntee or other security is not 
necessary. 
40 
25. (1) The Nntioool Bank may provide such finanda) assistance as it may 
consider necessary for promoting agriculture -and rural development by-
(a) making loans and advances: by way of refinance, on such terms and 
oonditions as the National Bank may think fit t'o impO'Se, to a Sro.te land 
development bank or a State co-opcrative bank or -a scheduled bank or any 
45 other financial institution approved by the Reserve Bank in this behalf, and 
also n'she"uling the payment of such loans and advances: 
Resche_ 
duling of 
loans to 
artisans, 
small-
seale 
indus-
tries, etc. 
Invest-
ment 
credit-
medium 
term. 
other in· 
vestment 
credit. 

Purchase 
and 
sale of 
shares. 
Loans to 
State 
Govern-
ments for 
share 
capital 
contribu-
tion. 
Security 
for 
credit. 
14 
Provided that the maxlmum period for whiQl any SUCh loan or advance 
may be granted, whether originally or by rescheduling the payment thereof, 
shall not exceed twenty~five years; 
(b) purchasing Or selling, or subscribing to the bonds or debentures 
issued by any bank or institution referred to in clause (a) and repayable 5 
within a period DOt exceeding twenty-five years from the dates on which 
they are issued: 
(c) making loans and advances on such terms and conditions as the 
National Bank may think fit to impose, to a State co-operative bank or a 
scheduled bank for the purpose of enabling such bank to make loans or 10 
advances to artisans, small-scale industries, industries in the tiny and decen-
tralised sector, village and cottage industries and those engaged in the field 
of handicrafts and other rural crafts and also rescheduling the payment of 
such loans and advances: 
Provided that the maximum period for which any such loan or advance 15 
may be granted, whether origina1ly or by rescheduling the payment thereof. 
shall not exceed twenty-five years; 
(d) making, where it is considered nece:qa.ry so to do in connection with 
any financial assistance under clause (a) or clause (b) or clause (c) to a 
State land development bank or a State co-operative bank or a Scheduled ~o 
}y,mk, loans and advances repayable on demand or on the expiry of a fixed 
period not exceeding eighteen months. by way of refinance to such bank and 
also rescheduling the payment of such loans and advances for such period 
as tbe National Bank may deem fit. 
(2) The provisions of this section shall be in addition to, and not in deroga- ~5 
tion of, the provisions of section 21 and section 24. 
26. The National Bank may contribute to the share capital of, or purchase 
and sell shares of, or invest in the securities of, any institution concerned with 
agriculture and rural development. which the Central Government ma.y notify, in 
consultation with the Reserve Bank. 30 
27. The National Bank may make loans and advances to State Governments, 
repayable on the expiry of fixed periods not exceeding twenty years from the 
date of makin~ such loans and advances, from the Nation.al R.ural Credit (Long 
Term Opemtions) Funds established under section 42 for enabling· them 
to subscribe directly or indirectly to the share capital of a co-operative credit 35 
society. 
28. (1) No accommodation shall be granted bv the National Bank under 
clause (~) or clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section 25 or section 30 or section 
32 to an institution other than '3 scheduled bank unless it i~ futtv and unconditio-
nally gu~ranteed by the Govemment as to the repayment of principal and pay- 40 
ment of interest: 
Provided that no such l!Uarantee sh?'l be required in cases in which security 
to the satisfaction of the Board is furnished by the borrowing institution. 
(2) No accommodation sha11 be .!'ranted bV the National Rank under clause 
. (0) or clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section 25 or section 32 to anv scheduled 45 
bank unlc<;<; security to the satisfaction of the Boord is furnished by such scheduled 
bank.' I .. ~ -- ., 
~ -
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sulHection (I) or sub~section 

15 
in which the Board, for reasons to be recorded by it in writing, decides having 
regard to the nature and scope of the scheme or schemes for which accommoda-
tion is granted by the National Bank that such security or guarantee ill Dot 
necessaly. 
5 29. (1) Any sums received by a borrowing institution in repayment or 
realisation of loans and advant:es refinanced either wholly or partly by the 
National Bank shall, to the extent of the accommodation granted by the 
National Bank and remaining outstanding, be deemed to have been received 
by the borrowing institution in trust for the National Bank, and shall accordingly 
10 be paid by such institution to the National Bank, as per the repayment schedule 
fixed by the National Bank. 
(2) Where an accommodation h'as been granted to a borrowing institution, 
all securities held, or which may be held, by such borrowing institution, on 
account of any transaction in respect of which such accommodation has been 
15 granted by the National Bank, shall be held by such institution in. trust for the 
National Bank. 
39. The National Bank may make loans and advances otherwise than by way 
of refiaaoce to any institution approved in this behalf by the Central Government 
011 sUCh terms and conditions (including security) and repayable within such 
go period not exceeding twenty-five years as the National Bank may deem fit. 
31. The National Bank may receive, for the rendering of any of the services 
mentioned in sections 25, 30 and 32, such commission or other consideration as 
may be agreed upon. 
32. The National Bank may guarantee, with the prior approval of the 
25 Central Government and on such terms and conditions as may be agreed upon, 
deferred payments in connection with the purchase of capital goods--
(i) due from a co-operative society approved by the Reserve Bank in 
this behalf Or such other institutions which may, on the recommendation of 
the Reserve Bank, be approved by the Central Government in this behalf, or 
go (ii) due from any other person and guaranteed to the National Bank 
by a State land development bank or a State co-operative bank or a schedul~ 
eel bank. 
33. In entering into any tran5actiEm under this Chapter with a borrowing 
institution, the National Bank may impose such conditions as it may think 
35 necessary or expedient for protecting the interests of tbe National Bank. 
34. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any agreement, 
the National Bank may, by notice in writing, require any borrowing institution 
to which it has granted any loan or advance to discharge .forthwith in full its 
liabilities to the National Bank-
40 (0) if it appears to the Board that false Of misleading information in 
·15 
any material particular was given in the application for the loan or advance; 
or 
(b) if the borrowing institution has failed to comply with any of the . 
terms of its contract with the Na.tional Bank in the matter a.! the loan or 
advance; or 
Amounta 
and 
securitiea 
to be 
held in 
trust. 
Direct 
loans. 
Commis-
sion. 
Issue of 
guaran-
tees. 
Power 
to impose 
condi-
tions for 
accom_ 
modation. 
Power to 
call for 
repay-
ment 
before 
agreed 
period. 

National 
Bank to 
have 
access to 
records. 
Validity 
of loan 
or 
advance 
not to 
be ques-
tioned. 
National 
Bank 
not to 
grant 
loans or 
advances 
against 
ita own 
bonds or 
deben-
tures. 
Other 
functions 
of 
National 
Bank. 
16 
(c) if there is a reasonable apprehension that the borrowing institution 
is unable to pay its debts or that proceedings for liquidation may be com-
menced in respect thereof; or 
(d) if for any reason, it is necessary so to do to protect the interesta 
of the National Bank. 
35. (1) The National Bank shall have free access to all such records of any 
institution which seeks to avail of any credit facilities from the National Bank and 
5 
to all such records of any such person who seeks to avail of any credit facilities 
from such institution, perusal whereof may appear to the National Bank to be 
necessary in connection with the providing of finance or other assistance to such I 
institution or the refinancing of any loan or advance made to such person by the 0 
borrowing institution. 
(2) The National Bank may require any institution or person referred to in 
sub-section (1) to furnish to it copies of any of the records referred to in that 
sub-sectiOn and the institution or the person, as the case may be, shall be bound 15 
to comply with such requisition. 
36. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any other law for 
the time being in force, the validity of any loan or advance granted by the 
National Bank in pursuance of the provisions of this Act shall not be called in 
question merely on the ground of non-compliance with the requirements of such 20 
other law as aforesaid or Of any resolution, contract, memorandum, articles of 
association or other instrument: 
Provided that nothing in this section shall render valid any loan or advance 
obtained by any company or C()-()perative society where such company or co-
opemtive society is not empowered by it'! memorandum to obtain loans or 25 
. advances. 
37. The National Bank shall not grant any loan or advance on the security 
IOf its own bonds or debentures. 
CHAPTER vn 
OnIBR FUNC110NS OF THE NATIONAL BANK 
38. The National Bank-
(i) shall co-ordinate its operations and the operations of various insti-
tutions engaged iR the field of rural credit and maintain expert staff to study 
all problems relating to agriCulture and rural development and be available 
for consultation to the Centra] Government, the Reserve Bank, the State 35 
Governments and the other iustitutions engaged in the field of rural develop-
ment; 
(ii) may act as the agent for the Central Government or a State Gov-
ernment or the Reserve Bank ill" the transaction of any business in respect 
of loans and advances granted Or to be granted. or bonds or debentures 40 
purchaaed or subscriMd for, or to ~purchased or subs.:ribed for; 
~' I 

17 
(iii) may provide facilities for training, for dissemination of informa-
tion and the promotion at research including the undertaking of studies, 
researches, techno-economic and other surveys in the field of rural banking, 
agriculture and rural development and it may for the said purposes make 
5 grants including grants by way of provision for fellowships and chairs to any 
institution. 
39. The N~tional Bank may also do all such things as may be necessary or 
incidental to or consequential upon the exercise of its powers, discharge of its 
functions and the performance of its duties, under this Act, or under any other 
10 law for the time being in force. 
40. The National Bank may invest its funds in promissory notes, stocks or 
securities of the Central Government or keep the moneys deposited with the 
Reserve Bank or with any agency of the Reserve Bank or, in consultation with 
the Reserve Bank, with 'a State co-operative or a scheduled bank:. 
15 41,. The National Dank may, for the purpose of the efficient discharge of its 
functions under this Act, collect from or furnish to the Central Government, the 
Reserve Bank or any banking company or such other financial institution as may 
be notified by the Central Government in this behalf, credit information or other 
information.' lJ~JiIL I 
20 Explanation.-For the purposes at this section, the expressions "banking 
company" and "credit information" sh~ll have the same meanings as in section 
1934. 45A of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934. 
CHAPTER VIII 
FuNDS, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT 
25 42. (1) The National Bank shall establish and maintain a Fund to be known 
as the National Rural Credit (Long Term Operations) Fund. 
(2) The Fund shall (in addition to assets and liabilities transferred undeI' 
section 18) include,-
(a) sudt _ of money 118 the Ceatnl Government and abe State 
30 Go~ may coatribute from time to tn.; 
(b) such sums of money as the Reserve Bank may contribute every 
year; and 
(c) such further 8umS of money as the Board may contribute every 
year. 
35 (3) The amount in the said Fund shall be applied by the National Bank only 
to provide financial assistance by way of loans and advances under section 23, 
section 24, clause (a) or clause (b) or clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section 
25 or section 27 or for the purposes of section 26. 
43. (1) The National Bank shall estaWisb and maintain a Fund to be known 
<to 8S the National Rural Credit (Stabilisation) Fund. 
45 
(2) The Fund shall (in addition to assets and liabilities transferred undM 
section 18) include,-
(a) si.:b __ of mooey as die Cmtnl Gov'ermuent and the State 
GovellUllellts may ~ froID time to time; 
(b) such sums of money as the Reserve' Bank: may contribute every 
year; and 
Inciden-
tal 
powers. 
Deposits 
and 
invest-
ments, 
Credit 
informa-
tion. 
National 
Rural 
Credit 
(Long 
Term 
Opera-
tions) 
Fund. 
National 
Rural 
Credit 
(Stabi-
lisation) 
Fund. 

P"'jU " 
,..> ' 
Research 
and 
Develop-
ment 
Fund. 
Reserve 
Fund 
and 
other 
Funds. 
Prepara-
tion of 
balance-
sheet, etc., 
of 
National 
Bank. 
Disposal 
of 
surplus. 
Audit; 
18 
(c) such rurther 811m, ,Of money as the Board may contribute every 
year. 
(3) The amounts in the said Fund shall be applied by the Natione! Bank 
0JIIy to pl'Ovi<kJoans and advances under section 22. 
44. ,(I) The National Bank shall establish and maintain a Fund to be known 5 
88 the Research and Development Pund, to which shall be credited-
(a) sudl SOIIIB of money &'I are mmsfenble to the FlBld in aecord8nce 
wJduedioll 47; 
(b) such sums of money as the Board may contribute every year to 
this Fund from out of its annual profits; and 10 
(c) such gifts, grants, donations or benefactions which the National 
Bank may receive and which the 'Board may earmark for this purpose. 
(2) The Rcseardl and ne"elopment Fund shall be expended on matters of 
importance to agriculture, egricultural operations 'lind rural development, in-
cluding the provision of :training and research facilities and the making of 15 
grants under clause (iii) of section 38. 
45. The National Bank shall establish a Reserve Fund and such other Funds 
as the Board may consider necessary by transferring such sums as it may deem 
fit, out of its annual profits and out of reuipts !from gifts, grants, donations or! 
benefactions, which it may receive. 20 
46. (1) The balance-sheet and accounts Of the Natioaal Bank ,haD. be pre-
pared and maintained in such form and manner as may be prescribed. 
(2) The Boar.d shall ,cause the books and accounts .of the National Bank to 
be balanced and closed as on the thirtieth day of June, each year. 
47. Mter making provision 'for bad and doubtful debts, depreciation of 25 
assets .and' all <>!her mat1lel'S for whieh provision is necessary or expedient or 
which is usually provided for by bankers, and for the Funds referred to in 
sections 42, 43 and 45, the National Bank shall transfer-
(;) for a period 01 fifteen yean, following the' accouDtlng year lIuring 
whlda die National BalIk is estabIisIMd, tile iUOUIIt , ........ bIg( ..... eafter In 30 
tIds 8edloD referred to as sarpIus) te die Rnn dt .. Denio' ...... 
Faad UDder sediOll' 44; .ad 
(ii) after the expiry of the said period of fifteen years the National 
Bank shall, after makiog provisiOllJor the Fund referred· to itt clause (I), 
transfer half of the balance of surplus to the Central Government and· the 35 
other half to the Reserve Bank. 
48. (1) The accounts of the National Bank shall be audited by auditors 
duly qualified to 8ctas auditors under sub-section (1) of section 226 .of the 
Companies Act, 1956, who shall be llppointed by the C.entral Government in 
consultation :with the Reserve Bank, for such term and on such remuneration as the 40-
Contra! Government may fix. 

19 732 
(2) The auditors sha!1 be supplied with a copy of the aDDual baIance-slleet 
of the National Bank and it shaU be their duty to exataine it together with the 
accounts and VQuchers rel'ating thereto and they shalf have a list ddivered 10 
them of all books kept by the National Bank sod shall at all reasonable times 
5 have access to the books, eccounts, vouchers and other documonts of the NaGona1 
Bank. 
(3) The auditors may, in relation to the accounts of the National Bank, eu- . 
mine any director of the Board or any officer or other employee of the National. 
Bank and shaH be entitled to require from the Board or officers or employees of 
10 the National Bank such information and explanation as they may think neces-
sary for the performance of their duties. 
(4) TIte auditors shall make a report to the National Bank UPOD the annual 
balance-sheet and accounts examined by them and in every such report, they 
shall state whether in their opinion the balance-sheet is a fun and fair balana-c-
15 sheet containing all necessary particulars and properly drawn up so as to exhibit 
a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the National Ban.k and in case Ihey 
had caned for any explanation or information from the Board or any officer or 
other employee of the National Bank. whetber it has been given and whether it is 
satisfactory . 
~o (5) The National Bank shall furnish to the Central Government and the 
Re!\erve Bank within four months from the date on which the annual accounts, 
of the National Bank are closed Rnd balanced. a COpy of it~ balance-sheet as on 
the close of that year tOl!ether with a eOllY of the Nofit and loss aer-ount for the 
vear and a COOv of the auditors' report and a "eoort of the work-Inll of the 
25 National Bank durin!!: the r~levant veRr. and the C"...e'I'1tral Government qhafl. as 
1100'1 as may be after they a're received bv it. cause the ~ame to be laid befor~ 
each House of Parliement and cau'le the r.ooiec; of the said b"t"n('.e~qheet. 17I"Oftt 
and lo~s account and auditors' report to be pUhlished in the Official Gazette. 
(6) Without oreiudice to Rnvthin!' confllined in tbe orecedinl! sub-section. 
30 the Central Government may, at any time. aoooint the Comntrol1er and Auditor 
/General of India to examine and retlott uno" th,. accnuntq of the N~tion!\l Dank 
'and any exocnditure incurred bv him in connection with snch examination "nd 
~oort shan be payable by the NetioMl Bank to the Comotroller And Auditor 
'General of India, 
35 49. The National Bank sh~I' fumi~h. from time to time. to the Central Gov- Returns. 
f'rnrnp:rf and to the Reservf' Rank. such returnq 11<; the Ccmtra) 'Government 01' 
the Re~erve Bank m~v require. 
CHAPTER IX 
STAFF 
40 !O, (J) The Nation'al Bank may aopointsuch number of' officers and other 
I"moloyees !I~ it considers neces~arv or desirable for the efficient nerformance 
of its functions and determine the terms and conditions of their appointment 
and service. 
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of ~ub-lIection (/). it shan be Imvful 
45 for the National Bank to utili"e, ::tnd for the Re~erve Rank to mak,! available. 
the services of such statT of the Reserve Bank on such terms !I'ld conditioQs 
as may be lIJT'oed upon between the National }lank and the Reserve Bank. 
Staff 
of 
National 
Bank, 

20 
(3) Subject to the provisions of sub-6ection (6) at any time before the ex-
piry of six months from the appointed day. the Reserve Bank may. in public 
interest, transfer to the National Bank, such members of the staff of Reservo 
Bank whom the Reserve Bank considers as engaged, or as suitable to be engag-
ed. in attending to the work Of a nature which is 'iame or similar to that which 5 
the National Bank' may require for its efficient functioning, and upon such 
transfer they shall be deemed to be appointed by the National Bank under sub-
, section (1) with effect from the date of such transfer: 
Provided tbat every person so transferred may, before the expiry of a period 
of six mon~hs from tbe appointed day, or' before the expiry of thirty 4ays from 10 
sucb transfer, whichever period expires later, elect to go back to the Reserve 
Bank by exercising an option in writing to that effect, the option once exercised 
being final, Rnd on the exercise of such option, the Reserve Bank shall, before 
the expi11ltion of '8 period of eighteen months from the appointed day, take 
back such member of the staff and he shall be deemed to have been on depu- 15 
tation to the National Bank during the period he was a member of the staff 
of the National Bank. 
(4) (a) Any member of the staff of the Reserve Bank who is not appointed 
under sub-section (3), may, if he so tlesires, tooke an 30plication to the 
Reserve Bank within six months from the apfYOinted d:lv. to he considered for 20 
appointment as a memher of the staff of the National Bank. 
(b) The Reserve Bank may, in consultation with the National Bank, consi-
der such application having regard to the suitability of the person so applyinF. 
the availability of vllcancies in the National Bank, the exigencie.c;of service 
in the Reserve Bank and the Nations{ Bank and such other factors as may be 25 
considered relevant in this regard. and, if the Reserve Bank is satisfied having 
regard to these factors, that such applicant is suitable for being so BI"Pointed, 
recommend his apPointment to the National Bank. 
(c) The National Benk may thereupon, within eiehteen month~ from the 
appointed day, appoint such II person applying under this sub-section, as a go 
member of the staff Of the National Bank, and on such aOJ)Ointment, such a 
person shalt be deemed to have been appointed in the National Bank under 
sub-section (3): 
Provided that the proviso to sub-section (3) and the I"rovi!io to sub-section (5) 
shall not apply in respect of such a person. 35 
(5) Notwitbstanding. anythine; contained elsewhere in this Act or in any 
other law cr in any contract, for the time being ill force, at any time before 
the expiry of six months from the aprointed dav. the 'Re"erve Rank may, if it 
considers it necessary in consultation with the National Rank go to do in the 
interest of the National Bank, transfer on promotiot1 I,,"V member of the staff 40 
()f the National Brank to the Reserve Bank, and on such tramfer to the Reserve 
Bank, each !iuch member Of the staff sha11 be decm~d 10 be n member of the 
st~ff of the Re!ierve Bank and shan he entitled to the same ~nlal'v emoluments 
and other conditions of servi<:e to which he was entitle1 immediately before 
the date of such tmnsfer, including benefits. if any, ar~ing directly out of such 45 
promotion: 
Provided that every member of the staff who is transferred as aforesaid may, 
before tbeexpiry of a period of six months from the appointed· day or within 
thirty days from such transfer, whichever period expires later, elect to. go back 
, 

7~o 
ti 
to the Nationa1 Bank by exercising an. option in writing to tbatt effect, tHe 
option once .exercised being final, and on the exercise of such option, the Na-
tional Bank shall, before the expiration of a period of eighteen months from 
the appointed day, take back such member of the staff and he shall be deemed 
5 to have been OIl depatation to the Reserve Bank during the period he was II 
member of the staff of the Reserve Bank. 
(6) Every person,-
(0) who, immediately before the date appointed under sub-section (1) 
of section 1~ is a member of the staff of the Agricultural Refinance and 
10 Development Corporation; or 
, (b) who is a member of the staff of, the Reserve Bank but whose 
services are being utilised immediately before that date by the said Cor-
poration, 
!;hall be deemed to be appointed by the National Bank under sub-section (1) 
I, on the said date: 
Provided that every member of the staff of the Reserve Bank, who is 80 
deemed to be appointed, and who was not recruited' specifically for utilisation 
in the Agricultural Refinance and Development Corporation, may, before the 
expiry of a period of six months from the appointed day or within a period 
20 of thirty days from the date appointed under sub-section (1) of section 16, 
whichever period expires later, elect to go back to the Reserve Bank by exercis-
ing an option in writing to that effect, the option once exercised being final, 
and on the exercise of such option, the Reserve Bank shall, before the expira~ 
tion of a period of eighteen months from the appointed day, take back such 
25 member of the staff and he shall be deemed to have been on deputation to 
thc National Bank during the period he was a member of the staff of the National 
Bank. 
(7) Notwitmtanding anything conltained in any other law or in any agree-
ment, for the time being in force, no member of the staff shall be entitled to 
30 claim any compensation for, or in relation to any matter concerning, his trans-
fer, appointment or as the case may be, return, under sub-sections (3) to (6) and 
no claim in respect thereof shall be entertained by any court, tribun~l or other 
authority. 
(8) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (10) and sub-section (11), 
35 every member of the staff of the Agricultural Refinance and Development Cor-
poration or of the Reserve Bank who is deemed to be appointed as a member 
of the staff of the National Bank under this section, shan be deemed to have 
been appointed by the National Bank on the same salary, c:molu~ents . and 
other terms and conditions of service to which he was entItled unmcdlatcly 
40 before his appointment in the National Bank. 
(9) The provisions relating to superannuation ~nefits, namely, the re~a­
tions relating to provident fund and the rules relatmg to payment of gmtUlty 
and compassionate gratuity and any other provision relating to superannuation 
as arc applicable to the staff of the Reserve Bank. on the appoin!cd day shal~, 
45 so far as may be, apply ttl the staff of the National Bank, unless and unhl 
the National Bank alters or amends the same: 
P ovided that after the appoin~ed day, any such alteration or amendment 
may ~ effected by the National Bank as regards provident fund regulations 

Obliga. 
tion as 
to fide-
lity and 
secrecy. 
Defects 
in ap-
pointment 
not to 
invali-
date 
a~s, 
etc. 
2j 
~. ~ce wi~ sectj(W,. 6Q. 1Hld, Il$ 'l'IJ&6.-. tM other rules in the meQOet 
t4ey W!9uld !\ave hoeD alter~d Qr am.eQded. but for this su1HectiQD: 
p,rovi~d;~r mat .twr the e,xplry of· silt. mouths fr~ t~,a~lefJ d~jI, 
$e botjanGCS held ~ ;th~ .·RefiCI)'eBank of .India E~~' Providoot Fund 
to the credit of any member of the staff of the R~e Bank WOoIle SOIVj!;e;s. an: 5. 
"ansferred under this section to the National Bank and who doe.s not 
opt to go back to the Reserve Bank, shall be transferred to, and held in, the 
PlOV.t Fund of:~ NjltiQllai.·BMk; on same or. similar t4mJ1S subj~ to which 
those balances ware. held cadier in 'the ReseVie. Bank. of Indi,a EmpJoJces' Pro-
vident Fund. J a 
'(10) Notwithstandina anything coomined in any other l~wj settlement, or 
agreement, every person 'employed by the National 'Bank or wh~e services 
have been transferred to the National Bank under this Act, shall be liable to 
8~rve anywheJe in .I¢ia. 
(11) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Disputes Aet, 15 
1947, or any other k.Vt' for.~ ~beiijg in f,¥,ce, 0,1' iQ ,aoy award, judaPlcnt, 14 of 1947. 
~~, deci6ion Of or~cr of.aIJy~dus~f\l Tr~,Go~r~ 0,1" q~cr,aut,l1qrity, o.r 
any ~tUCQJent or aareemeIJ"macie arentered il)tp befQ,l'c,t.be;dat,eoLtransfer.to the 
~l B~ of Ule ,iervjpes of ~y,pe~nunder tbis sectio,n, the NatKmal Bank 
sb~l ~ :frQe to alte" aJ,ncnd or r~~a~ in spch manner 3nP to such exteat it IlO 
DUly . c::oDf~der .necessuiy, any ot ~ tC;f~: ~ .c~~. of . se.{v~ a~able 
to sQCh pea>QD8W~ selVie~ cu;e SQ tran~ferrea.,to ,tbe,N~~aJ. ~~ anp ~~o 
8(0 ,ltppoi~ ·inthe ~ti~. c~ uqd~ this ~tiqn ex~pt that the National 
;Bank aQ.U not alief to tJa~ir prej~icetbe te,qns rela~ :top~y'ment of s~~y 
and otl1~ emollJlDents, retir~t bel\e~~ and ;eliBibijity for le!tve. 2 5 
Explanation.-For tilt: purposes of this section, "appointed day" means the 
date of establishment of the National Bank under section 3. 
·CHAPTER X 
M1sc;;J>L .. ANEOUS . . .-
51. (1) The National Bank shalI not, except as otherwise required by thiI 30 
Act or ally othe~ law~ cli~se any i~formation relating tel, or to th!! affairs of, 
its consti~~ ex~pt ill cirCUJWltAA~s in whicb it is, in accordan~e with the 
l~w orprllCtice and .usage cQst()ma.ry amo.ng b~~rs, nec~sary, ~r app~opriate 
fot' the National Bw. to divulge such information. 
(2) Every ~tor, ,member ofacoDlDlittee, auditor, oIia:er ~othcr .~ 35 
p]oyee of tlteNabOllal ,Bank;.or of .the RcsoIVcBank, ,wboseserNwes"arc utiliMd 
by the National Bank ooder the prO¥isions of tbis Act,. sbaU, . .,ore. .elltcrina 
upon his duti~s, make a de~laration of fidelity and secrecy in the form set out 
in the First Schedule to this A,ct. 
52. (1) No act or proceedil.'i of the Board or of any committee of the 40 ' 
NetioQal Bank shall be questioned on the ground merely of the existeoce of .any 
vacancy in, or def~ in .the constitution, of, ttre BOard, or the committee, 81. 
the case may be. 
(~) No. act done by any petlODaeting.in ,gQQCl faith as a dUect01'-. of the 
Board or as a member. of a com,uftee iof Ithe National iBaak shall'~ 45 

invaHd merely on the 'IfOUnd' "that he was cUsqoalifted to be 8 'director or that 
there .as any otlier defoct in his appointment 
'53, No suit or ather legal proceeding sltan lie agaHtst theNatio~al ,Biflit 
or any director or any officer or other empldyee' Of the Netloital Bank Or 
5 any othtr person 811thoristci by tbe Niltlonal 'Bank to discharge any 'functlOnll 
under this Act for any loss or damage caused or lik~ly to be CitiSe8 '6y ariytltlUg 
which is in good faith done or intended 10 be done in putsQ8llCe of this Act 
or of any other law or provision having the force of law. 
54. (1) Every director shall be indemnified by the National Bank against 
10 all losses a'nd expenses incurred by him in, or in relation to, the discharge of 
1m duties, Mcept such as are caUSed by his oWn '\'itilfill' IC~ or demtJtt. 
(2) A director shan not be responsible for any other direcbJr or for any 
officer or other employee of the National Bank or for any loss or expenses 
resulting to the National Bank from the insufficiency or deficiency of the 
15 value of, or title to, any property or security acquired or taken on behalf of the 
National Bank or the insolvency or wrongful act of anv debtor or any person 
under obJil!ation to the National Bank or anythinq done in good faith in the 
execution of the duties of his office in relation thereto. 
43 of 1961. 55. NOtwithstahdinlt anythin~ contained in the lttcome-tax Act, 1961, Or 
7 of 1964. 20 the Companies (Profits) S\1rta); Act, 1964, or any oth~r enacftntnt fOr the time 
being in force relating to tax on income, profits or gains, the National niWiJk 
"hall not be liable to pay income-tax, surtax or any odler tax in respect of any 
income, profits 01' gains derived' or liny amdnnt received ~ the NiltibttillJ.Qnk. 
ProtectiOQ 
of 
action 
taken 
under 
the Act. 
Indem-
nity of 
direett:1rs. 
Exemp-
tion 
from 
income-
tax, 
etc. 
56. (1) Whoever in anv return, baJance-sheet, or other document or in any Penllltftls. 
," 
25 information required or furnished by or under or for the purposes of 1iof proyhion 
of this A~t, wilfully makes a <;tatement which i<; false in anv m8~iat particular, 
knowing it to be false, or wilfully omits to make a material statement, !OIhal1 be 
tffioIififfiilblc with imprisonment for a tcmt whith niay extend to itJre~ years 
aM s'tial1 also be 1iabie to fine. 
30 (2) If any person. fails to produce 'any 000k. account or other document, 
or to furnish any statement or information which. under the provisions of this 
Act, it is his duty to produce or furnish. he shan be punishable· with a fine 
wtn'01l ri1:tv extend to twb thomiMJd ~t~ in r~t <'If ~a'ch offence and in 
tfie ca~e of a continoini!' failure, wltb" an additional' fine wt.;cl'i rrlliv extend to 
36 onehuhdred mpee« for eveJ"\l da'V durin!! w'fritofI the flilfur~ cbntinues after 
conviction for the first such failure. 
57. (1) Where lin dfferice h-.ls beeri committed bv Ii corrit1a1rY. eVery person 
... ho. at tlYe time the offence was committed, was in cha~e of. IftId was respon-
sible to !~Je companv for the conduct of the business of the oompaflv. a!l wen 
40 a'i the company, shall be deemed to be guiltv Of the offence and shall be liable 
to be proceeded against and punished accordingly: 
Provided tllat nothing contl'lin'ed in this sub-sectioti shall render any such 
person 1iable to any punishment provided in' tllis Act. it he ptoves that the 
offence was committed without "i" knowledl!e or that he e~dsed all due dili-
45' gence to prevent the commission of sucl't' ofhnco. 
Offences 
by 
compa-
nies. 

Baokers' 
Books 
Evidence 
Act, 
1891, to 
apply in 
relation 
to 
National 
Bank. 
Liquida-
tion of 
National 
Bank. 
Power of 
Board 
to make 
regula-
tions. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything confllined in sub-section (1). where an offence 
Uilder this Act has been committed by a company and it is proved that tho 
offence has been committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attribut-
able to any neglect on the part of any director, manager, secretary or other 
officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary of other officer shall 5 
also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded 
against and punished accordingly. 
EXtplanation.-For the purposes of th~ section-
(a) "company" means any body corporate and in~ludes a firm or 
other association of individuals; ond 10 
(b) "director", in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm. 
58. The Bankers' Books Evidence Act, 1891, shall apply in relation to the 
National Bank as if it were a bank as defined in section 2 of that Act. 
59. No provISIon of law "elating to the winding up of companies shall 
apply to the National Bank and the National Bank shall not be placed in liqui- 15 
dation save by order of the Central Government and in such manner as it may 
direct. 
60. (1) The Board may, with the previous approval of the Central Gov~ 
ernment and in consultation with the R~serve Bank, by notification, make 
regulations not inconsistent with this Act to provide Jor all matters for which 20 
provision is necessary or eXpedient for the purpose of giving . effect to the 
provisions of this Act. 
(2) In particular and without prejudjce to the generality· of the foregoin, 
power. such regulations may provide fo~ all or any of thefottowing. matters, 
namely:-
(a) the fees or allowances that may be paid . to the directors or 
m~mher4j of the Advisory Council; 
(b) the times and places of the meetings of the Board or the EXe-
cutive Committee or the Advisory Council and the procedure to be fol-
lowed at such meetings includin~ the quorum nece!lsary for tile transae- 30 
tion of business; 
(c) the number of directors constitutin~ the Executive Committee 
and the fUJ1(;tions that such Committee ~han dischar~e; 
(d) the manner and term!! of issue and redemption of bonds and 
debentures by the National 'Bank; 35 
(e) the conditions which ~he Natioool Bank may impose in granting 
loans and advances; 
(f) the manner and conditions r.ubject to which the N'.ltional Bank 
may borrow in foreign currency; 
(g) the form and manner in which the balance-sheets and the 8C- 40 
counts of the National Bank sh,11 *'e prepared or maintained; 
18 of 1891. 

(h) the forms of returns and statements whil.;h .the Nstional Bank 
may require under this Act; 
(i) the duties and conduct, salaries, allowances and conditions of 
service of officers and other employees; 
5 (j) the establishment and maintenance of proVident or other benefit 
funds for employees Of the National Bank; and 
(k) such other matters for which the Board may consider it expedient 
or necessary to provide for by way of regulations. 
(3) Any regulstion which may be made by the Board under this Act may 
10 be made by the Reserve Bank, in consultation with the Central Government, 
before the expiry of t]uee months from the date of establishment of the Na-
tional Bank, and any regulation so made may be altered snd rescinded by the 
Board in the exercise of its powers under this Act. 
(4) The power to make regulations conferred by this section soon include 
15 the power to ~ive retrospective effect to the regUtlations or any of them from 
a date not earlier than the date of commencement of this Act, but no retros-
pective effect shan be given to any regulation !iO as to prejudicia1Jy affect the 
interests of any person to whom such regulation may be applicable. 
(5) The Central Government shall oouse everv regulation made under this 
20 Act to be 1e.id, as soon as may be after it is made. before each House of Parlia-
ment. while it is in session, for 'a total period of thirty days which may be com-
nri~ed in one session or in two or more successive sessions. nnd if. before the 
ex.piry of the session immediately following the sec;sion or fhe' siicc~sive ses-
sions aforesaid. both Houses aJ!Tee in makin/! anv modification io the reguletion 
:2 5 or both Houses agree that the rel!ulation should no! be made. the re"lI'tation 
shall thereafter have effect onlv in such modified form or be of no effect. as 
the case may be; so, however. that any such modifi08tion or -annulment shall be 
without prejudice to the validity of anything pre~ously done under tbat regula-
tion. 
30 61. The enactments specified in the Second Schedule to this Act shall be 
amended in the manner provided therein and unless otherwise provided in ,that 
Schedule, such wnendments sh!lll take effect on and from the date of establish-
ment of the National Bank under section 3. 
Amend-
ment of 
certain 
enact-
ments. 
6%. If any difficulty arises in ,"ving effect to the provIsions of this Act, Power to 
35 the Central Government may, by order, not inconsistent with the provisions of r~:;:lty. 
this Act, remove the difficulty: 
Provided that no such order shan be made after the expiry of a period or 
three years from the commencement of this Act. 
TIlE FIRST SCHEDULE 
[See section 51,(2)] 
DECLARATION OF FIDELITY AND SECRECY 
I do hereby declare that T will faithfully, tr~ly and to the ~ of my ~ki1l 
nnd abiHty execute and perform ~he duties reqUIred of ~ as director, aud~tor, 
officer or other employee (as the case ma~ be) of the National Bank for Agncu1-

28 
lure and Rural Development and which properly relate to the oiioe or position 
held by me in the said National Bank. 
I further declare that I will not communicate or allow to be communicated 
to any person not legally entitled thereto' any ,inf0RDati~n relating to the ·affair~ 
of the N ational·Bank for AgricuLture ·and Rural Development or to the affairs 5 
df f1D1 pet'SOn . having • IDlY dealing with the said National Ba ft k nor will I allow 
any such person to inspect or have access to aqy books or doeulnmts ~ging 
to or in the possession of the National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Deve-
lopment and relating to the business of the said Nation~l Bank or the business 
'Of any person having any dealing with the said National Baok. 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE 
(See section 59) 
AMENDMENTS TO CERTAIN ENACTMENTS 
PART I 
AMENDMENTS TO THE RESERvE BANK OF INDIA Aer, 1934 
(2 GJ! 1934) 
AmendmeNts 
1. In section 2,-
fa) clauses (a), .(4Ii), (bi~, (bii)j (biii) , (biv), (tw);(b"iU)~ 
(ci)1 (Gi8t). (di), (ciii), (civ), (cv) and (I) shall be omitted; 
(b) after clause (ee) , the following clause shall be inse~ed, 
namely:-
10 
20 
'(ccc) "National Bank" means the National Ban~ for Agri- 25 
culture and Rural Development established under section 3 of 
the National Bank for Agriculture and Rural. Development Act, 
1981;'; 
(c). after clause (g), the following. clauses shan be, inserted, 
namely:- go 
«h) ",.gricultural operations", "cent4a! oo-<>pe'l!atwl! bank", 
''<:o-operative society", "a'aps", "marketing' at c~ops.", 
"pisciculture", "regional rural bank" and "State co-aperative 
bank" shall have the meanings. .respectively assigned to them 
in the National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development 35 
Act, 1981; 
(i) "oo-opcrative hank", "CQo.Operative <1redit society", "direc- .,.' 
tor", "primary agricultura1 credit society", "primary co-operative 
bank"'" and ~rimary credit socltty" shaiThave the meamngs res-
pecttv&ly assigned to them in PITt V of the Bankklg'Regulation 40 
.Aet, 1"0;'. 10 of 19ft. 

5 
2. In section 8, in sub.section (2), .after the existing proViso, th6 
following proviso shall be inserted, namely:-
"Provided. further that the Central Government may, in consul-
tation with the Bank, appoint a Deputy Governor as the Chairman 
of the NattonalBank, OIl such terlll& IUld condition, as that Govern-
ment may specify.". 
3. In section 17,-
(0) for clause ·(4AA), the following :cIBU8e shall be sUbstituted j 
namely:-
to U(4AA) the making of annual contributions to the National 
Rural Credit (Long Term Operations) Fund and the National 
Rural Credit (Stabilisation) Fund established under sections 42 
and 43, respectively, of the National Bank for Agriculture and 
Rural Development Act, 1981;"; 
!ao 
S25 
(b) for clause (4E) , -the following c1aw;e shall be subsUtQted, 
namely:-
"(4E) the making to the National Bank of loans and advan-
ces repayable on demand or on the expiry of' fixed period not 
exceecUng eighteen months 'from the date of making of the loan 
or advance, either-
(i) against the security of stock~, fun~ and .secwities 
(other than immovable property) in which a trustee is 
authorised to invest trust money by any law for t~ time 
being in force in India; or 
(ii) on such other terms and conditions cas the B~kmQ 
specify;"; 
(c) in clause (SA), for the expression "Agricultural Reftnance 
and Development Corporation", the expression "National Bank" shall • 
be sUbstituted. 
30 "' .. F«sub .. section (3) of seetion 33, the· following sub-section shall be 
35 
45 
IU.lbstituted, namely:-
"(3). The remainder· of ille assets shall be held -in rupee coin, 
Government of IncUa rupee securities of any maturity, promissory 
notes drawn by the National Bank for any loans or advances under 
clause (4E) of section 17 and such bills of exchange and promissory 
notes payable in India as are eligible for purchase by the Bank under 
sub-clause (a) or sub-clause (b) or sub-clause (bb) of clause (2) of 
section 17 or under clause (1) of section 18.". 
5. In section 42,-
(a) in the E~lanation occurring after sub-section (1), in sub-
clause (iO of clause (c), for the expression "Agricultural Refhlance 
arui. Development Corporation", the expression "National Bank" shall 
be substituted; 
(b) after sub-section (6), the following sub-section shall be in-
.aerted,··namely:-
U(6A) In conSidering whether a State co-ope1'a\ive ,bank or 
a regional rural bank should be included in or exc1'l1ded from 

Appoint-
tHent ot 
agents. 
Contribu-
tion to 
National 
.Rural 
Credit 
(Long 
Term Ope-
rational 
Fund and 
National 
Rural 
Credit 
(Stabili. 
sation) 
Fund. 
Rural 
Credit 
and De-
velopmeD't, 
fA 
the Second Schedule, it shall be competent for the Bank to a(!t 
on a certificate from the National Bank on the question whether 
or not a State co-operative bank or a regional rural bank, as the 
ease may be, satisfies the requirements 88 to paid-up capital and 
reserves or whether its affairs are being conducted in a 1) 
manner detrimental to the interests of its depositors.". 
I. For section 45, the following section shall be substituted, namely:-
"45. (1) Unless otherwise directed by the Central Government 
with reference to any place, the Bank may, having regard to public 
interest, convenience of banking, banking development and sueh It) 
other factors which in its opinion are relevant in this regard, appoint 
the Nadonal Bank, or the State Bank, or a corresponding new bank 
constituted uno.er section 3 of the Banking Companies (Acquisition 
and Trans'fer of Undertakings) Act, 1970, or a corresponding new 
bank constituted under section 3 of the Banking Companiell (Acqui- 15 
aition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1980, or any subsidiary 40 ot1980. 
bank as defined in the State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks) Act, 
1959, as its agent at all places, or at any place in India for such 
purposes as the Bank may specify. 
(2) When any bank is appointed by the Bank as its agent under 110 
sub-section (1) to receive on behalf of the Bank any payment 
required to be made into the Bank, or any hill, handies or other 
securities required to be delivered into the Bank, under any law 
or rUle, regulations or other instructions having the force of law, 
the same may be paid or o.elivered into the bank so appointed as 25 
the agent of the Bank.". 
7. On ano. from the date appointed under sub-section .(1) of section 18 
of the National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development Act, 1981, 
for sections 46A and 46B, the following section shall be substituted, 
namely:-
. "46A. The Bank shall contribute every year such swns of money 
as it ma:y consider necessary and feasible to do so, to the National 
Rural Credit (Long Term Operations) Fund and the National Rural 
Credit (Stabilisation) Fund established and maintained by the 
National Bank under sections 42 and 43, respectively, of the National 35 
Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development Act, 1981.". 
8. For section 54, the following section shall be substituted, namely:-
"54. The Bank may maintain expert staff to study various a&o 
pects of rural credit and development and in particular it may,-
(a) tender expert guidance and assistance to the National 40 
Bank; 
(b) conduct special studies in such.. areas as it may consider 
necessary to do so for promoting integrated rural develop* 
~meRt.". 
38 of 1058. 
-1 

• 
21 of 1976. 
5 
29 
PART II 
AMENDMENTS TO THE BANKING REGULATroN Acr, 1949 
(10 OF 1949) 
Amendments 
1. In section 5,-
(i) after clause (h), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:-
I (ha) "National Bank" means the National Bank for Agri-
culture and Rural Development established under section 3 of 
10 the National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development Act, 
1981;'; 
15 
110 
(ii) after cla~ (j>, the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:-
• (;a) "regional rural bank" means a regional rural bank 
established under section 3 of the Regional Rural Banks ~ct, 
1976;'. 
2. In section 23,. after sub-section (4), the following sub-sectio,a. shall 
be inserted, namely:-
1/ (4A) Ally regional rural bank requiring the permission of the 
Reserve Bank under this section shall forward its application to the 
Reserve Bank through the National Bank which shall give ita com-
ments on the merits of the application and send it to the Reserve 
Bank: 
Provilled that the regional rural bank shall also send an ad-
vance copy of the application directly to the Reserve Bank.". 
3. In section 24, to sub-section (3), the following proviso shall be 
added, namely:-
"Provided that every regional rural bank shall also furnish a 
copy of the said return to the National Bank.". 
go 4. In section 25, to sub-section (2), the following proviso shall be 
added, namely:-
"Provided that every regional rural bank shall also furnish • 
copy of the said return to the National Bank.". . 
5. In section 26, after the existing proviso, the following proviso 
35 shall be inserted, namely:-
"Provided further that every regional rural bank shall alsO 
furnish a copy of the said return to the National Bank.". 
6. In section 27, after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall 
be inserted, namely:-
II (3) Every regional rural bank shall submit a copy of the return 
which it submits to the Reserve Bank under sub-section (1) 
also to the National Bank and the powers exercisable by the Re-
serve Bank under sub-section (2) may also be exercised by the 
National Bank in relation to regional rural banks.". 

Power to 
publish 
tntor-
mallon. 
30 
7. For section 28, the following section shall be substituted, namely:-
"28. The Reserve Bank or the National Bank, o:r both, if they 
consider it in the public interest so to do, may publish any informa-
tion obtained by them under this Act in such consolidated form 
as they think fit.". 5 
8. In section 31, after the existing proviso, the following proviso shall 
be iMeried, namely:-
"Provided further that a regional rural bank shall furnish such 
retlll'l1S ,also to the National Bank.". 
t. In sub-section (3) of section 34A, after the words "the Industrial 10 
Dev~lqpment Ban)t of Inroa,", the wor-ds "National Ban1{" shall be :In-
serted. 
1~. In section 35, after sub-section (5), the following sub..section "' 
shall be inserted, namely: - ~ 
" (6) The powers ex,ercisaQle by the Reserve Bank undln' tilt. IS 
section in relation to regional rural banks may (without prejudice 
to the exercise of such powers by the Reserve Bank in relation to 
any regional rural bank whenever it considers necessary so to do) 
be exercised by the National Bank in relation to the regional rural 
banks, -and accordingly, sub-sections (1) to (5) shall apply :ln re- 510 
lation to regional rnral banks as if every reference therein to ~e 
Reserve Bank included also a reference to the N ationa! Bank,", 
11. In sub-section (3) of section 36AD, after the words "the indus-
trial Development Bank of India,", the words "National Bank" shall be 
insaria«\. !l5 
12. In section 417, for the words "the Reserve Bank" wherever they 
occur,the words "the Reserve Bank or, as the case may be, the National 
Bank", shall be substituted, 
13, In section 56,-
(i) in. clause (c), for sub-clause (i). the following sub-claUJe 
shall be substituted, namely:- go 
"(i) after clause (ee), the following clauses shall be in. 
serted, namely:-
'(cci) "co-operative bank" mearu a state co..operaUve 
b.$Dk, a central co.operatiw bank and· a primary eo-opera- Q 
tive J>ank; ,,5 
(ecU) "co-operative credit SOCiety" mei:Jns a co-o~a­
tive society, the primary object of which is to provide 
financial accommodation to its m-emben and inclutles a co-
opet'$tive laJ'1d mortgage bank: 40 

5 
io 
15 
110 
35 
40 
45 
31 
(cciii) ltdirector", in relation to a co-operative SOCiet)', 
includes a member of any committee or body for the time 
being vested with the management of the affairs of that 
.oclety; 
(edt» "prhnary agricultural credit society" means a 
co-operative society,-
(1) the primary object or principal business of 
which is to provide financial accommodation to its mem-
bers for agricultural purposes or for purposes connected 
with agricultural activities (induding the marketing of 
crops); anti 
(2) the bya.laws of which 40 not permit admlasioa 
of any other co-operative society as a member: 
Provided that this sub-clauee shall not apply to the 
admission of a co-operative bank as a member by rea-
son of such co-operative bank subscribing to the ,shd.1'8 
capital of. such co-operative society out of funds pro-
vided by the State Government for tlie purpose; 
(ccv) "primary co-operative bank" means a co-operative 
lOCiety, other than a primary agricultural credit society,-
(1) the primary object or principal business of which 
is the transaction of banking business; 
(2) the paid-up share capital and reserves of which 
are not less than one lakh of rupees; and 
(3) the bye-laws of which do not permit admission 
of any other co-operative society as a member: 
Provirted that. this sub-clause shall not apply to the 
admission of a co-operative bank as a member by reason 
of such co-operative bank subscribing to the share 
capital of such co-operative society 'Out of funds pro-
vided by the State Government for the purpose; 
~) "primary credit SOCiety" means a co-operativa 
800iety, other than a primary agriculttu'al credit society,-
(1) the primary object or principal business of which 
is the transaction of banking business; 
(2) the paid-up share capital and reserves of which 
are less than one lakh of rupees; and 
(3) the bye..lawa of which do not permit admission 
of any other co-operative society as a member: 
Provideci. that this sub-clause shall not apply to the 
admission of a co-operative bank as a member by rea-
son of such co-operative· bank subscribing to the share 
capital of such co-operative society aut of funds pro-
vided by the State Governmenf for the purpose. 
Explanation.-If any dispute arises as to the primary 
object or principal business of any co-operative society 

32 
r.eferred to in clauses (cciv), (ccv) and (ccvi), a detenni .. 
nation thereof by the Reserve Bank shall be final. 
(ccvii) "central cOMoperative bank", "co--operative 80'" 
ciety", "primary rural credit society", and "stateco-operaUve 
bank" shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them 3 
in the National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Develop-
ment Act, 1981;';"; 
(ii) in clause (P) ,-
,(a) for the words, figures and brackets "in section 23, for 
.ub-tlection (1), the following subMsection shall be substituted, 10 
namely", the following shall be substituted, namely:-
"in section 23,-
(i) for sub-section (1), the following sub-section 
shall be sUibstitutef\, namely"; 
(b) after sub-clause (i), the following sub-clause shall be 15 
inserted, namely:-
• (ti) after sub-section (4), the following SUb-eectiOD 
shall be inserted, namely:-
"(M) Any co-operative bank requiring the permis-
sion of the Reserve Bank under this section shall for- ~o 
ward its application to the Reserve Bank through the 
National Bank which shall give its comments on the 
merits of the application and send it to the Reserve 
Bank: 
Provided that the co-<>perative bank shall also send 515 
an advance copy of the application directly to the Re-
serve Bank." ;'; 
(~i) in clause (q), after sub-clause (ii), the follOwing sub-clause 
shall be inserteci, namely:-
"(iii) to sub-section (3), the following proviso shall be added, go 
namely:-
'Provided that every co-operative bank, other than a 
primary co-operative bank, shall also furnish a copy of the 
said retum to the National Bank.'."; 
(if.') after clause (r), the following ~lauses shall be inserted, 95 
namely:- ,,( 
, .. ,:.' ."'j'l .~. 
'(ri) in the second proviso to section 26, for the expression 
"regional rural bank", the expression "co-operative bank, other 
than a primary co-operative bank" shall be substitutecl; 
(rii) in section 27; for sub-section (3), the foll.owing aub- 40 
section shall be substituted, namely:-
" (3) Every co-operative bank, other than a prjmary 
()o~operative bank, shall submit a copy of the return which 
it submits to the Reserve Bank, under sub-section (1) 45 
also to the National Bank and the powers exercisabl~ by 
the Reserve Bank under sub-section (2) may also be 
exercised by the National Bank in relation to co-operative 
banks, other than priroaryco-operative banks.".'; 

10 of 1949. 
"1" of ] 983. 
" ~'t.~ 
)f 1915t;-, 
\ 
) 
5 
10 
~o 
25 
j! 
(V) for clause (t), the following clause shall be substltutea, 
namely:-
• (t) in section 31,-
(i) for the words "within three months" and Clot tbree 
months"; the words "within six months" and "at six months" 
shall, respectively, be substituted; 
(ii) for the second p'roviso, the following proviso ahall 
be substituted, namely:-
"Pttlvided further that a co-operative bank, other 
than a primary cO-operative bank, shall furnish such 
returns also to the National Bank.";'; 
(vi) in clause (w), existing sub-clause (iii) shall be re-number-
ed as sub-clause (iv) and before sub-clause (iv) as so re-Dum-
bered, the follOWing sub-clause shall be inserted, namely:-
'(iii) in S'Ub-section (6), for the expression "regional rural 
bank" wherever it occurs, the expression "co-operative- bank 
other than a primary co-operative bank" shall- be substituted'; 
(vii) after clause (z;), the follOwing clause shall be inserted, 
namely:-
'(z;i) in section 54, after the expression "Reserve Bank", 
wherever it occurs, the expression "or the National Bank" shall 
be inserted.'; 
(viii) in the Third Schedule as substituted by clause (zl) , 
after the expression. "Reserve Bank", wherever it occurs, the ex-
pression "the National Bank" shall be inserted. 
14. In the Banking Regulation Act, 1949, for the words "Agricultural 
Refinance and Development Corporation", wherever they occur, the 
words "National Bank" shall be substituted. 
PART III 
AMtNDMENT TO THE INDUSTRIAL DIsPU'l'ES ACT, 1947 
(14 o~ 1947) 
Amendment 
In section 2, in clause (a), for the words and figures "the Agn. 
cultural Refinance Corporation established under section 3 of the AgrI. 
35 cultural Refinance Corporation Act, 1963", the words and figures "the 
National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development estabIilhed 

',. 
GMer"section 8 of the National Bank for Agriculture' and Rural Develop.. 
ment Act, 198r' shall be substituted. ,.. 
PART IV 
~T 'lIO TIlB. PAYMENT OF BONUS Aar, 1965 
(21 OF 196r.) 
Amen-7ment 
In section 32, for sub-clause (d) of clause (~), the following sub. 
elause shall be substituted, namely:-
5 
"(d) the National Bank for Agrioulture an'd Rural Develop- 10 
ment.". 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
This Bill is intended to provide for the establishment of a national 
level institution for providing credit for the promotion of agriculture. 
small-scale industries, cottage and village industries, handicrafts and 
other rural- crafts and other allied economic activ~ties in rural .arell$ 
with a view to promoting integrated rural development and securing 
prosperity of 'rUral areas. 
2. It has its genesis in the recommendations of the 1'T'ltional Commis-
sion on Agriculture. The Commission had suggested that to overcome 
difftculties being faced by farmers in obtaininll credit and other inputs, 
an integrated approach should be adopted for the supply of services and 
imputs, including credit. The Commission had recommended that an 
types of credit needs should be met through a single integrated agency 
leading up to an Agricultural Development Bank: at the apex. It was 
suggested that such a Bank could consolidate expertise and· experience 
of various national level agencies into a single national organisation 
directing the flow of agricultural credit according to the needs. The 
Government had requested the Reserve Bank of India in March 1979 to 
arrange for a review of the institutional arrangemei-tts for rural credit 
with a view to streamlining them. In pursuance of. the above, the Re-
serve Bank had appointed a Committee to review arrangements for 
Institutional Credit for agriculture Ilnn rural development. The Com-
mittee gave an interim report recommendinp,' the setting up of a National 
Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development and also gave a broad out-
line for it. The recommendations of the interim report of the Committee 
were examined by the Government and it was decided to set up such a 
Bank. 
3. The National Bank shall be the apex organisation with respect to 
all matters relating to polley, planning and operational aspects in the 
field of credit for the promotion Of a~icu1ture, small-scale industries, 
cottage 'and village industries, handicrafts and other rural crafts and 
other allied economic activities in rural areas, The Bank will serve as 
a refinancing institution fbrextending short term credit for the promo-
tion of activities in the said field. Similarly, the Bank will provide re-
finance to various banks for their term lending operations for the pur-
poses of agriculture 'and rural development. A provision has also been 
made for direct lending to any institution as may be approved by the 
Central Government. The proposed Bank is to have or~anic links with 
the Rl.'5erve Bank. It is the iutention that the Reserve Bank's close link 
with rural cl't:!dit should be retained and its authority as the Central 
Bank. over nionetary and Cl'cdit aCl'retion should not be diluted in any 
manner. The entire undertaking of the Agricultural Refinance and 
Development COl:poration shall be transferred to and vest in the new 
Bank an<'l t1w Corporation "h1'll1 stand dissolved. 1'h(' Hill also provides 
3& 

36 
for changes of a supplemental, incidental or consequential nature in 
the Reserve Bank: of. India Act, 1934, the Banking Regulation Act, 1949, 
the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 and the Payment of Bonus Act, 1965. 
4. The Notes on C1auses appended to the Bill explain the provisions 
of the Bill. . 
R. VENKATARAMAN. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 14th September, 1981. 

•. r Nate, on clause, 
Claus.e 2 defines the expressions used in the Bill. 
Clause 3 provides for the establishment of the National Bank for 
Agriculture and Rural Development and its omces, branches and agen-
:ies. 
Clause 4 provides for the ownership of the National Bank. It will 
be jointly owned by the Central Government and the Reserve Bank of 
India and their subscriptIon to the capital Of the National Bank shall 
be in equal proportions. The capital of the National Bank will be one 
hundred crores of rupees, which may be increased up to five· hundred 
crores of rupees by the Central Government in consultation with the 
Reserve Bank. 
Clauses 5 and 6 provide for the management of the National Bank 
and for the vesting of the affairs and business of that B.::mk in a Board 
of Directors. The Board will have, apart from other directors, three 
directors who will be common to the Boards of the ReserW Bank and 
the National Bank. There will also be representation for experts in 
rural economics, rural development, handicraft.,; and other rural crafts, 
village and cottage industries and small-scale industries and persons 
with experience in the working of co-operative banks and commercial 
banks, and omcials of the Central Government and State Governme'.D.ts. 
Clauses 7, 8, 9 and 10 provide for the term of omce and retirement 
of Chairman and other directors and Managing Director and whole-time 
directors, their disqualificatit'ltm and vacation and resignation of ofBce. 
Clause 11 provides for the filling up of casual vacancy in the ofBce 
of the Managing Director. 
Clause 12 provides for the meetings of the Board and observance of 
rules of procedure in this regard. 
Clause 13 provides for the constitution of an Executive Committee 
and such other committee for such purp0'3es as the Board may decide. 
Clause 14 provides for the constitution of an Advisory Council 
consisting of such number of direct.ors and such other persons who, in 
the opinion of the Board,. have special knowledge in agriculture, agri-
cultural credit, co-operation and rural economics, small-scale industries, 
village and cottage industries, and handicrafts and other rural crafts or 
have special knowledge and appreciation of the country's overall deve-
lopmental policies and in particular overall monetary and credit policies, 
which. is considered by the Board as useful to the National Bank, to 
advise the National Bank on such matters as may be referred to the 
Advisory Council by the National Bank. It also provides for the term 
of office of members of the Advisory Council and their fees and al-
lowances and meetings of the Advisory Council and observance of rules 
in this regard. 
Clause 15 provides that a director Of th~ Board or a member of a 
committee shall not participate in meetings, in which any matter, 
wherein he has a direct or indirect pecuniary interest, comes up fQr 
consideration. 
37 

ClaU8e 16 provides for the transfer of assets and liabilities of the 
Akricultural Refinance and Development Corporation (hereinafter 
referred to as ARDC) to the National Bank. As compensation for the 
transfer of the said undertaking, the share-holders of the ARDC will be 
paid a sum equal to the total paid-up capital of the Corporation, in 
porportion to their contribution to such paid-up capital, as on the date 
Immediately preceding the date appointed under sub-section (1), and 
they will also be paid dividend, in proportion to the shares held by 
sUch share-holders, for the period, if any, that has expired in the 
accounting year of the Corporation before the said appointen date, . at 
the rate at which the shares of the Corporation are guaranteed for a 
minimum dividend. 
Clause 17 provides for the dissolution of ARDC and the repeal of 
the Agricul~ural Refinance and Development Corporation Act, 1963. 
Clau-'1e 18 provides for the transfer of assets and liabilities, from the 
Reserve Bank to the National Bank, relating to the National Agricul-
turaiCredit (Long Term Operations) Fund and the National Agricul-
tural Credit (Stabilisation) Fund now maintained in the Reserve Bank. 
It also provides that the loans and advances which the Reserve Bank 
has granted to the State co-operative banks and regional rural banks 
under section 17 [except sub-clause (a) of clause (4)] of the Reserve 
Bank of India Act, 1934 and which the Reserve Bank may specify by a 
general or special order, shall become and be de~men to be loans and 
'advances granted by the National Bank under section 21. 
CLause 19 enables the National Bank to raise resources by iss~ 
and selling bonds and debentures, which are to be guaranteed by th. , 
Central Government and carrying interest' at such rates as the Central 
Government, in c00'3ultatiO'n with the Reserve Bank, may fix. The 
National Bank may also avail of short-term borrowing from the Reserve 
Bank. It may also borrow from the Central Government and other 
institutions approved. by that Government and take deposits from 
Government or other authorities and banks. It is also enabled to accept 
gifts, grants, donations or benefactiO'ns from Government or any other 
source. 
Clause 20 provides for the National Bank to borrow in foreign 
currency with the previous approval of the Central Government and in 
consultation with the Reserve Bank . 
. Clause 21 provides the purposes' for which short-term credit may be 
extended by way of refinance by the National Bank, the forms of secu-
rities which may be obtained therefor, and the requirements for waiving 
the security. This clause p'rovines for the National Bank to extend 
short-term credit for agricultural operations or marketing of crops or 
the marketing and distribution of inputs necessary for agriculture' or 
rural development or any other activity for the promotion of or in the 
field of agriculture or rural development or bona fide commercial or 
trade transactions or the production or marketing activities of artisans 
or of small-scale industries, industries in the tiny and decentralised sec~ 
tor, village ann cottage industries or of those engaged in the field of 
handicrafts and other rural crafts. 

Clause 22 enables the National Bank to provide financial assist&nc@ 
tor the conversion of short-term loans and advances of state co-operative 
banks or regional rural banks and approved financial institt,ltions, the 
repayment of which is rendered difficult owing to drought, famine, 
oiher natural calamltie3, military operations or enemy actian. 
Clause 23 provide$ for the rescheduling of loans and advances made 
toartis~ns, small-scale industries, industries in the tiny and decentra-
Used sector, village and cottage industries and those engaged in the field 
of handicrafts and other rural crafts by State co-operative banks or 
regional rural banks and approved financial institutions where the re-
payment Of such loans is rendered difficult owing to unforeseen c1rcum-. 
stances. 
Clause 24 enables the National Bank to provide refinance facilities 
in respect of medium term loans to the State co-operative banks and the 
regional rural banks for agriculture, rural development or such other 
purpose determined by the National Bank. 
ClaUse 25 enables the Nations] Bank t6 make loans and advances, by 
way of refinance, to State land development banks State co-operative 
banks and scheduled btrnks and any other financial institutions .approved 
by the Reserve Bank in this behalf and reschedule the payment of such 
loans or advances. It 'also enables the National Bank to make loans 
and advances to a State co-operative bank or a scheduled bank to make 
lOaDS or advances to artisans, small-scale industries, industries in the 
tiny ~nd decentralised sector, village and cottage industries, and tho~ 
engaged in the field of handicraf1i3 and other rural crafts and reschedule 
the payment of such loans or advances. 
Clause 26 provides that the National Bank may cantribute to the 
share capital of or purchase and sell shares of, or invest in the securities 
of suchiinancial institutions as may be notified by the Central Govern.-
ment in con'3ultation with the Reserve Bank. 
Clause 27 provicles that the National Bank may make loans and 
advances to State Governments for subscribing directly or indirectly to 
the share capital of a co-operative credit society. 
ClaUse 28 provides for the security which. the National Bank may 
obtain for extending credit and also prov:des that the Board may relax 
the requirements as to security. 
Clause 29 provides that the amounts received by a borrowing insti-
tution in repayment of loans and advances refinanced by the Nationa~ 
Bank ann all securities which a borrowing institution may hold whUe 
reIending the moneys borrowed t'rom the National Bank, shall be held 
in trust for the National Bank. 
Clause 30 enables the National Bank to make direct loans, repayable 
within such peiiod not exceeding 25 yeal'S, to an institution which is 
approvE!d by the Central Gowrnment. 
Clause 31 pro'vides for the National Bank receiving such commission 
and other consideration as may be agreed upon while it extends long-
term credit, direct loans and while issuing guarantees. 
Clause 32 provides for the National Bank guaranteeing, with the 
priot- approval of the Central Gover'llment, deferred pay.ments in con-
nection with the purchase of capital goods, due from an approved co-

operative society or institution or due from any other person and 
guaranteed to the National Bank by a State land development bank or 
a State co-operative bank or a scheduled bank. 
Clause 33 provides that while entering into any transaction under 
Chapter VI with a borrowing institution the National Bank may impose 
such conditions as it may think necessary, for protecting its in~rests. 
Clause 34 provides for the circumstances in which the National 'Bank 
hlay call for repayment of any loan or advance before the date due for 
its repayment. 
Clause 35 prOvides that the National Bank shall have free access to 
all the records of a borrowing institution, which may be considered 
necessary in connection with providing financial or other assistance. 
Clause 36 provides that the validity of the loans and advances 
extended by the National Bank shall not be questioned merely on the 
ground of non-compliance with any reqUirements of any resolution. 
contract etc., but nothing in this clause shall render valid any loan or 
advance obtained by any company Or co-operative society where the 
said company or co-operative society is not empowered by its Memo. 
randum to obtain loahs or advances. 
Clause 37 provides that the National Bank shall not grant loans or 
advances on the Recurity of its own bonds and debentures. 
Clause 38 provides that the National Bank shall co-ordinate the 
operations of various institutions in the field of rural credit and maintain 
expert staff to study' problems relating to agriculture and rural develop-. 
ment and be available for consultation to the Central Government, the 
Reserve Bank, State Governments and other institutions. 
The National Bank may also act as agent for the Central Govern-
ment, the Reserve Bank or a State Government in respect of the matters 
specified in the clause. 
The National Bank may also provide facilities for training and re-
search and make grants to other ino.;titutions for this purpose. 
Clause 39 provides that the National Bank. may also do all such things 
as may be necessary or incidental to or consequential upon the exercise 
of its powers, discharge of its functions and the performance of its duties 
entrusted to it under this Bill or under any other law for the time 
being in force. 
Clause 40 provides that the National Bank may invest its funds in 
promissory notes, stocks and securities of the Central Government or 
keep the moneys deposited with the Reserve Bank or any agency of the 
Reserve Bank or, in consultation with the Reserve Bank, with a State 
co-operative bank or a scheduled bank. 
Clause 41 provides that the National Bank may collect from. or 
furnish to the Central Government, the Reserve Ba'nk or any banking 
company or any other institution, credit information or' other informa-
tion for the efficient discharge of its functions under this Bill. 
Clause 42 provides for the establishment (in the National Bank) of 
the National Rural Credit (Long Term Operations) Fund. The Fund 
sball (in addition to assets and liabilities transferred under section 18) 
include such sums of money as the Central Government and the State 

41 
Government ,may contribute from time to time, and such sums as the 
Reserve ~nk and the Board of Directors of the National Bank may 
contribute every year. The National Bank is also enabled to provide 
financial asosista'nce by way of, loans and advances under section 23, 
section 24, clause (a) or clause (b) or clause (c) ot sub-section (1) of 
section 25 or section 27 or for the purposes of section 26 out of the 
amounts in the said ·Fund. 
Clause 43 provides for the establishment (in the National Bank) of 
the National Rural Credit (Stabilisation) Fund. The Fund shall (in 
addition to assets and liabilities transferred under section 18) include 
such sums cif money as the Central Government and the State Govern-
monts may contribute from time to. time and such sums as the Reserve 
Bank and the Board of Directors of the National Bag.k may contribute 
every year. The amounts in the said Fund shall be applied by the 
National Bank only to provide loans and advances under section 22. 
Claus~ 44 provides that the National Bank shall establish and main-
tain a Research and Development Fund to which shall be credited 
such SWIl8 of money as are transferable to this Fund in accordance 
with section 47 and as the Board may contribute every year tc this 
Fund and such sums out of gifts, grants, donations or benefactions 
which the ,National Bank may receive and which the Board may ear-
mark for this purpose. This Fund will be expended on matters of 
importance to agriculture, agricultural operations and rural develop-
ment, including the provision of training and research, etc. 
Clause 45 provides for the establishment of a Reserve Fund and 
such other Funds as the Board may consider necessary. 
Clause 46 provides for the preparation of the balance-sheet and 
accounts of the National Bank in the form and manner prescribed by 
regulations made under section 60. 
Clause 47 provides that after making provisions for bad and doubt-
ful debts, depreciation of assets and all other matters for which provi-
lion is necessary or expedient or which is usually provided for by 
bankers and for the Funds referred to in sections 42, 43 and 45, the 
National Bank shall transfer, for a period of 15 years following the 
accounting year of its establishment, the amount remaining to the 
Fund established under section 44, and thereafter transfer half of the 
balance of surplus to thE' Central Government and the other half to 
the Reserve Bank. 
Clause 48 provides for the audit of the accounts of the National 
Bank. 
The auditor will be appointed by the Central Government in con-
sultation with the Reserve Bank. The Central Government may also, 
at any time, appoint the Comptroller and Auditor General oT! India to 
examine and report on the ~counts of the National Bank. 
CLause 49 provides for the National Bank furnishing such returns 
as the Reserve Bank or the Central Government may require. 
Clause 50 provides for the National Bank developing its own cadre 
cf staff. Initially, the staff working with the Agricultural Refinance 
and Development Corporation and such other staff of the Reserve Bank 
as the National Bank may require will be transferred to the National 
Bank and they will form the nucleus of the staff of the National Bank. 
It also provides for the terms and conditions of members of the staff 
of the National Bank. 

Clau8e 51 provides that the directors, members of committees, 
auditor, officers and other employees of the National Bsnk shall make 
a declaration of the fidelity and secrecy in the form set out in the First 
Schedule. 
Clause 52 makes a uSual provision to ensure that defects' in appoint-
ments, etc. do not invalidate acts of the Board or its committees. 
Cla.use 53 is the usu:ll provision relating to protection ot acthm 
taken in good faith. 
Clause 54 seeks to indemnify the director:; of the National Bank 
against all losses and expenses incurred by them in or in relation to 
diSch~rge of their duties other than those caused by their qwn wilful 
act or default. 
Clause 55 provides for the exemption of the National Bank from 
payment of income-tax and all other taxes on income, profits and 'gabil 
and is on the lines of similar exemption given to the Reserve Bank of 
India and to the Industrial Development Bank of India. 
Clause 56 provides for penalties 'for making false statements in 8Jly 
returns, balance-sheet or other documents furnished to the Nation~ 
Bank Of for failure to produce books or other documents required by 
the National Bank. 
ClaUse 57 provides for the responsibility of companies and their 
directors and the consequences of any failure in this regard. 
GLause 58 provides for the application of the Bankers Books EVi-
dence Act, 1891, in relation t.o the National Bank. 
Cll1use 59 deals with the liquidation of the National Bank and pr0-
vides that the National Bank shall not be placecI in liquidation, saVe 
by order .of the Central G.overnment and in such manner a~ it may 
direct. 
Clause 60 seeks to empower the Board of Directors of the National 
Bimk. with tbe previous approval of the Central Government, to make 
regulations not inconstitent with the Bill for. the purpose df. giving 
effect to. the provisions of the Bill and in particular in respect of mat-
terS spectfied in that clause. 
Clawe 61 seeks to amend the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, the 
Bankirig Regulation Act, 1949, the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947,.and' 
the Payment of Bonus Act, 1965, in the manner set out in the Secoiid 
Schedule. 
Clatt.se 62 provides for removal of difficulties. 
FIRST SCHEDULE 
The First Schedule gives the form for making the declaratioh of 
fidelity and secrecy. 
SECOND SCHEDULE 
AMENDMENT TO THE REsERVE BANK OF INDIA ACT, 1934 
The amendments empower the Central Government to appoint in 
co.nsultation with the B3nk, a Deputy Governor as the Chairman o.f 
the National Bank on such terms and conditions as that Government 

may specify. The amendments also provide for the Reserve Bank 
making loans and advances to the National Bank repayable on demand 
or on expiry of fixed period not exceeding eigQ.te~n months. 
The Reserve Bank is also empowered to appoint, in addition to cer-
tain other banks, the Nation:al Bank as its agent for such purposes ~s 
the Res~rve Bank may specify. 
The amendments also provide for the substitution of the provisions 
relating to the National Agricultural Credit (Long Term Operations) 
Fund and the National Agricultural Credit (Stabilisation) F\md now 
maintained by the Reserve Bank, upon transfer of the said Funds to 
the National Rural Credit (Long Term Operations) Fund and the 
Nat~onal RUral Credit (Stabilisation) Fund, which will be established 
and maintained by the National Bank and to which the Reserve Bank 
Will also make annual contribution. 
The amendments also provide for the Reserve Bank maintaining an 
expert staff to study various aspects of rural credit and dev.elopment 
a:nd in partiC" .. llar rendering expert guidance and assistance to the 
National Bank and eonduct special studies in such are~ as it may con-
sider necessary to do so for promoting ;ntegrated rural development. 
The other amendments are mainly consequential to the setting up 
of the National Bank and division of responsibilities of the Reserve 
Bank and the National Bank. 
AMENDMENTS TO THE BANKING REGULATION ACT, 1949 
The amendments to the Banking Reg'Ulation Act, 1949, ensure that:-
(i) With reference to regional rural banks a'nd co-operative banks 
(other than primary co-oper~tive banks) the National Bank will be 
thE' inspecting authority which will combine in itself the responsi-
bility envisaged both for developmental and statutory inspections. 
This, however, does not preclude Reserve Ba'nk from conducting test 
inspections. whenever it consid~rs to do so; 
(ii) as regards branch licensing of regional rural banks and 
co-operative banks (other than primary co-operative banks) the 
National Bank will receive applications for opening branches and 
forward the same to the Reserve Bank with its comments, since 
having regard to the criterion envisaged for sanctioning branch 
licences, the National Bank will be in a position to assist Reserve 
Bank of India in taking decision on them. Advance cO!,ies of such 
applications will be sent direoctly to the Reserve Bank); and 
(iii) the National Bank will r:e(!eive su'~h returns and other 
data concerning regional rural banks and co-operative banks (other 
than primary co-operative banks) as would facilitate national 
Bank keeping a close watch over the performance. health and via-
bility of the institutions. 
AMENDMENTS TO THE INDUSTRJ AL DISPUTES ACT 1947 AND THE 
PAYMENT OF BONUS AcT; 1965 
These are consequential. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Sub-clause (1) of clause 4 of the Bill provides that the capital Qf 
the National Bank shall be 100 crores of rupees. It has been provided 
that the Central Government may, in consultation wah the Reserve 
Bank and by notification in the Official Gazette, increase the said capital 
up to 500 crores. of rupees. Sub-clause (2) of clau5e 4 of the Bill pro-
vides that the capital of the Bank shall be subscribed to by the Central 
Government and the Reserve Bank in equal proportions. 
2. The Central Government will have to incur an expenditure of 
Rs. 50 crores for contributing to the share capital of the Bank when 
it is set up. In case it is decided to increase the capital of the Bank, a 
contribution to the share capital to the extent provided in the Act shall 
have to be made. 
3. 9lause 19 (a) requires bonds and debentures issued under that 
clause to be guaranteed by the Central Government. Clause 19 (c) and 
clause 19(d) empower the National Bank to borrow money and accept 
'deposits from the Central Government. Clause 20 (2) envisages a gua-
rantee by the Central Government for the borrowings of the National 
Bank in foreign currency under that section. Chuses 42(2) (a) and 
43 (2) (a) envisage contribations by the Central Government to the funds 
referred to in those clauses. It is not possible to visualise at this stage 
the amounts which the Central Government may lend to the Bank under 
clause 19 (c) or deposit with the Bank under clause 19 (d) or the contri-
but'ons which the Central Government may make under clause 42 (2) (a) 
and clause 43 (2) (a). The guarantee under clause 19 (a) and the guarantee 
under clause 20 (2) involve liabilities of a contingent nature and the 
extent of such liabilit1es, if any, will be known only after the Bank has 
started fUnctioning. 
4. Clause 47 (i) of the Bill em;sages that for a period of fifteen years 
following the accounti'ng year during which the National Bank is es-
tablished., the surplus left in each year after making provision for the 
various matters referrerl to in that section shall be credited to the Re-
sc8l'('h and Development Fund of the Bank. This provision by itself 
does not involve expenditure but it may be mentioned that but for this 
provision one-half of the amount which would become credited to the 
Research. and Development Fund under this section would have accrued 
to the Central Government. 
5. No other proviSion of the Bill involves any other expenditure of 
a recurring or non-reCUrrIng n,ature from out of the Consolidated Fund 
of Indja. 
44 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Sub-c!Iause (1), 'of clause 60 of the BUlconfers on the-Biard of the 
National Bank the power to make regulations, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, with the previO'lls approval of the Central Government 
and in cot\sultation with the Reserve Bank" SUb-clause+ (2) of that 
c13use specities the .matters which such regulations ,may provide for. These 
include, among other things, fees or allowances that may be pa!d.to the 
directors or members of the Advisory Council, the procedure for con-
ducting meetings' of the Board or of the Executive Cbmntittee or of the 
Advisory Council; the conditions which the National Bank may 'hnpoae 
in ~anting loans and advances and the fOrm and manner in. which the 
balance-sheet ami the accounts of the Bank shall be pJ:epare.<! or. main. 
tained, S\lb:-dause (4) of cla.use 60 empowers the Board to make re-
gulati9ns in resPect of the above mentioned matters with. retri>sIiective 
effect from a date not earlier than the date of comII1enceme~t .Qf the 
Act. This power is sllbject to the safeguard that no retrospective effect 
shall be gt\ren to any ~gulation so ~as to prejudicially affect the iIiterests 
at. any person to whom such regulation may be applicable.' -. 
, " 
Clause 62 of the Bill empowers the Central Gov.erriment to ~move 
by order any difticu~ty which ~ay arise .in. ~vin~ effec~ t~. the "provisions 
of the legislation. This is by way of abundant caution and for covenng 
difficulties which it is not 'practicable to Vis~a~e. . . 
&; the matters with 'respect to which regulations may be made '\lnd~r -. .. .. .. . . . ' .. " . 
clause 60 pertain to matters of procedure or detail ana as the' malCing 
of regulations with retrospective effect is subject to the safeguarC£ &fore-' 
mentioae(i and as the matters with respect to which. orders may be ma~e . 
unde.r,cUlu~ 62 pertain to matters which it is not 'practicable-to'visualise . 
at this st~ge, the delegation of legislative power is of 11:ormal.character.,.' 
-, 
, ", 
\, 
'.,. ' ., 

ANNEXURE 
ExTRACTS FROM THE REsERVE BANK OF INDIA 'ACT, 19M 
(2 OF 1934) 
• • • • • 
DeftDlticmt. !. In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or 
eontext,- ' 
(4) "agricultural operations" includes animal liuSbandry. dairy 
and poultry farming, pisciculture and other allied activities, whether 
or not undertaken jointly with agricultural operations; 
(al) "Agricultural Refinance and Development Corporation" 
means the Agricultural Refinance Corporation established under 
section 3 of the Agricultural Refinance and Development Corpora-
tion Act, 1963; 
• • • • • 
. (bi) "central co-operative bank" means the principal co-opera-
tive society in a district in a State, the primary object o'f which is 
the financing of other co-operative societies in that district: 
Provilted that in addition to such principal society in a district 
or where there is no such principal society in a district, the State 
Government may declare any one or more co-operative societies 
carrying on the business of financing other co-operative societies in 
that district to be a central co-operative bank or banks within the 
meaning of this definition; 
(bii) "co-operative bank" means a State co-operative bank, a 
ecntrl'll co-operative bank and a primary co-operative bank; 
(biii) "co-operative credit society" means a co-operative society, 
the primary object of which is to provide financial accommodation 
to its members and includes a co-operative land mortgage bank; 
(hiv) "co-operative society" means a society registered, or 
deemed to be registered, under the Co-operative Societies Act, 1912 
or any other law relating to co-operative societies for the time being 
in force in any State; I 
(bv) "crops" indudes products of agricultural operations; 
• • • • • 
(bviii) "director", in relation to a co-operative society, includes 
a member of any committee or body for the time being vested with 
the management of tlle affairs of that society; 
• • • • • 
(ei) "marketing of crops" includes the processing of crops prior 
to marketing by agricultural producers or any organization of such 
producers; I 
10 of 1963. 
2 of 1912, 

, . 
"(cia) "pisciculture'! includes the development of fisheries, both 
inland and marine, catching of fish and all other activities con-
nected therewith or incidental thereto; 
(cii) "primary agricultural credit society" means a co-operative 
society,-
(1) the primary object or principal business of which is 
to provide financial accommodation to its members for agricul-
tural purposes or for purposes connected with agricultural 
activities (including the marketing of crops); and 
(2) the bye-laws of which do not permit admission of any 
other co-operative ~iety as a member: 
Provided that this sub-clause shall not apply to the admission 
of a co-operative bank as: a member by reason of such C()oo()perative 
bank subscribing to the share capital of such co-operative society 
out of funds provided by the State Government for the purpose; 
(ciii) "primary co-operative bank'! means a co-operative society, 
other than a primary agricultural credit society,-
(1) the primary object or principal business of which is 
the transaction of banking business; 
(2) the paid-'!.1p share capital and reserves of which are not 
less than one lakh of rupees; and 
(3) the bye-laws of which do not permit admission of any 
other co-operative SOCiety as a member: 
Provided that this sub-clause shall not apply to the- admisslon 
of a co-operative bank as a member by reason of such co-operaUve 
bank subscribing to the share capital of such co-operative society 
out of funds provided by the State Government for the purpose; 
(civ) "primary credit society" means a co-operative society, 
other than a primary agricultural credit society,-
(1) the primary object or principal business of which is the 
transaction of banking business; 
(2) the paid-up share capital and reserves of which are less 
than one lakh of rupees; and 
(3) the bye-laws of which do not permit acbnission of any 
other co-operative society as a member: 
Provided that this sub-clause shall not apply to the admission 
of a co-operative bank as a member by reason of such co-operative 
bank: subscribing to t:le share capital of such co-operative society 
out of funds providetl by the State Government for the purpose. 
Explanation.-If any dispute arises as to the primary object or 
principal business of any co-operative society referred to in this 
clause or clause (cii) or clause (ciii) I a determination thereof by the 
Bank shall be final; I 
(cv) "Regional Rural Barile" means a Regional Rural Bank 
established under section 3 of the Regional Rural Banks Act, 1976; 
• • • • 

ComlM*1-
tion of 
the 
Central 
Board, 
and 
term of 
offtceof 
Directors. 
Busine .. 
which the 
Bankma1 
transacl 
Assets of 
the Issue 
Depart· 
ment. 
~' 
Cf) ejState co-operative bank", means the prmcipal c~tift 
-lOCiety'in a state, the primary object of which is the financing of 
other co-operative societies in the State: 
Provided that in addition to such principal society in a State 
or where there is 'no such principal society in a State the State 
'Government may declare anyone or mote ~ratlve societies 
carrying on business in that State to be a State co-operative bank 
or baDks within the meaning of this definition; 
• • • • • • 
s. (1) • • • •• • 
(2) The G!>vernor md Deputy Governors shall devote their whole time 
to the affairs of the Bank, and shall receive such salaries and- allow· 
ances as may be detenmned by the Central Board, with the approval 
of the Central Government: 
Provided that the Central Boarq may, if in its opinion it is necessary 
in the public interest so 16 do, permit the Governor or a Deputy Gover· 
nor to undertake, at the request of the Central Government or any 
State Government, such part-time honorary work, whether related to 
the purposes of this Act or not, as is not likely to interfere With his 
duties as Governor or Deputy Governor, as the case may be. 
• • • • • 
. 17. The Bank shall be IUIthorised to carry on and transact the 
.everal kinds of business hereinafter specified, namely:-
• • • • • 
(4AA) the making of loans and advances out of the National Agri-
cw..al Credit (Long Term Operations) Fund and the National Agri-
cultural Credit (Stabilliation) Fund established under section 46A and 
HCtion 46B respectively for the purposes spec~ed. in the sai~ sectionsj 
• ... • • • ~: 
. (4E) the making to the Agricultural Refinance and Development 
~ . at loans and advances repayable on the expiry of fixed 
periods not exceeding eighteen months from the date of the makin, 
of the ~08D or advance, against the security of stocks, funds and securi-
•. ; (o~ thai1 'immovable property) in which a trustee is authorised' 
to inWit trust money by any law for the time being in force in India; 
• • • • • 
'. (3A) the purchase and sale of shares in, or the clPftal dI. .. the AgrI_ 
cultural Refinance and Development· Corporation, the Depomt IftSurance 
C?rpo~ation, t~e Development Bank, the State Bank or any othter bank 
or ~nfU1cial institution notified by the Central Government in tbI. 
beh8lf: I' 
::' . " .: (. , ~ 
... • • • • 
~~ .. ~ (1). • .• • ... • .V'I'~~~ • 
. {3) The ~emainder o~ the assets shall be held in rupee coin, Govern-
ment· of India rupee securities of any maturity and such bilLs of exchanae 

~ of 19119. 
I 
'of 19119. 
I 
I - ... 
, "' ~:!..- I 
and promissory notes payable m India as are eligible for purchase by 
the Bank under sub-clause(a) or sub-clause (b) or sub-clause (bb) of 
clause (2) of section 17 or under clause (1) of section 18 . 
• • • • • 
42. (1) Every bank included in the Second Schedule shall maintain 
with the Bank an average daily balance the amount of whiCh shall not 
be less than tbree per cent. of the total of the demand and tiae liabili-
ties in India of such bank as shown in the return referred to in sub-
section (2): 
Provided that the Bank may, by notification in the GazetteallDdia, 
increase the said rate to S'Ueh higher rate 'as may be specified in tile 
notifieatioD 10 however that the rate shall not be more than fifteen, 
per cent. of the total of the demand and time liabilities. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section,-
• • • • • 
(c) "liabilities'" shall not include-
.. • • • • 
(ii) the amount of any loan taken from the ~ or !J:om 
the Development Bank or from the Agricultural Refinance and 
Development Corporation; , 
. -
• • • • 
45. (1) Unless otherwise directed by the Central Government with 
reference to any place, the Bank shall appoint the State Bank as its.lOle 
agent at aU places in India where it does not have an office or branch: of 
the -Banking Department and there is ·a branch of the State Bank 01: a 
braneh of a subsidiary baRk. 
(2) Notwithstandinc anyth!n& contained in su~section (1) or in any 
asreement between the Bank and the State sank, the Bank may, until 
an arraugement under section 36 of the State Bank of .India (Subsidiary 
Banks) Act, 1959, is made by the State Bank with the State Bank ot 
Hyderabad or the State Bank of MY!JOre, e1Jlploy or continue to employ 
as its agent, the State' Bank of Hyderabad or, as the .case may be, the 
Bank of Mysore, Limited or the State Bank of Mysore, at such places 
where, and for such purposes for whioh, the Hyderabad Bank and the 
Bank of Mysore, Limited were' respectively acting as agents afthe 
Bank immediately before the commencement of that Act and, with the 
previous approval of the Central Government, at any otber plaee and 
for any purpose. 
Explanction.-The expression "subsidiary bank" in this ~OD ahall 
have the .same meaning as in section 2 ot the State Bank of India 
(Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1959. 
• • • • • 
., 
C8hre. 
lerVes . 
of ICh~ 
duled 
banks .. 
be kept 
with the. 
Bank. 
Obli,ation 
to appoint 
State 
Bank a' . .-

National 
Agrictlltu-
ral Cre-
dit (Long 
Term 
Opera-
tions) 
Fund. 
~\ 
CHAl1'ER IV 
GENERAL PROVIsIONS 
46A. (1) The Bank shall establish and maintain a Fund to be known 
as the National A&ricultural Credit (Long Term Operations) Fund to 
which shall be credited-
(a) an initial sum of ten crores of rupees by the Bank; and 
(b) such further sums of money as the Bank may contribute 
every year: 
Provided that the annual contribution during each of the five years 
commencing with the year ending on the 30th day of June, 1956 shall 
not be less than five crotes of rupees: 
Provided further that the Central Government may, if the circum-
stances so require, authorize the Bank to increase or reduce the amount 
of its annual contribution in any year. 
,(2) The amount in the said Fund shall be applied by the Bank only 
to the following objects, namely:-
(a) the making of loans and advances to State Governments for 
subscribing directly or indirectly to the share capital of a co-
operative credit ~ociety and repayable on the expiry of fixed periods 
not exceeding twenty years from the date of making such loan or 
advance; j 
(b) the making to State co-operative banks ot Regional Rural 
Banks of loans. and advances, repayable on the expiry of fi~ed 
periods not being less than fifteen months and not exceeding five 
years from the date of making such loan or advance, against such 
securities as may be specified in this behalf by the Bank and such 
loans and advances maybe made for agricultural and allied pur-
poses including purposes of animal husbandry or piscic'Ulture or 
such other purposes connected with agricultural operations as the 
Bank. may, from time to time, determine: 
Provided that such loans and advances are fully guaranteed al 
to the repayment of principal and payment of interest,-
(i) in the case .of loans and advances to State co-operative 
banks, by the State Government; and 
(ii) in the case of loans and advances to a Regional Rural 
Bank, by the Spon.qar Bank: 
Provided further that such guarantee may be waived by the 
Bank if other security to the satisfaction of the Bank is available, 
'or if, for reasons to be recorded by it in writing, the Bank is satis-
fied that a guarantee or other security is not necessary; 
(c) the making to Central Land Mortgage Banks of loans and 
advances repayable on the expiry cif. fixed periods not exceeding 
twenty years from the date of making such loan or advance: 
Provided that such loans and adyances are fully guaranteed as 
to the repayment of the principal and payment of interest by the 
State Government: 

770 
51 
Provided further that S'Ueh guarantee may be wafV4!d by the 
Bank if otner security to the satisfaction of the Bank is available, 
or if, for reasons to be recorded by it in writing, the Bank f.s satl .. 
fied that a guarante~ or other security is not necessary; . . 
(d) the purchase I)f debentures of Central Land Mortgage Banks: 
Provided that gu~h debentures are fully guaranteed as to the 
repayment of the pri!'.cipal and payment of interest by the State 
Governmeftt; 
(e) the making to the Agricultural Refinance and DevelOpment 
Corporation of loans and advances repayable on the expiry of fixed 
periods not exceeding twenty years from the date of making such 
loan or advance. 
Explanation.-For th~ purposes of this section, a Central Land Mort-
gage Bank includes an institution engaged in the grant of 10A'1S on the 
mOt'tgllge of agricultural bud and declared as such by the State Govern-
ment in this behalf .. 
46B. (1) The Bank shall establish and maintain a Fund to be known as 
the Natio~al Agricultural Credit (Stabilisation) Fund to which shall be 
credited such sums of money as the Bank may contribute every year: 
Provided that the annual contribution during each of the five years 
commencing with the year enning on the 30th day of June, 1956 shall 
not be less than one cror.e 01 rupees: 
Provided further that thE' Central Government may, if the circum-
stances so require, authoriz2 the Bank t" increase or red'uce the amount 
of its annual contributio'l in any year. 
(2) The amount in the said Fund shall be applied by the Bank only 
to the m4king to State co-operative banks ot' Regional Rural Banks of 
loans and advances repayable on the expiry of fixed periods not being 
less than fifteen months and not exteedil1g five years from the date of 
making such loan or adva'1ce and on such t('t'ms and conditions as may 
be! specified in this behalf by the Bank: ' 
Provided that no such loans or advances shall be made-
(a) except for the purpose of enabling the State co-operative 
banks to pay any duE'S in respect of bills of exchange and promis-
sory notes purchased or re-discounted by the Bank under clause 
(2) O'f sectitm 17 or 103ns and advances made to them by the Bank 
'Under clause (4) of section 17, and unless, in the opinion of the 
Bank, the State co-operative banks are unable to pay such dues in 
time owing to drought, famine or other natural calamities; and 
(b) unless such loans and advances are fully guaranteed as to 
the repayment of the principal and payment of interest by the State 
Government: I 
Provided further that no such loans or advances shall be made-
(a) except for the purpose of enabling the Regional Rural Banks 
to pay any dues in re~pect of bills of exchange and promiSsory 
notes purchased or re-discounted by the Bank or loans and advances 
National 
Airicultu-
ral Cre-
dit (Sta-
bilisation) 
Fund. 

11' 
A,rkultu-
ral Cre-
dit De-
partment. 
Interpre. 
tation. 
MaiM .. 
nanCe 
ota 
percent· 
ale at 
uaet •. 
Auetl 
ill India. 
51 
made to them by the BAmk und.. aeeticm 17 8I1d imlIJI, in the 
opinion of the 'Bank, the Regional Rural Ban.kJ ar~ UIl;ablt tQ pay 
IUch dues in time owing to drought, famine .or other natunl c~alami-
ties, and I 
(b) unless such ,loans ahd, advances are rully glotaranteed as' to 
repayment of the principal and payment of interest by the Sponsor 
Bank.' 1 
• • • • • 
M. The Bank shall create a special Agricultural Credit· Department 
the functions at which shall be-
(a) to maintain an expert sfaff to study all questions of agri-
cultural credit and be available for consultation by the Central 
Government, State Governments, State c~per.ative ba.n.ks '. and. 
other banking organisations,' 
(b) to co-ordinate the operations of 'the ~ank m connectton 
with agricultural credit and its relations with' State ~perattve 
banks and any other banks or organisations engaged in the business 
of agricultural credit. 
• • • • • 
EXTRACTS FROM THE BANKING REGULATION ACt, 1949 
'(10 OF 1949) 
• • • • • 
'! ' 'l 
5. In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or 
context,-
• • • • • 
%4. (1) • • • • • 
(3) For the purpose of ensuring compliance with the provisions of 
this section, every banking company shall, not later than fifteea days 
after the end of the month to which it relates, furnish to the Reserve 
Bank in the prescribed torm and manner a monthly return showing 
particulars of its assets maintained in accordance with this section, and 
its time and deman'd liabilities in India at the close of business on each 
Friday during the month, or if any Friday is a public holiday under 
the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881, at the close of bUSiness on the 18 of 1 
preceding working day .. 
25. (1) • • • • 
(2) Every banking company shall, within one month from the end 
of every quarter, submit to the Reserve Bank a return in the prescribed 
form and manner of <the as~ets and liabilities referred· to in suh-section 
(1) as at the close of business on the last Friday of the previous quar-
ter, or, if that Fdday is a public holiday under the Negotiable Instru-
ments Act, 1881, at the close of business on the preceding working day. 
• • • • 
260f 1 

5 of 1970. 
\21 of 1976. 
40o't 1980. 
5 of 1970. 
21 of 1976. 
40 of 1980. 
7 .. ~ .. 
.i' ) , ..... 
53 
26. Every banking company shall, within thirty days after the close 
of each calendar year, submit a return in the prescribed form and 
manner to the ReserVe Bank as at the end of such calendar year of all 
accounts in India which have not been operated upon for ten years: 
Provided that in the cas€ of money deposited for a fixed period tbe 
said term of ten years shal1 be reckoned from the date of the expiry 
of su{'h flxed period. 
• • • • • 
28. The Reserve Dank. if it considers it in the public interest so to 
do, may publish any information obtained by it under this Act in 
such consolidated form as it thinks fit. 
• 
• 0 
• • • 
Return df 
unclaim-
ed depe-
Bits. 
~wer to 
publis)lo 
informa-
tion. 
OJ 
31. The accounts anti. balance-sheet referred to in section 29 together Submis-
with the auditor's report shall be published in the prescribed manr .. er sion of 
and three copies thereof shall be furnished ,as returns to the Reserve return'S. 
Bank within three months from the end ·of the period to which they 
refer: 
Provided that the Reserve Bank may fn any case extend the said 
period of three months for the furnishing of such returns by a fouriher 
period not exceeding three months. 
• • • • • • 
3olA. (1) • • • • • 
(3) For the purposes of this section, "banking company" includes the 
Industrial Development Bank of India, the Reserve Bank, the State 
Bank of India a corresponding new bank constituted under section 3 of 
the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) 
Act, 1970, a Regional Rural Bank established under section 3 of' the 
Regional Rural Banks Act, 1976, a corresponding new bank constituted 
under section 3 of the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Trallsfer 
of Undertakings) Act, 1980, and any subsidiary bank. 
• • • • • 
PART UB 
PROHIsmoN OF CERTAIN ACTIVITIES IN RELATION TO BANKING COMPANIES 
36AD. (1) • • • • • 
(3) For the purposes of this section, "banking company" includes the 
Reserve Bank, the Industrial Development Bank of India, the State Bank 
of India, a corresponding new bank constituted under section 3 of the 
Banking· Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 
1970, a Regional Rural Bank established under section 3 of the Regional 
Rural Banks Act, 1976, a corresponding new bank constituted 'lin~ 
section 3 of the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of 
Undertakings) Act, 1980, and any subsidiary bank. 
• • .. • 
47. No Court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under 
sub-section (5) of section 36AA or section 46 except upon complaint in 
writing made by an officer of the Reserve Bank generally or specially 
authorized -in writing in this behalf by the Reserve Bank, and no Court 
Produc-
tion ot 
documents 
of confi-
dential 
nature. 
Punish-
ments for 
certain 
activities 
in rela-
tion to 
banking t' 
rompa" ( ir 
nies. 
Cogni-
zance 
ot often-
ces. 

Act to 
apply to 
co-opera. 
tive socie. 
ties sub. 
ject to 
modifi· 
cationa. 
De1ini. 
tioos. 
S4 
inferior to that of a Presidency Magistrate or a Magistrate of the first 
class shall try any such offence. 
• • • • • 
PART V 
APPLICATION OF THl!: Ac:r TO co-oPIItA'l'IVB BAJI'D 
56. The provisions of this Act, as in force for the time being, shall 
apply to, or in relation to, co-operative societies as they apply to, or 
in relation to, banking companies subject to the following modiftcations, 
namely:-
• • • • .. 
(e) in section 5,-
(i) after clause (ee), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:-
'(ccc) "central co-operative bank", "eo-operative bank", 
&Ceo-operative society", "director", "primary agricultural 
credit society", "primary CO-IOperative bank", "primary 
credit society" and "State co-operative bank" shall have 
the meanings respectively assigned to them in the Reserve 
Bank of India Act, 1934.'; 
• • • • • 
(p) in section 23, for sub-section (1), the following sub-section 
shall be substituted, namely:-
• • • • • 
(t) in section 31, for the words "within three months" and "of 
three months", the words "within six months" and "of six months" 
shall respectively be substituted; 
• • • • 
(w) in section 35,-
• • • • • 
(iii) the ExplanatiOn shall be omitted; 
• • • • 
EXTRACT FROM THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947 
(14 OF 1947) 
• • • • • 
• 
Z. In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject Ol" 
context,-
(4) "appropriate Government" mean&--
(i) in relation to any industrial dispute concerning any 
industry carried on by or under the authority of the Central 
Gove,rnm.ent, or by a railway company or concerning any such. 
controlled industry as may be ~ in this behalf by the 
Central Government or in relation' to an indwtrial dispute 
concerning the Industrial Fina~e Corporation of India established 
2 of 1934. 

,~ 
15 of 1948. 
34 of 1948. 
27 of 1953. 
31 of 1956. 
10 of 1963. 
47 of 1961. 
52 of 1963. 
37 ot 1964. 
42 of 1975. 
21 of 1976. 
32. 
55 
under section 3 of the Industrial Finance Corporation Act, 
1~, or the Employees' State Insurance Corporation establilh-
ed under section 3 of the Employees' State Insurance Act, 1MB, 
or the "Indian Airlines" and "Air-India" CorporatioIlS establ1lh-
ed under section 3 of the Air Corporations Act, 1953, or t1ie Life 
Insurance Corporation of India established under section S. ot 
the Life Insurance Corporation Act, 1956, or the Agricultural 
Refinance Corporation established under section 3 of the Agri-
cultural Reftnan~ Corporation Act, 1963, or the Deposit Insur-
ance Corporation established under section 3 of the Deposit 
Insurance Corporation Act, 1961, or the Unit Trust of India 
established under section 3 of the Unit Trust of India Act, 1963, 
or the Food Corporation of India established under section 3, 
or a Board of Management established for two or more conti-
guous States under section 16, of the Food Corporations Act, 
1964, or the Banking, Service Commission established under 
section 3 of the Banking Service Commission Act, 1975, or a 
Regional Rural Bank established under section 3 of the Regional 
Rural Banks Act, 1976, or a banking or an insurance company, 
a mine, an oil-field, a Cantonment Board, or a major port, the 
Central Government, and 
(ii) in relation to any other industrial dispute, the State 
Government; 
· -. • • • • 
ExmAIcT ",OM $£ PAYMENT 01' BoNUS ACT, 1965 
(21 or 1965) 
• • • • • 
• • • • 
(ix) employees employed by-
• • • • • 
(d) the Agricultural Refinance Corporation. 
• • • • • 
Act not 
to apply 
to certain 
clanes 
of em-
ployee •. 

LOK SABHA 
" .. .. 
;r', ... ! 
A 
BILL 
to establish a Bank to be known as the National Bank 'for Agriculture 
and Rural Development for providing credit for the promotion of 
agriculture, small-scale industries, cottage" and village industriee, 
handicrafts and other rural crafts and other allied economic acti-
vities in rural areas with a view to proln.Oting integrated rural 
development and securjng prosperity of rural areas, and for matters 
connected therewith or incidental thereto . 
• 
(Shri R. Venkataramtltj., Minister of Finan.cf:) , ' 