As INTRQDUCED IN LoK SAB&A Q~ 
'1I1ll No, l25 of· 1987 
. 
THE ILLEGAL MIGRANTS (DETERMINATION BY ~UNALS) 
AMENDMENT BILL, 1987 . 
A 
BILL 
to amend the Illegal Migrants (Determination by Tribunals) Act, 1983. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-eighth Year of the Republic 
of India as fonows: - . . 
1~ This Act may be called the Illegal Migrants (Determination by 
Tribunals) Amendment Act, lW7. 
39 of 1983 S 2. In section 5 of the Illegal Migrants (Determination by Tribunals) 
Act. 1983 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in sub-section 
(3), for the words "three members", the words "two members" shall 
be substituted. 
3. In section 6 of the principal Act, for the words. "any other mem-
10 ber". the words "the member" shall be substituted .. 
4. In section 8 of the principal Act..-
(a) in sub-section (2) J-
(i) the words, brackets and figure "Without prejudice to 
the power conferred on the Cehtral Governmenti' \by sub-
I" section (1) ," shall be omitted; 
Short 
title. 
Amend-
mentof 
section 
5. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
6. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
8. 

Inaor-
tiOo of 
new 
sectioo 
IA. 
.App&e.. 
biD 
til. 
Central 
Govefpol 
ment for 
reference. 
2 
(ii) for the proviso, the following proviso shall be substitu-
ted, ·namely:-
"Provided that no such application shall be entertain-
ed by the Tribunal unless the person in relation to whom 
the application is made is found, or resides, within the S 
jurisdiction of the same police station wherein the applicant 
has his place of' residence.'t; 
(b) in sub-section (3),-
(i) for the words "two persons residing within three kilo-
metres of the area", the words "two persons residing within 10 
the jurisdiction of the same police station" shall be substituted; 
(ii) for the word "twenty-five", the word "ten" shall be 
substituted; 
(c) for sub-section (4), the following sub-sections shall be 
substituted, namely: -' l' 
" (4) Every reference under sub-section (1). shall be made 
to the Tribunal within the territorial limits of whose jurisdic-
tion the place of residence of the person named in such refer. 
ence is, at the time of making such reference, situated: 
Provided that where such person has no place of residencle, 20 
the reference shall be made to the Tribunal within the terri. 
torial limits of whose jurisdiction such person is, at the time 
of making such reference, found. . 
(5) Every application under su'irsection (2) shan be made 
to the Tribunal within the territorial limits of whnse jurisdfc- 25 
tion the persqn named in such application is found or, as the 
case may be, has his place of residence, at the time of making 
sueh application.". 
5. After section B of the principal Act, the following section shall 
be inserted, namely:-
"8A. (1) Any person may make an application to the Central 
GOTen.ment, for· cJeci~ion bv a Tribunal. as tn whether the ner.mn 
whose name ~nd other particulal'S are J!hren in the aonlication, i~ 
or is not an illeltal miltrant. and where any !luch aoplication' is re.-
ceived by the Central Government it mrw. on th .. ha~i!l of anv in- 35 
formatfon in it!': oossession or aft".,. makin£" ,:;n"h PTJquirv as it 
neems fit. reiect the application on thp. I!t'nl1nd thAt thp ~nn1i(,Rtion 
is frivolollQ or vp'l{atious or it dope; notcomnlv with thp rHmf,.p. 
ments of this section Or reff"r 'Such apolication to a Triblmal for 
decision: 
(2) Every anplication made unner suh.section (1) IIhell be Mane 
in such form and in such manner a" may he prescrihpri and !'lhall he 
accompanied by a declaration by another person resfdin~ within the 
40 

... '(.,.,. ;.. 
jurisdiction of the lame revenue sub-division in which the appti. 
cant resides in such form as may be prescribed to the effect that 
the particulars mentioned in the application are true to his know .. 
ledge, information and belief: 
S Provided that no person shall make more than ten such 
applications or more than ten such declarations. 
(3) Every reference under sub-section (1) shall be made to 
the Tribunal within the territorial limits of whose jurisdiction the 
place of residence of the person named in such reference is. at the 
10 time of making such reference, situated: ' 
f Provided that where such person has no place of residence, 
the reference shall be made to the Tribunal within the territorial 
limits of whose jurisdiction such person is, at the time of making 
such reference, found.". 
15 6. In section 10 of the principal Act. for the word and figure "sec- Amend.. 
tion 8", the words, figures, brackets and letter "section 8 or sub-section mem of 
(1) of section 8A" shall ~ substituted. section 
7. In section 12 of the principal Act,-
10. 
Amend.. 
ment of 
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words and figure "section 8, or section 
20 to which an application has been made under that section". the 12. 
words, figures and letter "section 8 or section SA, or to which' an ap-
plication has been made under section 8" shall be substituted; 
(b) for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be 
substituted, namely:-
2S "(2) Where the members of the Tribunal differ in their 
I opinion on any point, the Chairman of the Tribunal shall state 
the point or points on which they differ and make a reference 
to the President of the Appellate Tribunal which exercises 
jurisdiction in relation to the Tribunal who shall refer the case 
30 for hearing on ,such point or points by a member of another 
Tribunal under its jurisdiction and such point or points shall be 
decided according to the opinion of that member and such deci~ 
sion shall be deemed to be the decision of the Tribunal."; 
(c) in sub-section (3), after the words "prescribed authority", 
3S the words "or authorities" shall be inserted. 
8. In section 13 of the principal Act, for the words and figure "sec-
tion 8 or application made to a Tribunal under that section". the words, 
figures and letter "section 8 or section SA or application made to a 
Tribunal tmder section S" shall be substituted.. 
40 9. In section 14 of the frincipal Act, after the words "that section", 
the words, figure and letter "or any person named in a reference under 
section SA" shall be inserted. . 
10. In section 15 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (3), for the words "less than th~", the 
words "less than two" shall be substituted;· 
Amend. 
mem of 
section 
13. • 
Amend. 
ment of 
section 
14. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
15. 

Amend. 
mCDl of 
section 
16. 
...... , 
(b) in sub-section (6), for the words ""and each bench shall 
consist of not less than two members", .the words "which may either 
be single member bench or benches oonsisting of not less than 
two members" shall be Iilubstituted; 
(c) for sub-section, (10), the following sub-section shall be 5 
substituted, namely:-
"(10) Every Appellate Tribunal shall have the same powers 
as are vested in an appellate court under the Code of 
Civil Procedure, 1908, while hearing an appeal.". 
11. In section 16 of the principal Act,- 10 
(a) for sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be 
substituted namely:-
"(3) The Appellate Tribunal shall send a copy of every 
order passed by it under SUb-section (1) to the parties to the ap-
peal, to' the Tribunal concerned and to the prescribed autho- 15 
rity or authorities!'; 
(b) in sub-section (4), the words and figures "Subject to the 
provisions of section 17," shall be omitted. 
Substitu- 12. For section 17 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
tion of . substituted, namely: - " 20 
new 
lCClion 
for 
section 
17. 
Power of 
superinten. 
denCe by 
AppoUate 
Tribunals. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
20. 
"17. (1) Every Appellate Tribunal shall have' superintendence 
over all the Tribunals in the State. 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the fo'iegoing pro.. 
visions, the Appellate Tribunal may-
(1(1) call for returns from any Tribunal; . 25 
(b) make general rules and specify '\forms for regulating 
the practice and proceedings of Tribunals; and 
(c) specify the forms in which books, entries and accounts 
shall be kept by the officers of Tribunals /, . 
13. Section 20 of the principal Act shall be renumbered as' sub- 30 
section (1) thereof, and after sub-section (1) as so renumbered, the fol .. 
10wingsub-secUon shall be inserted, namely: - . 
"(2) My police officer not below the rank of a Supedntenc:ient 
of Police shall have such powers as may be necessary, including the 
power to obtain a bond from any penon for the due compHance 5 
of an order under sub-section (1) and to arrest such perion in the 
event of his failure to furnish such bond to the satisfaction of such 
pollce officer.". 
S of 1908 •. 

14. After section 21 of the principal Act, the following section shalt 
. he inserted, naIDFly:-
5 
10 
"21A. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for 
the time being in force, it shall be lawful for a police officer not below 
the rank of a Superintendent of Police, if he is satisfied that the 
circumstances so require and for reasons to be recorded in writing, 
to direct any person against whom a reference or an application has 
been made under this Act to enter Into a bond with or without sure-
ties for making himself available for the inquiry and observance of 
such restrictions or conditions as may be specified by such police 
officer: 
Provi~ that if such person fails to enter into such bond he 
may be arrested and detained in such manner as may be prescribed .... 
15. In section 25 of the principal Act, for the words "shall be punish-
15 able with imprisonment for a term which may extend to thI"eje years and 
shall also be liable to fine.", the following shall be substituted namely:-
"Shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall 
not be less than one year but which may extend to three years and 
with fine which shall not be less than two thousand rupees: 
20 Provided that the court may, for adequate and special reasons to 
25 
30 
be mentioned in the judgment, impose a sentence of imprisonment for 
a term of less than one year or a fine of leas than two thouSand 
rupees. ". 
16. In section 28 of the J)rincipal Act, in sub-section (2),-
(a) af~er clause (a), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:-
"(aa) the form and the manner in which an applic·ation, and 
the form in which a declaration, may be made under sub-section 
(2) of section SA;"; 
(b) for clause (b), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:-
"(b) the authority or authorities to be prescribed. under 
sections 11, 12 and 16;"; 
(e) after clause (e), the following clause shall be inserted, 
3S namely:-
"(ea) the manner of arrest and detention under the proviso to 
section 21A;". I 
Insertldn 
of new 
section 
21A. 
Power 
to bind 
certain 
persons 
against 
whom 
com-
plaint 
is made 
under· 
the Act. 
Amend'" 
ment of 
section 
25. 
Amend· 
ment Of 
section2&. 

The Illegal Migrants (Determination by Tribunals) Act, 1983 providei 
for the establishment o~ Tribunals for: the determination, in a fair 
manner, of the question whether a person is an illegal migrant so as to 
enable the Central Government to expel illegal migrants from India. 
2. Experience gained in the implementation of the Act has brought 
out the need for some amendments tal the Act. This need ailio finds 
expression in clause 5.9 of the Assam Accord. 
3. The Bill has been finalised. after detailed. discussions with the State 
Government of Assam. 'rhe Bill prOvides, among other things, for the 
following, namely:-
(i) reduction in the number of members of an Illegal Migrants 
(Determination) Tribunal from three to two; 
(ii) relaxation of the residence ;estriction and reduction of fee 
in case of private complaints; 
(iii) enabling any person living beyond the limit~ of the same 
police station to (make an application to the Central Government fOr 
reference to a Tribunal; 
(iv) reduction in the minimum number of members of aD 
Appellate Tribunal from three to· two; 
(v) omission of the existing provision relating to revision by 
High Court in view of the powers 'Of the High Court under articles 
226 land 227 of the Constitution; 
(vi) conferment of the powers on the Appellate Tribunal to 
exercise superintendence over all the Determination Tribunals in a 
State; I 
(vii) empowering a police officer not below the rank of a Superin-
tendent of Police to bind certain persons; 
(viii) providing for a minimum punishment for offences under 
the Act. I 
4. The Bill seeks to achieve ~e above objects. 
NEW DELm; 
The 16th November, 1987. BUTA SINGH. 
6 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 5 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section SA which empowers 
the Central Government to prescribe the form and manner in which an 
application may be made and the form m which a: declaration may be 
made under that section. I 
2. Clauses 7 and 11 of the Bill which seek to amend sections 12 and 
16 resPectively, empower the Central Government to prescribe autho-
rities to whom copies of every order passed by; a Tribunal or an Appellate 
Tribunal shall be sertt. I 
3. Clause 14 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section 2lA which em-
powers the Central Government to prescribe the manner of arrest and 
detention of persons who fail to enter into the bond under that section. 
4. The matters with respect to which the Central Government is 
empowered to make rules relate to matters of procedure. The delegation 
ot ~gislative power is, therefore I of a normal character. I 
7 

Establish· 
ment C1l 
megal 
Migrant. 
(Deter-
mination) 
Tribunals. 
ANNEXURE 
ExTR4CTS FROM THt 11.LEG4L MIGJlANTS (DETEIlMIN4TION BY 'l"IuBUNALS) 
ACT, 1983 
(39 or 1983) . 
• • • • • 
CHAPTER II 
ESTABLISHMENT OF TIuBUN.\LS 
5. (1) • • • • • 
(3) Each Tribunal shall consist of three mem'gers. 
• • • • • 
FilUng of 8. If, for any reason, any vacancy occurs in the office of the Chairman 
vacancies. or any other member of a Tribunal, the Central Government may flll 
lleferen-
ees or 
applica-
tionsto 
Tribunals. 
the vacancy by appointing any person who fulflls the qualifications 
specified in sub-s,ection (2) of section 5, as the Chairman, or, as the case 
may be, member of such Tribunal. 
• • • • • " , 
8. (1) • • • • • 
(2) Without prejudice to the power conferred on the Central Govern-
ment by sub-section (1), any person may make an application to the 
Tribunal, for its diecision, as to whether the person whose name and 
other particulars are given in the application, is or is not an illegal 
migrant: I . 
Provided that no such application shall be entertained' by the Tribunal 
unless the person in relation to whom the application is made is found, 
or resides, at a place within three kilometres from the place of residence 
of the applicant. 
(3) Every application made under sub-section (2) shall be made in 
such form and in such manner as may be prescribed and shall be 
accompanied by affidavits sworn by not less than two persons residing 
within three kilometres of the area in which the person referred to in 
the application is found, or reSiding, corroborating the averments made 
in the application, and shall also be accompanied by such fee, being not 
less than twenty-five, and not more than one hundred rupees, as may 
be pres~ribed. 
(4) Every reference under sub-section (1), and every application 
. under sub-gection (2), shall be made to the Tribunal within the tern-
I 
torial limits of whose jurisdiction the place of residence of the person 
named in such reference or ap,plication, as the case may be, is situated: 
8 
t: 

9 
Provided that where the person named in such reference or appli-
cation has no place of residence, the reference or application, as the case 
may be, shall be made to the Tribunal within the territorial limits of 
whose jurisdiction such pel'son is found . 
• • • • • 
10. On receipt of a reference under sub-section (1) of section 8, the Procedures 
Tribunal shall serve on the person named in such reference, a notice, with res-
accompanied -by a copy of such referencJe, calling upon him to make, pect to references within a period of thirty days from the date of receipt of such notice, under sub-
such representation with regard to the averments made in the r¢erence, section 
and to produce such evidence as he may think fit in support of his. (1) of 
defence: section 8. 
Provided that if the Tribunal is satisfied that the person aforesaid 
was prevented by suftlcient cause from making his representation and 
from producing evidence in support of his defence within the said period 
of thirty days, it may permit him to make his representation and to 
produce evidence in support of his defence, within such further period, 
not exceeding thirty days, as it may, by order, specify. 
• I • • • • 
12. (1) The Tribunal to which a referenqe has been made under sec-
tion 8, or to which an application has been made under that section, shall, 
after taking such evidence as may be adduced before it and after making 
such inquiry as it may think fit and after ~aring such persons as it may 
deem appropriate, by order, decide the question as to whether the person 
named in such reference or application, as the ~ may be, is or is not 
an illegal migrant: 
Provided that where for the detennination of such question in any 
case the decision on any issue re~rs any decision on any other issue 
or issues unnecessary, the Tribunal may not decide such other issue or 
issues. 
(2) Where the members of t¥ Tribunal differ in their opinion on 
any point, the decision on such point shall be according to the opinion 
of the majority of such members. 
(3) The Tribunal shall send a copy of every order passed by it to 
the pr~cribed authOrity and to the parties to the reference, or the appli-
cation, as the case may be . 
• • • • • 
13. Every reference made to a Tribunal under section 8 or application 
made to a Tribunal under that section shall be inquired into as expediti-
ously as possible and every endeavour shall be made to conclude such 
inquiry within a period of six months from the date of the service, on 
the person concerned, of a copy of such reference or application. 
• u. The Central Government, or any person, narI¥d in a reference 
or an application under section 8, or any applicant under sub-8ection (2) 
of that section may, if it or he is not satisfied with any order made by a 
Tribunal wider section 12, prefer an appeal to t~ Appellate Tribunal 
against such order. 
Determi-
nation of 
the ques-
tion as to 
whether a 
peI'B~m is 
an illegal 
migrant. 
Reference 
and appli-
cation 
to be 
disposed 
ot within 
six 
months. 
Appeal. 

Appellll.te 
Tribunal. 
Order of 
the Appc-
late Tri-
bunal. 
Revision. 
10 
15. (1) • • • • 
(3) An Appellate Tribunal shall consist of as many members, not 
being less than three and more than six, as the Central Government may 
think fit. 
• • • • • 
(6) The powers and functions of an Appellate Tribunal may be 
exercised and discharged by benches constituted by the President there-
of from amongst the members thereof and each bench shall consist ot 
not ],ess than two members. 
* • • • 
(10) Every Appellate Tribunal shall have the same powers as are 5 ot 1908. 
vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, while 
trying a suit, in respect of the following mat~rs, ,namely:-
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of witnesses and 
examining them on oath; 
(b) discovery and production of any docum~; 
(c) reception of evidence on affidavits; 
(d) requisitioning of public J1E!Cords from any court or office; 
(e) issuing of any commission for the examination of witnesses. , 
16. (1) • • • • • 
(3) The Appellate Tribunal shall send a copy of every order passed 
by it under sub-section (1) to the parties to the appeal and to the Tri-
bunal concerned. ' 
(4) Subject to the provisions of section 17, every order passed under 
sub-section (1), other than an order remanding the case, shall be final 
and no order pa~ under that sub-section shall be called in question 
in any court . 
. 17. The High Court may call for the record of any case which baa 
been decided by the Appellate Tribunal situate within its local jurisdic-
tion, and if such Appellate Tribunal appears-
(a) to have exercis;ed a jurisdiction not vested in it by law, or 
(b) to have failed to exercise a jurisdiction so vested, or 
(c) to have acted in the exercise of its jurisdiction illegally or 
with material irregularity, 
the High Court may make suc~, order in the case as it thinks fit: 
Provided that the High Court shall not, under this section, vary or 
reverse any order made or any order deciding an issue in the course of 
a proceeding with respect to an appeal, ~xcept where-
(i) the order, if it had been made in favour of the party apply-
ing for reviSion, would have finally disposed of the proceeding, or 

11 
(ii) the order, if a1low~ to stand, would occasion a failure of 
justice or cause irreparabl~ injury to the party against whom it 
was made. 
Expl4Mtion.-In this section, the expression "any case which has 
been decided" includes any order madle Or any order deciding an issue 
in the course of a proceeding with respect to any appeal. 
• • • • • 
CHAPrER IV 
ENFORCEMENT OF THE OllDERS MADE BY THE TRIBuNALS 
ZOo Where a person has been ~termined by a Tribunal, or, as the 
case may be, by the Appellate Tribunal, to be an illp.gal migrant, the 
Central Government shall, by order se~ on such person, direct such 
person to remove himself from India within such time and by such 
route as may be specified in the order and may give such further di~tions 
in regard to his removal from India as it may consider necessary or 
expedient. 
• • • • • 
25. Ally person who,-
(a) contravenes or attempts to contravene, or abets the contra~ 
vention of, any order made under section 20; or 
(b) fails to comply with any direction given by any such order; 
or , 
(c) harbours any person who has contravened any order made 
under section 20 or has failed to comply with any direction given by 
any such order, 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
three years and shall also be liable to fine. 
• • • • • 
28. (1) • • • • • 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of ~ fo~ 
going powers, such ru~s may provide for all or any of the following 
matters, namely:-
• • • • • 
(b) the authority to be prescribed under section 11; 
(c) the form and the manner in which an apwal to the Appel-
late Tribunal may be preferred and the fee which shall accompany 
such appeal, as required by su~section (8) of section 15; 
• • • • • 
Expuls~nn 
f.>t illegal 
migrant. 
Penalties. 
Power 
to make 
rules. 
• • 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to amend the Illegal Migrants (Determination by Tribunals) Act, 1983. 
(Shri Buta Singh, Minister of Hom.e Affairs.) 