ae

AS INTRODUCED IN 1.06 SABHA

17 0६0 1999

Bill No. 125 of 1999

‘THE COMPULSORY VOTING BILL, 1999

By
Suri P. C. Tuomas, M.P.
A
BILL
to make voting compulsory at all elections and for matters connected therewith.
Beit enacted by Parliament in the Fiftieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (7) This Act may be called the Compulsory Voting Act, 1999.
(2) It shall come into force at once.

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—

‘election’ means elections to the House of the People, Legislative Assemblies
of States and local bodies.

3. It shall be the duty of Central Government to ensure that,—

(0) the name of every citizen who has completed eighteen years of age has
been entered in the electoral rolls;

(ii) every eligible voter is issued an identity card.
4. It shall be the duty of every eligible citizen to exercise his franchise during every

election.

.5. Any citizen who does not exercise his franchise at an election without any

reasonable cause or prevents any person from exercising his franchise shall be punished

15 with imprisonment for a period of three months.

6. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make

rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.

Duty of the
Government.

Duty of the citi-
zens.

Punishment.

Power to make
rules.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Political interference, negligence and inaction on the part of
several persons who have a right to vote not being enlisted as voters.

There are instances where names of voters are deleted from electoral rolls
are known supporters of political opponents of ruling parties in many States.
is to be seriously dealt with.

Similarly eligible voters do not exercise their franchise. It should be made ad
every eligible voter to exercise his franchise during every election. 1

The Bill seeks to make provisions accordingly.

New Delhi; BS,
November 8, 1999.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 3 of the Bill provides that every eligible voter shall be issued an identity
card. Though majority of our population have been issued identity cards by the Election
Commission yet crores of people are yet to be issued. This Bill would hasten the process.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of
India. A recurring expenditure of about rupees ten lakh is likely to be involved from the
Consolidated Fund of India per annum.

A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees fifteen lakh is also likely to be involved.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 6 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of detail only and as such the -
delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.



LOK SABHA

A

BILL
2

(Shri PC. Thomas, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—2351LS—6-12-1999.