Bill No. 125 of  2022
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title and
commencement.
THE PROTECTION OF HUMAN RIGHTS (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2022
By
SHRIMATI SUPRIYA SULE, M.P.
A
BILL
 further to amend the Protection of  Human Rights Act, 1993.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Protection of Human Rights (Amendment) Act, 2022.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 2 of the Protection of Human Rights Act, 1993 (hereinafter referred to as
the principal Act), in sub-section (1)—
(a) after clause (e) the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(ea) “inquiry” means investigation of complaints  relating to human
rights violations by the Commission or through any officer or investigation
Amendment
of section 2.
5
10
10 of 1994.

agency of the concerned Government under sections 13, 14, 16, 17 and
18;”; and
(b) after clause (m), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
“(ma) “recommendation” means order or direction issued by the
Commission to the concerned Government, authority or person; and
(mb) “reparation” means compensation and rehabilitation provided to
the victims of human rights violations, determined and quantified based on
the principles mentioned under clause (ca) of section 18;”.
3. For section 15 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be substituted,
namely:—
“15. Any statement made by a person in the course of giving evidence before
the Commission may subject him to, or be used against him in, civil or criminal
proceedings:
Provided that the statement—
(a) is made in reply to the question which he is required by the Commission
to answer; or
(b) is relevant to the subject matter of the inquiry; and
15A.  Any evidence collected and the statements made before the Commission
under sections 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17 and 18 during the course of investigation into
complaints relating to human rights violations shall have evidentiary value and shall
be accepted as evidence in any civil or criminal proceedings in the courts, as the case
may be.”.
4. In section 18 of the principal Act,—
(a) in clause (a), in sub-clause (i) for the words “compensation or damages”,
the words “reparation” shall be substituted;
(b) for clause (b), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
“(b) where the inquiry discloses the commission of violation of human rights
or negligence in the prevention of violation of human rights or abetment thereof
by a public servant, the Commission may initiate proceedings for prosecution
against the concerned person or persons by approaching the Supreme Court or
the High Courts and invoking their writ jurisdictions under articles 32 and 226
of the Constitution, respectively;” and
(c) after clause (c) the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(ca) determine the quantum of reparations to be paid to the victims of
human rights violations based on the United Nation Basic Principles and
Guidelines on the Right to a Remedy and Reparation for Victims of Gross
Violations of International Human Rights Law and Serious Violations of
International Humanitarian Law, 2005 which shall be proportional to the gravity
of the violation and the harm suffered, including —
(A) compensation to be provided for any economically assessable damage,
as appropriate and proportional to the gravity of the violation and the
circumstances of each case, including,—
(i) physical or mental harm;
(ii) lost opportunities, including employment, education and social
benefits;
(iii) material damages and loss of earnings, including loss of earning
potential;
(iv) moral damage;
(v) costs required for legal or expert assistance, medicine and medical
services, psychological and social services; and
5
Substitution
of new
sections for
section 15.
2
10
15
20
Statement
made by
persons to the
Commission.
Evidentiary
value of evi-
dence and
statements
produced by the
Commission.
Amendment
of section 18.
25
30
35
40
45
50

(B) rehabilitation including medical, psychological, legal and social
services”.
5. After section 18 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:—
“18A. (1) The Central Government and State Government concerned shall be
responsible for the violations of human rights occurring within their jurisdiction
and payment of reparation to such victims, as determined under clause (ca) of
section 18.
(2) The Central Government and State Governments may recover the
reparation paid by them to the victims under sub-section (1), from the officers of
the concerned Government who had been found responsible for causing the human
rights violations in such manner as may be prescribed.”
6. In section 21 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the word “may” the word
“shall” shall be substituted.
State Res-
ponsibility
and Liability.
Amendment
of section 21.
Insertion of
new section
18A.
5
10
3

STA TEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The full bench of the Madras High Court in Abdul Sathar vs. the Principal
Secretary (Tamil Nadu State Government) on 5th February 2021 ruled that the
recommendations made by the State Human Rights Commission (SHRC) under section 18 of
the Protection of Human Rights Act, 1993 are binding on the Government or Government
authority. The bench observed that the recommendations of SHRC are adjudicatory orders
that are legally and immediately enforceable. The bench also recommended the Parliament
to make necessary amendments to the Protection of Human Rights Act, 1993, so as to
empower the Commissions to directly execute their recommendations.
Section 13 of the Protection of Human Rights Act, 1993 confers upon the National
and State level Human Rights Commissions the powers of a civil court during inquiry into
human rights violations. As such, all proceedings before the Human Rights Commissions
are deemed to be judicial proceedings under section 13 of the Act. But after the Commission
completes its investigation and human rights violations are brought to light, the Commission
does not have the penal powers to prosecute human rights violations. Section 18 of the Act
only provides for the Human Rights Commission to recommend to the concerned Government
or the authority to take suitable action against such human rights violators. As a result, the
Commission is unable to hold such people and organisations accountable for their acts of
human rights violations.
Over the years in various judgments, the Supreme Court and High Courts have
lamented that the National and the State Human Rights Commissions have become toothless
tigers. The Indian Judiciary has observed that the original intent of the framers of this
legislation was to protect and promote human rights, so as, such the recommendations of
the Commission are enforceable, binding and ought to be implemented. It held that
constructing the word ‘recommend’ to be treated as opinion or suggestion by the
Commission, would defeat the very statutory object of this Human Rights Act. Recognising
this lacunae in the legislation and the need to protect the citizens’ fundamental rights, this
Bill amends recommendation to mean order or directions which will be binding on the
authority or Government receiving it.
The Act is silent on the standards to be followed while determining the reparations
to be given to the victims of human rights violations. Thus there is no clarity on how the
compensation and damages will be quantified. In addition, Section 18(a) of the Act provides
only for compensation to be recommended to the concerned Government or authority.
The need is to address this gap by providing principles for determining reparation
and measuring damages caused. It is also required to provide for compulsory relief to
victims of human rights violations by holding the Central and State Governments responsible
and liable for any human rights violations happening under their jurisdictions.
When the Protection of Human Rights Act was brought in 1993, the intent of the
legislation was to bring greater accountability and transparency in the system of
administration of justice and devise efficient and effective methods of dealing with issues
relating to human rights. But by failing to hold people and authorities accountable for their
actions of committing or abetting human rights violations, the Act in its current form has
failed to achieve this objective.
Hence this Bill.
     NEW DELHI;                                                                   SUPRIYA SULE
1 July, 2022
4

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM PROTECTION OF HUMAN RIGHTS ACT, 1993
* * *  *
2. (1) * *  * *
(a) * *  *
(e)  “Human Rights Court” means the Human Rights Court specified under
section 30;
*  *  *  *
(m) “public servant” shall have the meaning assigned to it in section 21 of the
Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860);
*  *  *  *
15. No statement made by a person in the course of giving evidence before the
Commission shall subject him to, or be used against him in, any civil or criminal proceeding
except a prosecution for giving false evidence by such statement: Provided that the state-
ment— (a) is made in reply to the question which he is required by the Commission to
answer; or (b) is relevant to the subject matter of the inquiry.
*  *  *  *
18. The Commission may take any of the following steps during or upon the comple-
tion of an inquiry held under this Act, namely:—
(a) where the inquiry discloses the commission of violation of human rights or
negligence in the prevention of violation of human rights or abetment thereof by a public
servant, it may recommend to the concerned Government or authority—
(i) to make payment of compensation or damages to the complainant or to the victim
or the members of his family as the Commission may consider necessary;
(ii) to initiate proceedings for prosecution or such other suitable action as the
Commission may deem fit against the concerned person or persons;
(iii) to take such further action as it may think fit;
(b) approach the Supreme Court or the High Court concerned for such directions,
orders or writs as that Court may deem necessary;
(c) recommend to the concerned Government or authority at any stage of the
inquiry for the grant of such immediate interim relief to the victim or the members of his
family as the Commission may consider necessary;
(d) subject to the provisions of clause (e), provide a copy of the inquiry report to
the petitioner or his representative;
(e) the Commission shall send a copy of its inquiry report together with its recom-
mendations to the concerned Government or authority and the concerned Government or
authority shall, within a period of one month, or such further time as the Commission may
allow, forward its comments on the report, including the action taken or proposed to be
taken thereon, to the Commission;
(f) the Commission shall publish its inquiry report together with the comments of
the concerned Government or authority, if any, and the action taken or proposed to be
taken by the concerned Government or authority on the recommendations of the Commis-
sion.
*  *  *  *
21. (1) A State Government may constitute a body to be known as the (name of the
State) Human Rights Commission to exercise the powers conferred upon, and to perform
the functions assigned to, a State Commission under this Chapter.
*  *  *  *
5
Definitions.
Statement
made by
persons to the
Commission.
Steps during
and after
inquiry.
Constitution
of State
Human Rights
Commission.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
 further to amend the Protection of Human Rights Act, 1993
————
(Shrimati Supriya Sule, M.P.)