1
THE ANGANWADI WORKERS (EMPOWERMENT AND WELFARE)
BILL, 2018
By
SHRIMATI SUPRIYA SULE, M.P.
A
BILL
to constitute an Anganwadi Workers Welfare Authority to provide for performance based
pay to anganwadi workers and helpers, regularise their employment, recognise
the unpaid work done by anganwadi workers and protect their right to financial
entitlement, increase their wages and index them to inflation, provide for penalty
to be paid to workers in case of delay in the payment of their monthly wages,
redefine their job role and increase their responsibilities, make affordable
healthcare accessible to anganwadi workers, helpers and their families through
health insurance scheme and healthcare coupons, provide for paid maternity
leave, social security and pension benefits to anganwadi workers, improve access
to education among children of anganwadi workers through scholarships and
reservations, provide for quota in all government jobs for children of anganwadi
workers and for all matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
W
HEREAS the 45th Indian Labour Conference has recommended recognition of scheme
for workers (including anganwadi workers under the Integrated Child Development Services
Scheme) as regular workers stipulating them with minimum wages and social security benefits;
Bill  No. 125 of  2018
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Anganwadi Workers (Empowerment and Welfare)
Act, 2018.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "anganwadi worker" means a woman employed to provide additional and
supplementary healthcare and nutritional services to children and pregnant women
under the Integrated Child Development Services Scheme (ICDS Scheme);
(b) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State or a Union territory
having legislature, the concerned State Government or the Union territory Government,
as the case may be, and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(c) "Authority" means the Anganwadi Workers' Empowerment and Welfare
Authority constituted under section 3;
(d) "placement agency" means any agency or contractor, whether registered or
otherwise, engaged in the placement of children of anganwadi workers with prospective
private employers; and
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by the rules made under this Act.
3. (1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by notification,
appoint, there shall be constituted, an Authority to be  known as the Anganwadi Workers
Empowerment and Welfare Authority.
(2) The Authority shall consist of—
(a) the Union Minister of Women and Child Development — ex-officio,
Chairperson;
(b) the Union Ministry of Health and Family Welfare - ex officio, Vice-Chairperson;
(c) the Director General of Health Services, Union Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare — ex-officio member;
(d) the Secretaries of the Union Ministries of Women and Child Development,
Health and Family Welfare and Statistics and Programme Implementation — ex-officio
members;
(e) the Chairperson, National Commission for Women — ex-officio member;
(f) the Director, National Institute of Health and Family Welfare — ex-officio
member;
(3) The Central Government shall appoint such number of officers and staff as it
considers necessary for the efficient functioning of the Authority.
(4) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms of conditions of services of
officers and staff of the Authority shall be such as may be prescribed.
4. (1) The Authority shall meet at such times and places and shall observe such rules
of procedure in regard to transaction of business at its meetings as may be prescribed.
(2) The expenditure incurred to attend meetings by the members referred to in sub-
clauses (a) to (f) of section 3, shall be borne by their concerned controlling authorities.
5. The Authority shall, under guidance of the appropriate Government,—
(a) formulate a comprehensive policy for welfare of Anganwadi workers;
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Definitions.
Constitution
of the
Anganwadi
Workers
Empowerment
and Welfare
Authority.
Meetings of
the Authority.
Functions of
the Authority.
10
15
20
25
30
5
35
40

3
(b) forward such information as it may deem necessary to departments of the
State Governments;
(c) undertake a baseline study to collect comprehensive data about anganwadi
workers and their families, nutritional and health status of children (below six years of
age) and pregnant women within one year of its establishment; and
(d) formulate a policy to redefine responsibilities of anganwadi workers and
anganwadi helpers to include, but not limited to, participation in health screening
programs for especially cancer in women, public awareness activities for all sectors of
health, sanitation, education, road safety and any other such service, within one year
of its establishment; and
(e) discharge such other functions as may be assigned to it by the Central
Government:
Provided that the roles and responsibilities of anganwadi workers and anganwadi
helpers, prescribed under clauses ( c) and ( d) shall be in addition to the functions already
carried out by them under the Integrated Child Development Services Scheme (ICDS Scheme).
6. (1) The Authority shall recommend to the Central Government to regularise the
service of anganwadi workers and anganwadi helpers and confer the status of permanent
Government employees on such workers and helpers.
(2) The Authority shall, in consultation with the State Governments, decide the formula
and criteria for determination of wages of anganwadi workers and anganwadi helpers:
Provided that the wages and other incentives including bonus to be paid anganwadi
workers and anganwadi helpers shall be directly linked to the improved nutritional status of
children and pregnant women under their care:
Provided further that the wages of anganwadi workers and helpers shall be indexed to
market inflation.
7. (1) The appropriate Government shall pay interest at such rate as may be determined
for any delay in —
(a) payment of wages and performance related bonuses to be paid to the
anganwadi workers and anganwadi helpers; and
(b) transfer of funds to anganwadi centres for providing nutritional supplements
to children, pregnant women and its normal functioning:
Provided that if the delay is in the payment of Central Government share of wages to
the anganwadi workers and anganwadi helpers or its contribution to the anganwadi centres,
then the Central Government shall pay monthly interest at the rate of twenty per cent, on its
wage share for the entire delay period:
Provided further that if the delay is in the payment of State Government's share of
wages to the anganwadi workers and helpers or its contribution to the anganwadi centres,
then the respective State Government shall pay monthly interest at the rate of fifteen per
cent. on its wage share for the entire delay period:
Provided also that where the delay in payment of the Central Government and the State
Government share is more than a month then the interest shall be compounded monthly.
8. (1) In cases of vacancies in posts of supervisors, workers or helpers at the anganwadi
centres, and where the existing workers or helpers are burdened with performing additional
responsibilities of the posts lying vacant, such workers or helpers shall be paid additional
salary for undertaking such additional work.
Regularisation
of
employment
of anganwadi
workers and
anganwadi
helpers.
Penalty to be
paid by the
appropriate
Government
for delay in
payment of
wages and
transfer of
funds to
anganwadi
centres.
Vacancies in
posts at
anganwadi
centres and
joint
responsibilities.
10
15
20
25
30
5
35
40
45

4
(2) In case of delay in the payment of additional salary under sub-section (1), the
provisions of payment of interest as mentioned under section 7 shall apply.
(3) The appropriate Government shall fill the vacancy within two months from the
date on which such post becomes vacant.
9. (1) The Authority shall impart pre-service and in-service training to anganwadi
workers and anganwadi helpers and also initiate capacity building programme for such
workers and helpers to enable them to carry out their responsibilities in the best possible
way.
(2) The training under sub-section (1) shall include—
(a) training in maintenance of health and nutritional records of children,
pregnant and lactating women in digital form; and
(b) bimonthly training in digital and medical technologies.
10. (1) The appropriate Government shall—
(a) provide qualitative and affordable healthcare to anganwadi workers and
their families including their spouse, children and parents.
(b) provide healthcare coupons to anganwadi workers that may be redeemed for
free healthcare in private hospitals.
11. (1) The anganwadi workers and anganwadi helpers shall be entitled to paid
maternity leave.
(2) The cost of paid maternity leave shall be borne by the appropriate Government on
the basis of the cost sharing ratio on which the monthly wages are paid.
12. The anganwadi workers and anganwadi helpers shall be entitled to pension and
other social security benefits, to be paid by the appropriate Government, on the basis of the
cost sharing ratio on which wages are paid.
13. (1) The Central Government shall provide scholarship to children of anganwadi
workers and helpers till completion of their school education.
(2) The Central Government shall, in consultation with the State Government, reserve
five per cent. of seats in all Government schools and colleges in favour of children of
anganwadi workers and anganwadi helpers.
14. (1) The Central Government shall reserve three per cent. of jobs in the public sector
in favour of children of anganwadi workers.
(2) The Central Government shall, in consultation with the Authority, determine the
relevant principles and criteria for providing reservation in favour of children of anganwadi
workers helpers in job under the State.
15. The Authority shall, in consultation with the appropriate Government, constitute
a Placement Agency to engage the children of anganwadi workers with prospective private
employers.
16. The State Government shall direct supervisors and Child Development Project
Officers to visit the anganwadi centres and families of anganwadi workers every month, and
submit a report to the appropriate Government apprising the working conditions of anganwadi
workers and anganwadi helpers alongwith benefits being provided under welfare schemes
and policies formulated under this Act and the functioning of the anganwadi centres in such
manner as may be prescribed.
Training of
Anganwadi
Workers and
Anganwadi
Helpers and
computerisation
of health
records.
Healthcare
facilities and
coupons for
families of
anganwadi
workers and
helpers.
Maternity
benefits to
anganwadi
workers and
helpers.
Pension and
social  security
benefits to
anganwadi
workers and
helpers.
Scholarships
and
reservation in
schools and
colleges to
children of
anganwadi
workers and
helpers.
Reservation in
public sector
jobs to
children of
anganwadi
workers.
Constitution
of Placement
Agency.
Monthly
supervision of
anganwadi
centres and
report
submission by
Child
Development
Project
Officers.
10
15
20
25
30
5
35
40

5
17. The health, education, employment and such other welfare measures to be provided
to anganwadi workers and helpers under this Act shall be in addition to the benefits already
available to such workers and helpers.
18. (1) The Authority shall prepare once every year, as may be prescribed, an annual
report giving the summary of its activities, including schemes implemented, recommendations
made to the appropriate Government and statements of its annual accounts and submit the
same to the Central Government.
(2) The Central Government shall cause the annual report of the Authority to be laid,
before each House of Parliament within a period of one year from the date of receipt of such
report.
19. The Central Government shall, from time to time, after due appropriation made by
Parliament by law in this behalf, provide requisite funds for carrying out the purposes of
this Act.
20. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government, in consultation with the State Governments, may make such order or give such
direction, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or
expedient for the removal of any difficulty:
Provided that no such orders shall be made after the expiry of the period of three years
from the date of commencement of this Act.
21. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament or, as the case may be, each House of the State Legislature,
while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session
or two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately
following the session or the successive, sessions aforesaid, Parliament or, as the case may
be, the State Legislature agrees in making any modification in the rule or agrees that the rule
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of
no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Benefits to
anganwadi
workers over
and above the
present
benefits.
Annual report
and its laying
before the
Parliament.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Power to
make rules.
10
15
20
25
30
5

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Healthcare workers are an important link between the healthcare providers and
community, and are instrumental in raising awareness about health related risks, especially in
rural areas. Study undertaken about functioning of the anganwadi centres proved that
interventions by anganwadi workers and helpers can help in early detection and appropriate
management of preventable childhood disabilities like malnutrition.
As per the National Family Health Survey (NFHS), the malnutrition in children (below
five years of age) reduced to 35.7 per cent. in NFHS-4, compared to 42.5 per cent. in NFHS-3.
Anganwadi sevikas who work at the grassroot level are major contributors for this reduction
in malnutrition. Anganwadi workers are responsible for actual delivery of healthcare and
education services under the Government's Integrated Child Development Services Scheme
(ICDS scheme). The National Early Childhood Care and Education (ECCE) Policy of the
Central Government notified in the year 2013, envisaged anganwadi centres as vehicles of
ECCE service delivery. Anganwadi sevikas undertake a range of crucial functions and are
responsible for conducting real time monitoring of malnutrition among children and lactating
mothers, organise immunization drive along with Auxiliary Nurse Midwife (ANM), maintain
growth monitoring charts to track and assess the nutrition status of children, maintain
records (including registrations of births and deaths), provide pre-school and health
education, distribute supplementary nutrition, undertake health check-ups and referral
services among others.
The importance of anganwadis is also reflected in the renaming of ICDS Scheme as
Anganwadi Services Scheme. The anganwadi sevikas  are equipped with increasing
responsibilities over the years. Under Access to Justice project, the anganwadis also aid in
facilitating access of legal services to marginal communities. As per the Centre for Equity
Studies Report, the burden of non-ICDS work on the anganwadi workers was high, as
reflected in the percentage of anganwadi workers mobilised for other non-ICDS work. For
instance, in 2014, 17 per cent of anganwadi workers were mobilised for panchayat related
work, 46 per cent, for pulse polio, 42 per cent, for election work and 22 per cent. for other
work. Thus, on an average 63 per cent. of the anganwadi workers were mobilised for non-
ICDS work in 2014. There is need to increase the role and responsibilities of anganwadi
workers by including participation in health screening programs for especially cancer in
women, public awareness activities for all sectors of health, sanitation, education, road
safety, among others. Despite the importance of the functions they perform and their ever
increasing responsibilities, they are not entitled to any wages but are paid a meager amount
of honorarium by the Central and the State Governments as per the cost sharing ratio. While
a respective State's contribution to the honorarium varies, the Central Government pays its
share of monthly honorarium to the anganwadi workers and anganwadi helpers at the rate of
Rs. 3,000/- and Rs. 1,500/- respectively. Recognition of the relatively unpaid care work done
by women anganwadi workers and right to financial entitlements, job security and other
employment related benefits is also required. The 45th Indian Labour Conference has also
recommended the recognition of this scheme workers (including anganwadis under Integrated
Child Development Services Scheme) as regular workers stipulating them with minimum
wages and social security benefits.
In context of their changing responsibilities and roles, there is need to regularise
anganwadi workers and anganwadi helpers and confer the status of permanent Government
employees to them. The payment and bonuses are required to be based on the nutritional
status of children, rather than keeping them fixed. As per the research undertaken by Bill and
Melinda Gates Foundation, the performance pay and bonuses paid to healthcare workers
based on the nutritional status of children in their care, proved to be effective in improving
6

7
the nutritional status of children, compared to fixed bonuses. While this initiative reduced
the prevalence of underweight among children five percentage points, height of the children
increased by one centimeter, in a short span of three months.
The wages paid to the anganwadi workers and helpers shall be indexed to inflation. As
per the Progress of  Children Under Six Report, 2016 released by the Centre for Equity
Studies, 35 per cent of the anganwadi workers were not paid their wages on time. To counter
the problem of delay in wages to anganwadi workers and budget for buying nutritional
supplements at anganwadi centres, a monthly interest at the rate of 20 per cent. and
15 per cent. respectively on the delayed amount for the entire period of delay should be paid
by the Central and the State Governments. The interest shall be compounded, if the delay
period is more than a month.
To deal with the issue of vacancies in posts at anganwadi centres and the resulting
work overload, the provision for payment of wages for both positions to the anganwadi
performing tasks related to both posts has to be made and any delay in payment shall be
subject to penalty conditions.
Also participation of anganwadi workers in the health screening programs is necessary.
The Medical Research Institutes in India undertook health screening program involving the
anganwadi workers by training them of the risks of cancer and various tests for cancer. This
has shown positive results with the number of people attending the health care camps for
screenings, followed by diagnosis and treatment increased, especially for cancer screening
among Indian women. To keep the workers up to date with the evolving technologies,
frequent pre-service and in-service training and capacity building programme is required.
The compulsory computerisation of health records and requisite training and technology for
the same is also necessary.
Qualitative and affordable healthcare to anganwadi sevikas  through healthcare
coupons which can be redeemed for free healthcare at private hospitals is required which can
be availed by these anganwadi workers and their spouse, children and parents. These
anganwadi sevikas shall also be entitled to get paid maternity leave, the cost of which shall
be shared by both the Central and the State Governments in the same cost sharing ratio as
the wages. The provisions of pension after the retirement and other social security benefits
to be paid to Anganwadi workers and helpers by the Government to overcome the pitiable
conditions of the anganwadi workers and anganwadi helpers. Also to provide access to
education, scholarships to children of anganwadi workers till their completion of school
education shall also be granted. Further, provision of reservation of atleast five per cent. of
seats in all Government schools and colleges, 3 per cent. of jobs in the public sector for
children of anganwadi workers and helpers be made. Placement Agency is required to be
constituted to engage children of anganwadis with prospective private employers. Monthly
supervision of anganwadi centres and anganwadi household by Child Development Project
Officers (CDPOs) to ascertain whether the benefits which are in addition to the services
allocated to them under the present ICDS scheme to anganwadi workers' families are being
realized or not.
The Bill, therefore, champions for the rights and welfare of the anganwadi workers and
anganwadi helpers by mandating the Government to allocate the anganwadi workers and
anganwadi helpers their due share of entitlements viz, wages and bonuses, healthcare and
education services, pension and social security benefits.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SUPRIYA  SULE
July 2, 2018.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the constitution of the Anganwadi Workers'
Empowerment and Welfare Authority. It also provides appointment of such number of officers
and staff for its functioning. Clause 4 provides for meetings of the Authority to observe rules
of procedure for transaction of business. Clause 8 provides for additional salary to the
anganwadi workers for undertaking additional responsibilities. Clause 9 provides for training
of anganwadi workers and helpers. Clause 10 provides for affordable healthcare services and
coupons to anganwadi workers and anganwadi helpers. Clause 11 provides for paid maternity
leave to anganwadi workers and anganwadi helpers. Clause 12 provides for pension and
social security benefits to the anganwadi workers and anganwadi helpers. Clause 13 provides
for scholarships and reservation in educational institutions and in job in public sector in
favour of children of anganwadi workers and helpers. Clause 15 provides for constitution of
a Placement Agency to engage children of anganwadi workers and anganwadi helpers with
prospective private employers. Clause 19 makes it obligatory for the Central Government to
provide requisite funds for carrying out the purposes of this Bill. The Bill, therefore, if
enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a
recurring expenditure of five thousand crore rupees would be involved per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees two hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.
8

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 21 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
9

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to constitute an Anganwadi Workers Welfare Authority to provide for performance based
pay to anganwadi workers and helpers, regularise their employment, recognise the
unpaid work done by anganwadi workers and protect their right to financial
entitlement, increase their wages and index them to inflation, provide for penalty to
be paid to workers in case of delay in the payment of their monthly wages, redefine
their job role and increase their responsibilities, make affordable healthcare
accessible to anganwadi workers, helpers and their families through health insurance
scheme and healthcare coupons, provide for paid maternity leave, social security
and pension benefits to anganwadi workers, improve access to education among
children of anganwadi workers through scholarships and reservations, provide for
quota in all government jobs for children of anganwadi workers and for all matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shrimati Supriya Sule, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—667LS(S3)—20-07-2018.