1
THE MANDATORY BUYBACK AND RECYCLING OF PACKAGING
MA TERIAL BILL, 2019
By
SHRI VISHNU DAYAL RAM, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for constitution of a Committeee to ensure that plastic wrapping or packing
materials used by Fast Moving Consumer Goods (FMCG) companies are recycled with
a view to reduce pollution and bring in a sense of the responsibility, accountability and
awareness in the individuals and companies and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
WHEREAS under article 48A of the Constitution of India, it is the duty of the State to
protect and improve the environment and safeguard forests and wild life.
BE  it enacted by the Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
Bill No. 126 of 2019
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
1. (1) This Act may be called the Mandatory Buyback and Recycling of Packaging
Act, 2019.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government, may by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:—
(a) "Committee" means the Committee for Regulation of Recycling constituted
under section 4;
(b) "FMCG companies" means Fast Moving Consumer Goods Companies that
sell large quantities of goods at low cost;
(c) "packaging " means the wrap or packing material used for packaging of
products manufactured by FMCG Companies;
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(e) "recycling" means the usage of a waste product in a process to make it a
reusable material.
3. Every FMCG company compulsorily shall buyback the discarded packaging of
their products by tie-ups with retailers.
4. (1) The Central Government shall, within six months of the coming into force of
this Act, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute a Committee to be known as the
Committee for Regulation of Recycling for carrying out the purpose of this Act.
(2) The Committee shall consist of a Chairperson and five other members, to be
appointed by the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed:
Provided that the Chairperson shall be selected from amongst persons having special
knowledge and expertise in the field of environment and recycling of waste products.
Provided further that—
(a) two of the members of the Committee shall have prior experience of working
with FMCG companies and thorough understanding of their functioning in relation to
Corporate Social Responsibility in India;
(b) two of the members of the Committee shall have steller reputation among
environmentalists and prior experience and thorough knowledge of recycling; and
(c) one of the member shall have prior stellar experience in strategizing campaigns
and spreading awareness.
5.  (1) The Chairperson and every member of the Committee shall hold office for a term
of three years from the date of assuming office and shall be eligible for re-appointment:
Provided that the Chairperson and the members shall not be eligible to hold office for
more than two terms.
(2) The Chairperson and the members of the Committee may resign by giving in
writing a notice of not less than six months to such authority as the Central Government
may, by notification, specify.
(3) The salary and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of
service of the Chairperson and the members of the Committee shall be such, as may
prescribed.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Definitions.
Compulsory
buyback of
discarded
packaging by
products.
Constitution of
Committee for
Regulation of
Recycling
Term of
Chairperson and
members of the
Committee.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
6. The Committee shall,—
(a) publish a recycling strategy within six months of its constitution;
(b) after appropriate consultation,—
(i) set a target of recycling at least eighty per cent. of packaging of
products manufactured by FMCG companies by the year 2025;
(ii) assist companies in spreading awareness about recycling of packaging;
(iii) assist companies in preparation of schemes regarding recycling of
packaging;
(iv) encourage individuals to deposit packaging with the retailers; and
(v) ensure effective implementation of this Act;
(c) assess the positive and negative impacts of the E-waste (Management)
Amendment Rules, 2018 and strive to incorporate the findings in the rules;
(d) in discharging its duties under this Act, consult FMCG companies, retailers,
public environmental experts and such other individuals and organizations as it may
deem appropriate.
(e) conduct periodic inspections, within such time, as may be prescribed, of
FMCG companies to ensure that such companies are complying with the provisions
of this Act; and
(f) undertake such other functions as may be assigned to it, from time to time, by
the Central Government:
Provided that if, during the course of the inspection, the Committee finds that a
company has failed to comply with any of the provisions of this Act, the committee
shall recommend to the Central Government the penalty to be imposed on such
company.
7. Every FMCG company shall set the targets as specified in the Schedule for recycling
of packaging material:
8. (1) Every FMCG Company shall submit a Recycling Packaging Report to the
Committee, within such time as may be prescribed.
(2) The Report of sub-clause (1) shall include:—
(a) statistics such as the number of packaging produced every year, number of
packaging recycled every year and tie-ups with retailers;
(b) details of their schemes, success and problems being faced in the
implementations; and
(c) other details as deemed fit by the Committee.
(3) The Central Government shall cause the report to be laid before each House of
Parliament in such manner as may be prescribed.
9. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide adequate funds from time to time, for carrying out the purposes of
this Act.
10. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition and not in derogation of any other
legislation, rules, orders or instructions.
Functions of
the Committee.
FMCG
Companies to
set targets for
recycling of
packaging
material.
Recycling
Packaging
Report.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Act not in
derogation of
other laws.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

4
11. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of a
period of two years from the commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be
laid before each House of Parliament.
12. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall therafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Power to
remove
difficulty.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15

5
SCHEDULE
(See section 7)
Sl. No. Y ear Collection Target for Each Company
1. 2019-2020 20% of the quantity of packaging generated
2. 2020-2021 35% of the quantity of packaging generated
3. 2021-2022 50% of the quantity of packaging generated
4. 2022-2023 60% of the quantity of packaging generated
5. 2024-2025 70% of the quantity of packaging generated
6. 2025 onwards 60% of the quantity of packaging generated

6
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Under article 48A of the Constitution, it is the responsibility of the State to ensure the
protection of our environment. Reports suggest that sixty-two million tonnes of municipal
solid waste per annum is generated in urban areas of India. A majority of this waste is
unsegregated and hence unfit for recycling. It is left untreated to rot in open and as such act
as environmental hazard. The landfills or dumping grounds create greenhouse gases and
pollute the local water, soil and air in addition to being a breeding ground for diseases.
Further, packaging of products of FMCG Companies is thrown by the public in open
places. The need is to discourage such littering and instill a sense of responsibility in
individuals.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; VISHNU DAY AL RAM
June  6, 2019.

7
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for Constitution of  a Committee for Regulation of
Recycling. It is also provide for appointment of a Chairperson and members of the Committee.
Clause 9 provides that the Central Government shall provide adequate funds for carrying
out the purposes of this Act. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely to involve the recurring expenditure of about rupees
twenty crore per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees two crore is also likely to be involved.

8
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 12 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of this Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of a Committee to ensure that plastic wrapping or
packing materials used by Fast Moving Consumer Goods (FMCG) companies are
recycled with a view to reduce pollution and bring in a sense of  responsibility,
accountability and awareness in the individuals and companies and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—427LS(S3)—27.06.2019.