BtU !Ita. W or,UI @ 
THE INDIAN RAILWAYS (AMENDMENT) 
BILLs 19S8 

.. 
" .~~. 
~....-.-,-

Btu No. u6 01 1958 
TIlE INDIAN RAILWAYS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1958 
(To BE INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Indian Railways Act, 1890. 
Bz it enacted by Parliament in the Ninth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Indian Railwaya (Amendment) Act, ~hort 
1958. .. . . , . .'~.' title. 
S 2. In section .. 0 of the Indian Railways Act, 1890 (hereinafter Amend-
referred to as the principal Act), for the word ''President'', the word :~~~:f 
10 
"Chairman" shall be substituted. 40. 
3. In section 68 of the principal Act,- Amend-
ment of 
(a) in sub-section (I), after the words "railway servant", ~~~tion 
the words "empowered in this behalf by the railway administra-
tion" shall be inserted; 
(b) in sub-section (2), the words ", if empowered in this 
behalf by the railway administration," shall be omitted. 
4. In section 108 of the principal Act, for the words "with fine Amend-
IS which may extend to fifty rupees", the words "with imprisonment mell;t of 
for a term which may extend to three months, or with fine which ~o~~lon 
may extend to two hundred and fifty rupees, or with both" shall be 
substituted. 

Amend-
ment of 
Section 
109. 
Amend-ment of 
section 
112. 
Insertion 
of new 
section 
113B. 
Security 
for good 
behaviour 
in certain 
cases. 
2 
5. In sub-section (1) of section 109 of the principal Act, for the 
words "refuses to leave it when required to do so by any railway 
servant, he shall be punished with fine which may extend to twenty 
rupees", the following words shall be substituted, namely:-
"or having unauthorisedly occupied a berth or seat reserved 5 
by a railway administration for the use of another passenger, 
refuses to leave it when required to do so by any railway servant, 
he may be removed from the compartment or the berth or seat, as 
the case may be, by any railway servant authorised by the I\:1il-
way administration in this behalf or by any other person whom 10 
such railway servant may call to his aid and he shall also be 
punishable with fine which may extend to twenty rupees". 
6. In section 112 of the principal Act,-
(1) in sub-section (I), for the words "in addition to the 
amount of the single fare for any distance which he may have IS 
travelled", the following words shall be substituted, namely:-
"and shall also be liable to pay the excess charge herein-
after in this section mentioned in addition to the ordinary 
single fare for the distance which he has travelled, or where 
there is any doubt as to the station from which he started, the 20 
0Fdinary single fare from the station from which the train 
originally started, or if the tickets of passengers travelling 
in the train have been examined since the original starting 
of the train, the ordinary single crare from the place where 
the tickets were examined or, in case of their having been 25 
examined more than once, were last examined"; 
(2) after sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall 
be inserted, namely:-
"(lA) The excess charge referred to in sub-section (1) 
shall be a sum equivalent to the ordinary single fare referred 30 
to in that sub-section or fifty naye paise, whichever is 
greater.". 
7. After section 113A of the principal Act, the following section 
shall be inserted, namely:-
"113B. (1) When a court convicting a person of an offence 35 
under section 112 or section 113 finds that he has been habitually 
committing or attempting to commit that offence and the court 
is of opinion that it is necessary or desirable to require that 

3 
person to execute a bond for good behaviour, such court may at 
the time of passing the sentence on the person order him to 
execute a bond, with or without sureties, for such amount and 
for such period not exceeding three years as it thinks fit. 
S (2) An order under this section may also be made by an 
appellate court or by the High Court when exercising its powers 
of revision.". 
8. In section 114 of the principal Act, for the words "with fine Amerdi 
which may extend to two hundred rupees", the words "with impri-.:~tiono 
01 sonment for a term which may extend to three months, or with fine 114. 
which may extend to two hundred and fifty rupees, ,or with both" 
shall be substituted. 
9. In section 116 of the principal Act, for the words "with fine Amend-
which may extend to fifty rupees" , the words "with imprisonment ~~ri~~f 
IS for a term which may extend to three months, or with fine which 116. 
may extend to two hundred and fifty rupees, or with both" shall be 
substituted. 
20 
30 
10. After section 120 of the principal Act, the following section Insertion 
h I . of new 
S al be Inserted, namely: - section 
120A. 
"120A. (1) If a person canvasses for any custom or hawks Canvas-
or ~xposes for sale any article ~hatsoever, in any rai1w~y ~i~k~~g 
carrIage or upon any part of a nu!way, except under and In on a rail-
accordance with the terms and conditions of a licence granted way. 
by the railway administration in this behalf, he shall be punish-
able with fine which may extend to two hundred and fifty rupees. 
(2) Any such person as is referred to in sub-section (1) may 
be removed from the carriage or part of the railway by any 
railway servant authorised by the railway administration in this 
behalf or by any other person whom such railway servant may 
call to his aid.". 
11. In section 121 of the principal Act, for the words "with fine Amend-
which may extend to one hundred rupees", the words "with impri- mel1:t of . . s~hoo 
sonment for a term whIch may extend to SIX months, or with fine 121. 
which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both" shall be 
35 substituted. 
12. In section 131 of the principal Act, ~fter the figures "101,", the Amend-
figures "108, 112," shall be inserted. mel1:t of lectIon 
111. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The problems of ticketless travel, misuse of the alarm chain 
apparatus and nuisance on account of unauthorised hawking have 
been receiving constant attention of the Railways and in spite of 
their sustained efforts, the evils are continuing without any substan-
tial abatement. There has also been, of late, in certain areas, a num-
ber of cases of -intimidation of railway servants and interference with 
their duties on the slightest pretext. Railway servants have even 
been man-handled while discharging their nonnal duties. 
2. It has been increasingly felt, in these circumstances, that in 
order to deal with these problems effectively, the penal provisiolll 
for these offences should be made more severe. 
3. The present Bill seeks to achieve this object. 
NEW DELHI; JAGJIVAN RAM. 
7'he 29th November, 1958. 

ANNEXURE 
]bTRA1n8 ,.OM 'lH!I INDIAN RAILWAYS As:.T, 1890 (9 OF 1890) 
CHAPTER V 
TRAFFIC FACILITIES 
• • • • • 
Railway rates tribunal 
• • • • • 
48. The Tribunal shall have the powers of a Civil Court under ~oW? of 
the Code of Civil Proc:edure, 1008, for the purposes of taking evid- bu~al.n­
ence on oath, enforcing the attendance of witnesses, compelling the 
discovery and production of documents and issuing commissions for 
the examination of witnesses and shall be deemed to be IQ Civil Court 
for all tae purpoteS of seetion 195 and Chapter XXXV of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1898, and any reference to the presiding officer 
of a Court shall be deemed to include a reference to the President 
of the Tribunal . 
• • 
• • 
• • 
• • 
CHAPTER VI 
WORKING 01" RAILWAYS 
• 
CaTf"iape of passengerB 
• 
• • 
• * 
• • 
88. (1) No person shl811, withou~ the pel1Jlission of a railway Prohibi-
servant, enter or remain in any carriage on a railway for the purpose tiOl~ 
of travelling therein as a passenger unless he has with him a proper ~f:~~:: 
pass or ticket. li~g 
WIthout 
pass or 
(2) A railway s.erv.mt when granting the permission referred to ticket. 
in sub-section (1) shall ordinarily, if empowered in this behalf by 
the railway adminishmtion, grant to the paasenger a certificate that 
the passenger has beeD permitted to travel in such oarriage upon 
condition that he aubsequenUy pays the fare payable for the distance 
to H travelled. 
• • • • • 
5 

Need-
lessly 
interfer-
ing with 
means of 
communi-
cation in 
a train. 
Entering 
compart-
ment re-
served or 
already 
full or 
resisting 
entry 
into a 
compart-
ment 
not full. 
Fraudu-
lently 
travel-
ling or 
attempt-
ing to tra-
vel wIth-
out 
proper 
pass or 
ticket. 
Penalty 
for trans-
ferring 
season 
ticket or 
any half 
of a return 
ticket. 
... ... 
... ... 
6 
CHAPTER IX 
PENALTIES AND OFFENCES 
... 
Other offences 
... 
... ... 
... ... 
108. If a passenger, without reasonable and sufficient cause, 
makes use of or interferes with any means provided by a railway 
administration for communication between passengers and the 
railway servants in charge of a train, he shall be punished with fine 
which may extend to fifty rupees. 
109. (1) If a passenger, having entered a compal'ltment which is 
reserved by a railway administration for the use of another 
passenger, or which already contains the maximum number of 
passengers exhibited therein or thereon under section 63, refuses to 
leave it when required to do so by any railway servant, he shall be 
punished with fine which may extend to twenty rupees. 
... ... • • • • 
112. (1) If a person, with intent to defraud a railway adminia-
tration,-
, (a) enters or remains in any carriage on a railway in contra-
vention of section 68, or 
(b) uses or attempts to use a single pass or single ticket 
which has already been used on a previous journey or, in the 
case of a return ticket, a half thereof which has already been 
so used, 
he shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to three months or with fine which may extend to one 
hundred rupees in addition to the amount of the single fare for any 
distance which he may have travelled . 
... ... • • • • 
114. If a person sells or attempts to sell, or parts or attempts to 
part with the possession of, any season ticket or any half of a return 
ticket, in order to enable any other person to travel therewith, or 
purchases such season ticket or half of a return ticket, he shall be 
punishable with fine which may extend to two hundred rupees, and 
if the purchaser of such season ticket or half of a return ticket, 
travels or attempts to travel therewith, he shall be punishable with 
an additional fine which may extend to the amount of the single fare 
for the journey authorised by the ticket. 
• • ... • ... 

7 
116. If a passenger wilfully alters or defaces his pass or ticket so Altering 
b . 1 . ..1. f '11 or defac-as to render the date, num er or any materia portIOn •. uereo 1 e- ing pass 
gible, he shall be punished with fine which may extend to fifty or ticket. 
rupees. 
• • * • • 
121. If a person wilfully obstructs or impedes any railway servant Obstruct-
in the discharge of his duty, he shall be punished with fine which ing rail-way ser-may extend to one hundred rupees. vant in 
• • • • • 
his dUty . 
Procedure 
131. (1) If a person commits Wly offence mentioned in section Arrest 
100, 101, 119, 120, 121, 126, 127, 128 or 129 or in section 130, sub-section for 
(1), he may be arrested without warrant or other written authority ~~:I:tcs~s 
by any railway servant or police-officer, or by any other person certain 
whom such servant or officer may call to his aid. sections. 
(2) A person so arrested shall, with the 1€'3st possible delay, be 
taken before a Magistrate having authority to try him or commit 
him for trial. 
• • • • • • 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Indian Railways Act, 1890. 
(Shri Jagj.'Oan Ram, 
Minister of Railways.) 