LOK clAJ3HA 
CORRIGENDA 
to 
THE SMITH STANISTREET AND COMPANY LIMI'lED 
(ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF UNDERTAKINGS) 
BILL, 1977 
L-To be/As introduced in 10k SabhaJ 
1. Page 4, line 32,-
for ITo by " read ''by'' 
2. Page 7, line 20,-
for "ensure" ~ "enure" 
3. Page 11, line 29,-
• for "power" ~ "powers" 
4. Docket Page, last line,-
tQr. "Pe tro lium" ~ "Pe tro leUm" 
NEW:DELHI; 
N,Q,vember ~6, ~977 
Kartika 2 , 1 99 (Saka) 

As INTRODUCED IN Lox. SABHA ON , . 
2' NOV \911 
-1i~ .. i.o..!... t: ,F._'~ _ . Bill No. 111 ,of 1177 
THll'SMITH STANISTREET AND 'COMPANY LIMITED 
. (ACQUIS~TIONAND'TRANSFEROF UNDERTAKINGS) 
,', ".' I BaL, 1977 ' , ", 
,.~""USE& 
f " 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
,~.I 
PRl:LIMINARY 
1. Short title and commencement. 
2. Definitions. 
CHAPTER II 
" 
AlcQUISITlON AND TRAllJ.SFER OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF 'l'H&' C~ 
3. Transfer to and vesting in Central GoverDnlent of the under-
takings of the Company. 
4. General effect of vesting. 
" i, I 
5. Central Government or qov81'nment company no~ to be llable for 
prior liabilities. .. , ",,', 
6. Power of Central Government to di~ect vesting of the undel'-
takings of the Company in a Governni8l1t· ilOIDp.y~,; , 
CHAPTER III 
PAYMENT OF AMOUNTS 
7. Payment of amount. 
8. Payment of further amount. 
CHAPTER IV 
MANAGEMENT, ETC., OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF THE CoMPANY 
9. Management, etc., of the undertakings of the Company. 
10. Duty of persons in charge of management of the unciertakiDJI 
of the Company to deliver all assets, etc. 
11. Accounts and audit. 
CHAPTER V 
PRovIsIoNS RELATING TO EMPLOYEU OF THJ: COMPAHY 
12. Employment of employees to continue. 
1&. Provident and other funds. 
CHAPTER VI 
COMKISSIOBER OF PAYMBN'l'II 
14. Appointment of Commissioner of Payments. 
15. Payment by the Central GoverJlIDlll!nt to the Conmdssfoner. 
18. Certain powers of the Central Government or Govel'lllDeDt 
company. 
17. Claims to be made to the Commissioner. 
18. Priority of claims. 

't' 
CIAU~ ret, " ' 
eU) 
19. Examination of claims. 
,20. Admission or rejection of claims. 
21. Disbursement of money by Cgmmissioner to daimants. 
• , . ~ I 
22. Disbursement of amounts to the Company. 
23. Undisbursed or unclaimed amount to be deposited with the 
general revenue account. 
24. Assumption of liability. 
CHAPTER VII 
MIsCELLANEOUS 
25. Act to have overriding effect. 
26. Contracts to cease to have effect unless ratified by the Central 
Government or Government company. 
27. Penalties. 
28. Offences by companies. 
29. ProtectioR of action taken in good faith. 
30. Delegation of powers. 
31. Power to make rules. 
32. Power to remove difficulties. 
33. Declaration as to pollcy of the State. 
34. Repeal and saving. 
THE SCHEDULE. 

THE SMITH, STANISTREET AND COMPANY LIMITED 
(ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF UNDERTAKINGS) 
BILL, I977 
A 
BILL 
to pTovide for, in the p1tblic interest, the acquiBition and trat'&l~r of the 
right, t~tle and interest of the undertakings of Messrs Smith, Stani-
street and Company Limited, Calcutta and for matters connect.ed 
therewith or incidental thereto. . 
WHEltEAS Messrs Smith, Stanistreet and Company Limited, Calcutta 
were engaged in the manufacture and distribution of phann.aceuUeals 
and chemicals which are essential to meet the needs of the public; 
AND WHEREAS the management of the undertakings of the Company 
S was in a manner highly detrimental to .the public interest and had 
suffered heavy losses; 
AND WHEREAS the management of the Company was taken over by the 
Central Govemment under section 18A of the Industries (Developmen't 
and Regulation) Act, 1951; 
10 AND WHEIlIDAS for the purpose of recQtlstructlng and rehabWtating the 
undertakings of the Company so as to subserve the intereSt of tb:e general 
public by the augmentation and distriblltion of the different varieties ot 
essential phannadeUticals and chemicals produced by the said Company, 
and to ensure the eo~tinued supply thereof, it is necelilSary to acquire the 
IS right, title and interest of the undertakings of Messrs Smith, Stanistreet 
,nd 'Company Limited, Calcutta. 

ShortUtle 
ID4com-
mence-
met. 
TraDafer 
"to ad 
vel_in 
Central 
Qovem-
mento! 
the under-
taJdDp of 
the Com-
pany. 
General 
etrect of 
veatlDJ· 
BE it enacted by Parliamen~ in t.he Twenty-eighth Year of the 
Republic of India asfollows:-
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Smith, Stanistreet and Company S 
Limited (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, "1977. 
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into foI'C'3 ~ the 1st day of 
October, 1977. 
l. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "appointed day" means the 1st day of October, 1977; 10 
(b) "Company" means the Smith, Stanistreet and Company 
Limited, being a cumpany as defined in the Companies Act, 1956 and 1 of 1958. 
having its registered office at 18, Convent Road, Calcutta-700014; 
(c) IICommissioner" means the Commissioner of Payments 
appointed under section 14; IS 
(d) "notification" means a notification published in the Official 
Gazette; 
(e) "prescribed" m;eans prescribed by rules made under this 
Act; 
0jn(fk~lspe~d s\ate""JIlQa'llS such d,W; .~; tpe, (C~~JAe.V~-'20 
('P-~.,yIllf.Y, ·for ,the Pl#rposes. of 'IlllY of the proV~I\,ot:ij1iI M ~ 
notification, specify and different datesIllay be specified "for' dl1i'erent 
provisions of this Act; . 
(g) words and expressions used herein and not defined but 
defined in ~he Companies Act, 1966 have the meanings respectively 2S 1 of 1958 . 
. assigned to them in.: that Act. 
CHAPTER II 
:, ,", ~ \ I • v • ~ ~ • i \.'.: J :·'.)1 ! 
, ~UISIT;IoN. ~D TRANSFER OF THE UNDERT~IN~ o~ THE COMPANY . a,.J I. -' ~ ... ' .. H.-' .t'''· I .' •. :~ .f'~ .. !m .. ·, .~ .. :., .... ~.'!~I~ 'r'~~1!l"'~ 'v'\l 
Ii,On the,appqinted day, the unc1ertaldngajQf·,tPe '~~"'~'I~' I 
right, title:and :interest. of ,the Company. in" relatipn 1 tor,itt' un.4F~:30 
shall, by virtue of this Act, be transferred to, and shall vest In, the 
Ce~tr~1 ''Gb~emment~ 
. '. :.'/ /~ 
." 
•. (1) The lmdertaldngs of the Company shall, be clfaia6neci'.to "~; 
all ••. ri •• lease-hcjds, powers,. authQritJ.es. aD4'·pri..v~ .~;AA1 , 
pr~~=~v~li 'lnd i!rirnovab~ -~tluding ~~ .. ' ~·,..b~gi, I'! ::WGffr: .~S ' 
shops, .' lDstruments, m3chinery.:and,eqwpm~tif' ca.sQ ~~9'¥h, 
calfi·::6ni flaftdi'reservetunds,·.:irtvesbnmb,. ~,dsbita.i'~ ~I ~.,,, 
and" ih1JWMte '. 1ft, or arising.out. 01" ,such· ~M . ~q\ljrq~~~. 
befon! tJtei:·.ppt'lfMtid day in the.own~hip. pcM.t$SiH.!,,~\!er,pr,~trql'Ji"t 
of the Company, whether within or outsi~e'~. 8Z)d il1l. P,()Oq ".of ~ 

3 
< I,. 
~t, registers and all other do.cuments of wh,atever nature relating 
thereto. 
(2) All properties as aforesaid which have vested in the Central 
~qvern.Qlent ,under section 3 shall, by force of such vesting, be ~ and 
5 4}~~.ged tI'!lIn any trust, obliga~on, mortgage, charge, lien and an other 
~cwnbrRI;lces affeCting it, and any attachment, injunction or decree 61" 
~der Qf. any court restricting the use of such Property in any manner or 
~inting any receiver in respect of the whole or any part of such 
. p~ shall be deemed '(0 have been withdrawn. 
10 (3) Every mortgagee of ~y property which has vested under. t.tds Act 
in the Central Government and every person holding any charg~, lien 
or other interes~.in, or in relation to, .any such propercy $all give, witbfn 
such time and in such manner as may be prescribed, an intimation to the 
Commi~oner of such mortgage, charge, lien or other interest. 
15 (4) For the removal of doub~s, it is hereby declared that th~ ~ort:-
8,\gee of any property referred. to in sub-section (3) or any other persor. 
~d.in,g any charge, lien or oth;er intereslt in, or in relation to, ahYSueh' 
I¥PP'J;'ty shall be entitled to claim, in accordance with hisrlghts' 'and 
.. intereats, payment of the mortgage money or other dues, in whole or in 
2~' P.;U-t, 'outQf tHe amount specified in section 7, a,nd also out of, the monIes 
determined under section 8, but, no such mortgage, charge, lien or other 
interest shall be enforceable against any property which has veSted fft 
the Cen'tral Government. 
(5) If on the appointed day, any·. $u1t, appeal or other proceeding by 
25, 0f,a~~i~! ~!J.e ~ompany, o~ whatever nature in relation to any properly 
~W~hJ}IBS ,:,ested ih t~e Central Govemmlent, under section 3; fa peHdiIlg, 
t~·~ shall" not abate, De discontinued or be, in anyway, prejUdicially 
ai¥~ .by reason of the transler of the undertakings of the Comp~ 
~J;; p,f. ~~ng contained in this Act, but the suit, appeal or ·Other pro.;, .. 
30 ~ee&g may be continued, prosecUted or enforced by or against tHe 
. Company. . 
" 
, '. 
, :S: '(1) Ev9lj' liability of the Company in respect of any Il'riQd prior ~)". 
to the appointed day, shall be the liability of the Company ~d .11:))8 GawMJtr 
ehforeeable against it and not against the Central Govet;pmep.t, ,01,,, meft\iillhf: 
35 ~ere the undertak~ngs of the Company are directed, ... under sectipn 6, ::.:::n. 
to vest in a 'Government company: again!Jt that Govern~ent company. pany not 
(2) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declaJted that,- , , to be Hable 
(a) save as otherwiBe exprcsly provided in this Act, no l~ty ~=: .. 
I"of the Company in relation. to its un4ertakillgs. j,n respeqt,pf any 
40 I ·pelrf.0d prior tq the appointed day, shall be enforceable against the 
Central Government, or, where the undert,pkings ot the Co~~~ 
&Ire directed, under section 6, to vest ·in a Government I company,·,. 
against that GOY8mment companYi 
45 
50 
(b) no award, decree (if orderqf .nycourt, tribunal or O'ther 
authority in relation to the undertakings of the Company, passed 
after the appointed day, in respect of any matter, cl.im or disJilute, 
which arose befo~e that ~y, shall be enforceable against the ,9entral 
Government, or, w~ere ~he undertakings of the Company are ,direc,teci, 
under section 6, to vest in a Governmept company, against t118t 
Government company; 
(c) no liability incurred by th.~ Company before t~ awoint:e4 
day, for the contr01vention of any prQvision of law (or t~ time being 

Power of 
Central 
Govern-
ment to 
diredves-
tingof the 
undertak-
inpofthe 
Company 
in a Gov-
ernment 
company. 
Payment 
of amount. 
Payment 
offutitber 
amount. 
'" 
... 
in force, shall be enforceable against the Central Government, or, 
where the undertakings of the Company are directed, under section 
6, to vest in a Government company, against that. Government 
CQIllpany. 
6. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 3 and 4, the, 
C~ntral Government may, if it is satisfied that a Government company 
is willing to comply, or has complied, with such terms and conditions as 
that Government may think fit to impase, direct, by notification, that the 
undertakings of the Company and the right, title and interest of the 
Company in I'elation to its undertakings which have vested in that [0 
Government under s'Cction 3, shall, instead of continuing 'to Vest in that 
Government, vest in the Government company either on the date of the 
notification or on such earlier or la'ter date (not being a date ealrlier than 
the appointed day) as may be speeified in the notification. 
(2) Where the right, title and interest of the Company in relation to IS 
its undertakings, vest in a Government company under sub-section (1), 
the Government company shall, on and from the date of such vesting 
be deemed to have become the ownler in relation to such undertakings, 
and all the rights and liabilities of the Central Government in relatlon 
to such undertakings shall, on and from tHe date of such vesting, be 20 
deemed to have become the rights and liabilities, respectively, of the 
Government company. 
CHAPTER III 
PAYMENT OF AMOUNTS 
7. For the transfer to, and vesting in, the central ~vermnent, under 2S 
section 3, of the undertakings of the Company ,and the ri,)lt, title and 
interest of the Company in relation to its undertakings,there shan b~ 
given by the Central Government to the Company, in cash, and In the 
manner specified in Chapter VI, an amount of three crores and seventy-
four thousand rupees. 30 
8. (1)' For the deprivatiOil of the Company of the management of-its 
undertakings, there shall be given to the Company oby the Central Govern. 
ment an amount calculated at the rate of ten thousand rupees per annum 
for the period commencing on the date on which the management of tbe 
undertakings of the Company was taken over by the Central Governme~t ,3S 
and ending on·the appointed day. 
(~) The amount specified in section 7 and the amount determined 
under sub-section (1) shall carry simple interest at the rate of four ,per 
cent. pet' annum for the period ('ommencing on the appointed day and . 
eliding on the date on which the payment' of the amount is made by the 40 
Central Government to the Commissioner. 
(3) The amount determined in accordance with the provisions of sub-
sections (1) and (2) shall be given by the Central GQvernment to the 
Company in additior;' to the amou!llt sp"ecified in section 7. 
(4) For the removal of doubts. it is hereby declared that the liabilities 45 
of' the Company in relation to its undertakings whicoh have vested in 
the Central Government under section 3, shall be discharged from the 
amount referred to in section 7, and also from the amounts determined 
under sub-sections (1) and (2), in accordance with the rights and lnt-er-
eets 'of the creditors of the Company. ,0 
$ 

lot 18&8. 
, a 
CHAPTERlv 
MANAGEMENT. ETC., OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF THE COMPANY 
t. (1) The g~leral superintendence, direcLion, coo.trol and manage-
ment . qf the aitalrl:i and bUSUwss or the Wld.ertaluu.gs of t1ie Company, 
5 the right, tJ:tle and imerel>lt in relation to which h.a ve vested in t.ne 
Central Government under section 3, shall,-
(a) where a direction has been issued by the Central Govern-
ment under sub-section (1) of section 6, \'leSt in thE: Government 
company specified in such direction; or 
10 (b) where no such direction has been issued by the Ceu.tral 
Government, vest In one or more Custodians appointed. by the 
Central Government under sub-section (2), 
and thereupon the Go~nmenL co-mpany so specified or the CustodiwA. 
so appointed, as the case may ,be, shall be entitled to exercise all such 
15 powers and do all such things as the Company is authorised to exercise 
and do in relation to its under'.akings. 
(2) The Central Government may appoint one or more individuals 
or a Goverrunent co.mpany as the CWitodlan of the undertak.Ulgs of tbje 
Company in relation to which no direC~ion has been issued by it under 
20 sub-section (1) of section 6. . 
lB. (1) On the vesting. of the management of the undertakinas 9f the 
Company in a Goverrunent company o.r on the appointnlerx, of a Cwno-
dian, all persons in charge of the management of the updertakingS 'of 
the Company immediately before such veSUn.g or appointment, 'sh.aJ.l be 
25' ~und to deliver to the lioverrunent (.ompany or the CUstodian, 8& the 
ase may be, all assets, books of account, registers or other documents in 
their custody relating to the undertakings of theComp,any. 
(2) The Central G<lvernment may issue such directions' as it may 
deem desilrable in the circums~ of the case to the Governmen.t co.m-
pany ~r the Custodian as to its or his powers and duties and the Gov-
30 ernment company or Custodian may also, if it or hellO desires, apply. to 
the Central Gqv1ernment at any time for instructions as to the·~ 
in which the management of the wldertakings of the Company shall'be 
conducted by it or him or in relat.ion 'to any other matter arising in the 
course of such managemjelll 35 
(3) The Custodian shall receive from the funds of the u.nderta.kinas 
of the Company such remuneration as the Central Govermnen~ may fix 
and ahall hold office during the pleasure of 'the Government. HfJ~. "" 
, ,,!;.i. 
11. The C\,lstodian of the undertakings of the Company shall maintain 
the' accoUnts of the undertakings of the Company in such form and in such 
4O.ma1mer and under such conditions as may' be prescribed an4 the·· prcr 
. ~ons of the. Companies Act~' 1956,' shall apply to the audit of·1he 
~unta so ~tained as t4eY apply to the audit of the accounts of a 
i • . ',' . -
company. 
Man .... i 
ment~ • ., 
01 the 
\l.DCIertU .. 
inpofthe 
CompaD1'. 
~;,4(,. 
pel'lODlia 
charle of 
manap-
ment ot 
the under-
takinrt of 
the Com-
pany to 
deUverall 
Uleta, etc. 
: l , :, t. ~(', J • • 

Employ-
~of 
eD1p1o-
y8el to 
ocmtIDue. 
• ,'" I~ .• 
.: 
AppoInt-
ment of 
CommiI-
~·'of 
1itVa ••. 
.. 
CHAPTER V 
.. '. .I 
PRoVISIONS RELATING TO ;£MPLOY.EEs OF THE COMPANY 
:12. (1) Every p;erson who has been, immmediately 'befqre the 
appointed day, employed by the Company in relation to its undertakings, 
shall become, on and from the appointed day, an employee of tbe S 
Central Government or, as the calle may be, 01 the lio.vemment company 
referred to in section 6, and shall hold o1'ftce or service under ·the Central 
Govemment or Government company, as the c~ may be, with the 
same remuneration and upon the same terms and condItions, with the 
same rights and privileges as to pension, gratuity and oth.er matters as 10 
would have been admissible to him if tnere had been no such vesting 
and shall' continue to do so unl~s and until his employm,ent under the 
Central Government or ihe Government company, as the case may be, 
~ duly 'terminated or until his remuneration, tt;rnl& and conditions ~ 
servk:e are duly altered by the Central Government or the Govel'lUlleD.t IS 
~mpany, as the case may be. 
(2) Notwithstanding anythiJ;lg contained in the Industrial Disputes 
Act, 11147 or in any oLher law for the time being in force the transret· of 14 of 1947. 
the seL'vices of any officer or other person employed in . the undertakings 
of the Company to the Central Government or the Government company 20 
shall no~ entitle such officer or other employee to any compensatioll under 
this Act qr undf::r any other law for the tilne being in force '3:nd no such 
claim shall be entertained by any court, 'tribunal or other authoritY: 
, . 
1.3. (1) Where' the Company has .established a provident, superan-
nuiition; . welfare or other fund for the benefit of the persons employed 25 
in the undertakings of the Company, the monies relatable t4 the 
employees, whose services have become tcansferred by or under this 
ACt to 'the Central G'lvemment or Government company, shall, ou.t of 
·the monies J;'taruiing, on the appo,inted day, to the credit of such provi-:-
dent, superannuation, welfare or other fund, stand transferred to, aDd 30 
.shall vest in, the ~tral Government or the Go'Vemment company. as 
the .case may be. _ _ 
.il.. • 
(2) The monies which stand transferred under sub-sedtion (1) to the 
Central Goveminent or the· Govtemment eQmpany, as the case may be, 
;~1l ~ dealt with by that Government or the Government company in 3S 
.JUCh manner as may be presCribed. ; 
'-" . , ... 
CHAPTER VI 
COMMISSIONER OF PAYMlI:HTS 
14. (1) The Central Government shall, for the pul'pOse of ....... 
the aDlouotl;payabJ8'to the Company'UbderileCtlonl 'I .... 8, hf-otMiea-40 
tioD, appoint a Commissioner of Payments. 
·c···· 
(2) Tbe C.ntr~ GO~CU'D.lDent lBay appoiDt IUch other persou u 
. . ,It. may *Wak 6t toua,ist tbeCoDlD1issi~v ud lliehupon tbe>'dbiml~ 
_her may authorise ·oa.eor ~ol"e of such perion's alSo to eite'r~.~c~or 
., oltbe JH)w~ ,~erels,e~ble ,by. ~im~~' 't!ils A~t· .~d r~~"'t 4S ; •. ' 
pet'IODI may he autborised to eXercISe 4il&r8bt powers. . .. , ",. r 'R 
j • 
, 
. I 

'1 
(3VAhyperson authorised J.y the Comlldssteae.r to exercise any of 
the powers exerdaeable by the Commissioaer may exerdse those powers 
In the same manner and with the same effect as if they have been eell-
ferred on that person directly by this Act and n~t by way of authorisatiOn. 
S (4) The salaries and allowances of the Commissioner and other penoas 
appointed under this section shall be defrayed out oftha COlilOlidated 
F1IBd of India. 
1~. (1) The Central Government shall, within thirty days from the 
specIfied date, pay, in cash,to the Commissioner, for payment to the 
10 Company-
(a) an amount equal to the amount sPecified in section 7; and 
(b) an amount equal to the amount payable to t~ Company 
under section 8. 
(2) A deposit account shall be opened by the Central Government 
IS in favour of the Commissioner in the Public Account of India and , , 
every amount paid under this Act to the Commissioner, shall be depo-
sited by him to the credit of the said account and the said deposit account 
shall be' operated by th,e Commissioner. 
(3) IntereSt accruing on the amounts 1¢anding to the credit of ~ 
20 deposit account referred to in sub-section (2) shall ensure to the said 
account. 
!G. (1) The Oentral Government or the Government company, as the 
case may be, shall be entitled to receiVe up to the specified, date, to the 
exclusion of all other persons, any money due to the Company in rtela-
2S tion 'to its undertakings whiCh have vested in the Central Government, 
or the Go~rnment company, realised after the apPlJdnted day notwith-
S'tandlng that the realisations pertain to a period prior to the appointed 
day. 
(Z) The Central Government or the Government company, as the 
30 case may be, may make a claim to the CommiSSioner with regard to every 
payment made by it after the appointed day ror discharging any liability 
of the Company, in relation to any period prior to the appointed day; 
and every such claim shall have priority, in accordance with the priori-
-tIes attaching, under this Act, to the matter in relation to which such 
3S lia})1lity has been discharged by 'the Central Government or the Gov-
eri1ment company. 
(3) Sa~ as otherwise provided in this Act, 'the liabilities of the 
Company in respect of nny transaction prior to the appointed day, whkh 
have not been discharged on or before'the specified date, shall be th,e 
40 lilbilities of the Company. 
"17. E't1ery person having a claim against the Co-npany shall' prefer 
such ~18fm before the Commigsloner withIn thirty days from the lIIPtICifted 
"date: 
Provided that if the Commissioner is satfsfted that the claimant was 
4S prevented by sufficient cause from preferring the claim within the said 
perR;d of'th.i11y de:ys, he maY'entettain the claim wlthta a fartbe:r period 
of thirty days and not thereafter; 
Payment 
by the 
Central 
Govem-
ment to 
the Corn-
'm1ss1oner. 
Certain 
powenvf 
the Cen-
tralGov-
emment 
or Gov-
ernment 
compall7. 
Clalms to 
be made 
to the 
COIDIIUI-
doner. 

8 
Priority of 18. The claims arising out of the matters specified in the Schedule 
claims. shall have priorities in accordance with the following principles 
name1y:-
Examina-
tion of 
claims. 
Admission 
or rejec-
tion of 
c1alma. 
:J 
(a' category I will have Precedence over all other categories 
and category II will have precedence over category III, and so on; 5 
(b) the claims specified in each of the categories, shall rank 
equally and be paid in full, but, if the amount is insufficient to meet 
such claims in full, they shall abate in equal proportions and be paid 
accordingly; 
(c) the question of discharging any liaibillty with regard to a 10 
matter specified in a lower category shall arise only if a surplus is 
left after meeting all the liabilities specified in the immediately 
higher category. 
19. (1) On receipt of the claims made under section 17, the Commis-
sioner shall arrange the claims in the order of priorities specified in the IS 
Schedule and examine the same in accordance with such order of 
priori ties. 
(Z) If, on examination of the claims, the Commissioner is of the opi-
nion that the amount paid to him under this Act is not sufficient to meet 
the liabilities specified in any lower category, he shall not be required to 20 
examine the liabilities in respect of such lower category. 
20. (1), After examining the claims with reference to the priority set 
out in the Schedule, the Commissioner shall fix a date on or before 
which every claimant shall file the proof of his claim, failing which he 
shall 'be ~cluded from the benefit of the disbursements made by the 2S 
Commissioner. 
(2) Not less than fourteen days' notice of the date so fixed shall be 
given by advertisement in one issue of the daily newspaper in English 
language and in one issue of the daily newspaper in the regional langll-
age as the Commissiortetr may consider suitable, and every such notice 30 
shall call upon the c1aimant to file the proof of his claim with the ~­
missioner within the time specified in the advertisement. 
(3) Every claimant who "fails to file the proof of his claim within the 
time specified by the Commissioner shall be excluded from the diSburse-, 
ments made by the Commissioner. . . , ' 35 
(4) The Commissioner shall, after such investigation as may, in his, 
opinion, be necessary and after giving the Company an opportunity of 
refuting the claim and after giving the claimant a reasonable opportunity 
of being heard, in writing, admit or reject the' claim in whole or in part. 
(5) The Commissioner shall have ,the power to regulate his own pro- 40 
cedure in all matters arising out of the discharge of his functions, thclu-
ding th,q place or places at whiCh he will hold his sittings and shall, 'fm. 
the p~ of making au,. investigation under this A:c1;, haV'e the surie 
powen as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 5 of 1808. 
1908, while trying a suit, in respect of the 'following matters, namely:.- 45 
(a) the summoning and enforcing the attendance of any witness 
and examining him on oath; 
(b) the discovery and production ol any document or otha', 
IIlIIterial object producible 8S evidence; 

9 
(c) the reception of evidence on affidavits; 
(d) the issuing of any commission for the examination of 
witnesses. 
(6) Any investigation before the Commissioner shall be deemed to 
S be a judicial proceeding within the meaning of sections 193 and 228 of 
45 of 1860. the Indian Penal Code and the Commissioner shall be deemed to ije a 
civil court for the purp:>ses of section 195 and Chapter XXVI of the COde 
2 of 1974. of Criminal Procedure, 1973. 
(7) A claimant who is dissatisfied with the decision of the Comm!s-
10 stoner may prefer an appeal against the decisiqn to the principal civil 
coUrt of original jurisdiction 'within the local limits of whose jurjsdiction 
the registered office of the Company is situatled: 
Provided that where a person who is a Judge of a High Court is ap-
pointed to be the Commissioner, the appeal shall lie to the High Court 
IS at Calcutta and siUch appeal shall be heard and disposed of by not less 
than two Judges of that High Court. . . 
21. After adm~tting a claim under this Act, the amount due in respect 
of such claims shall be paid by the Commjssioner to the person or per-
sons to whom such sums are due, and, on such payment, the liability of 
20 th~ Company in respect of such daim shall stand discharged. 
Disburse-
ment of 
money by 
Commis-
sioner te 
claimants. 
%2. (1) If, out of the monies paid to him in relation to the undertak-
ings of the Company, there is a balance left after meeting the liabilities 
as specified in the Schedule, the Commissioner shall disburse such ba .. 
lance to the Company. 
Di.burse-
ment ot 
amounts 
to the 
Company, 
(2) Where any machinery, equipment or other property has vested 
in the Central Government or a Government company under thtgAct, 
but such machinery, equipment or other property does not belong to the 
Company, it shall be lawful for the Central Government or the Govern- . 
ment company to continue to possess such machinery, equipment or other 
30 property on the same terms and conditions under which they were 
possessed by the Company immediately before the 4th day of May, 1972 
23. Any money paid to the Commissioner which remains undisbursed 
or unclaimed for a period of three years from the last day on which the 
disbursement was made, shall b~ transferred by the Commissioner to the 
3S general revenue account of the Central Governmentj but a claim to any 
money so transferred may be preferred to the Central Government by 
the person entitled to such payment and shall be dealt with as if such 
trilnsfer had not been made, the order, if any, for payment of the claim 
being treated as an order for the refund of the revenue. 
40 K. (1) When any liabiUty of the Company arilin. out of all .. ~ny 
of the Items spedfled fn category I, catepry II, eatepry m or eatepry 
IV of the Schedule are I)Ot diacbal'led fully by the Comml-Ioner out of 
the amount paid to him under this Aet, the Commislloner shall intimate 
fa writu.. to the Central GovetlbDent the ext_ of the liability whieh 
45 remainsua4lseharpd, and that liability shaJl be allll1llbed by the Central 
Government. 
(2) The Central Government may, by order, direct the Government 
company to take over any Uability assumed by that Government under 
sub-section (1), and on receipt of such direction, it shall be the duty of 
so the Government company to di'JCharge such liability. 
Undis-
bursed or 
unclaimed 
amount 
to be 
deposited 
with the 
general 
revenue 
account. 
Assump-
tion of 
llabiUty. 

Act to 
have over-
riding 
et!ect. 
Contracts 
to cease 
to have 
effect un-
leu ratifi-
ed by the 
Central 
Govern-
ment or 
Govern-
mentcom-
J)anF. 
Penalties. 
10 
CIJAPTER VII 
MISCELLANEOUS 
25. The provisions of this Act shall ha,ve effect notwithstanding al~y­
thil!lg inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being 
in force or in any instrument having. effect by virtue of any law other S 
than this Act, or in any decree or order of any cour\ tribupal or o~f 
authority. 
2l6. (1) Every contract entered into by the Company in relation to its 
und.ertakings for any service, sale or supply, and in force immediately 
before the appointed day, shall. or. and from the expiry of one hundred 10 
aDd eighty days from that day, cease to have effect, unless such contra~t 
is before the expiry of the period, ratified, in writing, by the Central 
Government or Government company, and, in ratifying such contract, 
the Central Government or Government company may make such altera-
tiol) or modification t~erein as it may think fit: 
Provided that the Central Government or the Government company 
shall not omit to ratify a contrllct, and, shall not make any alteration 'Jr 
modification in a contract, unless it is satisfied that such contract is unduly 
onerous or has been entered into in bad faith or is detrimental to the 
interests of the Central Government or Government company. 
(2) The Central Government or Government company shall not omit 
IS 
20 
to ratify a contract, and, shall not make any alteration or modification 
therein, except after giving to the parties to the contract a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard and except after r.ecording in writing its 
reasons for refusal to ratify the contract or for making any alteration or 2S 
modification therein. 
ft. Any person who,-
(a) having in his p'Ossession, custody 01' control any property 
forming part of the undertakings of the Company, wrongfully with-
holds such property from the Central Government or the Government 30 
company or any p'el'son or body of persons authorised by th~t Govern-
ment or Government company; or 
(b) wrongfully obtains possession of, or retains, any property 
forming part of the undertakings of the Com-PfUlY or wilfully with-
holds or fails to furnish to the Central Government, or the Govern- 3S 
ment company or ;Jny person or body of persons authorised by that 
Government or Government. company any document relating to 
such undertakings which may be in his possession, cust':)dy or con-
trol or fails to deliver to the Central Government or the Government 
company or any person or b:>dy of persons authorised by that 40 
Government or Government company, any Bsse~l, books of account, 
registers or other documents in his pouessi.on, oustody or control 
relating to the undertakings of the CottlpaaYi or 
(c) wrongfully, remove~ or destrqys any. pro.perty f9rining 
part of the underta~ingS,of the Co~ary, or prefers Bl1yclaim under 45 
this Act which he knows or has reasonable· cause to believe to be 
false or grossly inaccurate, 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend 
to two years, or with fine which may extend' to ten thousand rupees, or 
with both. So 

11 
., (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a Oftences 
company, every person who at the time the offence was committed was by com-
in charge af, and ~a.s responsible to, the cOJ;Rpany for the conduct of the pant ... 
bta,iness of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be 
S guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and 
punished accordingly: 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-aection shall reDder any 
such person liable to any punishment, if he proves that the oft'ence was 
committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised all due 
10 diligence to prevent the commission of such offence. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in, sub-section (1), where any 
offence under this Act has been committed by a company an,d it is Pl'Oved 
that the offence has been committed with the consent or connivance of, 
or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, 
IS secretary or other officer of the companY,such director, manager, secre-
tary or other officer shaUbe deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall 
be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly. 
Expla.na.tion.-For the purposes of this section-
(4) "company" means any body corporate and includes a firm or 
20 other association of individuals; and 
(b) "director", in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm. 
29. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the 
Central Government or any officer of that Government or the Custodian 
of the undertakings of the Company Or the Government company or an)' 
25 officer or other person authorised by that Government or the Government 
company for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done 
under this Act. 
30. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, direct that all or 
any of the power exerciseable by it under this Act, other than the power 
30 conferred by section 31, may also be exercised by any person or persons 
as may be specified in the notification. 
(2) Whenever any delegation of power is made unde, sub-section (1), 
the person to whom such power has been delegated shall act under tho 
direc~ion, control and supervision of the Central Government. 
Protection 
of action 
taken in 
good faith. 
Delegation 
of powers. 
35 31. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for Power to 
carrying out the provisiolUl of this Act. make rules 
40 
45 
(2) In particular, and with:lut prejudice to the generality of the fore-
going power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following 
matters, namely:-
(4) the time within which and the maDDer in which an intima-
tion referred to in sub-secti~n (3) of section 4 shall be given; 
(b) the form and the manner in which, and the conditions under 
which, the Custodian shall maintain accounts as required by 
section 11; 
(c) the manner in which monies in any provident or other fund 
referred to in section 13 shall be dealt with; 

Power to 
remove 
dUftculties. 
Declaration 
as to 
policy of 
the State. 
Repeal 
and 
saving. 
12 
Cd) any other matter which is required. to be, or may be, pres-
cribed. 
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shan 
be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before eaeh House of Parlia-
nient while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may!lc S 
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessionS, and if, 
before the expiry of the sc:~sion immediately following the session or tt.e 
succeslive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modifica-
tion in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, 
the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be 10 
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification 
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything 
previously done under that rule. 
32. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Act, the Central Government may, by order, not inconsistent with the IS 
provIsions of this Act, remove the difficulty: 
Provided that no such . order shall be made. after the expiry of a 
period of two years from the dr.te on which this Act receives the assent 
of the President. 
33. It is hereby declared that this Act is for giving effect to the pJli<'y 20 
of the State towards securing the principles specified in clause (b) of 
article 39 of the Constitu~ion. 
Explanation.-In this section "State" has the meaning as in article 
12 of the Constitution. 
34. (1) The Smith, Stanistrcet and Company Limited (Acfluisition 
and Transfer of Undertakings) Ordinance, 1977; is hereby repealed. 2S 13 of 1977. 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done :lr any ac~ion t.:ken 
under the Ordinance Sll repealed shall be deemed. to have been done or 
taken under the corresponding provisions of thi.s, Act. 
THE SCHEDULE 30 
(See sections 18, 19, 20, 22 and 24) 
ORDER OF PRIORITIES FOR THE DISCHARGE OF LIABIUTIES OF THE COMPANY 
PART 'A' 
POST-TAKE-OVER MANAGEMENT palOD 
Categcwy ·1. . 35 
(a) Wages, salaries and other dues of the employees of the Conl-' 
pany. 
(b) Loans advanced by the Central Govemment~ 
(c) Loans advanced by Indian Drugs and PharmaceiJ.ticlirs Limited. 
(d) Loans advanced by banks guaranteed by the Central Govern-
ment. . 40 
(e) Credit availed of for purposes of trade or manufacturing 
opera~lons. 

5 
10 
;'0 
13 
Category II. 
(a) Revenue, taxes, cesses, rates or other dues to the Central 
Government or a State Government. 
(b) Sales tax, rates and taxes, contributioDS to: be made to the 
Employees' State Insurance Fund and Additional Dearness 
Allowances payable to employees .. 
PART 'B' 
PRE-TAD-OVER MANAGEMENT PIlRIOD 
Category III. 
Arrears in relation to provident fund, salaries and wages and 
other amounts due to employees of the Company. 
Categcwy IV. 
Principal amount due in relation to all secured loans. 
Category V. 
Amounts due by way of interest due in relation to . the secured 
loans referred to in category IV. 
Category VI. 
Revenue, taxes, cesses, rates or any other dues to the Central 
Government, a State Government, a local authority or a State 
Electricity Board. 
Category VII. .~ :. 
(a) Any credit availed of for purposes of trade or manufacturing 
operations. 
(b) Any other dues. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Messrs Smith, Stanistreet and Company Limited, Calcutta were en-
gaged in the manufacture of drugs and pharmaceuticals which were 
essential to the needs of the country. The Company began to show steady 
decline in production from 1970 onwards and incurred considerable 
losses. The Company was also being mismanaged. Mter investigation 
into the affairs of the Company through an investigation Committee, 
the management of its undertakings was taken over on 4th May, 
1972 by the Central Government acting under section 18A of the Industries 
(Development and Regulation) Act, 1951. The Indian Drugs and Phar-
maceuticals Ltd., a Public Sector Undertaking was appointed as authorised 
controller. As the Company had to be moder'nised and expansion under-
taken in order to ensure the augmentation and distribution of the dif-
ferent varieties of essential pharmaceuticals and chemicals produced by 
the Company and to ensure the continued sUp'ply thereof in public interest, 
it was necessary to acquire the right, title and interest of the underbk-
ings of the Company. This was done by the Smith, Stanistreet knd 
Company Limited (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Ordinance, 
1977. The Bill seeks the replacement of the Ordinance. 
NEW DELHI; H. N. BAHUGUNA. 
The 2nd November, 1977. 
14 
, 

;':')f":';\J<::;: i:::.: FINAN&AtM~NIri.tM'·)'i;<I .. ")!JI:j: 
. Claule Tn."'; ~ ,lUlIl:pl!Gl'¥lid~ -1ol'tne·'PYllJijilt, iii cash; l4Dd!! •• ithe 
~ spemW;UJ,ICheptei1I¥Lof aD amouirrt' at ib4 3~,'1..ftOQG (RupfJIH 
three crores and seventy-four thousand), for vestingiD tbaJ£,n.,al.ti!Q\Wo! 
eI'JllIlent, the right, title and interest of. the Company in relation to the 
unaerUtkih~:'bwnea ts,.:it; :~!l; . :: 'il :',: ... '':; I;I"y 'J:'; 11,1 
2. 'Sul:;~c!~ils~Jltl) elf Ic1ii(lseiS p'roHdes"'for! paym~:iit of i1'thrth~r ~Iitbunt 
in cash, in consideration for the deprivation of the :ebIrtpany 
o£·,~he .-;~~~~~ ~1~~·J~R4eqB~ip's~, .. ~n"~()\.W~Jl,!~I~~l,aW\ at the 
f~te ~f!,~"l.O,OQP (R~~~!t~ith~SMA!pnli'> ~f:~, .fp'~~;~iod 
commencmg On the date on which the management of!t.p.e ~p~~ings 
, of the Comp'any was taken over by the Government and ending w'th 
thlHlppoiilted dll'Y; . ltis estimated th~t :tbU amOun.t wW be'rottile order 
of Rs. 55,000 (Rupees fifty,.tlvethcusand.,only). ':'. i: 'Jf i:il:',' 
.. 3 .. Sub-clause (2) of clau~e. 8 provjdes for payment of simple interest 
o~,the: a~~~n~s Iipe~~'ft.~Cf iricl~~Se1~?d st1b-~lause(1) "6fCIlnl'se:S: at 
~~~ )~ate of ,4 per. P~~,t. ,pet,i1nnu~ '}o~ th~ pe~?~t ~~~wm~c'Hi~Jon; t~ 
appomted day (1st Odobel", 1977) an(h~hding wffilihe'tfaY''cItl ~hiclfiJ the 
payment of these amounts is made by the Cenfral"GoWrnmeM ;to·th~ 
Commissioner of Payments. The interest payment in terms of the pro-
visions of the said clause is of the order of Rs. 60,000 (Rupees sixty 
thousand only). 
4. Clause 14 of the Bill provides for the <:I1Pointment of the Commis-
sioner of Payments by the Central Government with adequate staff to 
assist him for the purpose of disbursing the amounts payable to the 
Company. The salary and allowances of the Commissioner of Payments 
and his staff and expenditure on office and establishment will be defrayed 
out of the Consolidated Fund of India. The estimated expenditure on 
this account is likely to be of the order of Rs. 10,000 per month. 
5. The liabilities relating to gratUity payable to employees amounting 
to Rs. 37 lakhs as well as balance of post-take-over liabilities of sundry 
creditors rmounting to Rs. 24.56 lakhs and principal amounts due in 
relation to secured loans (pre-take-over) amounting to Rs. 48 lakhs, are 
not likely to be discharged fully by the Commissioner of Payments out 
of the amount paid to him under clause 7 of the Bill. In the interest of 
the Company and its continued functioning it is proposed that the Central 
Government may assume these liabilities, as p'I'ovided in sub-clause (1) 
of clause 24. 
6. Funds will also have to be provided to the company for modernisa-
tion and expansion. The expenditure on this account is necessary to 
make the Company financially viable. The total estimated expenditure 
on the modernisation and expansion scheme is likely to be of the order 
of Rs. 1 crore (Rupees one crore only). A sum of Rs. 50 lakhs has been 
provided in the budget for 1977-78 towards Non-Plan loans for working-
capital for this Company and may have to be disbursed to the Company 
during the year. 
7. The Bill, if enacted, is not likely to involve any other recurring or 
non-recurring expenditure. 
15 

MEMORANDUM REGARD:ING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clauee 31 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make 
rules to carry out the provisions of the Bill. Such rules may provide 
for matters, such as-
<a> the time within which and the manner in which an intima-
tion referred to in sub-clCluse (3) of clauSe 4 of the Bill shall be 
given; 
(b) the form and the manner in which and the conditions under 
which the Custodian shall maintain the accounts as provided in 
clause 11; and 
(c) the manner in which monies in any pTovident or other fund 
referred to in clause 13 shall be dealt with. 
2. The matters in respect of which such rules may be made are matters 
of procedure and administrative detail and it is not practicable to provide 
for them in the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power is, there-
fore, of a normal character. 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for, in the public interest, the acquisition and transfer of the 
right, title and interest of the undertakings of Messrs Smith, 
Stanfstreet and Company Limited, Calcutta and for matters con-
nected therewith or incidental thereto. 
(Shri H. N. Bahuguna, Minister of Petrolium, Chemicals and Fertilizt1'B.) 