As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

25 NOV Cts

Bill No. 126 of 2005

THE PUBLIC PREMISES (EVICTION OF UNAUTHORISED
OCCUPANTS) AMENDMENT BILL, 2005
By
SHRI RAMDAS ATHAWALE, M.P.

A
BILL

further to amend the Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants)
Act, 1971.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:— |

1. (1) This Act may be calied the Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised ‘Short title and
Occupants) Amendment Act, 2005. commencement.

5 (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by |
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.

े 2. In section 2 of the Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Amendment of
of1971. Act, 1971,— Section eR

(i) in clause (९), in sub-clause (2), items (i) and (ii) shall be omitted; and

10 (ii) in clause (fa), sub-clauses (ii) and (iii) shall be omitted.



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

In their judgements, the Bombay High Court and the Supreme Court have upheld tl
the Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1971, takes precede
over the Rent Control Act. The Judgement has created a number of difficulties for the ¢
tenants who have been residing there for a number of years. The purpose of the Act wa!
safeguard the interest of Government buildings and to evict the unauthorised occupé
such as those employees who are staying in Government accommodation even after t
retirement from service or others who have been put in there unauthorisedly by employe
Expansion of public sector undertakings such as Government owned compan
nationalised banks and other nationalised sectors has brought in a number of old tenan
under the purview of this Act. As a result of this and due to the above said judgement, the 0
tenants have lost protection of the Rent Control Act. In fact there are enough provisiol
under the Companies Act, 1956 and/or under Rent Control Act to take care of those
are occupying the Government buildings without authority.

Under these circumstances, the amendment is imperative to exclude such p bl
sector undertakings from ithe purview of the Act so as to give relief to old tenants. It is als
necessary to bring the Government companies on par with the private landlords. Anoth
important aspect is the tenancy right which is a valuable right in cities and there is
reason to deprive the tenants of the same without any reason

Hence this Bill.

New DELHI; RAMDAS ATHAWALI
August 16, 2005


of 1956

|

ANNEXURE

EXTRACT FROM THE PUBLIC PREMISES (EVICTION OF UNAUTHORISED Occupants) Act, 1971
(40 oF 1971)

a ew शक कु

2. in this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—

% | कै % i 2

(8) "public premises" means. |

& क्र a & %

(2) any premises belonging to, or taken on lease by, or on behaif of-—

(i) any company as defined in section 3 of the Companies Act, 1956, in which not less
than fifty-one per cent, of the paid-up share capital is held by the Central Government or any
company which is a subsidiary (within the meaning of that Act) of the first-mentioned
company;

(ii) any corporation (not being a company as defined in section 3 of the Companies
Act, 1956, or a local authority) established by or under a Central Act and owned or controlled
by the Central Government;

* के * कक कं

(fa) "statutory authority", in relation to the public premises referred to in clause (e)
of this section, means,—

श्र & % Me 4

(ii) in respect of the public premises referred to in item (i) of sub-clause (2) of that
clause, the company or the subsidiary company, as the case may be, referred to therein.

(iii) in respect of the public premises referred to in item (7) of sub-clause (2) of that
clause the corporation referred to therein. |

a ea * * Ea


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

‘further to amend the Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthori
Act, 1971. |

(Shri Ramdas Athawale, M.P.)

MGIPMRND—2989LS——12.11.2005.