(AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

25 ave 2

Bill No. 126 of 2000

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000
By
SHRI K. BASAVANA GOUD, MP.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as
Tollows:—

1, This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2000, Shorttitle.
2. In article 316 of the Constitution, in clause (2),— Amendment of
article 316,

(i) for the words "six years", the words "four years" shall be substituted; and

(ii) for the words "sixty-five years", the words "sixty-four years" shall be
substituted.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

At present, a member of a Public Service Commission holds office for a term of six
years from the date on which he enters upon his olfice or until he attains the age of sixty-
five years in case of a Union Commission and sixty-two years in case of a member of State
or Joint Commission. In order to provide Opportunities to experienced administrators and
to make recruitment impartially, it is advisable to reduce the tenure of the member of a
Commission to four years instead of six years. In most of the States, the retirement age is
fifty-eight years and in the case of Central Government it is sixty years, Therefore, a
person who is appointed at the age of fifty-eight years and appointed as a member of a
State or Joint Commission will be able to serve four years or until he attains the age of
sixty-two years and a person who has retired from the Central Government at the age of
sixty years and appointed as a member of Commission will complete his four years term
at the age of sixty-four years. Since six years is a very long period for each person as a
member of the Commission, these amendments are very much necessary. Moreover,
uniformity in the tenure of members of both Union/State Service Commission is also
necessary.

Hence this Bill.

New Dewitt; K. BASAVANA GOUD
July 17, 2000


ANNEXURE,
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

* * * * * * *

316. (1) * * * * *

(2) A member of a Public Service Commission shall hold office for a term of six
years from the date on which he enters upon his office or until he attains, in the case of the
Union Commission, the age of sixty-five years, and in the case of a State Commission or
a Joint Commission, the age of sixty-two years, whichever is earlier:

Provided that—

(a) a member of a Public Service Commission may, by writing under his hand
addressed, in the case of the Union Commission or a Joint Commission, to the President,
and in the case of a State Commission, to the Governor of the State, resign his office;

(0) a member of a Public Service Commission may be removed {rom his office the
manner provided in clause (1) or clause (3) of article 317.

* * * * * * *

Appointinent
and term of
office of



LOK SABHA

BILL

further to amend the Constitution of India.

(Shri K. Basavana Goud, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—2024LS—31.7.2000,