THE WOMEN (RESERV ATION IN SERVICES) BILL,  2012
By
DR. (SMT.) BOTCHA JHANSI LAKSHMI, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for reservation of posts and appointments for women in services under
the Central Government and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-third Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Women (Reservation in Services) Act, 2012.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) ‘‘service’’ means the service in connection with the affairs of the
Central Government and includes the services in any public sector undertaking
or enterprise or any authority under the control of the Central Government;
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No.  126  of  2012
Definitions.
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(b) ‘‘prescribed’’ means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(c) ‘‘public sector undertakings and enterprises’’ includes all public sector
undertakings, enterprises, banks and financial institutions wholly owned or
managed by the Central Government or in which fifty-one per cent. shares are
held by the Central Government.
3. There shall be reserved thirty-three per cent. of all appointments and posts in
services for women.
4. The Central Government shall make such provisions relating to relaxation in
eligibility conditions, as may be prescribed, for appointment of women in services.
5. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is
made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty
days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions,
and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the
rule or both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so,
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the
validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Reservation for
women in
services.
Relaxation in
eligibility
conditions.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
In India, women are so deeply engrossed in family affairs and burdened with
such heavy domestic responsibilities that in spite of their capabilities, education and
aptitude, most of them are unable to enter into Government services on time.
Women have only marginal representation in services connected with the affairs
of the Union. Even though they are capable of efficiently carrying out various
responsibilities connected with the assignments, they do not fulfil the requisite
qualifications, experience and other conditions of eligibility attached to that post or
assignment.
In order to ensure that women get due representation in Government services, it
is necessary to reserve thirty-three per cent. of all posts and services under the Central
Government, including public sector undertakings and enterprises, for women by
providing them relaxation in matters of age limit, requisite educational qualifications,
experience and other conditions of eligibility.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; BOTCHA  JHANSI  LAKSHMI
November 7, 2012.
3

4
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 5 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the
delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for reservation of posts and appointments for women in services under
the Central Government and for matters connected therewith.
————
[Dr. (Smt.) Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi, M.P .]
GMGIPMRND—3308LS—21.11.2012.