1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015
By
SHRI ANANDRAO ADSUL, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2015.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In article 330 of the Constitution,—
(a) in clause (1), after sub-clause (c), the following sub-clause shall be inserted,
namely:—
“(d) the Nomadic Tribes.”; and
Short title
and
commencement.
Bill No.  126  of  2015
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Amendment
of article 330.
5

2
(b) in clause (2),—
(i)  for the words “the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes”,
the words “the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes or the Nomadic
Tribes” shall be substituted; and
(ii) for the words “the Scheduled Tribes in the State or Union
territory”, the words “the Scheduled Tribes in the State or Union Territory
or of the Nomadic Tribes in the State or Union territory” shall be
substituted.”.
5

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
At present reservation of seats in the House of the People is available to the persons
belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes.
The persons belonging to Nomadic Tribes are living in primitive conditions.
If the provision of reservation of seats in favour of persons belonging to the Nomadic
Tribes in the House of the People is made, their problems to a large extent can be addressed
effectively.
Therefore, the Bill seeks to amend the Constitution with a view to provide reservation
of seats in the House of the People in favour of persons belonging to the Nomadic Tribes.
N
EW DELHI; ANANDRAO  ADSUL
April 7, 2015.

4
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * * * * *
330. Reservation of seats for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in the House of
the People—(1) Seats shall be reserved in the House of the People for—
(a) the Scheduled Castes;
(b) the Scheduled Tribes except the Scheduled Tribes in the autonomous districts
of Assam; and
(c) the Scheduled Tribes in the autonomous districts of Assam.
(2) The number of seats reserved in any State or Union Territory for the Scheduled
Castes or the Scheduled Tribes under clause (1) shall bear, as nearly as may be, the same
proportion to the total number of seats allotted to that State or Union Territory in the House
of the People as the population of the Scheduled Castes in the State or Union Territory or of
the Scheduled Tribes in the State or Union Territory or part of the State of the State or Union
Territory, as the case may be, in respect of which seats are so reserved, bears to the total
population of the State or Union Territory.
* * * * * * * *

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India
————
(Shri Anandrao Adsul, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—293LS(S3)—28-04-2015.