Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 126 of  2017
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
THE SPECIAL FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO THE STATE OF
MAHARASHTRA BILL, 2017
By
SHRI RAJEEV SATAV, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for special financial assistance to the State of Maharashtra for the purpose of
sustainable and balanced development of growth-oriented infrastructure such as
housing, drinking water, roads, sanitation, creation of grain and fodder banks,
skill development, cloud seeding, contour bunding and welfare schemes for
the women, children, senior citizens and people living below poverty
line in the State along with combating desertification and drought
problem in Marathwada and Vidarbha regions caused by
consistent deficit rainfall and drought conditions by
encouraging traditional water conservation
through lakes, ponds, wells, rainwater
harvesting and afforestation and for
matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Special Financial Assistance to the State of Maharashtra
Act, 2017.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.5

2
2. There shall be paid such sums of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of India,
every year, as Parliament may by due appropriation provide, as special financial assistance
to the State of Maharashtra to meet the costs of such schemes of development as may be
undertaken by the Government of Maharashtra with the approval of Union Government for
the purposes of—
(i) eradication of the problem of malnutrition from the State;
(ii) implementation of schemes aimed at improving the health and educational
standards of girl child;
(iii) providing for welfare measures aimed at improving the condition of
agricultural and migrant labourers;
(iv) providing for measures aimed at lowering of infant mortality rate, improving
the maternal health and promoting institutional delivery in the State;
(v) providing employment to members of families living below poverty line and
unemployed youth through skill development;
(vi) providing water and sanitation facilities in rural and urban areas;
(vii) creating good quality infrastructure of roads, rail, highways, street lights,
schools, colleges and transport;
(viii) creating awareness amongst people about disaster preparedness plan and
training them to deal with disasters;
(ix) creation and maintenance of water conservation bodies such as check dams
and preventing the westward water diversion from Bhima basin to Konkan;
(x) digging of open wells, ponds and desiltation of such bodies from time to time
under the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act, 2005;
(xi) encouraging and providing irrigation facilities to the farming sector and
promotion of drip irrigation facility in these regions;
(xii) capping of water guzzling sugarcane area and promotion of drought
resilient crop like jawar, bajra, sunflower, pegion pea or tur, mulberry and potato;
(xiii) promotion of rain water harvesting and watershed development to ensure
replenishment of groundwater;
(xiv) afforestation particularly on vacant or barren and waste land with the help
of villagers and village Panchayats including community afforestation;
(xv) promotion of growing fodder and setting up fodder and foodgrain Banks at
conspicuous places;
(xvi) initiating welfare measures for improving the conditions of agricultural
workers, senior citizens, women, children and poor people living in these regions;
(xvii) establishing cold storages and warehouses for the farmers;
(xviii) settling the debt of farmers;
(xix) providing compensation and relief to farmers and agricultural labourers
for any damage to crops caused due to rainfall deficit, pest attack, flood, hailstorm or
any other natural calamity;
(xx) encouraging and providing sustainable practices like organic farming
coupled with modern irrigation facilities like drip irrigation, contour bunding and
sprinklers to farmers;
(xxi) promotion of research and development through Krishi Vigyan Kendra in
agriculture and drought management to ensure better and inexpensive inputs like
seeds, fertilizers and pesticides;
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(xxii) training of farmers in new agricultural techniques and promoting allied
sectors like livestock and poultry;
(xxiii) promoting food processing industries based on local agricultural products;
(xxiv ) implementation of social awareness campaigns through non-
Governmental Organisation and Self-Help groups relating to farmer credit, water
literacy and drought management through change in cropping pattern;
(xxv) promotion and implementation of cloud seeding through silver iodide in
the State; and
(xxvi) such other provisions as the Government of the State of Maharashtra
may deem necessary for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
3. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the President of
India may, by order, make such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act
which appears to him to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty :
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of two years from the date of
commencement of this Act.
4. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force dealing with the subject matter of this Act.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Act not in
derogation of
other laws.
5
10
15

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The State of Maharashtra needs assistance from the Central Government for the
successful completion of various schemes being undertaken at present with an aim to improve
the standard of life of the people, improve the sex-ratio and level of education and health
condition of the girls, to encourage the girl students of families living below poverty line to
pursue higher education and also to provide incentives for people living below poverty line
to pursue higher education. The condition of farmers and agricultural labourers in the State
is far from satisfactory and their welfare and protection are of paramount importance. Central
assistance to the State is also needed for further reduction in the maternal and infant mortality
rates.
Recurring droughts have made the State an epicenter of farmer suicide. The situation
is more precarious in Marathwada and Madhya Maharashtra where droughts have been a
frequent occurrence during the past fifty years. The frequent droughts are resulting in
desertification of the regions where quality pomegranates, grapes, sweetlime and other fruits
are exported for earning precious foreign exchange. These regions used to grow bumper
crops of Cotton, Soyabean and traditionally grown crops such as jawar, bajra, sunflower and
pigeon pea or Tur and other pulses and oilseeds. Water guzzling cane has resulted in steep
fall in ground water level and growing desertification. This trend has to be stopped through
massive water conservation with check dams and other structures to arrest rain water run off.
The traditional methods of water conservation through digging of open wells, ponds,
lakes and such other bodies and time to time desiltation of such water bodies needs to be
undertaken. Rain water harvesting has to be promoted as a mass movement in this regions.
Afforestation on a large scale particularly on barren lands and wastelands has to be promoted
in these regions involving villagers and village Panchayats by providing incentives. This
can certainly arrest the desertification in these regions. Unfortunately these regions of the
State are not much developed in comparison to other regions of the State in terms of
infrastructure facilities such as potable water, roads, electricity, sanitation and other
development indicators such as employment, per capita income and education particularly
of the girl child. Welfare measures for the senior citizens, widows, physically handicapped or
infirm do not exist in these regions of the State. Maharashtra has to be allocated its fair share
of resources by the Central Government. As a welfare State, the Government has to provide
all these facilities and work towards giving a requisite push for overall and allround
development of the State.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RAJEEV SATA V
June 30, 2017.
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides that there shall be paid such sums of moneys out of the
Consolidated Fund of India, every year, as Parliament may by due appropriation provide, as
special financial assistance to the State of Maharashtra to meet the costs of such schemes of
development, as may be undertaken by the State of Maharashtra with the approval of the
Central Government. The Bill, therefore, on enactment, will involve expenditure out of the
Consolidated Fund of India for providing special financial assistance to the State of
Maharashtra. As the sums of moneys which will be given to the State of Maharashtra as
special financial assistance by appropriation by law made by Parliament will be known only
after the welfare schemes to be implemented by the State Government are identified, it is not
possible to give the estimates of recurring or non-recurring expenditure, which would be
involved out of the Consolidated Fund of India at this stage.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be incurred from the Consolidated Fund of
India.
5

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for special financial assistance to the State of Maharashtra for the purpose of
sustainable and balanced development of growth-oriented infrastructure such as
housing, drinking water, roads, sanitation, creation of grain and fodder banks,
skill development, cloud seeding, contour bunding and welfare schemes for
the women, children, senior citizens and people living below poverty
line in the State along with combating desertification and drought
problem in Marathwada and Vidarbha regions caused by
consistent deficit rainfall and drought conditions by
encouraging traditional water conservation
through lakes, ponds, wells, rainwater
harvesting and afforestation and for
matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Rajeev Satav, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—909LS(S3)—20.07.2017.