As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA ON 
-, uEe 197D 
·'BlU"No. latO! 1270 
THE NEWSPAPER FINANCE CORPORATION BILL, 1970 
CLAUSES 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
1. Short title, exten17 8nd'~cement. 
2. Definitions. 
, 1 GHAP.'I:ER II 
INCORPORATION or NEWSPAPER FINANCIltlCOIdJoRATIONIJANB'llts CAPITAL 
3. Establishment and mcorpotationof "'Newspaper "'Finance' Cor-
poration. 
4. Head office and otherl~es. 
5. Capital of Corporation. 
CHAPTER III 
MANAGEMENT OF THE CORPORATION 
6. Management. 
7. Board to be guided by directions of Central Government. 
8. Constitution of Board. 
9. Conditions of service. 
10. Disqualifications. 
11. Vacation and resignation of office of directors. 
12. Meetings of Board. 
13. Defect in appointment not to invalidate acts, etc. 
14. Fees and allowances of directors. 
15. Appointment of General Manager. 
16. Staff of Board. 
17. Authentication of orders and other instruments of Board. 
CHAPTER IV 
FUND AND BUSINESS OF THE CORPORATION 
18. Fund of Corporation. 
19. Loan to Corporation by Central Government. 
20 Business which Corporation may transact. 
21. Loan by Corporation to small or medium newspapers. 
(i) 

CLAUSES 
22. Loan by Corporation how secured. 
23. 
24. 
25. 
26. 
Corporation to charge interest for loan. 
Duration of loan advanced by Corporation. 
Loan not to be advanced in certain cases. 
Recovery of money due to Corporation. 
CHAPTER V 
ACCOUNTS, AVDIT AND RETVRN 
27. Accounts. 
28. Audit. 
29. Disposal of profits. 
30. Returns. 
CHAPTER VI 
MISCELLANEOUS 
31. Declaration of fidelity and secrecy. 
32. Indemnity of directors. 
33. Protection Of action taken in good faith. 
34. Directors, etc., to be public servants. 
35. Provisions relating to income-tax. 
36. Delegation of powers. 
37. Power of Central Government to make rules. 
38. Power of Board to make regulations. 
THE SCHEDULE. 

Blll No. 126 of I'Z: 
mE NEWSPAPER FINANCE CORPORATION BILL, ICJ70 
A 
BILL 
to provide jor the establishment oj a Newspaper Finance Corporation for 
rendering financial assistance to small and medium -newspapers and 
jor matters C01I.nected therewith or incidental thereto. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-first Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
5 1. (1) This Act may be called the Newspaper Finance Corporation 
10 
Act, 1970. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government 
may, by notiftcation in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
Z. In this Act, urtless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "Board" means the Board of directors of the Corporation; 
(b) "Corporation" means the Newspaper Finance Corporation 
eetablished under eection 3; 
Short 
title, 
extent· 
and 
commence-
ment. 
Definition. 

Establish-
ment 
and 
incorpora-
tion of 
News-
paper 
Finance 
Corpora-
tion. 
Head 
office 
and other 
offices. 
Capital of 
Corpora. 
tioD. ·1 
2 
(c) "medium newspaper" means a daily, bi-weekly, tri-weekly 
or weekly newspapers, the average circulation of which exceeds,-
(i) in the case of a bi-weekly, tri-weekly or weekly news-
paper, five thousand copies, 
(ii) in the case of a daily newspaper, fifteen thousand copies, S 
but does not exceed, in any case, fifty thousand copies; 
(d) "newspaper" means any printed periodical work containing 
public news c:Jr comments on public news, but does not include any 
printed periodical work which, or a major part of which coontains 
exclusively news relating to sports, or technical, professional, econo- 10 
mic or financial matters, or all or any of them; 
(e) "small newspaper" means a daily, bi-weekly, tri-weekly or 
weekly newspaper, the average circulation of which exeeds,-
(i) in the case of a bi-weekly, tri-weekly or weekly news-
paper, two thousand copies but does not exceed five thousand 15 
copies, 
(ii) in the case of a daily newspaper, five thousand copies, 
but does not exceed fifteen thousand copies; 
(f) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act. 
CHAPTER II 
lNCOaroRATIPN OF NEWSPAPER FINANCE COBPORATION AND ITS CAPITAL 
·,a...:(J'~.WjD..-..ct from such date as the Central Governme~t may, by 
noti&.ti04 in' -tlWr ~iabGd~tUe·, appQint/, thtre m.ll' .be' .established·lfllr 
the purposes of this Act a Corporation to be known as the Newspaper 
20 
Finance Corporation. / 25 
(2) The Corporation shall be a body corparate with the name afore-
said, having!pe~ua]1 succession: andlla· common· seal· wUit ~pOWel'. subjeC!t, 
to' the· 'pnwiBions at· this Ac~ to IQcquire,l.hold·and: dispose 'of 'pro-perty, 
movable and irntaovable;land 1 to \Conttactl~'Qnd) may,~byllthat':name lIue or 
be sued. 30 
4. The Corporation shall establish its head office at J)eitJii·:(tt'suohlother 
place as the Central Government may specify in this behalf and may, 
with the previous approval of· the l Central Government, establish other 
omces at other places in India. 
s. ,(1) ·The'.u~_eapiMl,of .the<CorpMation.wll be:npees three 35 
erores, to be provided by the Central Govemment, out of which, rupeel 
one crore shall be subscribed by that Government in the first instance. 
(2) The Central Government shaD., after a loan of a sum of IrUpees 
one erore has been advanced by it, under seetion 19,' to the Corpor.tion, 
subseribe to the capital of the Corporation a further sum of rupees one 40 
crore, and shall, after a further loau of a sum of rupees one crore has been 
advaneed by it to the Corporation, subscribe a further sum of rupees one 
cron;'folhe: opith} of the~rati6ll/' 
(S) The- entire capital of 'the' Col1Jo ........ ~ sh ... t·ttBlltlJ ",est" in, and 
allotted to, the Central Govemment. 45 

3 
CHAPTER :III: 
MANAGEMENT OF THE CORPORATION 
6. (1) The general superintendence, direction and management of the Manage-
affairs and business of the.Corporatioon shall vest in the Board which may ment. 
S exercise all the powers and discharge all the functi<1Ils which may be 
exercised or discharged by the Corporation. 
(2) The' Board, in discharging its functions,· shall act on business prin-
ciples, regard being had to the interests of the general"' public; 
7. In the discharge of its functions, the Board shall be guided by such 
10 directions in matters of policy as the Central Gavemment may give to 
it in writing. 
• 
8. ~l) ,The Board . shall coll6i ... · of a Chairman ancil40ur i other, direclol'fiJ' 
wfto!1Ihali. bel appointed· by the Central< GwerDmenti.· 
(2)' , OUt> of the' ·di!'eObors appointed· under· ~ub-section'(l), not· more 
IS .than • one- -shall '. be· an . ofticer of the 'Central Gavemment. 
9. (1) The Chairman and the other directors shall hold office during 
the''Pleasure'Of.the'·Ceritnil ·(Sovernment·'and·the period of such ofBCe, 
unless terminated earlier, shall be two-yearS': 
(2)SUbj-ect "to the provisionsofsu'b<-eeetion (1)', the· conditions of ser-
20 vice of the Chairman and ·the other directors shall be such ·as may be-
prescribed. 
(3) It is hereby declared that the oftice of the' Chairman or any otller 
dir~r shall not disqualify its holder for being chosen as, or for being, 
a member of either House (1f Parliament or of any Legislature 'of a St ... 
(4) The Chairman and the other directors shall be eligible for re-
2S appointment. 
.Hoare:! 
to be 
guided 
by direc-
tions of 
Central 
Govern-
ment . 
Constitu-
tion o~ 
Board. 
Condi-
tions of 
service. 
10. No person shall be a director, who,- DisQlWi~-
30 
catiaM. (a)ds M employee,of a newspapef or·ha&a subataat.iaLinteJest., 
in 'any newspaper.; or' 
(b) is, or at any time has been, adjudged insolvent or has sus-
pe:ncitd .pafIMnt, of hilt, debts,' or . haa; ooral'OOu4ed..-.wi~ ,his • .crmiMrS, 
or, 
(c) is of unsound mind and stands 'So dec4ared'bya competent· 
coUl't\, or. . 
(d) 'is or has been convicted of an·'Offence,· whieh,'in the-opinion 
3S of the Cen.tral.Governmenb,. in.volvesmotal tuq>itude •. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of claWJe (a), a perion. shall. be deem-
ed . to have substantial interest in 8 newspaper if he-
(i) owns the newspaper, or 

Vacation 
and 
resigna-
tion of 
office by 
directors. 
Meetings 
of Board. 
Defect in 
appoint-
ment 
not to in-
validate 
acts, etc. 
Fees and 
allowances 
of direc-
tors. 
Appoint-
ment of 
General 
Manager. 
4 
(ii) holds not less than twenty-five per cent. of the subscribed 
capital of the CO'mpany which owns the newspaper, or 
(iii) has lent to, or given any guarantee or provided any security 
in connection with any loan to, the newspaper where the aggregate 
of the amount of such loan is not less than fifty thousand rupees. 5 
11. (1) If a director,-
(a) becomes subject to any of the disqualifications specified in 
section 10, or 
(b) is absent without leave of the Board for more than three 
consecutive meetings thereof, 10 
his seat shall thereupon become vacant. 
(2) The Chairman or any other director may resign his office by 
giving notice thereof in writing to' the Central Government, and on such 
resignation being accepted, shall be deemed to have vacated his office . 
• 
(3) A casual vacancy arising under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) IS 
or for any other reason shall be filled by fresh appointment, and a direc-
tor so appointed shall bald office for the remainder of the period for 
which the director in whose place he is appOinted would have held office. 
12. (1) The Board shall meet at such times and places and shall observe 
such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its 20 
meetings as may be prescribed. 
(2) Three directors personally present at any meeting of the Board 
shall be the quorum for such meeting. 
(3) If, for any reason, the Chairman of the Board is unable to attend 
any meeting of the Board, the directors present at the meeting shall elect 2S 
one of them to preside at the meeting. 
(4) All questions which may come up beme any meeting of the Board 
shall be decided by a majority of votes of the directors present and. voting, 
and in the case of equality of votes, the Chairman of the Board or in his 
absence, the person presiding, shall have a second <1r casting vote. 30 
13. (1) No act or proceeding of the Board shall be invalid merely on 
the ground of the existence O'f any vacancy in, or any defect in the consti-
tution of, the Board. 
(2) No act done by any person acting in good faith as a director shall 
be deemed to be invalid merely on the ground that he was, at the time 3S 
when such act was done, disqualified to be a directar or that there was 
any other defect in his appointment. 
14. Every director shall be paid such fees and allowances as the Board 
may, by regulations, determine, for attending the meetings of the Board 
or atteading to any other work of the Corporation: 40 
Provided that no such fees shall be paid to a whole-time Chainn,an or 
to ally other director who is an officer of the Central Government. 
15. The Board shall appoint a General Manager who shall-
(a) be a whole-time officer, 
(b) possess such qualifications as may be determined by regula- 45 
tions, 

s 
(c) perform such duties as the Board may by regulations or 
otherwise entrust to him, and 
(d) receive such salary and allowances as may be determined 
by regulations. 
5 1~. The Board may appoint officers and other employees as it may 
consIder necessary for the efficient discharge of the business of the Cor-
poration and determine, by regulations, the conditions of their service. 
17. All orders and decisions of the Board shall be authenticated by 
the signature of the Chairman or any other director authorised by the 
(0 Board in this behalf and other instruments issued by the Board shall be 
authenticated by the signature of the General Manager or any other 
officer of the Board authorised in like manner in this behalf. 
CHAPTER IV 
FUND AND BUSINESS OF THE CORPORATION 
StafI of 
Board. 
Authenti-
cation of 
orders 
and 
other 
instru-
ments of 
Board. 
15 18. (1) The Corporation shall have its own Fund, and all receipts of Fund of 
the Corporation shall be credited thereto and all. payments of the Cor- CorpOra-
poration shall be met therefrom. tion. 
(2) The Fund shall consist of-
(a) all moneys received by the Corporation from the Central 
20 Government; and 
(b) any other sums received by it under this Act, whether by way 
of interest or otherwise. 
(3) The Board shall deposit all moneys belonging to the fund in the 
Reserve Bank of India or the State Bank of India or in such scheduled 
25 bank as may be approved in this behalf by the Central Government. 
(4) The Corporation may invest any money for the time being stand-
ing to the credit of the Fund in any Government security or in any other 
security approved by the Central Government. 
19. (1) The Central Government may, after due appropriation made 
30 by ParUament by law in this behaH, advance such loan to the Corporation 
as it may deem necessary to enable the Corpoartion to perform its func-
tions under this Act, and every loan so advanced shan be on such terms 
and conditions as the Central Government may determine: 
Provided that the aggregate amount of the lQan advanced to the Cor-
35 poration by that Government shall not, at any time, exceed three crores 
of rupees. 
(2) Every loan advanced by the Central Government to the Corpora-
tion, together with interest due thercon, shall be repayable in ten equal 
annual instalments commencing hom the date on which the loan was 
40 received by the Corporation: 
Provided that the Central Government may, on request being made 
to it by the Corporation, increase the number of iostahoents or alter the 
amount of any instalment or vary the date on which any instalment is 
payable. 
Loans to 
Corpora-
tion by 
Central 
Govern-
ment. 

Business 
which 
CorPora-
tion 
may 
transact. 
Loanb'y 
Corpora-
tion to 
small 
or 
medium 
news-
papers. 
Loan by 
Corpora-
tion how 
secured. 
Corpora-
tion to 
charge 
interest 
for loan. 
Duration 
of loan 
advanced 
by Cor-
poration. 
6 
'(31)tB'\IIel'f' loan ...... :byotheC.tral Gover_eat to Ithe Corpora-
tion under sub-seetion (1) shall carry· • .,st at the-18IIl8,rateat,which 
loan are advanced by that Government on the date of such loans. 
20. The Corporation may advance loan to any small or medium news-
paper to enable It to expand its circulation, Or to purchase newsprint, S 
-printing machinery oranY'other''equipment-which may be required for 
'Its ptintihg or'publication: 
Provided that the aggregate amount of such loan to anyone newspaper 
'lShall not, at any time, exceed the 'sum of rupees twenty lakhs. 
21. (1) Subject to the provisions contained in section' 20, no loan shall 10 
be granted by the Corporation of lin amount exceeding seventy-five per 
cent. of the net value of the assets of the borrowing newspaper and of 
any other property offered as collateral security by the borrowing news-
paper or any other person interested in the loan, after deducting, in both 
cases, the existing incumbrances, 'the ftlue of such assets and property (S 
being ascertaiDed 1 by 'Mlch -ind6J)enGent valuer of .tanding as may be 
appointed by the Central Government and every such valuation shall be 
'. made- in ''SUch '!Ila!merj and in aC'ebrdance with Rch pl'ilaciples of valua-
;,·tion; as''may be ~scribed. 
(2) The Corporation while dealing with any application of a news- 20 
paper for a loan, shall not take the ide*>gy or'views: editorially eKpressed 
" ia·-such-'new8paper into consideration. 
22. The Corporation shall ensure that every -roan' 'Ildvanced . by it to 
·tt n:e\\t.,ape.. is ·.weaured' by a I mor1lgage of the, whole a.r .such portion of 
the assets of the borrowing newspaper as' it . may -consider suffiicent, 2S 
and where the whole of such assets is not considered sufficient by the 
valuer, 'the -Corpdhlttiori'shall-bbt'ain·'Stich '~llatera1' 'Seol!lrity as' may be 
., offered by' 'the t)orrowing' newspaper orl , any person' liDtelestedl in. -;the 
loan . 
. 123. (1) !'I'be han1 'Atl'Mn:ed by':the 'Oorporatian to a·small or I medium 30 
. newspaperitfbaU (!arry H1ll'tsest at a -rate Which· man eX<leed· by ftveper 
cent. the rate of interest atnwtJich,.J.oans' were< acivanced to it by.the Cen-
tral Government: 
; , ,'PrM'I1led .. Ulat ift the -borro.wing· new.,aper makes pepayment of any 
,··niMWtnenll 'of..,lean·.iogather with. interest due thereon on or before- the 3S 
'''date' OR' w.hich' suob instalment was payable, the rate of interest payable 
on such instalment oNheloan shall be reduced by two-and-a-half per cent. 
(2) The interest due on any instalment of loan advanced to any small 
01' medium ~paper~iln be pR1~ ... ally~nd IUJltIltontori'lU'Vl shall 
be 'grantedin' mped' of'·men'iritetest. 40 
U. E~ry loan advanced by the Corporation to a small or medium 
newspaper snal1 be repayable,' tdgether Withint~test"-due 'otJ\'t'!"t!oni in ten 
. equalarmualbtstalments. 
Loan not ,n 25: r(1)lNGI>loan.·ehall be '8dvanced by :1he. Corporation t8 any small or 
to be .. ,ftnedfum'newepsper,- 45 
advanced in certain (a) in' 'which any ditectot· of i tlie'Boal'dis Jdtteet1y or ~t11 
easeL interested; 

s 
45 of 1860. 
7 
tb) W~Ch is uwned or controlled by a PQhtlcal p~y for being 
l\1Hd ~ ,an Instrument or organ for the prop~gat.ion of the policy, pro-
gramme or ideology of such political ~tYj 
(c) which has printed or published any matter leading to the 
conviction of the writer or editor for any offence punishable under 
section 153A, 294, 295A or 505, of the Indian Penal Code within one 
year immediately preceding the date on which the application for 
the lo:m is made, the conviction not' having been set aside; 
340fl965. 10 
(d) which has been censured by the Press Council of India under 
section 13 -of the Press Council Act, 1965 in respect of any writing, 
'wi1hin one year immediatt:!ly llreceding·the date on which an appli-
cation for the loan is made; 
15 
(e) which has received or is receiving assistance (whether fin-
ancial or otherwise), directly or indirectly, from any foreign. Govern-
ment, organisation or individual. '.":I~';:~·;'!~ 
• 
(2) No loan shall be granted by the 'Corporation for the starting, for 
the first time, of any newspaper . 
.16. Where any amount is due to the Corporation in respect of a loan 
advanced by it to any small or medium newspaper, the Corporation or 
20 any person authonsedby Itin writing in this b~lf, may, without pre-
judicel.toaray other mode .of recovery, make an application to the Central 
Government for the. ,recovery of the amount due to the Corporation, and 
if the Cental Government or suC;h authorIty, as that Government may 
specify in this behalf, is satisfied after following such procedure as may 
25 be-"PTesCr:ibed ·that any amount is so due, it may issue a certifi~ate fqr that 
amount'-to the' Collector concernedw:ho ,shall proceed to recover. the said 
-amount ,tn"the ,same manner 8lld under the ,same conditfona, as if the said 
amount were -an alTear of ,land revenue: 
Provided that the good-will of the small or medium newspaper shall 
30 not be sold in the event of the proceedings for the recovery of arrears of 
iand revenue resulting in the sale of the assets ·of the said newspaper. 
CHAPTER V 
Recovery 
of money 
due to 
Corpora-
tion. 
27., (1) 'rhe balance-sheet and accounts of the Corporation shall be Aceounts. 
3S pr~pared and maintained in such fo~m and manner as may be prescribed. 
(2) The Board shall cause the books and accounts of the Corporation 
to be balanced and closed on the thirtieth day of .Tune each year. 
28. (1) The accounts of the Corporation shall be audited by an audi- Audit. 
tor duly qualified to act as an auditor under sub-section (1) of section 226 
lof1956. 4O.of,the.CoIQ.panies Act, 11*1,' who shall be appointed by the Cenu-al Gov-
~Bt ,in wnsultlltionw.ith:V1e Comptroller and Auditor General of 
India. 
(2) The Corporation shall supply its auditor with a copy of its annual 
balance-sheet and it shall be the 'duty of the auditor to examine such 
4S balance-sheet together with the accounts and vouchers relating thereto and 

Disposal 
of pro-
fits. 
Returns. 
Declara-
tion of 
fidelity 
and 
secrecy. 
Indemnity 
of Direc-
tors. 
8 
l1e shall have a list delivered to him of all books kept by the Corporation 
and shall at all reasonable .t.imes have access to the .books, accounts, 
vouchers and other documents of the Corporation. 
(3) The auditor may, in relation to the accounts of the Corporation of 
which he is the auditor, examine any director or any officer or employee S 
of the Corporation, and shall be entitled to require from any officer of 
the Corporation such iniormation or explanation as he may think neces-
sary lor the· performance ot his duties.' 
(4) The auditor shall make a report to the Corporation upon the annual 
balance-Sheet and accounts examined by him and in every such report he 10 
shall state whether in his opinion the accounts exhibit a true and fair 
view,-
(a) in the case of the balance-sheet, of the state of affairs of the 
r-' , 'Corporation at the end of the year, and 
(I» in case he had called for an explanation or information from IS 
the Corporation, whether it has been given and whether it is satisfac-
tory. 
• (5) Wi'ihouCprejudice to anything contained in the preceding sub-
sections, the Comptroller and Auditor General of India may, if so request-
ed by the Central Government, examine and report upon the accounts of 20 
the Corporation and any expenditure incurred by him in connection with 
such examination and report shall be payable by the Corporation to the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
29. After making proviSion for bad and doubtful debts, depreciation 
in assets, contributions to staft and superannuation funds and all other 2S 
matters for which provision is necessary under any other law or which 
are usually provided for by financial institutions, the Corporation shall 
transfer the balance of profits to the Central Government. 
30. (1) The Corporation shall furnish, from time to time, to .the Cen-
tral Government such returns as that Government may require. ao 
(2) The Corporation shall furnish to the Central Government within 
three months from the date on· which the annual accounts of the Corpora-
tion are closed, or within such further time, not exceeding one month as 
that Government may specify, a copy of its balance-sheet as on the close 
of that year, audit report, a report of the working of the Corporation dur- 35 
ing the year and copies of the said balance-sheet, audit report and report 
of the working of the Corporation shall be laid before each House of Par-
liament. 
I 
I.i. CHAPTER VI 
-
MISCELLANEOUS 
31. Every Chairman, director, officer or other employee of the Corpo-
ration shall, before entering upon his duties, make a declaration of fideUty 
and secretary in the form set out in the Schedule. 
40 
3Z.Every director shall be indemnified by the Corporation against all 
losses and expenses incurred by him in the discharge of his duties except 4S 
such as are caused by his own wilful act or default. 

c; 
33. No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central Gov-
ernment or the Corporation or any director or officer of the Corporation 
or any other person authorised by the Corporation to discharge any func-
tions under this Act, for any loss or damage caused or likely to be caused 
S by anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursu-
ance of this Act. 
34. Every director of the Corporation and every officer or other em-
ployee appointed by the Corporation shall be deemed to be a public ser-
45 of 1860. vant within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code. 
43 of 1961. 10 35. For the purposes of the Income-tax Act, 1961, the Corporation 
shall be deemed to be an Indian Company and a company in which the 
public are substantially interested. 
38. The Board may, by general or special order, delegate to the Chair-
man or General Manager or any other officer of the Corporation subject 
IS to such conditions and limitations, if any, as may be specified in the 
order, such of its powers and duties under this Act as it may deem 
necessary. 
37. (I) The Cent'ral Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act. 
20 (2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the fore-
going power, such rules may provide for all or any of th'e following 
matters, namely:-
(a) conditions of service of the Chail'man and the other directors; 
(b) rules of procedure with regard to the transaction of business 
2S at the meeting of the Board; 
(e) the manner in which the value of the security offered Is 
to be ascertained; 
(d) procedure for determining the amount due to the Corporation 
from a small or medium newspaper; 
(e) the form and the manner in which the balance-sheet and ac-
counts shall be prepared and maintained; and 
(f) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, 
prescribed. 
(3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may 
35 be, after it is made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session 
for a total period of thirty days, which may be comprised in one session 
or in two successive sessions and, if, before the expiry of the session in 
which it is so laid or the session immediately following, both Houses 
agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that 
40 the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only In 
such modified form or be no effect, as the case may be; so however, 
that any such modification or annulment shall be witliout prejudice to 
the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 
"' - ..... >I' 
Protec-
tion of 
action 
taken 
in good 
faith. 
Direc-
tors, etc., 
to be 
public 
servants. 
Provi-
sions 
relating 
to incon.e-
tax. 
Delega-
tion of 
powers. 
Power of 
Central 
Govern.. 
menttu 
make 
rules. 

.• 'j 
PoWer' 
of Boara-
to mal& 
regula-
tions; 
10 
3&. (1) Tbl! Board·· may make regulations··not· iBconBistent with the 
pro\"isions. of this Act and the rules made thereundec· to provide· fOl' all 
matters for which provision is necessary or expedient, for the purpose of 
giving effect· to the provisions of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the fore- S 
going provisions, such regulations may provide for all or any of the .. fol-
lowing. matters, namely:-
(0) fees and allowances whlc)r·ttlay be'paid tG every, director for 
attending any meeting of the Board; 
(b) qualifications for being appointed. as the General Manager; 10 
(c) duties, conduct, salaries and allOWllnces and condttrbM of 
service of General Manager and ot1\er omeers and em~loy~s of tae 
Corporation; 
(d) establi~hment and mBi!\'\:erta~ of· p~ovi\ient' and other 
benefit funds for th~ empi'Oy'ees' of the Corporation; and IS 
(e) any other matter which is, or may be, necessary ·for the effi-
cient conduct of the affairs of the Corporation. 
THE SCHEDULE 
(See seetton 31) 
DEcLARATION OF FIDELITY AND SECRECY 
I, .................................. , do hereby declare tha t I will 
20 
faithfully, truly and to the best of my judgment, skill and ability, exe-
cute and perform the duties required of me as a director, officer or em-
pl'6yee (as t'he case may be) of the NeWspaper Finance Corporation and 
which properly relate to any office or position in the said Corporation 25 
held by me. 
I further declare that I will not communicate or allow to be communi-
cated to any person not legally entitled triereto any information relating 
to the affairs of the Corporation nor will I allow any such person to ins-
pect or have access to any books or documents belonging. to or in the 30 
posseSSion of the Corporation and relating· to the business of the 
Corporation. 
~ture ........... ........ . 
Signed before me. 
Date ....... .............. . 

STATElmNT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
One ot the main diftleultiN in the way of the g,t'dwth aad development 
ofsmBlIandmedium newspapers on healthy lines is the lac]Q of adequate 
ftbaniles. The Enquiry Committee' on Small Newspapers, which went 
into this question, recommended the setting up ,of a ftneaee.eoJporation 
by the Government of India to provide credit. facilities to small and 
medium newspapers for purchasing printing machinery, newsprint; build-
ings, etc. The Press Council have also advised that the long-term solu-
tion for the problem, pased by newspapers which are aiUngflnanciaIly, 
would' be ,for Government to form' a ftnanee COlIpOflaUou. with 81\ inde-
Pendent Board wiih power to help such newspapel's" 
2. III furtheroce of the above objective, it has, been. decided to set up 
a, Newspaper Finance Corporation to extend financial assistance in the 
. snape of .int8l'est bearing loans to small and mediulU newspapers without, 
in any way, attempting to interfere with the freedom of. the Press .. TIle 
Bill seeks to establish such a Corporation. " 
SATYA NAHA¥MN SINHA. 
Ntw D£I:m; 
The 20th NO'Vember, 1970. 
11 ':" '" "'!"Jr" • 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
The Bill contemplates the setting up of a Newspaper Finance Cor-
poration to extend financial assistance in the shape of loans, carrying 
interest to newspapers published daily, bi-weekly, tri-weekly or weekly, 
whose average circulation does not exceed 50,000 copies. The total 
(equity) capital of the Corporation will be Rs. 3 crores, to be invested 
entirely by Government, out of which Rs. 1 crore will be initially 
invested (OOle clause 5). 
2. Central Government will also grant loans to the Corporation, as may 
be found necessary from time to time; the total amount af such loans will 
not exceed Rs. 3 crores at any point of time (vide clause 19). 
3. The investment by Government in the Equity Capital Qf the Cor-
poration and the grant by Government of Loans to the Corporation, will 
be made alternately, and according to the amounts required from time 
to time. After the initial investment by Government to the Corporation 
will be in the shape of loans till the next Rs. 1 crore is reached. There-
after payments will be in the shape of Equity Capital till the next RB. 1 
crore is reached; and so on. 
4. Provision has been made in the Bill for the appointment of a Chair-
man, 4 Directors and a General Manager who will be provided with the 
necessary staff to enable the Corporation to discharge its functions effi-
ciently and expeditiously. 
5. The Expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India on account 
of the Corporation is estimated to be Rs. 6 cfores for being invested in 
Equity Capital and loans (Rs. 3 crores in Equity and Rs. 3 crores in 
Loans) (vide clauses 5 and 19). It is estimated that the recurring ex-
i>enditure to be incurred by the Corporation from its own income on pay 
and allowances, fees of Directors, travelling allowances, miscellaneous 
recurring contingent charges, etc., would be of the order of as. 4 lakhs, 
it will also have to incur Iln expenditure of the order of Rs. 50,000 initially 
for office equipment, furniture, typewriters, etc., to be met f~'om its 
income. No provision has been made in Budget Estimates 1970-71 for 
any payments in respect of this Cprporation (vide clause 14). 
13 " 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 37 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules 
to carry out the provisions of the Bill, when enacted. The matters in 
respect of whicn such rules may be made, inter alia, relate to the condi-
tions of service of the Chairman and the other Directors of the Board 
of the Newspaper Finance Corporation, rules ot procedure with regard 
to the transaction of busineis at the meetings of the Board, the manner 
in which the value of the security offered for obtaining a loan from the 
Corporation is to be ascertained, procedure for determining the amount 
of loan due to the Corporation from a small or medium newspaper and 
the form and the manner in which the balance-sheet and accounts of the 
Corporation shall be prepared and maintained. Sub-clause (3) of this 
clause provides that every rule made by the Central Government shall be 
laid before Parliament and shall be subject to modification by Parliament. 
2. Clause 38 of the Bill empowers the Board to make regulations, not 
inconsistent with the proviSiOns of the Act and the rules made there-
under, for the purpose of giving effect to the proVisions of the Bill. Such 
regulations may provide, inter alia, for the fees and allowances which 
may be paid to every director of the Board for attending any meeting 
of the Board, qualifications for being appointed as the General Manager, 
duties, conduct, salaries and allowances and conditions of ser.vice of 
General Manager and other officers and employees of the Corporation 
and for the establishment and maintenance of provident and other benefit 
funds for the employees of the Corporation. 
3. The matters in respect of which rules or regulations may be made 
are generally matters of procedure and administrative detail and it is' 
hardly practicable to provide for them in the Bill itself. The delegation 
of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character. 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the establishment of a "Newspaper Fi~e Corporation 
for l-endering financialllssistance to s:naI1md-medium newspapers 
and for matters connected therewith or incidenmlthereto . 
. 
(Shri Satya Narayan Sinha, Mint"ster of Information &> Broadcasting 
and Com1fllmications). 