1
THE  CABLE  TELEVISION  NETWORKS  (REGULATION)
SECOND  AMENDMENT   BILL,  2011
A
BILL
further to amend the Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Act, 1995.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-second Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  ( 1) This Act may be called the Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Second
Amendment  Act, 2011.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.  In the Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Act, 1995 (hereinafter referred to as
the principal Act), after section 5, the following section shall be inserted, namely:—
"5A. (1) No cable operator shall carry or include in his cable service any satellite
or terrestrial television broadcast or channel unless such broadcast or channel has
been—
(a) registered with, or permitted by, the Central Government for being
viewed within the territory of India, in accordance with the policy guidelines for
downlinking of television channels as may be specified by the Central Government
from time to time; or
Short title
and
commencement.
Insertion of
new section
5A.
Prohibition on
re-transmission
of unregistered
channels.
7 of 1995.
Bill No. 126 of 2011
5
10
15
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(b) approved by the Central Government for being viewed within the
territory of India; or
(c) allowed in accordance with the provisions of any Central Act or rules
made thereunder for being viewed within the territory of India.
(2) The provision contained in sub-section (1) shall be applicable irrespective of
the manner of reception of such satellite or terrestrial television broadcast or channel,
as the case may be, by the cable operator.".
3.  In section 11 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the word, figures and letter
"section 3, 4A, 5", the word, figures and letters "section 3, 4A, 5, 5A" shall be substituted.
4.  In section 16 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section (1),—
(i) in clause ( a), for the words "one thousand rupees", the words "one
lakh rupees" shall be substituted;
(ii) in clause (b), for the words "five thousand rupees", the words "three
lakh rupees" shall be substituted;
(b) after clause ( b), as so amended, the following proviso shall be inserted,
namely:—
"Provided that in case of contravention of the provisions of section 5A,
the fine for the first offence shall not be less than fifty thousand rupees and for
the second or any subsequent offence shall not be less than one lakh rupees.";
(c) in sub-section (2), for the word, figure and letter "section 4A", the words,
figures and letters "section 4A or section 5A" shall be substituted.
Amendment
of section 11.
Amendment
of section 16.
5
10
15
20

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Act, 1995 was enacted for the purpose of
regulating the operations of cable television networks in the country so as to bring uniformity
in their operations, avoid undesirable programmes from being made available to viewers as
well as to enable the optimal exploitation of  the technology which had the potential of
making available to the subscribers a vast pool of information and entertainment.
2. It has come to the notice of the Central Government that instances of illegal
transmission or re-transmission of unregistered channels by cable operators in different
parts of the country take place as a result of the availability of signals of foreign television
channels via satellite. There have also been instances of illegal carriage of terrestrial channels
by cable operators in some border areas of the country. Several complaints have been
received by the Central Government against cable operators showing illegal channels which
have neither been permitted to uplink from India nor permitted or registered to downlink into
India, as per the Uplinking and Downlinking Guidelines. The contents of some of these
channels are found to be not conducive to the security environment of the country and may
pose a potential threat to the peace and security of the country. It is, therefore, considered
necessary to bring in necessary amendments in the Cable Television Networks (Regulation)
Act, 1995 to make its provisions more stringent and also to enhance the  punishment to have
necessary deterrent effect.
3. The Bill, inter alia, proposes to amend the aforesaid Act so as to—
(i) prohibit transmission or re-transmission of unregistered channels irrespective
of the manner of reception of such satellite or terrestrial television broadcast or channel
by any cable operator;
(ii) enhance the punishment provided for contravention of the provisions of the
Act as provided in section 16 thereof—
(a) from imprisonment for a term of two years or with fine which may
extend to one thousand rupees or with both, as at present for the commission of
the first offence, to imprisonment for a term of two years or with fine which may
extend to one lakh rupees or with both;
(b) imprisonment for a term of five years and with fine which may extend to
five thousand rupees or with both, as at present for the commission of the
subsequent offence, to imprisonment for a term of five years and with fine which
may extend to three lakh rupees or with both.
4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
N
EW DELHI; AMBIKA SONI.
The 7th December,  2011.
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE CABLE TELEVISION NETWORKS (REGULATION) ACT, 1995
(7 OF 1995)
*****
CHAPTER III
SEIZURE AND CONFISCATION OF CERTAIN EQUIPMENT
11. (1) If any authorised officer has reason to believe that the provisions of section
3, 4A, 5, 6 or 8 have been or are being contravened by any cable operator, he may seize the
equipment being used by such cable operator for operating the cable television network.
*****
CHAPTER IV
O
FFENCES AND PENALTIES
16. (1) Whoever contravenes any of the provisions of this Act shall be punishable,—
(a) for the first offence, with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two
years or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees or with both;
(b) for every subsequent offence, with imprisonment for a term which may extend
to five years and with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, the
contravention of section 4A shall be a cognizable offence under this section.
*****
Power to seize
equipment
used for
operating the
cable
television
network.
Punishment
for
contravention
of provisions
of this Act.
2 of 1974.
4

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Act, 1995.
————
(Smt. Ambika Soni, Minister of Information and Broadcasting )
GMGIPMRND—3095LS(S3)—09-12-2011.