Short title.
             Aඌ ංඇඍඋඈൽඎർൾൽ ංඇ Lඈ඄ Sൺൻඁൺ
Bill No. 126 of 2022
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022
By
Aൽඏ. Dൾൺඇ Kඎඋංൺ඄ඈඌൾ, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
Bൾ it enacted by the Parliament in the Seventy-third year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 
1.  This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2022.
2.  In the Tenth Schedule to the Constitution,— 
(a) In paragraph 2, in sub-paragraph (1) for the words “shall be disqualified for 
being a member”, the words “shall cease to be a member” shall be substituted; and
(b) in paragraph 4, in sub-paragraph (2) for the words “not less than two-thirds”, the 
words “not less than ninety per cent.” shall be substituted.
Amendment 
of the Tenth 
Schedule.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS  AND REASONS
The Tenth Schedule to the Constitution popularly known as Anti-Defection Law was 
added to the Constitution by the Constitution (Fifty-second Amendment) Act, 1985.
The 52nd Amendment to the Constitution was introduced to herald an era of healthy 
parliamentary democracy and sought to put an end to the scourge of political defections that 
were plaguing our body politic. It was indeed successful in creating a punitive atmosphere 
with respect to defections. In many ways, this has led to reduction in defections.
However, we see that many provisions of this schedule is being misused by certain 
political actors to subvert the political process and undermine the constitution of our country. 
If we look at recent history, we will see legislators switched sides in hordes and this have 
led to the fall of many elected legitimate Governments in the country. Through this Bill,
I seek to further strengthen the safeguards against mass defections. Most of these defection 
happened by misusing the provision for party mergers. Ostensibly, legislators are chosen in 
such a way to meet this “two-thirds” criteria. It is imperative that we make this number as 
high as possible as to prevent its misuse.
Hence this Bill.
        Nൾඐ Dൾඅඁං;                                                                                 DEAN  KURIAKOSE
     4 July, 2022

ANNEXURE
Eඑඍඋൺർඍඌ ൿඋඈආ ඍඁൾ Cඈඇඌඍංඍඎඍංඈඇ ඈൿ Iඇൽංൺ
*   *   *   *
[TENTH SCHEDULE]
[Articles 102(2) and 191(2)]
Provisions as to disqualification on ground of defection
2. (1) Subject to the provisions of paragraphs 4 and 5, a member of a House belonging 
to any political party shall be disqualified for being a member of the House— 
(a) if he has voluntarily given up his membership of such political party; or 
(b) if he votes or abstains from voting in such House contrary to any direction 
issued by the political party to which he belongs or by any person or authority 
authorised by it in this behalf, without obtaining, in either case, the prior permission 
of such political party, person or authority and such voting or abstention has not been 
condoned by such political party, person or authority within fifteen days from the date 
of such voting or abstention. 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-paragraph,— 
(a) an elected member of a House shall be deemed to belong to the political party, 
if any, by which he was set up as a candidate for election as such member; 
(b) a nominated member of a House shall,— 
(i) where he is a member of any political party on the date of his nomination 
as such member, be deemed to belong to such political party;
(ii) in any other case, be deemed to belong to the political party of which 
he becomes, or, as the case may be, first becomes, a member before the expiry 
of six months from the date on which he takes his seat after complying with the 
requirements of article 99 or, as the case may be, article 188.
*   *   *   *
4. (1)          *                                  *                             *                           *
    (2) For the purposes of sub-paragraph (1) of this paragraph, the merger of the original 
political party of a member of a House shall be deemed to have taken place if, and only if, 
not less than two-thirds of the members of the legislature party concerned have agreed to 
such merger.
*   *   *   *.

LOK SABHA
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India
(Adv. Dean Kuriakose, M.P .) 