As INTRODUCED IN LOJ{ SABHA ON 
t1,(' .. _'"" 
Ut~ f 
•• 
Bill No. 126 of INZ 
THF, INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT BANK OF INDIA (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 1982 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Industrial Development Bank of India 
Act, 1964. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-third Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
I. This Act may be called the Indus~rial Development Bank of India Short 
(Amendment) Act, 1982. title. 
18 of 1964. 5 2. JlI lleetion " af the Industrial Deve)op~ent Bank 01 India Act, 1164, Amend .. 
. in die provllo .... Ute .. greis ((two hundred oores of rupees'~, the words ment of 
t'lft huD4I.tH frons of rupees" ,,'han he substituted. section 4. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Under section 4 of the Industrial Development Bank of India Act, 1964, 
the authorised capital of the Bank may be increa8e!d by the Central Gov-
ernment by notification up to two hundred crores of rupees. A notification 
has accordingly been issued by the Central Government on the 12th May, 
1980, increasing the authorised capital to two hundred crores of rupees 
and the same now stands fully subscribed. Further subscription to the 
capital of the Development Bank is, therefore, not possible unless section 
4 of the Act is suitably amended. 
2. The operations of the Bank have been growing at the rate of 32 per 
cent. per year since 1976-77 and are expected to grow by over 20 per cent. 
in the next ~e years .. At present, the debt-equity ratio of the Dev:elop-
ment Bank is in the range of 12:1. In a situation where the Development 
Bank has to take recourse to further borrowings to augment its resources; 
the imbalance in its debt-equity ratio can be a serious' constraint. In view 
of the normal financial principles combined with the rapidly expanding 
operations of the Development (Bank, it has become necessary to take 
steps to set right the imbalance in the deb~uity ratio by enhancing its 
share capital. It is, therefore, proposed to amend the Act t9 enable the 
Central Government by notification to increase the authorised capital of 
the Bank from the present limi, of two hundred crores; of rupees to five 
hundred crores of rupees. 
3. The Bill seeks to achieve the above object. 
NEW DELHI; PRANAB MUKHERJEE 
The 24th September, 1982 . 
. , . 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION. UNDER ARTICLE 117. OF 
THE CONSTITUTION OF tNDIA 
[Copy of letter No. 10(41) /IF-I/82, dated the 5th October, 1982 from 
Shri Pranab Kumar Mukherjee, Minister of Finance to the Secretary, 
Lok Sabha.] 
The President having been informed of the subject matter of the pro-
!lOsed Bill, recommends under clauses (1) and (3) of article 117 of .. the 
Constitu.tion, the introduction of the Industrial Development Bank' of 
India (Amendment) Bill, 1982, in Lok Sabha and alSo recGmmentis to' 
Lok Sabha the consideration of the Bill. 
The above said recommendation was made by the President on the 
29th September, 1982. 
~ .. ,,: 
. ~ \ . . -.~-." 
• "'i .",. I' i. • '~ ~ , ~ ' .... 

fINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to empower the Central Government· to 
increase the limit of the authorised capital of' the Industrial Development 
Bank of India from two hundred crores of rupeesJto five hundred crores . 
of rupees by notification from time to time. At present, the authorised 
capital of the Industrial Development ~ank of India is rupees two., hundred 
crores. The authorised; capital has been fully subscribed. The proposed 
amendment woutd enable the Central Government to fix the authorised 
capital of the Industrial Development Bank of India by notiflcationftom 
time to time 'taking into accouiltthe Minimum requirements, within:the 
prescribed ~imit of five hundred crores of rupees. The Central Govern· 
ment alone is empowered to subscribe to the share capital of the Industrial 
Development Bank of India. The Central Government will, therefore, 
be required to subscribe to the capital of the Industrial Development 
Bank of India to the extent of the enhanced amount of authorised capital 
as may be fixed by notification from time to time. After~the present limit 
of the authorised capital of two hundred crores of rupees is enhanced to 
rupees five hundred cror~s by the proposed amendment, an additional 
amount of rupees three hundred crores would be subscribed by the Central 
Government during the following years. According to the present indica-
tions, the additional amount of rupees three hundred crores can be ex-
pected to be subscribed during the course of the next five years at an 
average rate of rupees Sixty crores annually. This would be a non· 
recurring expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. The outgo 
of funds would be to some extent offset/by the profit transferred annually 
by the IDBI to the Government of India. In 1981-82, the Industrial 
Development Bank of India transferred an amount of Rs. 7.31 crares to 
the Government of India. 
2. The Bill would not involve any other recurring or non-recurring 
expenditure. . 
3 

Authoris_ 
ed capital. 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACT FROM THE INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT BAM OF INDIA Acr, 1964 
(18 OF 1964) 
... • • • • 
4. The authorised capital of the De,velopment Bank shall be one 
hundred crores of rupees: 
• 
Provided that the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Oftlc:ial Gazette, increase the said capital up to two hundred crores of 
rupees. 
• ... • ... • • 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Industrial Development Bank of India Act, 1964. 
(Shri .PrcItacIb KUmGr Mukherjee, 
Ifmtlte7' of Finonce.) 