THE  SPECIAL FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO THE STATE OF
UTTARAKHAND BILL,  2009
By
SHRI K.C. SINGH 'BABA', M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for special financial assistance to the State of Uttarakhand for the
purpose of promoting the welfare of Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes
and Other Backward Sections of People and for the development,
exploitation and proper utilization of its resources.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixtieth Year of Republic of India as follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Special Financial Assistance to the State of Uttarakhand
Act, 2009.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commence-
ment.
Bill No.  126 of  2009
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2. There shall be paid such sums of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of India,
every year, as Parliament may by due appropriation provide, as special financial assistance
to the State of Uttarakhand to meet the costs of such schemes of development, as may be
undertaken by the State with the approval of the Government of India for the purpose of
Promoting the welfare of Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Sections
of people or for the development, proper utilization and exploitation of the resources in the
State.
3. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law to be made by Parliament or for the time being in force.
2
Act not in
derogation of
other law.
Special
financial
assistance to
the State of
Uttarakhand.
5

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Having been part of the erstwhile State of Uttar Pradesh, the region known as
Uttarakhand remained socially and economically backward mainly because it was found
impracticable to administer this region from the far away capital at Lucknow. The low pace of
development in the region resulted in the agitation by the people of the region for a  separate
State. Ultimately, the Government of India respected the wishes of the people of the region
and a new State of Uttarakhand was created. The State was also subsequently granted the
special category status.
The State of Uttarakhand is socially and economically backward. Problems of poverty,
unemployment, illiteracy as well as measures for proper utilization of resources, welfare of
weaker sections in the region and for initiating new development schemes are required to be
addressed urgently and in a time bound manner. It is, therefore, necessary that the Central
Government should provide some special financial assistance to the State of Uttarakhand for
its all-round development including the welfare of weaker sections and for the development
and exploitation of its vast resources. Such a step of providing financial assistance to this
new born State would go a long way in building this nation more and more strong.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; K.C. SINGH 'BABA'
November 5, 2009.
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides that there shall be paid such sums of moneys out of the
Consolidated Fund of India, every year, as Parliament  may by due appropriation provide, as
special financial assistance to the State of Uttarakhand to meet the costs of such schemes of
development, as may be undertaken by the State with the approval of the Government of
India.
The Bill, therefore, on enactment, will involve expenditure out of the Consolidated
Fund of India for providing special financial assistance to the State of Uttarakhand. As the
sums of moneys which will be given to the State of Uttarakhand as special financial assistance
by appropriation by law made by Parliament will be known only after the welfare schemes to
be implemented by the State Government with the approval of Government of India are
identified, it is not possible to give the estimates of recurring expenditure, which would be
involved out of the Consolidated Fund of India at this stage.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be incurred from the Consolidated Fund of
India.
4

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for special financial assistance to the State of Uttarakhand for the
purpose of promoting the welfare of Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes
and Other Backward Sections of People and for the development,
exploitation and proper utilization of its resources.
————
(Shri K.C. Singh 'Baba', M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—5023LS(S5)—08-12-2009.