1
Short title
and
commencement.
Bill No. 127 of  2015
THE  CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015
By
SHRI J. C. DIVAKAR REDDY, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2015.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. After article 112 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted,
namely:—
“112A. Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the sums required to
meet expenditure proposed to be incurred on freebies shall not be more than ten per cent.
of the total sums required to meet expenditure, other than the expenditure charged
upon the Consolidated Fund of India, proposed to be made from the Consolidated
Fund of India in respect of any financial year.”
Insertion of
new article
112A.
Ceiling on
sums to be
incurred on
freebies by
the Central
Government.
5
10
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
Explanation.—In this article, the expression 'freebie' does not include expenditure
proposed to be made from the Consolidated Fund of India in respect of subsidies or other
monetary concessions to be given to the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes, the
Socially and Educationally Backward Classes of citizens and the people living below the
poverty line or proposed to be made for socio-economic development of people.
3.  After article 202 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted,
namely:—
“202A. Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the sums required to
meet expenditure proposed to be incurred on freebies shall not be more than ten per cent.
of the total sums required to meet expenditure, other than the expenditure charged
upon the Consolidated Fund of a State, proposed to be made from the Consolidated
Fund of a State in respect of any financial year.”
Explanation.—In this article, the expression 'freebie' does not include expenditure
proposed to be made from the Consolidated Fund of a State in respect of subsidies or other
monetary concessions to be given to the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes, the
Socially and Educationally Backward Classes of citizens and the people living below the
poverty line or proposed to be made for socio-economic development of people.
Insertion of
new article
202A.
Ceiling on
sums to be
incurred on
freebies by
the State
Government.
5
10
15

3
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Of late, it has become a practice among political parties to promise a lot of freebies in
their election manifestoes and try to fulfil these promises at the cost of overall economic
interests of the country. No doubt that the Directive Principles of the State Policy in our
Constitution aim to establish a social and economic democracy through a welfare State, but
it cannot be done at the cost of common good or to the determinant of economy. A welfare
State requires a sound socio-economic development of the nation as a whole for its continued
existence.
It is worth to draw attention to the many such schemes involving distribution of
freebies like a gift for couple being married, Shadi Mubarak Scheme, Mangal Sutras, T.V. and
provision of Bicycles, etc.
The freebies are avoidable burden on the exchequer and a limit needs to be put to such
expenditure. It is indisputable that for the upliftment of the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled
Tribes, the Socially and Educationally Backward Classes of citizens and the people living
below the poverty line, monetary concessions like reduced education fee or free education,
reduced examination fee, subsidized food, etc. should be made available to them. However, at
the same time, giving of Laptops, Mangal Sutras and Bicycles, etc. to the citizens just to fulfil
the promises made during election is not justifiable under the Constitution in the name of
welfare measures. It is a wasteful avoidable expenditure. Money spent on freebies is hampering
development work because the same money can be utilized on developmental works. It is
therefore proposed that during any financial year, such expenditure shall not be more than
ten per cent. of the total expenditure of the Central or a State Government.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; J.C. DIVAKAR  REDDY
April 7, 2015.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of  India.
————
(Shri J.C. Divakar Reddy , M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—465LS(S3)—30-04-2015.