THE BANKING SERVICE COMHISSIO.: (REPEAL) BILL, 1977
rTobe/As introduced in Lok Sabha 7
1• Page 5, line 5,-
i2.! "sub-section" re,ad "sub-clause"
NEW DELHI;
November 15, 1977
Kartika 24,1899 (Saka)


42 of 1975. 
.\ 
As nmODtJCID IN LoK SABRA oN 
'8 NOv \911 
BIll No. 1ft of 1811 
.. ,I('; ... i "",. 9i11 ... 
THE ~ANKING SERVICE COMMISSION (BEPEAL) BILL, ~a77 
• BIJJL 
1: to repeal the Banking' Service CommiBrion. Act, wts:· 
.Bs it .en-.eted .byPariiunant in ,the 'Fw~ntB~th. :V .. ,0Lthe 
Republic of India as follows:-
" 
l . .(1), 'mUs Act mqbe ·ealhdtbe BukiQg S.Rief!.,~mi8sioD Short title 
~ .AIlt." 1.7-7. and com-
5 (2) "It shall . be deemed to have come into force on the 19th da, of 
mence-
ment. 
10 
September, 1977. ' 
.2. I In ,tQt; ~ct. \lnl~", ~lut CQutex't otherw'iare' ,r~w.~,~ 
~a) "appoated .day" ,means :the ,18th .da, ,Of8eptamber~ J87F1; 
(h,) , ''BanJd~~. Service Commi .. ion" means the Bank1ri~ Service 
CQ~miQion es~a:bUshed under ",ectfon 3 of 1he 1)anld~g se~e Com-
~ias1oil Act, Ijf,(S.' ,III., . " , ,. 
3. On the appointed day, the Banking Service Commission Act, 1975, 
sMU s~ :rep1raled and the B~ Service.C~n sAalJ. ,st-.nd 
dil8Qlved. 
Deftnitions. 
Repeal Of 
A4:t .42 of 
19'115 ,ltPa 
1be d!Uolu. 
tion of the 
Banking 
Service 
Commil. 
dcm. 

CoD!eCluen~ 
tla1 provi-
lions. 
,. On the dissolution of the Banking SerVice Comntission,"":' 
(4) (i) the person appointed as the Chairman of the Bankirig 
Service Commission; and . 
(ii) every other person appointed by the Banking Service Com-
mission. 
and holding office as such immediately before thie appointed day 
shall vacate their respective offices and no such Chairman or other 
person shall be entitled. to claim any compensation for the premature 
termination of the term of his oftice or of any contract of service; 
(b) any proceeding of whatever nature pending before the 10 
Banking Service Commission immediately before the appointed day 
shall stand terminated; 
(c) the balance of all monies (including any fee) received by, or 
advanCed to, the Banking Service Commission and not spent by it 
befOll"e the appointed day Qh:all, on the appointed day, stand trans- IS 
ferred to, and shall vest in, the Central Government and shall be 
utilised for rthe purposes of clauses ~e) and (/); 
(d), all property of whatever kind owned by, or vested. in, the 
Banking Service Commission immediately before the appointed. day, 
shall, on the appointed day, stand transferred to, and Shall vest in, 20 
the Central Government; 
(e). all liabilities and obligations of wha1iever kind incurred by 
the ~g Service Commission and subsisting immediately before 
·the appdinted day shall, on and from the appoin:ted day, 00 deemed 
to be thie liabilities or obligations, as the case may be, of the Central 25 
Government; and any proceeding or cause of action, pending or exist-
ing immediately before the appointed day by or aaainst the Banking 
Service Commission in relation to such liability or dbligation may, 
. : as from thlal aj)pOhltad. day, be continued or enforced by or against 
the Central Government. 30 
El1'planation.~For the purposes of this cla\Ule, "Uability" does :iwt 
include any liability for any money advanced 10 the Banking·Service 
Commission under sub-section (,3) of section 19 of the Banking Ser .. 
vice Commission Act, 1975; 42 01 1975. 
(1) . all moni~ vested in ~ Central, povemment un~ clawJe 35 
(c) sbtall, after deducting the amount incu,rred for discharging the 
Ua'bilities and obligatiOns under daUle (e), be refunded by the Cen-
tral Government to each public sector bank. as defined in clause (h) 
of secUQIl 2 of t~ Banlwig Service Commission Act, 1975, in pro- 42 of 1975. 
portion to the 'amount advanced. by such public sectqr bank to the 40 
Banking Servk:e Commission under 9Ub-section (3) of section 19 of 
that Act. • 
s. (1) 'the BaJ1kihg Service Comntission (Repeat, Ordinance, 1977. 
is hereby repealed. . , 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything dane or any action taken 4' 
UDder the Ordinance so repealed shall be deemed to have been done or 
taken under the corresponding proviSions of this Act. 
10 of 19'71. 

· ... ' 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
(The Banldn:g S.rvice COlIlIIliBsion Act, 1975, was enacted with a view 
to providing for the establishment of a Commission for the selection of 
personnel far appointment to services and posts in public sector banks. 
Although the Banking Service Commission was establisbed late in Feb-
ruary, 1977, it had not started actual recruitment of personnel for public 
sectOf' bankS. The need· for such a Commission was reviewed and it was 
felt that a centralised system of recruitment in banks, as envisa~ by 
that Act, was likely to interfere with the autonomy and flexibility in 
the functioning of the public sector banks and that having regard to the 
large number of persons to be recruited each year, such a system, even 
with regional offices, was likely to make the recruitment process 
unwieldy and' cumbersome. The object of attaining uniformity, 1mpar~ 
tiality and objectivity in selection procedures continues. to be Important, 
and it was felt that this could be better achieved if suitable guidtelines 
were issued by the Central. Government to the banks and a machinery 
established which will funotion in a d~entralised manner and which 
WliU also be run by the bankst themselves. ~t was, therefore, decided 
to repeal the Banking Service Commission Act, 1975, and to dissolve the 
Banking Service CommisBion, with suitable saving proVisions. The 
Banking Service Commisfion (Repeal) Ordinance, urn, was accordingly 
promulgated ·on the 19th September, 1977. The Bill seeks to replace 
the Ordinance. 
NEW DELHI; H. M.PATEL. 
The 5th November, 1977. 

FINANCIAL MD(ORANDUM 
8u1:rcla\lle~ (c) and., td) of clause 4 of the Bill p!l'cwide that ~the bal-
ance of all monies received by, or advanced to. ,the Banking Service 
Camminionand not spent by it as well as all property of wbatever kbld 
olll,uld by, or veated in, the -Commission ,shall 8t.~ transfel'Qed to, aDd 
shall \llest in, the Central Govemment. The total amount of thebalanoe 
money so tranfierred to the C-entral Government is RI. 1,55,390.86. 
2. Under sub.,clause (e) of clause 4 of the BUI all liabilities and. 
o.bliga~i~ of whatever kind inc:urred by the Banking Service COmrnl,," 
siop and subsisting shall be deemed to be the liabilities or obligations 
of the Central Gover.nment. The knownliabi1iti~ and obligat~onb 
assumed by the Central :Government under this sub-cla~e work up to 
RI. 30,000/-. 
8. Under sub-clause (f) of clause 4 of the Bill, all monies vested in 
theCentt'al Government under sub-clause (c) at that clause shall, after 
deducting the amount incu':red for discharging the UabUities and obliga-
tions under sub-clause (e) of that clause, be refunded by the 'Central 
Govel'llment to each public sector bank ,in proportion to >the &moDDtad-
vaneed by such public sector bank to the Banking Se!'vice ~ommission 
under sub-section (3) of sectlon 19 ,of the Banldng Service 'Commission 
Act, 1975. The total amount 80 required to be refunded 110 public sector 
banks is likely to be Rs. 7,35,390.66. 
4. The Bill if enacted and brought into operation is not likely to 
involve any recurring or non-recurring expenditure from the Conso-
lidated Fund of India. 
.' .. 

Memorandum regtlrding modification contained in the Bill to replace the 
Banking Service Commission (Repeal) Ordinance, 1977. 
The Bill closely follows the Ordinance with a slight modification 
explained below. 
2. In sUb-.. ~~~) of clause 4 of the Bill, the words, brackets and 
letters Oland shall be utilised for the purposes of clauses (e) and (f)" 
have been inserted at the end. This modification is of a clariflcatory 
nature. 
I 
• 

-', 
'·1 ~: 
,'- I 
>.", .!' 
"/' ,.~ I 
LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to repeal the Banking Service Commission Act, 1975. 
• 
(Shri H. M. Patel, Minister of Finance and Revenue and Banking.) 