As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABRA ON 
Bill No. 127 of 1982 
THE ANDHRA SCIENTIFIC~ COMPANY LIMITED (ACQUISITION 
AND TRANSFER OF UNDERTAKINGS) BILL, 1982 
CLAUSES 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
1. Short title and commencement. 
2. Definitions. 
CHAPTER II 
ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF THE COMPNAY 
3. Transfer to, and vesting in, the Centra\ Government of the 
undertakings of the Company. 
4. General effect of vesting. I 
5. Company to be liable for certain prior liabilities. 
6. Power of CentraJ Gov~ent to direct vesting of the undertakings 
of the Company in a Government company. 
CHAPrER III 
PAYMENT OF AMOUNTS 
7. Payment of amount. 
8. Payment of further amounts. 
CHAPTER IV 
MANAGEMENT, ETC., OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF THE COMPANY 
Management, etc., of the und.ertakings of the Company. .. 9. 
10. Duty of pen$ons in charge of management of the undertakings of 
the Company to deliver all assets, etc. 
11. 
12. 
Duty of persons to account for assets, etc., in their possesSion. 
Accounts and audit. 
CHAPTER V 
PROVISIONS RELATING TO THE EMPLOYEES OF THE COMPANY 
13. Continuance of employees. 
14. Provident fund and other funds. 
CHAPTER VI' 
COMMISSIONER OF PAYMENTS 
15. Appointment of Commissioner of Payments. 
16. payment by Central Government to the CorYimissioner. 
-, 

'eli) 
CLAUSES 
17. Certain powers of the Central Government or Government 
company. 
18. Claims to be made to the Commissioner. 
19. Priority of claims. 
20. Examination of claims. 
21. Admission or rejection of claims. 
22. Disbursement of money by the Commissioner. 
23. Disbursement of amounts to the Company. 
24. Undisbursed or unclaimed amount to be deposited with the 
general revenue account. 
CHAPTBR VII 
MISCELLANEOUS 
t \ 
25. Act to have overriding effect. 
26. Contracts to cease to have effect unless ratified by Centr81 Gov-
ernment or ,Government cotnpany. 
27. Penalties. 
28. Offences by companies. 
29. Protection of action taken in good faith. 
30. Delegation of powers. 
31. Power to make rules. 
32. Power to remove diftlculties. 
THE SCHEDULE. .., .. 

Bill No. 127 of 1882 
THE ANDHRA SCIENTIFIC COMPANY LlMITED (ACQUISI~ON 
AND TRANSFER OF UNDERTAKINGS) BILL, 1982 ' 
A 
BILL 
to provide jCYl'the acquisi'tion and transjer oj the undertakings of the 
Andhra Scientific Company Limited, with tI view to securing the 
proper ma~nt oj such undert4lcings so· tIS to subserve the 
interests Of the general public by ensuring the continuity Of produc-
tion O'J scientific instruments which tire vitaJ to the needi of the 
country tlnd jor matters connected therewith or incic1en.ttll thereto. 
WH!lRKAS the Andhra Scientific Company Limited had been engaged in 
the manufacture and production of artic1er. mentioned in the First 
65 of liS1. Schedule to the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951, 
namely. scientific instruments; 
AND WHEREAS the management of the undertakings of the Andhra 
5 Scientific Company Limited was taken over by the Central Governmeni 
,under lection IBM of the Industries (Development and Regulation) 
65 of 1951. Act, 1951; .:0' 
AND WHEREAS it is necessary to acquire the undertakings of the Andhra 
IO Scientific Company Limited to ensure that the interests of the general 
public are served by the continuance, by the undertakings of the 
Company, of the production of the aforesaid uticles which are vital to 
the needs of the country; 
BE it enacted. by Parliament in the Thirty-third Year of the Republic 
15 of India as followl:-
CHAPTER I 
PaEl.IM:INAllY 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Andhri Scientific Company Limited Sho.t 
(Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakitngs) Act, 1982. title 
and 
com-
meoc .. 
meat. 

Deftni-
tiona. 
Trans-
fer to, 
and 
vesting 
in the 
Central 
GoYern-
mental 
the 
under-
takings 
otthe 
Company. 
General 
effect. 
of vesting. 
2 
(2) The provisions of sections 27 and 28 shall come into force at once 
and the rem.aming provislOns of l.hls Act shall De cleeme<1 to have come 
1nto force on the 1st day' 01 JUly, 1981. 
2. In· this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "appointed day" means the 1st day of JUly, H,S1; 
.(b). "Commissioner" means the Gommissloner of .t>ayments 
appomted Under sectlon 1~; 
.(c) "Company" means the Andhra Scientific Company J..4nited. 
5 
a company wlthm the meaning of the Companies Act, 1956, and having 1 of 1956. 
its regIstered olfice at Machilipatnam in the State of Andhra 10 
Pradesh; 
(d) "Custodian" means the Custodian appointed under sut>-
section (~) ot section 9 1.0 take over, or carryon, the management of 
the Company; • --..J 
(e) "notification" means a notification published in the OJlicial 15 
Gazette; . 
(f) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this 
Act; 
(g) "specified date", in relation to any provision of this Act, 
means SUCh date as the Central Government may, by notification, 20 
specify for the purposes of that provision and different dates may 
be specified. for difterent provisions of this Act; 
(h) "the Government . company " means the Government com-
pany in w hich t~ undertakings of the Company' are directea to 
vest under sub-section (1) of section 6; . . !is 
(i) words and expressions used here.in and not deftned but 
defined in the Companies Act, 1956, shall have the meailings, reapec- 1 of 1956. 
tively, assigned to them in that Act. 
CHAPTER'II 
,ACQUISmON AND TRANsFEk OF THE UNDI2lTAKlNGS OF THE COMPANY 30 
3. On the appointed day, the undertakings of .the Company, and the 
right, title and interest of the Company in'relation to its undertakin,gs, 
ahall, by virtue of this Act, stancl transferred to, and shall, vest in, the 
Catral Government. 
4. (1) The undertakings of the' Company shall be deemed to include 35 
all assets, rights, lease-holds, powers, authorities and privileges: and all 
property, movable and immovable,including lands, buildIngs, work-
shops, stores, instruments, machiliery and equipment, cash balances, cash 
on hand, cheques, .demand drafts, 'reserve ~,dnvestments, book 
debts and. all ~ther.rights and interests in, or .arising out of, sueh property 40 
as were immediately before the appointed day in the ownerehip, POIJ888-
sion, power or control of the Company, whether within or outside India, 
and all books of account, registers and all other documents of whatever 
nature relating thereto. 

CCRR I GEN.J)\ 
to 
THE ANmRA S CIEUTIFIC COMPANY LI\fITED (ACQUISITION AND 
'1RANSFEl OF UNDER :rAKL.~ CE) BILL, 1982 
(To 1>e/As introduced in Lok 8abha) 
1 • Fa. ge (1), line 12,-
!.01: "COMP~Y".~ "COMPANY" 
2.. Page 3, line 43,-
a ftel: "under tt. ins art I1s ection" 
3. Page 5, line 8,-
" pIe" ~ "simple" 
4. Pare 5, line 13,-
fill:. ,t suh-s ectioJY'T' -1"00 d _" sub-.s.ect.i..on-- - -- ~ 
~ • P'rLge 8, line 2,-
!.Qx:.. "ppointed" r.@..d "a ppointed" 
f) • Fa ge 8, line 45, -
!Qr. ''ause'' ~ "cause" 
7. P:;J.ge 11, line 37,-
for "nay" ~ "any" 
D. Fa. ge 12, line 
~ "ment or the" 
9- ;page 13, line 34,-
!oJ:... '.!Pa'l"1.Jam~-~errttt-......-- ~. 
_,_ ~-1o....-J.'"'S..ge -13, line 37,-
!a.I: "IRIOR TllS" l:@Ji "ffi liRI TIES " 
-11. PagE. -14, line 5,-
!QL "ceasE'S" t.Q'!.d "cesses" 
12. P'd. ge 15, -LinfJ 4,-
f.Q.r:--1Tb~-~_-.::-.~ 
NE~v DElii I; 
p ber- 13 12B.£ 
,21, '1(){\4(Satia) 
-----------------------------

, 
(2) All properties as aforesaid which have vested in the Central 
Government under secw.on ~ snall, by 10rce 01 sucn vt!stmg, Oe iret!tl ana 
c1.lScnargt!c1 from any trUsL. OUllgatlon, mortgage, cfic:lr!:it:, iLen and ali 
other incumorances anectmg IDem, and any attachment, injunction, 
5 decree or order of any cO'Urt, tribunal or other authority restricting the 
use of such propertles in any manner or appointing any receiver in 
respect of the WhOle or any part of such properties shall be deemed to 
llave been wlthdrawn. 
.(3) Every modgagee of any property wruch has vesi.ed under this Act 
10 in the Central lioveClUllent and every peL'soa nOlding any cruuge, hen or 
other interest m, or m relatlOn to, any sucn pro~ny shall giVe, wltnm 
such time and in such manner as may IJe prescrloed, an mtimatIon to the 
Comnussloner 01 such mortgage, charge, lien or other interest. 
(4) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the mortgagee 
15 of any property referred to.in suu-section lJ) 01' any other person hOlwng 
any Charge, ben or oiher mterest in, or m re.latlOn to, any SUc.a property 
shall be entitled to Claim, Hl accordance WIth IDS ngnts and mterests, 
payment of the mortgage ulvllCY 01' other dues, in whole or In part, ou .. 
. ~L the amOUDL spec1llea. lU SCCUVLl 7 and also out of the arnounl.S de-..er-
20 mined under sectIon 8, but no such mortgage, charge, lien or other 
mterest shall be eniorceab1e against any property whIch has vested in 
the Central Government. 
(5) Any liceace or other ins Lrument granted to the Company in 
relation to any undertakmg wruch has vested in tne Central UovenunenL 
25 under section a at any time before the appomted aay and m torce unme-
diately before tnat aay shall continue l;() be m tolce on andatLer SUCh 
aay m' accordance with its tenor in relation to and for the purposes of 
such undertakmg, ana, on and from the date of vestmg of sucn under-
taking under section 6 in a Government company, such Government 
30 company shall be deemed. to be subStituted in sucn licence or. other in-
strument as 1f such llcence or other instrument had been granted. to such 
Government company and tnat Government company shall hold it for 
the remainder of the period for which the Company would have held 
it under the terms thereof. 
35 (6) If, on the appointed. day, any suit, appeal or other proceeding of 
whatever nature in relation to any property which has vested in the 
Central Government, under section 3, instituted or preferred Py. or 
against the Company, is pending, the same shall not abate, be disconU-
nued or be, in any way, prejudicially affected by reason of the transfer 
40 of the undertakings of the Company or of anything contained in this 
Act, but the suit, appeal or other proceeding may be continued, prosecut-
ed or enforced by or against the Central Government, or, where the 
undertakings of the Company are di~ected, under 6, to vest in a Govern-
ment ct>mpany, by or against that Government oompany. 
45 5. (1) Every liability of the Company in respect of any period prior 
to the appointed day, shall be the liability of the Company and shall be 
enforceable against it, and not against the Central Government, or, where 
the undertakings of the Company are directed, under section 6, to vest 
in a Government company, against that Government company. 
50 (2) For ·the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that-
(a) save as otherwise expressly provided in this section or in 
any other provision of this Act, no liability of the Company' in 
Company 
to be 
liable f()r 
certain 
prior 
liabili-
ties. 

Power of 
Central 
Govern-
mentto 
direct 
vesting 
of the 
under-
takings 
oftbe 
Company 
ina 
Govern-
ment 
company. 
4 
respect of any period. prior to the appoInted day, shall be enforce-
aore against tne (:entra! Government, or, whel'e the undertakings of 
the Company are directed, under section 6, to vest in a Govern.m.ent 
company, against tnat lioverrunent company; 
(tJ) no awal'U, decl't~e or order of any cOurL, tribunal or other 5 
authoI'lty in relatlon to tne wldertakingl) of the Company, passed 
aiter tne appoUl~ea day, In respect of any matter, claim or dLspute 
which al'OS~ belOre tnal; aay, snail be eru.orceao!e agamst the \,.;wtral 
tlovemment~ or, wnere the unuertakings of the Company are directed, 
:~~n:.~~:~~o~;~ny:est m a Uovemment company, agamst that 10 
(c) no llaoillty mcuned by the -Company before the appointed 
day, lor tile COlll.,l'Clventlon of any prOVIsIon of J.aw for the WIle beIllg 
in torce, shaH be enforceable agamst the Central Government, or, 
where we unUeha1(.J.Ug.s of tne \,.;ompany are directea, under sectlOn 
0, W ve.:i~ ill a lioyernment company, agamst tilat liovernment 15 
company. 
6. (1) NotWithstanding anything contamed in seCtions a and 4, l;he 
Centra! GoverruLlcnt may, suoJect to sucn terms and concUtlons as it may 
tuili.k ut to impuse, O1£el.:t, Oy notlficatlon, that the undertaKlngs Of the 20 
Company and Lu~ n~h', tHle and m~erest of the (:ompany in relal.10n to 
its WlaertClKJngs, Widen have vested in that Government under section 
a, sna11, 1lls~ed.a 01 contlnwng to vest in the Centra! (.iovernment, vest 
m a GOVt:L'nmeut compa,lY eJcher on tile elate Of the notifica'Llon or on 
sucneariler OJ: .l.ater Qctte (not oemg a date earlier than the appointed , 25 day) as may De spccll1ed m tne notl11cauon. 
(2) Whel'e ~i:1e fight, ti~le and interest of the Company, in r~lctiion to 
its uncieriaK.Ulgs, veSL Jll a lxovernment company un<1er suO-section (1), 
tne Government company snail, on and from tne ua~e of such vestmg, 
be deemca LO nave oecome tne owner in relation to such undertaklD&S. 30 
and all t.b.e nghl.S anel l1al>iliues o.f the Central liovermnent ,m l'e14tion 
to such undertaltings shail, on and from the date of such vesting, be 
deemed to have become the rights and liabilities of the Government 
company. 
CHAPTER III 
PAYUENT OF AMO't1Nl'S 
35 
Paymenti 7: For the transfer to, and vestinc in, tlie Central Government, under 
of amount. Jection 3, of til,:, undertakings of the Company and the ri,ht, title and. 
iDterest of the Utmpany in relation to its undertak.iDp, there shall be 
liven by the Central Government to the Company, in cash and in the 40 
manner specified. in Chapter VI, an amount of rupees two hundred and 
twenty-four lakhs and ten thousand. 
Payment 
of 
turthe~ 
amountll, 
S. (1) For the deprivation of the Company of the D}anagement of its 
undertakings, there shall be liven by the Central Government to the 
'Company in c~h, an amount calculated at the rate of rupees 'ten thou .. 45 
,ud per annum for the period. commencin, on the date on which tho 
management of the und.ertakinp of the Company was taken over ill 
pursuance of the order made by the Central Government uncler Seetion 
18AA of the Industries (Develo.pment and Bep.latioo) ,A.d, 1t51, and 6~ of 1951. 
f'adw, OIl theappointod cbiy. 50 

S 
(2) In consideration of the retrospective operation of the provisions 
of 5~tions 3, " and 5, there shall also be given by the Central Government· 
to the Company in cash, an amount calcnJat.ed at the rate of rupees ten 
thousand per annum for the period commendng on tbe uppoiDted day and 
5 ending on the date on whkb this Act receives tbe a~sent of th~ president. 
(3) The amouat specl.fied in section 7, and th(' amount det·p.rmined in 
accordant'P with the provisions of imb.seetions (1) and (2) shall carry 
''''nOe h'l~erest at the rate of four per cent. pel' annum for the period 
eommendn~ on the appointed day and endin~ on the date on which 
10 payment of such amounts is made by the CentrAl Gov'Nnment to the 
,.. ",nmlssioner. 
(4) The amounts 'detennined in accordanee '\'!'Hh the provisions of' 
sub-flection (1). (2) and (3) shAn be given by t~e Central Gove~ment 
''1 1:he Company in addition to the amount 5pecifi~d in section 7. 
15 (5) For thf' removAl of dnobt". it i.s herehv (f~c1ared that' the liabili .. 
tiC!ll of tbe C'nnl1UI,'1.V in 1'1'1:,t;(I~ tf) it., nl'\de'rlnldI'\CY~ which hAv., vested 
in the t;~"tl'al nO""l'nm~'l" lUv'pr !,<~,.tinn ::r ""lAn hp "illl"l.." ... JJ<('d from thp. 
amount "efe~d to in ~ .... tion 7. And "Iso from the atn<>untM determined 
under sub-sections (1), (2) and (3). in 8ccord~nce with the ri".bts and 
20 Intel't!Sts of the creditors of the Company. 
CHAPI'ER IV 
MANAGEMENT, ETC., OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF THE COMPANY 
t. (1) The general superintendence, difection. control and mnnage-
ment of the affairs 'and business of the m\dertakings of the Company. 
2 5 the right. title and interest in refation to which have vested in the Central 
-. Government under section 3, shall.-
(a) where a direction hRs heen made bv tl,P, Central Government 
under sub-section (1') of section 6, vest in the Government company 
specified in such direction: Or 
go (b) where no such direction has been made by the Central 
Government, vest in one or more Custodians appointed by the 
Central Government under sub~ectjon (2), 
and thereu:oon the Government company SO speCified or the Custodian 
or Custodians so appointed. as the caRe mav be, shall be entitled to 
35 exercise, to the exclusion of all other persons, all such powers and do 
all such things a~ the Company is authorised to exercise arid do in 
relation to its undertakings. 
(2) The Central Government may appoint one or more individuals 
or a Government company as the Custodian or Custqdians of the under-
40 takings of the Company in relation to which no direction has been made 
by it under sub-section (1) of section 6. 
(3) The Custodian or Custodians· so appointed shall receive, from the 
funds of the undertakings of the Company, such remuneration as the 
Central Government may fix and shall hold o~ce during the pleasure of 
45 the Central Government. 
10. (1) On the vesting of the management of the undertakinp,s of the 
Company in a Government company or on the appointment of a Custodian 
or Custodians, all persons in charge of the management of the under-
takings of the Company immediately before such vesting or appointment, 
50 shall be bound to "deliver to the Government company or the Custodian 
or Custodians, as the case may be, all assets, books of account, registers 
or other documents in their custody relating to tbe undertakings of the 
Company. 
Manage-
ment, etc .• 
oil the 
under-
takings 
of tire 
Company. 
Duty of 
persons 
in charge 
ot 
manage-
mentot 
the 
under -
\aldn~S 

of the 
Company 
todellver 
all 
assets, 
'etc. 
Duty of 
persons 
to account . 
for assets, 
etc., in 
their 
pooses-
sion. 
Accounts 
and 
audit. 
Conti-
nuance of 
~mpl()o 
yees. 
6 
(2) The Central Government may issue such directions as it may 
deem desirable in the circumstances of the case to the Government 
company or the Custodian or Custodians, and such Government company 
or the Custodian or Custodians may also, if it is conSidered necessary 
so to do, apply to. the Central Government at any time for instructions 5 
as to the manner in which the management of the undertakings of the 
Company shall be conducted or in relation to any other matter arising 
in the course of such management. 
11. (1) Any person who has, on the appointed day. in his possession 
or under his control, any assets, books, documents or other papers relating 10 
to any undertaking owned by the Company, whith have vested in the 
CentraJ Government or in a Government companv under th'is Act. and 
which belong to the Company, or would have so belonged, if the under-
takings owned bv the Company had not vested in the Central Govern-
ment or such Government company. shall be liable to aecount for the 15 
said assets, books, documents and other papers to the Central Government 
or the Government company and shalJ deliver them up to the Central 
Government or such Government company or to such person or persons 
as the Central Government or the Government company may specify 
in this behalf. !l0 
(2) The Central Government or the Government company aforesaid 
may take or cause to be taken all nece~sary steps for lecutin~ possession 
of the undf'!rtakings of the Company which have vested in the Central 
Government Or the GovemmE'nt company under this Act. 
(1) The Company shall. within such period as the Central Govern- 25 
ment may allow in this behalf, furnish to that Government a complete 
inventory of all its properties and assets. as on the appointed day, per-
taining to the undertakin~ which have vested in the Central Government" 
un'der section 3, and, for this purpose. the Central Govp.mm~nt or the 
Government company aforesaid shall afford to the Company all reason- 30 
able facilities. 
12. The Custodian or Custodians of the undertakings of the Companv 
shall maintain an account of the undertakings of' the Company in such 
form and manner and under such conditions as may be prescribed and 
the provisions of the Companies Act, 195-6, shall applv to the audit of 35 1 of 1956. 
the accounts so maintained as they apply to the audit of the accounts of a 
company. 
CHAPl'ER V 
PROVISIONS RELATING TO THE EMPLOYEE.C; OF THE COMPANY 
13. (1) Everv person whO' has been. immediately before the appointed 40 
day, employed in any undertaking of the Company shall become,-
(a) on and from the appointed day, an employee of the Central 
Government, ,and 
(b) where the undertakings of the Comoany are directed, under 
,ub-section (1) q! 9~~fon ~I t(l V~~ in a Govel1lment company. an 45 

Uot 1947. 
employee of the Government company on and from the date of such 
vesting. 
and shall hold office or service under the Central Government, or the 
Government company, as the case may be, with the same rights and 
5 privileges as to penSion, gratuity and other matter~ as would have been 
admissible to him if there had been no such vesting and shall continue 
to do so unless and until his employment under the Central Government 
or the Government company, as the case may be, is duly tenninated or 
until his remune::-ation and other conditions of service are duly altered 
10 by the Central Government or the Government company, as the case 
may be. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the" Industrial Disputes 
Act, 1947, or in any other law fOr the time being in force. the tr·ansfer of 
the services of any officer or other person employed in any undertaking 
15 of the Conlpany, to the Central Government or the Government company, 
shall not entitle such officer or other employee to any compensation under 
this Act Or any other law for the time being in force and no such claim 
shall be entertained by any court, tribunal or other authority. 
14. (1) Where the Company has established a provident fund, superan-
20 nuation, welfare or other fund for the benefit of the persons employed 
in any of its undertakings, the moneys relatable to the officers or other 
emnloyees whose services have become transferred by or under thfFl Act 
to the Central Government or the Government company, shall. out of the 
moneys standin~. on the APpointed day, to the credit of such provident 
25 fund. superannuation. welfl:tre Or other fund. stand trAnFlff'rred to. anr1 
vest in. the Central Government or the Government comnany. as the case 
may be. 
(2) The moneys which stand transferrerl unde-r sub·sect;on (1) to the 
Central Government 0'1' the Government ~omoonv. se; the (,Ase may be. 
30 shall be dealt with bv that C',.overnment or Government ('ompanv in such 
manner as may be prescribed. 
CHAPTER VI 
CO:M:MISSIONER OF PAYMENTS 
15. (1) The Central Government shall. lor the J)urDO!le of dtsbut'llln( 
35 the amounts payable to the Company under sedions 7 and 8, by notlft-
cation. appoint a Commissioner of Payments. 
(2) The Central Government may appoint s~h other nersons as it 
may think fit to assist the Commissioner and tbereupon tlu'! Comm;lIJsloner 
'" av authorise one or more of !IIuch persons also to exercise all or any 
40 of the powers exerefsable by him under this Act and different persons 
""ay be authorised to exercise different powen. 
(3) Any person authorised by the Commissioner to exercise any of 
the powers exercisable by the Commissioner may exercise those powers 
in the same manner and with the same effect as if they have been con-
45 ferred on that person directly by this Act and not by way of authori-
sation. . .~ ~ 1 
Provi· 
deDtf1md 
and 
other 
fUDdl. 
Appolnt-
mentot 
Com.miI-
.toDerof 
~ 

Payment 
by 
CeD.tral 
Govern-
mentto 
tie 
Commis-
sioner 
Certain 
powers 
of the 
Central 
Govern-
mentOr 
Govern-
ment 
company. 
Clatma 
to be 
made to 
th'e 
Cmunis-
sioDer. 
8 
(4) !'he _aries aad alJowaDtes of the Commissioner aDd other pers~, 
"ppohated UDder thJs seetiQn shaD be defrayed out of the Ccmsollda~ . 
Fund of JJ:uIIa. 
, 
16. (1) The Central Government shall, within thirty days from the , 
speclfted date, pay in cash to the Commissioner, for payment to the 5 
Company,-
(a) an amount equal to the amount specified in section 7; and 
(b) an amount equal to the amounts payable to the Company 
under section 8. 
(2) A deposit account shall be opened by the Central Government in 10 
favour of the Comm'ssioner in the Public Account of India and every 
amount paid under this Act to the Commissioner shall be deposited by 
him to the credit of the said deposit account and the said deposit account 
shall be operated by the Commiss'loner. 
(3) Records shalI be maintained by the Commissioner in respect of ]5 
the undertakings of the Company in relation to whiCh payments have 
been made to him under this Act, 
(4) Interest accruing on the amount standing to the credit of the 
deposit account referred to in sub-section (2) shall enure to the benefit 
:" '~t ''''''1 10 of the Company. 
17. (1) The Central Government or the Government company, as the 
case may be, shall be entitled to receive, up to the specified date, to the 
exclusion of all other 'Persons, any money due to the Company in relation 
to its undertaldn~s which have vested in the Central Government or 
the Government company, and realised after the appointed day, notwith- 'l5 
standing that th~ realisation pertains to a period prior to the appointed 
day. 
(Z) The Central Government or the Government com'Panv. as the 
case mav be, mav make a claim to the Commissioner with re~ard to 
every pavment mane bv that Government or Government eompanv after So 
the appointed dav. for diRchar~in9; any liabmtv of the Companv in relation 
to any period prior to the apootnted dav, and everv such claim shAll 
have priority. in accordance with the priorities attachin~ under this 
Act, to the matter in relRt;on to whieh such liabilitv hf\~ been discharged 
by the Central Government or the Government company. 35 
(3) Save as otherwise provided jn this Act, the liabilities of the 
C(')mpanv in respect of any transaction prior to the appointed day, which 
have not been di!lcharlted on or' before tHe Rpecifie~ date shall be the 
liabilities of the Company. 
18. Every person having, ~ 1"1ai m a!"ainRt the C'1mnanv with rettclrd to 40 
anv of the matterR specified in the Schedule pertainin~ to anv under-
taldng owned by it shall prefer ~uch claim before the Commissfo"~r 
wJthin thirty days from the specified date: 
Provided that If the Commf~Rioner fR satisfied that the claimant was 
prevented by suAlcient ~'Ulse from preferrin~ the claim within the Sflfd 45 

5 of 1908. 
t-iodof thirty days, he may entertain the claim within a further period 
of thirty days, but not thereafter. 
19. The claims made under section 18 shall have priorities in accord- Priority 
ance with the following prlnciples, namely:- of claims. 
5 (a) Category I shall have precedence over all .other categories 
and Category II shall have precedence over Category III, and so on; 
(b) the claims specified in each Of the categories shall rank 
equally and be· £aid in full, but, if the amount is insufficient to meet 
such claims in full, they shall abate in equal proportions and be 
10 paid accordingly; and 
(c) the question of d.ischarging any liability with regard to a 
matter specified in a lower category shall arise only if a surplus is 
left after meeting all the liabilities specified in the immediately 
higher category. 
15 20. (1) On receipt of the claims made under section 18, the Commis-
sioner shall arrange the claims in the order of prionties specifiE'd in the 
Schedule and examine the same in accordance with such order. 
(2) If, on examination of the claims, the Commissioner is of opinion 
that the amount paid to him under this Act is not sufficient to meet the 
20 liabilities specified in any lower category, he shall not be required to 
examine the claims in respect of such lower category. 
21. (1) After examining the claims with reference to the priorities 
specified in the Schedule, the Commissioner shall fix a certain date on 
or before which every claimant shall file the proof of his claim. 
25 (2) Not less than fourteen days' notice of the date so fixed shall be 
given by advertisement in one issue of any daily newspaper in the 
English language having circulation in the major part of the COUJltry 
and in one issue of any daily newspaper in such regional language as 
the Commissioner may consider suitable, and every such notice shall 
go call upon the claimant to file the proof of his claim with the Commissioner 
within the period specified in the advertisement. 
(3) Every claimant who fails to file the proof of his claim within the 
period specified by the Commissioner shall be excluded from the dis-
bursements made by the Commissioner. 
35 (4) The Commissioner shall, after such investigation as may, in his 
opinion, be necessary and after giving the Company an opportunity of 
refuting the claim and after giving the claimant a reasonable opportunity 
of being heard, by order in writing, admit or reject the claim in whole 
or in part. 
40 (5) The Commissioner shall have the power to regulate his own 
procedure in all matters arising out of the discharge of his functions, in-
cluding. the place or places at which he may hold his sitting and shall, 
for the purpose of making any investigation under this Act, have the 
same powers as are vested in a Civil Court under the Code ~f Civil Pro-
45 cedure, 1908, while trying a suit, in rupect of the followmg matters, 
namely:-
Exami-
nation of 
claims. 
Admission 
or re-
jection of 
claims. 

Dia-
burse-
mentol 
money 
by the 
CommlI-
sioner. 
uncUa-
bursed 
orUD-
claimed 
amount 
to be 
deposi-
ted with 
the 
general 
revenUle 
account. 
to 
(a) the summoning and enforcing the attendance of any witness 
and examjnjng him on oath; 
(b) the discovery and production of any document or other 
material object producible as evidence; 
(c) the reception of evidence on affidavits; 5 
(cL) the issuing of any commission for the examination of 
witnesses. 
(6) Any investigation before the CommjMioner shall be deemed to be 
a judicial proceeding within the meaning of sections 193 and 228 of the 
Indian Penal Code and the Commissioner shall be deemed to be a CivLl 10 4:5 ofl860. 
Court for the purposes of section 19a, and Chapter XXVI, Of the Code 
of Criminal Procedure, 1973. 2. of 1974. 
(7) A claimant who is dissatisfied with the decision of the Commis-
sioner may prefer an appeal against such decision to the principal CIVll 
court of original juriswctlon within the local limits of whose jurIsdiction 15 
the registered office of tne Company is sltuated: 
Provided that where a person who is a Judge of a High Court is 
appointed to be the Commissioner, such appeal shall lie. to the High 
Court exercismg jurisdiction over the place in which the registered office 
of the Company is situated and such appeal shall be heard and 20 
dispoBed of by not less than two Judges of that High Court. 
22. After admitting a claim under this Act, the amount due in respect 
of such claim shall be paid by the Commissioner to the person or persons 
to whom such amoun" i., due, and on such payment, the liability of the 
Company in respect of such claim shall stand discharged. 25 
23. (1) If, out of the moneys paid to him, in relation to the under-
takings of the Company, there is a balance left after meeting the lia-' 
bilities as specified in the Schedule, the Commissioner shall disburse such 
balance to the Company. 
(2) Where the possession of any machinery, equipment or other so 
property has vested in the Central Government or a Government 
company UDder this Act, but such machinery, equipment or other property 
does not belong to the Company, it shall be lawful for the Central 
Government or the Government company to continue to possess such 
machinery or equipment or other property on the same terms and condi- 35 
tions under which they were possessed by the Company immediately 
before the appointed day. 
U. Any money paid to the Commissioner which remains undisbursed 
or unclaimed on the date immediately preceding the date on which the 
office of the Commissioner is finally wound up, shall be transferred by 40 
the Commissioner, before his oiRce i~ finally wound up, to the general 
revenue account of the Central Government; but a claim to any money 
so transferred may be preferred to the Central Government by the 
person entitled to such payment and shall be dealt with as if such transfer 
had not been made, and the order, if any, for the payment of the claim 45 
being treated as an order for the refund of revenue. 

, 
II 
CHAPrER VU 
25. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding any-
thing inconsistent therewith in any other law for the time being in force 
5 or in any instrument having effect by virtue of any law, other than this 
Act, or in any decree Or order of any court, tribunal or other authority. 
26. Every contract entered into by the Company in relation to any of 
its undertakings which has vested. in the Cen~ral uovernment under sec-
tion 3 for any service, sale or supply, and in force immediately before the 
10 appo.nted day, shall, on and from the expiry of a period ot thirty days 
from the date on which this Act receives the assent of the President, 
cease to have effect unless such contract is, before the expiry of that 
period, ratified in writing, by the Central Government or the Govern-
ment company in which such undertaking has been veited under tn.s 
15 Act and in ratifying such contract, the Central Government or the Govern-
ment company may make such alterations or modifications therein as it 
may think fit: 
Provided that the Central Government or the Government company 
shall not omit to ratify a contract and shall not make any a!tera~ion or 
120 modlficaLion in a contrac~ 
30 
35 
(a) unless it is satisfied that such contract is unduly onerous o~ 
has been entered into in bad faIth or is 'detrimental to the interests 
of the Central Government· or the Government company; and 
(b) except after g. villg the parties to the contract a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard and except after recording in writing its 
reasons for refusal to ratify the contract or for making any altera-
tion or modification therein. 
27. Any' person ,who,-
(a) having in his possession, custody or control any property 
forming part of the undertakings of the Company, wrongfully with-
holds such property from the Central Government or the Govern-
ment company; or 
(b) wrongfully obtains possession of, or retains, any property 
forming part of the undertakings of the Company; or 
(c) wilfully withholds or fails to furnish to the Central Govern-
ment or the Government company or any person or body of persons 
specified. by that Government or Government company, may docu-
ment relating to such undertakings, which may be in his possession, 
custody or control; or 
(d) fails to deliver to the Central Government or the Gov-
ernment company or any person or body of persons specified by that 
Government or Government company, any assets, books of account, 
registers or other documents in his possession, custody or control, 
relating to the undertakings of the Company; or 
Act to 
have 
overri-
ding 
e1!ect. 
ContraCts 
to ceaae 
to have 
effect 
unleea 
rati1led, 
by Central 
Govern-
ment or 
Govern-
ment 
company. 
Penal-
ties. 

Protec-
tion of 
action 
tak~.l 
in lood 
faith. 
Delega-
tion of 
powel'l'J. 
I . 
... 
(e) wrongfully removes or destroys any property forming part 
of the undertakings of the Company or prefers any claim under this 
Act, which he knows or has reasonable cause to believe to be faJse or 
grossly inaccurate; 
shall be puwshable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 5 
two years, or ,with tine whlch may extend. to ten thousand rUl>f*s, or 
WIth both. 
2.8. ll) Where an oftence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every' person w.no, at tne time tne o11ence was Comml1.teCl was 
in. c.narge of, and was responsu.I.l.e to, 1.Ut: compcmy lor t.ne cona.uct 01 Lue 10 
bUSlIlelilS 01 the company, as well as t.ne compmy, s.b.a1J. be deemed to De 
gUilty of the offence and shail be liable to be proceeded against an.c1 
pUlUShed accordingly: 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any 
such person liable to any pUDlsnment, 11 .ne proves that the offence was 
COIIllW.tted Without his .k.n.owledge or that he .naci exerclSed all due cW1- 15 
gence to prevent the commission of such offence. 
(2) Notwithstanding an)'lthing contained in SUb-section ,(1), where 
any ofience under this Act has been committed by a company and It is 
proved that the offence has been. comnutted ,with the consent or conni- 0 
vance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part oi, any director, 2 
manager, secretlU'Y.. or other officer ot the company. such dlrector, 
manager, secretary or other otllcer shall be deemed to be guilty. of that 
offence and .shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accord.-
ingly. 
Exp,lanation.-For the purposes of this section,-
(a) "company" means any body corporate and includes a firm or 
other associatlon of individuals; and 
(b) "director", in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm. 
25 
28. (1) No suit, p1'OSecution or. other legal proceeding shall. lie against 30 
the Central Govemm.ent or any officer 01' other employee of that Govern-
ment or the Custodian. Or the Government company or other person 
authorised by that Government, Custodian or Government company for 
anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this 
Act. 35 
(2) No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central 
Government or any officer or other employee of that Government or the 
ment or the Custodian. or the Government company or other person 
authorised by that Government, Custodian or Government company for 
any damage caused or likely to be caused by anything which is in 40 
good faith done or intended to be done under this Act. 
30. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, direct that all 
or any of the pOwers exercisable by it under this Act, other than the 
powers conferred by this section and sections 31 and 32, may also be 
exercised by such person or persons as may be specifted in the notifica- 45 
tion. 

13 
(2) Whenever any delegation of power is made under sub-section (1), 
the person to whom such power has been delegated shall act under the 
direction, control and supervision of the Central Government. 
. 
31. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for 
5 carrying out the provisions of this Act. 
10 
(2) In lparticular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following 
matters, namely:-
(4) the time within which; and the manner in which, an intima-
tion referred to in sub-section (3) of section 4 shall be given; 
(b) the form and manner in which, and the conditions under 
which, the Custodian or Custodians shall maintain the accounts as 
required by section 12; 
(c) the manner in which the moneys in any provident fund or 
15 other fund referred to in section 14 shall be dealt with; 
(d) any other matter which is reqUired to be, or may be, pres-
cribed. . 
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall 
be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parlia-
20 ment, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may 
be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions. and 
ff. before the expiry of the session immediatelv followinrt the sec:!don or 
the successive sessions aforesaid, both Hous':!s a~ee in makinst anv modi-
fication in the rule or both Houses agree that ,the rule should not be 
25 made, the 1't1le shall thereaft':!r have effect only in such modifled form or 
be of no effect, as the case mav be; so, however, that anv such modifica· 
tion or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anythin~ 
previously done under that rule. 
32. If any diftlculty arises in givin(! effect to the provisions of this 
So Act, the Central Government mav. bv order, not inconsistent with the 
provisions of this Act, remove the difficulty: 
35 
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expirv of a 
period of two years from the date on which this Act receives, th.:~ss.:.n~ 
of the Parliament. 
THE SCHEDULE 
rSee sections 18.20(1),21 '(1) and 23 (1)1 
ORDER OF PRJORTrES FOR 'I'm: DISCHAltGE OF LIABILITIES OF THE COMPANY 
Post.ta.ke-over management period 
Ca.tegory 1 
Wa~es. salari'!s and otner dues of the employees of the Company. 
Category IT 
Loans advanced by the Central Government 
Power to 
make 
rules. 
Power to 
remove 
di1ficul-
tiel. 

CateflO'J'Y III . 
Any credit availed of by the Company for the purpose of carrying OD 
any trading or manufacturing operations. 
Category IV 
Revenue, taxes, ceases, rates Or any other dues to the Central Govem- 5 
ment or a State Government. 
P\re-take-oveT management period 
Vategory V 
Arrears in relation to contributions to be made by the Company to 
the PrOvident Fund, salaries, wages and other amounts due to the 10 
employees of the Company. 
Catego-ry VI 
Revenue, taxes, cesses, rates or any other dues, including Employees' 
State Insurance contributions, to the Central Government, a Local 
Authority or a State Electricity Board. . 15 
Category VII 
(i) Any credit availed of by the Company for the purpose of carrying 
on any trading or manufacturing operations. 
(ii) Any other dues. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Andhra Scientific Company Limited, Machilipatnam, is engaged 
in the manufacture and production of various types of scientific instru-
ments. From a smaH begillnng the Compny had gt'oWn to be the 
largest private sector undertaking in the field of scientific instruments. 
Building up steadily, the Company attained a turnover of Rs. 45 lakhs 
by 1965-66. A downward trend started thereafter and in 1967-88, the 
Company incurred a loss Of Rs. 1.91 lakhs which increased to Rs. 25.62 
lakhs in 1971·72. In the light of the recommendations of certmn Gov~ 
crnrnental Comm'ttees and in view of the fact that the Company had 
a body of talented and dedicated scientists and engineers. its manage~ 
n:ent was taken over by the Central Government under section 18AA 
of the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951, in June 1972. 
2. Though the Central Government was advancing some amounts 
as loans during the period of ils management, the Company was 
facing acute shortage of liqUid f~l\lds for ils working capital require-
ments. Funds are also required for modernisation of the pleut and 
machinery. But pending nationalisation of the Company, it was not poss'-
bIe for Government to invest the required amount of funds in the Com-
p<Jny. Studies made to determine the future set-up of the Company 
revealed that the undertakings of the Company should be nationalised 
in order to consolidate the gains of management and to ensure un-
interrupted supply of critical items of defence production. In view 0'1 
the importance of the products manufactured by the Company and the 
loss of employment to more than 850 employe~s of the Compa'1Y if the 
Company were to be closed down, it is considered necessary to take over 
the undertakings of the Company. 
3. The Bill seeks to achieve the aforesaid object. Apart !tom provld~ 
ing for the acqUisition and transfer of the undertakings of the Company, 
the Bill provides for the payment of an amO'lmt for such acquisition, 
vesting of the undertakin~s of the Company in a Government company, 
appoIntment of a Commissioner of Payments for the purpose of dJsburs-
ing the amount payable to the Company and for other incidental and 
consequential matters. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 22nd September, 1982. R. VENKATARAMAN. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF, THE 
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
rCopy of letter dated the 30th September, 1982 from Shri R. Venkata-
raman. Minister of Defence to the Secretary, Lok Sabha.] 
• 
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the Bill 
to provide for the A~uisition and Transfer of Undertakings of the Andhra 
Scientific Company Limited, is pleased to recommend, under clauses (0 
and (3) of article 117 of the Constitution, the introduction of the said Bill 
in and its consideration by Lok Sabha. 
15 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 7 of the Bill provides 'for the payment in cash of an amount 
of Rs. 224.10 lakhs for vesting in the Central Government of the under-
takings of the Andhra Scientific Company Limited and the right, title 
and interest of the Gompany in relation to its undertakings. 
2. Sub-Clause (1) of clause 8 of the Bill provides fo" the payment in 
cash of a further amount calculated at the rate of Rs. 10,000 per annum for 
the deprivation of the Company of the management of its undertakings for 
the period commencing on the date on which the management of the 
undertakings of the Company was taken over by the Central Government 
and ending on the appoint~d day, i.e., the 1st day of July, 19181. It is 
estimated that this amount will be of the order of Rs. 90,000. 
:t Sub-clause (2) of clause 8 of the Bill provides for payment in cash 
of a further amount in consideration of the retrospective operation of the 
provisions of clauses 3, 4 and 5 and calculated at the rate· of Rs. 10,000 
per annum for the period commencing on the appo:nted day and ending 
on the date on which the Bill receives the assent of the President. It 
is estimated that this amount will be of- the order of Rs. 11,000. 
4. Sub-clause (3) of clause 8 df the Bill provides for the payment of 
simple interest at the rate of four per cent. per annum in respect of the 
amounts payable under clause 7 and sub-clauses (1) and (2) ot" clause 
8 for the period cOmmeneing on the appointed day and ending on the 
date on which the payment of such amounts is made by the Central 
Government to the Commissioner of Payments. It is estimated that this 
[I mount is likely to be of the order of Rs 75,000 per month. 
•.. 5. Clause 15 of the Bill provides for the appointment of a Commissioner 
of Payments by the Central Government for the purpose of disbursing 
the amounts payable to the Company. This clause also provides for the 
appointment of such other persons as it thinks fit to assist the Commis-
sioner in the exercise of his Dowers under the Bill. Under sub-clause (4) 
of this clause, the salaries ~nd allowances of the Commissioner and the 
other persons appointed to assist him will be defrayed out of the Consoli-
dated Fund of India. The estimated expenditure on this account is 
likely to be of the order of Rs. 5,000 per month. 
6. The pre-take-over loans giv~n by nationalised banks and financial 
institutions to the Company are proposed to be protected outside the 
compensation scheme. The principal amount due at the time (If take-
over was Rs. 35.85: l~hs. The interest as appUcable without compound-
ing wUl have to be paid. The total amount to be protected wC'uld be 
approximate1y Rs. 84.59 lakhs. 
16 

17 
7. Provision in a-espect of gratuity amounting to Rs. 53.70 lakhs 
is also proposed to be made outside the compensation scheme. This 
would be assumed by the Central Government or by the Govern-
ment company as the payments on this account will be small 
amounts accruing from time to time and the amounts will be 
payable as and when the employees go out of service. 
8. The Bill, if enacted and brought into operation, is not likely to 
involve any other recurring or non-recurring expenditure. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISL.t\TION 
Clause 31 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to 
make rules to carry out the provisions of the Bill. The matters in 
respect of which rules may be made, inter alia. relate to the time 
within which, and the manner in which, intimation regarding any 
mortgage, charge, lien, etc., on the properties which have vested 
in the Central Government maybe given to the Comm:ssioner of 
Payments, the form and manner in which, and the conditions under 
which, accounts shall be maintained by the Custodian or Custodians 
and the manner in which the moneys ,.in any provident fund, 
superannuation, welfare or other fund maintained by the Company 
shall be dealt with bv the Central Government or the Government . . 
company. 
2. The matters il1 respect of which such rules may be made are 
matters of procedure and administrative detail. The delegation of 
letslative power ios thus of a normal character. 
I::{ 

LOK SABHA .. ' 
• 
.. 
BILL 
• 10 provide for the acquisition and transfer of the undertakinp of the-
ADdhra Scientific Company Limited, with a view to securina the pro-
per management of such undertakings so as to subeerve the interests: 
of the general public: by ensuring the continuity of production of 
edeDtiflc instruments which are vital to the needl of the eowKry aad 
t. for matters COllfteCted therewith or incidental thereto. 
(Shri R. Venkataraman, 
Minister of Defence.) 