1
Short title.
THE INDIAN MEDICAL COUNCIL (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2009
By
SHRI VARUN GANDHI , M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixtieth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  This Act may be called the Indian Medical Council (Amendment)  Act, 2009.
2. After section 23 of the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956, the following section shall
be inserted, namely:—
"23A. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, no person shall be eligible
for enrolling his name in any State Medical Register as a medical practitioner unless he
has served as a medical practitioner in a rural area for a minimum period of one year in
such manner as may be prescribed.”.
Insertion of
new section
23A.
Bill No.  127 of 2009
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
102 of 1956.
Compulsory
practice in
rural areas for
enrolment in
State Medical
Register.
5

SSTA TEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The current system of medical education makes it optional for the students to work in
outreach, rural, public or NGO supported hospitals. This has resulted in a very low percentage
of students actually opting for this exposure leading to a real disconnect between medical
knowledge of the students and community health needs. The present system only assesses
a student for knowledge in basic and clinical sciences and the underlying principles.
Rural Primary Health Centres (PHCs) remain understaffed and underutilized as a result
of the acute and growing shortage of qualified health care professionals in the public health
sector. As a result, patients from rural areas are forced to find medical help in cities which
leads to central institutions like AIIMS becoming over-burdened. There is a substantial gap
between increasing investments in health and proportionate improvement in access to health
care.
Around 30,000 medical students complete medical education every year. A majority of
these choose to practice in urban areas, the private sector or abroad. In order to ensure a
sufficient supply of qualified medical practitioners with the requisite stamina and medical
training to serve patients in rural areas and to give medical graduates invaluable experience
and a grasp of medical issues at the grassroot level, it becomes imperative to draft the
services of medical graduates to work in rural areas at least for one year.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; V ARUN GANDHI
November 12, 2009.
2

LOK  SABHA
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956.
(Shri Varun Gandhi, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—5024LS(S5—08-12-2009.