;
;
ह

—

As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

a (कि

Bill No. 127 of 2005

THE ERADICATION OF UNEMPLOYMENT BILL, 2005
| By क्‍
SHR! RAMDAS ATHAWALE, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide fora scheme for eradication of unemployment from the country.

BE it enacted by Parliament ‘in the F ifty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as |

follows:— |
1. (/) This Act may be called the Eradication of Unemployment Act, 2005. Short title,
| (2) It extends to the whole of India. | | pea आह
5 (3) It shall come into force at once.
2. In this Act,— | | Definitions.

(a) “Government” means the Central Government; and
(5) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act. |

3. The Government shall endeavour to provide every citizen who has attained the age Employment

10 ~=ofeighteen years and who is registered with the Employment Exchange with employment 7 citizens.

suited to his age, qualification and health.

4. Till such time as employment is provided to a citizen under section 3, he orshe Grant of |

Shall be entitled to such unemployment allowance, as may be prescribed. unemployment
| allowance. .


2

Unemployment 5. An Unemployment Insurance Scheme shall be started by the Governmentsoasto ._
br provide for a special fund for the grant of unemployment allowance under this Act. |
Contribution to 6. A citizen who has registered himself with the Employment Exchange shall be eli- =
Unemployment gible to receive benefit of unemployment allowance under this Act subject to his furnishing
me ag an agreement to contribute to the Unemployment Insurance Scheme for a prescribed period

immediately after securing employment at a rate as may be prescribed.
Power to make 7. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
rules. for carrying out the provisions of this Act.

(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers, such
rules may provide for the following matters, namely:—

(a) the rate of unemployment allowance referred to in section 4 and different
rates may be prescribed on the basis of qualification and skills,

(b) the necessary details of the unemployment insurance scheme;

(c) the rate of contribution to the Unemployment Insurance Scheme under }
section 6; | |

(d) the procedure to regulate all payments under this Act; and

~ (९) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.

|
|
|



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The problem of unemployment has assumed menacing proportions. Even the educated
citizens are rendered indigent. Lack of opportunity of employment in the country is also
leading to brain drain and exodus of a large number of skilled and unskilled persons abroad.
It is time that concerted efforts are made by the State to assure employment to the citizens
of the country and to provide unemployment relief to those who have not been able to
secure employment. It is also necessary to promote an unemployment insurance scheme for
the purpose, so that the scheme may serve to finance the funds for the unemployment relief.

Hence the Bill.

NEw DELHI; | RAMDAS ATHAWALE
August 16, 2005 | |


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 3 provides that the Government shall endeavour to provide employment to all

eligible citizens. Clause 4 of the Bill seeks to provide unemployment allowance to the 2 |

citizens who have attained the age of eighteen years or above. Clause 5 provides for
unemployment insurance scheme. This involves a recurring expenditure of about one
hundred crore rupees per annum from the Consolidated Fund of India. The recurring expen-
diture is expected to reduce substantially as and when employment is provided. |

No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.

मै



MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

| Clause 4 of the Bill empowers the Government to make rules for fixing the rate of
unemployment allowance. Similarly, clause 6 empowers the Government to fix the rate of
contribution to Unemployment Insurance Scheme.

Clause 7 empowers the Government to make rules for carrying out the provisions of
the Bill. The matters in respect of which such rules may be made would relate to matters of
procedure and administrative detail and it is not practicable to provide for them in the Bill
itself.

The delegation of the legisiative power is of a normal character.


LOK SABHA

A

BILL
to provide for a scheme for eradication of unemployment from the country. <a
तह

(Shri Ramdas Athawale, MP.)

MGIPMRND—3072LS—1 2-11-2005.

oe
- बढ
“a
ee R
=
a
>
;
श्र
i
4
ae is
—