1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2012
By
SHRI R. THAMARAISELV AN, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-third year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  This Act may be called the Constitution  (Amendment)  Act, 2012.
2. Article  130 of the Constitution shall be renumbered as clause (1) thereof and after
clause (1), as so renumbered, the following clause shall be added, namely:—
Short title.
Bill No. 127 of  2012
Amendment
of article 130.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
"(2) There shall be established a permanent Bench of the Supreme Court at
Chennai, consisting of such number of judges of the Supreme Court as the Chief
Justice of India may from time to time determine, but not less than five in number, to
exercise the powers and jurisdiction for the time being vested in the Supreme Court
in respect of cases arising in the States of Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala and
Tamil Nadu and the Union territory of Puducherry.".
5

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The Supreme Court, which is the apex Court of justice in the country, is located in
Delhi. The litigants have to come to Delhi in connection with their cases in Supreme Court.
A large number of people also have to come to Delhi in response to the summons of the
Supreme Court.
India being such a vast country, all such visits to the Supreme Court from far off places
exact a very high cost in terms of time and money from litigants. This is more so in case of
people coming from southern India. From the administrative point of view also, serving of
notices, paper work, postal exigencies in regard to distant places are leading to staggering of
cases, postponement, ex parte decisions, etc. The location of the apex court in Delhi is one
of the major reasons behind delays in delivery of justice.
Under  these circumstances, creation of a Bench of the Supreme Court in southern
India is the need of the hour.
Chennai, the cyber city of the nation, is ideally suited for the purpose as the
infrastructure and other facilities are already available there. It is also well connected both
within the region and with Delhi.
In case a Bench of the Supreme Court is set up in Chennai, it would not only save the
time and money of the litigants but will also help in expeditious disposal of cases.
The Bill accordingly seeks to amend the Constitution of India.
N
EW DELHI; R. THAMARAISELV AN
November 7, 2012.
3

4
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides for establishment of a permanent Bench of the
Supreme Court at Chennai. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely to involve a recurring expenditure of about rupees
fifty lakh per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five crore is also likely to be involved.

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * * *
130. The Supreme Court shall sit in Delhi or in such other place or places, as the Chief
Justice of India may, with the approval of the President, from time to time, appoint.
* * * * * *
5
Seat of
Supreme
Court.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri R. Thamaraiselvan, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—3271LS(S3)—21.11.2012.