1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016
By
SHRI R. DHRUV ANARAYANA, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2016.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In article 72 of the Constitution, in clause ( 1), after sub-clause (c), the following
proviso shall be added, namely:—
"Provided that in cases of sentence of death, the person convicted shall be
given a reasonable opportunity of being heard before the President.".
3. In article 161 of the Constitution, the following proviso shall be added at the end,
namely:—
"Provided that in cases of sentence of death, the person convicted shall be given a
reasonable opportunity of being heard before the Governor.".
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 127 of  2016
5
10
Amendment
of article 72.
Amendment
of article 161.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Articles 72 and 161 of the Constitution empower the President of India and the
Governors of States to grant pardons, reprieves, respite or remissions of punishment or to
suspend, remit or commute the sentence of any person convicted of any offence mentioned
in the said articles. The President and the Governors have been bestowed with absolute
powers in this regard. However, there is no Constitutional provision for oral hearing of a
convict before the President or the Governor in cases of mercy petition seeking parndo,
commutation, etc. of death sentence.
In the famous case of Kehar Singh Anr. vs Union of India, the petition to allow for Kehar
Singh's representative to see the President in person in order to explain the case concerning
him was rejected on the ground that it was not in accordance with "the well established
practice in respect of consideration of mercy petitions". In response to a further letter written
by the counsel for Kehar Singh, the Secretary to the President wrote that the President is of
the opinion that he cannot go into the merits of a case finally decided by the highest court of
the land and that the petition for grant of pardon on behalf of Kehar Singh will be dealt with in
accordance with the provisions of the Constitution. On 1st December, 1988, a writ petition was
filed before the Supreme Court to consider whether the President, while exercising his power
to grant pardon under article 72 of the Constitution, could examine the merits of a case which
had been finally heard and decided by the Supreme Court. The Supreme Court in its judgement
dated 16th December, 1988 under the then Chief Justice R.S. Pathak, observed, "We are of the
view that it is open to the President in the exericse of the power vested in him by article 72 of
the Constitution to scrutinise the evidence on the record of the criminal case and come to a
different conclusion from that recorded by the court in regard to the guilt of, and sentence
imposed on, the accused. In doing so, the President does not amend or modify or supersede
the judicial record. The judicial record remains intact and undisturbed. The President acts in a
wholly different plane from that in which the Court acted. He acts under a constitutional
power, the nature of which is entirely different from the judicial power and cannot be regarded
as an extension of it. And this is so, notwithstanding the practical effect of the Presidential act
is to remove the stigma of guilt from the accused or to remit the sentence imposed on him".
The judgement also said that there is no right in the condemned person to insist on an oral
hearing before the President and, "the President may consider sufficient the information
furnished before him in the first instance or he may send for further material relevant to the
issues which he considers pertinent, and he may, if he considers it will assist him in treating
with the petition, give an oral hearing to the parties".
The present Bill seeks to amend the Constitution keeping in view the judgement which
states that the effect of the pardon granted by the President or the Governor is to remove the
stigma of guilt from the accused or to remit the sentence imposed on him. An oral hearing
provides the petitioner with the opportunity to present the case in the matter of his/her life
and death. Since in most cases it is years before a mercy petition is considered for acceptence
or rejection, the convicted would have already spent a lot of time in prison. The person
convicted of death sentence should be allowed to present a case for himself so that while
considering his/her petition, the executive can take into consideration the evidence of
reformation. Even capital punishment retentionists advocate the exhaustion of all possibilities
of survival, as a greater principle of precaution, before executing a death sentence. Mercy
powers of the executive serve the purpose of saving the nation from the guilt of miscarriage of
justice. Though judicial review is incorporated to prevent the misuse of power granted to the
executive, it may also serve as a barrier in implementation of constitutional principles. Mercy
petition is a constitutional prerogative which must be exercised with a great deal of responsibility
and the petitioner should be entitled to an oral hearing before the executive.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; R. DHRUVANARAYANA
April 11, 2016.

3
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * * * * * * *
72. (1) The President shall have the power to grant pardons, reprieves, respites or
remissions of punishment or to suspend, remit or commute the sentence of any person
convicted of any offence—
(a) in all cases where the punishment or sentence is for an offence against any
law relating to a matter to which the executive power of the Union extends;
(b) in all cases where the punishment or sentence is for an offence against any
law relating to a matter to which the executive power of the Union extends;
(c) in all cases where the sentence is a sentence of death.
(2) Nothing in sub-clause (a) of clause (1) shall affect the power conferred by law on
any officer of the Armed forces of the union to suspend, remit or commute a sentence
passed by a Court Martial.
(3) Nothing in sub-clause(1) shall affect the power to suspend, remit or commute a
sentence of death exercisable by the Governor of a State under any law for the time being in
force.
* * * *
161. The Governor of a State shall have the power to grant pardons, reprieves, respites
or remissions of punishment or to suspend, remit or commute the sentence of any person
convicted or any offence against any law relating to a matter to which the executive power
of the State extends.
* * * *
Power of
President to
grant pardons,
etc., and to
suspend, remit
or commute
sentences in
certain cases.
Power of
Governor to
grant pardons,
etc., and to
suspend, remit
or cummute
sentences in
certain cases.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri R. Dhruvanarayana, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—211LS(S3)—03-05-2016.