~. 
CORJtIGBNDA 
to 
lhbi ThANSFOhl~ AiIj"D S~\.il'CHGL.AR lJ.AJj.:W (ACQUlbIT10N AND TRAtJSFl!li. 
OF UNLBh'J:Al' .. INGS) LILL, 1983 
(To be/As l.ntroo.uced in wk Sabha) 
; 
1 • Pa&e 2) -
agalnst line 32; . .l.nsert t.ne marginal: citaiion,-
"1 of 195'." 
2: ?aS6 5, line 15,-
for "sev~ntj-eighty" read IIseventy-t.-Loe,htll 
3. Page " l.l.nes 37 and 38,-
for lIa!lopinte(:n read "appointed" 
Ire PaiSe" 8, l.Lne H~-
for "ensure" n; ad "€:nurE," 
(i) for "i;:, " ~~ "in" 
(1i) 1'ot' "cat.oegorv" rea!.!. "category" 
6. Paf~ 11, ~ine 28,~ 
"ft~Ellf[i.~ls" Lnsert 
Pao~: 12, line 44,-
for "be" read "bytt 
8. f~ge 13~ line ~)-
"to" 
9. 
for "deE-lllend II re:;.d Udel::::med" 
Page 13, 1.:.ne 23:-,. 
for lI,Prlcipal" read IIPr.i..ncipw." 
10. Pab e 13, line 3',-
for "any" ~ ~IAny" 
11. Page 13, l~ne 38,-
for "allY" ~ "Jany" 
N.E.W DLL.t11 i 
November 29. 12~j_ 
Aerahay anao;-~S=-ak"'-a""') -

As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABRA ON 
• l U (C n\a~. 117 of 1983 ~ .. 
THE TRANSFORMER AND SWITCHGEAR LIMITED 
(ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF UNDERTAKINGS) 
BILL, 1983 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
CLAUSES 
'1. Short title and commencement. 
2. DefinitiOns. 
CHAPTER II 
ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF THE CoMPANY 
3. Transfer to, and vesting in, the Central Government of the under-
takings of the Company. 
. 4. General effect of vesting. 
5. Central Governmcl,1t dor Andrew Yule not to be liable for p~or 
liabilities. 
6. Power of the· Central Government to direct vesting of the under-
takings of the Company in Andrew Yule. 
<CHAPTER III 
PAYMENT OF AMOUNTS 
7. Payment of amount. 
8. Payment of further amount. 
CHAPTER IV. 
MANAGEMENT, ETC., OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF TIlE COMPANY 
9. Management, etc., of the undertakings of the Company. 
i 
.1 
10. Duty of persons in charge of management of the undertakings of 
the Company to deliver all assets, etc. 
11. Duty of pf'rsons to account 'for assets, etc., in their possession. 
CHAPTER V 
PROVISIONS RELATING TO nlE EMPLOYEES OF TIlE COMPANY 
12. Continuance of employees. 
13. Provident fund and other funds. 

(ii) 
CHAPTER VI 
COMMISSIONER OP PAYMINTS 
M '.€U\JSBS 
1'4~ Appointment of Commissioner of Paymeets. 
1'5. Payment by the Central Government totbeCOBunisliOaer. 
16. Certain powers of the Central Oovernment or AacIrew YIIIe. 
17. Oaims to be made to the Commissioner. 
18. Priority of claims. 
19. Examination of claims. 
20. Admission or rejectioa of claims. 
21. aisbursement o( mODeY by the Commissioaer to claimaDts. 
22. Disbursement of amounts to the CompallY. 
2l. Undisbursed or unclaimed amount to be deposited to tho paeral 
revenue account. 
CHAPTER VII 
MIscBLLANEOUS 
24. Act to have overriding effect. 
25. Contracts to cease to have effect unless ratified by the Central Gov-
ernment or Andrew Yule. 
26. Protection of actioa taken in JOOd faith. 
27. Delegation of powers. 
28. Penalties. 
29. Offences by companies. 
lO. Power to make rules. 
ll. Power to remove difficulties. 
32. Repeal and saving. 
THE SCHEDULE. 

BID No. 127 of 1'13 
THE TRANSFORMER AND SWITCHGEAR LIMITED 
(ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF UNDERTAKINGS) 
BILL. 1983 
A 
BR.L 
10 provide for ~ acquisition and transfer of the undertakings Of the Trans-
former IIIId Sw;tchltfDr Limited with a view to securing the be Iter utilisa-
lion of the a\.'ailable infra-structure thereof and to modernise and augment 
the production of. transformers, switchgears and other allied electrical 
equipments by the .aid rildertakings So 4'1 to subserlle the interests of th, 
general pubUc by ensuring the continued supply of the aforesaid articles 
wINch fit elMnt. to the needs of the economy of the cOUntry and for 
mDlters connected tlt6ewith tlr incidental therelo. 
WHEUAS the Transfonner and Switchgear Limited are. engaged in the 
production of ~erlain articles mentioned ;n the First SchedUle to the Industries 
6.5 of .'Sl. (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951\ under tbe beading "ELECTRICAL 
EQUIPMENT"'; 

3 
AND WHEREAS the Company had been suffering heavy losses for a 
number of years with the result that a majority of the workers of the Company 
had been laid off and the affairs of the Company are being managed in a 
manDer prejudicial to the interests of the Company and the public ~nterest; 
AND WHEREAS for the purpose of securing the better utilisation of the 5 
available infra-structure of the undertakings of the Company and for modernis-
ing and augmenting the production of transformers, switchgears and other 
allied electrical equipments by the said undertakings, investment of a large 
amount is. necessary; . 
AND WHEREAS it is necessary to acquire thc undertakings of the Trans- 10 
former and Switchgear Limit~rl to enable the Central Government to have 
such investments made so us to slibserve the interests of the general public by 
the continuance by the undertakings of the. Company of the production and 
supply of the aforesaid articles which are essential to the needs of the economy 
of the' country; 15 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-fourth Year of tile Republic 
of India as follows:-
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY : .' , 
aart title J. (1) This Act may be called the Transformer and Switchgear Limit- 110 
--. cd (Acquisition aDd Transfer of Undertukings) Act, 1983 . 
••• $1'1 
(2) It shall be deemed to have comciDtofol'Ge, oA • :tbo8tb day of 
November, 1983. 
, ~ ~, .. 
J 
( 
1. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "Andrew Yulc" means Andrew Yule and Company Limited, 25 
Calcutta, a cCll1lpany formed and rcgi~tered under the Companies Act, t of 19.56. 
1956; 
(b) "appointed day" means the 8th day of November, 1983; 
(e) "Commissioner" means tbe Commissioner of Payments ·appoint-I ". 
ed under section 14; 
. (fl) "Company" me.U)s the Transformer ··and Switchgear Limited, 
being a company as defined in the. Companies Act, 1956, and having lts 
registered office at 21, Guindy Road, Adyar, Madras-600020;. ~ . 
(e) "ootification" means a notification 
Gautte: 
-
. ". pUblished in 'the. Offtdal ., 
. .':. .. 35-' 
.J (1) "prescrihed" means prescribed by rules Jl1ade under .thjs A<;t; 
l~' 
." 

I of 1956. 
3 
(g) "specified date" in re-Jation to .. such date as the Central G any provIsIon of this Act, means , overnment may b ffi' . purposes of that provision a d d'ff ' Y no I catIon, specIfy for the . 
different. provisions of this Act.n I erent dates may be specified for , 
5 (h) words and expres" d h . the' Companies A.ct, 1956: s~~:~ use erem and not defined but defined in 
to them in that Act. have the meanings, respectively, assigned 
CHAPTER II 
ACQUISITJON AND TRANSFER OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF THE COMPANY 
10 3.08 tile appointed clay, the ......".... 01 theC 
tide "'~IiiUi.f of tile 0 .~, ... tile ript,. . . .o .... y ......... to its 1IIlCIenaIdnp, ...... ' by YiItao. 
01 MAd, ... fl.", to, ad f.' ill, 'the CedtrtII Go ... .... 
Transfer 
to. and 
vestin. in. 
the Cen-
tral Gov-
ernment of 
the under-
lakings of 
the Com-
pauy. 
4. (1)' The undertakings of the Company shall be deemed to include an General 
assets, rights,. lease-holds, powers. authorities and privileges. and atl property, etrect of 
15 movable and Immovable. including lands. buildings. workshops. stores instru- vcstinB. 
~enll!. machinery and equipment, cash balances. cash on hand. reserv~ funds. 
JOvestments. book debts and all other right!; and interests in. or arising out of, 
Guch ~roperty as were immediately before the appointed day in the ownership, 
~seS!lian;' power or control of the Company. whether within or outside India, 
10 and atl booles of account. registers and a11 other documents of whatever natUTe 
relating thereto. 
(2) All properties as aforesaid which have vested in the Central Government 
under s~tion 3 shall. by force of such vestinl!. he freed nnd discharged from 
any truSt, obli~atfOn. mortgall!e. cha~~e. lien and a11 o'her incumbrances affectint! 
:l5 them. and any attachment. in.junction. deeree or order of any court. tribunal or 
other authority reStrlctin~ the uc;e of ~uch p"operties in any maMer shall be 
deemed to have been withdrawn. 
(3) Every mortAagec of any property which has vested under this Act 
in the Central Government and every person holdin#! any charl!e. lien or other 
30 interC!li ,in. or in r~lation to. lmv ~llch property shaIJ I!ivc. within such time and 
in such mann~r 8!; may be prescribed. an intimation to the Commissioner of 
!luch mortgng~. charge. lien or other interest. 
(4) For' the removal of doubts. it is hereby dec1a"ed that the mort~agee of . 
any property re'ferred to in sub-section (3) or any other person holdinl! anv 
35 charlze. lien or other interest in. or in relation to. anv ·mch property shall be 
entit1ed. to. claim. in accordance with his rights and inte"ests. payment of the 
mortga,e money or other dues. in whole or 'in part. out of· the amount specified 
in s~tion 7 and also out of the amount determined under section 8. but no 
such mortgage. charge. lien or other interest shaU be enfor~eablc against any 
40 property whict) h~s vestcd. in thc Central Government. 
(5) Any licence or other instrument granted to thc Company j'n re~a:tion to 
IIny undertaking which has vested in the Ccntral Government under sectIOn 3. ~t 

c.tnJ 
a..... 
~ CII' 
A .... 
Yale IlOt 
to'" 1iab18 far 
priar IlL 
biU1iw. 
Power of 
the 
Central 
Oovem-
meat 
to direct 
veldq 
of the 
any ti~,e before the .appointed day and in force immediately before that day, 
shall continue lobe in force on and after such day in . accordance with' its tenor 
in relation to, and for the purpbses of, sucb undertaking and 'on and trom the 
date of vesting of such undertaking under section 6, in Andrew Yule: that caal~ 
pany shall be deemed to be substituted in such licence or other mstnimcmtli' 5 
if such licence or other instrument had been granted to, Andrew Vulo and that 
comp...,. shall hold it for the remainder 'of the period, for wbk:b tho ~J; I 
would have held it under the terms thereof. 
(6) If, on the appointed day, any suit, appeal or other proceeding of what-
ever nature in relation to any property whicb has vested in the. Central Govem- 10 
ment under section 3, instituted Or preftr~ bj Or. against, the Company is 
pending, the salDe, shan not abate, be discontinued or be, in any way, preJudl- , 
dally affected by reason of the transfer of the underla'king~ of the Co.pa..,· 
or or Wa'Y!hMt f!(tntaift~'hl' thls!Att, _t..'dte.·_,appoal OJ'otheriflroaeelill 
may b4!'~t .. eit, ;~.4ht,,·enfGrcrdd(t.;tcil'l'a_i ...... ,~lt.ae..-.; I~'i' 
, or where the ~atitl&S df.1ftte·Codtpaliy:art directod ..... tr.,.ti.r6 .. Wi.,t! ill 
'in And~ Yule, by or against Andrew Yule. 
s. (1) Every liability of the Company in respect of any period prior to the 
appointed day. shall be dle liability of the Company and shan be enforceable 
'against it and not against the Central Govemment. or. where the undertaldDgi ~o 
·of the .Companyare directed under section 6 fo vest il1 Andrew Yule, agaInst 
A1ldrew .. Vule. I j '" ';:: 
j 
, 
(2) F:or the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared tbat.~ 
, (D) save as otherwise exore9S1v provided in tftk section or in aay adler 
provljlon of this Act, no liability of the Com"anv in respect ofanv pwlod.15 
prior to the appointed day, shan be enforceable a2aimt dte Ceatrad·(Joy. 
emmeut, or, where the undertakings of the ComJ'lanv are directed UDder 
seCtIon 6 to vest in Andrew Yule, against Andrew Yule: 
(b) no award. decree or order of any court, tribunal or other authority 
in rrla~ion to the undertakings of the Company, pINed after the appointed SO 
day, in re~pect of any matter. claim or di!pule which arose before that:'." 
shaD be enforceable against the Central Government,. or where the uDder-
takings of the Company are directed under section 6 to vest in ADdrew 
Yale, agaimt Andrew Yule; 
(e) no liability incurred by the Company before the appointed day, f~r 35 
the contravention of a provision of any law for:tbe time bein2 in force, ihall 
be enforceable against the Central Government. or. where the undertatdngs 
of tbe Company are directed under section 6 to vest in A,ndrew Y.le~ 
apin&t Andrew Yule. 
6. (i) Notwithstanding· anythtng contained ',in ,;ections 3 aud 4, the Centra1 40 
Government may, subject to !luch term!! nndCODditions as it may Olink fit '0 
impose. direct, by notification. that the undertakinlP,$ of the Company. and the 
right, title and interest of dle Companv in relation to its undertaJdnl(s,whic:h 
have vested in the Central Government under section 3, ~hall, instead of continu-
in!! to veet in the Central Government. vec;t in Andrt'w 'Vule either on the 'd~~ 45 

5 
,.,f the notifie~tion or on such earlier or later date (not being 
than the appotnted day) as may be specified in the notification. 
a date earlier uDtlutat-
Hlp of 
(2) Where tbe light, title and interest of the Company in relation. to ill 
tIIldertakings vest in Andrew Yule under sub-section (I), Andrew Yule shall, on 
• Sand from the date of such vesting, be deemed to have become the owner in 
relation to such undertakings, and all the rights and liabilities of the Central Gov-
ernment in rolation to such undertakings shall, on and from the date of such 
vesting, 6e deemed to have become the rights and liabilities of Andrew Yule. 
ao 
" 
CHAPTER III 
PAYMENT OF AMOUNTS 
7 •. Fertile ....... to, _ v_" in, tile Ce ..... Govel'llllllld .... ..... 
3, .. the aMertakiQp 01 the CoaIpany aDd ,the ript, title ......... of ... 
C.,DJ .. nIItioDfo iU ........ kiap, dJere shall tie paid by'" CeD8'II 
Ge ........ to the Compaay, ia cash, and in .. .-ner specUied .. a.pter 
15 VI, .D .mould of rupees seftldy-eighty Iakbs .... twenty..- 'hoasIad. 
.. (1) The .aouat specified irD sedioD 7 sbaII CaT)' simple iDterest • tile nee 
01 ..... per .c:eat. per _.. for the period collUllelldllg OD tile appoiated day 
.... e..... OD the date oa which payment of such alllOllllt Is .. ..., .. 
CeIItnI Gftel'llDalt to abe Commissioner. ,» .. 
20 (2) The amount detennined in accordance with the prOVIsIons of sub-
section (1) shall be paid by the Central Government to the Company in adclitioil 
''':CDm-
.. ~Ia 
:A .... 
Ylde. ' 
Pay-
meat of 
amouDt. 
Paymeat 
of fur-
ther 
amount. 
to the' amount spocificd in section 7. .~ 
(3) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the liabilities of the 
Company, in relation to its undertakings which have vested in the Central 
!Z!j Governmentuncier section 3, shall be discharged from the amount referred to 
in section 7, and also from the amount determined under sub-section (1) in 
accordance with the rights and interests of the creditors of the Company. 
CHAPTER IV 
MANAGBMP.NT, ETC., OF nlE UNDERTAKINOs OF THB CoMPANY 
30 9. The general superintendence,. direction, control and mana~ement. of the 
affairs and business of the undertakmgs of the Company, the rIght, title and 
interest in relation to which have vested in the Central Government under sec-
tion 3 shall where a direction has been inade by the Central Government 
uftdel' ~b-~tion (1) of section 6, vest in Andre~ Yule and thereupon Andrew 
. Yule shan be entitled toexereise, to the exclUSion of all oth~r persona, ~1 
35 IUCh powers Bnd do atl such things. as the Company was authonscd to exercue 
and do In 'relation to its undertakmgs. 

"0.,: of 
--,·iIl dIqe 
of ....... 
..at .. 
th6~8DIIer­
tati .. 
oftbe 
Compa.y 
to cIeIi-
vet all 
auetI. 
etc. 
Duly of 
perIODS 
to account 
for ... .., 
etc., ia 
tbeir 
~ .. 
., 
• 
18. (1) On the vesting of the management of the undertakings of the 
Company in Andrew Yule, all persons in charge of the management of 
the undertakings of the Company immediately before such vesting, shall 
be bound to deliver to Andrew Yule, all assets, books of account, regis-
ters and other documents in their custody relating to the undertakings 5 
of the Company. 
(2) The Central Government may issue such directions as it may deem 
desirable in the circumstances of the case to Andrew Yule and that 
company may also, if it is considered necessary 80 to do, apply to the 
Central Government at uny time for instructions as to the manner in which 10 
the management of, the undertakings of the Company shall be conduct-
ed or in relation to any other matter arising in the course of such 
management. . 
11. (1) Any person who has, on the appointed day, in his possession 
or under his control, any assets, books, documents or other papers 15 
relating to any of the undertakings owned by the Company, which have 
vested in the Central Government or in Andrew Yule under this Act, and 
which belong to the Company or would have so belonaed, if the 
undertakings owned by the Company had not vested in the Central 
'Government or Andrew Yule, shan be liable to aecount for the said 20 
-assets, bOoks, documents and other papers to the Central Government 
'Or Andrew Yule and shall deliver them up to the Central Oovenunent 
or' Andrew Yule or to such person or persons as the Central Government 
or Andrew Yule may specify in this behalf. 
(2) The Central Government or Andrew Yule may take or cause to 25 
. be taken all necessary 'steps for securing possession of the undertakings 
of the Company which have vested in the Central Govemmeat or Andrew 
Yule under this Act. 
(3) The Company shall, within such period as the Central Govern-
ment may allow in this behalf, furnish to that Government a complete inventory of 30 
all its properties and assets, as on the appointed day, pertaining to the under-
takings which have vested in the Central Government under section 3, and, for 
this pUrpollC, the Central Government or Andrew Yule shall afford to the 
Company aU reasonable facilities. 
CHAPTER V 
PROVISIONS RELATING TO THE EMPLOYEES OP THE COMPANY 
U. (1) Every person who has been, immediately before the apopint-
ed day, employed in any of the undertakings of the Company shall 
become,-
35 
(a) on and from the appoiated day, an employee of the 40 
Central Government; and 
(b) where the undertakings of the Company are directed 
under sub-section (1) of section 6 to vest in Andrew Yule, an em-
ployee of Andrew Yute on and from the date of such vesting, 
and 'Shall hold office or service under the Central Government or Andrew: Yule, .5 
as the case may be, with the same rights and privileges as to ~D8ion, gratuity 
and . other matters 8S would have been admissible to him if there had been DO 
such vesting and shall continue to do so un1eas and untU his employment. under 

7 
the Ce.ntr~1 Governmc?t Or Andrcw Yule, as the case may be, is duly terminated . 
or UJ>h) his remuneratIOn and other conditions of service ar~ duly altered by the 
Central Government or Andrew Yule, as the 'Case may" be. 
14 of 1947. (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Disputes Act, 
5 1947, or in any other law for the time being in force, the' transfer of the services 
of any officer or other person employed in any undertaking of the Company tq 
the Central Government or Andrew Yule shaH not entitle such officer or othe~ 
employee :0 any compensation under this Aet or under any other law for the 
time being in force and nc such claim shall be entertained by any 'Court, tribunal 
10 or other authority. 
13. (1) Where the Company has established a provident .fund, superannua-
tion fund, welfare fund or any other fund for the benefit of the persons employed 
in any of the undertakings of the Company, the monics relatable to the officers 
or other employees, whose services haVe become transferred, by or under this 
15 Act, to the Central Government or Andrew Yule, shall, out of the monies 
standing, on the appointed day, to the credit df such provident fund, superan .. 
nuation fund, welfare fund. or other fund, stand tnmsferred to, and vest in, the 
Central Government or Andrew Yule, as the caSe may be. 
(2) The monies which stand transferred under sub-section (J) to the Ccn-
20 tral Government or Andrew Yule, as the case may be, shall be dealt with by 
that Government or that company in such manner as may be prescribed. 
CHAPTER VI 
COMMISSIONER OF PAYMENTS 
14. (1) Tbe Central Goyernment shall, for the purpose of disbursi6g thel 
:25· = a ... ...,DIe to die Compuy uDder sectioas 7 !lDd 8, by qodfic:ation, appoint 
'. Commis8ioner of Payments. 
(2) The Central Goftnuaent may 8JIIPOHM such oilier pel:SOllS as it may think 
fit to assilt tile ColIIIDIssieaet' Ilad' thereupon the CCJIDIDissioaer may ~rise 
0IIe or -ore of such perIODS alto to exercise all or 88y of !be powers eurdsable 
30 by him UDder this Act and different persons may be authorised te. exerd!le differ-
eat powen. 
. he' 'oner t exercise any of the (3) Any person authonsed by t e ommlss~ 0 . 
. able by the Commissioner may exercise those powers 10 the sante 
powers exnedrClwSI 'th lh~ same effect as if they have been conferred on tbat person 
manner a ". . . 
35. I b h' Act and not by way of authOrIsation. du;!ct y y t IS . 
of the Commissioner 13M other persons 
(4) TIle saJldes and allowances f the CoasoIifl*d Fund of 
appointed ....... this section shall be defrayed out 0 
1IMIia. 
Provi-
dent fund 
and other 
funds. 
Appoint_ 
ment of 
Com-
missioner 
of Pay-
ments, 
I G . nment shall within thirty days from the specified 
]5 (J) Th Centra over , 
. . e· I C mmissiollcr, for payment to the Company-
40 date, pay Jfl cash to t lC 0 . 
thc amount specified in sectIOn 7, and 
(a) an amount equal to 
I t the amount payable to tlle Company under 
( b) an amount cqua 0 
seclion 8. 
Payment 
by tht! . 
Central 
Govern-
ment to 
the Com-
missioner, 

certaiD 
powers of 
tbe Cen-
tral 
Govern-
ment or 
Andrew 
yule. 
Claims to 
be made 
to the 
Com-
miasiooer. 
Priorit;y of 
claima. 
8 
(2) A deposit account shall be opened by the Central Government in favour 
of the Commissioner, in the Public Account of India, and every amount paid 
udd-:r this Act to the Commissioner shall be deposited by him to the- credit of 
the said deposit a'Ccount and the said deposit account shall be operated by the 
Commissioner. 5 
(3) Records shall be maintained by the Commissioner in respect of the 
undertakings of the Company in (elation to which payment has been made to 
him under this Act. 
(-I) The interest accruing on the amount standing to the credit of the deposit 
account referred to in sub-section (2) shall en!iur~ to the benefit of the. Company. 10 
1'. (l) The Central Government or Andrew Yule, as the case may be, shall 
be entitled to receive up to the specified date. to the exclusion of all other per-
sons. any money due to the Company. in relation to its undertakings which have 
vested in the Central· Government or Andrew Yule', and realised after the 
appointed day, notwithstanding that the realisation pertains to a period prior to 15 
the appointed day. 
(2) The Central Government or Andrew Yule, as the case may be, may 
make a claim to the Commissioner with regard to every payment made by it 
after the appointed day for discharging any liability of the Company in rellition 
to any periOd prior to the appointed day; and every such claim shall have prio- 20 
rity in accordance with the priorities attaching. under this Act to the matter in 
relation to which such liability has been discbarged by the Central Government 
or A~drew Yule. 
('> Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the liabilities of the Company 
in respect of any transaction prior to the appointed day, which have not been 115 
discharged on or before the specified date. shall be the liabilities of the- Company. 
17. Every person having a claim against the Company with regard to any oC 
the matters specified in the Schedule pertaining to the undertakings of the Com-
pany shall prefer mlch c1aim before the Commissioner within thirty days from 30. 
the specified date: . 
Provided that if the Commissioner is satisfied that the claimant was prevented 
by sufficient cause from preferring the claim within the said period of thirty days, 
he may entertain the claim within a further period of thirty days .and not 
thereafter. . 
18. The claims made under section 17 shan have priorities in accor4ance 35 
with the following principles, namely:-
(a) Category J shall have precedence over all other categories and 
Category. II shan haVe .precedence over Category m, and SO on; 
( b) the claims specified in each of the categories shan rank equally 
and be paid in ifulI, but, if the amount is insufficient to meet such claims .0 
in full. they shan abate in equal proportions and he paid accordingly; 
and 
. (c) .the question of discharging any 1iability with regard to a matter 
Speclfted JD a lower category shan arise only if a surplus is left after meet-
jn~ all the liabilities spec,Hied is the immediately higher cateaorv. 4 .Ii 

9 
19. (1) On receipt of the claims made under section 17, the Commissioner 
shall arrange the claims in lhe order of priorities specified in the Schedule and 
examine the same in accordance with such order of priorities. 
(2) If. on examination of the claims, the Commissioner is of opinion. that 
5 the amount paid to him under this Act is not sufficient to meet the' 
liabilities specified in any lower category, he shall· not be required to examine 
the claims in respect of such lower category. 
~O. (1) After examining the claims with reference to the priorities set out 
In the Schedule, the Commissioner shall fix a certain date on or before which 
10 every claimant shall file the proof of his claim. 
(2) Not less than fourteen days' notice of the date so fixed shall be gIven 
by advertisement in one issue of any daily newspaper in the English language 
having circulation in the major part of the country and one issue of any daily 
newspaper in such regional language as· the Commissioner may consider suitable, 
15 and every such notice shall call upon the claimant to file the proof of his claim· 
with the Commissioner within the period specified in the advertisement 
(3) Every claimant who fails to file the pr90f of his claim within the time 
specified by the Commissioner shall be excluded from the disbursements made 
by the Commissioner. . 
~o (4) The Commissioner shall, after such investigation as may; in his 
opinion, be necessary and after giving the Company an opportunity of refuting 
the claim and after giving the claimant a reasonable opportunity of being heard, 
by order in writing, admit or reject the claim in whole or in part. 
(S) The Commissioner shall have the power kl regulate his own procedure 
~5 in all matters arising out of the discharge of his functions, including the piace 
or places at which he may hold his sittings and shall. for the purpose of making 
an investigation under this Act, have the same powers as arc vested in a 
5 of 1908. civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 190R, while trying a suit, in 
respect of the following matters, namely:-
45 of 1860. 
2 of 1974. 
35 
(a) the summoning and enforcing the attendance of any witness and 
examining him on oath; . 
(b) the discovery and production of any document or other material 
object producible as evidence; 
(c) the reception of evidence on affidavits; 
(d) the issuing of any commission for the examination of witnesses. 
(6) Any investigation before the Commissioner shall be deemed to be a 
judicial proceeding within the meaning· of sections 193 and 228 of. the Indian 
Penal Code and the Commissionl'r shall be deemed to be a civil court for the 
purposes of section 195 and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 
40 1973. 
(7) A claimant, who is dissatisfie~. with the de~isi~n of :~e Commissi~~er, 
may prefer an appeal against. ~ deCISion to ~h~ p~m~lpal CIvil c?urt of ~mgtnal 
jurisdiction within the local hmlts of whose lunsdlchon the registered (·ffice of 
the Company is situated: 
45 Provided that where a person who is a Judge of a High Court is appointed to 
be the Commissioner, lIuch appeal shall lie to the High Court of Madras and s~ch 
appeal shall be beard and disposed of by n,ot less than two Judges of that High 
Court. 
Exami-
Dation .,f 
claims. 
Admis-
sion or 
rejection 
of claims. 

Disbdne-
meat of 
moaey by 
the Com-
missioaer 
to clai-
mants. 
Disbune-
meat of 
amouDta 
to the 
Company. 
Undisbur-
ted or 
unclaimecl 
amcnmt to 
• be depo-
sited to 
1be II:De'" 
ralre-
YeDUe ac--
CIODDt. 
Act to 
have 
overridiq 
effect 
Contracts 
to c:eue to 
have effect 
unJesara-
tified by the 
CcDtral 
OOYel'lUDCnt 
or And-
rew Yule. 
to 
21. After admItting 'a c1aimunder this Act, the ameunt due in respect 
of such claim Shan be paid by the Commissioner to the person or persons to 
whom such amount is due, and on such payment, the liability of the Company in 
respect of such claim sball stand discharaed. • 
22. (1) If, out of the monies paid to him in relation to the undertakinp of 5 
tbe Company. there is a balance left after meeting the liabilities as specified in the 
Schedule, the Commissioner shaH uisburse such balance to the Company. 
(2) Whe~ the possession of any machinery. equipment or otherprnperty has 
vested in the Central Government' or Andrew Yule under 'this Act, but sucb 
machinery, equipment or other property does not belong to the Company, it mall 10 
be lawful for the Central Government or Andrew Yule to contil)ue to possess such 
machinery· or equipment or other property on the same terml and conditions 
under wbich they were POSsessed by the Company immediately before the 
appointed day. 
23. Any money paid to the Commissioner which remains undisbursed or un- 15 
claimed on the date immediately preceding the date on which the office of the 
Commissioner is inally wound up, shall be transferred by tbe Commis.Vooef, be-
fore his oftice is finally wound up, to the ~neral -revenue account of the Central 
Government; but a claim to any money so transferred may be preferred to tho 
Central Government by the person entitled to such payment and man be dealt 20 
with as if such transfer bad not been made. and the order, if any, for payment of 
the claim, being treated as an order for th~ refund of revenue. 
CHAPTER VII 
MISCELLANEOUS 
24. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding any- 25 
thing inconsistent therewitb contained in any other law for the time being in. 
force or in any instrument having effect by virtue of any law, other than this 
Act or in any decree or order of any court, tribunal or other authority. 
25. Every contrclCt entered into by the Company in reJation to its undertak-
ings, whicb bas veIted in the Central Government under section S, for any 30 
service, sale or supply and in force immediately before the appointed day, thall, 
on and from the expiry of one hundred and eighty days from theappointed 
day, cease to have effect UDl_ such contract is, before the e~iry of that period, 
ratified, in writing, by the Central Government or Andrew Yule, in which such 
undertakings have been vest,ed under this Act, and in ratifying such COlI-' 35 
tract, the Central Government or Andrew Yule may make such alteration or 
modification therein as it m~y think fit: 
Provided that the Central Government or Andrew Yule Shall not omit to 
ratify a contract and shall not make any alteration or modiftcation in a CODtract-
( a) unless it is satisfied that such contract is unduly onerous or has 4b 
been entered into in bad faith or is detrimental to the interests Of the Cen-
tral Government or Andrew Yule; and 

n 
(11) except after giving to the parties to the contract a reasonable 
opponVRity of hoktg heard and e~pt after recording in writing its reasons 
for refusal to ratify the contract Or for making any alteration or modifica-
tion tberein. 
5 26. (1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the 
10 
Central Government Or any officer or other employee of that Government or 
Andrew Yule or other person authorised by the Central Government or Andrew 
Yule for al1ything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this 
Act. 
(2) No suil or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central Govern-
ment or any of its officers or other employees or Andrew Yu!c or other person 
authorised by the C~ntral Government or Andrew Yule for any damage caused 
or likely to be caused by anything which is in gOOd faith done or intended to be 
dODe under this Act. 
J 5 17, (1) The Central Government may, by notification, direct that :.II or any 
of the powers exercisable by it under this Act, other than the powers con-
ferred by this section, section 30 and section 31, may also be exercised by 
such .person Or persons as may be specified in the notification. 
(2) Whenever any delegation of power is made under sub-section (1), the 
SlO person to whom such power has been delegated shall act under the direction, 
control and supervision of the Central Government. 
.35 
40 
28. Any person who,-
(a) having in his possession, custody or control any property fonning 
pan of 'the undenakings of the Company, wrongfully withholds such pro-
peny from the Central Government or Andrew Yule; Or 
(b) wrongfully obtains possession of, or 1'etains, any property forming 
part of the undenakings of the Company; or 
(c) wilfully withholds or fails furnish to the ~ntral Government or 
Andrew Yule or any person or body of persons speCIfied by that Govern-
ment or Andrew Yule. as the case may be, any document relating to the 
~rtakiDgs of the Company, which may be in his possession, custody or 
control; or 
(d) falls to deliver to the Central Government or Andrew Yule,!" to 
an rson, or body of persons specified by that Government or ~!I1d~ 
.(f ~lepe· .~. L.-J..s of accO\lDt registers or other documents 10 hIs III , any a ....... ,5, ~. , • • 
possession, custody or control, relating to the undertakln!'s of the Company, 
or 
(t') wrongfully removes or ~estroys any property forming part of the 
oodertakiRgs of the Company; or 
. refers any claim under this Act which he knows or has 
(1)bIP to believe to be false or grOSSly inaccurate, reasona e cause 
. h bl 'th imprisonment for a term which may extend to two 
shall be P~thlS fin8 e w:Ch may extend to ten thousand rupeel, or with both. year., or WI e 
Protection 
of action 
taken in 
good 
faith. 
Oeleaation 
of powers. 
Penalties. 

OJfCllCll 
by com-
panies. 
Power t. 
make 
rules. 
Power to 
remcwe 
ctitftc:ul· 
ti& 
29. (1) Where an oUenee under this Act has been committed by a 
Company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was in 
charge of, and was responsible to, the company, for the conduct of the busin-
ess of the company, as well as th~ company, shall be deemed to be guilty of 
the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished ac- 5 
cordingJy: 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such 
person liable to any punishmcn!. if he proves that the offence was committed 
without his knowledge Or that he had exercised all due diligence to prevent the 
commission of such offence. II') 
(2) Notwith8landing anything contained in sub-section (1), wbcre any of-
fence under this Act has been committed by a company and it is prov-
ed that the offence has been committed . with the consent or connivance of, 
or is attributable to any neglect On the part of. any director, manager, ~retary 
or other officer of the .company. such director, manager, secretary or other 15 
ollicer shall be deemed to be gui1ty of that offence and shan be liable to be 
proceeded against and punished accordingly. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section.-
(a) "company" means any body corporate and includes a firm or 
other association of individuals; and 20 
(b) "director", in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm. 
30. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for 
carrying OUt the provisions of this Act. . 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing 
power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following matten, 25 
namely~-
(a) the time within which, and the manner in which, an intimation 
shall be given to the Commissioner under sub-section (3) of section 
4; 
(b) the manner in which the monies in any provident fund or other 30 
fund under section 13 shall be dealt with; 
( c) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed. 
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act 
shall be laid. as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parlia-
. ment. while it is in session, for a total period of thirty day, which may be 35 
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions. and if, before 
the expiry of the session immediately· following the session or the successive 
sessions aforesaid. both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule 
or both Houses agree that the rule should not 'be made, the rule shall there-
after have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case 40 
may be; so, however. that any such modification or annulment. shall be with-
out prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 
31. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, 
the Central Oovetnment may, be order, not 1Pconsistent with the provisions of 
thia Act, remove the diftlcu1ty: .. 5 

11 of 1983. 
5 
13 
·Provided that no such order shall be made afte: the expiry of a period of two 
years from the appointed dav. 
31. (1) The TranSformer and Switchgear Limited (Acquisition and 
Transfer of Undertakings) Ordinance, 1983, is hereby repealed. 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken UDder 
tbe said Ordinance shall be deemend to have been done or taken under the 
corresponding provisions of this Act. 
THE SCHEDULE 
(See sections 1 7, 19, 20 and 22) 
10 ORDER OF PRIORITIES FOR TH.E DISCHARGE OF LIABILITIES OF THE COMPANY. 
('alellO'., 1-
l .. 
20 
(a) Wages, salaries and other dUes payable to the employees of the 
Company. 
(b) Deductions made from the salaries and wages of the employees 
for provident fund, Employees' State Insurance contribution, premium re-
lating to Life Insurance Corporation of India or for any otter pur-
poses. 
«(") Arrears in ,,~Ialion to contributions to be made by the Company 
to the provident fund, Employees' State Insurance Fund, Life Insura.nce 
Corporation premium and any other arrear under any law for the Hme 
being in force (excluding gratuity). 
Category , /-
Pricipal amount of secured loans advanced by-
(i) Central Government; 
(;;) State Government; 
(iii) lJanks; 
(i\') Public financial in~tilUiious: 
(\') others; 
CateROr;)' /11-
Principal amount of unsecured loans advanced by-
(;) Central Government; 
(ij) State Government; 
(iii) Banks: 
(iv) public linancial instittllior.5. 
35 Cai('ion' /V-(al any credit :.lVuiled of by the Com~any for the purpose of carry-
.. 
I 
40 
iolt on any trading or manufacturing operattons. 
<b) any dues payable to the State Electricity Boards' or d other 
ClOvemment or ~emi-Governl11(nt institutions for supply of goo s or 
serviceli. 
(e) Arrears of interest on loan~ and advances. 
Catt'flOr)' JI-
(a) Revenue, taxes, C.l'SSC:', rales o~. other 
ment, State Government and local authontles. 
(b) Any oth~r loans or ducs. 
dues to Central Govern-
Repeal 
and 
savillJ, 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Transformer and Switchgear Limited was established in 1956 
fo~ the m~nufacture of transformers, switchgears and other allied elec-
tncal. equlpments. The Company commenced production in 1957 in 
techrucal collaboration with Dominitworks GMbh West Ge It h d bee' . I I rmany. a n Incurring osses for a number of years and the accumulated 
loss~s at the e~d of October, 1982 were of the order of Rs. 306 lakos·as 
agamst the paId-up capital of Rs. 12.5 lakhs. 
2. Efforts for the revival of the Company in the past had failed. 
Many schemes prepared for. the revival of the Company could not be 
implemented for waut of necessary finance. Further, such schemes can-
not meet all the past liabilities of the Company. Production in the 
Company had come to a standstill and wages to the workers were not 
being paid. Restructuring the Company in order to bring about a balance 
between assets and liabilities was therefore considered to be an imme-
diate necessity. This process cauld be achieved quickly only through 
nationalisation of the undertakings of the Company which would also 
result in the· revival of the undertakings. The nationalisation of the 
undertakings will not only protect the employment of about 300 skilletl 
workers in the city o.f Madras but also prevent loss of productive assets 
worth over &s. 78 lakhs. The products of the Company also cater to the 
vital power transmission sector. The nationalisation of the undertakings 
will, also preserve the high degree of st'phlsticated manufacturing .kills 
developed over the years in the national interest. tn view of these 
circ\lmstance~. it was considered necessary in the public interest to acquire 
the undertakings of the Transformer and Switchgear Limited and vest the 
said undertakings in Andrew Yule and Company Limited, a Government 
company. The Transformer and Switchgear Limited (Acquisftion and 
Transfe.r of Undertakings) Ordinance, 1983 (11 of 1~), was, aecor-
dingly, promulgated by the President on the 8th November, 1983. The 
Ordinance. apart from providing for the acquisition of the undertakings 
of the Company and vesting the same in Andrew Yule and Company 
Limited provided for payment of an amount to the Company for the 
acqUisition, appointment of a Commissioner of Payments and other 
incidental and consequential matters. 
3. The Bill seeks to replace the aforesaid Ordinance. 
NEW DELHI; NARAYAN DA'M'TIWARI,. 
The 17th November, 1983. 
_ .... --. 
1.4 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
. Clause 3 of the Bill provides that, on the appointed day,. the right, 
tItle and interest of the Company ;n relation to its undertakings, shall 
stand transferred to, and vest in, the Central Government. 
2. Clause 7 of the Bill provides for payment in cash and in the 
manner specified in Chapter VI thereof, an amount of rupees seventy-
eight la1ms and twenty-six thousand for the transfer to and vesting in , , 
the Central Government the right, title and interest of the Company 
in relation to its undertakings. 
3. Su1H:lause (1) of clause 8 of the Bill provides for payment of 
simple interest at the rate of four p"er cent. per annum on the amount 
specified under clause 7 for the period commencing on the appointed 
day and ending on the date on which payment of such amount is made 
by the Central Government to the Commissioner of Payments. It is 
estimated that this amount will be of the order of Rs. 26,087 per month. 
4. Clause 14 of the Bill provides that the Central Government shall 
appoint a Commi.ssioner of Payments and may also appoint such other 
persons as it may think fit to assist the Commissioner and thereupon 
the Commissioner may authorise one or more of such persons also to 
exercise all or nnv of the powers exercisable by him and that the salaries 
and allowances Of the Commissioner and other persons appointed under 
the said clause shall be defrayed out of the Consolidated Fund of India. 
The estimated expenditure on this account is likely to be of the order 
of Rs. 25,000 per month. 
5. The BUl, if enacted, Is not likely to involve any other recurring o~ 
non-recurring exrenditure. 
lIS 

LOK SABHA 
• 
A .. 
BILL 
to provide for the acquisition and transfer of the undertakings of the 
Transformer and Switchgear Limited with a view to securing the 
better wtilisation of the available infra-structure thereof and to moder-
nise and augment the production of transformers, switchgears and 
other allied electrical equipments by the said undertakings so as to 
subserve the interests of the general public by ensuring the con-
tinued supply of the aforesaid artic1~ which are essential to the needs 
of the economy of the country and for matters connected therewith or 
incidental thereto. . 
(Shri NaTayaf/. Datt Tiwari, MiniateT of Indum.,.) 