16
Bill No. 127-F of  2018
THE INSOLVENCY AND BANKRUPTCY CODE
(SECOND AMENDMENT) BILL, 2018
(AS PASSED BY THE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT—
LOK  SABHA ON  31ST  JULY, 2018
RAJY A  SABHA ON 10TH AUGUST, 2018)
ASSENTED  TO
ON 17TH AUGUST, 2018
ACT NO. 26 OF 2018

1
THE INSOLVENCY AND BANKRUPTCY CODE
(SECOND AMENDMENT) BILL, 2018
(AS PASSED BY THE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT)
A
BILL
further to amend the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code,  2016.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (Second
Amendment) Act, 2018.
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 6th day of June, 2018.
2. In the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 (hereinafter referred to as the
principal Act), in section 3, in clause ( 12), for the word "repaid", the word "paid" shall
be substituted.
Short title and
commencement.
Amendment
of section 3.
31 of 2016.
Bill No.  127-F  of  2018

2
3. In section 5 of the principal Act,—
(i) after clause ( 5), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
'(5A) "corporate guarantor" means a corporate person who is the
surety in a contract of guarantee to a corporate debtor;’;
(ii) in clause ( 8), in sub-clause ( f), the following Explanation shall be
inserted, namely:—
'Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub-clause,—
(i) any amount raised from an allottee under a real estate project
shall be deemed to be an amount having the commercial effect of a
borrowing; and
(ii) the expressions, "allottee" and "real estate project" shall
have the meanings respectively assigned to them in clauses ( d) and
(zn) of section 2 of the Real Estate (Regulation and Development)
Act, 2016;';
(iii) in clause ( 12), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
"Provided that where the interim resolution professional is not
appointed in the order admitting application under section 7, 9 or
section 10, the insolvency commencement date shall be the date on which
such interim resolution professional is appointed by the Adjudicating
Authority;";
(iv) in clause ( 21), for the word "repayment", the word "payment" shall be
substituted;
(v) after clause ( 24), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
'(24A) "related party", in relation to an individual, means—
 (a) a person who is a relative of the individual or a relative of
the spouse of the individual;
(b) a partner of a limited liability partnership, or a limited liability
partnership or a partnership firm, in which the individual is a partner;
(c) a person who is a trustee of a trust in which the beneficiary
of the trust includes the individual, or the terms of the trust confers
a power on the trustee which may be exercised for the benefit of the
individual;
(d) a private company in which the individual is a director and
holds along with his relatives, more than two per cent. of its share
capital;
(e) a public company in which the individual is a director and
holds along with relatives, more than two per cent. of its paid-up
share capital;
(f) a body corporate whose board of directors, managing director
or manager, in the ordinary course of business, acts on the advice,
directions or instructions of the individual;
(g) a limited liability partnership or a partnership firm whose
partners or employees in the ordinary course of business, act on the
advice, directions or instructions of the individual;
Amendment
of section 5.
16 of 2016.

3
(h) a person on whose advice, directions or instructions, the
individual is accustomed to act;
(i) a company, where the individual or the individual along with
its related party, own more than fifty per cent. of the share capital of
the company or controls the appointment of the board of directors of
the company.
Explanation .—For the purposes of this clause,—
(a) "relative", with reference to any person, means anyone who is
related to another, in the following manner, namely:—
(i) members of a Hindu Undivided Family,
(ii) husband,
(iii) wife,
(iv) father,
(v) mother,
(vi) son,
(vii) daughter,
(viii) son's daughter and son,
(ix) daughter's daughter and son,
(x) grandson's daughter and son,
(xi) granddaughter's daughter and son,
(xii) brother,
(xiii) sister,
(xiv) brother's son and daughter,
(xv) sister's son and daughter,
(xvi) father's father and mother,
(xvii) mother's father and mother,
(xviii ) father's brother and sister,
(xix) mother's brother and sister, and
(b) wherever the relation is that of a son, daughter, sister or brother,
their spouses shall also be included;'.
4. In section 7 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 1), for the words "other
financial creditors", the words "other financial creditors, or any other person on behalf
of the financial creditor, as may be notified by the Central Government," shall be
substituted.
5. In section 8 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section ( 2),—
(i)  in clause ( a), for the words "if any, and", the words "if any, or"
shall be substituted;
(ii) in clause ( b), for the word "repayment", the word "payment"
shall be substituted;
Amendment
of section 7.
Amendment
of section 8.

4
(b) in the Explanation , for the word "repayment", the word "payment"
shall be substituted.
6. In section 9 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section ( 3),—
(i) in clause ( c), for the words "by the corporate debtor; and", the
words "by the corporate debtor, if available;" shall be substituted;
(ii) for clause ( d), the following clauses shall be substituted,
namely:—
"(d) a copy of any record with information utility confirming
that there is no payment of an unpaid operational debt by the corporate
debtor, if available; and
(e) any other proof confirming that there is no payment of an
unpaid operational debt by the corporate debtor or such other
information, as may be prescribed.";
(b) in sub-section ( 5),—
(A) in clause ( i), in sub-clause ( b), for the word "repayment",
the word "payment" shall be substituted;
(B) in clause ( ii), in sub-clause ( b), for the word "repayment",
the word "payment" shall be substituted.
7. In section 10 of the principal Act,—
(a) for sub-section ( 3), the following sub-section shall be substituted,
namely:—
"(3) The corporate applicant shall, along with the application,
furnish—
(a) the information relating to its books of account and such
other documents for such period as may be specified;
(b) the information relating to the resolution professional
proposed to be appointed as an interim resolution professional; and
(c) the special resolution passed by shareholders of the
corporate debtor or the resolution passed by at least three-fourth of
the total number of partners of the corporate debtor, as the case may
be, approving filing of the application.";
(b) in sub-section ( 4),—
(i) in clause ( a), after the words "if it is complete", the words
"and no disciplinary proceeding is pending against the proposed
resolution professional" shall be inserted;
(ii) in clause (b), after the words "if it is incomplete", the words
"or any disciplinary proceeding is pending against the proposed
resolution professional" shall be inserted.
8. In section 12 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 2), for the word
"seventy-five", the word "sixty-six" shall be substituted.
9. After section 12 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
"12A. The Adjudicating Authority may allow the withdrawal of application
admitted under section 7 or section 9 or section 10, on an application made by
the applicant with the approval of ninety per cent. voting share of the committee
of creditors, in such manner as may be specified.".
Amendment
of section 9.
Amendment
of section 10.
Amendment
of section 12.
Insertion of new
section 12A.
Withdrawal of
application
admitted
under section
7, 9 or 10.

5
10. In section 14 of the principal Act, for sub-section ( 3), the following
sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
"(3) The provisions of sub-section ( 1) shall not apply to—
(a) such transaction as may be notified by the Central Government in
consultation with any financial regulator;
(b) a surety in a contract of guarantee to a corporate debtor.".
11. In section 15 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 1), in clause ( c), for the
word "claims", the words "claims, as may be specified" shall be substituted.
12. In section 16 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 5), for the words "shall not
exceed thirty days from date of his appointment", the words and figures "shall continue
till the date of appointment of the resolution professional under section 22" shall be
substituted.
13. In section 17 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 2),—
(i) in clause ( d), for the words "may be specified.", the words "may be
specified; and" shall be substituted;
(ii) after clause ( d), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
"(e) be responsible for complying with the requirements under any
law for the time being in force on behalf of the corporate debtor.".
14. In section 18 of the principal Act, in the Explanation , for the word
"sub-section", the word "section" shall be substituted.
15. In section 21 of the principal Act,—
(i) in sub-section ( 2),—
(a) in the proviso, for the words "related party to whom a corporate
debtor owes a financial debt", the words, brackets, figures and letter
"financial creditor or the authorised representative of the financial creditor
referred to in sub-section ( 6) or sub-section ( 6A) or sub-section ( 5) of
section 24, if it is a related party of the corporate debtor," shall be
substituted;
(b) after the proviso, the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
"Provided further that the first proviso shall not apply to a
financial creditor, regulated by a financial sector regulator, if it is a
related party of the corporate debtor solely on account of conversion
or substitution of debt into equity shares or instruments convertible
into equity shares, prior to the insolvency commencement date.";
(ii) in sub-section ( 3), for the word "Where", the words, brackets, figures
and letter "Subject to sub-sections ( 6) and ( 6A), where" shall be substituted;
(iii) in sub-section ( 6), in the opening portion, the words "or issued as
securities" shall be omitted;
(iv) after sub-section ( 6), the following sub-sections shall be inserted,
namely:—
"(
6A) Where a financial debt—
(a) is in the form of securities or deposits and the terms of the
financial debt provide for appointment of a trustee or agent to act as
authorised representative for all the financial creditors, such trustee
or agent shall act on behalf of such financial creditors;
Amendment
of section 14.
Amendment
of section 15.
Amendment
of section 16.
Amendment
of section 17.
Amendment
of section 18.
Amendment
of section 21.

6
(b) is owed to a class of creditors exceeding the number as may
be specified, other than the creditors covered under clause ( a) or
sub-section ( 6), the interim resolution professional shall make an
application to the Adjudicating Authority along with the list of all
financial creditors, containing the name of an insolvency professional,
other than the interim resolution professional, to act as their
authorised representative who shall be appointed by the Adjudicating
Authority prior to the first meeting of the committee of creditors;
(c) is represented by a guardian, executor or administrator, such
person shall act as authorised representative on behalf of such
financial creditors,
and such authorised representative under clause ( a) or clause ( b) or
clause (c) shall attend the meetings of the committee of creditors, and vote
on behalf of each financial creditor to the extent of his voting share.
(6B) The remuneration payable to the authorised representative—
(i) under clauses ( a) and ( c) of sub-section ( 6A), if any, shall
 be as per the terms of the financial debt or the relevant
documentation; and
(ii) under clause ( b) of sub-section ( 6A) shall be as specified
which shall form part of the insolvency resolution process costs.";
(v) for sub-sections ( 7) and ( 8), the following sub-sections shall be
substituted, namely:—
"(7) The Board may specify the manner of voting and the determining
of  the  voting  share  in  respect  of  financial  debts  covered  under
sub-sections ( 6) and ( 6A).
(8) Save as otherwise provided in this Code, all decisions of the
committee of creditors shall be taken by a vote of not less than
fifty-one per cent. of voting share of the financial creditors:
Provided that where a corporate debtor does not have any financial
creditors, the committee of creditors shall be constituted and shall comprise
of such persons to exercise such functions in such manner as may be
specified.".
16. In section 22 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section ( 2), for the word, "seventy-five", the word
"sixty-six" shall be substituted;
(b) in sub-section ( 3),—
(i) in clause ( a), after the words "resolution professional", the
words "subject to a written consent from the interim resolution
professional in the specified form" shall be inserted;
(ii) in clause ( b), after the words "appointment of the proposed
resolution professional", the words "along with a written consent
from the proposed resolution professional in the specified form" shall
be inserted.
17. 
In section 23 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 1), the following proviso
shall be inserted, namely:—
"Provided that the resolution professional shall, if the resolution plan under
sub-section ( 6) of section 30 has been submitted, continue to manage the
Amendment of
section 22.
Amendment
of section 23.

7
operations of the corporate debtor after the expiry of the corporate insolvency
resolution process period until an order is passed by the Adjudicating Authority
under section 31.".
18. In section 24 of the principal Act,—
(i) in sub-section ( 3), in clause (a), for the words "Committee of creditors",
the words, brackets, figures and letter "committee of creditors, including the
authorised representatives referred to in sub-sections ( 6) and ( 6A) of section 21
and sub-section ( 5)" shall be substituted;
(ii) in sub-section ( 5), for the words "Any creditor", the words, brackets,
figures and letters "Subject to sub-sections ( 6), (6A) and (6B) of section 21, any
creditor" shall be substituted.
19. After section 25 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:-—
'25A. ( 1) The authorised representative under sub-section ( 6) or
sub-section ( 6A) of section 21 or sub-section ( 5) of section 24 shall have the
right to participate and vote in meetings of the committee of creditors on behalf
of the financial creditor he represents in accordance with the prior voting
instructions of such creditors obtained through physical or electronic means.
(2) It shall be the duty of the authorised representative to circulate the
agenda and minutes of the meeting of the committee of creditors to the financial
creditor he represents.
 (3) The authorised representative shall not act against  the interest of the
financial creditor he represents and shall always act in accordance with their
prior instructions:
Provided that if the authorised representative represents several financial
creditors, then he shall cast his vote in respect of each financial creditor in
accordance with instructions received from each financial creditor, to the extent
of his voting share:
Provided further that if any financial creditor does not give prior
instructions through physical or electronic means, the authorised representative
shall abstain from voting on behalf of such creditor.
 (4) The authorised representative shall file with the committee of creditors
any instructions received by way of physical or electronic means, from the
financial creditor he represents, for voting in accordance therewith, to ensure
that the appropriate voting instructions of the financial creditor he represents is
correctly recorded by the interim resolution professional or resolution
professional, as the case may be.
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, the "electronic means"
shall be such as may be specified.'.
20. In section 27 of the principal Act, for sub-section ( 2), the following
sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
"(2) The committee of creditors may, at a meeting, by a vote of
sixty-six per cent. of voting shares, resolve to replace the resolution professional
appointed under section 22 with another resolution professional, subject to a
written consent from the proposed resolution professional in the specified form.".
21. In section 28 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 3), for the word,
"seventy-five", the word "sixty-six" shall be substituted.
Amendment
of section 24.
Insertion of
new section
25A.
Rights and
duties of
authorised
representative
of financial
creditors.
Amendment
of section 27.
Amendment
of section 28.

8
22. In section 29A of the principal Act,—
(i) in clause (c),—
(A) for the words "has an account,", the words "at the time of
submission of the resolution plan has an account," shall be
substituted;
(B) after the words and figures "the Banking Regulation
 Act, 1949", the words "or the guidelines of a financial sector regulator
issued under any other law for the time being in force," shall be
inserted;
(C) after the proviso, the following shall be inserted, namely:—
'Provided further that nothing in this clause shall apply to a
resolution applicant where such applicant is a financial entity and is
not a related party to the corporate debtor.
Explanation  I.—For the purposes of this proviso, the
expression "related party" shall not include a financial entity,
regulated by a financial sector regulator, if it is a financial creditor of
the corporate debtor and is a related party of the corporate debtor
solely on account of conversion or substitution of debt into equity
shares or instruments convertible into equity shares, prior to the
insolvency commencement date.
Explanation II.—For the purposes of this clause, where a
resolution applicant has an account, or an account of a corporate
debtor under the management or control of such person or of whom
such person is a promoter, classified as non-performing asset and
such account was acquired pursuant to a prior resolution plan
approved under this Code, then, the provisions of this clause shall
not apply to such resolution applicant for a period of three years
from the date of approval of such resolution plan by the Adjudicating
Authority under this Code;';
(ii) for clause (d), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
"(d) has been convicted for any offence punishable with
imprisonment—
(i) for two years or more under any Act specified under
the Twelfth Schedule; or
(ii) for seven years or more under any other law for the
time being in force:
Provided that this clause shall not apply to a person after the
expiry of a period of two years from the date of his release from
imprisonment:
Provided further that this clause shall not apply in relation to a
connected person referred to in clause ( iii) of Explanation  I;";
(iii) in clause ( e), the following proviso shall be inserted,
namely:—
"Provided that this clause shall not apply in relation to a
connected person referred to in clause ( iii) of Explanation I;";
(iv) in clause ( g), the following proviso shall be inserted,
namely:—
"Provided that this clause shall not apply if a preferential
transaction, undervalued transaction, extortionate credit transaction
or fraudulent transaction has taken place prior to the acquisition of
the corporate debtor by the resolution applicant pursuant to a
resolution plan approved under this Code or pursuant to a scheme or
Amendment
of section
29A.
10 of 1949.

9
plan approved by a financial sector regulator or a court, and such
resolution applicant has not otherwise contributed to the preferential
transaction, undervalued transaction, extortionate credit transaction
or fraudulent transaction;";
(v) in clause (h),—
(A) for the words "an enforceable guarantee", the words "a
guarantee" shall be substituted;
(B) after the words "under this Code", the words "and such
guarantee has been invoked by the creditor and remains unpaid in
full or part" shall be inserted;
(vi) in clause (i), for the words "has been", the word "is" shall be substituted;
(vii) the Explanation occurring after clause ( j) shall be numbered as
Explanation I, and in Explanation  I as so numbered, for the proviso, the following
provisos shall be substituted, namely:—
'Provided that nothing in clause ( iii) of Explanation I shall apply to
a resolution applicant where such applicant is a financial entity and is not
a related party of the corporate debtor:
Provided further that the expression "related party" shall not include
a financial entity, regulated by a financial sector regulator, if it is a financial
creditor of the corporate debtor and is a related party of the corporate
debtor solely on account of conversion or substitution of debt into equity
shares or instruments convertible into equity shares, prior to the insolvency
commencement date;';
(viii) after Explanation I as so numbered, the following Explanation shall
be inserted, namely:—
'Explanation  II.—For the purposes of this section, "financial entity"
shall mean the following entities which meet such criteria or conditions as
the Central Government may, in consultation with the financial sector
regulator, notify in this behalf, namely:—
(a) a scheduled bank;
(b) any entity regulated by a foreign central bank or a securities
market regulator or other financial sector regulator of a jurisdiction
outside India which jurisdiction is compliant with the Financial Action
Task Force Standards and is a signatory to the International
Organisation of Securities Commissions Multilateral Memorandum
of Understanding;
(c) any investment vehicle, registered foreign institutional
investor, registered foreign portfolio investor or a foreign venture
capital investor, where the terms shall have the meaning assigned to
them in regulation 2 of the Foreign Exchange Management (Transfer
or Issue of Security by a Person Resident Outside India)
Regulations, 2017 made under the Foreign Exchange Management
Act, 1999;
(d) an asset reconstruction company registered with the Reserve
Bank of India under section 3 of the Securitisation and Reconstruction
of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002;
(e) an Alternate Investment Fund registered with the Securities
and Exchange Board of India;
(f) such categories of persons as may be notified by the Central
Government.'.
42 of 1999.
54 of 2002.

10
23. In section 30 of the principal Act,—
(i) in sub-section ( 1), after the words "resolution plan", the words, figures
and letter "along with an affidavit stating that he is eligible under section 29A"
shall be inserted;
(ii) in sub-section ( 2),—
 ( A) in clauses ( a) and ( b), for the word "repayment" at both the
places where it occurs, the word "payment" shall be substituted;
(B) after clause ( f), the following Explanation shall be inserted,
namely:—
"Explanation .—For the purposes of clause ( e), if any approval
of shareholders is required under the Companies Act, 2013 or any
other law for the time being in force for the implementation of actions
under the resolution plan, such approval shall be deemed to have
been given and it shall not be a contravention of  that Act or law.";
(iii) in sub-section ( 4),—
(a) for the word "seventy-five", the word "sixty-six" shall be
substituted;
(b) after the third proviso, the following proviso shall be inserted,
namely:—
"Provided also that the eligibility criteria in section 29A as
amended by the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (Amendment)
Ordinance, 2018 shall apply to the resolution applicant who has not
submitted resolution plan as on the date of commencement of the
Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (Amendment) Ordinance, 2018.".
24. In section 31 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section ( 1), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
"Provided that the Adjudicating Authority shall, before passing an
order for approval of resolution plan under this sub-section, satisfy that
the resolution plan has provisions for its effective implementation.";
(b) after sub-section ( 3), the following sub-section shall be inserted
namely:—
"(4) The resolution applicant shall, pursuant to the resolution plan
approved under sub-section ( 1), obtain the necessary approval required
under any law for the time being in force within a period of one year from
the date of approval of the resolution plan by the Adjudicating Authority
under sub-section ( 1) or within such period as provided for in such law,
whichever is later:
Provided that where the resolution plan contains a provision for
combination, as referred to in section 5 of the Competition Act, 2002, the
resolution applicant shall obtain the approval of the Competition
Commission of India under that Act prior to the approval of such resolution
plan by the committee of creditors.".
25. In section 33 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 2), after the words "decision
of the committee of creditors", the words "approved by not less than sixty-six
per cent. of the voting share" shall be inserted.
Amendment
of section 30.
Amendment
of section 31.
Amendment
of section 33.
12 of 2003.
18 of 2013.
ord. 6 of 2018
.

11
26. In section 34 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section ( 1), for the words and figures "Chapter II shall", the
words and figures "Chapter II shall, subject to submission of a written consent
by the resolution professional to the Adjudicatory Authority in specified form,"
shall be substituted;
(b) in sub-section ( 4),—
(i) in clause (b), for the words "in writing", the words "in writing; or"
shall be substituted;
(ii) after clause ( b), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
"(c) the resolution professional fails to submit written consent
under sub-section ( 1).";
(c) in sub-section ( 5), for the word, brackets and letter "clause ( a)", the
words, brackets and letters "clauses ( a) and ( c)" shall be substituted;
(d) in sub-section ( 6), after the words "another insolvency professional",
the words "along with written consent from the insolvency professional in the
specified form," shall be inserted.
27. In section 42 of the principal Act, after the words "of the liquidator", the
words "accepting or" shall be inserted.
28. In section 45 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 1), the words and figures
"of section 43" shall be omitted.
29. In section 60 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section ( 2), for the words "bankruptcy of a personal guarantor
of such corporate debtor", the words "liquidation or bankruptcy of a corporate
guarantor or personal guarantor, as the case may be, of such corporate debtor"
shall be substituted;
(b) in sub-section ( 3), for the words "bankruptcy proceeding of a personal
guarantor of the corporate debtor", the words "liquidation or bankruptcy
proceeding of a corporate guarantor or personal guarantor, as the case may be,
of the corporate debtor" shall be substituted.
30. In section 69 of the principal Act, for the words "On or after the insolvency
commencement date, if", the word "If" shall be substituted.
31. In section 76 of the principal Act,—
(a) in the marginal heading, for the word "repayment", the word "payment"
shall be substituted;
(b) in clause ( a), for the word "repayment", the word "payment" shall be
substituted.
32. In section 196 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 1),—
(i) after clause ( a), the following clause shall be inserted namely:—
"(aa) promote the development of, and regulate, the working and
practices of, insolvency professionals, insolvency professional agencies
and information utilities and other institutions, in furtherance of the
purposes of this Code;";
(ii) in clause (c), for the words "for the registration", the words "for carrying
out the purposes of this Code, including fee for registration and renewal" shall
be substituted.
Amendment
of section 34.
Amendment
of section 42.
Amendment
of section 45.
Amendment
of section 60.
Amendment
of section 69.
Amendment
of section 76.
Amendment
of section
196.

12
33. In section 231 of the principal Act, for the words "Adjudicating Authority" at
both the places where they occur, the words "Adjudicating Authority or the Board"
shall be substituted.
34. After section 238 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
 "238A. The provisions of the Limitation Act, 1963 shall, as far as may be,
apply to the proceedings or appeals before the Adjudicating Authority, the
National Company Law Appellate Tribunal, the Debt Recovery Tribunal or the
Debt Recovery Appellate Tribunal, as the case may be.".
35.  In section 239 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 2), after clause ( e), the
following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
"(ea) other proof confirming that there is no payment of an unpaid
operational debt by the corporate debtor or such other information under
clause ( e) of sub-section ( 3) of section 9;".
36. In section 240 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 2),—
(i) clause ( g) shall be omitted;
(ii) after clause ( j), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
"(ja) the last date for submission of claims under clause ( c) of
sub-section ( 1) of section 15;";
(iii) after clause ( n), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
"(na) the number of creditors within a class of creditors under
clause ( b) of sub-section ( 6A) of section 21;
(nb) the remuneration payable to authorised representative under
clause ( ii) of the proviso to sub-section ( 6B) of section 21;
(nc) the manner of voting and determining the voting share in respect
of financial debts under sub-section ( 7) of section 21;".
37. After section 240 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
'240A. (1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Code,
the provisions of clauses ( c) and ( h) of section 29A shall not apply to the
resolution applicant in respect of corporate insolvency resolution process of
any micro, small and medium enterprises.
(2) Subject to sub-section ( 1), the Central Government may, in the public
interest, by notification, direct that any of the provisions of this Code shall—
(a) not apply to micro, small and medium enterprises; or
(b) apply to micro, small and medium enterprises, with such
modifications as may be specified in the notification.
(3) A draft of every notification proposed to be issued under
sub-section ( 2), shall be laid before each House of Parliament, while it is in
session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session
or in two or more successive sessions.
(4) If both Houses agree in disapproving the issue of notification or both
Houses agree in making any modification in the notification, the notification
shall not be issued or shall be issued only in such modified form as may be
agreed upon by both the Houses, as the case may be.
Amendment
of section
231.
Insertion of
new section
238A.
Limitation.
Amendment
of section
239.
Amendment
of section
240.
Insertion of
new section
240A.
Application
of this Code
to micro,
small and
medium
enterprises.
36 of 1963.

13
(5) The period of thirty days referred to in sub-section ( 3) shall not include
any period during which the House referred to in sub-section ( 4) is prorogued or
adjourned for more than four consecutive days.
(6) Every notification issued under this section shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is issued, before each House of Parliament.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section, the expression  "micro,
small and medium enterprises" means any class or classes of enterprises
classified as such under sub-section ( 1) of section 7 of the Micro, Small and
Medium Enterprises Development Act, 2006.'.
38. After the Eleventh Schedule to the principal Act, the following Schedule
shall be inserted, namely:—
"THE TWELFTH SCHEDULE
[See clause ( d) of section 29A]
ACTS FOR THE PURPOSES OF  CLAUSE (d) OF SECTION 29A
 (1) The Foreign Trade (Development and Regulation) Act, 1922 (22 of 1922);
(2) The Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934);
(3) The Central Excise Act, 1944 (1 of 1944);
(4) The Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954 (37 of 1954);
(5) The Essential Commodities Act, 1955 (10 of 1955);
(6) The Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956 (42 of 1956);
(7) The Income-tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961);
(8) The Customs Act, 1962 (52 of 1962);
(9) The Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 (6 of 1974);
(10) The Conservation of Foreign Exchange and Prevention of Smuggling
    Activities Act, 1974 (52 of 1974);
(11) The Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981 (14 of 1981);
(12) The Sick Industrial Companies (Special Provisions) Act, 1985 (1 of 1986);
(13) The Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 (29 of 1986);
(14) The Prohibition of Benami Property Transactions Act, 1988 (45 of 1988);
(15) The Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 (49 of 1988);
(16) The Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992 (15 of 1992);
(17) The Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999 (42 of 1999);
(18) The Competition Act, 2002 (12 of 2003);
(19) The Prevention of Money-laundering Act, 2002 (15 of 2003);
(20) The Limited Liability Partnership Act, 2008 (6 of 2009);
(21) The Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Act, 2010 (42 of 2010);
(22) The Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 2013) or any previous company law;
Insertion of
new Schedule.
27 of 2006.

14
(23) The Black Money (Undisclosed Foreign Income and Assets) and Imposition
of Tax Act, 2015 (22 of 2015);
(24) The Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 (31 of 2016);
(25) The Central Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017 (12 of 2017) and respective
State Acts imposing State goods and services tax;
(26) such other Acts as may be notified by the Central Government.
Every notification issued under this Schedule shall be laid, as soon as may
be after it is issued, before each House of Parliament.".
39. In section 434 of the Companies Act, 2013, [as substituted by paragraph 34
of the Eleventh Schedule to the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016], in
sub-section ( 1), in clause (c), after the proviso, the following proviso shall be inserted,
namely:—
"Provided further that any party or parties to any proceedings relating to
the winding up of companies pending before any Court immediately before the
commencement of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (Amendment) Ordinance,
2018, may file an application for transfer of such proceedings and the Court may
by order transfer such proceedings to the Tribunal and the proceedings so
transferred shall be dealt with by the Tribunal as an application for initiation of
corporate insolvency resolution process under the Insolvency and Bankruptcy
Code, 2016.".
40. (1) The  Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (Amendment) Ordinance, 2018 is
hereby repealed.
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the
Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016, as amended by the said Ordinance, shall be
deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of the said
Code, as amended by this Act.
Amendment
of section
434 of Act 18
of 2013.
Repeal and
savings.
Ord. 6 of
2018.
31 of 2016.
31 of 2016.

A
BILL
further to amend the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016.
————
(As passed by the Houses of Parliament)
MGIPMRND—1693RS(S3)—21-08-2018.