As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABRA obi' 
~7 DEc ~97a 
,am No. Jaz of 1t70 
THE LABOUR PROVIDENT FUND LAWS 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 1970 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Coal Mines Provident Fund and &nw Schemes Act, 
1948 and the Employees' Provident Funds Act, 1952. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-first Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
• 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Labour Provident Fund Laws Short 
(Amendment) Act, 1970. title and 
commence-
S (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government ment. 
may, by notification in the oalcial Gazette, appoint and dt1ferent dates 
may be appointed for different provisions of this Act. 
2. In the lOllg tUle to the Coal MiD:es Provident Fund and Bonus 
ol8 of 1948. . Schemes Act, 1948 (hereinafter referred to as the Coal Mines Act), after 
10 the words ''Provident Fund Scheme", the words ", a Family Pension 
Scheme" shall be inserted. 
Amend-
ment of 
long 
title. 

Amend-
mentof 
preamble. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 1. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 2. 
Amend-
mentof 
section 
3A. 
Amend-
mentor 
section 3C. 
Insertion 
of neoN' 
sections 
3Eand 
3F. 
Coal 
Mines 
Family 
Pellsion 
Scheme. 
.. 
~ . 2 
3. in the preamble to the Coal Mines Act, the first paragraph shall 'be 
omitted. 
4. In sub-section (1) of section 1 of the Coal Mines Act, after the words 
"Provident Fund", the words ", Family Pension" shall bl~ inserted. 
5. In section 2 of the Coal Mines Act, after clause (e), the following S 
clause shall be inserted, namely:-
• (ee) "Family Pension Fund" means the Family Pension Fund 
established under the Coal Mines Family Pension Scheme framed 
under sub-section (1) of section 3Ej'. 
6. In section 3A of the Coal Mines Act,-
(a) in sub-section (3), after the words "The Board shall", the 
words, figure and letter ", subject to the provisions of section 3E," 
shall be inserted; 
10 
(b) in sub-section (4), for the words "the Scheme aforesaid", the 
words "the Coal Mines Provident Fund Scheme and the Coal Mines IS 
Family Pension Scheme" shall be substituted. 
7. In sub-section (3) of section 3C of the Coal Mines Act, after the 
words "Coal Mines Provident Fund Scheme", the words "and the Coal 
Mines Family Pension Scheme" shall be inserted. 
8. After section 3D of the Coal Mines Act, the following sections shall ac 
be inserted, namely:-
"3E. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, frame a scheme to be called the Coal Mines Family 
Pension Scheme for the purpose of providing family pension and life 
assurance benefits to such employees as are covered by the Coal Mines zS 
Provident Fund Scheme. 
(2) There shall be established, as soon as may be, after the fram-
ing of the aforesaid Scheme a Family Pension Fund into which shall 
be paid from time to time in respect of every such employee-
(a) such sums not exceeding one-fourth of the amount pay- 30 
able under sub-section (1) of section lOD as the employer's con-
tribution as well as the employee's contribution, as may be spe-
cified in the said Scheme, and 
(b) such sums, being not less than the amount contributed 
by the employer in pursuance of clause (a) to which shall be 35 
addecl a further sum equivalent to one-sixteenth of the amouat 
payable under sub-section (1) of section lOD as the employer's 
sontribution, as the Central Government may, after due appro-
priation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, specify. 
(3) The Family Pension Fund shall vest in and be administered 40 . 
by the Board. 

. 3 
(4) Any scheme framed under the provisions of sub-section (1) 
may provide for all or any of the matters specified in the Second Sche-
dule. 
3F. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made 
S by Parliament by law in this behalf, pay such further sums as may 
be determined by it into the Family Pension Fund to meet the 
expenses ineurred in connection wUh the administration of the Coat 
Mines Family Pension Seheme not includiJII therein the cost of an)' 
benefits provided by or under the said Scheme.". 
10 9. In sub-section (2) of section 5 of the Coal Mines Act, for the words 
"Second Schedule", the words "Third Schedule" shall be substituted. 
10. In section 8 of the Coal Mines Act, after sub-section (2), the fol-
lowing sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-
II (3) The provisions of sub-section (1) and sub-section (2) shall, 
IS so far as may be, apply in relation to the family pension or any other 
amount payable under the Coal Mines Family Pension Scheme as 
they apply in relation to any amount payable out of the Fund.". 
11. The Second Schedule to the Coal Mines Act shall be re-numbered 
as the Third Schedule and before the Third Schedule as so re-numbered, 
20 the following Schedule shall be inserted, namely:-
"THE SECOND SCHEDULE 
(See section 3E) 
Matters to be provided for in the Coal Mines Family Pen3ion Scheme 
1. The employees or class of employees to whom the Coal Mines 
2S Family Pension Scheme shall apply and the time within which option 
to join that Scheme shall be exercised by those employees to whom 
the said Scheme does not apply. 
2. Subject to the provisions of section 3E (2), the portion of em-
ployer's and employees' contribution which may be credited to the 
30 Family. Pension Fund. 
3S 
40 
3. The contribution by the Central Government to the Family 
Pension Fund and the manner in which such contribution is to be 
made. 
4. The manner in which the account shall be kept, the investment 
of moneys belonging to the Family Pension Fund in accordance with 
. any directions issued or conditions specified by the Central Govern-
ment, and the rate of interest, not being less than 5~ per centum per 
annum, payable on such investments. 
5. The form in which an employee shall furnish particulars about 
himself and his family whenever required. 
6. The nomination of a person to receive the assurance amount 
due to the employee after his death and the cancelIation or variation 
of such nomination. 
7. The registers and records to be maintained in respect of em-
ployees, the form or design of any identity card, token or disc for 
the purpose of identifying any employee, or his nominee or a member 
of family entitled ro receive the penSion. 
Special 
grant by 
Central 
Govern-
ment. 
Amend-
mentol 
section •. 
Amend-
mentol 
section 8. 
Insertion 
of new 
Second 
Schedule. 

Amend-
ment of 
long 
title. 
Amend-
ment of 
8P.Ction 1. 
Amend-
ment ot 
section' 
Amend-
ment ot 
section 6A. 
Amend-
mentol 
section 
liD. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
6E. 
8. The scales of family pension and the assurance amount._· 
9. The mode of disbursement of family pension and the arrange-
ments to be entered into with such disbursing agencies as may be 
specified for the purpose. 
10. The manner in which the expenses incurred 1n comleetion with 5 
the adrtifhlstration of the Coal Mines Family ~sion S~h.eme ·be paid 
by 'the-'Cettttlal Government to the~rd of Trustees. 
11. Any other matter which is to be provided for in the Coal 
Mines P'afrl11y Pension Sch~me or which may be necessary or proper 
for the purpose of tml'lementlng the Coal Mines Family Pension 10 
Scheme.". 
12. In the long title to the Employees' Provident Funds Act, 1952 19 ot 1952. 
'hereinafter referred to as the Provident Funds Act), atter the words 
i'provident funds", the words "and fatnily pension fund" shall be inserted. 
13. In section 1 of the Provident Funds A-ct,- IS 
(a) in sub-section (1), after the words "Provident FUllds", the 
words "and Family Pension Fund" shall be inserted; 
(b) the proviso to sUb-section (5) shall be omitted. 
14. In section 2 of the Provident Funds Act,-
(a) after clause (g), the following clauses shall be inserted, 20 
nRmely:-
'(gg) ''Family Pension Fund" means the Family Pension 
Fund established under the Family Pension Scheme; 
(gag) "Family Pension Scheme" means the Employees' Fa-
mily Pension SCheme framed under section 6A;'; 25 
(b) for clause (1), the following clause shall be substituted, na-
n'I~Jy:-
'(1) "Scheme" means the Employees' Provident Funti Scheme 
framed under section 5.'. 
15. In section ~A of the Provident Funds Act,- 30 
(a) in sub-section (3) , after the words -"The Central Board shall", 
the words, ftgure and letter "subject to the provisions of section 
6A," shan be inserted; 
(b) in Bub-section (4), after the words Clof the Seheme", the 
words "and the Family Pension ~cheme" shall-be mserted. 3S 
18. In Bub-section (3) ofse<rtion 5D of the Provident lI'wlds Act, after 
the words "the Scheme", the words "and the Family Pension Scheme" 
shall be inserted. 
17. In. section 5E of the 'Provident Funds Act, after the words "the 
Scheme", the words "and the Famfly Pension Scheme" shall be inserted. 40 

5 
18. After section 6 of the Provident Funds Act, the following sections 
shall be inserted, namely:-
5 
"6A. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazett~, fratpe a scheme to be called the Employees' Family 
Pension Scheme for the purpose 'Of providing family pension and life 
assurance benefits to the ~mployees of any establishment or class of 
establlshments to whicb this 'Act appli~s. 
(2) There shall be established, as soon as may be, after the fram-
ing of the Family Pension Scheme, a Family PenSion Fund into which 
10 shall be paid from time to time in respect of every such employee-
(a) such sums not exc~eding one-fourth of the amount pay-
aQle under section 6 as contribution by the E:mployer ~s well as 
the employee, as may be specified in the Family PensioJl $cpeme, 
(b) such sums as are payable by the employer of an exempted 
IS establishment under sub-section (6) of section 17, and 
(c) Such sums, being not Jess than ~e QaOMJlt cOQtributed 
by the employer in pursuance of dause (a), as the Central Gov-
et1lJMllt may, ·.fter due appropriatien lDIlde by Parliament by law 
in tlris behalf. specify. 
2.0 (3) The Family Pension Fund shall vest in and be administered 
by the Central Board. 
(4) A Family Pension Scheme may provide for all or any of the 
matters specified in SchedJlle III. 
(5) A Family Pension Scheme may provide that any of its pro-
2.5 visions shall take effect either prospectively or retrospectively on such 
date ~s may be specified in this behalf in that scheme. 
30 
88. The Central Government shall, after due approPliation made 
by Parliament by law in this behalf, pay such further sums as may 
be determined by it jpto the Family Pensi,qn F\lud to meet the ex-
pellHl incurred in conneetion with the administration of the Family 
'88ion StW,~ _ ~iq t~",ein the caat ef an,. beneftts pro-
VWM J.y or.auuler .",d Scheme." 
.J 19. In sub-section (1) of section 7 of the Provident Funds Act, for the 
words "any Sch,e.me framed under i1:his Act",thewords ",the Scheme or 
3S the Family :P.ellfJion Scheme, as the .case may ·be" shall be substit\rted. 
20. In sub-section (1) of section 7A of the Provident Funds Act, for the 
words "or of the Scheme", the words "the Scheme or the Family Pension 
Scheme, as the case may be," shall be substituted. 
21. In clause (b) of section 8 of the Provident Funds Act. for the 
40 words ·and .figures '~under sQCtion 17",tbe words and~res "under sec-
tion 17 or in tel\pect of the contribution payable by ·him towards the 
Family Pension Scheme under the said section 17" shall'be substituted. 
Insertion 
of new 
sections 
6Aand6B. 
Employees 
Family 
Pension 
Scheme. 
Special 
grallt by 
the Cen-
tral 
Govern-
ment. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 7. 
Amend-
ment at 
section 7A. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 8. 

Ament!-
ment of 
section 10. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 11. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 13. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 14. 
Amend!.. 
mentof 
section 
14A. 
22. In section 10 of the Provident Funds Act, after sub-section (2) I the 
following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-
"(3) The provisions of sub-section (1) and Bub-section (2) shall, 
so far as may be, apply in relation to the family pension or any other 
amount payable under the Family Pension Scheme as they apply in S 
relation to· any amount payable out of the Fund.". 
23. In clause (b) of section 11 of the Provident Funds Act, after the 
words "under the rules of the provident fund,", the words, figures and 
brackets "any contribution payable by him towards the Family Pension 
Fund under sub-section (6) of section 17," shall be inserted. 10 
24. In section 13 of the Provident Funds Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words "or of any Scheme", the 
words "the Scheme or the Family Pension Scheme" shall be substi-
tuted; 
(b) sub-section (2A) shall be re-numbered as sub-section (2B) J, 
and before sub-section (2B) as so re-numbered, the following sub-
section shall be inserted, namely:-
U(2A) Any Inspector appointed under sub~ection (1) may, 
for the purpose of inquiring into the correctness of any informa-
tion furnished in connection with the Family Pension Scheme or 2.0 
for the purpose of ascertaining whether any of the proviSions of 
this Act or of the Family Pension Scheme have been complied 
with in respect of an establishment to which the Family Pension 
Scheme applies. exercise all or any of the powers conferred on 
him under clause (a), clause (b), clause (c) or clause (d) of:2 S 
sub-section (2) ."; 
(c) in sub-section (28) as sore-numbered, after the words, 
bracket and figures "under sub-section (2)", the words, brackets, figure 
and letter "or under sub-section (2A), as the case may be," shall be 
inserted. 30 
25. In section 14 of the Provident Funds .Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words "or under any Scheme", 
the words "the Scheme or the Family Pension Scheme" shall be subs-
tituted; 
(b) in sub-section (2), for the words CIA Scheme framed under 35 
this Act", the words "The Scheme or the Family Pension Scheme" 
shall be substituted; 
(e) in sub-section (3), for the words "or under any Scheme", the 
words "the Scheme or the Family Pension Scheme" shall be substi-
tuted. 
26. In section 14A of the Provident Funds Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1). for the words "or the Scheme made there-
under", the words lithe Scheme or the Family Pension Scheme" shall 
be substituted; -, 
40 

· (b) in sub-section (2), for the words "or the Scheme thereunder', 
the words "the Scheme or the Family Pension Scheme" shall be sub-
stituted 
27. In section 17 of the Provident Funds Act, after sub-section (5), the 
S following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-
10 
"(6) Notwithstanding any exemption granted under this section, 
the employer of an exempted establishment to which the provisions 
of the Family Pension Scheme apply, shall pay to the Family Pension 
Fund such portion of the employer's contribution as well as the em-
ployee's contribution to its provident fund as may be specified in the 
Family Pension Scheme.". 
28. In section 18 of the Provident Funds Act, for the words "or under 
any Scheme", the words "the Scheme or the Family Pension Scheme" shall 
be substituted. 
29. In section 19 of the Provident Funds Act, for the words "or any 
IS Scheme", the words "the Scheme or the Family Pension Scheme" shall be 
su bstitu ted. 
20 
30. After Schedule II to the Provident Funds Act, the following Sche-
dule shall be inserted, namely:-
SCHEDULE III 
[See sectj()n 6A (4)] 
Matters for which provision may be made in the Family Pension Scheme 
1. The employees or class of employees to whom the Family 
Pension Scheme shall apply and the time within which option to join 
that Scheme shall be exercise d by those employees to whom the said 
25 - Scheme does not apply. 
30 
35 
2. Subject to the provisions of section 6A (2), the portion of em-
ployer's and employee's contribution which may be credited to the 
Family Pension Fund. 
3. The contribution by the Central Government to the Family 
Pension Fund and the manner in which such contribution is to be 
made. 
4. The manner in which the account shall be kept, the investment 
of moneys belonging to the Family Pension Fund in accordance with 
any directions issued or conditions specified by the Central Govern-
ment, and the rate of interest, not being less than 5. per centum per 
annum, payable on such investments. 
5. The form in which an employee shall furnish particulars about 
himself and his family whenever required. 
6. The nomination of a person to receive the assurance amount 
due to the employee after his death and the cancellation or variation 
of such nomination. 
7. The re~ters and records to be maintained in respect of em-
pleyees, the form or design of any identity card, tGken or disc for the 
Amend-
ment of 
section 17. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 18. 
Amend. 
ment of 
section 19. 
Insertion 
of new 
Schedule 
III. 

Amend-
ment of 
Act 31 of 
1956. 
purpose of identifying any employee, or his nominee or a member of 
family entitled to receive the pension. 
8. The scales of family pension and the assurance amoUnt. 
9. The manner in which the ex-empted establishments have to 
pay the contributions (both employers' and employees' shares) 5 
towards the Family Pension Fund and the submission of returns re-
lating thereto. 
10. The mode of disbursement of family pension and the arrange-
ments to be entered into with such disbursing agencies as may be 
specified for the purpose. 10 
11. The manner in which the expenses incurred in connection 
with the administration of the Family Pension Scheme be paid by the 
Central Government to the aoard of Trustees. 
12. Any other matter which is to be provided for in the Family 
Pension Scheme or which may be necessary or proper for the purpose 15 
of implementing the Family Pension Scheme.". 
31. In section 44 of the Life Insurance Corporation Act, 1956, after 
clause (f), the following clause shall be inserted, namely;-
"(g) any Family Pension Scheme framed under the Coal Mines 
Provident Fund and Bonus Schemes Act, 1948 or the Employees' 20 48 of 1948. 
Provident Funds Act, 1952 for the purpose of providing family pen- 19 of 1952. 
sion and life assurance benefits to the employees covered by the said 
Scheme .... 

!TATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Coal Mmes Provident Fund 'and Bonus Schemes Act, 1948 and 
the ~mploy~s' Provident Funds Act, 1952 provide"for the institution of 
protrident funds for employees' in coal mines, factories and other estab-
llshnlents. Provident Fund is an effective old~age and survivorship 
benefit, but when the employee happens to die prematurely, the accumu-
lations in the Provident Fund are too small to render adequate and 
long-term protection to his family.' With a view t6 providing long-term 
financial security to the families of industrial employees in the event of 
their premature death, it is proposed to introduce a Family Pension 
Scheme for the employees covered under the two Acts, and to create a 
Family Pension Fund for this purpose by diverting a portion of the 
employer's and the employees' contributions to the Provident Fund, to 
which will be added a contribution by the Central Government. Out of 
the Fund so set up, it is proposed to pay Family Pension at prescribed 
scales to the survivors of employees who die while in service before 
reaching the age of superannuation. Besides Family Pension,a com-
pulsory life insurance benefit of Rs. '1000 will also be payable to the 
survivors of the employees in the event of death in service. In the case 
of retirement, a lumpsum payment up to a maximum· of Rs. 4000 will 
be made to the employee dependin.g upon the length of his service. The 
terms and conditions for the grant of family pension will generally be 
the same as those applicable ~g. the. Celltral Government employees. The 
benefits payable under the Family Pension Scheme will be in addition 
to the payments due to the employees . from the Provident Fund. 
2. The proposed Scheme of Family Pension will be administered by 
the Board of Trustees, Coal Mines Provident Fund in respect of members 
of the Coal MineS Provident Fund, and by the Central Board of Trustees, 
Employees' Provident Fund, in respect of the employees of establish-
ments covered by the Employees' Provident Funds Act; 1952. The cost 
ot administration'of the family Pension Scheme in each case will be. 
borne by the Central Government. .. ' . . " - , 
3.· The Bill seeks to amend suitably the Coal Mines Provident Fund 
and Bonus Schemes Act, 1948 and the Employees' Provident Funds Act, 
l~:l in order to achieve t~ese objectives. 
D. SANJIVAYYA. 
Nsw DJ:LBI; 
The23rd November, 1970 •.. ·. 
•• ., ... 'O ' \ 
PRlsm:nrt"s BECOMMENDATIOl'f UNDER. ARTICLE 117. OF . nrE .. .. ".' . 
CPNSTITUTION· OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. 16/1/70-PF.II <Vol. It), c;iated.the.27th November, 
1170 from Shri D. Sanjivayya, Minister of· Labour, and Rehabilitation to 
the Secretu.y, Lok Sabha.] 
The President of India having been informed of the' subject matter 
of the above-mentioned Bill has, in pursuance of clause (1) of article 117 
of the Constitution, recommended the introduction of the said Bill in the 
l.ek Sabha. 
9 

:iUHAMQ1t\L idMlQaAMbuM: 
Clauses 8 Qld 18 of the am. envis",,~ c;Qnstit"tiQn,oLEam~ .aeD.lien 
Funds tor the workers cQv.ered Wldar the CCi)al.MinescEtAvldent.ElUUleru:t 
Bonus Schemes Act, 1948 and the EmploY,ees'P,rovident,Funds. Act, .1952 
by diversion of a portion of the employer's. and the emplQyeae' contribu.-
tiOns to the Provident Funds; to which wiUb.e added a contrib"tion b¥. 
the Central Government. It has been prl)poJed thattbe contributions 
ot the employer, employees and the Centril Government to the Family 
Pension Funds may be asshow.n below.-
(1) a.al Miiltl.provjdeaHl*-l : 
(a) Jilhp~r 
(It) BlDplo,ee. 
(e) Centrll Goven ment " 
11% ofp.,. 
I.~o of...,.y. 
1 te;o of pay. 
Tar&L :4% .er pay. 
(2) JUnpJoyee.' Providf!Dt I'. : 
(II) El1lplo,cr 
(6) BmplorMI 
(c) CcaualOoyblllaliO;lt 
I~.of'h). 
l"",ofP.~·. 
It';., or..,. 
• 
2. Clauses 8 and 18 of the Blll also envisagfi! that the. cost .Qf.a.tlmiuJi-
tration of the Fltnlly Pension Fund Scheme will be paid by the Central 
GOWlllBlfIIatl 
3. The Coal Mlnes Provident F.und a.nd .BQlUI8 S~Mmes Act, 1948. is 
app'li~able ttl about 4 lilths of employeeS in coal mines. 'the EqUayeea' 
Prbvldent Fund$ At!\, 19&2.iS at pre*t..~~b1e to. abmlt.5.5.JakhI·.a1 
empltJyees. ~)tlStlha n'lemb~i. of th~ .~o.a1 ·,Miaaes. PMVicter.t .r.1iDd udl 
the employ-eea 01 &stlbU!;hrn~nts already c:ov.en:d bytb. t.nQlgy.M'l' 
Provident Funds Act will be given option to come over to the Family 
Peneion ~I_ orctaJ..tbn1illile."UI'uier·.·PWlIlI1Ieut>I'ad"s.htint-·Rsek. 
It U' eJllledtdi.dIat'f6':pfJI'., .. t.d ,otJ tbe.,empio)lMl8 .6lfeatl, ..... 11' •. \iftdt!t 
the two Acts will opt for the Famlty ........... me.. But the' p6t1tibili~ 
of l00.-peI\ ~t .• mtloyees opting for the Family Pension Scheme cannot 
be ruled out. . 
4. Assuming that 75 per cent. of the emplo~ ~ Uft~ the 
Coal Mines Provident Fund and. B.o..nUl.~&h=e..,Act,alui.thL~ 
PreYldent Fuhds A'Ct opt for the Flmlly ~i\libn Scheme, the annual 
financial liability of the Clfttr.al ~ent 1Iftd«msequent expenditure 
from the Consolidated Fund of IncU .. hasb~n estimated as under:-
(I) ==i:l1.=~M=: 
(II) Centrll Government CODtributiOft to ·R..I ............ 
the Peaaioo Fund at the rate of If% of ply. 
~ c.t.of,,..iGi'trat_ ... , ~~; 
............ , ) 
TOTAL •. ft •.. 1.15 _010 
10 

11 
(%) Employees covered under the Emph,yee.· 
Provident Fund Act: 
~) e~I-(}Gvermnent·eontrlbutlon to the 'pens Ion 
PU;'l at the rat~ of 1 i% of PlY. 
(~ Coat·fIf adJftinimatiOir 
Rs. 10,% Ct'9NI. 
-lb. 0,76 CIOrft. 
TOTAL ... RI. 10.96 crorea. 
If, however, 100 ~r cent. employees covwed uncleI' the Coal Minet 
Provicteftt FUnd and' Bonus Schemes Act and the' Emp!QYettS'Prov.ident 
Funds Act opt for the Family Pensi'an Scheme. the annual ftnanclal 
liqtiUlty of the Central Government and COIlleQJlen~ exPenditure from the 
C0ns01i<!ated'1"und of 1hdi, will b~ as under;-
(J) ~.yeu""""'''r:thCIa''l Mines·Jtro9i'lllm:1'uDd 
-lJI>NIs ~ ~ : 
(.) Employqs~ned u..a. tit. 881'10,....· Pro9id .. 
P~:isAct: 
(til C~tral G'W:mm~tcontribatlan to the PlllliOllhnci 
It 11% of Ply, 
(~·G .. ltr· __ s1r.tten 
RI. I.~ crorel • 
.... o~oB crore •. 
ToTAL ... lb. 1.S! 'CnhI. 
TOTAL ... Rs. 14.61 crores. 
The Uabilityof the Central . Govemment in respect.' of employees 
eavered under the Employees' Provident Funds Act will increase propor-
tionately with the expansion of coverage of the Act. 
eNOTE.-About 4 per cent. of the cost of administration represents non-
recurring expenditure. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGA'J'F,:D LEGISLATION 
. The nraw section 3E of the Coal Mine~Provideni Fund and Bonus 
Schemes Act', 1948, proposed to be inserted under clause 8 of the Bill, 
seeks to empower the Central Government to frame the Coal Mines 
Family Pensiop Scheme for the purpose of providing family pension and 
life assurance benefits to the employees covered by the Coal Mines 
Provident Fund Scheme .. Under clause 18 of the Bill, a corresp,onding 
provision is being made in the new section 6A of the Employees' Pro-
vident Funds Act, 1952 for providing similar family pension and life 
assurance beneiits to the employees of establishments or 'class of esta1:).. 
lishments to which the said Act applies. Under the Family Pension 
Schemes which will be framed by the Central Government; the various 
matters which are to be provided therein, are enumerated in the new 
Second Schedule proposed to be inserted in the 1948-Act under clause 
11 of the Bill and in new Schedule III proposed to' be inserted in the 
1952,-Act unqer clause 30 of the Bill. It is' clear Jpat t,h.e provisions to 
~ ,!PJ!d~j..n,_tn.a Family Pension Scheme under both the Statutes, referred 
to" ~bove, will c~n~~n matters of detail and day-ta-day working, e.g., the 
~mplQyees_or class.. of employees to which the Schemes shall apply, the 
portion of employer's and employee's contribution to be credited to the 
Family Pension Funds, the contrib1!tionto be made by the Central Gov-
ernment towards the Fund, the scales of family pension and the assurance 
amount to be paid to the ~mplo~es and,the ,mode of dis,b.ursement thereof, 
arid other like matters. . , ' . 
. ,2. The delegation of legislative powers is, thus/ 'of, a normal character • 
. . 
12 

ANNEXURE 
~C'l'S nOM TID COAL MINES PROVIDENT FUND AND BONUS ScHD08 
Ac:r. 1948 
(46 OF 1948) 
An Act to make provision for the framing of a Provident Fund Scheme 
and a Bonus Scheme for persOns employed in coal mines. 
WHEREAS it is expedient to make provision for the framing of a Provi-
dent Fund Scheme and a Bonus Scheme for persons employed in coal 
mines; 
• • • • • 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Coal Mines Provident Fund and 
Bonus Schemes Act, 1948. 
• • • • • 
3A. (1) • • • • 
(3) The Board shall administer the Fund vested in it in such manner 
as may be specified in the Scheme aforesaid. 
(4) The Board shall perform such other functions as it may be re-
quired to perform by or under any provisions of the Scheme aforesaid. 
• • • • • 
3e. (1) • • • • 
(S) Subject 110 the provisions of lub-sections (1) and (2), the Board 
may appoint such other officers and employees as it may consider neces-
IIU'Y for the efficient administration of the Coal Mines Provident Fund 
Scheme. 
• • • • • 
• • • • • 
I. (1) • • • • • 
(2) A scheme framed under the provisions (If sub-section (1) may 
prOV'lde for ill or any (If the matters specified in the Second Schedule. 
• • • • • 
EXftAC'I'S ntOM !'HZ EMPLOYHS' PJtovmENT P'UN1)tII ACT, 1952 
(19 OF 1952) 
An Act to provide for the institution of provident funds for employees 
in fllCtorie. and othe-r establishments. 
• • • • • 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Employees' Provident Funds Act. 
1952. 
• • • • • 
(5) An establishment to which this Act applies shall continue to be 
pemed 'by this Aet notwithstanding that the number of persons em· 
pleyed therein at any time falls below twenty: 
13 
Short title 
and extent. 
Constitu-
tion of 
Board of 
Trustees. 
Appoint_ 
ment of 
officers. 
Coal 
mines 
Bonua 
Scheme. 
Short title. 
extent and 
applica-
tion. 

Defini-
tions. 
Central 
Board. 
Appoin~­
mentof 
officers. 
Dele,a-
tion. 
Modib-
tiono! 
Scheme. 
Determina-
tion of 
money due 
from em. 
ployers. 
Mode of 
recovery 
of-moneys 
du. from 
employers. 
l-i 
Provided that where for a continuous period of not less than one year 
the number of persons employed therein has been less than fifteen, the 
employer in relation to such establishment may cease to give effect to 
the provisions of this Act and any Scheme framed tliereunder, with effect 
from the beginning .of the month following the expiry 'af . the -said-period 
of one year, but he shall, within one month of the date of such cessation, 
intimate, by registered post, the fact thereof to such authO'rity as may be 
specified by the appropriate Government in this behalf. 
Z. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
• • • • • 
(l) "Scheme" means a Scheme framed under this Act. 
• • • • • 
SA. (1) • • • • 
(3) The Central Board shall administer the Fund vested in it in such 
manner as may be specified in the Scheme. 
(4) The Central Board shall perform such other functions as it may 
be required to perform by or under any provisions of the Scheme. 
• • • • • ... . , 
SD. (1) • • • -. ., 
(3) The Central Board may appoint such other officers and employees' 
as it may consider necessary for the effiCient administration·' of the 
Seheme. ' 
• • • • • 
5E. The Central Board may, with the prior approval of the Central 
Government and a State Board may, with the prior approval of the State 
Government concerned, delegate to its chairman or t<1 any· of its of'llce!'8,' 
subject to such conditions and Umftatlons, if any, as it may specifY, sUeltl" 
of its powers and functions under this Act as it may deem necessal"1tor' 
the efficient administratien of the Saheme. 
• • • .. • 
7. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the· Oftieial 
Gazette, add to, amend or vary any Saheme framed under tbis. Ad. 
• • • • • 
7A. (1) The Central Provident Fund Commissioner, any Deputy Provi-
dent Fund Commissioner or any Regional Provident Fund Commissioner 
may, b~ order, determine the amount dUe from any employer ul'l<:ier any 
provisiOft of this Act or of the Scheme an1i'b this purttose mayeonduet 
such inquiry as he may deem nfiOessat'y. 
• • • • • 
8. Any amount due-
• • • • • 
(b) from the employer in relation to an exempted establish-
ment in respect of any damages recoverable under section 14B or 
any charges payable by him to the appropriate Government under 
any provision of thitl Act or under any of the conditions specified 
under section 17, 
may, if the amount is in arrear, be r~overed by the appropriate ,Govern-
ment in the same manner as an arrear of land revenue. . 
• • • • • 

tot 1909. 
5 of 1920. 
'1 of 1913. 
5 of 1898. 
15 
>.':11.: Wbt!tea~y employer is adjudicated insolvent or, beine a compah.y, 
~. ordet: f?r wmding up is made, the amount due-
· .. . . • 
(b) from the employer in relation to an exempted establishment 
in respe~t of any eontrlbution to the provident fund (in 80 far as 
it relates to exempted employees), under th~ rules of the provident 
fun.d, damages recoverable under section 14B fir any charges pay-
able by him to the appropriate Government under any provision of 
this Act or under any of the conditiolUl·specifted under section 17, 
shall, wh~re the liability therefor has accrued before the order of adjudi-
cation or winding up is made, be deemed to be included among the debts 
which under section 49 of the Presidency-towns InsolveQcy Act, 1909 or 
under section 61 of the Provincial Insolvency Act, 1920 or under section 
230 of the Indian Companies Act, 1913 are to be paid in priority to aU 
other debts in the distribution of the property of the insolvent or the 
assets of the company being wound up, as the case may be. 
• • • • • 
Prlorltyor 
pa~meDt 
of eon-
tributionl 
over 
other 
debts. 
13. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the OffiCial InIpfictors. 
Gazette, appoint such persons as it thinks fit to be Inspectors fuT the 
purposes of this Act or of any Scheme, and may define their jurisdiction. 
• • • • • 
(2A) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 189,8 shall, 
so far as may be, apply to any search or seizure under sub-section (2) 
811 they apply to any search or seizure made under the authority of a 
warrant issued under section 98 of the said Code. 
• • • • • 
14. (1) Whoever, for the purpose of avoiding any payment to be made Penalties. 
by himself under this Act or under any Scheme or of enabling any other 
person to' avoid such payment, knowingly makes or causes to be made 
any false statement or false representation shall be punishable with im-
prisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine 
which may extemd to one thousand rupees, or with both. 
(2) A Scheme framed under this Act may provide that any person 
who contravenes, or makes default in complying with, any of the pro-
viSions thereof shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand 
rupees, or with both. 
• .. • • .. 
(3) No Court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under 
this Act or under any Scheme except on a report in writing of the facts 
constituting such offence made with the previous sanction of such autho-
rity as may be specified in this behalf by the appropriate Government, 
by an Inspector appointed under section 13. 
14A. (1) If the person committing an offence under this Act or the 
Scheme made thereunder is a company, every person, who at the time 
the offence was committed was in charge of, and was responsible to, the 
company for tile conduct of the business of the company, as well as th:' 
company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable 
to be proceeded a,ainst and punished accordinilY: 
Offences 
by eom-
pani_ 

Protection 
tor act. 
done in 
,ood faith 
Dele, ... 
tion of 
powers. 
~ 
Provided that nothing contained in this .ub-iection .hali render any 
such person liable to any punishment, if he proves that the offence wu 
committed without hil knowledge or that he exercised all due diliaence 
to prevent the commisaion of luch oftence. 
(2) NotWithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where aD 
offence under this Act or the Scheme thereunder has been committed by 
a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with 
the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to, any neglect on the 
part of, any director or manager, secretary or other officer of the com-
pany, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall be deemed to 
be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and 
punished accordingly . 
• • • • • 
18. No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against an Inspector or 
any other person in respect of anything which is in good faith done or 
intended to be done under this Act or under any Scheme. 
19. The appropriate Government may direct that any power or autho-
rity or jurisdiction exerCisable by it under this Act or any Scheme shall, 
in relation to such matters and subject to such conditions, if any, as may 
be specified in the direction, be exercisable also-- . 
(a) where the appropriate Government is the Central Govern-
ment, by such officer or authority subordinate to the Central Govern-
ment or by the State Government or by such officer or authority 
subordinate to the State Gove.'"IUUent, al may be specified in the 
notification; and 
(b) where the appropriate Government is a State G<1vemment, 
by such officer or authority subordinate to the State Government as 
may be specified in the notification. 
• • • • • 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
funher to amead the Coal Mines Provident Fund and Bonus Schemes 
Act, 1948 and the Employees' Provident Funds Aa, 1952. 
(Shri D. SanjifJayya .. 
Minister of Labour and Rehabilitation.) 