1
THE CONSTITUTION (SCHEDULED TRIBES) ORDER
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010
By
SHRI HANSRAJ GANGARAM AHIR, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order (Amendment)
Act, 2010
2. In the Schedule to the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950, in Part IX.-
Maharashtra, for entry 17, the following entry shall be substituted, namely:—
''17. Gamit, Gamta, Gavit, Mavchi, Padvi, Gowari, Gowar, Gowara.''.
Short title.
Bill No. 127 of  2010
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
C.O. 22. Amendment
of the
Schedule.
5

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
There has been a long pending demand to include the Gowari tribe of Maharashtra in
the list of scheduled tribes maintained under article 342 of the Constitution.The Gowari tribe
is also known as Gowar or Gowara tribe. This community is plagued by extreme social,
educational and economic backwardness. The Union Government took cognizance of the
poor condition of this community and brought a Bill in the year 1967 to include this community
in the schedule to the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950. However, the Bill lapsed
and the Gowari community could not be added to the list of Scheduled Tribes of the State of
Maharashtra.
The Gowari community made several efforts and launched campaigns in the past to get
their community in schedule to the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950. As many as
114 people of the community have laid down their lives seeking inclusion of the Tribes. After
considering the demand of the community, on four different occasions the Government of
Maharashtra have recommended the inclusion of the Gowari community in the schedule to
the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950. The condition of this community is
deteriorating day by day due to lackadaisical approach of the Government in providing the
benefits of reservation to the people belonging to this community.
The Gowari tribe needs the support of the State in the form of reservation in services
under Government and other affirmative action of the Government so that they can be
integrated with the mainstream and become an important part of the social fabric. To ensure
such support to them, it is proposed in the Bill to include the Gowar, Gowara and Gowari
community in Part IX.- Maharashtra in the Schedule to the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes)
Order, 1950.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; HANSRAJ GANGARAM AHIR
October 22, 2010.
2

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
The Bill seeks to include Gowar, Gowara and Gowari community in the list of Scheduled
Tribes in respect of the State of Maharashtra by way of amending the Constitution (Scheduled
Tribes) Order, 1950. The Bill, if enacted, would involve recurring and non-recurring expenditure
on account of the benefits to be given under the schemes and programmes of the Government
meant for social, educational and economic development of the scheduled tribes. At this
stage, it is not possible to mention the exact amount which may be incurred on this account.
However, it is estimated that a sum of approximately rupees one hundred crore is likely to be
involved as a recurring expenditure per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees fifty crore is also likely to be involved.
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION (SCHEDULED TRIBES) ORDER, 1950
C.O. 22
*******
(PART III.—Rules and Orders under the Constitution)
*******
Part IX. Maharashtra
*******
17. Gamit, Gamta, Gavit, Mavchi, Padvi
*******
4

GMGIPMRND—4947LS(S3)—11-11-2010.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950.
————
(Shri Hansraj Gangaram Ahir, M.P. )