U
BM No. 127 of 198S
THE DIRECT TAX LAWS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1988
A s nrniooucBto in  Lok Samu; on
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
C latjsss
CHAPTER I
PREIiIM INARY
1. Short title and commencement.
CHAPTER n  
AASBNDMEinS T O  T H E  IK C O M B -A A X  ACT, 1961
2. Amendment of section 2.
3. Araaidm«»t of section 3.
4. Amendment of section 10.
5. Amendmwit of section 11.
6. Amendment of section 32A.
7. Amendment of section 32AB.
8. Amendment of section 3& .
9. Amendment of section 40.
10. Amendment of section 44AC.
11. Amendment of section 64.
12. Insertion of new section 67A,
13. Amendment of section 80C.
14. Amendment of section 80CC.
15. Amendment of section 80HHC.
16- Insertion of new section 80HHD.
17. Amendment of section 86.
18. Amendment of section 115A.
19. Amendment of section 115J.
20. Amendment of section 139.
21. Amendment of section 143.
22. AmMidment of section 144A.
23- Amendment of section 147.
24. Amendment of section 148.
25. Amendment of section 155.
i


C la u ses
26. Substitution of new  sub-heading for sufa^Jieading DD ot  
Chapter XV.
27. Omission of section 167A.
28. Insertion of new section 167B,
29. Amendment of section 190.
30. Amendment of section 194A.
31. Omission of section 194E,
32. &abstitution of new section for section 196A.
33. AmendmMit of sections l98, 199, 200, 202, 203, 208A, 206 and  
215.
34. Amendment of section 206C.
35. Amendment of section 209.
36. Amendment of sections 222, 223. 224, 225, 226, 228 and 228A.
37. Amendment of section 226.
38- Amendment of section 2HA-
39. Amendment of section 234B!
40. Am endm m t of section 234C.
41. Amendment of secticm 244A.
42. Am endm oit of sub-heading to Chapter XX .
43. Amendment of section 246.
44. Omission of section 246A.
45. Amendment of section 249.
46. Amendmrat of se c tio n  253.
47. Amendment of section 255.
48. Amendment of section 269A.
49. A m en in en t of section 269B.
50. Amendment of section 271.
51. Amendment of section 273A.
52. Amendment of section 275.
53. Insertion of new section 279B.
54. Amendment of Second Schedule.
55. Amendment of ITiird Schedule.
56. Amendment of Tenth Schedule.
57. Consequential amendments.
CHAPTER III  
A m e n d m e n t s to  th e W ealth -tax  A ct, 1957
58. Amendment of section 2.
59. A m e n d m e n t o f sectio n  4 .
60. Amendment of section 5.
61. A m e n d m e n t o f se c tio n  6.
62. S u b s titu tio n  of n e w  se c tio n  fo r se c tio n  7.


H i
Cl a u s e s ;
63. Amendment of section 11.
64. Amendment of section 16.
65. Amendment of section 16A.
66. Am endm «it of section 17-
67. Amendment of section 17B.
68. Amendment of section 18.
69. Substitution of new section for section ISA.
70. Amendment of section 18B.
71. Amendment of section 23.-
72. Amendment of section 26.
73. Amendment of section 34A.
74. Amendment of section 35.
75. Insertion of new section 36.
76. Amendment of section 41.
77. Amendment of section 42A.
78. Insertion of new Schedule III.
CHAPTER IV  
AMENDMEms TO THE GlPT-TAX ACT, 19S8
79. Amendment of section 3.
80. Amendment of section 5. '
81. Substitution of new section for section 6.
82. Amendment of section 10.
83. Amendment of section 15.
84. A m e n d m e n t o f s e c tio n  16.
66. Amendment of section 16B.
86. Amendment of section 17.
87. Substitution of new section for section 17A.
88. Amendment of section 22.
89. Amendment of section 25.
90. Amendment of section 33A.
91. Amendment of section 34.
92. Insertion of new section 35E.
93. Amendment of section 45.
94. Insertion of new Schedule II.
CHAPTER V
A m en d m en ts to the  D ihect  T ax  L a w s (A m en d m e n t) A ct, 1987
95. Amendment of Act 4 of 1968.


THE DIRECT TAX LAWS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1988
A
BILL
further to amend the Income-tax Act^  1961. the W ealth-tax Act,  1967,  
the Gift-tax Act,  .1958 and the Direct Tax Laws (Amendment) Act,  
1987. ..
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-ninth Year of the Republic
of India as follows; —
CHAPTER I  
P r e l i m i n a r y
5  1. (I) This Act may be called the Direct Tax Laws (Amendment)
Act, 1988.
(2) Save aa otherwise provided in this Act, sections 2 to 31 and 33 to
95 shall come into force on the 1st day of April, 1989.
CHAPTER II
10 A m e n d m e n t s  to  t h e I n c o m e - ta x Act, 1961
2. In section 2 of the Income-tax Act, 1961 (hertafter in this Chapter  
referred to as the Income-tax Act),—
(o) in clause (24),—
(i) in sub-clause (iia) [as amended by section 3 of the  
1988 1 5 Direct Tax Laws (Ameivlment) Act, 1987], for the words, brac­
kets letters and figures “or by a trust or institution of nati<Kial
BiH No. 127 of 1988
|of ]9fi1
SJiort
title
and com-
injncc-
ment.
Amend­
ment of 
section 2.


importance referred to in clause (d) of sub-section (I)' d  sec­
tion 80F”, the words, brackets, figures and letter "or by an asso­
ciation or institution r e te ic d  to in dause (21) or clause (2 5 ), oif 
by  a fund or trust or institution referred to in  sub-clause (iv) or  
sub-clause (u) of clause (25C), of section 10” shall be substituted; ^
(ii) after sub-clause (H i), the following sub-clauses shall be  
inserted and shall be- deemed to have been inserted with effect  
from the 1st day of April, 1962, nam ely:—
“(iiia) any special allowance or benefit, other ftmn per-  
quisite included imder aub-clause (tii), sgpecifically granted
to the assessee to m eet expenses wholly, necessarily and  
exclusively for the performance of ths duties of an office  
or employment of profit;
(iiib) any allowance granted to the assessee either to  
meet his personal exp«ises at the place where the duties of 15  
his office or employment of profit are ordinarily performed  
by him or at a place where he ordinarily resides or to com­
pensate him for the increased cost of living;’’;
(b) in clause (25) [as substituted by clause (k of section 3 of
the Direct Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 1987], the words, brackets 20 4  of 1988. 
and figure "sub-section (2)  of shall be omitted and shall be deemed  
to have been omitted with effect from the 1 st day of April, 1988;
(c) in clause (S7A)  [as amended by clause ( 0 ) of section 3 of  
the Direct Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 1987],— 4  of 1988.
25(A) in sub-clause (i), the words, figures and letter “or  
section 167A”, wherever they occur, shall be omitted;
(B) in sub-clause (ii). the figures and letter “, 194E” shall  
be omitted and shall be deemed to have been omitted with effect  
from the 1 st day of April, 1988.
Amend- section 3 of the Income-tax Act [as substituted by section 4 of jq
mentof the Direct Tax Laws (Amend;.. »nt) Act, 1987], in sub-section (2), after 4 ofig 8 8 .
sections. the proviso, the following provisos shall be inserted, namely: —
‘Provided farther tliat in the case of a business or profession  
newly s^t up. or a source of income newly coming into existence on  
or after the 1st day of April, 19& 7 but before the 1st day of April, 3 5  
1988 and v^here the accounts in relation to such business or profes­
sion or source of income have not been made up to the 31s{ day of  
March, 1988, the “previous year” in relation to the assessment year
commencing on the 1 st day of April, 1989. shall be the period begin­
ning with the date of setting up of the business or profession or, as  
the case may be, the date on which the source of income newly  
comes into existence and ending on the 31st day of March, 1989:
Provided also that where the assessee has adopted one or more  
periods as the “previous year” in relation to the assessment year  
commencing on the 1st day of April, 1988, for any source or sources 4 5  
of his income, in addition to the business or profession or source of  
income referred to in the second proviso, the previous ye^r in re­
lation to the assessment year commencing on the 1 st day of April,


1S89, shall be reckoned separately in the manner aforesaid in respect  
of each such sdoirce of income, and the longer or the longest of the  
periods so reckoned shall be the previous year in relation to the said  
assessment year.’.
5. 4. In section 10 of the Incom e-tax Act,— Amend-
(a) after clause (6B ). the following clause shall be inserted,  
namely;— lo.
10
“ (6C) any income arising to such foreign company, as the  
Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,  
specify in this behalf, by way of fees for technical services  
received in pursuance of an agreement entered into with that  
Government for providing services in or outside India in pro­
jects connected with security of India;’';
’6 of 1988 clause (1 5 ), after sub-clause (iic ) [as inserted by section
’  4 of the Fina^ice Act, 1988], the following sub-clause shall be inserted,
nam ely:—
‘(iid ) interest on such bonds, as the Central Government  
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify, arising to—
(a) a non-resident Indian, being an individual owning
20 the bonds; or
(b) any individual owning the bonds by virtue of being  
a nominee or survivor of the non-resident Indian; or
(c) any individual to whom ,  the bonds have been gifted  
by the non-resident Indian:
2 5  Provided that the aforesaid bonds are purchased by a non­
resident Indian in foreign exchange and the interest and  
principal received in respect of such bonds, whether on their  
maturity or otherwise, is not allowable to be taken out of  
India:
3 Q  Provided furthcsr that where an individual, who is a non­
resident Indian in any previous year in which the bonds are  
acquired, becomes a resident in India in any subsequent year,  
the provisions of this sub-clause shall continue to apply in  
relation to such individual:
35 Provided also that in a case where the bonds are encashed
in a previous year prior to their maturity by an individual who  
is so entitled, the provisions of this sub-clause shall not apply  
to such individual in relation to the assessment year relevant  
to such previous year.
Explanation — ^ F or the purposes of this sub-clause, the  
expression “non-resident Indian” shall have the meaning  
assigned to it in clause (c) of section 115C;’;
(c) for clause (21) [as it stood immediately before its omission  
by clause (k) of  section 6 of the Direct Tax Laws (Amendment)


Act, 1987], the following clause shall be substituted, with effect 4ofi98|.  
from the 1st day of April. 1990, namely; —
'{2 1 ) any income of a scientific research association for the  
time being approved for the purpose of clause (ii) of sub-section  
(1) of section 35: 5
Provided that the scientific research association—
(a) applies its income, or accumulates it for application,  
wholly and exclusively to the objects for which it is estab­
lished, and the provisions of sub-section ( 2 ) and sub-section
(3) of section 1 1  shall apply in  relation to such accumulation |q  
subject to the following modifications, namely: —
(i) in sub-section ( 2 ),—
(7) the words, brackets, letters and figure
“referred to in clause (a) or clause (b) of sub­
section (I) read with the Explanation  to that sub-  
section” shall be omitted;
(2 ) for the words “to charitable or religious  
purposes”, the words “for the purposes of scientific,  
research’’  shall be substituted;
(3) the reference to ‘  Assessing Officer”  in 2 0
clause (a) thereof shall be construed as a reference
to the “prescribed authority” referred to in clause
(ii) of sub-section (7) of section 35;
(ii) in sub-section (3), in clause (a), for the words  
“charitable or religious purposes”, the words “the pur- 2 5  
poses of scientific research” shall be substituted; and
(b) does not invest or deposit its funds (other than  
voluntary contributions received and maintained in the  
form of jewellery, furniture or any other article as the  
Board may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify) ^
for any period during the previous year otherwise than in
any one or more of the forms or modes specified in sub-sec-  
tion (5) of section 11:
Provided further that nothing contained in this clause shall  
apply in relation to any income of the scientific research associa*  
tion, being profits and gains cf business;’;
(d) for clause (2 S ) [as it stood immediately before its omission  
by clause (k)  of section 6  of the Direct Tax Laws (Amendment)
Act, 1987], the following clause shall be substituted with effect from 4 of 1988, 
the 1st day of Api'il, 1990, namely:— 40
“(2 3 ) any income of an association or institution established  
in India which may be notified by the Central Government in  
the Official Gazette having regard to the fact that the associa­
tion O r institution has as its object the control, supervision,  
regulation or encouragement in India of the games of cricket,  
hockey, football, tennis or such other games or sports as the 45


Central Government may, by notification in the Official Ga 2rett», 
specify in this behalf:
Provided that the association or institution shall mak« an  
application in the prescribed form and manner to the prescribed  
5  authority for the purpose of grant of the exemption, or c«nti-
nuance thereof, under this clause;
Provided further that the Central Government may, before  
notifying the association or institution under this clause call for  
such documents (including audited annual accounts) or infor-  
jQ  mation from the association or institution as it thinks necessary
in order to satisfy itself about the genuineness of the activities  
of the association or institution and that Government may also
make such inquiries as it may deem necessary in this behalf:
Provided also thai the association or institution,—
] 5  (a ) applies its income or accumulates it for application,
wholly and exclusively to the objects for v/hich it is estab-
•  lished and the provisions of sub-section (2 ) and sub-section
( i)  of section 11 shall apply in relation to such accumulatioft  
subject to the following modifications, namely:—
20 (0 sub-section (2),—
(I) the words, brackets, letters and figure  
“referred to in clause (a) or clause (b) of sub­
section (J) read with the Explanation  to that srub-  
section’  shall be omitted;
2 5  (2) for the words “lo charitable or religioua
purposes”^  the words “for the purposes of gamee or  
sports” shall be substituted;
(3) the reference to “Assessing Officer” in  
clause (a) thereof shall be construed as a referowwi
to the “prescribed authority”  referred to in ^ e
first proviso to this clause;
30
(iii) in sub-section (3), in clause (a), for the watili  
“charitable or religious purposes”^  the words “the pur«  
poses of games or sports’  shall be substituted; and
2^ (b)  does not invest or deposit its funds (other than
voluntary contrib'utions received and maintained in the form  
of jewellery, furniture or any other article as the Board  
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify) for any  
period during the previous year otherwise than in any on*  
or more of the forms or modes specified in sub-section (5)  
of section 11; and
(c) does not distribute any part of its income in M y  
manner to its members except as grants to any assodatio*  
or institution affiliated to it:
i  P ro v id e d  also that the exemption under this clause Shall
n o t b e  d e n ie d  in  relation to any funds invested or depoaited


before the 1st day of April, 1989 otherw ise than in any one or 
m ore of the form s or modes specified sub*section (5) of section 
11 if such funds do not conti^iue to rem ain so invested or 
deposited after the 30th day of M arch, 1990:
Provided also that nothing contained in this clause shall 5 
apply in relation to any income of the association or institution, 
being profits and gains of business:
Provided also th at any notification issued by the C entral 
G overnm ent under this clause in relation to any association or 
institution shall, at any one time, have effect for such assessment 10 
year or years, not exceeding three assessment years, (including 
an assessment year or years commencing before the date on 
which such notification is issued) as may be specified in the 
notification:
(c) in clause (2 3 C ) [as it stood im m ediately before its amend- 15 
m ent by section 6 of the Direct Tax Laws (Am endm ent) Act, 1987], ^
for sub-clauses (it') and (v ). the following sub-clauses shall be substi­
tuted w ith effect from the 1st day of April^ 1990, namely: —
“ (it’) r y  other fund or institution established for chari­
table purposes which may be notified by the Central G overnm ent 20 
in the Official Gazette, having regard to the objects of the fund 
or institution and its im portance throughout India or throughout 
any State or States; or
(v)  any tru st (including any other legal obligation) or 
institution wholly for public religious purposes or wholly for 25 
public religious and charitable purposes, which m ay be notified 
by the Central Governm ent in the Official Gazette, having regard 
to the m anner in which the affairs of the trust or institution are 
adm inistered and supervised for ensuring that the income accru­
ing thereto is properly applied for the objects thereof:
Provided th at the fund or tru st or institution referred to in 
sub-iclause (iv)  or sub-clause (i;) shall m ake an application in 
the prescribed form and m anner to the prescribed authority for 
the purpose of grant of the exemption, or continuance thereof, 
under sub-clause (iv) or sub-clause (v):  35
Provided further th at the Central G overnm ent may. before 
notifying the fund or trust or institution under sub-clause (iv ) 
or sub-clause ( r ) , call for such documents (including audited 
annual accounts) or inform ation from the fund or tru st or insti­
tution as it thinks necessary in order to satisfy itself about the 40 
genuineness of the activities of the fund or trust or institution 
and th at G overnm ent may also make such inquiries as it may 
deem necessary in this behalf:
Provided also th at the fund or tru st or institution referred 
to in sub--clause (it;) or sub-clause ( i))— 45
(a) applies its income, or accum ulates it for application,
wholly and exclusively to the objects for which it is estab­
lished; and


(b) does not invest or deposit its funds (other than  
voluntary contributions received and maintained in the  
form of jewellery, furniture or any other article as the Board  
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify) for any  
5 period during the previous year otherwise than in any one or
) more of the forms or modes specified in sub-section (5)( o£
section 11;
Provided also that the exemption under sub-clause {iv ) or  
sub-clause (v)  shall not be denied in relation to any funds in-  
10 vested or deposited before the 1st day of April, 1989 otherwise
than in any one or more of the forms or modes specified in sub­
section (5) of section 11 if such funds do not continue to remain  
so invested or deposited after the 30th day of March, 1990;
Provided also that nothing contained in sub-clause (iv ) or  
^ 15 sub-clause (v)'shall apply in relation to any income of the fund
or trust O r institution, being profits and gains of buaness, unless  
the business is incidental to the attainment of its objectives and  
separate books of accounts are maintained by it in respect of such  
business:
2 0  provided also that any notification issued by the Central
Government under sub-clause (iv)  or sub-clause iv)  shall, at  
any one time, have effect for such assessment year or years, not  
exceeding three assessment years (including an assessment year -  
or years commencing before the date on which such notification  
2 5  is issued) as may be specified in the notification;”;
{/) in clause (2 3 D ), the words including the condition that at  
least ninety per cent, of such income shall be distributed to the  
holders of its units every year.” shall be omitted and shall be deemed  
to have been omitted with effect from the 1st day of April, 1988.
\  30 5. In section 11 of the Income-tax Act fas it stood immediately before Amead-
its omission by section 7 of the Direct Tax Laws '(Amendment) Act, mentof
4 of 1988. 19871,— sectio*
11.
^  (a) in sub-section (1),—
(i) after clause (c) and before the Explanation,  the fo'llow-
35 ing clause shall be inserted, namely: —
“(d ) income in the form of voluntary contributions made  
with a specific direction that they shall form part of the  
corpus of the trust or institution;”;
(ii) in the Explanation,  in clause (2), —
4 0  ( 1 ) the words, brackets and figure “or sub-section (2)”
shall be omitted;
(2) the words “. whether fixed originally or on exten­
sion” shall be omitted;
(b) in eub-section (57,—
4 5  (i) in clause (I’ ii) ,  for the words and figures “Government
' company as defined in section 617 of the Companies Act. 1956”,
the word? “public sector company” shall be substituted;


Amend­
ment of 
section 
32A.
“ (acii) any other form or mode of investment or deposit  
as may be prescribed.”.
6 . 6 1  »ection 32A of the Income-tax Act,— ^
(a) in sub-section (I),—
(i) for the words “Provided that”, the following shall be  
substituted, namely; —
"Provided that in respect of a ship or an aircraft acquir-  
.ed or machinery or plant installed after the 31st day of 10  
March, 1988, this sub-section |h all have effect as if for the  
words “twenty-five per cent.”, the words “twenty per cent.”  
had been substituted:
Provided further that”;
(ii) the following Explanation  shall be added at the and,  
namelT: —
‘Explanation. —^ F or the purposes of this sub-section,  
•‘actual cost” means the actual cost of the ship, aircraft,  
machinery or plant to the assessee as reduced by chat part of  
such cost which has been met out of the amount releaSfed to 2 0  
' the assessee imder sub-section (6) of section 32AB."j
(b) in sub-section (2), after clause (b), the following proviso  
shall be inserted, namely: —
“Provided that nothing contained in clauses (a) and (b)  shall 2 5  
apply in relation to—
(i) a new ship or new aircraft acquired, or
fii) any new machinery or plant installed, after the Slat  
day of March, 1987 but before the 1 st day of April, 1988;”;
(c) in sub-section (2 C ) , after the words, figures and letters “the „  
31st day of May, 1983”,  the words, figures and letters “but before the  
1st day of April, 1987 ’  shall be inserted;
(d) in sub-section (4), in clause (ii), in sub-clause (a), for the
werds “the proviso”, the words “the second proviso” shall be substi-  
twted; I
(e ) in sub-section (5), in clause (b),  for the words “the proviso”,  
the words “the second proviso” shall be substituted;
(/) for sub-section (8B ), the following sub-sections shall be  
substituted, namely: —
“ (5B) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section
(8 ) or any notification issued thereunder, the provisions of t h is ^  
section shall apply in respect of a ship or aircraft acquired or  
any machinery or plant installed after the 31st day of March, 1988  
but before such date as the Central Government, if it considers  
necessary or expedient so to do, may, by notification in  the Official  
Gazette, specify in thip behalf.
8
.  (ii) after clause (x i), the follow ing clause shall be Inserted,
namely:—


(8C) Subject to the provisions of clause (ii) of sub-section
(3), where a deduction has been allowed to an assessee und«r  
sub-section (I) in any assessment year, no deduction shall be  
allowed to the assessee under section 32AB in the said assessment  
5  year and in the four assessment years immediately succeeding
such assessment year.” .
7. In section 32AB of the Income-tax Act, for sub-section (10), the Amend-
following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:— mentof
“ (1 0 ) Where a deduction has been allowed to an assessee under 32AB.  
10 this section in any assessment year, no deduction shall be allowed to  
the assessee under sub-section (1) of section 32A in the said assess­
ment year and in the four assessment year$ immediately succeeding  
such assessment year.’’.
8. In section 35 of the Income-tax Act [as it stood immediately before Amend-  
15 its omission by section 10 of the Direct Tax Laws (Amendment) Act mentof
1687],— - section
35.
(o) in clause (ii), in the proviso, after the words “prescribed  
authority”, the words “by notification in the Official Gazette” shall  
be inserted;
2 0  (^ ) in clause (in ), after the words “prescribed authority’’, the
words “by notification in the Official Gazette” shall be inserted;
(c) the following provisos shall be inserted at the end, namely:—
“Provided that the scientific research association, university,  
college or other institution referred to in clause (ii) or clause  
25 (iii) shall make an application in the prescribed form and manner
to the prescribed authority for the purpose of grant of approval,  
or continuance thereof, under clause (ii)  or, as the case may be,  
clause (iii):
Provided further that the prescribed authority may, before  
30 granting approval under clause ( ii) or clause (iii), call for such
documents (including audited annual accounts) or information  
from the scientific research association, university, college or  
other institution as it thinks necessary in order to satisfy itself  
about the genuineness of the activities of the scientific research  
35 association, university, college or other institution and that
authority may also make such inquiries as it may deem necessary  
in this behalf:
Provided also that any notification issued by the pres­
cribed authority under clause (ii) or clause (iii) shall, at any  
40 one time, have effect for such assessment year or years, not
exceeding three assessment years (including an assessment year  
or years xommencing before the date on which such notification
is issued) as may be specified in the notification.”.
9. In section 40 of the Income-tax Act, after clause (b ) [as it stood Amend-  
45 immediately before its substitution by clause (ii) of section 13 of the  
Direct Tax Laws (Amendment) Act. 1987], the following clause shall h e  
inserted, namely;—
*(ba) in the case of an association of persons or body of indi-  
vidvials (other than a company or a cooperative society or a society


1 0
Amend­
ment of 
section 
44AC.
Amend­
ment of 
section 
64.
registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 or under any law 2 1 of i 8 6 0  
corresponding to that Act in force in any part of India), any payment  
of interest, salary, bonus, commission or remuneration, by whatever  
name called, made by such association or body to a member of such  
association or body. ^
Explanation 1 - — Where interest is paid by an association or body  
to any member thereof who has also paid interest to the association  
or body, the amount of interest to be disallowed under this clause  
shall be limited to the amount by which the payment of interest by  
the association or body to the member exceeds the paynient of inter - 1 0  
est by the member to the association or body.
Expldfiation  2 .— Where an individual is a member of an associa­
tion or body on behalf, or for the benefit of any other p^ son (such  
member and the other person being hereinafter referred to as ■
“member in a representative capacity’’  and “person so represented”, 15  
respectively),—
(i) interest paid by the association or body to such individual
O r by such individual to the association or body otherwise than  
as member in a representative capacity, shall not be taken into  
account for the purposes of this clause; 20
(ii) interest paid by the association or body to such indi­
vidual or by such individual to the association or body as member  
in a representative capacity and interest paid by the association  
or body to the person so represented or by the person so repre­
sented to the association or body, shall be taken into acxount for 30  
the purpose of this clause.
Explanation  3.—Where an indh’idual is a member of an associa­
tion or body otherwise than as member in a representative capacity,  
interest paid by the association or body to such individual shall not  
be taken into account for the purposes of this clause, if such interest is  
received by him on behalf, or for the benefit, of any other person.’.
35
26 of 1988.10. In section 44AC of the Income-tax Act (as inserted by section 15  
of the Finance Act. 1988), in sub-section (1), in clause (a), the following  
proviso shall be inserted, namely; —
“Provided that nothing contained in this clause shall apply to a ^  
buyer where the goods are not obtained by him by way of auction  
and where the sale price of such goods to be sold by the buyer is  
fixed by or under any State Act;”.
IL In section 64 of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section (I) [as it stood  
immediately before its amendment by section 17 of the Direct Tax Laws 4 5  
(Amendment) Act, 1987],— 4 of 1968.
(a) in clauses (v)  ;ind (vii).  the bracket.*; and words “(not being  
a married daughter)” shall be omitted;
(b ) for Explanation 3,  the following Explanation  shall be yabsti-  
tuted, namely; —
‘Explanation  3.— For the purposes of clauses (iv), (v)  and 5 0
(in), where the assets transferred directly pr indirectly by an


11
15
? .l of I860.
20
individual to his spouse or m inor chUd or son's wife or son’ s 
m inor child (hereinafter in this Explanation  referred to as “the 
transferee’  ) are invested by the transferee in any business, th at 
p art of the income arising out of the business to the transferee 
in any previous year, which bears the same proportion to the 
incom e of the transferee from the business, as the value of the 
assets aforesaid as on the 1st day of the previous year bears to 
the total investm ent in the business by the transferee as on the 
said day, shall be included in the total income of the individual 
10 in th a t previous year.’.
12. A fter section 67 of the Income-tax Act [as it stood im m ediatdy 
before its substitution by section 18 of the Direct Tax Laws (Amendment)
4 of 1988, Act, 1987], the following section shall be inserted, nam ely:—
‘67A. (I) In computing the total income of an assessee who is a 
m em ber of an association of persons or a body of individuals wherein 
the shares of the members are determ inate and known (other than 
a company or a cooperative society or a society registered under the 
Societies Kegistration Act, 1860 or under any law corresponding to 
th at Act in force in any part of India), w hether the net result of the 
com putation of the total income of such association or body is a profit 
or a loss, his share (w hether a net profit or net loss) shall be comput­
ed as follows, nam ely: —
(o) any interest, salary, bonus, commission or rem uneration 
by w hatever name called, paid to any m em ber in respect o^’  the 
previous year shall be deducted from  the total income of the 
association or body and the balance ascertained and apportioned 
am ong the m em bers in the proportions in which they are entitled 
to share in the income of the association or body;
(b) w here the amount apportioned to a meniber under clause 
30 (o) is a profit, any interest, salary, bonus, commission or re­
m uneration aforesaid paid to the m em ber by the association 
or body in respect of the previous year shall be added to that 
amount, and the result shall be treated as the m em ber’s share in 
the income of the association or body;
35 (c) w here the amount apportioned to a m em ber under clause
(o) is a loss, any interest, salary, bonus, commission or re­
m uneration aforesaid paid to the member by the association or 
body in respect of the previous year shall be adjusted against 
th at amount, and the result shall be treated as the member’s share 
in the income of the association or body.
(2) The share of a m em ber in the income or loss of the associa­
tion or body, as computed under sub-section (1), shall, for the pur­
poses of assessment, be apportioned under the various heads of income 
in the same m anner in which the income or loss of the association 
or body has been determ ined under each head of income.
(3) Any interest paid by a member on capital borrowed by him 
for the purposes of investm ent in the association or body shall, in 
computing his share chargeable under the head “Profits and gains of 
business or profession’’  in respect of his share in the income of the
50 association or body, be deducted from his shai’ e.
25
40
45
Insertion 
of new 
section 
67A.
Method 
of com­
puting a 
member’ s 
share 
in the 
Income 
of asso­
ciation 
of
persons 
or body 
of
indi­
viduals.


12
Amend­
ment of 
section 
80C.
Amend­
ment of 
eection 
B O C C .
Amend­
ment of 
section 
80HHC.
Insertion 
of new 
section 
60HHD.
Deduction 
in respect 
of earn- 
in«s in 
converti- 
ble foretgn 
exchange.
Explanation .—^ I n  this section, “paid” has the same meaning as is  
assigned to it in clause (2) of sw tion 43.’.
13. In section 80C of the Income-tax Act,—
(a) in sub-section ( 2 ),—
(i) in clause (d), the words “or ten thousand rupees, which- 5  
ever is less’’  shall be omitted;
(ii) in clause (h ), in sub-clause (ii),  in item (c ), in sub-item
(6 ), after the words' “public company”, the words “or a public  
sector company or a University established by law or a college  
affiliated to such University” shall be inserted; 1 0
(b) in sub-section (8), after clause (c ), the following clause shall  
be inserted, nam ely;—
‘(d) “contribution” to any fund shall not include any sums  
in repayment of loan.”.
14  In section 80CC of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section (3 ) ,  in clause j ^
(a),  after sub-clause (ii), the following sub-clause shall be inserted,  
nam ely:—
“ (iii) a hotel approved by the prescribed authority;”.
15. In section 80HHC of the Income-tax Act [as amended by section
24 of the Finance Act, 1988],— 2 0  26of l 9 gg
(a) in sub-sections ( 1 ) and (lA ), for the words “whole of the  
income”, the word “profits’’  shall be substituted;
(b) in sub-section (4 ), for the words “net foreign exchange  
realisation as determined in accordance with the Import and Export  
Policy of the Government of India for the relevant period”, the 25  
words “export turnover’’  shall be substituted;
(c) in sub-section (4A),  in clause (a), for the word “income”,  
the word “profits” shall be substituted;
(d)  in the Explanation,—  i
(i) clause (c) shall be omitted; 3 ©
(ii) clauses (d) and (e) sh ill be renumbered as clausea (c)  
and (d) respectively.
IS. After section 80HHC of the Income-tax Act, the following section  
shall be inserted, namely; —
‘80HHD. {1) Where an assessee, being an Indian company or a 3 5  
person (other than a company) resident in India, is engaged in the  
business of a hotel approved by the prescribed authority in this  
behalf or of a travel agent, there shall, in accordance with and subject  
to the provisions of this section, be allowed, in computing the total  
income of the assessee, a deduction of a sum equal to the aggregate 40  
of—
(a) fifty per cent, of the profits derived by him from fsrviCM  
provided to foreign tourists; and '


(b) so much of the amount out of the r«maiaing ]»rofitB  
referred to in clause (a) as is debited to the profit and loss account  
of the previous year in respect of which the deduction is to be  
allowed and credited to a reserve account to be utilised for the
5 purposes of the business of the assessee in the manner laid down
in sub-section (4).
(2) This section applies only to services provided to foreign  
tourists the receipts in relation to which are received by the assessee  
in convertible foreign exchange.
10 (3) For the purposes of sub-section (1 ), profits derived from
services provided to foreign tourists shall be,—
13
(o) in a case where the business carried on by the  
consists exclusively of services provided to foreign tourists  
resulting in receipts in convertible foreign exchange, the  
15 profits of the business as computed under the head “Profits and
gains of business or profession”;
(b) in a case where the business carried on by the assessee  
does not consist exclusively of services provided to foreign  
tourists resulting in receipts in, convertible foreign ex-
20 changa, the amount which bears to the profits of the business
(as computed under the head “Profits and gains of business or  
profession”) the same proportion as the receipts in convertible  
foreign exchange bear to the total receipts of the business carried  
on by the assessee.
25 (4) The amount credited to the reserve account under clause (b)
of sub-section (I), shall be utilised by the assessee before the expiry  
of a period of five years next foHowing the orevious year in which the  
amount was credited for the following purposes, namely:—
(a) construction of new hotels approved bv the prescribed
30 authority in this behalf or expansion of facilities in existing
hotels already so approved;
(b) purchase of n<wr cars and new coaches by travel agents;
(c) purchase of sports equipment for mountaineering,  
trekHng, golf, river-,rafting and other sports in or on water;
3 5  (d)  construction of conference or convention centres;
(e) provision of such new facilities for the growth of Indian  
tourism as the Central Government may, by notification in the  
QflRcial Gazfi'tte. sjiedfy in this behalf:
Provided that where any of the activities referred to in clauses  
40 (c) to («) would result in cresition of any asset owned bv the assessee
outside India, such asset shoxiH be creatc/j only after obtaining prior  
approval of the prescribed authority. '
(5) Where anv amount credited to the resen^e account under  
clause (b> of sub-section (I)
45 (a) has been utilised for anv r)iirno«:e nt^’er than those refer­
red to in snb-section (4). the amount so utilised: or
(b) has not been utilised in the manner specified to sub­
section (4). the amoimt not so utlHsed.


(i) in a case referred to in clause (a ), in the year in w hidi  
the amount was so utilised; or
(it) in a case referred to in clause (b)in  the year imm®-  
diatdiy following the period of five years specified in sub-section 5
(O .
and shall be charged to tax accordingly.
( 6 ) The deduction iinder sub-section ( 1 ) shall not be admissible  
unless the assessee furnishes in the prescribed form, along w ith the  
return of income, the report of an accountant, as defined in the 1 0  
Explemation  below sub-section (2) of section 288, certifying that the  
deduction has been correctly claimed on the basis of the amoimt of
•  convertible foreign exchange received by the r.ssessee for services  
provided by him to the foreign tourists.
Explanation .—^ F or the purposes of this section,—
(a) “travel agent” means a travel agent or other person  
(not being an airline or a shipping company) who holds a valid  
licence granted by the Reserve Bank of India under section 32
of the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act. 1973; 46 of 1973.
(b) “convertible foreign exchange’’  shall have the meaning 2 0  
assigned to it in clause (a) of the Explanation to section 80HHC;
(c) “seriT.ces provided to foreign tourists” shall not include  
services by way of sale in any shop owned or managed by the  
person who carries on the business of a hotel or of a travel agent.’.
Am«nH . 17- Itt section 8 6  of the Income-tax Act [as it stood immediately before 25
mant of its substitution by section 29 of the Direct Tax Laws (Amendment) Act,
•®ction 19®7], for clause (r ) . the following clause shall be substituted, • *  I?**’
® ® -  - nam ely;—
“ (v) if the assessee is a member of an association of persons or a  
body of individuals (other than a company or a cooperative so c ie ty  30 
- or a society registered imder the Societies Registration A ct, 1880 or 2 1 oi IIW.
under any law corresponding to that Act in force in any part of India)’ ,  
his share in the income of the association or_body computed in the  
manner provided in section 67A:
Provided that.— 3 5
(o) where the association or body is chargeable to tax on its  
total income at the maximum marginal rate or any higher rate,  
under any of the provisions of this Act, the share of a member  
computed as aforesaid shall not be included in his total income;
(b) in any other case, the sharo of a member computed as ^  
aforesaid shall form part of his total income;
Provided further that where no income-tax i$ chargeable 6 n the  
te ttl income of the association or body, the share of a member com-  
imtod as a fo n n ld  lAall be chargeable to tax as part of hlg total  
laeome and aotMng contained in this section shall apply to the
14
•h a ll be doemed to be th e profits,—
4S


IS. In section 115A of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section (J),— Am«nd-
(i) after clause (aa),  the following clause shall be inserted,
n a m e ly :- H 5 A.
“ (<ib) income ireceived in respect of units, purchased in
5 foreign currency, of a Mutual Fund specified under clause (23D)
of section 10; or”;
(ii) after clause (ia),  the following clause shall be Inserted,
nam dy:—
“ (ib) the amount of income-tax calculated on the income in  
10 respect of units referred to in clause (ab), if any, included in
the total income, at the rate of twenty-five per cent.;”;
(iii) in the Explanation ,—
clause (l)) shall be omitted;
(B) clause ( h b ) shall be re-lettered, as clause (b) .
15 19. In section 115J of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section (1),— Aipend-
ment of
(o) in the opening portion, after the words “a company”, the section  
bradcets and words “ (other than a company engaged in the business  
of generation or distribution of electricity)” shall be insetted;
(b) in the Explanation ,—
20 (0  in clause (b), after the words “any reserves”, the brac­
kets, words, figures and letters ‘  (other than the reserves speci­
fied in section 80HHD)” shall be inserted;
(ii) in cla'Jse ( f) , for the word “applies,”, the words “apjdies;  
or” shall be substituted;
(iii) after clause (f). the following clauses shall be inserted,
namely:— r  / .  '
“(g ) the amoimt withdrawn from the reserve account  
under section 80HHD, where it has been utilised for any  
purpose other than those referred to in sub-section (4) of  
that section; or •
(H) the amount credited to the reserve account under  
section 80HHD. to the extent that amount has not been uti­
lised within the period spedfied in sub-section ( 4 )  o f that  
section,”;
(iu) for the words “if any such amoimt is debited”, the words,  
brackets and letters “if any amount referred to in clauses (a)  
to (/) is debited or, as the case may be, the amount referred to  
in clauses (g ) and (h ) is not credited” shall be substituted;
(v) in clause (i), after the words “from reserves”, the brac-  
4 0  kets, words, figures and letters “ (other than the reserves speci­
fied in section 80HHD)” shall be inserted;
(Vi)  clause (iii)  shall be renumbered as clause (iv)  and 
fore clause (iv) as so renumbered, the following clause shall be  
inserted, namely:—
“ (iii) the amounts [as arrived at after increasing the  
net profit by the amount referred to in clauses (») to ^
13
25
30


and reducing the net profit by the amounts referred to in  
clauses (i) and (ii)] attributabje to the business, the profits  
from which are eligible for deduction imder section 80HHC
or section 80HHD; so, however, that such amounts are com­
puted in the manner specified in sub-section (3) 6 f section 5  
80HHC or sub-section (3) of section 80HHD, as the may be;  
or'.
20. In section 139 of the Income-tax Act [as amended by section 42 4ofl#M. 
8 ^ 0 ^  of the Direct Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 1987],—
139. (a ) f o r su b -se c tio n  (4 A ), th e  fo llo w in g  su b -se c tio n  s h a ll b e  su b - 10
s titu te d , n a m e ly : —
“(4A )  Every person in receipt of income derived from pro­
perty held under trust or other legal obligation wholly for chari­
table or religious purposes or in part only for such pmposes, or  
of income being voluntary contributions referred to in sub-clause j 5  
(iia) of clause (24) of section 2, shall, if the total income in res­
pect of w hich'he is assessable as a r^resentative assessee (the  
total income for this purpose being computed under this Act  
without giving effect to the provisions of sections 1 1  and 1 2 ) 
exceeds the maximum amount which is not chargeable to income-  
tax, furnish a return of such income of the previous year in the  
prescribed form and verified in the prescribed manner and set­
ting forth such other particulars as may be prescribed and aU the  
provisions of this Act shall, so far as may be, apply as if it were  
a return required to be furnished under sub-section ( I ) . ”;  2 5
(b) in sub-section ( 1 0 ). in the proviso, for clause (d), the fol­
lowing clause shall be substituted, namely; —
“ (d) a return of a person who has claimed exemption of in­
come from property held for charitable or religious purposes;”.
Amend- 21. In section 143 of the Income-tax Act [as substituted by section 48 3 0  4  of 1M 8.
ment of of the Direct Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 1987].—
sMtion sub-section (I), in clause (a), after the proviso^ the fol-
.low ing proviso shall be inserted, nam ely;—
“PrcJvided further that an intimation for any tax or interest  
due under this clause shall not b® sent after the expiry of two 3 5  '
years from the end of the assessment year in which the income  
was first assessable.”; 1
(b) after sub-section (I), the following sub-section shall be in­
serted, namely: —
‘  (lA)  (a) Where, in the case of any person, the total income, ^  
as a result of the adjustments made under the proviso to clause  
(0.) of sub-section (I), exceeds the total income declared in the  
return by any amount, the Assessing Officer shall,—
(i) further increase the amount of tax payable imder sub­
section (I) by an additional income-tax calculated at the ^  
rate of twenty per cent, of the tax payable on such excess  
amotmt and specify the additional income-tax in the intima­
tion to be sent under sub-clause (i) of clause (a) of •sub­
section (I);
(ii) where any refund is due under sub-section (I ), re- 50
duce the amaant of such refund by an amount equivalent to j
thte' addftatnal inmwe-tax caltulBtetf uwJer sub-dawste
1€


M
(b) Wliere as a result of an order under section 154 or section  
250 or section 254 or section 260 or section 262 or section 263 or  
section 264, the amount on which additional income-tax is pay­
able under clause (a) has been increased or reduced, as the case
5 may be, the additional income-tax shall be increased or reduced
accordingly, and,—
(i) in a case where the additional income tax is increased,  
the Assessing Ofl&cer shall serve on the assessee a notice of  
demand under section 156;
10 (ii) in a case where the additional income-tax is reduced,
the excess amount paid, if any, shall be refunded.
Explanation .— For the purposes of this sub-section, “tax  
payable on such excess amount” means,—
(i) in any case where the amount of adjustments made  
15 imder the proviso to clause (a) of sub-section (1) exceed the
total income, the tax that would have been chargeable had  
the amount of the adjustments been the total income;
(it) in any other case, the difference between the tax on  
the total income and the tax that would have been charge-  
20 able had such total income been reduced by the amount of
adjustments.’.
22. In section 144A of the Income-tax Act, in the Explanation,  for the  
word “sub-section”, the word “section"’  shall be substituted.
17
23. section 147 of the Income-tax Act [as substituted by section 54
4of 1988 . 25 Direct Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 1987], for the words “, for rea­
sons to be recorded by him in writing, is of the opinion”, the words “has  
reason to believe” shall be substituted.
24. Section 148 of the Income-tax Act [as substituted by section 54 of
4 0t 1988. Direct Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 1987], shall be renumbered as
•  30 sub-section (1 ) thereof and after sub-section (I) as so renumbered, the
following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
^  " (2 ) The Assessing Officer shall, before issuing any notice under
this section, record his reasons for doing so.”.
Amend­
ment of 
section 
144A.
Amend­
ment of 
section
147.
Amend- 
ment of 
section
148,
35
25. In section 155 of the Income-t.ox Act, in sub-section (4A ), in  
clause (b),  for the words “the proviso”, the words “the second proviso”  
shall be substituted.
Amend, 
ment of 
section 
155.
4 of i m .
26. In Chapter XV of th e  Income-tax Act, for the sub-heading ‘‘DD.—  
Association of persons—special cases’*  [a s it stood immediately before its  
substitution by section 66 of the Direct Tax Laws (Amendment) Act,  
40 1987], the sub-heading “DD — Association of persons and body  o f indivi-  
duals*' shall be substituted.
Substitu­
tion of 
new sub­
heading 
for sub­
heading 
DD of 
Chapter 
XV.


IS
Omission 
of section 
167A.
27. Section 167A of the Income-tax Act [as it stood immediately before  
its substitution by section 6 6  of the Direct Tax Laws (Amendment) Act,
1987] shall be omitted. 4«tl988.
Insertion 
of new  
section 
167B.
Charge of 
ta x  w h ^
shares of 
m em bers 
in  associa. 
tion of 
persons 
o r body of 
indivi­
duals un­
know n etc.
A m end. 
BMBt oi
IM.
,28. After section 167A of the Income-tax Act (as omitted by section  
27 of thifc A ct), the following section shall be inserted, nam ely:—
“167B. (J) Where the individual shares of the m «nbers of an  
an association of persons or body of individuals (other than a eom-  
pany or a cooperative society or a society registered under the Socie­
ties Registration Act, 1860 or under any law corresponding to that 21  of 1800.
Act i»  force in any part of India) in the whole or any part of the jo  
income of such association or body are indeterminate or imknown,  
tax shall be charged on the total income of the association or body  
at the maximum marginal rate:
Provided that, where the total inome of any member of such  
.  association or body is chargeable to tax at a rate which is h i^ e r  15  
than the maximum marginal rate, tax shall be charged on the total  
income of the association or body at such higher rate.
(2) Where, in tiie case of an association of persons or body of  
individuals as aforesaid [not being a case falling under sub-section  
(1) 1-  20
(i) the total income of any member thereof for the previous  
year (excluding his share from such association or body) exceeds  
the maximum amount which is not chargeable to tax in the case  
of that member under the Finance Act of the relevant y»ar, tax  
shall be charged on the total income of the association or body 25  
at Ihe maximum marginal rate;
(ii) any member or members thereof is or are chargeable to  
tax at a rate or rates which is or are higher than the maximum  
marginal rate, tax shall be charged on that portion or portions  
of the total income of the association or body w h ich .is or a r e 30  
rdatable to the share or shares of such member .or members at  
such higher rate or rates, as the ease may be, and tiie balance of  
the total income of the association or body shall be taxed at the  
maximum marginal rate.
Explanation . —For the purposes of this section, the individual 3 5  
shares of the members of an association of persons or body of indivi­
duals in the whole or any part of the income of such association or  
body shall be depmed to be indeterminate or unknown if such ^ a res  
(in relation to the whole or any part of such income) are indeter­
minate or unknown on the date of formation of such association or 4 0  
body or at any time thereafter.”.
29. In section 190 of the Income-tax Act. in sub-section (I), after the  
words “pajrable by deduction”, the words “or collection” shall be inserted  
and diall be deemed to have been inserted w ith effect from the 1 st day  
o c j w ,  l o e e . 4 $


19
30. In section 104A of the Income-tax Act, in iUb-Mction (3 ), aft*r  
clatise (iii), the following clause shall be inserted and shaU be deemed  
to have been inserted with effect from the 1st d a j-^  of April, 1988, namely:—
“ (iu) to such income credited or paid by a firm to a partner of  
the firm;’’.
Aaaend.
m ent of
section
IM A.
31. Section 194E of the Income-tax Act shall be omitted and shall be Onissfoa  
deemed to have been omitted with effect from the 1st day of April, 1988. section
32. For section 196A of the Income-tax Act, the following section  
shall be substituted, namelv: —
10 “196A. (I) Subject to the provision? of sub-section (2 ), no de­
duction of tax shall be made from any income payable in respect of  
units O f a Mutual Fund, specified imder clause (23D) o f section 10,  
to its units-holders being persons other than foreign companies.
(2) Where any income referred to in sub-section (I) is payable  
15 to a unit-holder, being a foreign company, the person responsible
for making the payment shall, at the time of credit of such income  
to the account of the payee or at the time of pasrment thereof in  
cash or by the issue of a cheque or draft or by any other mode,  
whichever is earlier, deduct income-tax thereon at the rate of  
20 twenty-fiv^ per cent.” .
33. In sections 198, 199, 200, 202, 203, sub-section (1) of section 203A,  
section 205 and sub-section (5) of section 215 of the Income-tax Act,  
for the words and figures “and section 195”, the words, figures and letter  
section 195 and section 196A” shall be substituted.
25
30
35
S4. In section 206C of the Income-tax Act,—
(a) in sub-section (/), in the Table, in column (3) against item
(iii), for the words “Ten per cent.”, the words “Five per cent.’»  shall  
be substituted and shall be deemed to have been substituted w th  
effect from the 1st day of June, 1988;
(b) after sub-section (5), the following sub-section shall be in­
serted. namely: —
“ (5A) Every person collecting tax in accordance with the  
provisions of this section shall prepare half yearly returns for  
the period ending on 30th September and 31st March in each  
year, and deliver or cause to be delivered to the pres­
cribed income-tax authority such returns in such form and v ^ -  
fled In such manner and iettlng-forth such particulars and with­
in such time as rm y he .jM seacEibed ,",
I94E.
Substitu- 
tion of 
new  
section 
for sec. 
tion 196A^
Tax not
to be 
deducted 
from any 
income 
pajrable to 
unit­
holders 
of Mutual 
Fund.
Amend­
m ent O f 
sections 
198, 199, 
S O O , 202, 
203, 203A, 
205 and 
215.
Amend, 
ment of 
section 
206C.


ao
A m end.
ment of
section
209.
M. In section 209 of the Income-tax Act^ in sub-section (1), in clauM
(d),  for the words “deductible at source”, the words “deductible or  
collectible at sofurce" shall be substituted and shall be deemed to have  
been substituted witli effect from the 1st day of June, 1988.
36. In sections 2 2 2 , 223, 224, 225, 226. 228 and 228A of the Income-  
tax Act [as they stood immediately before their amendment by the  
Direct Tax Laws (Amendment) Act. 1987], for the words “Income-tax  
Officer”, wherever they occur, the words “Assessing Officer” sdiall be  
substituted and shall be deemed to have been substituted with effect
Amend­
ment O f  
sections 
222. 223.
224, 225,
226 228
and 228A. ^st day of April. 1988.
4 of 1988.
10
Amend­
ment Of 
section 
228.
37. In section 226 of the Income-tax Act (as amended by section 36  
of this A ct), in sub-section (2), (3), (4 )  and (5), after the words "As­
sessing Officer”, wherever they occur, the words “or Tax Recovery  
Officer” shall inserted.
Amend­
ment Of 
section 
234A.
38. &  section 234A of the Income-tax Act [as inserted by section 94 15 _ 
of the Direct Tax I>aws (Amendment) Act, 1987],— 4 of 1988,
(c) in sub-section (!>,—
(i) for the words “the tax on the^^otal income as determined  
on regular assessment as reduced by the advance'tax, if any,  
paid and any tax deducted at source”, the words, brackets and 2 0  
figures “the tax on the total income as determined under sub­
section (I) of section 143 or on regular assessment as reduced by  
the advance tax. if any. paid and any tax deducted or collected
at source’’  shall be substituted;
(ii) for Explanation  2. the following Explanation  shall be 25 
substituted, namely: —
‘Explanation  2 .—In this sub-section, “tax on the total  
income as determined under suo-section (I) of section 143"  
shall not include the additional income-tax if any, payable  
under section 143.’;  30
(iii) after Explaruition  3, the following Explanation  shall 6 e 
inserted, namely; —
‘Explanation  4.—In this sub-section, “tax on the total  
Income as determined under sub-section (I) of section 143  
or on regular assessment” shall, for the purposes of compu- 3 5  
ting the interest payable under section 140A. be deemed to  
be tax on total income as declared in the return.’;
(b) In sub-section (3),—
(i) after the words and figures “under section 148 issued”,  
the words, brackets and figures “after the determination o f 40 
Income under sub-section (1) of section 143 or” shall be in­
serted;
(ii) for the words "income determined on the basis of the  
earlier assessment aforesaid” the words, brackets and figures  
“income determined under isub-section (I) of section, 143 or on 45 
tfaa of the earlier assessment aforesaid’’  shall he substituted;


3S. In section 234B of the Income-tax Act [as inserted by section 94 Amend.
4  of 1388. o f the Direct Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 1987], —  ment of
section
(a) in sub-section (I),— 234B.
5 (i) for the words “to the date of the regular assessment'*,
the words, brackets and figures “to the date of determination of  
total income under sub-section (1) of section 143 or regular  
assessment” shall be substituted;
(ii) for Explanation  1, the following Eocplanation shall be
jQ  substituted, namely: —
^  ‘Explanation  1.—In this section, “assessed tax” means,—
(o) for the purposes of computing the interest pay­
able under section 140A, the tax on the total income as  
declared in the return referred to in that section;
(b) in any other case^ the tax on the total income  
determ&ied under sub-section (I) of section 143 or on  
regular assessment,
as reduced by the amount of tax deducted or collected at  
source in accordance with the provisions of Chapter XVII  
20 on any income which is subject to such deduction or collec­
tion and which is taken into account in computing such total  
incom e.’;
(iii) for Explanation  3, the following Explana^on  shall be  
substituted, namely:—
f 25 ‘Explanation  3.—In Explanation  1 and in sub-section
(3), “tax on the total income determined under sub-section  
(1) of section 143’’  shall not include the additional income-  
tax, if any, payable under section 143.’;
(b) in sub-section (2 ), in the opening portion, after the words  
30 “date o f ’, the words, brackets and figures “determination of total in­
come under sub-section (I) of section 143 or” shall be inserted;
(c) in sub-setion (3),—
(i) for the words “the date of the regular assessment”, the  
words, brackets and figures “the date of determination of total  
income under sub-section (I) of section 143 or regular assess­
ment” shall be substituted;
(ii) for the words “income determined on the basis of the  
regular assessment aforesaid”, the words, brackets and figures  
“income determined under sub-section (I) of section 143 or on
40 the basis of the regular assessment aforesaid’’  shall be substitu­
ted;
(iii) the Explanation  shall be omitted.
21
(iii) the Explanation  shall be om itted.
2000 LS— 4
35


Amend­
ment O f 
section 
234C.
40. In section 234C of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section (1),—
(o) the following proviso shall be inserted before the Explana­
tion,  nam ely;—
“Pi'ovided that nothing covitained in this sub-section shall  
apply to any shortfall in the payment of the tax due on the re- 5  
turned income where such shortfall is on account of under-esti­
mate or failure to estimate,—
(o) the amount of capital gains; or
(b) Income of the nature referred to in sub-ciause (ix)  
of clause (24) of section 2, . jq
and the assessee has paid the whole of the amount of tax payable  
in respect of income referred to in clause (a) or clause (b), as  
the case may be. had such income been a part of the total in­
come, as part of the instalment of advance tax which is imme­
diately d u e.’’;  15
(b) in the Explanation,  for the words, figures and letter “th?  
amount of tax deductible at source in accordance v,-ith the provisions  
of Chapter XVII B on any income which is subject to such deduc-  
tioa”, the words and figures “the amount of tax deductible or col­
lectible at source in accordance with the provisions of Chapter XVII 2 0  
on any income which is subject to such deduction or collection” shall  
be substituted;
22
Amend­
ment Of 
section 
244A.
Amend­
ment of 
sub.head- 
ing to 
Chapter 
XX.
41. In section 244A of the Income-tax Act [ag inserted by section 99  
of the Direct Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 1987],—
(a) in sub-section (I),— 25
(i) for the words “Where, in pursuance of any order passed  
under this Act. refund of any amooint becomes due to the asses-  
see’’, the words “Where refund of any amount becomes due t®  
the assessee under this Act” shall be substituted;
(ii) in clause (a),— 30
(a) in the opening portion, after the words “out of any  
tax”, the words, figures and letter “collected at source under  
section 206C or” shall be inserted;
(b) in the proviso, after the words “tax as determined",  
the words, brackets and figures “under sub-section (jf) of 35  
section 143 or ’  shall be inserted;
(b) in sub-section (3 ). after the words “an order under’’, the  
words, brackets and figures “sub-section (3) of section 143 or” shall  
be inserted.
42. In th e sub-heading to Chapter XX of the Income-tax Act [as 4 0  
substituted by section 99 of the Direct Tax Laws (Amendment) Act,
1987J, the words “or applications"  shall be omitted. 4ofi»t'8


23
43. In section 246 of the Income-tax Act [as substituted by section  
4 of 1988. EM rect Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 1987],—
(a) in sub-section (I),— *
(i) clauses (g) and (h), the words, figures and letters “in
5 respect of any as:;ossment for the assessment year commencing
on the 1st day of April, 1988 or aniy earlier assessment year’’
occurring at the end shall be omitted;
(ii) in clause ( I ) ,—i
(1) in sub-clause (ii),  for the words, figures and letters
10 “section 271E or section 272A” the words, figures and letters
“section 271E, section 272A, section 272AA or section 272BB”  
shall be substituted >
(2 ) in  sub-clause (H i), the words, brackets and figures
^  “sub-section ( 1 ) of section 271,’ ’  shall be'omivted;
15 (b) in sub-section (2),—
(i) in clause (b),  after the words, brackets and figurt
“sub-section (1)’ \ th e  words, figures and letters “or an order
under section 104, as it stood immediately before the 1st day
of April, 1988 in respect of any assessment for the assessment
20 year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1987 or any earlier
assessment year,” shall be inserted;
( ii) after clause (f), the following clause shall be inserted,  
namely: —
“ ( f f ) an order made hy a Deputy Commissioner im-
2 5  posing a penalty under section 272AA;”;
( H i) for clause ( g ) , the follow ng clause shall be substitut­
ed, namely;—i
. ‘  “ (g) an order imposing a penalty under Chapter XXI
by the Income-tax Officer or the Assistant Commissioner,  
where such penalty has been imposed with the previous  
approval of the Deputy Commissioner under sub-section (2)  
of section 274;*’.
44. Section 246A of the Income-tax Act [as inserted by section 99  
of the Direct Tax La^vs (Amendment) Act, 1987] shall be omitted-
35 45. In section 249 of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section (4 ), in the
proviso.—I
(j) after the words “Provided that,”, the words, brackets and  
letter “in a case falling under clause (b) and’ ’  shall be inserted;
(ii) for the words “this sub-section”, the words “that clause”  
40 shall be substituted.
30
Amend.
ment
section
248.
4 of 1988 Omission  
o f section  
246A.
A m end­
m ent Of 
section  
249.
46. In section 253 of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section ( 0 —
(t) in clause (a), the words, brackets and figures “sub-section
(2) of section 131,” shall be omitted;
A m end-  
m ent of  
section  
253.


24
Amend­
ment O f 
section 
255.
Amend­
ment Of 
section 
296A.
Amend­
ment Of 
section 
2«9B.
Amend­
ment O f 
section 
271.
(ii) in claude (c), the words, figures and letter “or an order  
passed by a Chief Commissioner or a Director General or a Director  
under section 272A ’  shall be inserted at the end. ,
47. In section 255 of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section (.?), for the  
words •‘ forty thousand rupees”, the words “one lakh rupees” shall be 5  
substituted-
48. In section 269A of the Income-tax Act, in clause (b), for the  
words “an Assistant Commissioner of Income-ta.x”, t.ie words “ a Depu­
ty Commissioner" shall be substituted and shall be deemed to have  
been substituted with effect from the 1st day of April, 1988, 10
49. In section 269B of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section ( 3 ), in  
clause (a), for the words “Assistant Commissioners of Income-tax”, the  
words “Deputy Commissioners” shall be substituted and shall be deem­
ed to have been substituted with effect from the 1st day of April, 1988.
50. In section 271 of the Income-tax Act [as it stood immediately 15  
before its substitution by section 106 of the Direct Tax Laws (Amend­
ment) Act, 1987],— 4of 1»88.
(a) in sub-section (J),—i
(i) clause (a) shall be omitted; j
(ii) clause (i) shall be omitted; 2 0
( H i) for clause (ii). the following clause shall be substitut­
ed. namely: —
“ (ii) in the cases referred to in clause (b), in addition  
to any tax payable by him, a sum which shall not be less  
than one thousand rupees but which maiy extend to twenty- 2 5  
five thousand rupees for each such failure;’’;
(ir) in clause (in ).—
( 1 ) for the word  
be substituted;
‘ twice*’  the words “three times” shall
(2 ) the proviso shall be omitted; 3 0
(r) for Explanation  3. the following Explanation  shall be  
substituted, namely: — ^  
f
“Explanation  3.—Where any person who has not pre­
viously l^een assessed under this Act, fails, without reason­
able cause, to furnish within the period specified in sub- 3 5  
section (l) of section 153 a return of his income which he is  
required to furnish under section 139 in respect of any assess­
ment year commencing on or after the 1 st day of April,  
1989, and until the expiry of the period aforesaid, no notice  
has been issued to him under clause (i) of sub-section (i) 4 Q 
of section 142 or section 148 and the Assessing Officer or  
the Deputy Commissioner (Appeals) or the Commissioner  
(Appeals) is satisfied that in respect of such assessment  
year such person has taxable income, then, such person  
shall, for the purposes of clause (c) of this sub-section, be 4 5  
deemed to have concealed the particulars of his income in


25
10
15
20
25
respect of such assessment »year, notwithstanding that such  
person furnishes a return of his income at any time after  
the expiry of the period aforesaid in pursuance of a notice  
under section 148.”;
( v i )  in E x p la n a t io n 5, in cluase (2), the words, brackets and  
letters “clause (a) or clause (b) o f ’  shall be omitted.
{ v i i ) after E x p la n a t io n 5, the following E x p la n a t io n shall be  
inserted, namely: —
“ E x p la n a t io n 6,—Where any adjustment is made in the  
income or loss declared in the return under the proviso to  
clause ( a ) of sub-section (J) of section 143 and additional  
tax charged under that section, the provisions of this sub­
section shall not apply in relation to the adjii.stment so  
made.”;
(b) sub-section (3) shall be omitted;
(c) after sub-section (4), the following sub-section shall be in­
serted, namely:—^
“ (5) The provisions of this section as they stood immediate­
ly before their amendment by the Direct Tax Laws (Amend­
ment) Act, 1988 shall apply to and in rdation to any assess­
ment for the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of  
April, 1988, or any earlier assessment year and references in  
this section to the other provisions of this Act shall be construed  
as references to those provisions as for the time being in force  
and applicable to the relevant assessment year.”.
30
51. In section 273A of the Income-tax Act [as amended by section Amend-
4 of 1988. 113 of the Direct Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 1987], — mentsection
(a) in  su b -sectio n  (1 ),—i  273A.
(i) clauses (i) and (Hi) shall be omitted;
(ii) clauses (o) and (c) shall be omitted;
(Hi) for the words, brackets and letters “in all the cases  
referred to in clauses (a), (b) and (c)”, the words, brackets and  
letter “in the case referred to in clause (?0 ’  shall be substitut­
ed;
,  (b) in sub-section (2), clause (a) shall be omitted;
(c) in sub-section (6), after the words “of this section", the  
words, brackets and figures “as they stood immediately before  
their amendment by the Direct Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 198'8’' 
shall be inserted.
40 52. In section 275 of the Income-tax Act, in clause (p) [as substituted Amend.
4 o fi 9 8 - <  section 116 of the Direct Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 19S7], after ment of
the words “the order of”, the words and brackets “the Deputy Commis­
sioner (Appeals) or ’  shall be inserted.
35
section 
275.


26
insertion 
of new  
section 
279B.
Proof of 
entries in  
records or 
documents.
Amend­
ment o f 
Second 
Sohedule.
53. A fter section 279A of the Incom e-tax Act, the follow ing section
shall be inserted, nam ely:— ,
•‘279B. Entries in the records or other documents in the custody  
of an Income-tax authority shaU be admitted in evidence in any  
proceedings for the prosecution of any person for an offence under 5  
this Chapter, and all such entries may be proved either by the pro­
duction of the records or other documents in the custody of the  
Income-tax authority containing such entries, or by the production  
of a copy of the entries certified by the Income-tax authority having  
custody of the records or other documents under its signature and 10  
stating that it is a true copy of the original entries and that such  
original entries are contained in the records or other documents in  
its custody.” . *
54. In the Second Schedule to the Income-tax Act—
(o) [as it stood immediately before its amendment by the 15  
Direct Tsix Laws (Amendment) Act, 1987], for the u-ords “Income- 4 of 1988.
tax Officer”, wherexer they occur, the words “Assessing Officer’’  
shall be substituted and shall be deemed to have been substituted  
with effect from the 1st dan- of April, 1988;
(b) [as amended by clause, (a) of this section],— 20
(J) in rule 2, for the words “When a certificate has been  
received by the Tax Recovery Officer from the Assessing Offi­
cer’’. the words “When a certificate has been drawn up by the  
Tax Recovery Officer’’  shall be substituted; ,
(2) in rule 9, for the words “Assessing Officer’* , the words 25  
“Tax Recovery Officer” shall be .substituted;
(3) In rule 14, for the words “Assessing Officer’’, the words  
“Tax Recovery Officer” shall be substituted;
(4) in rule 25, in sub-rule (1), for the words “and the As­
sessing Officer shall bear such sum as the Tax Recovery OfBcer 30  
sh ^ l require in order to defray the cost of such arrangements’* ,  
the words “and he shall have power to defray the cost of such  
arrangwnents” shall be substituted;
(5) in rule 27, for the words “Assessing Officer”, wherever  
they occur, the words “Tax Recovery Officer” shall be substi- 35  
tuted; i
(6) in rule 31, for the words “Assessing Officer” occurring in  
the proviso, the words “Tax Recovery Officer” shall be substi­
tuted)
(7) in. rule 47, for the words “direct that such coins or notes, 40  
or a part thereof suff. :ient to satisfy the certificate, be paid over
to the Assessing Officer” the words and figure “direct that such  
coins or notes shall V  : ?  credited to the Central Government and  
the amount so credited shall be. dealt with in the manner speci­
fied in rule 8’’  shall be substituted; ,45


27
4 of 1068. 20
(8) in rule 60, in sub-rule (J), in clause (a), the words  
“for payment to the Assessing Officer" shall be omitted;
(9) in rule 61, for the words “Assessing Officer”, the words
‘‘such Income-tax Officer as may be authorised by the Chief  
Commissioner or Commissioner in this b eh a lf shall be substi­
tuted; I
(W)  in rule 74, for the words “the Tax Recovery Officer  
shall proceed to hear the Assessing Officer and take all such  
evidence as may be produced by him in support of execution by  
10 arrest, and shall then give the defaulter”, the words “the Tax
Recoveriy Officer shall give the defaulter” shall be substituted;
(11) in rule 85, for the words “If at any time after the issue  
of the certificate by the Assessing Officer to the Tax Recovery  
Officer”, the words “If at any time after the certificate is drawn
15 up by the Tax Recovery Officer” shall be substituted;
(1 2 ) in rule 90, in sub-rule (1), for the words “Assessing  
Officer”, the words “Tax Recovery Officer’’  shall be substituted.
55. In the Third Schedule to the Income-tax Act—
(c) [as it stood immediately before its amendment by the  
Direct Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 19871, for the words “Income-  
tax Officer”, the words “Assessing Officer’ ’ shjdl be substituted and  
shall be deemed to have been substituted with effect from the 1st  
day of April, 1988; i
(b) [as amended by clause (a) of this section], after the  
words “Assessing Officer”, the words “or Tax Recovery Officer’’  shall  
inserted.25 V
56. In the Tenth Schedule to the Income-tax Act [as inserted  
section 125 of the Direct Tax Laws (Amendment) Act. 1967],—
by
4 of 1988.
30
35
40
45
(i) in rule 1,—!
(a ) for the words “the proviso”, the words “the first pro-  
\dso or the third proviso’ ’  shall, be substituted;
(b) for the words “the said proviso”, the words “the said  
first proviso or, as the case may be, the said third proviso” shall  
be substituted^
(it) in rule 3,—^
(a) after the proviso, the following provisos shall be in­
serted, namely:—i
‘Provided further that the amount of ten thousand rupe­
es, specified in column (2) of the said Table against sub­
section (2) of section 48, shall be increased during the transi­
tional previous year only where the long-term capital gain  
arises as a result of two or more transfers of long-term
capital assets and at least one of the said transfers is made  
during the initial period of twelve months comprised with­
in the transitional previo’js year and the remain’nsf trans­
fer or transfers is or are made during the period beyond  
the said period of twelve inonth.s comprised wifhin the
transitional previous /year;i
Amend­
ment O f 
Third 
Schedule.
Amend, 
ment of 
Tenth 
Schedule.


Provided also that where more than one period in res­
pect of different sources of income are Included iri the transi­
tional previous year under the first proviso or the third
pro\aso to sub-section (2) of section 3, then the amount or
amounts specified in column (2) of the said Table shall be 5
increased to such extent and in such manner as the Board  
may, having regard to,—
(a> length of the period or periods included in the  
transitional previous year in respect of different sources  
of incomej
(b ) length of the transitional previous year; and
(c) other relevant factors;
prescribe in this behalf.’?
(b) for the Table, the following Table shall be substituted,  
nam ely : — ] 15
“T able
28
Provision of Act 
(\)
Amount
O)
Section
S ^ o n
xSection
Section
Section
Section
Section
Section
Section
Section
Section
Section
10(3)
12A(b)
13 (2Xc)
13 (3)rb)
Wi)
16 i), proviso 
16,10 .
23(1) (d) (ii) 
24(2), proviso 
33A(7), proviso 
35A .
35AB
Section 35D .
Section 37(2A)
Section 40Ari2)
Section 44AA (2) (i) and (ii) 
Section 44AB *
Section 48(2)
Section 80C(I)
Section 80C(3)
Se^ion 80C(4)
Rs.
5.000 20  
.  25,000
J,000 
. 25,000
.  12,000
1.000 2 5
5.000 and 7,500 
3,600
5.000
40,000; 35,000 and 30,000
1  /14th of the amouni of cipital expenditure
I/6th or I/3rd of the amount paid as 
lumpsum coQsideiation.
1/lOth of the amount of certain preliminary 
expenses.
5.000 and 50,000 3 5
10.000
25,000 and 2,50,000
40.00.000 and 10,00,000 
10,000
6.000, 9,000 and 12,000 ^0 
J/lOfh of the actuol capital sum ?ssure<f
.  60,000 and 40,000


29
Piovfsion of ilie Ac
(i)
Amoiini
(2)
Scction 80C(7) (c)
Rs.
10,000 •
5 Scction 80CC (2) 20,000
Section 80CCA(1) 30.000
Section 80D(() . 3,000
Section 80L(1) 7,000 (occurring in two places)
Section 80L(I>, hi proviso , 3,000
10 Section 801(1), 2nd proviso 3,000
Section SOPfJXj) 40,000 ana 20,000
Section 80P (2)(ft 20,000
Section 801 / • 15,000
Section 139A(?) 50,000’ ;;
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
2000 LS—5
(iii) for rules 4 and 5, the following rules shall be substituted,  
namely: —
“4. Where the transitional, previous year comprises a period  
of eighteen months or more, then, sub'section (1) of section 6  
shall be subject to the modification that references therein to the  
periods of one hundred and eighty-two days, ninety days tod  
sixty days shall be construed as references, respectively, to the  
periods of two hundred and seventy-three days, one hundred and  
thirty-five days and ninety days.
5. Where the assessee s income under the head “Profits and  
gains of business or profession” or under the head “Income from  
other sources” for a period of thirteen months or more is included  
in his total income for the transitional previous year, the allow­
ance under clause (ii) of sub-section ( 1 )  o f section 32 or, as the  
case may be, under clause (ii) of section 57 in respect of depre­
ciation on block of assets calculated in the manner stated in  
clause (ii) of sub-section (1) of section 32, shall be increased by  
multiplying it .  by a fraction of which the numeralor is the num­
ber of months in the transitional previous year and the denomi­
nator is twelve:
Provided that where more than one period in respect of in­
come under the head “Profits and gains of business or profes­
sion’’  or under the head “Income from other sources” are includ­
ed in the transitional previous year under the first proviso or  
the third proviso to sub-section (2) of section 3, the allowance  
in respect of depreciation on block of assets shall be calculated  
separately for each such period included in the transitional pre­
vious year in the manner stated in clause ( i i ) of sub-section (I)  
of section 32 and increased, where necessary, by multipljang it  
by a fraction of which the numerator is the number of months  
in such period (after excluding the number of months relatable
Modifica. 
tion in 
section 8-
Modifica­
tion ill 
respect 
of deprc. 
ciation al­
lowance.


30
Consequ­
ential 
amend, 
m ents.
to the periacl in relation to which depreciation on block of assets  
has been allowed or is allowable in the previous year relevant  
to the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of ApriJ,
1988) and the denominator is tw elve.”;
(iv) in rule 6 , the following proviso shall be inserted at the 5  
end, nam ely:—
“Provided that where more than one period in respect of  
different sources-of income are included in the transitional pre­
vious year under the first proviso or the third proviso to 'sub­
section (2) of section 3, then the tax shall be chargeable at the 10  
average rate of tax, calculated in accordance with the nrovidons  
of this rule, on the total income of the transitional previous year  
after excluding from such total income the income relatable to  
any such period or periods which has already been included  
or is includible in the total income of the previous year or pre- 15  
vious years relevant to the assessment year commencing on the  
1st day of April. 1988.”.
57. The following amendments (being amendments of a consequen­
tial nature) shall be made in the Income-tax Act, namely: —
(1) in'section 80A, in sub-section (3) [as it stood immediately 20  
before its substitution by section 21 of the Direct Tax Laws (Amend­
ment) Act, 1987],—
(a) after the figures and letters “BOHHC”, the words, figures  
and letters “or section 80HHD” shall be inserted;
(fc) the words, figures and letters “or section 80QQ or section 25  
«0T” shall be omitted;
(2) in section SOP, in sub-section (3),—
(«) after the words, figures and letters “or section 80HHC”,  
the words, figures and letters “or section 80HHD’' shall be in­
serted; 30
(b) after the figures and letters “80HHC,”, the word, figures  
aad letters “section 80HHD,” shall be inserted;
(3 ) in section 184 [as it stood immediately before its substitu­
tion by section 6 8  of the Direct Tax Laws (Amendment) 4 0 1 1 9 1 8  
Act, 1987], in rub-section (7), in the proviso, in clause (ii), for the 3 5  
words, brackets and figures “sub-section (I) or sub-section (2 ) of
section 139 (whether fixed originally or on extension)”, the words,  
brackets and figu’^ es ‘  sub-section (1 ) of section 139” shall be sub­
stituted .
4011988.
CHAPTER III  
A m e n d m e n t s to th e W ealth - tax  A ct, 1957
40
Amend, 
inent of 
section 
2 ,
58. In section 2 of the Wealth-tax Act, 1957 (hereafter in this Chapter  
referred to as the Wealth-tax A ct), in clause (m ), the Explanation  shall  
be renimibered as Explanatwm  1  and after Explanation  1 as so renum­
bered, the following Explanation  shall be inserted, nam ely:— ^ 5
“Explanation  2.—Where a debt falling under sub-clause (ii) is  
secured on, or has been incurred in relation to, any asset which is


31
10
not to be included wholly or partly in the net wealth by virtue of  
the prpvisions of sub-section (lA)  of section 5, the amount of such  
debt shall, for the purposes of the said sub-clause, be limited to the  
value of the said asset v.'hich is not includible in the net wealth  
under sub-section (lA ) of section 5 .”.
59. In section 4 of the Wealth-tax Act,—
(o) in sub-section (1),—
(i) for the portion beginning with the words “In computing  
the net wealth of an individual” and ending with the words “on  
the valuation date are held—”, the following shall be substitu­
ted, namely: —
“In computing the net wealth—
15
20
25
30
35
40
A m end, 
ment of  
section  
4.
45
(a) of an individual, there shall be included, as be­
longing to that individual, the value of assets which on  
the valuation date are held—
(ii) for clause (b), the following clause shall be substituted,  
nam ely:—
“(b ) of an assessee who is a partner in a firm or a mem­
ber of an association of persons (not being a co-operative  
housing society), there shall be included, as belonging to  
that assessee. the value of his interest in the firm or associa­
tion determined in the manner laid down in Schedule iTI:
Provided that where a minor is admitted to the benefits  
of partnership in a firm, the value of the interest of suck  
minor in the firm, determined in the manner specified above,  
shall be included in the net wealth of that parent of the  
minor whose net wealth (excluding the interest of the  
minor in the firm referred to in this clause) is greater; and  
where any such interest is once included in the net wealth  
of either parent for any assessment year, any such interest  
in any succeeding year shall not be included in the net  
wealth of the other parent unless the Assessing Officer is  
satisfied, after giving that parent an opportunity of being  
heard, that it is necessary so to do.’’;
(b) sub-section (2) shall he omitted.
60. In section 5 of the Wenlth-tax Act,—
(a ) in such section (1). after clause (xvif),  the following clause  
shall be inserted, namely: —
“(xvig)  in the case of an individual who is a non-resident  
Indian during the year ending on the valuation date, or a nomi­
nee or survivor of such individual or an individual receiving by  
way of gift from such individual” the bondg specified under sub­
clause (lid ) of clause ( 1 3 ) of section 10 of the Income-tax Act:
Provided that where an individual, who is a non-resident  
Indian during the year ending on the valuation date in which  
the bonds are acquired, becomes a resident in India in any
Amand-  
rr ant of  
section  
5.


subsequent year ending on the valuation date, the provisions  
of this clause shall continue to apply in relation to such indivi­
dual. ^
Explanation . —For the purposes of this clause, an individual  
shall be deemed to be a non-resident Indian during the year ^  
ending on the valuation date if ini respect of tliat year the indi­
vidual is a non-resident Indian within the meaning of clause (e) 
of section 115C of the Income-tax Act;”;
(b) in sub-section (lA),  the following Explanation  shall be in­
serted at the end, nam ely;— j  ] 0
‘^Explanation .— ^Where a debt is secured on, or has b e « i  
incurred in relation to, any asset referred to in this sub-sectioiv  
the exemption under th is sub-section shall be allowed first  
against the value of the asset on which or in relation to which  
such debt is secured or incurred and, theresifter, against the value j ^  
of any other asset so referred to.”;
(c) after sub-section (3), the following sub-section sliall be  
inserted, namely: —
“ (4f Where the assessee is a partner of a firm or member of  
an association of persons, and the firm or association owns any  
one or more of the assets which are exempt under sub-section
(1), then, for the purposes of his ^sessm ent under this Act, the  
value of his interest In the firfi or association shall be deemed  
to include the value of a part of each such asset of the firm or  
association in the same proportion in which he is entitled to 25  
share the profits of the firm or association and the assessment  
shall be made after allowing the exemption under sub-section  
(J) in respect of those assets on the basis of such proportionate  
vaTue.”.
Amend- 61. In section 6  of the Wealth-tax Act, in Explanation  lA, for the
ment o/ word, brackets, figure and letter “clause (4A )'\  tJie words, brackets and
section figures “sub-clause (ii) of clause (4 )” shall be substituted.6 .
Substiti!- 62. For saction 7 of the W e a lt h - t a x  Act. the following .seciion shall
tion O f substituted namelv: —new s e ; .
tion fOr
section 7.
Value of ‘ 7 . (J) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2),  the value 3 5  •
of any asset, other than cash, for the purposes of this Act shall be  
deter-^ its value as on the valuation date determined in the manner laid
down in Schedule III-,
(2) The value of a house belonging to the assessee and exclusive­
ly used by him for residential purposes throughout the period 40  
of tw elve months immediately preceding the valuation date, may.
at the option of the assessee, be taken to be the value determined  
in the manner laid down in Schedule III as on the valuation date next  
following the date on which he became the owner of the house or the  
valuation date relevant to the assessment year commencing on the  
1st day of A-pril, 1971, whichever valuation date is later;
32


10
Provided that where more than one house belonging to the  
assessee is exclusive]|y used by him for residential purposes, the  
provisions of this sub-section shall apply only in respect of one of such  
houses which the assessee may, at his option, specify in this behalf  
in the return of net wealth. ,
Explanation .—^ F or the purposes of this sub-section,—
(i) where the house has been constructed by the asseasee,  
he shall be deemed to have become the owner thereof on the  
date on which the construction of such house was completed;
(ii) “house” includes a part of a house being an independent  
residential unit.’.
33
• 4  of 1988. S 3 . In section 11 of the Wealth-tax Act [as substituted by section 131
of the Direct Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 1987], in sub-section (2), in  
clause (b),  for the brackets and figure “ (5)”, the brackets and figure
15 “ (4) ”  shall be substituted and shall be deemed to have been substituted  
with effect from the 1st day of April, 1988.
Amend.
meptof
section
11.
4  o f 1988. 64. In section 16 of the Wealth-tax Act [as substituted by section 138 Amend.
of the Direct Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 1987].— mentof
sectio n  16.
20
(a) in sub-section (D, in clause (a), .after the proviso,  
following proviso shall be inserted, namely; —
the
25
“Provided further that an intimation for any tax or interest  
due under this clause shall not be sent after the expiry of two  
years from the end of the assessment year in which the net  
wealth was first assessable.”;
(b) after sub-section (J). the following sub-section shall be  
inserted, namely: —
“ (lA ) (a) Where in the case of any person, the net wealth,  
as a result of the adjustments made under the proviso to clause
(a) of sub-section (1), exceeds the net wealth declared in the  
3 0  return by any amount, the Assessing Officer shall,—
(i) further increase the amount of tax payable under  
sub-section ( 1 ) by an additional wealth-tax calculated at  
the rate of twenty per cent, of the tax payable on such  
excess amofunt and specify the additional wealth-tax in tbs  
intimation to be sent under sub-clause ( i ) of clause (a)  
of sub-section (I);
(ii) where any refund is due under sub-section (1 ), 
reduce  the amount of such refund by an amount equivalent  
to the additional wealth-tax calculated under sub-clause (i)-
40 (b) Where as a result of an (jrder under section 23 or
section 24 or section 25 or section 27 or section 29 or section 35,  
the amount on which additional wealth-tax is payable under  
clause (a) has been increased or reduced, as the case may be. the
35


S4
Ainend-
m eot of
section
16A.
Amend.
ment of 
eectioji 
17.
Amend.
m ent of  
section  
17B.
additional wealth-tax shall be increased or reduced accordingly,  
and,—
(i) in a case where the additional wealth-tax is increas­
ed, the Assessing Officer shall serve on the assessee a notice
of d«nand under section 30; 5
(ii) in a case where additional wealth-tax is reduced,  
the excess amount paid, if any, shall be refunded.
Explanation .—^F or the purposes of this sub-section, “tax  
payable on such excess amount” means the difference between  
the tax on the net wealth and the tax that would have been 1 0  
chargeable had such net wealth been reduced by the amount of  
adjustments.’’.
,65. In section 16A of the W ealth-tax Act, in sub-section (1), in the  
opening portion, after the words “under this Act.”, the words and figures  
“where under the provisions of section 7 read with the rules made undac 15  
this Act or, as the case may be, the rules in Schedule III, the market
value of any asset is to be taken into, account in such assessment,” shall
be inserted.
8 6 , In section 17 of the W ealth-tax Act, in sub-section (I) [as substitut­
ed by clause (a) of section 139 of the Direct Tax Laws (Amendment) 2 0  4 1988.
Act. 1987],—
(a) for the words  
ing. is of the opinion”,  
substituted:
for reasons to be recorded by him in writ-  
the words “has reason to believe” shall be
(b) after the proviso, the following proviso shall be inserted, 2 5  
namely: —
“Provided further that the Assessing Officer shall, before
issuing any notice under this :rab-section, record his reasons for
doing so.’’.
67. In section 17B of the Wealth-tax Act [as inserted by section 141 jq
of the Direct Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 1987],—
(a) in sub-section ( 1 ),—
(i) after the words “net wealth as determined". tUe words,
brackets and figures “under sub-section ( 1 ) of section 16 or”  
shall be inserted; 3 5
(ii) for Explanation  2, the following Explanation  shall be
substituted, nam ely:— .
‘Explanation 2 .—In this sub-section, “tax payable on the  
net wealth as determined imder sub-section ( 1 ) of section  
16” shall not include the additional wealth-tax, if any, pay- 4 Q 
able under section 16.’;
(iii)  after Explanation  3, the following Explanation  shall  
be inserted, namely: —
‘Exploration  4.— In this sub-section, “tax payable on the  
net wealth as determined under sub-section (1) of section 4 5
4 of 1988.


35
16 or on regular assessment” shall, for the purposes of  
computing the interest payable under section 15B, be deem­
ed to be tax payable on the net wealth as declared in the  
return-’;
5 (b) in sub-section (3),—
(i) after the words, brackets'and figures “sub-section (1)  
of section 17 issued”, the words, brackets and figures “after the  
determination of net wealth under sub-section (1) of section 16  
or” shall be inserted;
10 ( m) after the words “net wealth as determined”, the words,
brackets and figures “under sub-section (1) of section 16 or”  
shall be inserted;
(in)  the Eocplanation  shall be omitted.
68. In section 18 of the Wealth-tax Act [as it stood immediately before
15 its substitution by section 142 of the Direct Tax Laws (Amendment)
4 041988. Act, 19^7],—
(a) in sub-section (2),—
(i) clause (a) shall be omitted;
20
25
( ii)  clause ( i) shall be omitted;
( H i) for clause (ii), the following clause shall be substituted,  
nam ely:—
“ (ii) in the cases referred to in clause (b), in addition  
to the amoimt of wealth-tax payable by him, a sum which  
shall not be less than one thousand rupees but which may  
extend to twenty-five thousand rupees for each such  
failure;”;
(iv ) for the proviso, the following proviso shall  
tirted, namely:—
be substi-
3#
“Provided that in the cases referred to in clause (/>),  
no penalty shall be imposable if the person p>oves that there  
was a reasonable cause for the failure referred to in that  
clause.”;
(v) for Explanation  3, the following Explanation  shall  
substituted, namely: —
be
35
40
45
“Explanation  3.—Where any person who has not pre­
viously been assessed under this Act, fails, without reason­
able cause, to furnish within the period specified in sub­
section (1) of sectiofi 17A, a return of his net wealth which  
he is required to furnish under section 14 in respect of any  
assessment year commencing on or after the 1st day of  
April, 1989, and until the expiry of the period aforesaid, no  
notice has been issued to him under clause (i) of sub-section
(4) of section 16 or sub-section (1) of section 17 and the  
Assessing Officer or the Deputy Commissioner (Appeals) or  
the Commissioner (Appeals) is satisfied that in respect of  
such assessment year such person has assessable net wealth,
Amend.
ment of 
section 
18.


then, such person shall, for the purposes of clause (c) of  
this sub-section, be deemed to have concealed the particulars  
of his assets or furnished inaccurate particulars of any  
assets or debts in respect of such assessment year, notwith­
standing that such person furnishes a return of his net s 
wealth at any time after the expiry of either of the periods  
aforesaid applicable to him in pursuance of a notice under  
section 17.’';
(t'i) after Explanatioj 5, the following Explanation  shall be  
inserted, nam ely:— 1 0
“Explanation  6 .—^Where any adjustment is made in the  
wealth declared in the return xmder the proviso to clause
(a) of sub-section (1) of section 16 and additional v.'calth-  
tax charged under that section, the provisions of this sub­
section shall not apply in relation to the adjustments so 1 5  
made.”;
(b) for sub-section (3),  the following sub-section shall be  
■ubstituted. namely: —
“ (3) No order imposing a penalty under sub-section (1)  
shall be made.— 2 0
(i) by the Income-tax Officer, where the penalty  
exceeds ten thousand rupees;
(ti) by the Assistant Commissioner^ where the penalty  
exceeds twenty thousand rupees.
except with the prior approval of the Deputy Commissioner.”;  25
(c) sub-section (3A) shall be omitted;
(d) for sub-section (5). the following sub-sections shall be  
substituted, namely: —
“ (5) No order imposing a penalty under this section shall 
be passed— 30
(i) in a case where the assessment to which the pro­
ceedings for imposition of penalty relate is the subject-  
matter of an appeal to the Deputy C‘’mmissioner (Appeals) or  
the Commissioner (Appeals) under section 23 or an appeal tc »  
the Appellate Tribunal under sub-section (2) of section 24, 3 5  
after the expiry of the financial year in which the proceedings.
in the course of which action for the imposition of penalty has  
been initiated, are completed, or six months from the end  
of the month in which the order of the Deputy Commissioner  
(Appeals) or the Commissioner (Appeals) or. as the case 4 ^ 
may be, the Appellate Tribunal is received by the Chief Com­
missioner or Commissioner, whichever is later;
(ii) in a case where the relevant assessment is the  
subject-matter of revision under sub-section (2 ) of section
25, after the expfry of six months from the end of the month  
in which such order of revision is passed;
38


10
15
20
(H i) in any other case, after the expiry of the financial  
year in which the proceedings, in the course of which action  
for the imposition of penalty has been initiated, are com­
pleted, or six months from the end of the month in which  
action for imposition of penalty is initiated, whichever  
period expires later.
«
Explanation .—In computing the period of limitation for the  
purposes of this section,—
(i) any period during which the immunity granted  
under section 22H remained in force;
(ii) the tim e taken in gi\dng an opportunity to the  
assessee to be reheard under the proviso to section 39; and
(iii) any period during which a proceeding under this  
section the levy of penalty is stayed by an order or
injunction of any court,
shall be excluded.
(6) The provisions of this section as they stood immediately  
before their amendment by the Direct Tax Laws (Amendment)  
Act, 1988 shall apply to and in relation to any assessment for  
the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 198S,  
or any earlier assessment year and references in this section to  
the other provisions* of this Act shall be construed as references  
to those provisions as for the time being in force and applicable  
to the relevant assessment vear.”.
25
30
35
40
89. For section 18A of the Wealth-tax Act [as it stood immediately  
before its substitution by section 142 of the Direct Tax Laws (Amend­
ment) Act, 1987], the following section shall be substituted, namely.' —
‘18A. XI) If any person,—
(a) being legally bound to state the truth of any matter  
tcmching the subject of his assessment, refuses to answer any  
question put to him by a wealth-tax authority in the exercise  
of his powers under this Act; or
■  (b) refuses to sign any statement made by him in the course  
of any proceedings under this Act. which a wealth-tax authority  
may legally require him to sign; or
(c) to whom a summons is issued under sub-section (1) of  
section 37 either to attend to give evidence or-produce books of  
account or other docvunents at a certain place and time, omits  
to attend or produce the books of account or documents at the  
place and time,
he shall pay, by way of penalty, a s-am which shall not be-less than  
five hundred rupees but which may axtend to ten thousand rupees  
for each such default or failure;
2000 L S - 8
Substitu­
tion of 
now 
section 
for
section
18A.
Penalty 
for failure 
to answer 
questions, 
sign state­
ments, 
furnish 
iaforma- 
tion, allow 
inspec­
tion, etc.


38
Airif-nd-
Tfitnt of 
cection 
18B.
Amend- 
m e n l  o f
ejection
23,
Provided that no penalty shall be imposable under clause (c) if 
the person proves that there was reasonable cause for the said failure.
(2) If a person fails to furnish in due tim e any statement or  
information which such person is bound to furnish to the Assessing  
Officer under section 38, he shall pay, by way of penalty, a sum which 5
shall not be less than one h'undred rupees but which may extend to <
two hundred rupees for every day during which the failure continues:
Provided that no penalty shall be imposable under this sub­
section if the person proves that th er^ w as reasonable cause for the  
said failure. 1 0
(3) Any penalty imposable under sub-section (1) or sub-section
(2 ) shall be imposed—
(a) in a case where the contravention, failure or default in  
respect cf which such penalty is imposable occurs in the course
of any proceeding before a wealth-tax authority not lower in rank 15 w
than a Deputy Director or a Deputy Commissioner, by such  
wealth-tax authority;
(b) in any other case; by the Deputy Director or the
Deputy’  Commissioner. ,
(•!? ) No order under this section shall be passed by any wealth- 2 0  
authority referred to in s’ ab-section (3) unless the person on whom  
tl'.e penalty is proposed to be imposed has been heard, or has been  
given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in the matter, by such  
authority.
Explanation .—In this section, “wpalth-tax authority” includes a 2 5  
Director General. Director, Deputy Director, Assistant Director and  
a Valuation Officer while exercising the powers vested in a court  
under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, when trying a suit in respect g  
of the matters specified in sub-section (I) of section 37.’.
70. In section 18B of the W ealth-tax Act,—
(a ) in sub-section (I),—
•(:) claase (i) shall be om itted;
(ii) clause (a ) shall be om itted;
(b) after sub-.'^ection (5), the following
inrertsd, nam ely;— .
30
sub-section shall be
35
“ (6 ) The provisions of this section as they stood immediate­
ly before their amendment by the Direct Tax Laws (Amend­
ment) Act, 1988, shall apply to and in relation to any assess­
ment for the a.ssessment year commencing on the 1 st day of  
April, 1988, or any earlier assessment year, and references in 4 9  
this section to the other provisions of this Act shall be construed  
as references to those provisions as for the tim e being in force  
and applicable to the relevant assessment year.”.
71. In section 23 of the W ealth-tax Act [as amended by section 146 of  
the Direct Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 1987],— 4 5  4 of ]988.
(i) in .sub-section (1),  in clause (d), the words, figures and  
letters “as it stood immediately before the 1st day of April, 1989 or'


39
i
. under section 18 as amended by the Direct Tax Laws (Amendment)
4 of 1988. Act. 1987” occurring at the end shall be omitted;
V  0 0  in sub-section (lA),  for clause (b), the following clause
shall be substituted, namely: —
5  “ (b) objecting to any penalty imposed under sub-section ( 1 )
of section 18 w ith the previous approval of the Deputy Commis­
sioner as specified in sub-section (3) of that section;”.
72. In section 26 of the Wealth-tax Act, in sub-section (J), after the Am:nd-
word and figures “section 25”, the wo-ds, figures and letter “or an order mant of
J O  passed by the Director General or Director under section 18A” shall be section
inserted. -j.
f 1988.
4of 1988.
15
20
25
4 of 1988. 
k
30
73. In section 34A of the Wealth-tax Act,—
(a) in sub-section ( 1 ), in the proviso [as inserted by clause (i)  
of section 150 of the Direct Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 1987], in  
clause (b ), for the words “total income”, the words “net wealth” shall  
be substituted;
tb) in sub-section (4 B ) [as inserted by section '150 of the Direct  
Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 1987],—
(i) in clatise (a ), for the words “Where, in pursuance of  
any order passed under this Act, the refund of any amount  
becomes due to the assessee”, the w'ords “Where refund of any  
amount becomes due to the assessee under this Act,” shall be  
substituted;
(ii) in clause (c), after the words “an order under”, tlie  
words, brackets and figures “sub-section (3 ) of section 16 or”  
shall be inserted.
74. In section 35 of the Wealth-tax Act [as amended by section 160 of  
the Direct Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 1987], in sub-section (3), in  
clause (c ), the words, figures and letter “or section 23A” shall be omitted.
75. After section 35-0 of the Wealth-tax Act, the following section  
shall be inserted, namely: —
A mend-
men I of
section
3-1A.
35
A m e n d ­
m e n t o f 
se c tio n
35.
In sertio n  
of n e w  
se c tio n
36.
P ro o f o f 
e u trics in  
record s or  
docu­
m en ts.
“36. Entries in the records or other documents in the custody of  
a wealth-tax authority shall be admitted in evidence in any proceed­
ings for the prosecution of any person for an offence under this Act,  
and all such entries may be proved either by the production of the  
records or other documents in the custody of the Wealth-tax authority  
containing such entries or by the production of a copy of the entries  
certified by the Wealth-tax authority having custody of the records  
or other documents imder its signature and stating that it is a true  
copy of the original entries and that such original entries are con­
tained in the records or other documents in its custody.”.
76. In section 41 of the Wealth-ta?: Act, in sub-section (2), for the A m e n d - 
words “and in the case of any other association of persons”, the words  
"and in the case of a company or any other association of persons’’  shall  
4 5  be subsUtuted.
40


40
Amend­
ment of 
section 
42A.
Insertion 
of new 
Sche­
dule III,
Value of  
assets  
how in  
be deter-  
TT.incd.
Defini­
tion*.
77, In section 42A of the Wealth-tax Act, the following Explanafiofi  
shall be inserted at the end, nam ely:—
"Explanation .—^ In  the case of a company, the names of the  
directors, secretaries and treasurers, or managers of the companji^  
m ay also be published if, in the opinion of the Central Government, 5  
the circumstances of the case justify it.”.
78. In the W ealth-tax Act, after Schedule II, the following Schedule  
shall be Inserted, namely: —
SCHEDULE HI  
[See section 7 (1 )] 10
R u les  to r d et er m in in g th e value  o f assets
P a r t A
General
1 . The value of any asset, other than cash, for the purposes of thi»  
Act. shall be determined in the manner laid down in these rules. 1 5
2. In this Schedule, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(1) “accounting year ’  in relation to a company means a period  
in respect of which any profit and loss account of the company laid  
before it in the annual general m eeting is made up;
(2 ) “debenture" includes debenture stock, bonds and any other 2 0  
securities of a company, whether constituting a charge on the assets  
of-the company or not;
(3) “equity share’’  means any share in the share capital of a  
company other than a preference share.
(4) ‘‘gold ' means gold, including its alloy, whether virgin, 25  
melted, remeltcd, wrought or unwrought, in any shape or form of a  
purity of not less than nine carats and includes any gold coin (whether  
legal lender or n o t). any gold ornament and other article of gold;
(5) “gold ornament” means any article in a finished form, meant  
for personal adornment or for the adornment of any idol, deity or 3 0  
any other object of religious v/orship, made of, or manufactured  
from gold, whether or not set with stones or gems, real or artificial,  
or with pearls, real, cultured or imitation, or with all or any of them  
and includes parts, pendants or broken pieces of gold ornaments;
(6 ) “investment company” means a company whose gross total 3 5  
income consists mainly of income which is chargeable to income-tax  
under the heads “Income from house property’’, “Capital gains” and  
“Income from other sources”.
ExpUmation.  In tiiis clause, the expression “gross total income’*  
shall have the meaning assigned to it in section SOB of the Income-tax ^  
Act;


(7) “jewellery'’  includes—
(a) ornaments made of gold, silver, platinum or any other  
precious metal or any alloy containing one or more of such  
precious metals, whether or not containing any precious or semi-
5  precious stones, and whether or not worked or sewn into any
wearing apparel;
(b)  precious or semi-precious stones, whether or not set in  
any furniture, utensils or other article or worked or sewn into  
any apparel;
1 “preference share” has the meaning assigned to it in section,
1 0 1 195«. 85 of the Companies Act, 1956;
(9) “quoted share” or “quoted debenture ’, in relation to an  
equity share or a preference share or, as the case may be, a debenture,  
means a share or debenture quoted on any recognised stock exchange
15 with regularity from time to time, where the quotations of such shares
or debentures are based on current transactions made in the ordinary  
*  course of business.
Explanation .—^Where any question arises whether a share or  
debenture is a “quoted share” or a “quoted debenture’’ within the  
2 0  meaning of this clause, a certificate to that effect furnished by the
concerned stock exchange in the prescribed form shall be accepted
as conclusive;
(1 0 ) “recognised stock exchange” has the meaning assigned to  
it in clause (f)  of section 2 of the Securities Contracts (Regulation)
42 of 25 Act, 1956;
41
1956.
(II) “unquoted share’’  or “unquoted debenture”, in relation to  
an equity share or a preference share or, as the case may be, a deben­
ture, means a share or debenture which is not a quoted share or a  
quoted debenture.
30 P art B
Immovahle property
3. Subject to the provisions of rules 4. 5, 6, 7 and 8, for the purposes Valua.
of sub-section (1) of section 7, the value of any immovable property, tioaof
being &  building or land appurtenant thereto, or part thereof, shall be the  
3 5  amount arrived at by multiplying the net maintainable rent by the figure p^jfy  
12.5; ' ’
Provided that in relation to any such property which is constructed on  
leasehold land, this rule shall havt effect as if for the figure 12.5,—
(a) where the unexpired period of the lease of such land is fifty  
4 9  years or more, the figure 1 0  0  had been substituted; and
(b) where the unexpired period of the lease of such land is less  
than fifty years, the figure 8 . 0  had been substituted:
Provided further that where such property is acquired or construction
o f whidi is c o m p le te d,  after the 31st day of March, 1974, if the value so


arrived at is lower thaa the cost of ecquisition or the cost of construction,  
as increased, in either case, by the cost of any improvement to the property,  
the cost of acquisition or, as the case may be, the cost of construction, as  
so increased, shall be taken to be the vai'ae of the property under this  
rule- 5
42
Net 
nutin- 
tainablc 
rent how 
to be
computed.
Gross
luain.
t£inabla
rent
how to
be com.
puted.
4. For the purposes of rule 3, “net maintainable rent” in relation  
to an immovable property referred to in that rule, shall be the  
amount of gross maintainable rent as reduced b y ^
(i) the amount of taxes levied by an(y local authority in  
resp>fect of the property; and 1 0
( i) a sum eq u ^  to fifteen per cent, of the gross maintainable  
rent. ;  ;
6 . For the purposes of rule 4, “gross maintainable rent”, in relation  
to any immovable property referred to in rule 3 , means—
(i) where the property' is let, the amount received or receiv- 1 5  
able by the owner as annual rent or the annual value assessed by  
the local authority in v/hose area the property is situated for the  
purposes of levy of property ta:c or any other tax on the basis of  
such assessment, whichever is higher;
(ii) where the property is not let, the amount of annual rent 2 0  
assessed by the local authority in whose area the property is  
situated for the purpose of levy of property tax or any other tax  
on the basis of such assessment, or, if there is no such assessment  
or the property is situated outside the area of any local authority  
the amount which the owner can reaonably be expected to receive 2 5  
as annual rent had such property been let.
Explanation .—In this rule,—
( 1 ) “annual rent” means,—
(a) where the property is let throughout the year ending
.  on the valuation date (hereinafter referred to as “previous 3 0  
year”), the actual rent received or receivable by the owner in  
respect of such year; i  •
(b)  where the property is let for only a part of the pre­
vious year, the amount which bears the same proportion to the  
amount of actual rent received or receivable by the owner for 3 5  
the period for which the property is let as the period of twelve  
m o n t^  bears to the number of months (including part of a  
'month) during wl.ich the property is let during the previous  
year:
Provided that in the followinj* cases, such actual rent under 4 0  
sub-clauses (a) and (b)  shall be increased in the manner specified  
below ;— t
(i) where the property is in  the occupation of a tenant and
taxes levied by any local authority in respect of the property
are borne w holly or partly by the tenant, by the amount of the 45  
taxes so borne by the tenant;


(ii) w h e re  th e  p ro p e rty  is in th e  o ccu p atio n  of a  te n a n t 
a n d  e x p e n d itu re  o n  re p a irs  in  re sp e c t o f th e  p ro p e rty  is b o rn e  
b y  th e  te n a n t, b y  o n e -n in th  o f th e a c tu a l r e n t;
(ii/) w h e re  th e  o w n e r h a s  -accepted a n y  a m o u n t as d e p o sit 
5 (n o t b e in g  a d v a n c e  p a y m e n t to w a rd s r e n t fo r  a p e rio d  ol th re e
m o n th s  o r le s s ), b y  th e  a m o u n t c a lc u la te d  a t th e  r a te  o f 15 p e r 
ce n t, p e r  a n n u m  o n  th e  a m o u n t of d e p o sit o u ts ta n d in g  from  
m o n th  to  m o n th , fo r th e  n u m b e r o f m o n th s (e x c lu d in g  p a r t 'o f  
a  m o n th ) d u rin g  w h ic h  s u c h  d e p o sit v/as h e ld  b y  th e  o w n e r in 
]0  th e  p re v io u s  y e a r, a n d  th e  o w n e r is lia b le  to  p a y  in te re s t o n
su ch  d e p o sit, th e  in c re a se  to  b e  m a d e  u n d e r th is  c la u se  s h a ll b e  
lim ite d  to  th e  su m  b y  w h ic h  th e  a m o u n t c a lc u la te d  as a fo re ­
s a id  e x c e e d s th e  I n te re s t a c tu a lly  p a id ;
, (it?) w h e r e  th e  o w n e r h a s re c e iv e d  any  a m o u n t by  w a y  o f
p re m iu m  o r o th e rw is e  as c o n sid e ra tio n  fo r  le a sin g  of th e  p ro ­
p e r ty  o r  a n y  m o d ificatio n  o f th e  te rm s  o f th e  leas-?, by  th e  
a m o u n t o b ta in e d  b y  d iv id in g  th e  p re m iu m  o r o th e r a m o u n t b y  
th e  n u m b e r o f y e a rs  o f  th e  p e rio d  of th e  lease;
(v)  w h e re  th e  o w n e r d e riv e s a n y  b en efit o r p e rq u isite , 
70 w h e tJje r c o n v e rtib le  in to  m o n e y  o r n o t, as c o n sid e ra tio n  fo r
le a s in g  o f th e  p ro p e rty  o r  a n y  m o d ificatio n  of th e  te rm s  of th e  
lease, b y  th e  v a lu e  o f sucli b e n e fit o r p e rq u isite ;
(2) “r e n t re c e iv e d  o r re c e iv a b le " s h a ll in c lu d e  a ll p a y m e n ts fo r 
th e  u se o f th e  p ro p e rty , by  w h a te v e r n a m e  called , th e  v a lu e  of all 
25 b e n e fits o r  p e rq u is ite s  w h e th e r co n v tartib le in to  m o n e y  o r  n o t, 
o b ta in e d  fro m  a  te n a n t o r o cc u p ie r of th e  p ro p e rty  a n d  an y  sum  
p a id  b y  a te n a n t o r o c c u p ie r o f th e  p ro p e rty  in  re sp e c t o f a n y  o b li­
g a tio n  w h ic h , b u t fo r su ch  p ajT n en t, v /o u ld  h a v e  been p a y a b le  b y  
th e  o w n er. I
43
30 6. W h e re  th e  im b u ilt a re a  of th e  p lo t of la n d  on  w h ic h  th e  p ro p e rty  A d iiis t-  
riife rre d  to  in  r u le  3 is c o n stru c te d  cxceer’s th e  specified a re a , th e  v a lu e  m e n t s t o
a rriv e d  a t in  a c c o rd a n ce  w ith  th e  p ro v isio n s of ru le  3 sh a ll b e  in c re a se d  
b y  a n  a m o u n t c a lc u la te d  in  th e  fo llo w in g  m a n n e r, n a m e ly :—  at u n d er
(a) w h e re  th e  d ifferen ce b e tw e e n  th e  u n b u ilt a re a  a n d  th e
35 specified a re a  e x c e e d s te n  psi' cent, b u t d o ts  n o t ex ceed  fifte e n  p e r
ce n t, o f th e  a g g re g a te  a re a , b y  a n  jm o u n t e q u a l to  tw e n ty  p e r ce n t area of
o f su c h  v a lu e ; i  plot
o f land.
(b ) w h e re  th e  differen ce b e tw e e n  th e  u n b u ilt a re a  r.nd th e  
specified a re a  ex ceed s te n  p e r c e n t b u t does n o t ex ceed  fifteen p e r
4Q c e n t, o f th e  a g g re g a te  a re a  b y  an  nm o im t e q u a l to  th irtj- p e r c e rt,
o f su c h  v a lu e ;
(c) w h e re  th e  d ifferen ce b e tw e e n  th e  u n b u ilt area an d  th e
specified a r e a  e x ceed s fifteen  p e r  cen t, b u t does n o t exceed tw e n ty  
p e r cen t, o f th e  a g g re g a te  a re a  b y  a n  a m o u n t eq u al to  fo rty  p e r c e n t 
of su c h  v alu e. i  i45
E xn ln iiation .— F o r th e  p u rp o se s o f th is ru le  an d  ru le  6,—
(a) “aggi’ e s a te  a re a ”, in  re la tio n  to th e  p lo t of la n d  on w hich 
th e  p ro p e rty  is c o n stru c te d , me.^ns th e  aggrefrate o f th e a re a  on 
w it’ch th e  p ro p e rty  is c o n stru c te d  en d  t>'e u n b u ilt a re a ;


Adjust­
ment for 
unearned 
increase 
in the 
value 
Of the 
land.
Hule3 
not to 
«pply 
in certain 
easm
(b ) “sp ecified  a re a " , in  r e la tio n  to  th e  p lo t o f la n d  on  w liich  
th e  p r o p e r tj' is  c o n s tru c te d , m e a n s —
(i) w h e re  th e  p r o p e r ty  is s itu a te  a t B o m b a y , C a lc u tta , D e lh i 
o r  M a d ra s, s ix ty  p e r  cent- of th e  a g g re g a te  a re a ;
(tj) w h e r e  th e  p r o p e r ty  is s itu a te  a t A g ra , A h m e d a b a d , 5 
A lla h a b a d , A m rits a r. B a n g a lo re , B h o p a l, Cochifli, H y d e ra b a d , 
In d o re , Jab alp u i* . J a m s h e d p u r , K a n p u r, L u c k n o w , L u d h ia n a . 
M a d u ra i, N a g p u r. P a tn a , P u n e , S a le m , S h o la p u r, S rin a g a r, S u ra t, 
T iru c h ira p p a lli. T r iv a n d ru m , V a d o d a ra  (B a ro d a ) o r V a ra n a s i 
( B a n a r a s ) , six ty -f?v e p e r  c e n t, o f th e  a g g re g a te  a re a ; a n d  10
(iii) w h e r e  th e  p ro j)e rty  is s itu a te  a t a n y  o th e r  p la c e , s e v e n ty  
p e r  c e n t. *of th e  a g g re g a te  a re a : ,
P ro v id e d  th a t w h e re , u n d e r  a n y  la w  fo r th e  tim e  b e in g  in  fo rce, 
th e  m in im u m  a r e a  o f  th e  p lo t o f la n d  r e q u ir e d  to  b e  k e p t as o p en  
sp a c e  fo r th e  e n jo y m e n t of th e  p r o p e r ty  e x c e e d s th e  specified a re a , 15 
s u c h  m in im u m  a re a  s h a ll b e  d e e m e d  to  b e  th e  sp ecified  a re a ;
(c) “im b u ilt a r e a ’’, in  re la tio n  to  th e  a g g re g a te  a re a  of th e  p lo t 
o f la n d  o n  w h ic h  th e  p r o p e r ty  is c o n s tru c te d , m e a n s  th a t p a r t o f 
su c h  a g g re g a te  a re a  on  w h ic h  n o  b u ild in g  h a s  b e e n  e re c te d .
7 . W h e re  th e  p r o p e rty  is c o n s tru c te d  on  la n d  o b ta in e d  o n  Ita s e  fro m  20 
th e  G o v e rn m e n t, a  Io c eI c u t” V^^t)ritv o r  a n v  r^ ith o rity  r e f e r r e d  to  in  c la u se  
(20A> o f se c tio n  10 of th e  In c o m e -ta x  A ct, a n d  th e  G o v e rn m e n t o r a n y  
su c h  a u th o r ity  is. u n d e r  th e  te rm s  of th e  le a se , e n title d  to  c la im  a n d  
re c o v e r a  sp ecified  p a r t  o f  th e  u n e a rn e d  in c re a s e  in  th e  v a lu e  o f th e  la n d  
a t  th e  tim e  o f th e  tr a n s f e r  o f th e  p ro p e rty , th e  v a lu e  o f su c h  p ro p e rty  as 
d e te m in e d  u n d e r  r u le  3 s h a ll b e  re d u c e d  b y  t h e  a m o u n t so  lia b le  to  b e  
c la im e d  a n d  re c o v e re d  o r b y  a n  a m o u n t e q u a l to  fifty  p e r  c e n t, o f  th e  
v a lu e  o f th«» p r o p e r ty  a s so d e te rm in e d , w h ic h e v e r is less, as if th e  p ro - 
D erty h a d  b e e n  tr a n s f e r r e d  o n  th e  v a lu a tio n  d a te . •
E.r^lnnation .— F o r  th e  p u rp o s e  o f th is  ru le , “ u n e a rn e d  in c re a se ” m e a n s 30 
th e  d iffe re n c e  b e tw e e n  th e  v a lu e  o f su c h  la n d  o n  th e  v a lu a tio n  d p te  as 
d e te rm in e d  V > v  th e  G o v e rn m e n t o r su c h  a u th o r ity  fo r th e  p u rp o s e  o f c a l­
c u la tin g  s u c h  in c re a s e  r n d  th e  a m o im t o f  th e  o re m iu m  p a id  o r  p a y a b le  
to  th e  G o v e rn m e n t o r su c h  a u th o r itv  fo r th e  le a s e  o f th e  la n d .
8. N o th in g  c o n ta in e d  in, r u le  3 sh all a p p ly ,—  35
(a)  w h e re , h a v in g  r e g a r d  to  th e  fa c ts a n d  c irc u m s ta n c e s  o f th e  
case, th e  A sse ssin g  OflBcer, w ith  th e  p re v io u s  a p p ro v a l o f th e  D e p u ty  
C o m m issio n e r, is o f o p in io n  th a t  it is n o t p ra c tic a b le  to  a p p ly  th e  
p ro v is io n s  o f th e  sa id  r u le  to  su c h  a case; o r
(b ) w h e re  th e  d iffe re n c e  b e tw e e n  th e  u n b u ilt a re a  a n d  th e  sp eci- ^  
fied  a r e a  e x c e e d s tw e n ty  p e r  c e n t, o f th e  a g g re g a te  a re a ; o r
44
(c) w h e r e  th e  p r o p e r ty  is c o n s tru c te d  o n  le a s e h o ld  la n d  a n d  th e  
le a s e  e x p ire s  w ith in  a  p e rio d  n o t e x c e e d in g  fifte e n  y e a rs  fro m  th e  
r e le v a n t v a lu a tio n  d a te  a n d  th e  d eed  o f le a s e  d o es n o t g iv e  a n  o p tio n  
to  th e  le sse e  f o r  th e  re n e w a l o f th e  le a se .


a n d  in  a n y  c a se  r e f e r r e d  to  in  c la u se  (a) o r c la u se  (b ) o r clau se (c ), th e  
v a lu e  o f th e  p ro p e rty  s h a ll b e  d e te rm in e d  in  th e  m a n n e r la id  d o w n  in  
n i l e  20.
45
P art C
5 Shares in or debentures oj companies
9. T h e  v a lu e  o f a n  e q u ity  s h a re  o r a p re fe re n c e  s h a r t in  a n y  co m p a n y  
o r  a d e b e n tu re  of a n y  c o m p a n y  w h ic h  is a q u o ted  s h a re  o r a q u o te d  
d e b e n tu re  s h a ll b e  ta k e n  a s th e  v a lu e  q u o te d  in  re sp e c t of su c h  s h a r t o r 
d e b e n tu re  o n  th e  v a lu a tio n  d a te  o r w h e re  th e r t is ho  su c h  q u o ta tio n  o n
10 th e  v a lu a tio n  d a te , th e  q u o ta tio n  on th e  d a te  clo sest to th e  v a lu a tio n  
d a te  a n d  im m e d ia te ly  p re c e d in g  su c h  d ate.
10. ( i )  S u b je c t to  th e  p ro v isio n s of su b -ru le  ( 2) ,  th e  v a lu e  o f tm - 
q u o te d  p re fe re n c e  s h a re  in  a n y  c o m p a n y  sh a ll—
(a) where the preference share is issued before the valuation  
15 date at a rate of dividend of not less than eight per cent., be the
p a id -u p  v a lu e  of su c h  sh a re ; a n d
(b ) w h e re  th e  p re fe re n c e  s h a re  is issu e d  b e fo re  th e  v a lu a tio n  d a te  
a t a  r a t e  o f d iv id e n d  o f le ss th a n  e ig h t p e r cen t., b e  th e  a d ju s te d  
p a id -u p  v a lu e  o f su c h  sh a re .
20 (2) W h e re  n o  d iv id e n d  h a s b e e n  p a id  in  re sp e c t of a n  u n q u o te d
p re fe re n c e  s h a re  b y  a n y  c o m p an y  c o n tin u o u sly  fo r n o t le ss th a n  th re e  
a c c o u n tin g  y e a rs  e n d in g  o n  th e  v a lu a tio n  d a te  o r, in  a case w h e re  th e  
a c c o u n tin g  y e a r of th e  c o m p a n y  d o es n o t e n d  on  th e  v a lu a tio n  d a te , fo r 
n o t less th a n  th r e e  c o n tin u o u s a c c o u n tin g  y e a rs  e n d in g  on a d a te  im m e- 
25 d ia te ly  b e fo re  th e  v a lu a tio n  d a te , th e  p a id -u p  v a lu e  o r, as th e  case m a y  
b e, th e  a d ju s te d  p a id -u p  v a lu e  sh a ll b e  re d u c e d —  ,
(a) in  th e  case of a n o n -c u m u la tiv e  p re fe re n c e  sh a re , as in d i­
c a te d  in th e  T a b le  b e lo w :—
Quoted 
shares  
and de­
bentures  
of com­
panies.
Un­
quoted
prefer­
ence
shares.
T a b l e
2 Q  Number of accounting years ending on the valrmtion date or, in a case  
where the acfcounting year does ^not end on the valuation date, the  
number of accounting years ending on a date im m ediately preceding the  
valuation date, for which no dividend has been paid. '
Rate o f reduction
35 (I) (2)
Three years
Four years  
40 Five years
$ix years and above
10 per cent, o f the paid-uo  
value or the adjus'ed paid-  
up value, as the case may be :
2 0 - d o -
30
40
—do— 
—do—
(b) in  th e  c a se  of a  c u m u la tiv e  p re fe re n c e  sh a re , b y  one h a lf 
of th e  ra te s  specified in  th e  a fo re sa id  T able.
Explanation. — F o r th e  p u rp o se s of th is ru le , “a d ju ste d  p a id -u p  v a lu e ”, 
45 in  re la tio n  to a p re fe re n c e  sh a re , m e a n s a n  a m o u n t w h ich  b e a rs to  th e  
p a id -u p  v a lu e  of th e  p re fe re n c e  s h a re  th e  sam e p ro p o rtio n  as th e s tip u la t­
e d  r a te  of d iv id en d , [b e in g  th e  ra te  of d iv id en d  on th e  p re fe re n c e  s h a re  
2000 L S — 7.


specified in the term s of issue of such share, and in  a case whece such 
dividend is required to be increased under the provisions of section 3 of the 
reference Shares (Regulation of Dividends) Act, 1960, the rate of dividend 
^ as so increased] on such share bears to the rate of eight per cent.quoted
value of an unquoted equity share in any company, other 5 
In com- investmMit company, shall be determined in the m anner stt out
panics' in sub-dule ( 2) 1
(2) The value of all the liabilities as shown in the balance-sheet 
invest- ®^^h company shall be deducted from  the value of all its assets shown
ment in th at balance sheet; the net am ount so arrived at shall be divided by 10
the total am ount of its paid-up equity share capital as shown in the 
balance-sheet; the result m ultiplied by the paid-up value of each equity 
share shall be the break-up value of each unquoted equity share, and an 
am ount equal to e ig h ty  per cen t of the break-up value so determ ined 
shall be the value of toe unquoted equity share for the purposes of this 
A ct
(3) For the purposes of sub-rule (2),—
(a) the following amounts shown as assets in the balance-sheet 
shall not be treated as assets, namely: —
(i) any amount paid as advance-tax under the Income-tax
Act:
(ii) any amount shown in the balance-sheet including the
debit balance of the profit and loss account or the profit and loss 
af^ropriation accoimt which does not represent the value of any 
asset; 25
(b) the following amounts shown as liabilities in the balance- 
sheet shall not be treated as liabilities, namely: —
(t) the paid-up capital in respect of equity shares;
(ii) the amoimt set apart for pajonent of dividends oa 
preference shares and equity shares w here such dividends have 
not been declared before the valuation date at a general body 
meeting of the company;
(iii) reserves, by w hatever name called, other than those 
set apart towards depreciation;
(iw) credit balance of the profit and loss account;
(v) any amount representing provision for taxation, other 
than the amount referred to in sub-clause (i) of clause (a), to 
the extent of the excess over the tax payable with reference to 
the book profits in accordance w ith the law applicable thereto;
(tn) any am ount representing contingent liabilities other 
than arrears of dividends payable in respect of ciunulative pre­
ference shares.
ETplanation.— For the purposes of this rule, “balance-sheet”, In 
relation to any company, means the balance-sheet of such company 
(including the Notes annexed’thereto and forming part of the accounts) 
as drawn up on the valuation date and, w here there is no such balance- 
sheet, the balance-sheet drawn up on a date Immediately preceding the 
valuation date, and, in the absence of both, the balance-she^t draw n up 
on a date immediately after the valuation date.
46


A 1
12. (1) Subject to rule 13, the value of an unquoted equity share in  
an investment company shall be determined in the manner specified in  
sub-rule (2).
(2) The value of all the liabilities as shown in the balance-sheet of 
5 such company shall be deducted from the value of all its assets shown in
that balance-sheet; the net amovmt so arrived at shall be divided by the 
total paid-up equity share capital of the company as shown in the balance- 
slieet, and the result multiplied by the paid-up value of such equity share 
shall be the value of the unquoted equity share in that investment com- 
10 pany for the purposes of this Act.
(3) For the purposes of sub-rule ( 2), the value of an asset disclosed 
in the balance-sheet of the company shall be taken to be its value deter­
mined in accordance with the rules as applicable to that particular asset 
and, in the absence of any such rule, the value of such asset shall be its
15 value as determined under rule 20.
(4) For the puiposes of this rule,—
(a) “balance-sheet” has the same meaning as in rule 11;
(h) the amounts referred to in sub-rule 
be treated as assets or liabilities.
(3) of rule 11 shall not
20 (5) For the purpose of facilitating the valuation of unquoted equity
shares under this rule and rule 13, the company concerned shall have 
such valuation made by its auditors appointed under section 224 of the 
Companies Act 1956, and a certificate of the auditors relating to such 
valuation in the prescribed form shall be furnished to the Assessing Officer 
25 in ‘the case of the company; and the valuation made by the auditors 
shall be taken into account in the assessments of the shareholders of the 
company.
13. (I) The value of an unquoted equity share in one of the two 
interlocked companies held by the other interlocked company for the 
30 purposes of rule 12 shall be errual to the paid-up value of such share or 
the value determined under sub-rule ( 2), whichever is higher.
(2) For the purpose of sub-rule (1), the aggregate value of all the 
equity shares in an interlocked company shall be arrived at by multiplying 
the maintainable profits of such company by—
35
40
45
(a) the fraction 100/8.5. in a case where the gross total in­
come of the company consists, to the extent of not less than 51 
per cent, of income chargeable under the head “Income from house 
property”; or
(b) the fraction 100/ 10. in the case of any other interlocked 
company,
and the lesiOtant amount divided by the number of such equity sh.-ires 
phall bo the value of such an equity share in such company.
(3> The maintainable profits of the company, for the purpose of sub­
rule ( 2). shpJl be computed in the following manner namely:—
(a) the book profits of the companv for the five arcountins; years 
of the companv immediately preceding the valuation date shall 
first be agcertained;
U n . 
quoted  
eq u ity 
shares  
in in v est­
m ent  
com ­
panies.
U n­
quoted  
equity  
shares  
in inter­
locked  
com ­
panies.


(b) adjustm ents shall be made to the book profits for each
of the said five years for all non-recurring and extraordinary 
items of income and expenditure and losses;
(c) adjustm ents shall be made to the book profits for ex­
penditure which is not of a revenue nature but is debited in the 5 
accounts and for receipts which are in the nature of revenue 
receipts but are not accounted for in the profit and loss account;
(d) any development rebate or investm ent allowance debited in 
the books of account shall be added back to the book profits;
(c> the tax liability of the company on the book profits, 10
arrived at after the adjustm ents at items (a ), (b),  (c) and (d),  shall
be deducted from such book profits;
(/) amounts required for payin<» dividends on preference share or 
shares w ith prior riphts shall be deducted from such book profits;
(p> the aggregate of the book profits for the five account- 15 
ing years so arrived at. divided by 5, shall be the m aintain­
able profits of the company.
Explanation .—^For the purposes of this rule, “interlocked companies” 
means any two investment conjpanies each of which holds shares in the 
other company. 20
P a r t D
Assets of business
14 (I) Where the assessee is carrving on a business for which accounts 
are maintained by him regularly, th e net value of the assets of the busi­
ness as a whole, having regard to the balance-sheet of such business on 25 
the valuation date after adjustm ents sr>ecified in sub-rule (2) shall be 
taken as the value of such assets for ihe purposes of this Act.
(2) For the purposes of sub-rule (1) —
(a) the value of any asset as disclosed in the balancc-s^eet 
shall be taken to be.— ‘
in the case of an asset on which depreciation is 
admissible, its written-down value;
CtH in th*? case of r» n  asset on which no depreciation is 
admissible, its book value;
(iti) in the ca.so of closing stork. it< i value adopted for the 35 
purposes of assessment vmder the Income-tax Act for the pre­
vious year relevant to the correpnonding assessment year;
(b) whore the value of anv of the asset«i referred to in clause
(a),  determined in accordance with the nrovi.sions of this Schedule 
as applicable to that partinilar asset or if there are no such provi- 40 
sfons. <?etermined in accordanfp with rule 20 exceeds the value 
arrived at in accordance with claxise fa) bv more than 20 per cen t 
then the higher value shnll be tnl^on to He the value of that asset;
Cr) the value of an as'Pt not disrlo 5< > r i  in the balance-sheet, 
shall he taVen to be fho valnr* r’efeTnined in accordance with the 45 
provisions of this Schtdule as applicable to that asset;
(d) the value of the following a.ssets which are disclosed in the 
balance-sheet shall not be taken into account namely: —
48


(i) any amount paid as advance tax under the Income-tax
Act;
(ii) the debt due to the assessee according to the balance- 
sheet or part thereof which has been allowed as a deduction 
^ . under clause (vii)  of sub-section (I) of section 36 of the
Income-tax Act, for the purposes of assessment for the previous 
year relevant to the! corresponding assessment year under that 
Act;
( H i) the value of any asset in respect of which wealth-tax 
10 is not payable under this Act;
(iv) any amount shown in the balance-sheet including the 
debit balance in the profit and loss account or profit and loss 
appropriation account which does not represent the value of any 
asset; ’
15 (v)  any asset shown in the balance-sheet not really pertain­
ing to the business;
(e) the following amounts shown as liabilities in the balance- 
sheet shall not he taken into account, nam ely:—
(i) capital employed in the business other than that attri-
20 butable to borrowed money;
(it) reserves by whatever name called;
(itt) any provision made for meeting any future or contin­
gent liability;
(iv) anv liability shown in the balance-sheet not really 
25  pertaining to the business;
(r) any debt owed bv the assessee to the extent to which 
it has been snecifically utilised for acouiring an asset in respect
of which wealth-tax is not payable under this Act:
Provided that where it is not possible to calculate the amount 
30 of debt so utilised, it shall be taken as the amount which bears the 
same oroportion to the total of the debt? owed by the assessee as 
the value of that asset bears to the total value of the tssets of the business.
Explanation.—Provision  for any purpose other than taxation shall 
be treated as a reserve.
35 P a r t E
Interest in firm or association of persdns
15. The value of the interest of a person in a firm of which he is 
a partner or in an association of persons of which he is a member shall 
be determined in the manner provided in rule 16.
V alua-  
tion of  
interest  
in firm  
or assoclji-  
tion of 
persons.


50
Compu­
tation 
of net 
wealth 
of the 
firm or 
•sso- 
ciation 
and its 
alloca­
tion
amongst 
the part, 
nersor 
mem­
bers.
Valua­
tion of 
life
interest.
16. The net wealth of the firm or association of persons on the  
valuation date shall first be determined as if it were the assessee and,  
thereafter,—
(i) that portion of the net wealth of the firm or association as
is equal to the amount of its capital shall be allocated among the 5  
partners or members in the proportion in which capital has been  
co n trib u te by them;
(ii) the residue of the net wealth jtif the firm or association shall  
be allocated amongst the partners or members in accordance with  
the agreement of partnership or association for the distribution of 10  
assets in the event of dissolution of the firm or association or, in  
the absence of such agreement, in the proportion in which the partners
or members are entitled to share the profits,
and the sum total of ,  amounts so allocated to a partner or member under  
clause (i) and claur« (ii) shall be treated as the value of the interest of 15  
that partner or member in the firm or association:
Provided that in determining the net wealth of the firm or associa­
tion for the purposes of this rule, no account shall be taken of the ex­
emptions in sub-sections (I) and (lA)  of section 5.
Explanation .— ^For the purposes of this rule,— 20
(a)  w here the net wealth/ of the firm or association c o m p u ^  
in accordance w ith this rule includes the value of any assets located  
outside India, the value of the interest of any partner or member  
in the assets located in India shall be determined having regard to the  
proportion which the value of assets located in India diminished by 25  
the debts relating to those assets bears to the net wealth of the firm  
or association;
(b) where the net wealth of the firm or association computed  
in accordance with this rule induces the value of any assets which  
are exem pt from inclusion in the net wealth under sub-sections (I) 3 0  
and (1.4) of section 5, the value of the interest of a partner or mem­
ber shall be deemed to include the value of bin nroportionate share
in the said assets and, the provisions of sub-sections (I) and (lA)  of  
section 5 shall apply to him accordingly;
(c) where the net wealth of the firm or association computed 35  
in accordance with this rule inclu'les the value of any assets referred
to in sub-section (2) of section 5, the value of the interest of a partner  
or member shall be deemed to include the value of his proportionate  
share in the said assets, and the provisions of sub-section (2) of  
section 5 shall apply to him accordingly. 40
P art F 
L ife  I nterest
n. (I)  For the purposes of sub-section (1 ) of section 7, the value of  
the life interest of an as.sessee shall be arrived at by multiplying the
average annual income that accrued to tlie assesse<» from the life in­
terest by the fraction ^  minus 1, where ‘P ’  represents the annual  
premium for a whole life insurance without profits on the life of th^
45


51
life tenant for unit sum assured as specified in the Appendix to these  
rules, and ‘d’  is equal to T  being the rate of interest.
Explanation .—In this rule,—
(o) “life tenant” means a person for the duration of whose life  
5 the life interest is to subsist;
(b) “average annual income” means the average of the gross  
income derived by the assessee from the life interest during each  
year of the period ending on the valuation date, reduced by the  
average of the expenses incurred on the collection of such income in
1 0  each of those years:
Provided that the amount of the reduction for such expenses  
shall, in no case, exceed five per cent, of the average of the annual  
gross income:
Provided further that in case the income so derived is for a period  
15 exceeding three years, only that income derived during the three
years ending on the valuation date shall be taken into accoiuit;
(c) the rate of interest shall be per cent, per annum.
(2 ) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-rule ( 1 ),—
(o) the Assessing Officer may, if he is of the opinion that in the
2 0  case of the life tenant, a life insurance company would not take the
risk of insuring his life at the normal premium rates in force but  
would demand a higher premium, vary the valuation suitably;
(b) the value of the life interest so determined shall, in no case,  
exceed the value as on the valuation date as determined under this  
2 5  Schedule, of the corpus of the trust from which the life interest is
derived.
P art G  
Jew ellery
18. The value of jewellery shall be—
3 0  (a) where the value declared by the assessee in the return of
net wealth does not exceed rupees five lakhs, and the return is
supported by a statement in the prescribed form, the value so de­
clared in the return;
(b) in any other case^ subject to rule 19, the price which in the  
3 5  opinion of the Valuation Officer, on a reference made to him under
section 16A, the jewellery would fetch if sold in the open market  
on the valuation date.
19. The value of any jewellery determined in accordance with clause
(b) of rule 18 for any assessment year (hereinafter referred to as the
40 first assessment year), shall be taken to be the value of such jewellery
for the subsequent four assessment years, subject to the following
adjustments, namely: —
(a) where the jewellery includes gold or silver or any alloy  
containing gold or silver, the value of such gold or silver or such
Valua­
tion of 
jewellery.
Adjust* t 
ment
in value o 
jewellery 
for sub­
sequent 
assess­
ment 
years.


52
Valua­
tion of 
assets ia 
other
Restric­
tive co- 
venatsto 
be ignored 
in deter-
market
value.
alloy as on the valuation, date relevant to the concerned subsequent  
assessment year shall be substituted for the value of such gold or  
silver or alloy on the valuation date relevant to the first assessment  
year;
(b) where any jew ellery or part of jew ellery is sold or otherwise 5  
disposed of by the assess ee. or any jew ellery or part*of jew ellery  
is acquired by him, on or before the valuation date relevant to the  
concerned subsequent year, the value of the jew ellery detenruned  
for the first assessment year shall be reduced or increased, as the
case may be, and the value as so reduced or increased shall be the lO
value of the jew ellery for such subsequent assessment year.
P a r tH
Residuary
20. (J) The value of any asset, other than cash, being an asset which
is not covered by rules 3 to 19, for the purposes of this Act, shall be 15  
estimated to be the price .which, in the opinion of the Assessing Officer,  
it would fetch if sold in the open market on the valuation date.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained In sub-rule (1), where  
the valuation of any asset referred to in that sub-rule is referred by the
Assessing Ofl&cer to the Valuation Officer imder section 16A, the value 20
of such asset shall be estimated to be the price which, in the opinion  
of the Valuation OflBcer, it would fetch if sold in the open market on  
the valuation date.
(3) W here the value of any asset cannot be estimated under this  
rule because it is not saleable in the open market, the value shall be 25  
determined in accordance with such guidelines or princ^Ies as may  
be specified by the Board from time to tim e by general or special order.
21. For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the price  
or other consideration for which any property may be acquired by or  
transferred to any person under the terms of a deed of trust or through 3 0  
or vmder any restrictive covenant in any instrument of transfer shall  
be ignored for the purposes of determining under any provision of this  
Schedule, the price such property would fetch if sold in the open mar­
ket on the valuation date.
[APPENDIX 
(See rule 17)
35
t a b l e  o f  (- — 1)
Age nearer btrlb-day
pnm ium  for  
unit sum  
assured 
P
(-
I
P + d 
Value o f life  
interest o f Rupee i  
per aontim at  
6 1/2 %  rata of  
interest ‘
40
45
0
1
0.02906
0.01590
10.100
11.999
50


63
1
2
3
4
5 5
4
7
S
9
M> 10
11
12
13
14
15
t6
17
18
19
20 20
21
22.
13
24
25
25
26
27
28
29
30 30
31
32
33
34
35 aS-' i-
36
37
1
‘ 38
1
1.39
40 40
0.01295 
0.01162 
0.01095 
0.01065 
0.01058 
0.01063 
0.01076 
0.01(^5 
0.01117 
0.01142 
0.01169 
0.01197 
0.•01226 
0.01257 
0.01286 
0.01319 
0-01350 
0.01387 
0.01431 
0.01469 
0.01512 
0.0556 
0.01606 
0.01656 
0.01706 
0.01762 
0.01825 
0.01894 
0.01962 
0.02037 
0.02112 
0-02194 
0.02281 
0.02369 
0.02462 
0.02562 
0.02669 
0.02787 
0.02912
12.317 
12.765 
12.893 
12.951 
12.965 
12.955 
12.»30 
12.893 
12.850 
12.803 
12 751 
12.699 
12.644 
12.587 
12.534 
12.473 
12.417 
12.351 
12.273 
12.207 
12.132 
12 057 
11.972 
11.888 
11.806 
11.715 
11.614 
11.505 
11.399 
11.285 
11.173 
11.053 
10.927 
10.804 
10.675 
10.541 
10.400 
10.24 9 
10.093
9000


1
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60 
61 
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73
74
75
76
77 
71
79
80
0.03044 9.932
0.031il 9.771
0 0332S 9.607
0.03475 9.441 5
0.03637 9.267
0.03806 9.092
0.03987 8.911
0.04181 8.724
0.04387 8.533 10
0.04612 8.333
0; 04850 8.130
0.05100 7.926
0.05362 7.722
0.05637 7.518 15
0-05931 •  7.310
0.06244 7,099
0.06575 6.888
0.06925 6 676
0.07294 6.464 20
0.07681 6.255
0.08167 6 008
0.08589 5.806
0.09025 5.610
0.09475 5.419 25
0.09938 5.234
0.10415 5.054
0.10907 4.879,
0.11414 4.709
0-11933 4.543 30
0.12483 4.380
0.13054 4.2M
0.13652 4.062
0.14278 3.907
0.14936 3.753; 3 5
0.15627 3.602
0.16356 3.453
0.17125 3.305
0.17937 3 .1< iO
0 18796 3.016
0-19706 2.075


as
10
IS
20 20
25
21 
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30 
il
32
33
34
35 -
36
37
‘3* •
.39 
40 ^
30
0.01295 12.517
0.01162 12,765
0.01095 12.893
0.01065 12.951
0.01058 12.565
0.01063 12.955
0.01076 12.930
0.01095 42.893
0.01117 12.850
0.01142 12.803
0.01169 12 751
0.01197 12.699
0.01226 12.644
0.01257 12.587
0.01286 12.534
0.01319 12.473
0-01350 12.417
0.01387 12.351
0.01431 12.273
C.01469 12.207
0.01512 12.132
0.0556 12 057
0.01606 11.972
0.01656 11.888
0-01706 11.806
0.01762 11.715
0.01825 11.614
0.01894 11.505
0.01962 11.399
0.02037 11.285
0.02112 11.173
0.02194 11.053
0.02281 10.927
0.02369 10.804
0.02462 10.675
0.02562 10.541
0.02669 10.400
1.02787 10.24 9
0.02912 10.093


)
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60 
61 
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73
74
75
76
77
78
79
80
0.03044 9.M 2
0.03111 9.771
0,03325 9.607
0.03475 9.441
0.03637 9.267
0.03906 9.092
0.03987 8.911
0.04181 8.724
0.04387 8.533
0.04612 8.333
0.04850 8.130
0.05100 7.926
0.05362 7.722
0.05637 7.518
00S931 7.310
0.06244 7.099
0.06575 6.8W
0.06925 6.676
0.07294 6.464
0.07681 6.255
0.08167 6 008
0.08589 5.806
0.09025 5.610
0.09475 5.419
0.09938 5.234
0.10415 5.054
0.10907 4.879
0.11414 4.709
0.11933 4.343
O.I24t3 4.380
0.13054 4.229
0.1365^ 4.062
0.14278 3.907
0.14936 3.753
0.15627 3.602
0.16356 3.4S3
0.17125 3.303
0.17937 3.IC O
0.18796 3.916
0-19706 2.073
15
20
30
35
40


58
II of 1951.
CHAPfER IV  
AMBNDMEim TO THB GnT-TAX ACT, 1958
79. In section 3 of the Gift-tax Act, 1958 (hereafter in this Chapter  
referred to as the Gift-tax A ct), in sub-section (1)^ for the words “the  
5 Schedule”, the word and figure “Schedule I” shall ^  substituted.
Amend­
ment of
section Z.
10
IS
80. In section 5 of the Gift-tax Act, in sub-section (1), after clause Amend-  
(iiid ), the following clause shall be inserted^ namely:— mentof
. . . . . .  ^  scctionS.
(the)  being an individual who is a non-resident Indian, to any
relative, of property in the form of the bonds specified under sub-
claiise (iid) of clause (15) of section 10 cf the Income-tax Act:
Provided that the exemption conferred by this clause shall be  
available only if the gift of such bonds is made after a period of three  
years from the date of their purchase:
Provided further that where an individual, who is a non-resident  
Indian in any previous year in which the bonds are acquired, becomes  
a resident in India in any subsequent year, the provisions of this  
clause shall apply in respect of the gifts of property referred to in  
this clause in such subsequent year or any year thereafter.
Explanation .—^ F or the purposes of this clause, the expressions—
4 of 1988.
• o fiw a .
20 (a^ “relative’’ shall have the meaning assigned to it in
clause (4 1 ) of section 2 of the Income-tax Act;
(b) “non-resident Indian” shall have the meaning assign­
ed to it in clause (e) of section 1I5C of the Income-tax Act;’.
81. For section 6 of the Gift-tax Act, the following section shall be  
2 5  substituted, nam ely:—
“6. (I) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), the value of  
any property, other than cash, transferred by way of pift shall, for  
the purpose of this Act. be its value as on the date on which the gift  
was made and shall be determined in the manner laid down in  
3 0  Schedule II.
( 2 ) Where a person makes a gift which is not rev'ocable for a  
specified period, the value of the property sifted shall be the caoi-  
talised value of the income from such pro’ ^erty during the period  
for which the gift is not revocable.” .
R 2. In section 10 of the Gift-tax Act Fas s’iV.ctitiited bv section 164  
of the Direct Tax Laws (Amendment) Act. 19871, in sub-section (2 ), 
in clause (5 ). for the brackets and “ (5V*. the brackets and fi<njre
shall be substituted and shall be deemed to have been substituted  
with effect from the 1st day of April, 1988.
83. T n section 15 of the Gift-tax Act fas substituted by section 170  
of the .Direct Tax Laws (Amendment) Act 1987].—
(a) in sub-section (1 ). in clause (a^. after the proviso, the fol­
lowing proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
“Provided further that an intimation for any tax or interest  
45 due under this clause shall not be sent after the ex*piry of two
Substitu- 
tion of 
new 
section 
for sec­
tion 6.
Value of 
gifts, 
how de­
termined.
Amend­
ment of 
section 
10.
Amend­
ment of 
section 
15.


s e
years from the end of the assessment year in which the gifts 
w ere first assessable.’’;
(b) after sub-section (I), the following sub-section shall be 
inserted, namely: —
“ (lA ) ( 0) W here in the case of any person, the taxable gift, 5 
as a result of the adjustm ents made under the proviso to clause 
(a) of sub-section (I), exceeds the taxable gift declared in th e
retu rn  by any amoimt, the Assessing Officer shall,—
(i) fu rther increase the am ount of tax payable im der
sub-section (I) by an additional gift-tax calculated at the 12
rate of tw enty per cent, of the tax payable on such excess 
amount and specify the additional gift-tax in the intimation
to be sent under sub>clause (i) of clause ( 0) of sub occt ion
(I);
(ii) w here any refund is due under sul)-section (I), re- 15 
duce the amount of such refund by an amount equivalent to 
the additional gift-tax calculated under sub-clause ( i) .
(b) W here as a result of an order under section 22 or section 
23 or section 24 or section 26 or section 28 or section 34. the 
amount on which additional gift-tax is payable under clause 20  
(a) has been increased or reduced, as the case may be, the addi­
tional gift-tax shall be increased or reduced accordingly, and,—
(t) in a case w here the additional gift-tax is increased," 
the Assessing Officer shall serve oa the assessee a notic* of 
dem and under section 31; 25
(it) in a case w here the additional gift-tax is reduced, the 
excess am ount paid, if any, shall be refunded.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, “tax 
p>ayable on such excess am ount” means the difference between 
the tax on the taxable gift and the tax th at would have been 30 
chargeable had such taxable gift been reduced by the amount of 
adjustm ents.”;
(c) in sub-section (6 ), in the opening portion, after the words 
“under this A c t”, the words and figures “whe^'e under the provisions 
of section 6 read w ith Schedule II, the fair m arket value of any 35 
property transferred by way of gift is to be taken into account in 
such assessment,” shall be inserted.
Amend- g 4 section 16 of the Gift-tax Act, in sub-section (I) [as substi-
tuted by clause (a) of section 171 of the Direct Tax Laws (Amendment)
I S Act, 1987],— ^  4 of 1968.
(a) for the words for reasons to be reconJed by him in writing, 
is of the opinion”, the words *Tias reasons to believe” shall be sub­
stituted; I


“Provided further that the Assessing Officer shall, before
issuing any notice under this sub-section, record his reasons for  
5 doing s o .”.
85. In section 16B of the Gift-tax Act [as inserted by section 173 of Amend-
the Direct Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 1987],— mentof
section
(a) in sub-section (I),— 16B.
(i) after the words “taxable gifts as detennined’’, the words,
jQ brackets and figures “under sub-section (I) of section 15 or”
shall be inserted;
(ii) for Explanation  1, the following Explanation  shall be  
substituted, namely: —
‘Explanation  1.—In this sub-section, “tax payable on the
1 5  taxable gifts ^  determined under sub-section (I) of section
15” shall not include the additional gift-tax, if any, payable  
imder section 15.’;
(iii) after Explanation  2, the following Explanation  shall be  
inserted, namely: —
20 ‘Explanation  3.—^ I n  this sub-section, “tax payable on
the taxable gifts as determined under sub-section (I> of sec-  
ti(m 15 or on regular assessment” shall, for the purposes of  
computing the interest payable under section 14B. be deem­
ed to be tax payable on the taxable gifts as declared in the
2 5  return.’;
(b)  in sub-section (3),—
(i) after the words, brackets and figures “under sub-section  
(I) of section 16 issued”, the words, brackets and figures “after  
the determination of taxable gifts under sub-section (I)  of sec-  
tion 15 or” shall be inserted;30
(ii) after the words “taxable gifts as determined”, the words,  
brackets and figures “under sub-section (1) of section 15 or”  
shall be inserted;
(iii) the Explanation  shall be omitted.
86. In section 17 of the Gift-tax Act [as it stood immediately before Amend-  
its substitution by section 174 of the Direct Tax Laws (Amendment)
Act, l£f87],— 1 7.
(c) in sub-section (1),—
(i) clause (o) shall be omitted;
(ti) clause (?) shall be omitted;
40
(fii) for clause (ii), the following clause shall be substituted.
67
(b) after th e proviso, the follow ing proviso shall be inserted,
nam ely:—
namely: —
“ (ii) in the cases referred to in clause (b), in addition to  
the amount of gift-tax payable by him, a sum which shall


not be less than one thousand rupees but which m ay extend  
to twenty-five thousand rupees for each such ftiilure;”;
(it)) for the proviso, the following proviso shall be substitu­
ted, namely: —
“Provided that in the cases referred to in clause (b), no 5  
penalty shall be imposable if the person proves that there  
was a reasonable cause for the failure referred to in that  
clau se.”;
(v) the following Explanation  shall be inserted at the end,  
nam ely:— 1 0
"Explanation .—^Where any adjustment is made in the  
taxable gifts declared in the return under the proviso to dauM
(a) of sub-section (I) of section 15 and additional gift-tax  
charged under that section, the provisions of this sub-section  
shall not apply in relation to the adjustments so made.”;  15
(b) for sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be sub­
stituted, namely; —
“ (3) No order imposing a penalty imder sub-section (2)  
shall be made,—
(i) by the Income-tax OfBcer, where the penalty ex- 20  
ceeds ten thousand rupees;
(ii) by the Assistant Commissioner, where the penalty  
exceeds twenty thousand rupees,
except with the prior approval of the Deputy Commissioner.”;
(c) after sub-section (4), the following sub-sections shall be in- 25  
serted, namely: —
“ (5) No order imposing a penalty under this section shall  
be passed—
(i) in a case where the assessment to which the pro­
ceedings for imposition of penalty relate is the subject-mat- 3 0  
ter of an appeal to the Deputy Commissioner (Appeals) or  
Commissioner (Appeals) vinder section 22 or an appeal to  
the Appellate Tribunal imder sub-section (2) of section 23,  
after the expiry of the financial year in which the proceed­
ings, in the course of which action for the imposition of 3 5  
penalty has been initiated, are completed, or six months  
from the end of the month in which the order of the Dejmty  
Commissioner (Appeals) or the Commissioner (Appeals) or,  
as the case may be, the Appellate Tribunal is received by  
the Chief Commissioner or Commissioner, whichever is ^  
later;
(it) in a case where the relevant assessment ia the sub«  
ject-matter of revision under sub-section (2) of section 24,  
after the expiry of six months from the end of the month  
in which such order of revision is passed;
3«


99
10
13
ac
(in)  in any other case, after the expiry of the finandal  
year in which the proceedings, in the course of which action  
for the imposition of penalty has been initiated, are com­
pleted, or six months from the end of the month in which  
action for imposition of penalty is initiated, whichever period  
expires later.
Explanation — ^ In  computing the period of liiritation for the  
purposes of this section,—
(i) the time taken in giving an opportunity to the asses-  
see to be reheard under ih e proviso to section 38; and
(ii) any period during which a proceeding imder this  
section for the levy of penalty is stayed by an order or in­
junction of any court
shall be excluded.
(6) The provisions of this section as they stood immediately  
before their amendment by the Direct Tax Laws (Amendment)  
Act, 1988 shall apply to and in relation to any assessment for  
the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1988,  
or any earlier assessment year and references in this section to  
the other provisions of this Act shall be construed as references  
to those provisions as for the time being in force and applicable  
to the rdevant assessment year.”.
87. For section 17A of the Gift-tax Act [as it stood immediately be­
fore its substitution by section 174 of the Direct Tax Laws (Amendment)  
25 Act, 19®7], the following section shall be substituted, namely:—
‘17A. (I) If a person,—
(a) being legally bound to state the truth of any matter  
touching the subject of his assessment, refuses to answer any  
question put to him by a gift-tax authority in the exercise of  
his powers under this Act; or
,(b) refuses to sign any statement made by him in the  
course of any proceedings under this Act, which a gift-tax  
authority may legally require him to sign; or
(c) to whom a summons is issued under sub-section (1) of  
section 36, either to attend to give evidence or produce books of  
account or other documents at a certain place and time, omits  
to attend or produce the books of account or docimients at the  
place and time,
30
35
40
he shall pay, by way of penalty, a sum which shall not be less than  
five hundred rupees but which may extend to ten thousand rupees  
for each such default or failure;
Provided that no penalty shall be imposable under clause (c)  
if the person proves that there was reasonable cause for the said  
lidlure.
Substittu
new 
■eeticn 
for sec­
tion 17A.
Penalty
fot
failure
to answer
guestieni;
sign
■tate.
iBei^
fijm if t i
inform^
.  tlO T l, 
allow 
inspec­
tion, «t%


60
Amend-
mentof
Amend­
ment of 
Mctitm 
2S.
Amend*
mentof
wetion
StA.
(2) If a person fails to furnish in due tim e an y  statem ent or in­
form ation which such person is bound to furnish to the Assessing 
Q fiker under section 37, he shall pay, by way of penalty, a sum 
which shall not be less thzin one hundred rupees but which may 
extend to two hundred rupees for every day during which the 5 
failure continues:
Provided th at no penalty shall be imposable under this sub­
section if the person proves that there was reasonable cause for the 
said failure.
(3) Any p « ialty  imposable under sub-gection (J) or sub- 10 
section ( 2 ) shall be imposed,—
(a) in a case where the contravention, failure or default in 
respect of which such penalty is imposable occurs in the course 
of any proceeding before a ^ ft-ta x  authority not lower in rank 
than a Deputy Director or a Deputy Commissioner, by such gift- 15 
tax  authority;
(b) in any other c a ^ , by the Deputy Director or th e D eputy 
Commissioner.
(4) No order im der this section shall be passed by any gift-tax 
authority referred to in sub-section (3) unless the person on whom 20 
penalty is proposed to be imposed has been heard or has been given
a reasonable opportunity of being heard in the m atter by such 
stuthority.
Explanation .—In this section, “gift-tax authority” includes a 
Director G m eral, Director, Deputy Director, Assistant D irector or 2 
Valuation Officer while exercising the powers vested in a court under 
the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, when trying a suit in respect of 
the m atters specified in sub-section (1) of section 36.’.
3of 1 9 0 8
4ofl»88.
88 . In section 22 of tlie Gift-tax Act [as amended by section 176 of
the Direct Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 1987],— 30 4 of igM'
(i) in sub-section (I), in clause (d)^ the words, figures and 
letters “as it stood immediately before the 1st day of April, 1989 or 
im der section. 17 as amended by the Direct Tax Laws (Amendment)
Act, 1987” occurring at the end shall be omitted;
(ii) in sub-section (lA),  for clause (c), the following clause shall 
be substituted, namely: —
"(c) objecting to any penalty imposed under sub-section (1 )'. 
of section 17 w ith the previous approval of the Deputy Com­
missioner as specified in sub-section (3) of that section;’'.
89. In section 25 of tlie Gift-tax Act, in sub-section (1), after the ^  
word and figures “section 24”, the words, figures and letter “or an <xder 
passed by the D irector General or Director under section 17A’ ’  shall be 
inserted.
M. In section 33A of the G ift-tax Act,—
(a) in sub-section ( 1), in  the proviso (as inserted by dauae (i) 45  
of section 180 of the Direct Tax Laws  (Amendment) Act, 1967], in 4 of INK


e l a ^  (b), for the words “total income”, the words “taxable gifts”  
shall be substituted;
(b) in sub-section (4B),  [as inserted by section 180 of the Direct  
Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 1987],—
5 . (i) in clause (a), for the words “Where, in piursuance trf
any order passed under this Act, the refimd of any amount be­
comes due to the assessee”, the words “Where refund of any  
aimount becomes due to the assessee under this Act,” shall be  
substituted;
10 (ii) in  clause (c), after the words “an order under”, th«
words, brackets and figures “sub-section (3) of section 15 or^  
shall be inserted.
51. In section 34 of the Gift-tax Act [as amended by section 186 of  
the D ir ^ T a x  Laws (Amendment) Act^ 1987], in sub-section (1), in clatise
15 (c) the words, figures and letter “cr section 22A” shall be omitted.
#2. After section 35D of the Gift-tax Act, the following section shall  
be inserted, nam ely:—
01
20
23
“S5E. Entries in the records or other documents in the custody of  
a gift-tax authority shaU be admitted in evidence in any proceedings  
for the prosecution of any person for an offence under this Act, and  
all such entries may be proved either by the production of the re­
c o r d  fft  other documents in  the custody of the gift-tax authority  
conttiining such entries: or by the production of a copy t»f the entries  
certified by the gift-tax authority having custody of the records or  
other documents under its signature and stating that it is a true copy  
of the original entries and that such original entries are contained  
in the records or other documents in its custody.”.
35
J3. In section 45 of the Gift-tax Act, for Explanations  1 and 2 [as  
they stood immediately before their substitution by section 184 of the  
jQ Direct Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 1987], the following Explanation  
shall be substituted, namely: —
‘Explanation  1.—For the purposes of clause (b), the twrn “amal­
gamation” shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause (IB ) of  
section 2 of the Income-tax Act.’.
t4. In the Gift-tax Act, the existing Schedule shall be renoimbered  
as Schedxile I and after Schedule I as so renumbered, the following Sche­
dule shall be inserted, namely: —
“SCHEDULE n  
[See section 6(J)]
^  Rules for determ ining the value oj property gifted
The value of any property, other than cash, transferred by way at  
gift riiall, for the purposes of this Act, be determined in accordance with  
the provisions of Schedule III to the Wealth-tax Act, which shall apply  
subject to the following modifications, namely: —
In the said Schedule,—
^  (0) refereneei by whatever form of words t* the Wealth-tax
Act shall be construed as rsfsrense* to this Act;
Amend­
ment of 
section 
?4.
Insertion 
of neW" 
section 
35E.
Proof of 
entries in 
recorda 
or docu- 
menti.
Amend­
ment of 
section 
45.
InitHioa 
of new 
Schedule
n. 5
Value of 
gifted 
property, 
how to 
be deter, 
mined.
a m


A sm A -
(b) In rule 5, the reference to the year elidhxg on th e viOmrtion 
date shall be construed as a reference to the previous y e a r as defined 
^  this Act;
(e) save as provided in clause (h ), references to the valuation date 
shaH be coostrued as r^eren ces to th e  date on Khe gift was 5
made;
(d) reference to section 7 of the W ealth-taz A ct ehall catt> 
strued as references to section 6 of this Act;
(e) references to section 16A of the W ealtit-tax Act shall be 
construed as references to sub-section (6 ) of section 15 ol this A c t.” , jq
CHAPTER V
Am w dm bnt to t m  Direct T ax L aws (A M xm ann;) Acat, UB7
95. In the Direct Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 19& 7,—
(a) in section 3,—
1W8. (j) clauses (p) and (s) shall be omitted; U
(2) in clause ( r ) , after the yrords “shall ^  .sttbatUaited", 
the words, figures and letters ‘‘and shall J>e -deemed to Juore 
been substituted w ith effect irom  the 1st day ot  ApciL U 88” 
shall be inserted;
in section 6, clauses (a), {k)  and (1) A A  1m unHMil 20
(c) sections 7 and 3 shall be onxitted;
(d) in section 9, clause (a) shidl be omitted;
(e) in section 10 , lo r the figures, letters and word 36B, SSC,
35CC, 35CCA and 35CCB”, the figures, letters and w ord “35B, 35C 
and 35CC" shall be substituted; ^
if)  in section 13, clause <ii) shall be omitted;
(0 ) sections 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21. 24, 26 and 2» diaD U  om ittea;
(h ) in section 25, clauses (a), (b),  (d) and aInU te « n itt e d ;
(1) in section 01 ,—
(J) clause (a) shall be omitted,; ^
(2 ) in clause (c), the bradcets, 'flgare -and le tter ^fSB) ,* 
shall be omitted;
(;) sections 62, 63. 66 , 67, 68 , 69, 71; 72; 100; 101 and 122 shall be 
omitted;
(k) in section 64,— ^
(1) clause (a) shall be omitted;
(2 ) in clause (b). the words, brackets and figures “sub­
sections ( 2 ) and (3), and” shall be omitted;
(I) in section S i, clause (b)  «baitt b t


(n») section 106 ghall t e  omittodi  
(n) in section, 124.—
(1) clauses (3), (6 ),(S ), (9). {10)  (11). (13),
_  ( ^ )  shall be omitted;
5 (2) in danse (5), sub-claxise (i) shall be omitted;
(^> in  clause (1 2 ), for the words "Income-tax QfiBcer”, the  
words “Assessing Officer” shali be substituted;
(4} in claose (24), tor  the words “Income-tax Officer", tha
words “Assessing Officer” shall be substituted;
10 (• )  in  Metkm 126^ dauseg (5 ), (S), (11), (13),  (23) and (2S)
shall omitted;
(p) sections 142, 143, 144, 147, 174, 175 and 177 shaU be omitted;
(q>  ia  ■Bctka 149, in clause (a), after the words “shall be iab> 
stituted”, the words, figures and letters “and shall be deemed to  
13 have been substituted with effect from the 1st day of April, 1988”  
sbr.ll be inserted;
(r) In section 160, clauses (1) and (2) shall be omitted;
(s) in section 179, in clause (a), after the words “shall be sub­
stituted”, the words, figures and letters “ and shall be deemed to  
have been substituted with effect from the 1st day of April, 1988”  
shaU be inserted;
(t) in secticm 184, clauses (c) and (d) shall be omitted;
(tt) in section 186, clause (2 ) shall be omitted.
20


The Direct Tax Laws (Am endm ent) Bill, 1987 introduced and passed 
by Parliament in the Winter Session of 1987, was preceded by a Discus­
sion Paper on direct tax laws presented to Parliament in August, 1986-  
The proposals iiicorporated in the BUI were framed in the light of further  
discussions and consultations among experts and the public after the 
presentation of the Discussion Paper. The said Bill was passed by both  
the Houses and received the assent of the Presidrat on 24th Januaijti  
1988 and was enacted as Act 4 of 1988.
2. After the enactm ent of the Direct Tax Laws
1987, a large number of representations wer6 received from experts,  
^ Q c e m e d  associations. Chambers of Commerce and other tax payers re­
garding some provisions in the Act. The following, in-ter alio, were the  
main points made in these representations, namely: —
(i) the proposed system  of assessment of partnership firms is  
harsh in respect of lower bracket of income, as such firms, subject  
to certain deductions, will henceforth be taxed at the maxim um  
marginal rate. Further, the definition of whole-time working partner  
marginal rate. Further, the definition of whole-time working partn*  
as introduced by the Direct Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 1907 and  
certain other provisions w ill result in hardship.
(ii) the levy of additional tax at a flat rate of thirty per cent,  
would be unfair in cases of gemiine doubts regarding taxability of  
certain receipts and that the provision relating to levy of additional  
tax should be made appealable;
(iii) the new  provisions relating to charitable trusts, voluntary  
a g n d e s  and institution carrying on sdentiflc rMearch, n u y  r—ult  
in hardship;
(iv) the new Act has introduced unfettered discretion regarding  
reopening of assessments.
3. In response to the representations received, the then Finance  
Minister gave an assurance in the Lok Sabha, while presenting the  
Budget for the financial year 1988-89 (para 94 of Part B of the Budget  
Speech), that a further Amendment Bill w ill be introduced which would  
take care of genuine grievances pointed out in the .representations  
received. He mentioned four areas where amendments relating to the  
provisions introduced by the Direct Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 1987  
could be considered. These were; —
(i) reopening of assessments;
(ii) assessment of religious and charitable institutions and  
trusts as also scientific research associations;
(iii) levy of additional tax; and
(iv) assessment of the income of the firms and partners.
ST A T fiM E N T  O F O B JE C TS A ND  REASONS'
94


4. Subsequentlx, during the cou n e of diccussiQn on th« Finance Bill,  
in the Lok Sabha on 27th April, 1988 and the Rajya Sabha on 5th May,
1988, the Finance Minister made statements announcing Government'*  
decision to give certain tax concessions and incentives. Iliese, inter alia,  
relate to reintroduction of investment allowance as an option to the  
existing Investment Deposit Scheme, complete exemption in respect of  
export profits by taking these out of the purview of section 115J,  
exclusion of companies engaged in generation or distribution of electric  
power from the purview of section 115J, introduction of certain measures  
for encouragement of tourism for augmenting foreign exchange  
resources. > - j
5. After the Budget Session of 1988, certain tax concessions have also  
been agreed to for the promotion of the off-shore fund launched by the  
State Bank of India and for the non-repatriable NRl Bonds. Tax con­
cessions are also to be given in respect of the technical know-how pro­
vided to certain projects connected with the security of India.
6. Fiarther, amendments in some of the provisions were necessary to  
set right certain anomalies and also make consequential changes in some  
of the provisions of the various direct tax laws as amended by the Direct  
Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 1987. .  Amendments are also r eq u ire to  
incorporate the rules for valuation of assets in the Wealth-tax Act so as  
to provide certainty in the matter of assessment and reducing litigation  
on this account.
7. It is, therefore, proposed to amend the Income-tax Act, 1961, the  
Wealth-tax Act, 1957, the Gift-tax Act, 1958, and the Direct Tax Laws  
(Amendment). Act, 1987, to achieve mainly the following objects,  
nam ely;—
(i) to withdraw the amendments made in the Income-tax Act  
for introducing a new scheme of assessment of firms and partners  
and to restore the old provisions, in this regard;
(ii) to withdraw the amendments made in the Income-tax Act  
for introducing a new scheme of assessment of charitable or religious  
trusts, institutions or funds and to restore the old provisions in this  
regard;
(iii) to restore the old provisions of sections 35, 35CCA' and  
35CCB relating to deductions on account of scientific research, rural  
development programmes and progi’ ammes of conservation of  
natural resources;
(iv) to withdraw the provisions relating to levy of additional  
income-tax, additional wealth-tax and additional gift-tax and to with­
draw the provisions relating to advance ruling in the said Act and to  
restore the old penal provisions in this regard in the said Acts.
8. The Notes on claus«s «xplain in detail the provisions of th« Bill.
9. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
N*w D « ;  •  »
M k D aC M iber. I M t


CUatse 2 seeks to amend section 2 of the Income-tax A c t
Sub-clause (a) seeks to amend clause (24) of section 2 which relates  
to tbe definition of the term “income’'—
(i) by substituting references to clause (21), clause (23) and  
sub-clauses (iv) and (v) of clause (23C) lor t’ ne existing reference  
to section ^ F ;
(ii) by extending the scope of the term “income” to include—
(a) any special allowance or benefit specifically granted to  
the assessee to m eet his expenses wholly necessarily and exclu­
sively for the performance of his duties; and
(b) any allowance granted to the assessee either to m eet his  
personal expenres at the place where he performs his duties or  
compensate him for the increased cost of living. This amend'  
m ent shall be effective and shall be deemed to have been effec­
tive from 1st April, 1962 and will, accordingly, apply in relation  
to the assessment year 1962-63 and subsequent years.
Sub-clause (b) se?ks to amend clause (25) defining Income-tax Officer  
so as to omit the reference to sub-section (1) of section 117.
Sub-clause (c) seeks to amend clause (37A) [as amended by clause
(o) of section 3 of the Direct Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 1987] relat­
ing to the definition of “rate or rates in force”-
■Under the proposed amendments, references to,—
(a) section 167A in sub-clause (i) of the said clause are being  
omitted consequent upon the omission of that section relating to  
charge of tax at the maximum marginal rate in the case of firms;
(b) section 194E in suVcIause (ii) of the said clause is being  
omitted with effect from 1-4-1988, consequent upon the retrospective  
omission of that section relating to deduction of tax at source from  
interest and salary, etc., paid by a firm to itg p artn m .
Clause 3 seeto to amend section 3 of the Income-tax Act rdating to  
previous ^eer, as substituted fay section 4 of the Direct Tax Laws (Am­
endment) Act, 1987. Under the pro\nsions of sub-section (2) and the  
proviso theremtdar, it has been provided that In tbe case o f an M seuee,  
who has been having a previous year or years different from the financial  
jTM T, the previous year r*«levant to the assessment year commencing on  
tke 1st day of Apnrfl. 19M be Iof a period loader th u  tw elve
Notes on Clauses


€f
Under the proposed amendment, second and third provisos are bd&g 
inserted in sub-section (2) to provide that where a new business or pro­
fession is set up, or a source of income newly comes into existence on or  
after the 1st day of April, 1987, but before the 1st day of April, 1988 and  
where the accounts in such a case 'lave not been made up to the 31st day  
of March, 1983, the “previous year” in relation to the assessment year  
1989-90 shall be reckoned from the date of setting up of the business or  
profession or, as the case may be. the date on which the source of income  
new ly comes into existence to the 31st day of March, 19^9.
Where the assessee has a'^opted one or more periods previous vear  
in relation to the assessment year 1988-89 for any source or sources of  
his income in addition to new business, profession or source of income  
referred to in the second proviso, the previous year in relation to the  
assessment year 1989-90 shall be reckoned separately in the manner  
specified in that sub-section in respect of each such sources of  
income and the longer or the longest of the periods so reckoned shall be  
the previous year for the said assessment year.
Clause  4 seeks to amend section 10 of the Income-tax Act.
Sub-clause (a) seeks to insert a new clause (6c). The new clause  
provides that income by way of fees for technical services receix'e'^ by  
such foreign company, as may be notified by the Central Government,  
shall not form part of the total income of such company, where such  
income is received in pursuance of an a^eem ent entered into with the  
Central Government to provide services in or outside India in projects  
connected with security of India-
Sub-clause (b) seeks to insert a new sub-clause (iid) in clause (15).  
"nie new sub-claiT*e provides that interest received by a non-resident  
Indian ftrtm such b^nds as are notified by the Central Government or by  
any individual owning the bonds by virtue of being a nominee or sur­
vivor of such non-resident Indian or by an individual to whom the  
bonds have been gifted by the non-resident Indian, will not be includ­
ed in  computing the total incwne of such individual.
The first proviso to the sub-clause seeks to pro\”de that the bonf^s  
should have been purch'^sed by a non-resident Ind’an in foreign exchange  
and the interest and principal received in respect of such bonds whether  
on their maturity or otherwise, is not allowable to be taken out of India.
The second proviso to the sub-clause seeks to provide that where the  
Individual who is a non-resident Indian in the previous rear in which  
the bonds are acquired, becomes a resident in India in any subseouent  
year the interest received from such bonds wiH continue to be exempt  
in the subsequent vears as w e ll
The third proviso to the sub-clause seeks to provi»^e that in a case  
where the bonds are encashed in a previous vear p^or to their m aturity  
by an individual who is so entitled, the exemption in relation to the inte­
rest income shall not be available to such individ’ial in the assessment  
year relevant to such previous year in wh’ch the bonds have been en­
ca se d - .
The Explanation  to the sub-clause se^ks to define the expression “non-  
rMidant rndian**,


« •
Sub-clause (c) seeks to substitute clause (21) [w  it stood im m edlattly  
before its omission by clause(k) of section 6 of the Direct Tax Laws (Am-
•ndm ent) Act, 1987] by a new clause.
The substituted clause exem pts the income of scientific research asso­
ciation for the tim e being approved under clause (ii) of sub-setion (1)  
of section 35. However, such exe m ption is subject to the satisfaction of  
the following conditions—
(i) it has to apply its income or accumulate it for application,  
w holly and exclusively to the objects for which it is established-'  
Such accumulation w ill be governed by the provisions of sub.section
(2) and sub-section (3) of section 11 with appropriate modifications;
(ii) it has not invested or deposited its funds (other than volun-  
tary contributions received and maintained in the form of jewellery,  
furniture or any other article as notified by the Board) during the  
previous -year otherwise than in any one or more of the forms or  
modes specified in sub-sertion (5) of section 11. However, such  
condition w ill not be applicable in relation to any income of such  
association being profits and gains o f business. This amendment shall  
take effect from 1st day of April, 1990 and w ill be relevant for assess­
m ent year 1990-91 and subsequent years.
Sub-clause (d) seeks to substitute clause (23) [as it stood immediately  
before its omission by clause (k) by section 6 of the Direct Tax Law*  
(Amendment) Act. 1987], by a new clause.
The substituted clause empowers the Central Government to notify  
an association or institution established in India having regard to the  
fact that the association or institution has as its object the control, super-  
Tision, regulation or encouragement in India of games of cricket, hock ey,'  
football, tennis or such other games or sports, as the Central Government  
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf. The  
notification, however, shall at any one tim e have effect for not more than  
three assessment years fincluding an assessment year  of y e a n  com­
mencing before the date of issue of such notification).
However, such exemption w ill be subject to the satisfaction of the  
following conditions,—
(i) the association or institirtion shall make an application in 'Ae
prescribed form and manner to the prescribed authority for the
purpose o f grant of such exemption, or continuance thereof;
(ii) the association or institution shall furnish such docxm^ents  
(including audited annual accounts) or information which the Cen­
tral Government m ay consider necessary in order to satisfy the  
genuiness of activities of the association or institution;
(iii) the nssociation or institution shall apply Its income or  
accumulate it for application w holly and exclusively to the objects  
♦or ^hich it is est?bl1shed. The provisions of sub-sections (2) and
(3) of section 11 with certain modifications M rill apply to the accu­
mulation of the income;


(iv) the institution or association shall not deposit or invest its  
funds (other than voluntary contributions received and maint^inoH  
in the form of jewellery, furniture or any other article as notified by  
the Board) during the previous year otherwise than in any one or  
more of the forms or modes specified in sub-section (5) of section 11.  
Further as a saving clause it is provided that any funds invested or  
deposited before 1st day of April, 1989 in any form or mode other  
than that specified in section 11(5), shall have to be invested or de­
posited in the form or mode specified in section 11 (5) on or before  
the 30th day of March, 1990.
(v) the institution or association shall not contribute any part  
of its income in any manner to its members except as grants to an  
fsssociation or institution affiliated to it.
This amendment will take effect from 1st day of April, 1990 and  
w ill be relevant for assessment year 1990-91 and subsequent years.
Sub-clause (e) seeks to substitute sub-clauses (iv) and (v) of clause  
(23C)
The substituted sub-clauses (iv) and (v) empower the Central  
Clovefmment to notify—
(a) any fund or institution established for charitable purposes,  
having regard to its objects and importance throughout India or  
throughout any one or more States; and
(b) any trust or institution, which is either wholly for public  
religious purposes or wholly for public religious and charitable pur­
poses, having regard to the fact that it is administered and super­
vised in a manner to ensure that its income is properly applied for  
its objects, * ■
for the purpose of grant of exemption from income-tax of the income of  
such fund, trust or institutit®.
However, for getting the exemption from income-tax, the fund, trust  
ox institution will be subjected to the requirement of—
(a) making an application in the prescribed fofm  and manner  
to the prescribed authority for the purpose of grant of such exemp­
tion, or continuance thereof ;
(b) furnishing such documents (including audited annual ac­
counts) or information which the Coitral Government may consider  
necessary in order to satisfy itself about the genuineness of the acti-  
trities of the fund or trust or institution;
(c) applying its income, or accumulating it for application,  
wholly and exclusively to the objects for which it is established;
(d) not investing or depositing its fimds (other than voluntary  
contributions received and maintained in the form of jewellery, ftir-  
niture or any other article as the Board may, by notification in t i i e  
Official Gazette, specify) for any period during the pre^oas y e »  
otherwise than in any form or mode specified in sub-sectien (5) of
section 11;
6»
2000 L S—10


(e) disinvesting by the 30th day of March, 1990, all the invest­
m ents made before the 1st day of April, 1989 otherw ise than in any 
one or more of the forms or modes specified in sub-section ( 5) of 
section 11. ;
However, the grant of exem ption from income-tax will not tpp ly  
to any income in the natxire of profits and gains of business unless the 
business is incidental to the attainm ent of its objectives and separate 
books of account are m aintained by it in resp-ect of such business.
Further, the tax exem ption granted to the fund or trust or institution 
notified in this behalf will relate to such assessment year or years, net 
exceeding three assessment lyears at any one time, as may be specified 
in the notification, including an assessment year or years which com- 
m ^iced before the date of issue of the notification.
Sub-clause (f) of this claiise seeks to amend clause (23D).
The provisions of clause (23D) provide for exemption of income of a 
M utual Pimd set up by a pubbc sector bank or a public financial institu­
tion. as may be specified by the C entral G ovem m oit, by notification in 
the Official G azette and subject to certain conditions including the condi­
tion th a t at least 90 per c e n t of the annual income of the said fund thall 
be distributed to th e unit-holders.
Sub-clause (f) seeks to w ithdraw  the ccmdition relating to distribu­
tion of a t least 90 per cent, of th e annual income of the M utual Fund 
am ongst the imit-holders w ith effect from 1st day of April, 1988.
Clause 5 seeks to amend section 11 of the Income-tax Act providing 
exduslM i of the income from property held for charitable or religious 
purposes from  the total income of the previous year of the person in 
receipt of the income.
S u b .d su se (a) (i) of this dau<;e seeks to insert a new  clause '(d) in 
sub-section ( 1) of section 11 so as to exclude the corpus donations from 
the total income of the tru st under section 11. This am endm ent U con. 
sequent to the am endm ent m ade by the D irect Tax Laws (Amendment) 
Act, 1987 in the definiticm of ‘income’  whereby corpus donations are in­
cluded w ithin the definition of ‘income’  of a wholly or partly charitabk 
or religious trust. Since stipulation regarding expenditure to the extent 
of 75 per cent, of the income «nd accumulation to the extent of 25 per 
?ent. thereof during the year as provided in clauses (a) and (b) of sub- 
section ( 1) of section 11 cannot be m ade applicable to corpus donations 
the proposed am endm ent in section 11 has become necessary to exclude 
the corpus donations from  the total income of the tru st under section 11.
As a result of this am endm ent the corpus donation will be included 
in the total income of the tru st only if it loses the exem ption of sec­
tion 11 .
Sub-clatise (a) (ii) of this clause seeks to amend clause (2> of the 
Explanation  to sub-sectirai (1) of section 11 by om itting the references 
to sub.section <(2) of lection 139 and power of the Income-tax Officer to 
extend the for filing of the retu rn  provided in th a t section- llils  
am endm ent is consequential to the am endm ent made by the Direct Tax 
(Amendznent) Act, 1W7 in section 189 of th e Income-tax A ct
70


Sub-clause (b) of this clause seeks to amend sub-section (5) of sec­
tion 11 so as to include public sector companies in the list of institutions  
where the investment or deposit can be made under that sub-section.  
It also proposes to enable the Central Government to prescribe any other  
form or mode of investment or deposit for the pxupose of this sub-section.
Clause 6 seeks to amend section 32A of the Income-tax Act relating  
to investment allowance.
Clatise  6 seeks to amend section 32A of the Income-tax Act relating to  
that in respect of a ship or an aircraft acquired or a machinery or plant  
installed after 31st March, 1988, deduction in respect of investment  
allov/ance shall be allowed at, the rate of 20 per cent, of the cost thereof.  
Sub-clause (a) (ii) seeks to insert an Explanation to provide that for the  
purposes of investment allowance, the actual cost shall mean the actual  
cost of ship, aircraft, machinery or plant to the assessee as reduced by  
any amount which has been m et out of the amount released from the  
D ^ elopm ent Bank in accordance with sub-section (6) of section 32AB.
Sub-clause (b) seeks to amend sub-section (2) to provide that daases"
(a) and (b) thereof shall not apply in relati(»i to a new  ship or new  
aircraft acquired or new machinery or new plant installed after 31st  
March. 1987, but before 1st April. 1988.
Sub-clause (c) seeks to amend sub-section (2C) relating to invest­
ment allowance in respect of new  machinery or plant used to assist in  
control of pollution or protection of «ivircam ent to provide that invest­
ment allowance at the rate of 35 per cent, shall be allowed only in respect  
of such machinery or plant installed before the 1st April, 1987.
Sub-clauses (d) and (e) seek to carry out amendments of a conse­
quential nature.
Sub-clause (f) seeks to substitute existing sub-section (8B) by new  
Fub-sectlons (8B) and (8C).
The new sub-section (8B) provides that notwithstanding anything  
contained in sub-section (8) or any notification issued thereunder the  
provisions of Investment allowance wiU apply tn respect of a ship or  
aircraft acquired or machinery or plant installed after 31st Mardi, 1988,  
but before such date as the Central Government may, by notification in  
the Official Gazette, specify.
The n»w sub-section ( 8C) provides that where a deduction has been 
allowed in any assessment year in respect of Investment allowance, no 
deduction shall be allowed to the assessee under section 32AB in respect 
of investment deposit account in the said assessment year and in the four 
immediately succeeding assessment years.
Clause  7 seeks to amend section 32AB of the Income-tax Act relating  
to investment deposit account by substituting sub-section (10) by a new  
sub-section.
The new sub-section (10) provides that where a deduction has been  
allowed to the assessfee in re^>ect of investment deposit account ^  
ittsessmimt y :ar. no deduction shall be allowed to the assessee in respect
71


of investm ent allowance under sub-secticm (1) of section 32A in the said 
assessm rat year and in the four immediately succeeding assessment 
years. 1
Clause 8 seeks to amend clauses (ii) and (iii) of section 35 of the 
Income-tax Act [as it stood immediately prior to its omission by section 
10 of the D irect Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 1967] dealing w ith deduc­
tion from  profits and gains of business or profession of expenditure on 
scientific research carried out by a scientific research association or a 
university, college or institution approved under those sub<lauses.
As a result of the am endment proposed, the prescribed authority, by 
notification in the OfiBcial Gazette, will approve,—
(a) scientific research associations, university, college or institu­
tion, for the purpose of section 35 (l)< ii);
(b) a university, college or other institutions to be used for 
research in social science or statistics research related to the class of 
business carried on, for the purpose of section 3 5( 1) (iii).
am endment also proposes to make the following stipulations:—
(i) th at the scientific research association, university, college or 
other institution referred to in clause (ii) or clause (iii) of this 
section shall make an application in the prescribed form and m anner 
to the prescribed authority for the purpose of grant of approval, or 
continuance thereof under these clauses;
(ii) the prescribed authority may, before granting approval 
under clause (ii) or clause (iii), call for stich documents (including 
audited annual accounts) or inform ation from the scientific research 
association, etc.. in order to satisfy itself about the genuineness of 
the activities of the research association, etc.;
(iii) notification issued by the prescribed authority under these 
clauses shall at one tim e have effect for not more than three assess­
m ent years, including an assessment year or assessment y e a n  
commencing before the date on w hidi such notification is issued' 
<(as m ay be specified in the notification).
The above amendments will take effect from the 1st day of April, 1900 
and 'Will be relevant for assessment year 1990-91 and subsequent assess- 
m m t years.
Clause 9 seeks to amend section 40 of the Income-tax Act relating to 
am ounts not deductible.
U nder the provisions of clause (b) of th at section [as it stood imme­
diately before its substitution by clause (ii) of section 13 of the Direct 
Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 1987] any paym ent of interest, salary, 
bonus, commission or rem uneration made by the firm to its partners Is 
not allowed as a deduction in computing the income of the firm.
U nder the proposed amendment, a new clause (ba) is being inserted 
to  provide th at any paym ent of Interest, salary, bonus, commission or 
m u m e ra tio n  m ade by an association of persons or a body of individuals 
to  tis  m em b o s will also not be allowed as a deduction in computing
72


income of the association or body. Explanations  1 to 3 to the new* clause 
are on the same lines as Explanations  1 to 3 in the existing clause (b).
Clause  10 seeks to amend section 44AC of the Income-tax Act by in­
serting a proviso to clause (a) of sub-section’  (1) thereof.
The new proviso provides that clause (a) relating to determination of  
profits in the trading of goods, in the natiure of alchoholic liquor for  
human consumption (other than Indian made foreign liquor), at 40 per  
cent, of the purchase price, shall not apply where the goods are not ob­
tained by way of auction and where the sale price of such goods to be  
sold by the buyer is fixed by or under any State Act.
Clause  11 seeks to amend sub-section (1) of section 64 of the Incon»-  
ttix Act [as it stood immediately before its amendment by section 17 of  
the Direct Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 1987] dealing with the circiun-  
stances under which the income of the spouse, minor child, etc., is in­
cluded in the total income of the individual.
Under the existing provisions of clause (v) of that sub-section, income  
from assets transferred by an individual to his minor child (not being a  
married daughter) is clubbed with the iix»m e of the individual d a n se  
(vii) of that sub-section similarly deals with the assets transferred by am . 
individual to any person or association of persons for the benefit of Ms  
spouse or minor child (not being a minor daughter).
Under the proposed amendment, sub-clause (a) s e ^  to omit tiie  
brackets and words “ (not being a married d a u ^ te r )’ ’, which qualify the  
term “minor child” used in the said clauses (v) and (vii) as th© use of  
these words has become unnecessary.
The existing Explanation 3,  below that sub-section applies to clauses
(iv) and (v) only and clarifies that where the assets transferred by an  
individual to his spouse or his minor child are invested in any business,  
the income proportionate to the investment out of the transferred assete  
v/ill be clubbed with the income of the transferor.
Under the proposed amendment sub-clause (b) seeks to substitute a  
new  Explanation  for the existing Explanation  3. The new Explanation,  
applies to clause (vi) also relating to assets tranrferred by an individual  
to his son’ s wife or son’s minor child and thus removes a lacxma in the  
existing provisions.
Clause  12 seeks to insert a new section 67A after section 67 of the  
Income-tax Act [as it stood immediately before its substitutioli by section  
18 of the Direct Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 1987,] dealing with the  
method of computing a partner’s share in the income of the firm.
The new section provides for the method of computing a member’s  
share in the income of an association of persons or a body of individuals,  
wherein the shares of the members are determinate, in the same manner  
as provided for in sub-sections (1) to (3) of section 67 for ctanputing a 
partner’ s share in a firm.
Clouse 13 seeks to amend section 80C of the Income-tax Act relating to  
deduction in respect of life insurance premia, contributions to provident  
fund, etc.
73


Sub-clause (a) (i) af this dause sedcs to remove the limit of Bs. 10/M )0 
from clause (d) of sub-section (2) of this section in respect of contribu­
tions from employees participating in a recognised provident fund.
Sub<clause (a) (ii) of this clause seeks to amend clause (h) of sub­
section (2) of this section so as to extend the benefit to a public sector  
company or a imiversity established by law or a college afBliated to such 
imiversity. i
Sub-clause (b) of this clause seeks to amend sub-<section (8) by  
inserting a new clause so as to clarify that the contribution to any fund  
f^all not include any sums in repayment of loan taken from that fund.
Clause 14 seeks to amend section 80CC of the Income-tax Act relating 
to deduction in respect of investment in certain new shares.
The proposed amendment seeks to extend the benefit of deduction to  
investment in shares of hotels approved by the prescribed authority.
Clause 15 seeks to amend section 80HHC of th* bicome-tax Act relating 
to deduction in respect of profits from export business.
Sulxlause (a) seeks to amend sub^sections (1) and (lA ) by substi­
tuting the words “whole of the income” by the word “profits" to remove 
certain doubts.
Sub-dause (b) seeks to amend sub-section (4) as the basis for calcu­
lating ^  deduction has been changed from **net foreign exchange reali­
sation*’ to “export turnover".
Sub-dause (c) sedcB to amend sub-section (4A) to substitute the  
word “income** by the word “profits” to remove certain doubts.
Sob-dause (d) seeks to omit the definition of “net foreign exchange  
reaUation** from the ExpUmction as the same will not be required after  
the amendment to sub section (4). C T auses (d) and (c) accordingly  
being renumbered as dauses (c) and (d).
Clause 16 aeeks to insert a new section 80HHD in the Income-tax Act
Sub-section (1) of the new section provides that in computing  
inc<M ne of an assessec, being an Indian company or a person (other tiian 
a company) resident in India, engaged in the business of a hotel whidi  
is for the time being approved by the prescribed authority or of a travel  
agoit, deduction will be allowed of a sum equal to the aggregate of—
(a) fifty per cent of the profits derived by him from services  
pnTvitJed to foreign tourists; and
r
(b) so much of the amount out of the remaining profits derived  
by It from services provided to foreign tourists, as is ^U ted by the  
assessee in the profit and loss account and credited to a reserve  
account to be utilised by the assessee fW the purposes of Ma business, 
in the manner laid down in sub-section (4) ■
Sub-section (2) of the new section provides that the provisions of  
new section shall apply « ily  tc services provided to foreign tourists the  
receipts In relation to whldi are received by tfie assMsee In convertAte  
f'^rel^ exchange.
74


Sub>section (3) of the new  section provides that for the purposes of  
sub-section (1) the profit derived by the assesses from services provided  
to foreign tourists shall be,—
(a) in a case w here the business carried on by the assessee 
consists exclusively of services provided to foreign tourists resulting 
in receipts in convertible foreign exchange, the profits of the business 
as computed under the head “Profits and gains of business or profes­
sion”; and
(b) in a case where the business of the assessee does not consist 
exclusively oi services provided to foreign tourists resulting in 
receipts in convertible foreign exchange, the amount which bears to 
the profit of the business of the ass^see the same proportion as tiie 
receipts in convertible foreign exchange on account of services pro­
vided to foreign tourists bear to the total receipts of the business 
carried on by the assessee.
Sub-section (4) provides that the amount credited by the assessee to  
the reserve account under clause (b) of sub-section (1) shall be utilised  
by the assessee before the expiry of a period of five years from the  
year in which the amount was credited for the following purposes;—
(i) construction of new hotels approved by the prescribed 
authority or expansion of facilities in existing hotels already s-j  
approved;
(ii) purch&se of new  cars and new coaches by travel agents;
(ill) purchase of sports eqxiipments for mountaineering, trdcking,  
golf, river-rafting and other sports in and on water;
(iv) construction of conference or convention centres;
(v) provision of such new facilities for the growtii of Ihdiao  
tourism as the Central Government may, by notification in the Offldal  
Gazette, specify for this purpose.
The proviso to the sub-section provides that where any of the afbr^  
said activities would result in creation of any asset owned by the assessee  
outside India, such asset should be created only after obtaining prior  
approval of the prescribed authority.
Sub-section (5) seeks to provide that where any amount credited to  
the reserve accoimt has been utilised by the assessee for any purpose  
other than tliose referred to in sub-section (4) then the amount so uti­
lised shall be deemed to be the profits of the assessee in the year of  
utilisation and shall be charged to tax accordingly. Similarly, where am'  
amount credited to such reserve account has not been utilised in the  
manner specified in sub-section (4). the amount not so utilised shall be  
deemed to be the profits in the year immediately following the period  
of five years specified in sub-section (4) and shall be charged to tax  
accordingly.
Sub-section (6) provides that the deduction under sub-section (1)  
shall not be adtrrfsslble xmle&s the assessee furnishes In the prescribed  
from along with the retxim c t incwne the report of an accountant certi­
fying that the deduction Has been correcUy claimed on the basis of the
75


sn ount of convertible foreign exchange received by the assessee in res­
pect of services provided by him  to foreign tourists. For this purpose ac­
countant wiii be a person defined in Explanation  below sub-section ( 2) 
of section 288.
Clause (a) of the Explanation  defines travel agent to mean a travel 
agent o r any other person, not being an airline or a shipping company, 
who holds a valid licence granted by the Reserve Bank of India under 
section 32 of the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1973.
Clause (b) of the Explanation  provides that for the purposes of this 
section, “convertible foreign exchange” shall have the meaning asngned 
to it in clause (a) of the Explanation  to section 80HHC.
Clause (c) of the ExplanaHon provides th at “services provided to 
foreign tourists’’  shall not include any services provided by way of sale 
in any shop owned or managed l> y  any person who carries on the busi- 
of a hotel or of a travel agent
76
Ckivse  17 seeks to am w d  sectitm 86 of the Income-tax Act [as it stood 
immediatd;y before its substitution by. section 29 of the Direct Tax Laws 
(Amendment) Act, 1987] relating to shares of partners in the income of 
an unrecistered firm or the shares of members of an association of per­
sons or a body of individuals in the income of the associatipn or body.
U nder the existing provisions of clause (v) of th at section, income-tax 
shall not be payable in respect of share of a member in the income of the 
.  association of persons or body of individuals on which income-tax has 
already been paid by the association or body, although the share shall 
form p art of the total income of the member.
U nder the proposed amendment, clause (v) of th at section is being 
substituted by a new  clause which {Hvvides th at income>tax shall not be 
payable in respect of share of a member in the income of (he association 
of persons or body of individuals, computed in the m anner provided in 
section 67A. i
The first proviso to th at section lays down th at w here the associa. 
lio n  or the body is chargeable to tax a t th e m axim um  m arginal rate or 
any higher rate, the share of the m em ber shall not be included in his 
total income at all. The second proviso lays down th at w here no in­
come-tax is chargeable on the total income of the association or the
body, the share of the member therein shall be chargeable to tax as part 
of his total income.
Clause 18 seeks to amend section USA of the Income-tax Act.
Sub-dauses (i) and (ii) seek to insert clauses (ab) and (ib) in sub­
section ( 1)' "nie new clauses seek to provide that w here the total in- 
cwne of a foreign company includes any income by w ay of Income 
received in respect of the units of a M utual Fund specified under clause 
f23D) of section 10, purchased by the foreign company in foreign cu r­
rency, income-tax income from such units shall be calculated at the
rate of twenty-five per cent, of fuch income.


&ub<iause (iii) seeks to caxry out an amendment of consequentia:  
nature omitting clause (b) of the Explanation  to section 115A d»finin£  
the term foreign company” and relettering clause (bb) as clause (b *
Olause  19 seeks to amend section 115J of the Income-tax Act.
Sub-clause (a) seeks to amend sub-section (1) to provide that li-.e  
provisions of the sub-section relating to taxabiUty of thirty per cenl.  
o£ the book profits of certain companies shall not apply in the case of an  
assessee engaged in the business of generation or distribution of electri­
city.
Sub-clause (b) ^eeks to amend the Expianai4on  to provide that for  
the computation of book profits, the net profit shall be inoreased by—
(i) any amcunt withdrawn from the reserve accoudt under  
section 80HHD that has been utilised for any purocse other than  
those referred to in sub-section (4) of that Section;
(ii) the amount credited to the resen/e account under section  
30HHD to the extent that amount has not been utilised within the  
period specified in sub-section (4> Qf that section,
if the said amounts have not been credited to the profit and loss account.
Item (vi) of sub-clause (b) seeks to amend the Explanation  to pro­
vide that for the computation of the book profits the net profit shall be  
reduced by the eunount of net profits derived from the business of ex­
ports O r from services provided to foreign tourists by approved hotels or  
travel agents, which are eligible for deduction under section 80HHD or  
80HHD, as the case muy be. For tiiis purpose, the net profits siiall be  
computed in the same manner as specified in sub-section (3) of section  
80HHC or sub-section (3) of section 80HHD, as the case may be.
Clause  20 seeks to amend section 139 of the Income-tax Act [as  
amended by section 42 of the Direct Tax Laws  (Amendment) Act, 1987]  
relating to return of income. The amendments are proposed in sub­
section (4A) and clause (d) of the proviso to sub-section (10) of this  
section, relating to the provisions for filing of returns by chaiitabie or  
religious trusts or institutions governed under section 11 of the Income-  
tax Act. These  amendments seek to bring back the provisions as they  
stood before the amendments made by the Direct Tax Laws (Amend­
ment) Act, 1987. and are consequential to the revival of the provisions  
of sections 11 to 13 of the Income-tax Act and omission of section 80F of  
tile Income-tax Act.
.  Clause  21 seeks to amend section 143 of the Income-tax Act relating  
to procedure for assessment, as substituted by section 48 of the Direct  
Tax Law^ (Aniendmeni) Act. 1987.
Under the provisions of cUmse (a) o£ sub-ssction (!) of n™  section  
143, where a return has been filed under section 1S9 or under sub-section
(1) of section 142--
(i) if anv tax or interest is found due on the basi. of such
turn an intimation shaU be sent to the " T
lo  piiyable and such inUmation shaU be deemed to be a notice of
demand issuad under section 156; and  
2U00 L S - U
77


(ii) if aii^v refund is due on the basis o f such return, it shall be  
j granted to the assesaee.
The proviso to the said clause enables the Department to make cer­
tain adjustments in the returned income or loss.
Sub-clause (a) seeks to insert a further proviso in the said clause to  
provide that an intim ation for any tax or interest due under this clause  
shall not be sent after the expiry of two years from the end of the  
assessment year in  which the income was first assessable. ^
Sub-clausc ,(b) seeks to insert a new su b jection  (lA ) which provides  
for— ,  ;
<a) levy of an additional income-tax of an amount equal to
tw enty per cent of the tax payable on the amount of difference
bettt'een the total income determined under ,  sub-section (1) of this  
section and the total income declared in the return;
(b) increase or decrease o£ the amount of additiorial income-tax
as a consequence of an increase or decrease in the amount on which
additional incom e-tax is payable by reason of a rectification order  
passed under section 154 or appellate order imder section 250 or sec­
tion 254 or section 260 or section 262 or section 264 or a revisionarj’ ’  
order under section 263.
Clause 22  seeks to amend section 144A relating to power o£ Deputy  
Commissioner to issue directions in certain cases. As a result of the  
amendment in the Explanation to  that section for the word “sub-section”  
the word “section” is proposed to be substituted TTiis is consequent tj  
the omission of sub-section (2) in this section b/.’  the Direct Tax Laws  
(Amendment) Act, 1987.
Clause  23 seeks to amend section 147 ‘ of the Income-tax Act relating  
to income escaping assessment.
Under the provisions of new section 147, as substituted by section  
o f the Direct Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 1987, the Assessing Officer  
is empowered to assess or re-assess income which has escaped assessment  
for any assessment yeai%  after recording reasons for doing so.
Under the proposed amendment, the words “for reasons to be record­
ed by him in w T itin g , is of the opinion” are being replaced by the ex­
pression ‘ has reasons to believe”, which occurred In section 147 l>efore  
its amendment by the Direct Ta.\ l..avvs (Amendment) Act, 1937.
Clause 24  seeks to amend section 148 of the Income-tax Act relating  
to issue of a notice where income has escaped assessment.
Under the provisions of new section 148, as  substituted by section 54 
of the Direct Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 1987, the Assessing Officer,  
before making the assessment, re-assessment or recomputation of income  
under section 147, shall serve on the assessee, a notice requiring him to  
furnish the return of iiicorne within such period, not ^leinp less than  
thirty day«, as may be specified in tho notice.
78


UiKjor the |>rop&sed amendment, sub-section (2) is being inserted to  
provide that beXore issuing'a notice, ti e Assessing OflRcer shall record  
his reasons for doing so.
Clause  25 seeks to amend clause (b) of sub-section (4A) of scctlon  
155 of the Income-tax Act in consequence of insertion of a proviso in  
sub-3ection (1) of sectiort 32A vide clause 6.
Clause  26 seeks to substit’-te the existing sub-headmg -‘DD-Assoda-  
tion of persons—special cases” by a new sub-heading “DD^Aesociation  
of persons and body of individuals” in Chapter X V  of the Income-t?x A ct
Clause 27 seeks to omit section 167A of the Income-tax Act [as it  
stood immediately before its substitution by section 66 of the Direct Tax  
Laws (Amendment) Act, 1987] relating to charge of tax in the case of  
association of persons wherrin the shares of the members are indeter­
minate or unknown at the maximum marginal rate.
Clause  28 seeks to insert a new section 167B in the Income-tax Act.
Sul>secti(Mi (1) of that section provides that where the individuel  
shares of the members of an association or a body in the whole or any  
part of the income of such association or body are indeterminate or un­
known. tax shall be charged on the total income of the association or  
body at the maxiratim marginal rate. Hov/ever, where the total income  
of any member of such association or body is chargeable to tax at a rate  
which is tiigher than the maximum marginal rate; tax shall be charged  
on the total income of the association or body at such higher rate.
Sub-section (2) of that section provides that where the total income  
any member of an associaticm of persons or body of individuals referred  
to in sub-secfion (1) for the previous year (excluding his share from such  
association or body) e::ceeds the maximum amount wliich is net charge­
able to tax in the Case of that member, tax shall be charged on the tot«l  
income of the association or body ot the maximum marginal rat«- How­
ever, where any member or members of such association or body is or are  
cliargeable to tax for the pre\aous year at a rate or rates which is or are  
higher than the maximum marginal rate, tax shall be cliarged on that  
portion portions of the total income of the association or body which  
is or are relatable to the share or shares of such member or members at  
such higher rate or rates, as the case may be. and the balance of the  
total income of the association or body shall be taxed at the maximiun  
marginal rate.
Exptanat'.on  to that section specifies the circumstances in which shares  
of tlie members of an association or body in the whole or any part of the  
income ot srch association or body shall be deemed to be indeterminate  
or unknown.
Clause  20 seeks to amend sub-section (1) of section 190 of the Income-  
ta;: Act- It is proposed to provide that in spite of the feet that regular  
assessment is to be made in a Inter assessment year, tax on income shall  
also be payable by way of collection at source in accordance with the  
provisions of section 206C.
Clause 30 seeks to amend section 194A of the inix)me-tax Act relating  
to deduction of tax at source fi-om interest other than interest on securi­
ties.
79


so
Section 73 of the Direct Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 19O T had omit­
ted with effect from 1-4-1988, clause (iv) of sub-section (3) of section  
194A which pi-o\ided that tax shall not be deducted at source from any'  
interest credited or paid by a firm to. its partners.
Under the proposed amcq^ment, the said clause (iv) is being rein­
serted in the said sub-section (3) retrospectively with effect from 1-4-1988.
Claitse 31 s e ^  to « n lt section 194E of the Income-tax Act tas inserted  
by section 74 of the Direct Tax Laws (Amendment) Act. 1S87] relating  
to deduction of tax at source from interest, salary, Ixjnus, commission or  
remuneration paid by a firm to its partners with effect from 1st day of  
April, 1988. Consequently, no tax shall be deducted at sowrce from in­
terest. salary, etc.. paid by a finn to its partners.
Clause 32 saeks to substitute a new section for section 196A of the  
Income-tax Act.
Sub-section (1) of new section 196A seeks to provide that no deduc­
tion of tax shall be made from ary income payable in respect of units of  
a M utual Fund, specified under clause (23D) of section 10. to Its tmit  
holders being persons other than foreign companies.
Sub-section (2) of that section seeks to provide that w here the unit  
holder is a foreign comp>any, the person responsible for making 'the pay­
m ent w ill, a t .  the tim e of credit of such income to the account of litae  
pa^ree or at the tim e of paym ent thereof in  cash or b y the issue of a  
dieque or draft or any other mode, whichever is earlier, deduct income-  
tax on the sum so paid, at the rate of tw-enty-five per cent,
These amendments v.n’l come into force on the date of assent.
Clause  33 seeks to amend sections 198. 199. 200. 202, 203. sub-section
(1) of section 203A, section 205 nnd sub-section (f?) of section 215 of the  
Income-tax Act so as to ?n.scrt a reference to new section 196A being  
inserted vide clause 32.
Clause  34 se^ks to amend «eofion 208C of the Income-tax A^-
Sub-clause (a) seeks to amend sub-section (1) of the said section by  
substituting the words ‘T en per rent.” by  the words “Five per c e n f  
occurrintf in column (3) afrain'^t item Ciii) of the Ta^le below that sub­
section. thereby providing that in respect of timber obtained by any  
m ode other than a- forest lease, incom e-tax shall be collected at the rate  
of five per cent of the purchase price payable by the buyer.
'Rie proposed iimendm?nt .ehnll come into force retro.spectively from  
the 1st June, 1988 ;
Clause (b) seeks to insert a new sub-section (5A) in the said section  
to provide that every penson collecting tax *n accordance vi^th the pro­
visions of section 20CC, shall prepare half yearly returns for the period  
ending on the 30th September and 31st March in each financial year and  
deliver or cause to be delivered to the prescribed inrome-tAx authority  
mich Tettim«» in such form end verified in S'lch mannf'r and setting forth  
fuch particulars as may be prescribed in the rules.


dOM c 35 seeks to amend sub-section (1) of section 209 of the Inccme-  
tax Act regarding computation of advance tax. It is f>roposed to provide  
in clause (d) of that sub-section that the income-tax calculated for the  
p u rp ose of pdvance tax shall also be reduced by the amount of income-  
tax which v/ould be collectible at source in accordance with sub-section
(1) of section 206C. (
The proposed amendment shal! come into force retrospectivelv from  
the 1st June, 1988.
Claxise 36 seeks to amend the provisions of sections 222, 223, 224, 225,  
226, 228 and 228A of the Income-tax Act relating to tax recovery to -give  
effect to change in designation of Income-tax Officer as “Assessing OfBcer”  
made by the Direct Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 1987. with effect frwn  
1-4-1988.
Clause 37 seeks tc amend section 226 of the Income-tax Act [& £ am­
ended by section 36 of the Direct Tax Laws (Amendment) Act. 1988]  
by inserting the words “or Tax Recovery Officer” after the words “Assess­
ing Officer”, wherever they occur, in sub-sections (2). (3). (4) and t'5)  
of that section.
Clause  38 seeks to amend section 234A of the Income-tax Act as  
inserted by section 94 of the Direct Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 1987.
The provisions of section 234A which provide for levy of mandatary  
interest for defualts in furnishing retuitis of income, are proposed to  
be amended so as to provide for c h a r ^ g  of intraest in  tespect of Miy 
default in furnishing return of income, on the amount of tax on the  
total income as determined undw sub-section (1) of section 143 or on  
regular assessment after giving credit for any advance tax paid, tax  
deducted at source or tax collected at source.
A  new Explanation  4 to sub-section (1) is proposed to be introduced  
to provide that for the purpose of computing the interest payable under  
section 140A, the tax on the total ince«ne as determined under sub­
section (1) of section 143 or on regular assessment shall be deemed  
to be tax on total income as declared in the return. This is necessary  
to enable the tax payers to pay the amount of interest along with the  
tax under self-assessment as is required under section 140A.
Clauae  39 seeks to amend section 234B of the Income-ta>: Act as  
inserted by section 94 of the Direct Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 1987.  
The provisions o? section 234B which provide for levy of mandatory  
interest for defaults in payment of advance tax, are proposed to be  
amended so as to provide for charging of interest in respect of any  
defeult in pa.vment of advance tax on the amount of the tax on the total  
income ns determined under sub-section (1) of section 143 or on r e ^ la r  ,  
assessment iiftor giving credit for any advance tax paid, ta:: deducted  
at source or tax collected ?t source.
Further, ExpUmction  1  to sub-section (1) is substituted so as to provide  
that “assessed tax” would mean,—
(a) far the purpose of computing the interest pavable nnder
section 140A. the tax on total income as declared in the return as
81


reduced by & n  amoiuit of tax deducted or collected at source in  
wjcordance with the provisions of Chapter of the Income*tax  
Act; . .
(b) in any other case, the tax on the total income determined  
under sub-section (1) of section 143 or on regular assessment, as  
reduced by th e amount of tax deducted or collected at source in  
accordance with the provisions of Chapter XVII of the Income-tax  
Act.
Sub-clausc (a) (iii) seeks to substitute Explanation  3 by a new Expla-  
aoliOTi so as to provide that for tfie purposes of collecting interest under  
this section tpx would not include the additional tax, if any, pavable under  
section 143.
Sub. clauses (b) and (c) of this clause seek to amend sub-sections
(2) and (3) so as to insert reference to the determination of total in-  
en n e  imder sub-section (1) of section 143. Explanation  to sub-section
(3) is also proposed to be om itted.
Clause  40 seeks to amend section 234C.*
An assessee is required to pay advance-tax in three instalments on  
its estimated total income including capital gain and income arising from  
w innings from lotteries, horse races, etc. The provisions of section 234C  
provide for levy of mandatory interest for deferment in payment of  
advance tax. Numerous represoitations rec«ved  pointed out hardrfiip  
on account of inability to esitimate correctly the expected income from  
capital gain, or w innings from lotteries, horse races, etc.. which are of  
casual nature. In order to rem ove this unintended hardship, the provi­
sions of section 234C are being amended to provide that no interest will  
be levied in raspect of any sboi*tfaU in the pa^Tnent of advance tax due  
on the returned ’ncome if—
(i) the shortfall is on account of underestimate or failure to  
estim ate the amount of capital gains or income of the nature referred  
to in sub-clause (ix) of clause (24) of section 2; and
(ii) the assessee has paid the whole of the amount of tax p a y ^ le  
in respect of such income, as part of the instrlment of advance tax  
which is immediately due.
Claxue  41 seeks to Jimend section 244A of the Income-tax Act (as In­
serted  by section ^  of the Direct Tax Laws (Amendmenfj Arl. 1987],
Sub-clausc (a) seeks to amend rub-section (1) so a.s to enable the  
assessee to claim interest on .refund due to it also in pursuanr;e. of the  
detoTnination of total income under sub-section (1) of section 143.
Further, clause (a) of sub-section (1) is proposed to be amended so  
as to include tho tax collected at source under section also for cal­
culation of interest on the refund due to the assessee.
Sub-rection (3) is being amended to include the reference of the order  
passed under pub-section (3) of section 143 for the purports of calcula­
tion of interes'. under this nib-section.
Cljause 42  seeks to omit the words “or applications" in the sui>-heading  
t 4j Chapter X X  of the Income-tax Act consequents on the omission of  
section 246A.
82


Clause  43 s e ^  to amend section 246 of th e Income-tax Act [as sub>  
stituted by section 99 of the Direct Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 1987J  
relating to appealable orders.
Under clauses (g) and (h) of sub-section (i) ol section 246, any  
assessee m ay appeal against an order of the Assessing Officer (other than  
the Deputy Commissioner) under various sub-sections of section 185  
refusing to grant registration of renewal of registration to the firm or  
under section 186 c a r o llin g  the registration of the firm in respect of the  
assessment yeai 1983-89 or any earlier assessment year.
Under the proposed amendment by sub-clause (a) ( i), the words  
lim iting the appeals under these clauses up-to the assessment year 1988-89  
are being omitted. Consequently^ appeals under these clauses can now be  
filed even in  respect of the subsequent assessment years.
Sub-clause (a) (ii) seeks to amend clause (1) of sub-section (1) by  
providing appeal to the Deputy Commissioner (Appeals) against the  
Orders passed by the Assesjsing Officer also under section 272AA and section  
272BB.
This sub-clause omits the reference of sub-section (1) of section 271  
in sub-clause (iii) of clause (1) of aub-section (1) of this section conse­
quent on amendment made in section 271.
Sub-clause (b) of this clause seeks to amend sub-section (2) providing  
appeal to the Comipissioaer Appeals) against the order passed under  
section 104 in respect of assessment year 1987-88 or earUer years, against  
an order made by Deputy Commissioner imposing a penalty tmder section  
272AA, and against an order imposing a penalty under Chapter XXI by  
th e Income-tax Officer or the Assistant Commissioner with the previous  
approval of the Deputy Commissioner.
Clause 44 seeks to omit section 246A [as inserted by section 99 of the  
Direct Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 1987] relating to application by the  
assessee before the Deputy Commissioner (Appeals) or Cominissioner  
(Appeals) for an advance ruling in certain cases.
Clause  45 s^ k s to amend the proviso to sub-section (4) of section 249  
providing forms of appeal and limitation- As a result of the amendment  
the discretion of appellate authority under sub-section (4) has been  
limited to the case •whore no return has been filed by tlie assessee and  
the assessee has not paid an amoimt equal to the amount of advance tax  
which was payable by him, before the filing of the appeal.
Clause  46 seeks lo amend section 253 of the Income-tax Act providing,  
appeals to the Appellate Tribunal. The amendment in clause (a) of sub­
section (1) of this section is consequent ou the omission of sub-section (2)  
of section 181 by the Direct Ta:r Laws (Amendment) Act, 1987. Tlie  
amendm eni in clause (e) of sub-section (1) provides an appeal against  
an order passed by Chief Cominissioner or Director General or Director  
under section 272A.
Clou,se 47 seeks to amend section 255 of the Income-tax Act relating  
lo proceuiiro o( Appellate Tribunal.
83 »


Under the ezistuag provisions of sub-secUon (3) o£ that section, a  
Single Afember Bench of I'ribunal m ay  hear appeals pertaining U >  
an a sse se e  whose total income as computed by ihe Assessing Officer in  
the case does not exceed forty thousand rupees.
Under the proposed amendment the monetary lionit of forty thousand  
rupees is being raised to one lakh rupees- . ,
Clause  48 seeks to amend clauae (b) of section 269A providing defini­
tion of the competent authority under C'hapter X X -A relating to acquisi­
tion of immovable prc^terties in certain cases of transfer to counter-act  
evasi<m of ta:c.
A s a result of the amendment made by the Direct Tax Laws (Amend-  
xnent) Act, 19a? w ith effect feom 1st d iy  of April, 1988 in  the designation  
of "income-tax authorities’, the Assistant Commissioners of Income-tax  
have been re-designated as Deputy Commissioners of income-tax.  
Consequently, the amendment is proposed m the definition of competent  
authority v.ath effect from 1>4-19B8 to mean a Deputy Commissioner  
Income-tax authorised by the Central Govermnent under section 2ddB  
to perform the functions of a competent authority under Chapter XX-A.
Clause 49  seeks to eonend ckoise (a) of sub-section (1) of section 26W  
dealing with jurisdiction and functions of the competent authority under  
Chapter X X -A  relating to acquisition of immovable properties in certain  
eases of transfer to counter-act evasion of tax.
As a result of the amendment made by the Direct Tax Laws (Amend­
m ent) Act, 1987 with effect from 1st day of April, 1988 in the c l e ^ natioB  
of “income-tax authorities'’, the Assistant Commissioners of Income-tax  
have been redesigiated as “Deputy Commissioneis of Income-tax".  
Consequently, the amendment is proposed in section 269B to provide that  
Central Government taay, by general or special order in the Uf&dal  
Gaaxtte, authorise the D ^ u ty  Commissioners of Income-tax to p&'form  
the functions of a competent authority under Chapter XX-A.
Clause  50 s e d u  to amend section 271 [as it stood immediately before  
its amp-ndmgnt by section 106 of the Direct Tax Laws (Amendment) Act,  
1967] providii^  for imposition of penalty for failure to furnish returns,  
comply with notices, concealment of income^ etc- The clause seeks to  
carry out the following amendments in this section:—
(a) the provi^ons relating to imposition of penalty for failure  
to furnish returns are being deleted in view  of the provisions for  
levy of mandatory interest undn: section 234A;
(b) the amount of penalty imposable for failure to comply with  
n o tic e  under sub-section (1) of section 142 or sub-s«x:tion (2) of  
section 143 or failure to comply with a direction issued under sub­
section (2A) of section 142 is now being revised to a minimum  
amount of one thousand rupees and, up to a maximum junount of  
twenty-Qve thousand rupees for each such failure. The amoimt of  
penalty which was earlier imposablc was a minimum amount of ten  
per cent, and up to a maximum amoimt of fifty pfer cent, of the amount  
o£ tax, if  any, wMeh would have been avoided if the income retiunied  
by such person had been accepted as the correct inccmc;


(c) ExpUmation  3 of sub-section (1) has been amended so aa to  
bring the references to the various provisions of the Act in Kne with  
the provisions as amended by the Direct Tax Laws (Amendment)  
Act, 1987;
(d) a new Explanation  6 is being introduced to provide that  
penalty for concealment of income shall not be imposed <m  so much  
of the income on which additional income-tax hsa been charged  
under the new  sub-section (lA ) of section 143;
(e) a new  sub-section (5) is being inserted to provide for a  
transitory provision so as to levy penalty in assessment year 1986-89  
and any earlier assessment year in accordance with the provisions  
of section 271 aa they stood immediately before their amendment by  
the Direct Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 1988.
Clause  51 seeks to amend section 273A [as amended by section 113 of  
the Direct Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 1987] dealing with the power to  
reduce or v, iiive penalty, etc., in certain cases.
The clause seeks to carry out consequential amendments in this  
section as a result of—
(a) the deletion of the provisions relating to levy of penalty  
for failure to furnish returns;
(b) the amendments made in sections 139(8), 215, 217 and 273  
by the Direct Tax Laws Amendment Act, 1987; and
(c) the amendments made in the penalty provisions under sec­
tion 271 by clause 50.
Clause  52 seeks to amend clause (a) of section 275 of the Income-tax  
Act relating to bar on limitation for imposing penalties, as substituted  
by section 116 of the Direct Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 1987. Under  
the proposed amendment, the orders of the Deputy Commissioner  
(Appeals) are also being included for the purpose of calculating the  
limitation period.
Clause 53 seeks to insert a new section 279B in the Income-tax Act  
to provide for production of evidence in prosecution for offenees under  
Chapter XXH of the A ct
The new section provides that entries in the records or other docu­
ments in the custody of an income-tax authority shall be admitted in  
evif*'“ nce during proceedings for the prosecution of any person for an  
offence under Chapter XXII of the Act. and all such entries may be  
proved either by the production of such records or other documents or  
by production of a copy of entries certified by the income-tax authority,  
having custody of such records or other documents, under its signatm-e  
and stating that it is a true copy of the original entries which are contain­
ed in the records or other documents in its custody.
Clause 54 seeks to amend Second Schedule to the fiicome-tax Act  
[as it stood immediately before its amendment by the Direct Tax Laws  
(Amendment) Act, 1987] by substituting the words “Assessing Officer’  
wherever they occur, for the words “Income-tax Officer’*  with effect from  
the 1st day of April, 1988.
2000 LS—12.


As a result of this am endm ent in this Schedule, the words “Tax 
Recovery Officer” are proposed to be substituted for the words “Assessing 
Officer” by m aking suitable am endm ents in  th e rules in the said 
Schedule. j.
Clause 55 seeks to a m en d ,the Third Schedule to the Income-tax Act 
[«B it stood im m ediately before its am endment by the Direct Tax Laws 
(Amendment) Act, 1987] by substituting the words “Assessing OfiBcer” 
lo r the words 'Incom e-tax Officer” w ith effect from  the 1st day of April, 
1968.
As a result of this am oidm eiit in  this Schedule, the words “or Tax 
Recovery Officer” are prc^[X ) 6ed to be inserted after the words “Assessing 
Officer”.
Clause 58 seeks to am oid the Tenth Schedule to th e Income-tax Act, 
as inserted by section 125 of the Direct Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 
1987.
The said Schedule provides special provisions applicable in cases w here 
th e previoua year in relation to the assessment year commencing on the 
1st day of April, 1989 (hereinafter referred to as the transitional previous 
y e a r), exceeds a period of tw elve mpnths.
‘ n ie  proposed amendments to rule 1  of & e Schedule, which defines 
th e  term  “transitional previous y e a r ”, are of consequential nature follow­
ing the am endments made in sub-section (2) of section 3 of the Ifk;ome- 
tex  Act.
U nder the existing provisions of rule 3 of the Schedule, the amoimts 
m entioned in various sections of the Act, which are enum erated in  a 
Table given in the rule will be proportionately increased during the 
atten d ed  transitional previous year.
D ie proposed am endments to rule 3 are as follows:—
(a) two new provisos are being inserted 1®  the said rule to 
provide th a t:—
(i) the am ount of Rs. 10,000/- mentioned in column (2) of 
the Table against section 48(2) shall be increased during the 
fcansitional previous year only w here the long-term capital gain 
arises as a result of two or more transfers of long-term capital 
assets and out of these, at least one transfer is made during the 
initial period of twelve months and the remaining transfer o r 
transfers is or are made beyond the said period of tw elve months 
comprised w ithin the transitional previous year.
(ii) w here more than one period in respect of different 
sources of income are included in the transitional previous year 
Tin<to the first proviso or Uie third proviso to section 3(2), the 
am ounts mentioned in column (2) of the aforesaid Table shall be 
increased to such extent and in such m anner as A e Board may 
prescribe having regard to the length of th e period or periods
, included in the teansitional previous year in respect of dyferenfc
floorces of income, the length of the transitional pTeidous year 
and other rd c v a n t factors.


(b) a new Table is being substituted for the existing Table. The  
amount or amounts mentioned in sections 12A(b), 13<2) (g), 13(3) (b)  
the proviso to section 16(i), section 16(ii), proviso.to sect. on 24(2)* 
sections 33A, 3^A, 35AB, 35D, 40A(12), 80C(3), 8 0C (7)(c), 80CC(2)’ ,  
80CCA(1). 80D (1), 80P(2) (c) and 80P(2) (£) of the Act, which are  
also proposed to be increased proportionately during the extended  
transitional previous year, are being included in the new  Table.  
Opportumty has also been taken to correct some references to sections  
or amounts as also to enhance the amounts menticoied against fffrttffiT  
16(1) and 2nd proviso to section 80L(1) consequent to the am oid-  
ments made by the Finance Act, 1988 in those sections.
Rule 4 provides that where the transitional previous year consists of  
a period of eighteen months or more, than the niunber of days specified  
in sub-section (1) of section 6 for determining the residential status of  
an individual, namely, 182 days and 90 days shall be increased to 271  
days and 135 days, respectively.
Under the proposed amendment, the new  rule 4 provides that tiie tfmg  
lim it of 60 days mentioned in sub-section (1) of section 6 of the Act wiU  
also be in c r e a ^  to 90 days where the extended previous year comprises  
of a period of 18 months or more.
Rule 5 provides that where in a transitional previous year the assessee’ s  
icome under the head “Profits and gains of business or profession” is  
.icluded in the total income for a period of thirteen months or more,  
the depreciation allowance under clause (ii) of sub-section (1) of section  
32 w ill be proportionately increased.
Under the proposed amendments, the new rule 5 provides that increas­
ed depreciation w ill also be available in those cases where depreciatibn  
is allowable imder the provisions of section 57 (ii) while computing  
income under the head “Income from other sources”, and that depreda­
tion w ill be allowable on “block of assets” instead of ‘ ‘building, machinery,  
plant or furniture”. The proviso in new rule 5 provides that where rnore  
than one period in respect of income under the head “Profits and gains of  
business er profession” or under the head “Income from other sourceB**  
are included in the transitional previous year under the first proviso or  
the third proviso to section 3 (2), the depreciation allowance under section  
32 (1) (ii) on block of assets shall be calculated separately for each such  
period included in the transitional previous year and the said allowance  
■V m ll be increased, where necessary, by multiplying it by a fraction of  
which the nxmierator is the number of months in such period (after  
excluding the number of months relatable to the period in relation to  
which depreciation on block of assets has been allowed or is allowable in  
the previous year relevant to the assessment year commencing on the  
1st day of April, 1988) and the denominator is twelve.
Rule 6 provides that tax will be payable on the total income of the  
transitional previous year at the average rate of tax applicable to the  
proportionate income of twelve monliis.
Under the proposed amendment, a proviso is being inserted to provide  
that where more than one period in respect of d'fferent of
Income are included in the transitional previous year under the first
87


ptoviM or th« tiiird proviso to lectlon S(2), then the tax diall be charge* 
aUc at the average rate of tax, calculated in a ^ r d a n c e  with the provi­
sions of this rule, on the total income of the transitional previous year after  
eaccluding from such total income the income relatable to any such period  
or periods, which has already been include or is includible in the total  
income of the previous year or  previous years relevant to the assessment  
year 198»<89.
Clause  67 m akes amendments of a consequential nature in certain  
provisions of the Income-tax A c t
Clause 58 seeks to amend section 2 of the W ealth-tax Act by In sert  
ing a new  Explanation  2 in clause (m) after the existing Explanation,  
in «rder to clarify that the debt mentioned in sub-clause (ii) in respect  
of an asset exem pt either wholly or pai'tly under section 5(1 A) shall be  
lim ited to the value of the exemption which the said asset w ill get u n d tf  
the said section 5(1A ).
Clause  59 seeks to amend section 4 of the W ealth-tax Act dealing  
w ith the inclusion of certain deemed assets in the net wealth.
Sub-clause (a) of this clause seeks to amend sub-section (1) which  
contains two clauses (a) and (b). Clause (a) deals with assets trans­
ferred an individual to his or her spouse, minor children etc. Clause
(b) deals w ith value of interest in a firm or association of persons of an  
assessee who is a partner in the firm or a member of the association of  
l-«rsons. i  ;
The opening words of sub-section (1) have led to the interpretation  
that the sub-section is applicable only to cases of assessees who are  
individuals.
The proposed amendments by sub-clause (a) seek to clarify that  
clause (a) of sub-section (1) applies to an individual and clause (b)  
would be applicable to any assessee. The revised clause (b) of sub­
section (1) also specifies that the value of the interest of the assessee in  
the firm or association of persons shall be determined in the manner  
laid down in new Schedule III. The proviso to new clause (b) also  
includes the interest of £ minor child in a firm or association of persons  
in the net wealth of the parent having a higher net wealth.
Sub-clause (b) of this clause seeks to omit sub-section (2) as rules 15  
and 16 of new Schedule III now provide the manner in which the value  
of the interest of a person in a firm of which he is a partner or in an  
association of pers<His of which he is a member is to be determined.
Clause  60 seeks to amend section 5 of the W ealth-tax A ct
Sub -d aiue (a) seeks to insert a new clause (xvig) in sub-section (1).  
t The new  clause seeks to provide that in computing the net wealth of an  
individual who is a non-resident Indian during the year ending on the  
valuation date or of a nominee or survivor of such individual or of any  
other individual receiving by way of gift from such individual, any  
investm ent made in the bmids sp ^ fie d  under sub-clause (ild) of daUse  
(ISi) of section 10 of the Income-tax Act, shall not form part of such  
net wealth.


The proviso to the clause seeks to provide th at where an individual 
who is a non-resident Indian during the year ending on the valuation 
date in which such bond is accjuired, subsequently becomes a resident 
In India, the clause shall continue to apply in relation to such individual
The Explanation  seeks to provide that for the purposes of this clause  
an individual shall be deemed to be a non-resident Indian during the  
year ending on the valuation date if in respect of that year the indivi­
dual is a non-resident Indian within the meanings of clause (e) of  
section 115C of the Income-tax Act.
Sub-clause (b) seeks to insert an Explanation  at the end of sub-  
^ t i o n  (]A ) in order to provide that where a debt is secured or has been  
incurred in relation to any asset referred to in tliis sub-section, the  
exemption under this sub-section shall be allowed first against the value  
of the asset on which or in relation to which such debt is secured or  
incurred and, thereafter, against the value of any other asset so referred  
,  to.
Sub-clause (c) seeks to insert a new sub-section (4) in order to pro­
vide that where the assessee is a partner of a firm or a member of the  
assoda^on of persons and the firm or the association owns any one or  
more of the assets which are exempt under sub-section (1), then his  
interest in the firm or association shall be deemed to indude the value  
of a part of each of such asset of the firm or the association in the same  
proportion in which he is entitled to share the profits of the firm or the  
association and the assessment shall be made j^ er allowing the exemp­
tion under sub-section (1) in respect of those assets on the basis of this  
proportionate value.
CUtuse 61 seeks to amend section 6 of the Wealth-tax Act. Explana-  
tion lA  to section 6 which refers to clause (4A) of section 10 of the  
Income-tax Act is being amended as the said clause (4 -A ^ ) has been re­
numbered as sub-clause (ii) of clause (4) of the said section 10 by the  
Direct Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 1987.
Clause 62  see!:? to substitute a new section in the Wealth-tax Act for  
the existing section 7 relating to the determination of the value of assets.
As per the existing provisions, the value of any asset, other than  
cash, for the purpose of this Act is to be taken as the price which it  
would fetch if sold in the open market on the valuation date. It further  
provides that where the taxpayer is carrying on a business for which  
regular accounts are maintained, the Wealth-tax Officer may determine  
the net value of the assets of the business as a whole on the valuation  
date instead of d eterm in in g separately the value of each asset held by him  
In this business, and may make sudi adjvCstments as prescribed in the 
rules.
The substituted section 7 now sedts to do away with the above  
method of valuation. Under the new section the value of any asset.  
< ^ er than on the valuation dale is to be determined in the manner  
laid down in Schedule III of thi* Act.


However, sub-section ( 2) of the n 6w section, gives option to the 
anrosMQ in  th e case of a house belonging to him  and exclusively used by 
him for residential purpose to opt the value determ ined in the m anner 
laid down in Schedule HI of this Act^ as on the valuation date next 
following date on which he become the owmer of the house, or the value 
determ ined for the Valuation date relevant to the assessment year 
commencing on the 1st day of April, 1971, whichever valuation date is 
later.
Proviso to this sub-section seeks to restrict the above option only to 
one residential house if more than one house belonging to the assessee 
are excliisively used by him for residential purposes.
#
Explanation  to this sub-scction seeks to clarify that where the house 
is constructed by the assessee, he' shall be deemed to have become the 
«wner thereof on the date on which the construction of such house was 
Ciunpleted- I t also seeks to clarify that a p art of house being an inde­
pendent residential unit shall be taken as a house.
Clause  63 seeks to amend section 11 of the W ealth-tax Act [as substi­
tuted by secticm 131 of the Direct Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 1987] 
so a^ to substitute the reference to sub-section “ (5)" occurring in sub­
section (2) of th at section by a reference to sub-section “ (4)”. -
Clause 64 seeks to amend section 16 of the W ealth-tax Act [as substi­
tuted by section 138 of the D irect Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 1987] 
rela'ing to procedure for assessment.
The am endm ^its proposed by sub-clauses (a) and (b) are on the 
lines of am endments proposed in section 143 of the Income-tax Act vide 
clause 21 . ■
Clause 6&  seeks to am end section 16A of the W ealth-tax Act relating 
to reference to Valuation OfiScer.
The proposed am endment provides that w here under the provisiooa 
uf section 7 read w ith the rules made im der this Act or the rules in new 
SchedMle III, the m arket vahie of any asset Is to be taken into account 
in m aking an assessment, the Assessing QflOcer may refer the valuation 
< f  such asset to the V aluation Officer.
Clatise 66 seeks to amend sub-section (1) of section 17 of the W ealth- 
tax Act relating to w ealth escaping assessment.
U nder the provisions of new sub-section (1), as substituted by clause
(a) of section 1^  of th e Direct Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 1987, th e 
Assessing Officer is empowered to assess or re-assess the net w ealth 
which has escaped assessm m t for any assessment year, after recording 
reascms for d o i^ so.
The proposed amendments in sub-section (1) are on the lines of 
ftm finr am endm ents m ade in sections 147 and 148 of the Income-tax Act 
o id e‘clauses 2Z and 24. i
Clause 67 seeks to am end section 17B of the W ealtti-tax A ct C«» 
Inserted by section 141 of the Direct Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 1 9 ^


on the aam« lines as amendments made in section 234A of the Income-tax 
Act vide  clause 38.
Clause 68 seeks to amend section 18 of the W ealth-tax Act on the 
same lines amendments made in section 271 of the Income-tax Act 
vide  clause 50.
Clause 69 seeks to substitute section 18A of the W ealth-tax Act [as 
it stood immediately before its substitution by section 142 of the Direct 
Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 1987] by a new section so as to bring the 
provisions of this section on the same lines as those of section 272A of 
the Income-tax Act substituted by section IIC of the Direct Tax Laws 
(Amendment^ Act. 1987.
Clause 70 seeks to amend section 18B of the W ealth-tax Act on the 
same lines as the amendments made in section 273A of the Income-tax 
Act inde clause 51.
Clause 71 seeks to amend section 23 of the Wealth-tax Act |>s amend­
ed by section 146 of the Direct Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 1S87] pro­
viding for fixst appeal against the orders of the Assessing OflBcers. Am­
endm ent in sub-section ( 1), clausc (d) is consequent to the amendment 
made in section 18. Amendment in clause (b) of sub-section (lA) pro­
vides appeal against the orders passed imder sub-section ( 1) of section 
18 with the previous approval o the Deputy Gammissioner as specified 
in sub-section (3) of that section.
Clause 72 seeks to amend section 26 of the Wealth-tax Act providing 
a ] ^ a l  to the Appellate Tribxmal against the orders passed by the Direc­
tor General or Director under section 18A.
Clause 73 seeks to am oid section 34A of the Wealth-tax Act.
,  Sub-clause (a) seeks to amend sub-section ( 1) so as to substitute the 
reference to “total income” by a reference to ‘‘ net wealth’’  to rectify a 
factual error. *the amendments proposed by sub-clause (b) are on the 
same lines as the amendments made in section 244A of the Income-tax 
Act 
v id e clause 41-
Clause 74 seeks to amend section 35 of the Wealth-tax Act so as to 
omit the references to section 23A in clause (c) of sub-section (1).
Clause 75 seeks to insert a new section 36 in the Wealth-tax Act to 
provide for production of evidence in prosecution for offences under the 
A r t
The provisions of the new section are on the same lines as those of 
new section 279B inserted in the Income-tax Act vide clause 53-
Clatue 76 seeks to amend section 41 of the Wealth-tax Act relating 
to  sei-vice of notice. In view of levy of wealth-tax on companies, sub- 
sectioQ ( 2) is proposed to be amended to clarify that in the case of com­
p anies the notice or requisition referred to in the sectton be addressed 
to the principal officer of such companies.
a o w e  77 sedB to amend section 42A < rf tte  Wealthrtax Act relating 
to publication of infonnation reepectin*
91


Itt v iew  o f le v y  o f W ealth-tax on com panies, th e proposed Expiana^
fseeks  to clarify th at :n the case of a company, the names of the 
directors, secretaries and treasurers, or m anagers of the company, may 
also be published if, in the opinion of the Central Government, the cir- 
cumstances of the case justify it.
Clause 78 seeks to insert a new Schedule III in the W ealth-tax Act to 
provide rules for determ ining value of assets.
Schedide III ctmtains P arts A to H :—
1. P a rt A is of general nature-
Rule 1 in this p art provides th at the value of any asset, other 
than cash, for the purposes of the W ealth-tax Act, shall be deter­
m ined in the m anner laid down in nUes 2 to 21 -
R ule 2 lays down definitions of various term s appearing in these 
rules.
2. P art B contains rules 3 to 8 which provide the m anner in 
which the value of any immovable property, being a building or land 
aj^Mirtenant thereto, or p art thereof, is to be determined- '
The provisions of these rules are on the same lines as those «f 
the existing rule IBB in the W ealth-tax Rules. 1957, subject to the 
following modifications, namely; —
(i) these rules w ill be used for valuation of residential as 
well as commercial properties. Thus the w ord “house” w herever 
appears in rule IBB has been substituted by the words “immov­
able property**;
(ii) rules 3 provides th at the value of any immovable pro­
perty being a building or land appurtenant tliereto, or part 
tiiereof, shall be the amo\mt arrived a t by multiplpring the net 
m aintainable rent by the figure 125 in all cases except w here the 
p roperty is constructed on leasehold land-
(iii) proviso to rule 3 provides th at in the case of a property 
co n stru ct^  on a leasehold land the figure 12-5 mentioned above 
shall be substituted by the figure 10 if the unexpired period of 
the lease of such land is 50 years o r more, and by the figure 8 
if the unexpired period of the lease is less than 50 years-
It has fu rther been provided that if the property is acquired 
cr constructed after the 31st day of March, 1974, then the value 
arrived at as per the aforesaid provision shall not be less than 
th e cost of acquisition or the cost of construction as increa'^ed 
by the cost of any Improvements in the properliy;
(iv) ru le 4 deals w ith the m ethod of com puting the “net 
m aintainable rent" for the purpose of rule 3. This has am ended 
suitably sub-rule 2(c) of the existing rule IBB. U nder the am­
ended provision th e n et m aintainable ren t is to be computed 
after deducting from  the "gross m aintainable rent" the amoimt 
of taxes levied h f any local authority In respect of property and 
a sum equal to 19 p er cent- of the gross m aintainable rent;
92


(v) rule 5 provides method of computing gross maintaia- 
able rent for the purpose of rule 4, This has amended the pro- 
visions of existing sub-rule (2) (a) of rule IBB. In this rule 
gross maintainable rent means— ,
(a) w here the property is let out the amount received 
or receivable by the owner as annual rent or annual value 
assessed by the local authority, whichever is higher;
(b) w here the property is not let out, the amount of 
annual rent assessed by the local authority or if the property 
is not situaftd in the jurisdiction of any local authority, the 
am ount which the owner can reascmably be expected to re­
ceive as 4mnual rent.
Explanations to this rule define the words “the awnnai rent’' 
and “rent receivsd or receivable”. In the case of a property let 
out throughout the year the annual rent would mean the actual 
rent received or receivable by the owner in that year. If the pro- 
' P®rty is let out for part of tiie year, the annual rent wlU be 
determined proportionately- In cases where the land-lord re- 
. ceives a benefit from the tenant by way of municipal taxes borne 
wholly or partly by the tenant, the “annual rent” will be in­
creased by the amount so borne by the tenant. Where the tenant 
bears the expenditure on r^pairiB ‘‘the annual ren t” shall be in 
creased by one-ninth. Where the owner has accepted any 
deposit (not being advance rent for a period of three months or 
less) the annual rent shall be increased by 15 per' cent, of such 
deposit per annum less the interest payable by the owner to the 
tenant. Where the owner has recetved any amount by v/ay of 
premium or otherwise for leasing tlie property the annual rent 
will be increased by the amount obtained by dividing the ore- 
n^vim by the number of years of the period of lease. ‘‘ Rent 
received or receivpble” shall include all payments for the use of 
a property by whatever name called, the value of all benefits or 
perquisites, whether convertible into money or not, obtained 
from the tenant or occupier by the owner;
(vi) rules 6 and T  provide for adjustment to the value arrived 
at imder rule 3 for unbuilt area of plot of land, and adjustment 
for unearned increase in ths value of the land respectively. 
These are on tiie lines of the existing sub-rules (3) and (4) of 
rule IBB i
(vii) Rule 8 mentions the cases where provisions of rule 3 are 
not +o applv. Provisions of this rule are on the lines of sub-rule 
(5) of the existing rule IBB except tfiat the requirement of 
having to obtam the prior aprrr»iral of the Inspecting Assistant 
Commissioner in the m atter of valuation in such cas« h ^  been 
dispensed «ath as a result of laying d o w  the guidelme in nUe
20 . '
3 P art C contains rules 0 to 13 which provide the m an n «  in 
which the value of shares in or debenture of companies are to be
determined.
9$
2000 LS—13.


(a) Rule 9 provides for the valuation of quoted shares aad 
debentures of companies. It provides th at the value of a quoted 
equity or preference share in any company or a quoted deben­
ture shall be taken as the value quoted in respect of such share 
or debenture on the valuation date, or w here there is no such 
quotation on the valuation date, the quotation on the im m edi' 
a td y  preceding date closest to the valuation date.
(b) Rule 10 provides for the valuation of unquoted prefer* 
e ice shares. TTie provisions of this rule are on the same lines 
as those of the existing rule 1C of the W ealth-tax Rules, 1957 
except th at the words “m arket value” have been substituted by 
the word “value’’.
(c) Rule 11 provides for the valuation of unquoted equity 
shares in companies other than investment companies. The pro­
visions of this rule are on the same lines as these of the existing 
ru le ID of the W ealth-tax Rules, 1957 subject to the following 
modifications, nam ely;—
(t) the words “m arket value*’  is substituted by the word 
*-\^ue”;
(u) the value is determ ined in aU cases at 80 per c e n t 
of the break-up value irrespective of the num ber of years for 
w hidi dividend has not been dedared.
(d) Rule 12 provides for the valuation of unquoted equity 
shares in investm ent companies. Sub-rule (2) of this ru le pro­
vides the m anner by which the value of sudi shares will be
determined- The provisions of this sub-rule are on the same 
lines as in sub-rules ( 1) and (2) of tlie existing rule IE of the 
W ealth-tax Rules, 1957.
Sub-rule (3) clarifies th at tlie value of an asset disclosed in 
the balance-sheet of the compaAy shall be taken to be the value 
determ ined in accordance w ith the rules as applicable thereto 
and, in the absence of any such rule, the value of such asset shall 
be its value as determined under rule 20 , i e., the price it would 
fetch in the open m arket if sold on the valuation date.
Sub-rule ( 4 ) clai ifies th at the words “balance-sheet" in this 
r-.tle shall have the same meaning as in rule 11 , and the amaunta 
referred to in sub-rule ( 3) of rule 11 shall not be treated as 
assets. These amounts are specified in Explanation  II to the exis­
ting rule ID
For the purpose of facilitating the valuation under this rule, 
sub-rule ( 5) provides th at the company concerned shall have 
such valuation made by its auditors appointed under section 224 
of the Companies Act, 1956, and a certificate of the auditors re­
lating to such valuation in the prescribed form shall be furnished 
to the Assessing Officer in the case of the company. Tt further 
pro\ide 8 th at the valuation made by the auditors shall be taken 
into account in the assessments of the shareboldefs of the com­
pany. •
H


(e) Rule 13 provides for the valuation of unquoted equity 
snares m inter-locked companies. Explanation to this rule clari- 
fies that inter-locked companies in this rule mean any two in­
vestment companies holding shares in each other.
Sub-rule ( 1) provides that the value of an unquoted eqxiity 
share in one of the two inter-locked companies held hy the other 
inter-locked company for the purposes of rule 12 shall be the 
higher of the paid-up value of such share or the value deter­
mined under sub-rule ( 2). ;
Sub-rule ( 2) provides the mode of determining the value of 
such share which is mentioned below:
(i) the value of equity share for this rule =
Aggregate value of all the equity shares
Number cf equity shares ■
(ii) aggregate value of ail the equity shares shall be:
(a) in a case where 51 per cent, or more of the gross 
total income of the company consists of the income 
chargeable under the head “Income fiom  house proporty”, 
equal to the maintainable profits of such company 
X100IS5
(b) in the case of any other inter-locked company, 
equal to maintainable profits x lOOjlO
(iii) Sub-ixile (3) provides the manner in which the 
“maintainable profits” of the company for the above ptir- 
pose shall be computed.
4. P art D contains rule 14 which prowdes the manner in which 
the net value of the assets of the business as a whole, having regard 
to the balance-sheet of such business, is to be determined.
Sub-rule (2) provides the manner in which various adjustments 
are to be made in the value of assets and liabilities in the balance- 
sheet for the purpose of this rule.
5. P art E contains rules 15 and 16 which provide the manner in 
which the value of the interest of a person in a firm of which he is 
a partner or in an association of persons of which he is a member, 
is to be determined.
Rule 16 provides the computation of net wealth of the firm or 
an association of persons and its allocation amongst the partners or 
members. The provisions of this rule are on the same lines as those 
of the existing sub-rule (1) of rule 2 of the Wealth-tax Rules, 1957.
A proviso has been added in rule 16 to provide that in deter­
mining the net wealth for the purpose of this rule, no account shdl 
be taken of the exemptions in sub-sections ( 1) and (lA) of section 5.
E xplanat^  to this rule seeks to provide that:
(a) where the net wealth of the firm on association com­
p u te d  in accoKiance with this rule includes the value of any
95


assets located outside India, the value of the interest of an^ 
partner or member in the assets located in India shall be deter- 
iniiied iiMving regard to ibe jjuoporUon v\rbich Uie value of 
a ^ e ts  located in India diminished by the debts relating to those 
assets bcar^ to the net wealth of the firm os association. These 
provisions are contained in the existing sub-rule ( 2) of rule 2 
of the W ealth-tax Rules. 1957.
(b) where the net wealth -of the firm or association, com­
puted in aixordance w ith this rule includes the value of any 
assets which are exem pt from inclusion in the n et w ealth under 
sub-sections ( 1) and (lA ) of section & , the value of the interest 
of a partner or m m b e r shall be deemed t» include the value 
of his proportionate share in the said assets and, the provisions 
of sulvsections (1) and (lA ) of section 5 shall apply to him 
accordin^y;
(c) Wliere the net wealth of the firm or association computed 
in accordance w ith this rule includes the value of any assets 
referred to in sub-section (2) of section 5, the value of th e 
interest of a partnex* or m ember shall be deemed to include the 
value of his proportionate share in the said assets, and the pro­
visions of sub-section (2) of section 5 siiaU ai^ ly  to him  accord­
ingly. llie se  pro^'isions are contained in existing sub-rule (3) 
of rule 2 of the W ealth-tax Rules, 1957.
6. P art F contains rule 17 which provides the m anner in which 
the value of life in t« « st < S f  an assessee is to be determined.
T he provisions of this rule are on the same lines as those of the 
existing ru le J B  of the W e\Ith-tax Rules, 1957.
7. P a rt G contains rules 18 and 19 which provide the m anner in 
which valuation of jew ellery is to be determined.
CUnue (a) of rule 18 provides th at in a case w here th e 
value of jew ellery declared by the assessee is Rs. 5 laUis or less, 
th e value declared will be a c c ^ te d  provided infonnation in th e 
prescribed form is furnished by the assessee.
Clause (b) of nile 18 provides th a t in a case where the 
value of jew ellery declared is more than Rs. 5 lakhs, the valu­
ation will be based on the value estim ated by the valuation 
officer on a reference under section 16A of the W ealth-tax Act.
RuU' 19 pro’ .i'ic'; that the value of jew ellery determ ined 
under clause (b) of rule 18 for any assc^ssment year (liereinafter 
referred to as the first assessment year) shall be taken to be 
the value of such jewellery for the subsequent four assessment 
years subject to the adjustm ents proxnded in clauses (a) and 
( b ) : -
(a) w here the jewellery includes gold or silver or any 
alloy containing gold or silver, the m arket value of such gold 
or silvc'- or such alloy on the valuation date relevant to the 
concerned subsequent assessment year shall be substitated
%


for the market valixe of such gold or silver or alloy on th« 
valuation date relevant to the first assessment year;
(b) where any jewellery or part of jewellery is sold or 
otherwise diq>osed of by the assessee or any jewellery or 
part of jewellery is acquiaed by him, on oi- before the valu­
ation date relevant to the concerned subsequent year^ the 
value of the jewellery determined for the post-assessment 
year shall be reduced or increased, as the case may be, and 
the value as so reduced or increased shall be the value of 
the jewellery for such subsequent assessment year.
8. P art H contains rules 20 and 21 which provide that the value 
of any asset, other than cash, being an asset which is not covered by 
rules 3 to 19. shall be estimated either by the assessing officer him­
self or by the valuation officer if reference is made to him under sec­
tion 16A.’ This rule farther provides that in both these cases, the 
value shall be estimated to be the pnce which it would fetch if sold 
iu the open m arket on the valuation date- Sub-rule- (3) provides 
that in the case of assets not saleable in the open market, value shall 
be determined in accordance with guidelines or principles specified 
by the Board from time to time by general or special order.
Rule 21 provides that for the purposes of determining market 
value under any provision of this Schedule, the price or other consi­
deration for which the property may be acquired by or transferred 
to any person under the terms of a deed of trusty or through or imder 
any restrictive covenant in any instrument of transfer shall be 
ignored.
Clause 79 seeks to amend section 3 of the Gift-tax Act to make a 
consequential change so as to substitue the reference to “the Schedule’' 
by “Schedule I’’  in view of renumbering of the existing Schedule as 
Schedule I. '
Clause 80 seeks to amend section 5 of the Gift-tax Act by inserting 
clause (iiie) in sub-section ( 1).
Tlie new clause seeks to provide that gifts made by an indi\ddual 
•vdio is non-resident Indian to any relative of any property in the form 
of bonds specified under sub<lause (iid) of clause (J5) of section 10 of 
the Income-tax Act shall be exempt from gift-tax.
The proviso to the new clause seeks to provide that where an indivi­
dual who is a non-resident Indian in any previoiis year in  which the 
bonds are acquired, becomes resident in any subsequent year, the clause 
shall apply in respect of the gifts of property in the form of such bonds 
made in such s u h ^ u e n t year or any year thereafter.
Explanation seeks to provide that for the purposes of this clause the 
expressions “relative” and “non-resident Indian” shall have the meanings 
assigned to them in clause (41) of section 2. and clause (e) of section 
115C. of the Income-tax Act.
Clansf 81 seeks to substitute a new section for section 6 of the Gift- 
tax Act dealing with the mode of determination of the value of glftfc
97


Siib-section ( 1) of the new section provides that the value of any 
prc^>erty; other than cash, ti'ansferred by way of gifi shall, for the pur­
pose of this Act, be its value as on the date on w hich the gift w as m ade 
and shall be determ ined in the m anner lai<J down in Schedule II. Sche­
dule n  provides that the valuation is to be made in accordance w ith the 
proviaons of Schedule III to the W ealth-tax Act.
Sub-section ( 2) of the new section provides that in respect of a gift 
not revocable for a specified period, the value of property gifted shall be 
the capitalised value oI the income from such pi'operty during the period 
for which the gift is not re\’ ocable.
Clause 82 seeks to arneml section 10 of the Gift-tax Act [as substitut­
ed h y section 164 of the Direct Tax Laws (Amendmeni) Act, 1987] so as 
to substitute the reference to sub-section “ (&)” occurring in sub-section
(2) of th at section by a reference to sub-section “ ( 4) ’’ .
Clause 83 seeks to amend section 15 of tlie G iii-lax Act [as subsl lu­
ted b section 170 of the Direct Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 1987].
T he am endments proposed by sub-clauses (a) and (b) are on the 
lines of am endm oits made in section 143 of the Income-tax Act vide  
clause 2 1.
Sub-clause (c) seeks to amend sub-section ( 6) to provide that where 
u n d v  the provisions of section 6 read w ith new Schedule II, the fair 
m arket value of an property transferred by way of gift is to be taken 
into account in m aking an assessment, the Assessing OflRcer may refer 
the valuation of such p r t ^ r t y  to the Valuation OflRcer. The amend­
m ent is on the lines of section 16A of the W ealth-tax A ct.
d o m e 84 seeks to amend sub-section (1) of section 16 of the Gift- 
tax Act relating t< »  gift escaping as&essment.
U nder the provisions of new sub-section ( 1) [as substituted by clausc
(a) of section 171 of the Direct T ax Laws (Amendment) Act, 1987], the 
Assessing Officer is em powered to assess or re-assess the taxable gift 
which has escaped assessment for any assessment year, after recording 
reasons for doing so.
The proposed am endments in sub-section (1) are on the lines of 
Kirnilar am endments made in sections 147 and 148 of the Income*tax Act 
vide  clauses 23 and 24.
Clause 85 seeks to amend section 16B of the Gift-taj; Act [as in­
serted by section 173 of the Direct T ax Laws (Amendment) Act, 1987] 
on th e same lines as amendments made in section 234A of the Income- 
tax A ct vide  clause 38.
Clause 86  seeks to amend section 17 of the Gift-tax Act on the same 
as amwidments made in secti<m 271 of the Income-tax Act tnde 
clause 50.
CUttue 87 seeks to substitute section 17A of the G ift-tax Act [as 
it stood im mediately before its substitution by section 174 of the Direct 
Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 1987] by a new section so as to make the
dd


provisions of this section on tlie same lines as those of section 272A of 
the Income-tax Act [as substituted by section 110 of the Direct T&x Laws 
(Amendment) Act, 1587].
Clause 88 seeks to amend section 22 of the Gift-tax Act [as amend­
ed by section 176 of the Direct Tax Laws (Amendmenl) Act, 1M7] pro- 
viding first appeal against the orders passed by the Assessing Officers. 
Amendment in sub-section ( 1), clause (d) is consequent to the amend­
m ent made in section 17. A m entoent in clause (c) of sub-section (lA) 
pro'ddes appeal against the orders passed under sub-section ( 1) cf 
section 17 w ith the previous approval of the Deputy Commissioner as 
specified in sub-section (3) of that section.
Clause 89 seeks to amend section 2 .5  of the Gift-tax Act providing 
appeal to the Appellate Tribunal against the order passed by the Director 
General or Director under section 17A.
Clause 90 seeks to amend section 33A of the Gift-tax A ct.
The amendmehts proposed by sub-clauses (a) and (b) are on the 
lines of amendments proposed in section 34A of the Wealth-tax Act vide 
clause 73.
ClaiLSe 91 seeks to amend section 34 of the Gift-tax Act so as to 
omit the references to scction 22A in clause (c) of sub-section (1).
Clause 92 seeks to insert a new section 35E in the Gift-tax Act to 
provide for production of evidence in prosecution for offences under the 
Act.
The provisions of the new section are on the same lines as those 
ctf new section 279B inserted in the Income-tax Act vide clause 53.
Clause 93 seeks to amend section 45 of the Gift-tax Act mentioning 
certain cases in which the provisions of the Gift-tax Act are not applied. 
The amendment seeks to substitute a new Expla;iation for Explanations
1 and 2 [as they stood immediately before their substitution by section 
184 of the Direct Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 1987] so as to clarify 
that for the purpose of clause (b) the term “amalgamation” shall have 
the assigied to it in clause (IB) of swtion 2 of the Tncotne-tax
Act.
Clr:'vf 94 seeks to amend the Gift-tax Act by inserting Schedltls IT  
^  'hich inc-orncra^es th? rules for determininp the value of the property 
gifted.
Schedule II provides that the value of any property other than cadi 
transferred by way of gift shall be determined, for the purpose of this 
A.ct, in accordance with the provisions of Schedule HI of the Wealth-tax 
.^ct. subject 10 the following modifications—
(a) in rule 5 of Schedule HI to the Wealth-tax Act, reference
to the vear ending on the valuation date shall be construed as a
reference to the previous year. Except this, reference to the valua­
tion dfite shp 1l be Ponst'-'i<-H as reference tr the date on which the
gift was made.
69


(b) references to sections 7 and 16A of the W ealth-tax Act
be construed as references to section 6 and sub-section ( 6) o£ section 
15 of this A ct.
Clause 95 seeks to omit or amend various provisiors of the Direct 
Tax Laws (Amendment) Act 1987.
ITie clause seeks to omit clauses (p) and (s) of section 3, clauses (a ), 
(k) and ( 1) of section 6 , sections 7, 8. clause (a) of section 9, clause ( 1 1) 
of section 13, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 24, clauses (a ), (b ), (d) ' and (e) 
of section 25, 26, 29, clause (a) of section 61, 62. 63; clause (a) of section 
64, 66 , 67, 68 , 69, 71, 72, clause (b) of section 88, 100, 101, 106, 122, clause
(3). sulMdause (i) of clause (5), dauses («), ( 8), (9), (10), ( 11 ), (18), 
(14). (16), (IS) and (22) of section 124 clauses (5). ( 8), (11), (13). 
(23) and (28) of section 126, secUons 142,’  148, 144, 147, clauses (1) and 
(2) of section 160, 174. 17S, 177, clauses (c) and (d) of section 184 and 
clause ( 2 ) of section 186.
The clause also seeks to ameiul clause (r) of section 3, section 18, 
clfliise (c) of section 61, clause (b) of section 64, clauses (12) and (24) 
of section 124, clause (a) of section 149 and clause (a) of scction 179.
The pi-oposed amendments in various provisions of the. Direct Tax 
haws  (Amendment) Act, 1967 will mainly h£ve the following effect, 
namely: —
(i) to- w ithdiaw  the am endm ents made in the Income-tax Act 
for introducing a new scheme of assessment of firms and partners 
and to restore the d d  provisions in this regard which existed imme­
diately before their am endm ent by the Direct Tax Laws (Amend­
m ent) Act, 1987;
(ii) to w ithdraw  the amendment made in clause (ii) of sub­
section (1) of section 64 of the Income-tax Act restricting the in­
applicability of th at clause to professional firms only and to revive 
the old provisions of that clause as they existed immediately before 
the amendment by the Direct Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 1987;
(iii) to w ithdraw  ’’.e amendments made in the Income-tax 
Act for introducing a new scheme of assessment of charitable or 
religious trusts, institutions or funds and to restore the old provi­
sions in this regard and also the provisions of sections 35, 35CCA 
and 35CCB relating to the deductions on account of scientific re­
search, rural development programmes and pr«»grammes of conser­
vation of natural resources which existed immediately before their 
am endment by the Direct T ax I^w s (Amendment) Act, 1987;
(iv) to withdt-aw the provisions relating? to levj- of additional 
income-tax, wealth-tax and gift-tax and advance ruling in the 
Income-tax Act, W ealth-tax A ct and G ift-tax Act and to restore the 
old penal provisions in this regard In the said Acts which existed 
im m ediately before their am endment by the Direct Tax Laws 
(Amendment) Act, 1987;
(v) to substitute th e  words “Assessing Officer'’  for the v/ords 
“Income-tax Officer” <m account of tbe changes in the designations 
m ade by tbe Direct Tax Law s (Amendment) Act, 1987 w ith effect 
from 1-4-1988 in the Second and Third Schedules of the Income-tax 
Act.
100


MEMORANDUM REX3ARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
V
Clause 4 of the BUI seeks to amend section 10 of the Income-tax Act. 
Sub-clause (a) of clause 4 seeks to insert clause ( 6C) which empowers 
the Centra] Government to specify a foreign company whose income, by 
way of fees for technical services received in pursuance of an agreement 
with the Central Govenunent for providing services in projects connected 
with security of India, will be exempt. Sub-clause (b) -seeks to insert 
sub-clause (ild) in clause (15). The new sub-clause empowers th e 
Central Government to specify bonds which are purchased by a non­
resident Indian in foreign exchange, the interest whereon arising to a 
non-resident Indian, etc., will be exempt. Sub-clause (d) seeks to 
substitute a new clause for clause (23). The new clause empowers the 
Central Government to notify an associaition or institution which has as, 
its object the control, supervision, regulation or encouragement in India 
of the games of cricket, hockej". football, tennis or such other games as 
the Central Government may specify- The income of such association 
or institution will, on such notification being issued, be exempted. The 
form in which the association has to make an application and the 
authority to whom the application is to be made w ’ ill be prescribed by 
rules. Clause (b) of the third proviso to clause (23) also empowers the 
Central Board of Direct Taxes to notify certain articles received in the 
form of voluntary contribution which need not be invested or deposited 
under that clause. Clause (e) seeks to amend clause (23C) so as to 
substitute new sub-clauses for sub-clauses (iv) and (v). New sub-clause 
(iv) empowers the Central Government to notify any fund or institution 
established for charitable purposes which has importance throughout 
India or throughout any State or States and new sub-clause (v) 
empowers the Central Government to notify any trust or institution 
e.etablished wholly for public religious purposes or wholly for public 
religious and charitable purposes. The income received by any person 
on behalf of the said fund, institution or trust will stand exempted on 
such notification being issued. Under the first proviso to the said sub­
clauses. the form of application and the authority to which application 
is to be made are required to be prescribed by rules.
2. Q ause 5 of the Bill seeks to amend section 11 of the Income-tax Act. 
Sub-clause (b) (ii) seeks to insert clause (xii) in sub-section (5) of 
section 1 1  which enables the Central Government to prescribe any other 
form  or m«;de of investment or deposit by rules made in this behalf.
3. Clause 6 of the Bill seeks to amend section 32A of the Income-tax 
Act. Sub-clause (f) proposes to «vbstitute new sub-sections for sub­
section ( 8B ). 'N ew  sub-section ( 8B) empowers the Central Government 
to specify a date after which the provisions of section 32A shall cease to 
apply in respect of a ship or aircraft acquired or any machinery or plant 
in stiled .
4. Clause 8 of the Bill seeks to amend section 35 of the Income-tax 
Act. Sub-clause (c) proposes to insert three provisos in sub-section (1) 
of section 35. Undei the first proviso the form of application and the
101
2000 L S -M .


authority to which the. application shall be made by the scientific re­
search association, university, college or other institution .are required 
to be prescribed by rules.
5. Clause 14 of the Bill seeks to insert a ne .v sub-clause (iii) in clause
(a) of sub-section (3) of section 805CC of tne Income-tax Act. Under the 
said sub-clause the authority by which a hotel is to be approved is re- 
quii-ed to be prescribed by rules.
6. Clause 16 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section 80HHD in the 
Income-tax Act. Under the provisions of sub-section ( 1) and clause (a) 
of sub-section (4) of the said section, the authority by which hotels are 
to be approved, is to be prescribed by rules. Under clause (e) of sub­
section (4), tiie Central G overnment is empowered to specify by noti­
fication new facilities for the grow th of Indian tourism for the purposes 
'j[ section 80HHD.
7. Clause 20 of the Bill seeks to amend section 139 of the Income-tax 
Act. Sub-clause (a) seelcs to substitute a new sub-section for sul>- 
section (4A). Under new sub-section ( ^ ) ,  the form in wliich retu rn  of 
income is to be made, the m anner in which the return is to be verified 
and certain other particulars to be included in the return are required to 
t»e prescribed by rules.
8. Clause 34 of the Bill seeks to amend section 206C of the Income-tax 
Act. Sub-clause (b) proposes to insert a new siA>-section (5A) under tha 
said sub-section. Tlie form in which half-yearly returns are to be 
delivered, the income-tax authority t« »  which such returns are to be 
delivered, the m anner of verification of such returns and the time w ithin 
which such returns are to be delivered are required to be prescribed by 
rules.
9. Clause 56 of the Bill seeks to amend the Tenth Schedule to th e 
Income-tax Act. Sub-clause (ii) (a) proposes to insert two new provisos 
after the existing provLo in rule 3. Under the new third proviso, the 
Central Board of Direct Taxes has power to make rules so as to increase 
the amount or amounts specified in column (2) of the Table tm der rule
3 . to such extent and in such m anner as may be prescribed ■  in the 
rule^ having regard to the factors specified in the said proviso.
10. Clause 78 of the Bill seeks to insert a new Schedule III in the 
W ealth-tax Act. laying down rules for determ ining the value of assets. 
The Explanation tc sub-rule (9) of rule 2 of the said Schedule requires 
the form of certificate to be furnished by the stock exchange to be pres­
cribed by rules. Sub-rale (3) of rule 20 of the said Schedule empoweis 
the C entral Board of D irect Taxes to specify guidelines or principles by 
general or special order for determ ining the value of any asset w here 
the value of any such asset cannot be estim ated under r ^ e  20 because 
the same is not saleable in the open market.
11. The m atters in respect of which the notifications may be issued by 
the Central Governm ent or the Central Board of Direct Taxes or in 
respect of which the rules may be made by the Central Board of Direct 
Taxes under section 295 of the Incoitie-tax Act and section 46 of the 
W ealth-tax Act. are m atters of adm inistrative details and it is not possi­
ble to include them in the Bill. U nder the circumstances the delegation 
of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal charac^r.
102


LCMC SABHA
A
RIT.T.
fu rth er to amend the Income-tax Act, 1961, the W ealth-tax Act, 1957, th e 
G ift-tax Act, 1958 and the Direct Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 1987
(S M  S. B. Chavan, MinUtter of T iw n st.)
