5

AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

25 Ave cue

Bill No._127 of 2000

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000
By
Set 8030७ ACHARIA, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.

Br it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. (J) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2000.

(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.

2. After article 16 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted,
namely:—

416A. Every citizen who has attained eighteen years of age shall have the
right to work and in the event of failure of the State to provide any employment,
he shall be entitled to an unemployment allowance at such rate as may be pre-
scribed from time to time by public notification".

Short title a
‘commence
ment,

Insertion of
article 16A

Right to we


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Political democracy and freedom and civil liberties without economic security is a
farce. It is true that man does not live on bread alone, but it is equally true that man cannot
live without bread. Right to life and liberty is meaningless without right to livelihood.
Democracy will be a mere mockery if millions of unemployed youth are left uncared for
without any means of livelihood, which may lead to many undesirable consequences like
social unrest, terrorism, violence and crime and erosion of ethical values.

Part III of the Constitution guarantees fundamental rights to the citizens of India, But
the fundamental human requirement like right to work does not find a place in the list of
Fundamental Rights. This bill seeks to include in the category of Fundamental Rights, the
basic human requirement of right to work, which already forms part of the Directive
Principles of State Policy in Part IV of the Constitution, which is mere platitude without
enforceability,

After completing fifty two years of our independence, it is high time to make right to
work a Fundamental Right, since it is more fundamental for all human beings. Employ-
ment for all will be possible only when the State guarantees jobs to all able-bodied per-
sons. The Constitution, therefore must guarantee the citizens, the right to work.

Hence this Bill.

New Dew; BASUDEB ACHARIA
25 July , 2000,


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides for right to work or unemployment allowance in lieu,
thereof, This Bill, therefore, if enacted, is likely to involve a recurring expenditure of
approximately rupees five hundred crore from the Consolidated Fund of India per annum,

No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.


LOK SABHA

A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.

(Shri Basudeb Acharia, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—2023L S—3107-2000,