As INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

is ave 28 a

No. 128 of 2000

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000
By
‘Suri ANaNT GanoaraM Geers, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
Beitenacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2000, Short title.

2. In Article 81 of the Constitution, in clause (2), in sub-clause (b), for the words Amendment of
“each State”, the words “subject to the provisions of article 213A, each State” shall be article 81
5. substituted.

3. In article 170 of the Constitution, for clause (2), the following clause shall be Amendment of
substituted, namely:— article 170.

“2(a) for the purposes of clause (1), each State shall be divided into territorial
constituencies and for this purpose administrative units formed under article 213A
10 shall form the basis.

(b) every administrative unit formed under article 213A shall be further divided
into territorial constituencies and it shall be ensured that the whole part of a territorial
constituency falls within the jurisdiction of an administrative unit:

Provided that division of territorial constituencies shall be made in such a manner
15 that the ratio between the population of each constituency and the number of seats
allotted to administrative unit shall, so far as practicable, be the same:


Insertion of
hew article
213A.

Administrative
unit

2

Provided further that such readjustment shall not affect the representation in
the Legislative Assembly until the dissolution of the then existing Assembly,

Explanation —In this clause, the expression “population” means the population
as ascertained at the last preceding census of which the relevant figures have been
published.

4. In Part VI of the Constitution, after Chapter IV, the following Chapter and article
thereunder shail be inserted, namely:—

“CHAPTER VIA"
ADMINISTRATIVE UNIT
213A. (1) Every State shall be divided into administrative units.

(2) Every administrative unit shall be the territorial constituency of the House
of the People.

(3) Every administrative unit shall be divided into district or districts, as the
case may be.

(4) While forming a district, it shall be ensured that whole part of a district |
within the jurisdiction of an administrative unit concerned and shall not fall within
the jurisdiction of another administrative unit.

5

15


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Atpresent, every State is divided into districts for better administration. However the
area of a district docs not synchronise with the area of constituency of the House of the
People/State Assembly. Whereas some part of a district falls within jurisdiction of a
constituency of either Lok Sabha/Assembly, the remaining part of the district falls within
the jurisdiction of another constituency. This creates confusion and hurdles in plans and
projects, Moreover, now-a-days under Local Area Development Schemes Members of
Parliament and Legislative Assembly can recommend schemes upto certain amount in their
constituencies, Since their constituencies spread to two or more districts in parts, plans and
projects are not executed properly.

Therefore, it is suggested that Parliamentary constituency shall form the basis of an
administrative unit and districts should be formed out of this. And also the constituencies
of Legislative Assemblies should be divided in accordance with area and population of an
administrative unit. This will pave way for not only better administrative but uniform
development of all districts, The constituencies can be delimited without affecting the
strength of the Legislative Assembly.

The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Constitution with a view to making provision
for forming of administrative units which will be territorial constituencies for the Lok Sabha
for better administration and management.

New Dewan; ANANT GANGARAM GEETE
July 24, 2000


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 4 of the Bill provides for division of districts of an administrative unit, It is
likely that some districts may have to be formed. The Bill therefore will involve expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of India in respect of infrastructure and other facilities for
districts to be newly formed in respect of Union Territories.

Moreover, there is a provision of delimitation of territorial constituencies of Legislative
Assemblies.

1 8 likely that an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred may be
involved. A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees two hundred crore may also be
involved.


ANNEXURE

EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* + + * +
81. (1). * * * ;
(2) For the purpose of sub-clause (a) of clause (1),—

(b) each State shall be divided into territorial constituencies in such manner that
the ratio between the population of each constituency and the number of seats allotted to
it is, so far as practicable, the same throughout the State.

* * * * *
170. (1) = bs के *

(2) For the purposes of clause (1), each State shall be divided into territorial
constituencies in such a manner that the ratio between the population of each constituency
and the number of seats allotted to it shall, so far as practicable, be the same throughout
the State.

* * * * *

Composition
of the House
of the People.

Composition
of Legislative
Assemblies.


LOK SABHA

A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.

(Shri Anant Gangaram Geete, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—2073LS—31,07,2000.