8U1 No. 128 of 19$8 riY 
THE PHARMACY (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 1958 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOR SABHA) 

Bill No. las of I". 
THE PHARMACY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1958 
(As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
further to a.mend the PMrma.cy Act, 1948. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Ninth Year of the Republic 
of India as folIows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Pharmacy (Amendment) Act, Short 
19M. title and commence--
5 (2) Section 19 shall come into force at once; and the remaining 
provisions shall come into force on such date as the Central Gov-
ernment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint; and 
different dates may be appointed for different States or areas 
thereof. 
ment. 
I of 1948. 10 Z. In section 1 of the Pharmacy Act, 1948 (hereinafter referred Amendment 
to as the principal Act),- ofseaion I. 
(a) for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be 
substituted, namely:-
OJ (2) It extends to the whole of India except the State 
IS of Jammu and Kashmir."; 
(b) in sub-section (3), the words "not later than three 
years from the commencement of this Act," shall be omitted; 
and the following proviso shall be inserted at the end, namely:-
"Provided that. where on account of the territorial 
changes brought about by the reorganl18tion of States on 

Amendment 
of section 2. 
Amendment 
of section 3. 
:I 
the 1st day of November, 1956, Chapters III, IV and V have 
effect only in a part of a State, the said Chapters shan take 
effect in the remaining part of that State from such date as 
the State Government may in like manner appoint.". 
3. In section 2 of the principal Act,-
(a) for clause (c), the following clause shall be substi-
tuted, namely:-
'(e) "Indian University" means a university established 
or incorporated under any law for the time being in force in 
5 
the territories to which this Act extends;'; 10 
(b) for clause (f), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:-
'(f) "medical practitioner" means a person-
(i) holding a qualification granted by an authority 
specified or notified under section 3 of the Indian Medical 15 
Degrees Act, 1916, or specified in the Schedules to the 
Indian Medical Council Act, 1956; or 
(ii) registered or eligible for registration in a medi-
cal register of a State meant for the registration of 
persons practising the modern scientific system of ao 
medicine; or 
(iii) registered 01' eligible for regiltration in the 
register of dentists for a State under the Dentists Act, 
1948; or 
(iv) who is engaged in the practice of veterinary 25 
medicine and who possesses qualifications approved by , 
the State Government;'; 
(e) clause (k) shall be omitted. 
4.' In section 3 of the prinCipal Act,~ 
. (a) after clause (d), the fo~lowing clause shall be inserted, )0 
namely:-
"(dd) the Drugs Controller, India, ex Officio or if he is 
unable to attend any meeting, a person authorised by him in 
writing to do 50;"; 

J 
(b) for the proviso, the following proviso shall be substi-
tuted, namely:-
"Provided that for five years from the date on which 
this Chapter comes into force in the State of Kenla, Mysore 
or Rajasthan, as the ease may be, instead of a member elected 
under clause (g), the State Government shall nominate one 
member, being a person eligible for reptration as a pharma-
cist under section 31 ". 
5. In section 5 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), the proviso Amendment 
10 shall be omitted. ofsectionj. 
6. In section 8 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), the proviso Amendment 
shall be omitted. ofacction8. 
7. In section 19 of the principal Act, after clause (d), the follow- Amcn~nt. of section 19· ing c1au~ shall be inserted, namely:-
1$ , "(dd) the officer-in-charge of drugs control organisation 
of the State under the Drugs Act, 1940, ex officio or if he is 
unable to attend any meeting, a person authorised by him in 
writing to do so;". 
8. In section 21 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), after Amendment 
30 clause (d), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:- of section 
11. 
"(dd) the officer-In-charge of drugs control organisation of 
each participating State under the Drugs Act, 1940, ex officio 01 
if he is unable to attend any meeting, a person authorised by 
him in writing to do so;". 
35 9. In section 31 of the principal Act. for the words "A person Ame.l~ment 
shall be entitled", the words "A person who has attained the age of ~~.sect\(ln 
eighteen years shall be entitled" shall be substituted. 
10. In section 32 of the principal Act,-
( 4) in sub-section (1) ,-
30 (i) for the words "a person shall on payment of the 
prescribed fee", the words "a person who has attained the 
age of eighteen years shall on payment of the prescribed 
fee" shall be substituted; 
(ii) in the proviso, for the words "under this sub-sec-
35 tion", the words, brackets and letters "under clause (4) or 
clause (c)" shall be substituted; 
(b) in sub-section (2) ,-
(i) for the words "twenty-one years", the words 
"eighteen years" shall be substituted; 
Amendment 
of section 
31. 

(ii) the words "or is a registered pharmacist in anothe! 
State" shall be inserted at the end. 
Insertion of 11 .. After section 32 of the principal Act, the following section 
new tecdon aball be inlerted, namely:-3lA. 
Special 
proviaion5 
for registra-
tion of cer-
taiD persool. 
"32A. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 32, 6 
a State Council may also permit to be entered on the register-
(a) the names of displaced persons who have been carry-
ing on the business or profession of pharmacy as their prin-
cipal means of livelihood from a date prior to the 4th day of 
March, 1948, and who satisfy the conditions for registration 10 
as set out in section 31; 
(b) the names of citizens of India who have been carry-
ing on the business or profession of pharmacy in any coun-
try outside India and who satisfy the conditions for ~gistra-
tion as set out in section 31; 15 
(c) the names of persons who resided in an area which 
has subsequently become a territory of India and who 
satisfy the conditions for relistration as set out in section 
31; 
(d) the names of persona who carryon the business or» 
profesaion of pharmacy in the State, and would have satisfied 
the conditions for registration as set out in section 31, on 
the date appointed under sub-section (2) of section 30, had 
they applied for registration on or before that date; 
(e) the names of persons who were qualified to be 25 
entered in the register for a State as it existed immediately 
before the 1st day of November, 1956, but who, by reason 
of the area in which they resided or carried on their business 
or profession of pharmacy having become part of a State as 
formed on that date, are not qualified to be entered in the 30 
register for the latter State only by reason of their not having 
passed either a matriculation examination or an examination 
prescribed as being equivalent to a matriculation examina-
tion or an approved examination or of their not possessing a 
qualtfteation approved under IJection 14; .. 35 
<f> the names of persons-
(i) who were included in the register for a State 
aB It existed immediately before the 1st day of Novem~ 
ber, 1ge6; and 

10 
IS 
20 
30 
(ii) who, by realon of the area in which they ·resided 
or carried on their business or profession of pharmacy 
having become part of a State as formed on that date, 
reside or carryon such business or profession in the 
latter Statej 
(g) the names of persons who reside or carry on their 
business or profession of pharmacy in an area in which 
this Chapter takes effect after the commencement of the 
Pharmacy (Amendment) Act, 1958, and who satisfy the 
conditions for registration as set out in section 31. 
(2) Any person who desires his name to be enrered in the 
register in pursuance of sub-section (1) shall make an applica-
tion in that behalf to the State Council, and such application 
shall be accompanied by the prescribed fee. 
(3) The provisions of this section shall remain in operation 
for a period of two years from the commencement of the 
Pharmacy (Amendment) Act, 1958: 
Provided that the State Government may, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, extend the period of operation of clause (4), 
clause (b) or clause (c) of sub-section (1) by such further period 
or periods, not exceeding two years in the aggregate, as may be 
specified in the notification. 
Explanation l.-For the purposes of clause (a) of sub-
section (1), "displaced person" means any person who on 
account of the setting up of the Dominions of India and Pakistan 
or on account of civil disturbances or the fear of such disturban-
ces in any area now forming part of Pakistan, has, on or after the 
1st day of March, 1947, left or been displaced from his place of 
residence in such area and who has since then been reSiding in 
India. 
Explanation 2.-For the purposes of clauses (b), (c) and 
(g) of sub-section (1), the periud referred to in clause (d) of 
section 31 shall be computed with reference to the date of appli-
cation. 
3S 12. In section 34 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3) I for the 
words "in the prescribed manner endorse the certificate of registra-
tion, accordingly", the words "issue a receipt therefor and such 
receipt shall be proof of renewal of registration" shall be substituted. 
13. In sub-section (1) of section 36 of the principal Act,-
(ll) in clause (iii), after the words "for the purposes of his 
business of pharmacy", the words "or employed. to work under 
Amendment 
Of8eCtion 
34· • 
Amendment 
of Ketlon 
]6. 

Substitu-
tion of new 
section for 
!lection 40. 
Printing of 
register and 
c vid, ntiarv 
value of . 
entries 
therein. 
I 
6 
him in connection with any business of pharmacy" shall ~ 
inserted; 
(b) in the provisio,-
(i) in clause (c), after the words "employed by the 
registered pharmacist for the purposes of his business of S 
pharmacy", the words "or employed to work under him in 
connection with any business of pharmacy" shall be 
inserted; 
(ii) in clause (e), after the words "by persons employed 
by him", the words "or by persons under his control" shall 10 
be inserted. 
14. For section 40 of the principal Act, the following section shall 
be substituted, namely:-
"40. (1) As soon as may be after the 1st day of April subse-
quent to the commencement of the Pharmacy (Amendment) 15 
Act, 1958, the Registrar shall cause to be printed copies of the 
register as it stood on the said date. 
(2) The Registrar shall thereafter cause to be printed as 
soon as may be after the 1st day of April in each year copies of 
the annual supplement to the register referred to in sub-section 20 
(1), showing all additions to, and other amendments in, the said 
register. 
(3) (a) The register shall be brought up-to-date three months 
hefore ordinary elections to the State Council are held and copies 
of this register shall be printed. as 
(b) The provisions of sub-section (2) shall apply to the 
register as 80 printed as they apply to the register referred to in 
81.1 b-section ( 1 ) . 
(4) The copies referred to in sub-section (1) or sub-
section (2) or sub-section (3) shall be made available to persona 30 
applying therefor on payment of the prescribed charge nnd 
shall be evidence that on the date referred to in the register or 
annual supplement. as the case may be, the persons whose names 
are entered therein were regi!ter~d pharmacists. 
15. In section 41 of the principal Act,- 35 
(a) in clause (b) of sub-section (2), after the words "or 
any cOmbination of such words", the words "or of any such word 
with any other word" shall be inserted; 

'I 
(b) in sub-section (3), after the words "the State Govern-
ment or", the words "any officer authorized in this behalf by the 
State Government or by order of" shall be inserted. 
16. In section 42 of the principal Act,- =t:eDt 
(a) in sub-section (1), the words "except under the direct 42· 
and personal supervision of a registered pharmacist" shall be 
omitted; 
(b) in sub-section (3), for the words "an order of the State 
Government", the words "order of the State Government or any 
10 officer authorised in this behalf by the State Government, or by 
order of the Executive Committee of the State Council" shall be 
substituted. 
IS 
17. In sub-section (2) of section 46 of the principal Act,- Amendment ofsecUon 
(a) in clause (j), the words "and the manner of endorse- 46. 
ment of renewals thereof" shall be omitted; 
(b) after clause (k), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:-
"(kk) the conduct of pharmacists and their duties in 
relation to medical practitioners, the public and the profes-
20 sion of pharmacy;" 
18. (1) Where on account of the territorial changes brought about S~cial pro-. . VISions for by the reorgamsatlOn of States on the 1st day of November, 1956, a dissolution 
State Council is functioning either in a part of a State or in more or ~ecoandnsti-• tuuon than one State, the Central Government may, after consultmg the reorganisa-
.as State Government or Governments concerned. by order provide for teion of.Sltate 
• OUOCl s. 
all or any of the followmg matters, namely:-
(a) the dissolution of the State Council; 
(b) the reconstitution and reorganisation in any manner 
whatsoever of the State Council, including the constitution, 
30 where necessary, of new State Councils; 
(c) the extension of the term of office of the members of a 
State Council for any period or periods not exceeding two years 
in the aggregate; 
(d) the area in respect of which the reconstituted State 
3S Council or new State Council shall function and operate; 
(e) the transfer, in whole or in part, of the assets, rights and 
liabilities of the State Council (including the rights and liabili-
ties under any contract made by it) to any other State Councils 

31 of 1956. 
Validation 
of certain 
acts. 
8 
or State Governments and the terms and conditions of iluch 
transfer; 
(f) the substitution of any such transferee for the State 
Council or the addition of any such transferee, as a party to 
any legal proceeding to which the State Council is a patty; and 5 
the transfer of any proceedings pending before the State 
Council to any such transferee; 
(g) the transfer or re-employment of any employees of 
the State Council to, or by, any such transferee and subject 
to the provisions of section 111 of the States. Reorganisation 10 
Act, 1956, the terms and conditions of service applicable to such 
employees after such transfer or re-employment; 
(h) such incidental, consequential and supplementary 
matters as may be necessary to give effect to the purposes of 
this section. 15 
(2) Where an order is made under this section, transferring the 
assets, rights and liabilities of any State Council, then, by virtue of 
that order, such assets, rights and liabilities of' the State Council 
shall vest in, and be the assets, rights and liabilities of, the trans-
feree. 20 
(3) Every order made under this section shall be published in 
the Official Gazette and shall be laid before each House of Parlia-
ment, as soon as may be, after it is made. 
19. Chapters III, IV and V of the principal Act shall be deemed tl? 
, have taken effect in the territories which immediately before the 25 
commencement of the Constitution were either comprised' in the 
Province of Bombay or being administered as if they formed part 
of that Province, on the earliest date on which any act, proceeding' 
ur thing was done or taken .in the said territories by the Govern-
ment or by any officer of Government or by any other authority in 30 
the belief or purported belief that the said Chapters had taken 
effect in the said territories and that such act, proceeding or thing 
was being done or taken under the said Chapters; and all acts, pro-
ceedings and things of the nature referred to above, done or taken 
in the said territories between the said date and the commencement 35 
of this section by the Government or by any officer of Government 
or by any other authority shall f9r all purposes be deemed to be, 
and to have always been, done or taken in accordance with law; 
and no suit or other proceeding shaH be maintained or continued 
against the Government or any person or authority whatsoever on 40 
the ground that any such act, proceeding or thing was not done or 
taken in accordance with .law. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Pharmacy Act, 1948 (8 of 1948), which provides for the 
regulation of the profession and practice of pharmacy has been in 
force since 1948. This Bill seeks to amend the Act so as to give 
effect to the following objects, namely:-
(1) the extension of the Act to the areas comprised in the 
former Part B States; 
(2) the introduction of provisions necessary to meet the 
situation which has arisen on account of the reorganisation of 
States which took effect on 1st November, 1956; 
(3) the registration of certain categories of persons. 
Opportunity has also been taken to make a few minor amendments 
in the Act, the need for which has been brought to light in the 
course of the administration of the Act during the last ten years. 
The Notes on clauses appended hereto explain the provisions of 
the Bill, wherever necessary. 
D. P. KARMARKAR. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 1st December, 1958. 

Notes on clawe, 
Clawe 2.-The Act now in force does not extend to the areas 
comprised in the former Part B States. Further, after the re-
organisation of States, it is operative in .some parts of a reorganised 
State but not in the other parts thereof. Sub-clause (a) seeks to 
extend the Act to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir, while sub-clause (b) will enable a State Government to 
bring the provisions of Chapters III, IV and V of the Act into opera-
tion in any portion of the State in which they were not operative 
before reorganisation. Sub-clause (b) also proposes to omit the 
time-limit of three years laid down in section 1 (3) for bringing these 
Chapters into operation, since that time-limit expired long ago. 
Clawe 3-Sub-clause (a) .-The definition of 'Indian University' 
is being amplified to cover a university established by a law of a 
former Part B State Legislature. 
Sub-clawe (b) .-The existing definition of "medical practitioner" 
is being amplified for the purpose of bringing within its scope 
dentists and veterinary practitioners who also practise the modern 
scientific system of medicine. 
Clawe 4-Sub-clause (a) and clauses 7 and a.-The Drugs 
Controller, India, and the Drugs Controller of a State are not mem-
bers of the Pharmacy Council of India and the State Council respec-
tively. These officers who are intimately connected with the 
licensing of drugs and pharmacies under the Drugs Act, 1940, are 
being made ex officio members of the Central Council and State 
Council respectively. 
Clause 4-Sub-clau.se (b) .-The Bill seeks to extend the Act for 
the first time to the States of Kerala, Mysore and Rajasthan. As it 
will take time for members to be elected by these Councils, the 
sub-clause vests in these State Governments the power of nominat-
ing members for an initial period of five years. 
Clawe.5 and 6.-The amendments seek to omit provisions which 
are spent. 
Clawes 9 and lO.-Clause 9 and sub-clauses (a) (i) and (b) (i) 
of clause 10 seek to amend sections 31 and 32. Sections 31 and 32 (1) 
do not prescribe a minimum age-limit for a person who desires his 
10 

II 
name to be entered in the register. It is now proposed to fix the 
age-limit in these sections at 18 years, since it is considered not 
desirable to permit the registration of minors. The age-limit of 21 
years specified in section 32 (2) for subsequent registration is rather 
high, as ordinarily pharmacists complete their period of training 
after matriculation at the age of 18 years. The age-limit is therefore 
being reduced to 18. 
Sub-clause (a) (ii) and sub-clause (b) (ii) of clause 10 will 
entitle a pharmacist registered in one State to be registered as such 
in another State on the strength of his registration in the former 
State. 
Clause H.-Clauses (a) to (g) of new section 32A (1) seek to 
permit the registration of certain categories of persons who, though 
eligible for registration under section 31, could not, or did not, get 
themselves registered or may have been affected by the reorganisa-
tion of States, but for whom suitabl~ provisions require to be made. 
It is, however, provided that all these new categories of persons 
should satisfy the conditions for registration set out in section 31, 
before they are registered. Further, this provision is intended to 
be operative only for a limited period. 
Clause l2.-The amendment seeks to dispense with the need 
for the making of an endorsement by the Registrar on the certificate 
of registration, when the annual renewal fee is paid. 
Clause l3.-The amendments proposed will enable the removal 
of the name of a registered pharmacist from the register in a case 
where a person runs the pharmacy and employs for that purpose 
a registered pharmacist as well as assistants under that pharmacist 
and the assistant is convicted of an offence or is guilty of infamous 
conduct in a professional respect. 
Clause H.-As the printing of the register annually causes 
unnecess~ry expenditure to St2te Councils. the printing of an 
annual supplement containing additions and .amendments to the 
register is being proposed. The printing of an up-to-date register 
once in five years, i.e., before elections, is however, being provided 
for. 
Clause 15.-Sub-clause (a) .-The amendment seeks to prohibit 
the combination of any of the words mentioned in section 41 (2) (b) 
with any other word not so mentioned, because even in such cases 
persons are likely to be considered as registered pharmacists. 
Clause l6.-Sub-clause (a) seeks to prevent the dipensing of 
medicines by an unqualified person under the direct and personal 

12 
supertrision of ,a registered pharmacist, as this provision is not desi-
rable from the point of view of the safety of the public. 
Clause 17.-Sub-clause (b) is intended to provide for the prepa-
ration of a Code of ethics for pharmacists, which will be of assistance 
in the enforcement of the Act. 
Clause 18.-0n account of the reorganisation of States, some 
of the existing State Councils are functioning in more thal1 one 
State by virtue of section 109 of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956. 
Necessary enabling provisions are, sought to be made whereby State 
Councils may be suitably reorganised. 
Clause 19.-Although action was taken under the Act, no formal 
notification was issued by the State Government of Bombay for 
bringing Chapters III, IV and V into effect before taking such 
'1lction. This clause seeks to regularise the position. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM ' . 
Secp(>n 3 of the Pharmacy Act, 1948 (8 of 1948), provides for the 
constitution of the Central Pharmacy Council of India (known aa 
the "Central Council'). It is proposed to' amend this ·section so as to 
proVide that the Drugs Controller (India) who is intimately con-
nected· with the problems concerning the licensing of pharmacies, 
etc.lor, in case he is unable to attend any meeting, a person authoris-
ed by him in writing in this behalf, should also be a member of the 
Central Council. Again, as a result of the reorganisation of States, 
some additional members will be elected to the Central Council by 
the State Councils of Pharmacy (known as 'State Councils'). 'fhe 
Central Council meets normally twice a year and the expenditure 
involved on account of travelling allowance of the Drugs Controller 
(India) and some of the additional members elected by State Councils 
is not likely to exceed Rs. 3,000 per annum. This expenditure has 
to be borne by the Central Government. The receipts of the Central 
Council from State Councils may show an increase consequent on 
the formation of State Councils in States to which the Pharmacy 
Act will be extended; and although this increase may indirectly 
result in saving in the grant made by . the Central Government to 
the Central Couneil, it is not possible at present to state what the 
saving is likely to be. The estimated additional expenditure to be 
born.e by the Central Government on this account is likely to be not 
more than Rs. 3,000 a year. 
13 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 17 (b) of the Bill seeks to empower a State Government 
to make rul~s regarding the conduct of pharmacists and their duties 
in relation to medical practitioners, the public and the profes-
sion of pharmacy. Such a provision is necessary for improv-
ing the standard of dispensing by pharmac~~ts. The matter is also 
one which can be dealt with more appropriately by rules according 
to the conditions prevailing from time to time. 
Clause 18 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to issue 
orders with reference to State Councils in respect of various matters 
relating to them, e.g., their dissolution, reconstitution and reorga-
nisation, the extension of the term of office of members up to a 
maximum of two years, the area in respect of which the reconsti-
tuted or new Council should operate, the transfer of assets and 
liabilities to the reconstituted or new State Councils or the State 
Governments, th~ transfer or re-employment of staff. As a result of 
the States Reorganisation Act, 1956, the State Councils constituted 
under the Pharmacy Act before 1st November, 1956, for the purposes 
of individual States became transform~d into inter-State Corpora-
tions o~ that date. To meet the situation, it was provided as a 
transitional provision in section 109 of the States Reorganisation 
Act that such a corporation should continue to function and operate 
in those areas in respect of which it was functioning and op~rating 
immediately before 1st November, 1956, subject to the directions of 
the Central Government until other provision was made by law in 
respect of that corporation. This provision cannot continue indefi-
nitely and it is necessary to reconstitute and reorganise the State 
Councils so that there is one State Council for each State. Various 
problems, some of which have been mentioned above, may arise for 
consioeration in this connection and they may also vary from State 
to State. Power has therefore been taken by the Central Govern-
ment to issue orders for this purpose after consulting the State 
Governments concerned and to notify them in the Official Gazette. 
These orders will also be laid before both Houses of Parliament. 
Having regard to what is stated above, the delegation of legisla-
tive power Is of a normal character. 
14 

10 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THB PHARMACY N:.T, 1948 (No. 8 OF 1941) 
• • • • • • 
CHAPTER I 
INTRooUCTORY 
1. (1) 
• • • • 
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the territories which, 
immediately before the 1st November, 1956, were comprilJed in Part 
B States. 
(3) It shall come into force at once, but Chapters nI, IV and V 
shall take effect in a particular State from such da~ not later than 
three years from the commencement of this Act, as the State 
Government may, by notification in th~ Official Gazette, appoint in 
this behalf. 
Short title 
extent and 
commence-
ment. 
IS 2. In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject Itpterprcta-IOD. 
20 
or context,-
• • • • 
(c) "Indian University" means a University in any State of 
India established by an Indian law; 
• , 'J' . .. .. • • • 
(f) "medical practitioner" means a person holding a quali-
fication gran~d by an authority specified or notified under 
section 3 of the Indian Medica' Degrees Act, 1916 or specified in 
the Schedules to the Indian Medical Council Act, 1933 or a 
25 person registered or eligible for registration in a medical register 
of a State meant for the registration of persons practising allo-
pathic system of medicine; 
• • • • 
, (k) "State" means the territories thereof to which this 
!O Act extends. 
• • • • 

16 
CHAPTER II 
THE PHARMACY COUNCIL OF INDIA 
Consdtudon 
and compo-
sidon of 
Central 
Oronal. 
3. The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, constitute a 
Central Council consisting of the following members, namely:-
President 
and Vice-
PresidtJlt 
of Central 
C.ouncl1. 
Staff. re-muneration 
and aIlow-
IIDCCI. 
Qualifica-
tions for 
entry on 
first relia., 
tcr. 
(a) 
• • • • 
(g) one member to represent each State elected by the mem-
bers of each State Council, who shall be a registered pharmacist; 
5 
(h) one member to represent each State nominated by the 
State Government, who shall be either a registered medical 10 
practitioner or a registered pharmacist: 
Provided that for five years from the first constitution of the 
Central Council, instead of members elected under clause (g), each 
Government shall nominate one member, being a person eligible for 
registration as a pharmacist under section 31. IS 
Explanation.-In this· section, "State" does not includJe a Union 
territory. 
• • • • 
5. (1) The President and Vice-President of the Central Council 
shall be elected by the members of th~ said Council from among 20 
themselves: 
Provided that for five years from th~ first constitution of the 
Central Council the President shall be a person nominated by the 
Central Government who shall hold office at the pleasure of the 
~ntral Government and" where he is !lot already a ~ember, shall 25 
be a member of the Central Council in addition to the members 
referred to in section 3. 
• • • • 
8. (1) The Central Council may appoint a Secretary who may 
also, if so decided by the Central Council, act as Treasurer: 30 
Provided: that for the first four ~ars from the first constitution 
of the Central Council, the Secretary shall be a person appointed by 
the Central Government, who shall hold office during the pleasure 
,:,f the ~ntral Government. 
• • • • 
31. A person shall be entitled on payment of the prescribed fee 
to have his name entered in the first register if be resides, or carries 
(111 the business or profession of pharml\CY, in the State and if he-
35 

17 
(a) holds a degree or diploma in pharmacy or pharmac~u­
tical chemistry or a chemist and druggist diploma of an Indian 
University or a State Government, as the case may be, or a 
prescribed qualification granted by an authority outside India, 
5 or 
(b) holds a degree of an Indian University other than a 
degree in pharmacy or pharmaceutical chemistry, and has been 
engaged in the compounding of drugs in a hospital or dispensary 
or other place in which drugs are regularly dispensed on pres-
10 criptions of medical practitioners for a total period of not less 
than three years, or 
(c) has passed an examination recognised as adequate by 
the State Government for compounders or dispensers, or 
(d) has been engaged in the compounding of drugs in a 
IS hospital or dispensary or other place in which drugs are regularly 
dispensed on prescriptions of medical practitioners for a total 
period of not less than five years prior to the date notified under 
sub-section (2) of section 30. 
• • • • • • 
20 32. (1) After the date appointed under sub-section (2) of section Qualifica-
30 and before the Education Regulations have, by or under section 11, tiob_1.8 for . . su sequent taken effect m the State, a person shall on. payment of the prescnbed registration. 
fee be entitled to have his name entered in the register if he resides 
or carries on the business or profession of pharmacy in the State and 
25 if he-
30 
(a) satisfies the conditions prescribed with the prior ap-
proval of the Central Council, or where no conditions have been 
prescribed, the conditions entitling a person to have his name 
entered on the first register as set out in section 31, or 
(b) is a registered pharmacist in another State, or 
(c) possesses a qualification approved under section 14: 
Provided that no person shall be entitled under this sub-section 
to have his name entered on the register unless he has passed a 
matriculation examination or an examination prescribed as being 
35 equivalent to a matriculation examination. 
(2) After the Education Regulations have by or under section 11 
taken effect in the State, a person shall on payment of the prescribed 
fee be entitled to have his name entered on the register if he has 
. attained the age of twenty-one years, if he resides, or carries on the 
4C1. business or profession of pharmacy, in the State and if he has passed 

Renewal 
fees. 
Itemonl 
from regis-
ter. 
18 
an approved examination or possesses a qualification approved under 
section 14. 
• • • • 
M. (1) • • • • • • • 
(3) On payment of the nenewal fee, the Registrar shall in the S 
prescribed manner endorse the certificate of registration accordingly . 
• • • • 
36. (1) Subject to the provisiolls of this section, the Executive 
Committee may order that. the name of a registered pharmacist shall 
be removed from the register, where it is satisfied, after giving him a 10 
reasonable opportunity of being heard and after such further in-
quiry, if any, as it may think fit to make,-
(i) that his name has been entered in the register by error 
or on account of misrepresentation or suppression of a material 
fact, or 
(ii) tltat he has been convicted of any offence or has been 
gWltty of any infamQus conduct in any profeSsional respect which 
in the opinion of Ex«~tive Committee, renders him unfit to be 
kept in the register, or 
15 
(iii) that a person employed by him for the purposes of his 
business of pharmacy has been convicted of any such offence or 20 
has been guilty of any such infamous conduct as would, if such 
person were a registered pharmacist, render him liable to have 
his Ilame removed from the register under clause (ii): 
Provided that no such order shall be made under clause (iii) 
unless the Exe~utive Committee is satisfied- 25 
(a) that the offence or infamous conduct was instigated or 
connived at by the registered pharmacist, or 
(b) that the registered pharmacist has at any time during 
the period of twelve months immediately preceding t'he date on 
which the offence or infamous conduct took place committed a 30 
similar offence or been guilty of similar infamous conduct, or 
(c) that any person employed by the registered pharmacist 
for the purposes oJ his business of pharmacy has at any time 
during the period of twelve months immediately preceding the 
date on which the offence or infamous conduct took place, com- 35 
mitted a similar offence or been guilty of similar infamous 

19 
conduct, and that the registered pharmacist had, or reasonably 
ought to have had, knowledge of such previous offence or 
infamous conduct, or 
(d) that where the offence or infamous conduct continued 
S over a period, the registered pharmacist had, or reasonably 
ought to have had, knowledge of the continuing offence or 
infamous conduct, or 
(e) that where the offence is an offence under the Drugs 
Act, 1940, the registered pharmacist has not used due diligence 
10 in enforcing compliance with the provisions of that Act in his 
place of business and by persons employed by him . 
• • • • 
40. As soon as may be after the first day of April, in each year, Printing of 
the Registrar shall cause to be printed copies of the register as it register. 
IS stood on the said date, and such copies shall be made available to 
persons applying therefor on payment of the prescribed charge, and 
shall be evidence that on the said date the persons whose names are 
entered therein were registered pharmacists. 
CHAPTER V 
MISCELLANEOUS 
20 41. (1) 
• • • • 
(2) For the purposes of this section-
(a) it shall be immaterial whether or not any person is 
2S deceived by such pretence or use as aforesaid; 
(b) the use of the description "pharmacist", "chemist", 
"druggist", "pharmaceutist", "dispenser", "dispensing ~hemist", 
or any combination of such words shall be deemed to be reason-
ably calculated to suggest that the person using such description 
30 is a person whose name is for the time being entered in the 
register of the State; 
(c) the onus of proving that the name of a person is for 
the time being entered in the register of a State shall be on 
him who asserts it. 
3S (3) Cognizance of an offence punishable under this section shall 
not be taken except upon complaint made by order of the State 
Government or the Executive Committee of the State Coun~il. 
Penalty for 
falsely 
claiming to 
be registered. 
42. (1) On or after such date as the State Government may by D\"'ren~i!lg 
notificatioFl in the Official Gazette appoint in this behalf, no person ~edn;r-.-
SOliS. 

power to 
make rules. 
other than a registered pharmacist shall compound, prepare, mix, or 
dispense any medicine on the prcscrip~~on of a medical practitioner 
except under the direct and personal supervision of a registered 
pharmacist: 
Provided that the sub-section shall not apply to the dispensing 5 
by a medical practitioner of medicine for his own patients, or with 
the general or special sanction of the State Government, for the 
patients of another medical practitioner . 
• • • • 
(3) Cognizance of an offence punishable under this section shall 10 
not be taken except upon complaint made by an order of the State 
Government. 
• • • • • • 
46. (1) 
• • • • • • 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of . the IS 
foregoing power such rules may provide for-·-
• • • • 
(j) the form of certificates of registration and the manner 
of endorsement of renewals thereof; 
(k) the maintenance of a r~gister; 
30 
• • • • 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Pharmacy Act, 1948. 
The President has, in pursuance of clause (3) of article II7 of 
the Comtitution of India, recommended to Lok Sabha 
the comideration of the Bill. 
M. N. KAUL, 
Secretary. 
(Shri D. P. Karmarkar, 
Minister of Health.) 