Aඌ ංඇඍඋඈൽඎർൾൽ ංඇ Lඈ඄ Sൺൻඁൺ
Bill No. 128  of  2022
 
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022
By
Sඁඋං  P.P. Cඁൺඎൽඁൺඋඒ, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
 B ൾ it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
 1 . This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2022. 
 2 .  After article 123 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted below the 
heading “CHAPTER IV .—THE UNION JUDICIARY”, namely:—
 “123A. None of the articles viz. 124, 127, 128, 217, 222, 224A and 231, as 
amended, and new articles 124A, 124B and 124C, as inserted, by the Constitution 
Short title.
Insertion ofnew article 123A. 
Validation.

(Ninety-ninth Amendment) Act, 2014 shall be deemed to be void, or ever to have become 
void, on the ground that the said articles are inconsistent with, or taken away, the independence 
of judiciary, and, notwithstanding any judgment, decree or order of any court, each of the 
said article shall, subject to power of Parliament to omit or amend them, continue in force 
and shall be deemed always to be in force from the 13th day of April, 2020.”. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
 The Judges of the Supreme Court are appointed under clause (2) of article 124 
of the Constitution and the Judges of the High Courts are appointed under clause (1) of 
article 217 of the Constitution, by the President of India. The Ad-hoc Judges and retired 
Judges for the Supreme Court are appointed under clause (1) of article 127 and article 128 
of the Constitution, respectively. The appointment of Additional Judges and Acting Judges 
for the High Court is made under article 224 and the appointment of retired Judges for 
sittings of the High Courts is made under article 224A of the Constitution. The transfer 
of Judges from one High Court to another High Court is made by the President after 
consultation with the Chief Justice of India under clause (1) of article 222 of the Constitution. 
 The Supreme Court in the matter of the Supreme Court Advocates-on-Record 
Association Vs. Union of India in the year 1993, and in its Advisory Opinion given in 
the year 1998 in the Third Judges’ case on a reference being made to the Supreme Court 
by the then President of India, had interpreted clause (2) of article 124 and clause (1) of 
article 217 of the Constitution with respect to the meaning of  “consultation” as  “concurrence”. 
Consequently, a memorandum of procedure for appointment of Judges to the Supreme Court 
and the High Courts was formulated known as the “collegium system”, and is presently 
being followed for such appointments. Pertinently, the said collegium system doesn’t 
find mention either in the original Constitution or in any successive amendments thereto. 
 After a thorough review of relevant constitutional provisions, pronouncements of the 
Supreme Court of India and consultations with eminent jurists, a pressing need has been 
felt that a broad based National Judicial Appointments Commission should be established 
for making recommendations for appointment of the Judges of the Supreme Court and the 
High Courts. The said Commission is expected to serve a meaningful role to the judiciary, 
the executive and eminent persons to present their view points and make the participants 
accountable, while also introducing transparency in the selection process. This is further 
strengthened by the fact that a democratic set up necessitates that all appointments 
to public offices are made transparently and in a manner which is free from any bias.
The process of appointment should be open to review and not merely based on the personal 
preferences. The transparency in appointments is also necessary to maintain the credibility 
and reputation of the institution for whose offices such appointments are being made. 
 The proposed amendment for introduction of National Judicial Appointment 
Commission is being made after taking into account the fact that established and mature 
democracies across the world such as the United Kingdom, France, Canada, Denmark, 
Ireland and South Africa have a robust democratic system of appointing judges to their 
highest courts where opinion of all quarters of democracy i.e. legislature, executive, judiciary 
and public at large is considered and valued while appointing the judges in their apex courts. 
 In a democratic set up, the legitimacy of every constitutional institution including the 
Supreme Judicial Authority must be traced to the will and consent of the people, directly or 
indirectly. The bearers to public offices in all other institutions in the country are appointed 
either by an executive authority that is accountable to the people or by a mechanism involving 
the executive and legislature by law. No institution in a democracy is entitled under the 

Constitutional provisions to abrogate itself any power of appointing its own successors. 
An unelected institution, however exacted, appointing its own press and successors is 
smeared with the questions regarding democratic accountability. Since the pronouncements 
made by the judges have a strong and deep impact on the public at large, it is necessary that the 
judicial appointments are not made unilaterally by the incumbents of the said institution only. 
Transparency and objectivity in appointment of judges of the Supreme Court and the High 
Courts is also sine qua non, to ensure the credibility of the judiciary and the will of the people. 
 The legitimacy of the people’s express or implied consent in the democracy as 
established by the Constitution of India is required to be upheld under all circumstances 
and for all public appointments including those of the judges of the Supreme Court and the 
High Courts. The Parliament of India is one of the pillars upon which the foundations of 
democracy stand and which has been bestowed with the right of formulating legislations and 
any attempt to override such constitutional mandate would only go to lessen the supremacy of 
Constitution which would in effect amount to altering the basic structure of the Constitution. 
 No functioning Democracy in the world, save for India, has a judiciary that appoints 
itself. In well-developed democracies, judicial appointments are not in the sole prerogative 
of the judiciary but the said appointments are made on the basis of an amalgam of considered 
and valued opinions of the legislature, executive, judiciary and lay citizens appointed 
by law. The body entrusted with the task of appointing the judges plays a critical role 
by keeping effective checks and balances and steers to keep any bias out of the system. 
The history of the appointments of judges in the other democracies as listed in the table 
can be an effective proof that the involvement of the executive and legislature in the 
appointment of the judges to the highest judicial offices has not reduced the independence 
or effectiveness of the judiciary as secured and safeguarded by the Constitution of India. 
 It is important to protect the credibility of the judiciary, an institution held in high 
esteem by the citizens of India and the other organs of the State. This credibility must 
not be tarnished and a credible and respected Supreme Court alone can safeguard the 
Constitution and the nation and effectively reconcile justice, Constitution, law, harmony 
and the public good. Any supposed unconstitutional usurpation of power by any 
constituent of democracy will only go to adversely affect the entire democratic set up. 
Any apprehension or suspicion that any input by the executive and/or legislature would 
deconstruct the independence of judiciary and the attempts to completely exclude the 
executive and/or legislature from the process of appointing judges would be wholly illogical 
and inconsistent with the foundations of the theory of democracy and a doctrinal heresy. 
 Lastly, it is vital that transparency of all proceedings material to the people of India 
and necessary within the Constitutional framework be ensured. The current proceedings 
of the collegium system are absolutely opaque and inaccessible both to the public and the 
Governmental records. This is in contrary to the recordings of all other matters that affect the 
people of India, unlike the proceedings of Parliament and the Government that are available 
on record and on request under the Right to Information  Act, 2005 to the people. Introduction 
of transparency in appointment of judges would only strengthen the independence of 
democracy and would be a positive step to further reinforce the trust and faith of people in 
the judicial set up. Any biasness suspected to have crept into the collegium system would 
effectively be wiped out by introducing a democratic election of the judges by a body 

having its roots in the Constitution. For achieving the goals set out above, for ensuring the 
continued credibility and independence of judiciary and for reinforcing the faith of general 
public in the judicial set up, the proposed Bill seeks to insert a new article 123A, in the 
Constitution with a view to validate the Constitution (Ninety-ninth Amendment) Act, 2014. 
 Hence this Bill. 
        Nൾඐ Dൾඅඁං;                                                                          P. P. CHAUDHARY                                                                                                   4 July, 2022                                     
 

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India
————
(Shri P .P . Chaudhary,  M.P .)