1
THE FARMERS (OLD AGE PENSION) BILL, 2014
By
SHRI OM PRAKASH YADAV, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for old age pension to small and marginal farmers and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1)  This Act may be called the Farmers (Old Age Pension) Act, 2014.
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No.  128 of  2014
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(i) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(ii) "farmer" means a person possessing agricultural land measuring not more
than five acres and has no income from any source other than agriculture;
(iii) "Fund" means the Farmers' Old Age Pension Fund constituted under
section 3; and
(iv) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) The Central Government shall constitute a Fund to be known as the Farmers'
Old Age Pension Fund for the purpose of payment of old age pension to farmers.
(2) The Central Government and the State Governments shall contribute to the Fund
in such ratio as may be prescribed.
4. (1) The appropriate Government shall within six months from the commencement of
this Act, provide for maintenance of a register of farmers in every district with such details in
such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The appropriate Government shall forward the details of farmers registered under
sub-section (1) to the Central Government from time to time.
5. The Central Government shall release monies out of the fund to the appropriate
Government on the basis of information received under section 4.
6. (1) Every farmer who has attained the age of sixty years and registered with
appropriate Government shall be entitled to a monthly old age pension which shall be
equivalent to thirty times the daily wages prevalent in the State in which the farmer resides.
(2) The Old age pension shall be paid to farmers through nationalized banks.
7. The Central Government may give such directions to the State Governments as it
may think necessary for the purposes of this Act.
8. (1)  The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of the Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Definitions.
Constitution of
the Farmers'
Old Age
Pension Fund.
Maintenance
of register of
farmers.
Release of
funds to the
appropriate
Government.
Entitlement of
pension.
Powers to
make rules.
5
10
15
25
20
30
35
Directions to
the State
Governments.

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Agriculture is the mainstay of the livelihood of our rural population and it contributes
immensely towards the growth of our national economy. But the living conditions of majority
of small and marginal farmers have not improved over the years. They live in abject poverty.
When they attain old age, their sufferings increase as they are not in a position to do any
work. The large chunk of these farmers own only a few acres of land and since the yield
depends upon vagaries of weather, they always live hand to mouth. Therefore, it is neces-
sary to provide some social security in the form of old age pension to the farmers.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; OM PRAKASH YADA V
November 3, 2014.
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for constitution of a Fund to be known as the Farmers' Old
Age Pension Fund to pay old age pension to the small and marginal farmers to which the
Central Government and the State Governments shall contribute in such ratio as may be
prescribed. Clause 5 provides that the Central Government shall release monies out of the
Fund to the State Governments for payment of old age pension to farmers. Clause 6 provides
for monthly old age pension to every farmer who has attained the age of sixty years. The Bill,
therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India.
It is likely to involve a recurring expenditure of about rupees two thousand crores per
annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be
incurred.
4

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
5

GMGIPMRND—2662LS(S-3)—01.12.2014.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for old age pension to small and marginal farmers and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Om Prakash Yadav, M.P.)