Bill No. 128 of  2009
THE MERITORIOUS STUDENTS (ASSISTANCE IN HIGHER
STUDIES)  BILL, 2009
By
SHRI  K.C. SINGH “BABA”, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for loan facilities to meritorious students for pursuing their higher studies
and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixtieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Meritorious Students (Assistance in Higher Studies)
Act, 2009.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:—
(a) "bank" means any nationalised bank and includes any financial institution
which is owned by or is under the control of or where fifty one per cent. of shares are
held by the Central Government or is receiving aid from the Central Government;
Short title
and extent.
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Definitions.5

2
(b) "higher studies" means and includes courses in medicine, engineering or
management or any professional course in any field or vocation or research in any field
from any recognized college or a university or an institution;
(c) “meritorious student” means a student who has secured a minimum of
seventy-five per cent. marks in the higher secondary examination; and
(d) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3.  All meritorious students shall be provided with loan from the Banks for pursuing
their higher studies:
Provided that the loan shall be sanctioned only to such students whose family income
from all sources is not more than ten thousand rupees per month.
Explanation.—For the purpose of this section, “family” means husband, wife and
their dependent children.
4. (1) Any student who fulfils the provisions of section 3 and who wishes to pursue
higher studies may make an application to the concerned branch of any bank.
(2) An application made under sub-section (1) shall be disposed of within one month
from the date of receipt thereof.
5. (1) The loan shall be payable to the eligible student till he completes the course for
which the loan is applied for.
(2) The amount of loan payable shall cover the entire cost of education which shall
include course fees, study material, hostel fees, if any, and any other expenditure in connection
with the education.
(3) The Bank shall make the payment directly to the Head of the college or  university
or institution where the student is studying.
6. (1) The loan shall be given to an eligible student without any security or guarantee:
Provided that the Bank may demand from the student such details and documentary
proof, as it may deem fit, before sanctioning the loan.
(2) The loan shall be recovered from the students in equal monthly instalments with
simple interest at the rate of five per cent. per annum immediately after the student gets a job
on completion of his study:
Provided that the loan shall be repaid within four years from the date of getting job.
7. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions,  and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Banks to pro-
vide loan to
meritorious
students.
Application
for loan.
Amount of
loan.
Terms and
conditions of
sanction and
repayment of
loan.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The higher education, especially medical and engineering education has become very
expensive. The meritorious students who come from the lower strata of society are unable to
afford the fees charged for such courses and are, therefore, deprived of higher studies. This
will have an adverse effect on the nation building activity.
It is, therefore, necessary that banks extend concessional financial assistance at nominal
rate of interest to meritorious students to enable them to pursue their studies unhindered
and contribute to nation building.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; K.C. SINGH "BABA"
November 5,  2009.

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. These rules will relate to the matters of detail only.
 The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.
4

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for loan facilities to meritorious students for pursuing their higher studies and
for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri K.C. Singh "Baba", M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—5067LS—08-12-2009.