1
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. 128 of 2016
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
THE FREEDOM FIGHTERS AND THEIR FAMILIES (WELFARE)
BILL, 2016
By
DR. MANOJ RAJORIA, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the welfare of freedom fighters and their families and for matters
connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Freedom Fighters and their Families (Welfare) Act,
2016.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
5

2
Definitions. 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "Authority" means the Freedom Fighters Welfare Authority established under
section 3;
(b) "family" means spouse, parents, sons and daughters of the freedom fighters;
(c) "freedom fighter" means any person who has participated in the freedom
movement or has undergone imprisonment in connection with the freedom movement;
and
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish
an authority to be known as the Freedom Fighters Welfare Authority in every district of the
country.
(2) The composition of the Authority and terms and conditions of service of the members
of the Authority shall be such as may be prescribed.
4. The Authority shall—
(i) maintain a register of freedom fighters and the members of their families
residing in that district;
(ii) formulate plans and schemes for the welfare of the freedom fighters and
their families;
(iii) identify and remove the names illegally included in the list of names of
freedom fighters; and
(iv) recommend action against persons giving mala fide and incorrect statements
or making disgraceful or insulting remarks or publishing distorted facts in books or
newspapers or in any other media about freedom fighters.
5. The Central Government shall provide to every freedom fighter and his family, as
the case may be, the following facilities, namely:—
(a) subsistence allowance of rupees fifteen thousand per month and such other
financial assistance as may be prescribed;
(b) free health care facilities;
(c) free housing facility;
(d) free education including technical education to the dependant children of
the freedom fighters;
(e) gainful employment;
(f) vocational training;
(g) free pass for travelling in AC first class in Railways and other public and
private owned transport; and
(h) such other facilities as may be necessary for the all-round development and
welfare of freedom fighters and their families.
6. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
Establishment
of the
Freedom
Fighters
Welfare
Authority.
Functions of
the Authority.
Facilities to be
provided to
freedom
fighters and
their families.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Freedom fighters have played an important role in the independence of our country. It
is only because of the struggle of freedom fighters that we are the citizens of a free India
today. Today freedom fighters, who made great sacrifices putting their lives at stake and
inspired the country for freedom, are leading a very hard life in an independent India. The
pension that they receive from the Government is meager. They are not able to sustain
themselves properly with the amount of pension they are receiving. They have been facing
financial hardship. They do not have any housing facility for themselves or their dependant
children and they are unable to get any special financial help for the treatment of chronic
diseases as a result of which they die for want of proper treatment.
Further writers are presenting distorted facts about freedom fighters in Government
and private publications. There are many authors who do not have complete and correct
information about freedom fighters, yet they write unrealistic articles about freedom fighters.
They are presenting wrong facts about freedom fighters and making illusive statements, as
a result of which the citizens of the country including the families of freedom fighters are
suffering mental agony. This not only causes disrespect and insult to the freedom fighters,
but also brings disgrace to the nation.
Even today, there are many names in the list of freedom fighters who had no connection
with the freedom struggle, but still their names have been included in the list in an illegal
manner.
It is, therefore, necessary to bring legislation for the welfare and safeguard of freedom
fighters and their families.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; MANOJ  RAJORIA
April 13, 2016.
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of  Freedom Fighters Welfare
Authority by the Central Government in every district of the country. Clause 4 provides that
the Freedom Fighters Welfare Authority shall formulate plans and prepare schemes for the
welfare of the freedom fighters and their families and that they will also register the names of
all freedom fighters and their families in their respective jurisdiction. Clause 5 provides that
the Central Government shall provide to all freedom fighters and their families financial
assistance of rupees fifteen thousand every month, free medical care and such other facilities
as are necessary for their appropriate development and welfare.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund
of India. It is estimated that  a recurring expenditure of rupees three hundred crore per annum
would be involved from Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees sixty crore is also likely to be involved.
5

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 6 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of this Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
6

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the welfare of freedom fighters and their families and for matters connected
therewith.
————
(Dr. Manoj Rajoria, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—205LS(S3)—03.05.2016.