1
THE MAHATMA GANDHI NATIONAL RURAL EMPLOYMENT
GUARANTEE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015
By
SHRI NANABHAU FALGUNRAO PATOLE, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act, 2005.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee
(Amendment) Act, 2015.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 128 of 2015
5
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In section 3 of the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act,
2005, after sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
‘‘(1A) Notwithstanding anything in this Act, every farmer, who gets himself
registered under this Act in such manner, as may be prescribed, shall be provided
work for at least one hundred days in a year, if the place where he is residing and
practising farming is declared as an area affected by natural calamity including
drought or flood by the State Government.’’.
Amendment
of section 2.
5

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
In our country, farmers constitute nearly seventy per cent. of the total population.
Many parts of the country face earthquake, hailstorm, cloud bursts, unseasonal rain and
other natural calamities. Farmers mostly bear the brunt of such natural calamities. They
loose their crops, livestock and many a time their dwelling units and household items including
foodgrains. Despite this, farmers are supposed to repay their loans to the money-lenders
whether their harvest is good or not. In depression, many of them end their lives. Thousands
of farmers have committed suicide in recent years in the States of Maharashtra,
Andhra Pradesh, Punjab, Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Tamil Nadu and Karnataka.
Indebtedness of our farming community is chronic and a continuing problem which has to
be taken care of by the Government.
It is the foremost duty of the Government to provide work to every farmer under the
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme for at least one hundred
days in a year in case the place where he is residing and practising farming is declared by the
State Government an area affected by the natural calamity including drought or flood.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; NANABHAU FALGUNRAO PATOLE
April  6, 2015.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to provide work to every farmer, for at least one hundred days
in a year, residing and practising farming in an area declared to be an affected are by natural
calamity including drought or flood by the State Government. The Bill, therefore, if enacted,
would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely to involve an
annual recurring expenditure of about rupees one thousand crore from the Consolidated
Fund of India.
Non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.
4

5
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE  MAHATMA GANDHI NATIONAL RURAL EMPLOYMENT GUARANTEE
ACT, 2005
* * * * * *
3. (1) Save as otherwise provided the State Government shall, in such rural area in the
State as may be notified by the Central Government, provide to every household whose
adult members volunteer to do unskilled manual work not less than one hundred days of
such work in a financial year in accordance with the Scheme made under this Act.
* * * * * *
Guarantee of
rural
employment
to
households.

GMGIPMRND—298LS(S3)—30-04-2015.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act, 2005.
————
(Shri Nanabhau Falgunrao Patole, M.P.)