1
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017
By
SHRI NISHIKANT DUBEY, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Y ear of the Republic of  India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2017.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In article 83 of the Constitution, in clause (2), after the existing proviso, the following
proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
“Provided further that where the House of the People is dissolved earlier than
the said period of five years, the duration of the House constituted immediately after
such dissolution may, on a report made by the Election Commission to this effect, be
extended or curtailed by a period up to two years in order to synchronise the holding
of elections to the House of the People and the State Legislative Assemblies.”
Bill No. 128 of  2017
Amendment
of article 83.
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

3. In article 172 of the Constitution,—
(i) in clause (1), after the existing proviso, the following proviso shall be inserted,
namely:—
‘‘Provided further that where the Legislative Assembly is dissolved earlier
than the said period of five years, the duration of the Legislative Assembly
constituted immediately after such dissolution may, on a report made by the
Election Commission to this effect, be extended or curtailed by a period up to
two years in order to synchronise the holding of elections to the Legislative
Assembly with the elections to the House of the People.’’; and
(ii) after clause 2, the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
‘‘(3) The Central Government shall, in consultation with the Election
Commission, within six months from the date of commencement of the
Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2017 by notification in Official Gazette, specify
the State Legislative Assemblies, the duration whereof may be extended or
curtailed in order to synchronise the elections to such Legislative Assemblies
with the next elections to the House of the People.”.
4. After article 326 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely:—
‘‘326A. The elections to the House of the People and to the Legislative Assembly
of every State shall be held simultaneously.”.
Amendment
of article
172.
Insertion of
new article
326A.
Simultaneous
holding of
elections to
House of the
People and
Legislative
Assemblies of
the States.
2
5
10
15

3
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
India is the world's largest democracy. As many as eighty-one crore people are
registered as eligible voters with the Election Commission of India, which has been entrusted
with the Powers to hold elections to both the House of the People and the State Legislative
Assemblies. Though the House of the People and the State Assemblies have a fixed tenure
of five years, the expiration of their term does not synchronise. As a result, the House of the
People and different State Assemblies go to polls at different times. As a result, we often find
elections being held in the country in one part or the other.
Of late, the idea of frequent elections is being challenged on various grounds. The first
among these is that the conduct of elections is an enormous exercise administratively. The
entire administrative machinery and the security apparatus have to be mobilised to ensure
smooth and fair conduct of elections. If the elections to the House of the People and the
State Assemblies are held together, a redundant duplication of election exercise can be
avoided.
Secondly, the conduct of elections at such scale involved huge expenditure, both by
the Government and political parties. As per estimates of the Election Commission, the
Government expenditure for holding the House of the People elections in 2009 was
Rs. 1115 crore, which increased to Rs. 3870 crore in 2014. Unofficial estimates peg the
Government expenditure incurred in holding elections to the Bihar Legislative Assembly in
2015 at Rs. 300 crore. Precious tax-payers' money can be saved and utilised for developmental
activities if, State Assembly elections are held together with the House of the People elections.
Thirdly, it is not only the Government, but political parties also incur huge expenditure
on elections. There are unscrupulous elements among political parties who freely use
dubious money in elections. It is among the top agenda of the present Government that the
role of such dubious money in elections is minimised, if not eliminated. Towards this end, the
simultaneous elections to the House of the People and the State Legislative Assemblies will
serve a long way since there will be lesser opportunities for use of dubious money.
Fourthly, the process of Government is severely affected due to imposition of Model
Code of Conduct. To quote from the Seventy-ninth Report (2015) of the Standing Committee
on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice:—
"....The imposition of Model Code of Conduct (MCC) puts on hold the entire
development programme and activities of the Union and State Governments in poll
bound State. It even affects the normal governance. Frequent elections lead to
imposition of MCC over prolonged periods of time. This often leads to policy paralysis
and governance deficit."
Besides, there are issues such as disruption of normal public life, resort to populist
measures by ruling parties, etc. which weight heavily in favour of conducting simultaneous
elections to the House of the People and the State Legislative Assemblies.
There are, however certain challenges to holding simultaneous elections. There are
questions over operational feasibility of such a huge exercise. Above all, the
synchronisation of tenure of  the House of the People and the State Legislative Assemblies,
to begin with and also when any popular House is dissolved prematurely, is a major political
challenge.
With the above objectives in view, the Bill seeks to amend the Constitution with a
view to:—
(i) insert a new article 326A in the Constitution to provide for simultaneous
elections to the House of the People and the State Assemblies;

(ii) to amend article 83 of the Constitution to provide that in case the House of the
People is dissolved before completing its full terms, the duration of the next the House
of the People may be extended or curtailed by up to two years to synchronise the
elections to the House of the People with the elections to the State Assemblies;
(iii) amend article 172 of the Constitution to provide that in case a State Legislative
Assembly is dissolved before completing its full term, the duration of the next Assembly
may be extended or curtailed by up to two years to synchronise the elections to the
Assembly with the elections to the House of the People; and
(iv) make a transitional provision that on commencement of the Bill, the Central
Government shall, in order to coincide the elections of State Assemblies with the
elections to the House of the People, take a decision, in consultation with the Election
Commission, regarding extending or curtailing the duration of State Legislative
Assemblies.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; NISHIKANT DUBEY
June 29, 2017.
4

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill vide proposed article 326A provides for simultaneous holding of
elections to the House of the People and Legislative Assemblies of the States by the Election
Commission of  India. The Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure, recurring and
non-recurring, from the Consolidated Fund of India. However, it is not possible to assess the
actual financial expenditure likely to be incurred at this stage.

6
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
*****
83. Duration of Houses of Parliament,—
(1) The Council of States shall not be subject to dissolution, but as nearly as
possible one-third of the members thereof shall retire as soon as may be on the expira-
tion of every second year in accordance with the provisions made in that behalf by
Parliament by law.
(2) The House of the People, unless sooner dissolved shall continue for five
years from the date appointed for its first meeting and no longer and the expiration of
the said period of five years shall operate as a dissolution of the House:
Provided that the said period may, while a Proclamation of Emergency is in
operation, be extended by Parliament by law for a period not exceeding one year at a
time and not extending in any case beyond a period of six months after the Proclamation
has ceased to operate.
*****
172. Duration of States Legislatures,—
(1) The Legislative Assembly of every State, unless sooner dissolved, shall
continue for five years from the date appointed for its first meeting and no longer and
the expiration of the said period of five years shall operate as a dissolution of the
Assembly:
Provided that the said period may, while a Proclamation of Emergency is in
operation, be extended by Parliament by law for a period not exceeding one year at a
time and not extending in any case beyond a period of six months after the Proclamation
has ceased to operate.
(2) The Legislative Council of a State shall not be subject to dissolution, but as
nearly as possible one-third of the members thereof shall retire as soon as may be on
the expiration of every second year in accordance with the permission made in that
behalf by Parliament by law.
*****

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Nishikant Dubey, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—956LS(S3)—20-07-2017.