• 
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABRA ON 
7 DE: 198~ 
BiU No. 128 uf 1987 
-THE CUSTOMS AND CENTRAL EXCISES LAWS 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 1987 
A 
BILL 
further to a.mend the Customs Act, 1962, the Central Excises and Salt Act. 
1944 and the Customs and Excise Revenues Appellate Tribunal Act, 
1986. • 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-eighth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows: - \ 
CHAPTER I 
. PRELIMINARY 
5 1. (1) This Act may be called the Customs and Central Excises Laws Short 
(Amendment) Act, 1987. title and 
com-
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government mence· 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint: ment. 
Provided that different dates may be appointed for cliffe,rent provisions 
10 of this Act and any reference in, any such provision to the commencement 
of this f'\ct shall be construed as a l'eference to the coming into force of 
that provision. 

Amend-
ment of 
section 3. 
Amend-
ment of 
sectiQn 
28A. 
Amend-
mentof 
section 
129D. 
2 
CHAPTER II 
AMENDMENTS TO THE CUSTOMS Acr, 1962 
2. In section 3 'Of the Customs Act, 196Z (hereafter in this Chapter 32 of 1962. 
referred to as the Customs Act), claUBe (a) sball be re-!ettered as clause 
(aa), and before clause (aa) as so re-latta'ed, the followIDg clause shall 5 
be lDserted, Dall1'ely:-
•• (a) Principal Collectors of CustoJDS;". 
3. Section 28A of the Customs Act shall be .renumbered as sub-section 
(1) thereof, and after sub-*ction (1) as so renumbered, the following 
sub-section shall be inserted, namely: _ 10 
"(2) Where any notification under sub-section (1) in respect of 
any goods has been issued, the whole of the duty paid on such goods, or, 
as the case may be, the duty paid in excess of that payable on such 
goods, which would not have bejen paid if the said notification -had 
been in force, shall be refunded in accordance with the said notifi- 15 
cation: 
Provided that the person claiming the :refund of such duty or, as 
the case may be, excess duty, makes an application in this behalf to 
the Assistant CoUector of Customs before the expiry of six months 
from the date of issue of the said notification and proves to the sati5- 20 
faction of the Assistant Collector of Customs that the incidence of 
such duty had not been passed on any other person.". 
4. In section 129D of the Customs Act, after sub-section (4), the 
followin,g sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-
.. (5) The provisions of this section shall not apply to any 2S 
decision o:r order in which the determination of any question having 
a relation to the ra~ of duty or to the value of goods for the pur-
poses of assessment of any duty is in issue Or is one Of the points 
in issue. 
Expla1l.atio1l..-P'or the purposes of this sub-section, the determi- 30 
nation of a rate of duty in relation to any goods or valuation of 
any goods for the purposes of assessment of dUty includes the deter-
mination Of a question-
"(a) relating to the rate of duty for the time being in foree. 5J of 1975. 
whether under the CUstom!! Tariff Act. 1975 or under any other 35 
Central Act providing for the levv and collection of anv duty of 
cu..~u,ms, in ,.p.htjon to any goods on or after the ~8th da~ of 
Fpbruary, 1986: or -
(b) relating to the value Of goods for the purposes of assess-
ment of anv duty in cases where the assessment is made on or 40 
after ~ 28th day of February, 1986; or 
(c) whether anv goods faU under a particular heading or sub-
heading of the First Schedule or the Second Schedule to the 
Customs 'rariff A,..t. 1975, or that any goods 'are or not covered bv 51 of 1975. 
a particular notification or order issued by the Central Govern- 4S 
ment granting total or partial exemption from duty; or 
(d) whether the value of anv goods for the purposes of Rssess-
ment of duty shall be eD'hant-ed or reduced by the addition or 
reduction of the amounts in respect of such matters as are speci-
tlcally provided in this Act.". j • SO 

620£1986. 
s 
10 
15 
20 
5. After section 1290 of the CUstoms Act, the following section shaIl 
be inserted, namely:-
'I29DA. (1) The Board may, of its ,own motion or on the appli-
cation of any aggrieved person or otherwise, call for and examirie 
t~ record of any proceeding in which a Collector of Customs haS 
passed any decision or order [not being a decision or order passed under 
sub-section (2) of this section] Of the nature referred to in sub-
section (5) of section 129D for the purpo* of satisfying itself as to 
the correctness, legality or propriety of such decision or order and 
may pass such order thereon as it thinks fit. 
(2) The Collector of Customs may, of his own motion or on the 
application of any' aggrieved. person or otherwise, call for and examine 
the record of any' proceeding in which an adjudicating authority 
subordinate to him has passed. any decision or order of the nature 
referred to in sub-section (5) of section 129D for the purpose of 
satisfying himself as to the correctness, legality or propriety of such 
decision or order and may pass such order thereon as he thinks fit. 
(3) (Ill) No decision or order under this section shall be made so 
as to prejudicially affect any person unless such person is given a 
reasonable opportunity Of making representation and if, he so desires, 
of ~g heard in his defence. 
(hi) Where the Board or, as the case may be, the Collector of 
Customs is of the opinion that any duty has not been levied or has 
been short-levied or short-paid or erroneously refunded, no order 
25 requiring the affec~ person to pay any duty not levied or paid, 
short-levied or short-paid or erroneously refunded shall be 
p~sSfed under this section unless such person is given notice wtthin 
the time limit specified in section 28 to show cause against the pro-
posed order. 
30 (4) No proceedings shall be initiated under sub-section (1) or 
sab-section (2) in respect iOf any decision or order after the expiry 
of a period of six months from the date of communication of such 
decision or order: 
Provided that in respect of any decision or order passed before 
35 the commencement of the Customs and Central Excises Laws 
(AI$ndment) Act, 1987, the provisions of this sub-section shall have 
e1fect as if for the words "six months", the words "one year" were 
substituted. 
40 
(5) Any person aggrieved by any decision or order passed under 
sub-section (1) Or sub-section (2) may appeal to the Customs and 
Excise Revenues Appellate Tribunal established. under section 3 of 
the Customs and Excise Revenues Appellate Tribunal Act, 1986, 
against such decision or order:. ! J 
Insertion 
o'l new 
section 
129DA. 
Power of 
revision 
of Board 
Or Col-
lector of 
Customs 
in certain 
cases. 

tns~rtiori 
of new 
tectiOD . 
13SC. 
Admissi-
bilityof 
micro 
filma, 
faesimile 
copies &t 
decuments 
and com-
puter 
print outs 
as docu-
mente and 
alIT 
evidence. 
. - '\ 
4 
6. After section 138B of 'the Customs Act, the fOlMwing section shall b~' 
inserted, namely:-
'138C. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law 
for the time being in force,-
(a) a micro film of a document or the reproduction of t}je 5 
image or images embodied in such micro-film (whether enlar-
ged o.r not); or 
(b) a facsimile copy of·a document; or 
(c) a statement contained in a document and included in 
a printed material prod!lced by a computer (hereinafter refer- 10 
red to as a "computer print out"), if the conditions mentioned 
in sub-section (2) and the other provisions contained. in this 
section are satisfied in relation to the statement and t~ com-
puter in question, 
shall be deemed to be also a doeument for the purposes of this Act and 15 
~ rules made thereunder and shall be admissible in any proceedings 
thereunder. without further proof or production of the original, as 
evidence of any contents of the original or of any fact stated 
therein of which direct evidence would be admissible. 
(2) The conditions referred to in sub-section (1.) in respect of a 20 
computer print out shall be the following, namely:-
(a) the computer print out containing the statement was 
produced by the computer during the .. period over which t~ com-
puter was used regularly to store or pr~ss information for the 
purposes of any activities regularly carried on over that period 2S 
by the person h~ving lawful control over the use of the computer; 
(b) during t~ said period, there was regularly supplied to 
the computer in the ordinary course of the said activities, infor-
mation of the kind contained in the statement or of the kind from 
which the information sO contained is derived; 30 
(c) . throughout the ma1'.e.rial part of the said peri'od, the 
computer was operating properly or, if not, then any respect in 
which it was not operating properly or was out of operation 
during that part of that period. was not such as to affect the pro-
duction of the document or the accuracy of the con~ts; and 3S 
(d) the information contained in the statement reproduces 
or is derived from information supplied to the computj8r in the 
ordinary course of the said actiVities. 
(3) Where over any period, the function of storing or processing 
information for the purposes of any actiVities regularly carried on 40 
over that period as mentioned in clause (a) of sub-section (2) was 
regularly performed by computers, whether-
(a) by a combination of computers opjerating over that 
period; .or 
(b) by different computers operating in succession over 45 
that period; or . 
(c) by different combinations of compu1jers operatini in 
succession over that pe.riod; or ! 

10 
IS 
20 
25 
30 
3S 
40 
(el) ih any other manner involving the successive operation. 
over that period, in whatever order, of one or more computers 
and one or more combinations of computers, 
all the computers used for that purpose during that period shall be 
treated for the purposes of this section as constituting a single com-
puter; and references in this section to a computer shall be construed 
accordingly. 
(4) In any proceedings under this Act and the rules made t~re­
under where it is desired to give a stateme~t in evidence by virtue 
of this section, a certificate doing any of the followng things, that 
is to 8ay-
(a) identifying the document containing the statement and 
describing the manner in which it was produced; 
(b) .giving such particulars of any device involved in the 
production of that document as may be appropria~ for the pur-
pose of showing that the document was prodUced by a com-
puter; , . I 
(c) dealing with any of the matters to which the conditions 
mentioned is sub-section (2) relate, 
and purporting to be si~d by a person occupying a responsible 
official position in relation to the operation of the relevant devide or 
the management of the relevant activities (whichever is appropriate) 
shall be evidjence of any matter stated in the certificate; and for the 
purposes of this sub-section it shall be sufficient for a matter to be 
stated to the best of the know ledge and belief of the person stating 
it.' , 
(5) For the purposes of this section,-
(a) information shall be taken to be supplied to a computer 
if it is supplied thereto in any appropriate form and whether 
it is so supplied directly or (with or without human interven-
tion) by means of any appropriate ~uipment; 
(b) whether in the course of activities carried on by any 
official, information is supplied with a view to its being stored 
or processed for the purposes of th~ activities by a computer 
operated otherwise than in the course of those activities, that 
information, if duly supplied to that computer, shall be taken 
to be suppl~ to it in the course of th!ose activities; 
(c) a document shall be taken to have been produced by a 
computer whether it was produced by it directly or (with 011 
without human interv;ention) by means of any appropriate 
equip.t. 
E.rplanation.-For the purposes of this section,-
(a) "computer" means any device that receives, stores and 
processes data. applying stipulated processes to the information 
45 and supplying results of ~ processes; and , 
(b) any reference to information being derived from other 
info.rmation shall be a referenoo to its being derived therefrom 
by calculation, comparison or any ourer process.'. 

.Amend-
ment of 
.ection 
1~ 
Amend-
mentof 
section 
159. 
Insertion 
of new 
section 
5A. 
Power 
to grant 
exemp-
tiontrom 
duty of 
excise. 
1. lltsection 152 of·the. Customs Act, in clause (G), for\the ~rds ~a 
Collector of Customs", the words "a Principal Collector Of Customs or 
a Collector of Customs" shall be substituted. 
8. In section 159 of the Customs ~ct, after the figures' "25,", the 
figures and letter "28A," shall ij! inserted. ' S 
CHAPTER ill 
AMENDMENTS TO THE CI:Nnw. ExCISES AND SALT Aer, 1944· 
9. After section S of the Central Excises and Salt Act. 1944 (here-
after in this Chapter referred. to as the Central Excises Act), the 
followirigSjeCtion shall be inserted, namely:- 10 
'SA. (1) If the Central Government is satisfied. that it is neces-
sary in the public interest So to do, it may, by notification in the 
Oftlcial Gazette, exemptj generally ,either absolutje1y or subject to 
such conditions (to be fulfilled before or after removal) as may be 
specified in the notification, excisab~ goods of any specified! des~ 15 
cription from the whole or any part of the duty of exciSe ~viable 
thereon: \ 
Provided tha~ unless specifically provided in such notification, 
no exemption therein shall apply to excisable goods which are pro-
duced o.r manufactured- 20 
(i) in a free trade zone and brought to any other place in 
"India; or : 
(ti) by a hundred per cent. export-oriented undertaking 
and allowed to ~ sold in India. 
Explanation_In this proviso, "free trade zo¥" and "hundred 25 
per cent. export-oriented undertaking" shall have the same mean-
ings as in Explanation 2 to sv.b-section (1) of section 3· 
(2) If the Central Government is satisfied that it is necessary 
in the public interest so to do, it may, by special order in each case, 
exempt from the payment of duty of. ~xcise, under circumstances ot 30 
an exceptional nature to be stated in such order, any excisable 
goods on which duty of excise is leviable. 
(3) An exemption un~r sub-section (1) or sub-8ec~ion (2) in 
respect of any excisable goods from any part of the, duty ot excise 
leviable thereon (the duty of excise leviable ~reon being herein~ 3S 
after referred to as the statutory du.ty) may be granted by' provid~ 
ing £0&' the levy of a duty on such goods at a ratje expressed in a 
farm or method different from the form or method in which the 
.tutory duty is leviable and any exemption granted in relation to 
any excisable goods in t~ manner provided in this SUb-section 40 
shall have effect subject to the condition that the duty of excise 
chargeable on such goods shall in no caSe exceed th.e statutory duty. 
Ezplanation.-"Forrrt or method", in relation to a rate of duty 
of exeise means the basis, namely. valuation, weight, number, 
length. area, volu~ or other measure with reference to which the 4S 
duty is leviable. f 
(4) Every notification issued under sub-rule (1), ariQ every 
order made under sub-rule (2), of rule 8 of the·Ctmtral'Excise Rules, 

5 o'{ 1986. 
5 of 1986. 
58 of 1957 
40 of 1978. 
7 
1944, and in force immediately before the commencement of the 
Customs and Central Excises Laws (Amendment) Act, 1987 shall 
be deemed to have been issued or made under the provisions of this 
section and shall continue to have the sa~ force and effect after 
S such commencement until it is amended, varied, rescinded or super-
seded under the provisions of this *ctian.'. 
10. Section llC of the Central Excises Act shall be renumbered as 
sub-section (1) thereof, and after sub-section (1) as so renumbered, the 
following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-
10 "(2) Where any notification under sub-section (1) in respect 
of any goods has been issued, the whole of the duty of excise paid 
on such goods, or, as the case may be, the duty of ~xcise paid in 
eKcess of that payable: on such goods, which would not ,have been 
paid if the said notification had been in force, shall be refunded in 
15 accordan~ with the said notification: 
Provided that the person claiming the refund of such 
duty or, as the case may be, excess duty. makes an application in 
this behalf to the Assistant Collector of Central Excise before the 
expiry of six months from the date of issue of the said notification 
20 and proves to the satisfaction of the Assistant Collector of Central 
"Excise that the incidence of such duty had not been passed on to any 
other person.". ! 
11. Tn section 35E of the Central Excises Act. after sub-section (4), 
the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-
25 "(5) The provisions of this section shall not apply to any, decision 
30 
3S 
or order in which the determination of any question having a rela-
tion to the rate of duty of excise or to the value Of goods for the 
purposes of assessment of any duty is in issue or is one of the points 
in issue. 
~X'Plafl,ation.-For the purposes of this sub-section, the determi-
nation of a rate of duty in relation to any goods or valuation of 
any goods for the purposes of assessment of duty includes the 
determination Of a questian-
(a) relating to the rate of duty of e~cise for the time 
being in force, whether under the Central Excise Tariff A.ct 19851 , 
OT' under ~nv ~her fCentral Act providing for, the levy I!Uld 
collection of any duty of excise. in relation to any goods on or 
after the 28th day of February, 1986; or 
, (0) relating to the value of goods for the' purposes of 
40 aSSE:ssment of any duty of excise in cases where the assessment 
is inade on or after the 28th day of February, 1986; or 
4S 
(c) whether anv goods are excisable ~ods or whether th,e 
rate of duty of excise on any gOO~S is nil; or 
(d) whether any goods fall under' a particular heading or 
su~-heading of the Schedule to the Central Excise Tariff Act. 
1985, lor the ~Addltional Dutiles of Excise (Goods CYt l Snecial 
Importance) Act. ]957 or the Additional Duties of Excise 
(Textiles and Textile Articles) Act, 1978, or that any goods are 
Amend-
mentof 
section 
HC. 
Amend-
mentof 
section 
351:. 

Insertion 
of new 
section 
35EA. 
Powers Of 
revision 
of Board 
or Col-
lector of 
Central 
Excise 
in certain 
case.. 
or not covered by a particular notification or order issued by 
the Central Government or the Board, as the case may be, 
granting total or partial exemption from duty; or 
(e) whether the value of any goods for the purposes of 
assessment of duty of excise shall be enhanced or reduced by , 
the addition Or reduction of the amounts in respect of such 
matters as are specifically provided in this Act.". 
12. Mter section 35E of the Central Excises Act, 
l'Iection shall be inserted, namely:-
the following 
C35EA. (1) The Board may. of its own motion or on the applica- 10 
tion of any aggrieved person or otherwise, call for and examine the 
record of any proceeding in which a Collector of Central Excise 
has passed any decision or order [not beinp: a decision or order 
passed under sub-section (2) of this section] of the nature referred 
to in sub-section (5) of section 35E for .the purpose of satisfying IS 
itself as 'to correctness. legality or proprietydl. such decision or 
order and may pass such order thereon as it thinks fit. 
(2) The Collector of Central Excise may, of his own motion or 
on the application of _ any a~grieved person or otherwise. call for 
and examine the record of any proceeding in which an adjudicating 20 
authority subordinate to him has passed any decision or order of 
the nature referred to in sub-section (5) of section 35E for the 
purpose of satisfying himself as to the correctness, lep:ality or pro-
priety of such decision or order and may pass such order thereon 
as he thinks fit. 25 
(3) (a) No decision or order under this section shall be made 
so as to prejudiciallv affect any person unless such person is given 
a reasonable opportunitv of making representation and if, he so 
desires, of being heard in his defence. 
(b) Where the Board or. as the case may be, the Collector of 30 
Central Excise is of the opinion that any duty of excise has not 
been levied or has been short-levied or short-paid or erroneously 
refunded, no ordet' requirin[f the affected person to pay any duty 
not levied or paid. short-levied or short-paid or erronE!9uslv 
refu"'lded shall he passed under this section unless 'Such nerson is 35 
given notice within the time limit specified in section llA to show 
cause against the proposed order. 
(4) No nroceedin(!s Rhall be initiated under suh-section '(t) or 
sub-eection (2) in respert of any dech;ion or order after the expfrv 
of a period of six months from the date of communication of such 40 
decision or order: 
Provided that jn rf'!;nect of :mv df'chdon or nrder nassed before 
the commencement of the CustnmR fln~ r'pntra1 Excises LAWs (Am-
p.ndment) Act. 1987. th,. nroviRinn~ nf thhl sllb-~e('t,ion shall have 
effect as if for the words "six months", the words u one year" were 45' 
substituted. . .. 

82 of 1886. 
s 
9 
(5) Any person aggrieved by any decision or order passed under 
sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) may appeal to the Customs and 
'Excise Revenues Appellate Tribunal established under section 3 of 
the. Customs and Excise Revenues Appellate Tribunal Act, 1986, 
against such decision or order.'. 
13. In Chapter VIB of the Central Excises Act, after section 36A, Insertion 
Ulelo11owing section shall be inserted, namely: - of new 
section 
36B. 
10 
15 
'36B. (1) 'Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law 
for the time being in force,-
(a) a micro fUm of a document or the reproduction of the 
image or images embodied in such micro film (whether enlarged 
or not); or 
(b) a facsimile copy of a document; or 
(c) a statement contained in a document and included in a 
printed material produced by a computer (hereinafter rmrred 
to as a "computer print out"), if the conditions mentioned in sub-
section (2) and the other provisions contained in this section 
are satisfied in relation to the statement and the computer in 
question, 
20 shall be deemed to be also a document for the purposes of this Act 
and the rules 'made thereunder and shall be admissible in any pro-
eeedings'thereunder, without further proof Or production of the 
original, as evidence of any contents of the original or of 
are satisfied in relation to the statement and the computer in 
25 sible. 
(2) The conditions referred to in sub-section (1) in respect of 
a computer print out shall be the following. namely:-
(.a) the computer print out containing the statement was 
produced by the computer during the period over which the 
30 oomputer was used regularly fo store or process infonnation 
for the l'urposesof any activities regularly carried on over that 
period by the person having lawful control over the use of the 
computer; 
(b) durin~ the said period, there was regularly supplied 
35 to the computer in the ordinary C'ourse of the said activities, 
Information of the kind contained in the statement or of the 
kind from which the information so contained is derived: 
(c) throughout the material part of the said period, the 
eomputer was operating properly or, if not, then any respect 
dn which it was not operating properly or was out of operation 
dUring that part of ' that period was not such as to affect the pro-
·duetion of the document OT the Ilccuracy of the contents; and 
(d) the information contained in the statement reproduces 
or is derived from information supplied to the computer in the 
45 ordinary course of the said activities. 
(3) Where over any period, the function of storing or processing 
information for the purposes of any activities regularly carried on 
Admissibi-
lity of 
microw 
fthns, 
facsimile 
copiesDf 
docu-
ments 
and 
computer 
print 
outs as 
docu-
menta 
and u 
evidence. 

10 
over that period as mentioned in clauie (a) of sub-section (2) was 
regularly performed by computers, whether-
(a) by a combination of computers operatina over that 
period; or 
(b) by differ.ent computers operating in succession over that 5 
period; or 
(c) by different combinations of computers operating in 
succession over that period; or 
(d) in any other manner involving the successive operation 
over that period, in whatever order, of one or more computers 10 
and one or more combinations of computers, 
all the computers used for that purpose during that period shall be 
treated for the purposes of this section as constituting a single com-
puter; and references in this section to a computer shall be construed 
accordingly. 15 
(4) In any proceedings under this Act and the rules made there-
under where it is desired to give a statement in evidence by virtue 
of this section. a certificate doing any of the following things, that 
is to say-
(a) identifying the document containing the statement and 20 
describing the manner in which it was produced; 
(b) giving such particulars of any device involved in the 
production of that document as may be appropriate for the pur-
pose of showing that the document was produced by a computer; 
(c) dealing with any of the matters to which the conditions 25 
mentioned in sub-section (2) relate. 
and purporting to be signed by a person occupying a responsible 
official position in relation to the operation of the relevant device 
or the management of the relevant activities (whichever is appro-
priate) shall be evidence of any matter stated in the certificate; and 30 
for the pUIlposes of this sub-section it shall be sufficient for a matter 
to be stated to the best of the knowledge and belief of the person 
stating it. 
(5) For the purposes of this section,-
(a) information shall be taken to be supplied to a computer 35 
if it is supplied thereto in any appropriate form and whether' 
~~ is so supplied directly or (with or without human interven-
tion) by means of any appropriate equipment; 
(b) whether in the course of activities carried on by any 
offiCial, information is supplied with a view to its being stored,' 40 
or processed for the purposes of those activities by a computer 
operated otherwise than in the course of those activities that , 
information, if duly supplied to that computer. shall be taken 
to be supplied to it in the course of those activities-, 
(c) a document shall be taken to have been produced by 4S 
" Qomput.,r whether it was produced bY' it directlY' or (with Qf 

820t 19~. 
U 
withouthUJIUUl iiliervention) by means of any appropriate 
equipment. 
ExpZanation.-For the purposes of this section,-
(a) "computer" means any device' that receives, stores and 
\ procesie~ data, applying stipulated processes to the information 
and supplying results of these processes; and 
(b.) any reference to information being derived from other 
information shall be a reference to its being derived therefrom 
by cakulati.on, comparison or any other process.'. 
io '. -14. In SeCtion 3'lA of the Central Excises Act, .in clause (a), for 
the words "a Collector of Central Excise", the words "a Principal Collec-
tor of Central Excise or a Collector of Central Excise" shall be substi-
t~ted. ..' 
15. In section 38 0'£ the Central Excises Act, for sub-section (2), the 
15 following subsection shall be substituted. namely:-
20 
25 
30 
II (2) Every rule made under this Act and 'every notification issued 
under sub-section (1) of sectiO'Il 5A and section llC shall be laid, as 
soon as may be after it is made or issued, before each House of 
Parliament, while it is in ~.ession for Ii total period of thirty days 
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more-successive 
seSSions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately follow-
ing the ¥Ssion or the successiVe sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree 
in making any modiiication in the rule Or notification or both Houses 
agree that the rule should not be made or the notification should 
not be issued, the rule or notification shall thereafte.r have effect 
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; 
so, however. that any such modification or annulment shall be with-
out prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under 
that rule or notification." 
CHAPTER IV 
AMENDMENTS TO THE CUSToMS AND EXCISE R.I:vENuEs AppELLATE 
TRIBUNAL ACT, 1986 
16. In section 14 of the Customs and Excise ReV)enues Appellate 
Tribunal Act, 1986, in sub-section (1) ,-
35 . . (i) after clause (b,) , the, following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:-
" (bb) a decision or orde.r passed by the Board or th, 
COllector of ~ntral Excise under section aSEA of the Central 
Excises Act;"; and 
4(' ('j) after clause (d). the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:-
"(e) a decision or order passed by the Board ar the Collec-
tor o'f C\lIltoms under section 129DA of the Customs Act,". 
Amend-
ment ot 
section 
37A. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
38. 
.Amend· 
ment of 
section 
14. 

STATEMENT Oli' OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The <:JustoIDS Act, 1962 and the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944 
provide for the levy and collection of duties of customs and' excise, 
respectively. The Customs and Excise Revenues Appellate Tribunal is 
bt:ing set up for adjudication of disputes with respect to the d.etermi~ 
naUon of ilie rates of duues of cus~oms and central excise on goods aDd 
to the valuation of goods for the purposes of assessment of such duties. 
it 15 proposed to make certain amendments in these Acts to streamline 
tile proce\l.Ul'eS. to sateguard revenue interest, to mitipte hardshiPs of 
t,be assessees in assessment matters, and to include the provisions 
relatmg to the powers to grant exemption from duty Of excise in the 
Central ,~cises and Salt Act itself which presently are available in the 
Central Excise Rules. 
2. The Bill, accordingly. provides mainly for the following aJDend.. 
ll.ents:-
(i) \0 ~t>\!l:iiy Prillcipal Collectors as a separate class of o1Ikers 
and empowering the Cemral Government to delegate to them certain 
powers pl'esently exel'cised by the Central Board of Excise and 
CustolUS; 
(ii) 10 rest.ore powe.rs of the Board and the Collectors to revise 
assessment orders passed by the subordinate officers and making 
such orders appealable to the said Customs and Exciae Revenues 
Appellate Tribunal; 
(iii) to empower the Central Government to grant refund of 
duties in cases where an assessee had paid duties as an exception 
to the generally prevalent practice if the Central Government issues 
notification under section 28A o'f the Customs Act or. aa the 
case may be, under section HC of the Central Excises and Salt Act 
and the assessee had not passed on the duty incidence to other, and 
the claim· is made within six months of issue of the said notif1cation. 
Such notifications, when issued, will be laid before each House of 
Parliament; 
(iv) to accept micro films, facsimile copies and ,tatement con-
tained in a document produced by a computer as a document and 
as evidence for the pw-poses of the said Acts. This will, 
however, be subject to certain conditions and safeauards; 
(v) to include in the Central Excises and Salt Act itself 
provisions of rule 8 of the Central Excise Rules, 1944 which autho-
rises the Central Government to grant exemption froID. duties of 
excise on any excisable goods or payment thereof since these are 
important substantive provisions and should more appropriately find 
place in the Act itself. Notification granting exemption from duties 
of excise, whenever issued under the new prOviSions, will be laid 
before each House of Parliament. 
3. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. The Notes on 
clauses explain the provisions of the Bill. 
NEW DELHI; 
NARAYAN DATT TEWARt. 
The 2&th November, 1987. 
12 
• 

il 
PJIlESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTIClXS 117 ANt> 
274 OF THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. 313j7187-CX-IO. dated the 26th November, 1987 
from Shri Narayan Oatt Tiwari, Minister of Finance to the Secretary-
General. Lok Sabha.] 
The President, having balm in:f.ormed· of the subject matter of the Bill 
further to amend the Customs Act, 1962. the Central Excises and Salt 
Act, 1944 and the Customs and Excise Revenues Appellate Tribunal Act. 
1986, recommends under clause (1) of article lI'T and clause (1) of 
article 274 and also under clause (3) of article 117 of the Constitution. 
the introduction and consideration of the above Bill, by Lok Sabha. 

CLa~ 2.-This clause specifies the Principal Collectors of Cust~ 
as a separate class of officers of Customs. 
Clause a.-This clause seeks to make provision to give refund of 
duty of customs paid as an exception to the generally prevalent prac-
tice, subject to certain conditions. 
Clause 4.-This clause seeks to exclude disputes with respect to the 
determination of the rates of duties of customs and the valuation of 
goods for the purposes of assessment of such duty, from the purview 
of section 129D. 
Clause 5.-This clause inserts a new section to empower the Board 
and the Collectors of Customs to revise decisions or orders passed by 
subardinate officers with respect to the determination of the rate of 
duty of customs and the valuation of goods, if found incorrect, illegal 
or improper. 
Clause 6.-This clause provides for acceptance· of micro films, facsi-
mile copies and computer print outs as documents and as evidence, in 
customs proceedings, subject to certain c'Jnditions and safeguards. 
Clause 7.-This clause provides that certain functions of the Board 
may be delegated by the Central Government to the Principal Collectors 
of Customs. 
Clause a.-This clause pr >vides that notifications issued under section 
28A of the Customs Act shall be placed before each House of Parliamen t. 
Clause 9.-·This clause seeks to insert a new section in the Central 
Excises Act to incorporate the existing provisions relating to exemption 
contained in rule 8 of the Central Excise Rules, 1944 and specifies a new 
condition that the exemption may be granted only if the Central Gov-
ernment is satisfied that it is necessary in the public interest and that the 
Board's power to grant exemption 'from payment of duty will vest with 
the Central Government. 
Clause 10.-This clause seeks to make provision to give refund of 
duty of excise paid as an exception to the generally prevalent practices, 
lubject to certain conditions. 
Clause n.-This clause seeks to exclude disputes with respect to the 
determination of the rates of duties of excise and the valuation of goods 
for the purposes of assessment of such duty, from the purview of section 
35E. 
ClauSe 12.-Tbis clause inserts a new section to empower the Board 
and the Collectors of Excise to revise decisions or orders passed by sub-
ordinate oft\cers with respect to the determination of the rate of duty 
14 

15 
of excise and the valuation of eoods, if found incorrect, illegal or 
improper. 
Clause 13.-This cla~ provides for acceptance of micro films, 
facsimile copies and computer print outs as documents and as evidence. 
in central excise proceedings, subject to certain conditions and safe-
guards. 
Clause 14.-This clause provides that certain functions of the Board 
may be delegated by the Central Government to the Principal Collectors 
of Central Excise. 
ClaUse IS.-This clal1se provides that notifications issued under the 
new sub-section (1) of section 5A and section UC of t~ Central Excises 
Act shall be placed before each House of Parliament. 
Clause 16.-It confers jurisdiction· on the Customs and Excise Re-
venues Appellate Tribuna1 to hear appeals against orders in reVlSlOR 
made by the Boax:d and the Collectors' Of Customs and Collectors of Cent-
ral Excise. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to specify the Principal Collectors ot 
. OtIAoms as a tleparate class of oftlcers of customs. 'nUs provision. 
however, does 'not envisage providing for any new posts, siDcethePrincl-
pal Co~tors are already in position under the existing aclntiniStrative 
~r8l\Bements. But they are not appointed under the law u a class 
at omcers separate hom the Collectors. Thepr~posal is me~e],y to 
appoint them under the law 'so as to enable the· Central Government to 
delegate them powers under the law for certain purposes. In view 
tftereof, provisioml of the Bill, if enacted and brought into operation. 
'would not involve any additional expenditure from the Consolidated Fund 
. tJfIndta· e.x~ . the expendfture already being incurred on this account. 
2. The provisions of the Bill will not require any other expenditure 
whether recurring or non-.recurring. 
16 
1 
M 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 9 of the Bill inserts a new section 5A in the Central Excises 
and Salt Act, 1944. This new section reproduces the provisions of ex-
isting rule 8 of the Central Excise Rules, 1944, to confer power on the 
Central Government to issue notifications and make oreers relating t.o 
exemption in the public interest of goods of any specified description 
from payment of duty of excise. Since this is an important substan-
tive power, it should more appropriately find a place in the Act itself. 
The notifications issued by virtue of this power shall be placed before 
each House of Parliament as in the case of rules made under an Act. 
17 

.. 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRAcrS FROM THE CUSTOMS Acr, 1962 
.. 
(52 OF 1962) 
.. 
CHAPTER II 
OFFICERS OF CUSTOMS· 
• .. 
3. There shall be the following classes of office.rs of customs, 
namely:-
(a) Collectors of Customs; 
.. .. .. .. .. 
152.. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, direct that subject to such conditions, if any, as may be specified 
in the notification-
(a) any power exercisable by the Board un~r this Act shall be 
exercisable also by a Collector of Customs empowered in this behalf 
by the Central Government; 
.. .. .. • .. 
159. Every rule made under· this Act and every notification issued 
under sections 11, llB, llH, 11-1, 11K, l1N, 14, 2.5, 43, 66, 69, 70, 74, 75, 76, 
98, 101 and 123 shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made or 
issued before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total 
period of thirty days which may be comprised in o¥ session or in two 
or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session imme-
diately following the session or the succesSive ,sessions aforesaid, both 
Houses agree in making any modification in the rule o.r notification or 
both Houses agree that the rule should not be made or the notification 
should not be issued, the rule or notification shall thereafter have effect 
only in such modified form .>r be of no effect, as the case may be: so, 
however. that any such moclification or annulment shall be without pre-
judice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule or 
notification . 
• * .. • .. 
EXTRACTS FROM THE CENTRAl, EXCISES AND SALT ACT, 1944 
(1 OF 1944) 
.. • • • .. 
37A. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, direct that subject to such conditions. if any, as may be 
specified in the notification-
(a) any power exercisable by the ,Board under this Act may be 
ex.ercisable also by a Collector of Central Excise empowered in this 
behalf by the Central Government; 
.. .. .. • .. 
18 
Classes of 
offtcen 
of customs. 
Delega-
thnof 
powers. 
Rules 
and 
certain 
notifica-
tions to 
be lalid 
before 
Parlia-
ment. 
Delega-
tion of 
powers. 

Publica-
tion of 
rules IIDd 
notifi-
catiDns 
and lay-
ing of 
rules 
before 
Parl:ia'-
ment. 
Jurisdic-
Uion, 
powers 
and 
autho-
rity 
of the 
Appel-
late 
Tri-
bunal. 
19 
38. (1) • • • • • 
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be 
after it is made, before each House of Parliament whi~ it is in session 
for a ,total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session 
, Or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or .the successi.ve sessions 
aforesaid, both Houses agrElfe in making any modification in the rule or 
both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only. in such modified form or ~ of no effect, as 
the case may be; so, however, ,that any such modification or annulment 
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that rule. 
• • • • • 
EXTRACT FROM THE CUSTOMS AND EXCISE REVENUES ApPELLATE 
TRIBUNAL ACT, 1986 
(62 OF 1986) 
• • • • • 
CHAPTER III 
JURISDICTION, POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF THE ApPELLATE TRIBUNAL 
If· (1) Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, the Appel-' 
late Tribunal shall exercise, on and from the appointed day, all the juris-' 
diction, powers and authority exercisable in relation to an appeal aginst-
• • • • • 

LOK SABHA 
• 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Customs Act, 1962.. the Central Excises and Salt 
Act, 1944 and the Customs and Excise Revenues Appellate Tribunal Act. 
1988. . 
(Shri Narayan Datt Tewari, 
Mmuter of Fin.cmce) 