Bill No. 129 of  2018
Short title,
and
commencement.
THE MAINTENANCE AND WELFARE OF PARENTS AND SENIOR
CITIZENS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2018
By
SHRI BHARTRUHARI MAHTAB, M.P.
A
BILL
to amend the Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens Act, 2007.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of  India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior
Citizens (Amendment)  Act, 2018.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the official Gazette, appoint.
  2. After Chapter V of the Maintenance and Welfare of Senior Citizens Act, 2007, the
following Chapter and sections there under shall be inserted, namely:—
Insertion of
new Chapter
VA .
5
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
"CHAPTER V A
PROTECTION OF SENIOR CITIZENS FROM LONELINESS
23A. (1) Every State Government shall prepare and maintain a confidential district-
wise digital database of senior citizens living alone.
(2) Any unauthorised access to the database of senior citizens living alone or attempt
thereof shall be an offence punishable with a fine which may extend upto one lakh rupees or
with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend upto six months or both.
23B. (1) The State Government shall establish sufficient number of senior citizen
centers in each district.
(2) The senior citizen centers established under sub-section ( 1) shall provide
interactional, recreational and such other facilities to senior citizens as may be prescribed.
(3) Where oldage homes have been established under section 19 of this Act, the
facilities under sub-section (2) may be provided at such oldage homes.
23C. The State Government shall depute officials or volunteers who shall regularly
visit senior citizens living alone and perform the following functions, namely:—
(a) organising social interaction activities for such senior citizens;
(b) updating the database of senior citizens living alone;
(c) aiding the local police administration in providing adequate security to such
senior citizens.
23D. ( 1) All establishments shall provide counselling to their retiring employees
regarding post-retirement life and the need for social interaction.
(2) The appropriate Government shall provide counseling regarding elderly life and
need for social interaction to all individuals, except those covered under sub-section ( 1),
approaching the age of sixty years.’’.
Database of
senior citizens
living alone.
Interactional
and
recreational
facilities for
senior citizen
living alone.
Regular visits
to senior
citizens living
alone.
Counseling of
retiring
individuals and
individuals
approaching
sixty years of
age.
5
10
15
20

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS  AND REASONS
India has a sizeable population of senior citizens. Therefore, the legislative bodies
have been mindful of the needs of senior citizens. The Parliament enacted the maintenance
and Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens Act in the year 2007 which has proved to be a
landmark enactment to serve the interests of senior citizens. While the need to meet physical
requirements of senior citizens is addressed, a major problem that afflicts them and often
goes unattended is loneliness in their lives.
With the advent of globalisation, the joint family system is on the decline. Children
often have to leave their parents behind in pursuit of employment. As a result, senior citizens
are forced to live a life of solitude. Modern social life offers little opportunities of social
interaction to people at the dusk of their lives. Loneliness in life is not just a problem in itself,
it brings with it a host of psychological and health issues. People living alone are more
vulnerable to depression. There is ample evidence to prove that such persons sooner or later
develop life-style diseases. A study has found that the risk of Alzheimer's dementia was more
than double in lonely elderly individuals compared to those who were not lonely.
In order to protect senior citizens from loneliness and its harmful effects, the Bill
therefore, seeks to amend the parent Act with a view to:—
(i) provide that the State Government shall provide interactional and recreational
facilities to senior citizens where they can interact with other people;
(ii) make arrangement of regular visits to senior citizens living alone by officials
or volunteers appointed by the State Government in order to address their needs for
social interaction and security;
(iii) provide for counselling regarding elderly life and the need for social
interaction to retiring employees and individuals approaching sixty years of age; and
(iv) provide for creation of a database of senior citizens living alone and to
provide for its confidentiality so as to prevent misuse of such database.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
N
EW DELHI; BHARTRUHARI MAHTAB
July 2, 2018.
3

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill vide proposed section 23A provides for creation of a digital data-
base of senior citizens living alone; it also vide proposed section 23B provides for interactional
and recreational facilities for senior citizens living alone; and vide proposed section 23D, it
also seeks to provide for counselling facilities to retiring individuals and individuals
approaching the age of sixty years.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure out of the Consolidated Fund of
India. A recurring expenditure of rupees five crore is likely to be involved from the
Consolidated fund of India. A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees two crore is also
likely to be involved.
4

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to amend the Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens Act, 2007.
————
(Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—697LS(S3)—24-07-2018.