1
THE INDIAN PENAL CODE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015
By
SHRIMATI MEENAKASHI LEKHI, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Indian Penal Code (Amendment) Act, 2015.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the Indian Penal Code, 1860, for section 326A, the following section shall be
substituted, namely:—
‘‘326A. Whoever causes permanent or partial damage or deformity to, or burns
or maims or disfigures or disables, any part or parts of the body of a person or causes
grievous hurt by throwing acid on or by administering acid to that person, or by using
any other means with the intention of causing or with the knowledge that he is likely to
cause such injury or hurt, shall be punished with death.”.
Bill No. 129 of  2015
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title and
commencement.
Substitution of
new section for
section 326A.
Voluntarily
causing
grievous hurt
by use of acid.
5
10

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Acid attack is a form of violent assault with the intention to disfigure, maim, torture or
kill another person particularly women and has been a threat to the safety of women for long.
According to the National Crime Records Bureau, in the decade 2001-2011, the crime rate
against women had increased by 34.9 percent. The National Crime Records Bureau has also
reported that there have been 225 acid attack cases between the years 2010 and 2012. It is
unfortunate that despite the widespread incidence of acid attacks, there is no specific law to
effectively deal with the issue.
The Poisons Act, 1919 empowers the State Government to regulate possession for sale
and sale of any poison. It also provides for imprisonment for a period upto one year and fine
upto one thousand rupees for violation of the provisions of the Act. Acid attack cases are
treated as ‘hurt’ and ‘grievous hurt’ under the provisions of the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
Eventually, the watershed Criminal Laws Amendment in 2013 has recognised the acid attack
as an heinous crime but a lot more has to be done.
Despite all this, the number of acid attacks in the country have not come down. It is
strongly felt that the punishment to offenders in acid attack cases should be raised to death
penalty as is provided in case of murder in order to deter the offenders from committing the
heinous crime of acid attack.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; MEENAKASHI  LEKHI
March 27, 2015.
2

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860
(45 OF 1860)
*******
‘‘326A. Whoever causes permanent or partial damage or deformity to, or burns or
maims or disfigures or disables, any part or parts of the body of a person or causes grievous
hurt by throwing acid on or by administering acid to that person, or by using any other
means with the intention of causing or with the knowledge that he is likely to cause such
injury or hurt, shall be punished with death.”.
******
Provided that such fine shall be just and reasonable to meet the medical expenses of
the treatment of the victim:
Provided further that any fine imposed under this section shall be paid to the victim.
3

GMGIPMRND—295LS(S-3)—28.04.2015.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
————
(Shrimati Meenakashi Lekhi, M.P.)