Bill No. la9 of 1958 
THE FOREIGN EXCHANGE REGULA-
TION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1958 
(As INTRODVCED IN V)I< SABHA) 

Bill No. tZ9 of 1951 
THE FOREIGN EXCHANGE REGULATION (AMEND-
MENT) BILL, 1958 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
. further to amend the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1947. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Ninth Year of the Republie 
of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Foreign Exchange Regulation Short title. 
(Amendment) Act, 1958. 
S 2. For section 13A of the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act Substitution 
'of new sec-
tion for sec-
tion 13 A. 
10 
IS 
1947, the following section shall be substituted, namely:-
"13A. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other Restrictio~ 
law or in any contract, agreement or other instrument, the:: ie:=~~f 
holder of any Government security, as defined in the Public cer~a!n se-
Debt Act, 1944, created and issued for the purpose of raising a CUIltJes. 
public loan before the 15th day of August, 1947, in respect of 
which the principal or interest or both are for the time being 
payable outside India in any country or place notified in this 
behalf by the Central Government shall not be entitled, except 
with the general or special permission of the Reserve Bank, to 
have any such payment made at any place in India. 
Explanation.-In this section, "holder" shall have the 
same meaning as in clause (a) of sub-~ction (5) of section 13.". 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
" 
Section 13A of the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act as it now 
stands empowers Government to prohibit the holder of a notified 
security payable outside India in a notifi~d country from having 
the payment of such security made in India without the permission 
of the Reserve Bank. The intention was only to empower the 
Governm~nt of India to regulate the transfer of Government of 
India securities issued prior to 15th August, 1947, so that they could 
not be transferred to India for payment of interest and principal in 
India except with the consent of the Government of India. Section 
13A waSj ho~ver, couched in very general terms and it has been 
pointed out that it is open to Government under the powers vested 
in them by this sectiorl' to notify at any time that repayment of a 
loan made by a foreign investor to an Indian company would not 
be permit~d even in India without the specific approval of the 
Reserve Bank. This might create some misapprehension among 
foreign investors and it is desirable to remove such misapprehen-
sion. It is accordingly proposed to am~nd this section by limiting 
its applicability specifically to "Government Securities" as defined 
in the Public Debt Act, 1944, relating to the loans floated before the 
15th August, HJ47, arid payable outside India in any country or 
place notified in this behalf by the Central Government. 
The Bill f>eeks to achieve this object. 
NEW tiEt.Hij 
The 3rd Decimibb, 1958. 
MORARJI DESAI. 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE FOREIGN EXCHANGE REGULATION ACT. 1947 
(No.7 OF 1947) 
• • • • 
13. 
• • • • • 
(5) For the purposes of this section,-
(a) "holder" in relation to a bearer security means the 
person having physical custody of the security; provided tbat, 
where a bearer security is deposited with any person in a 
locked or sealed receptacle from which the person with whom 
it is deposited is not entitled to remove it without the authority 
of some other person, that other person shall be deemed to be 
the holder of the security; 
• • • • 
R"IrUlatiOQ 
of CXpOl t and 
tra'lsfer of 
accurities. 
13A. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law Restrictions 
or in any contract, agreement or othE;r instru~ent" the holder . ,of r: :;:~c;n~f 
any seeurity or class of securities notified hi this behalf by the CCttain IC-
Central Government in respect of which the principal or interest CUrH,CS. 
or both is for the time being payable outside India in any country 
or place so notified shall n:>t be entitled, except with the general or 
special permission of the R(::serv(> Bank, to have any such payment 
made at any place in ~nclia. 
(2) In this section, the expr(>ssions "holder" and "security" shall 
have the 9ame meanings as in sub-section (5) of section 13 . 
• • • • • • 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1947. 
(Shri Morarji Desai, 
Minister of Finance.) , 