As rnTropucen IN LOK SABH’

9S Aus 1992

Bill No, 129 of 1992

THE FOREIGN EXCHANGE, CONSERVATION. (TRAVEL) TAX
ABOLITION BILL, 1992
A
BILL

further to amend the Finance Act, 1987.

Br it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-third Year of the Republic
of India as follows:—

1, (1) This Act may be called the Foreign Exchange Conservation Short
(Travel) Tax Abolition- Act, 1992 title
and
| (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 1st day of com-
June, 1992. i me
ment,

2. Chapter V of the Finance Act, 1987 (hereinafter referred to as the Omis-

principal Act), relating to the Foreign Exchange Conservation (Travel) oe ns

Tax, shall be omitted. etl
Finance
Act, 1987.

3. (1) The Foreign Exchange Conservation (Travel) Tax Abolition Repeat
and

Ordinance, 1992 is hereby repealed. i
saving.

(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action

taken under the principal Act, as amended by the said Ordinance, shall

be deemed to have been done or taken under the principal Act, as

15 amended by this Act.

10


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The Government had been tecelving representations from |

time for abolition of, or exemption from, the Foreign Exchange Coy
vation (Travel) Tax in respect of foreign exchange releases for trav

abroad under various schemes like the Returning Indians Foreign
Exchange Entitlement Scheme, etc. as it added to the cost
of acquisition of foreign exchange significantly after devaluation of
the rupee. Further, with the introduction of partial convertibility of
the rupee and the Liberalised Exchange Rate Management
foreign exchange for travel abroad is now required to be purchased at
the market rate and the levy of 15 per cent. on foreign exchange so

fore, felt that since foreign exchange for foreign travel ig being made
available at market rate, there is no need for continuing the Foreign
Exchange Conservation (Travel) Tax. Government, therefore, decid led
to abolish the levy of 15 per cent. on foreign exchange released in
connection with all types of travel abroad with effect from Ist June,
1992. As the Parliament was not in session, the President promulgated —
the Foreign Exchange Conservation (Travel) Tax Abolition Ordinance,
1992 on 29th May, 1992 for this purpose. t

2. The Bill seeks to replace the said Ordinance,

New Dev;
The 28th July, 1992.

MANMOHAN SINGH.


ANNEXURE
Extract FROM THE Frnance Act, 1987
(11 or 1987)
* * कं * +
CHAPTER V

FOREIGN EXCHANGE CONSERVATION (TRAVEL) TAX

98. (1) This Chapter extends to the whole of India. Extent
and
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government com-
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. mence-
ment.
$9. In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires— Defini-
Ms tions.

(a) “authorised dealer” means a person for the time being eu-
thorised ‘under section 6 of the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act,
1973 to Geal in foreign exchange;

(b) “dealing”, in relation to foreign currency, means purchasing
or selling foreign currency;

(c) “foreign currency” means any currency other than Indian
currency;

(d) “foreign exchange” means foreign currency and includes—

(® all deposits, credits and balances payable in any foreign
currency, and any drafts, traveller’s cheques, letters of credit
and bills of exchange, expressed or drawn in Indian currency
but payable in any foreign currency;

(i) any instrument payable, at the option of the drawee or
holder thereof or any other party thereto, either in Indian cur-
reney or in foreign currency or partly in ene and partly in the
other;

(e) “foreign travel” means a travel, the whole or any part of
which is outside India;

ca) “money changer” means a person for the time being autho-
vised under section 7 of the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1973
to deal in foreign currency;

(g) words and expressions used but not defined in this Chapter
shall have the meanings assigned to them in the Foreign Exchange
Regulation Act, 1973. |

100. (1) With effect from the date of commencement of this Chapter. Foreign
there shall be levied on all foreign exchange released for any foreign exchange
travel by any person, a tax [hereafter in this Chapter referred to as the conserva-
foreign exchange conservation (travel) tax] at the rate of fiftqen per Hon.

‘travel.
ent, of the rupee equivalent of the amount of foreign exchange released. As vey

3


Power to
exempt.

Penalties,

Protec-
tion of
action
taken in
good
faith,

Power to
make
rules,

4

(2) In accordance with the rules made under this Chapter, the foreign
exchange conservation (travel) tax shall be collected by the authorised

dealer or money changer and paid to the credit of the Central Gov
ment.

101. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Chapter, the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, and subject to
such conditions and limitations as may be specified therein, exempt
wholly or to such extent as may be specified in the notification. any.
release of foreign exchange for any foreign travel or class or category
of foreign travel from the payment of tax leviable under this Chapter.
if that Government is satisfied that it is necessary or expedient so to do,
having regard to the purposes of the foreign travel and any other
special circumstances.

102, (1) Every person intending to undertake a foreign travel and.
holding foreign exchange in relation to which the tax payable under th
Chapter has not been paid shall, in addition to his liability to pay thi
tax, be liable to pay a penalty not exceeding twice the amount of the
tax he would have paid under the provisions of this Chapter,

(2) Every authorised dealer or money changer who fails to collect
the tax leviable under this Chapter, or after collecting such tax fails
to pay the tax to the credit of the Central Government under sul
section (2) of section 100 shall, in addition to the payment of the tax.
if any, so collected, be liable to pay a penalty not exceeding twice the
amount of the tax he would have collected or, as the case may be, twice
the amount of the tax collected but not paid to the credit of the Central
Government.

(3) No penalty shall be leviable under sub-section. (1) or sub-sectior
(2), if the authority specified under sub-section (4), for reasons to be
recorded in writing, waives the amount of penalty so payable.

(4) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (3), any penalty under
this section may be adjudged, collected and paid to the credit of tha
Central Government by such authority and in such. manner as may bi
specified in the rules made uncer this Chapter.

103, No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central
Government and no suit or prosecution or other legal proceeding shall ॥
against any officer of the Central Government, or of the State Govern-
ment or against any authorised dealer or money changer for anything in.
good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Chapter or
the rules made thereunder.

104, (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Chapter.

(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of
foregoing power, such rules may provide for—

the

(a) the collection of the foreign exchange conservation (travel)
tax, the authorities by whom adjudication of penalties or other fun
tions under this Chapter shall be discharged, the manner in whi
such tax or penalties due under this Chapter shall be payable, 1
manner in which such tax or penalties shall be collected and pa
to the credit of the Central Government and the procedure for clat

ing refund of any amount paid ender this Chapter;


MHSAS AG
(b) the procedure for adjudication of penalties;

(९) appeals against orders made under this Chapter, the manner
in which and the time within which such appeals may be preferred
and the fees payable therefor;

(d) the returns and other particulars and information which may
be required to be furnished for the purposes of this Chapter. the per-
song or authorities by or to whom or which, and the intervals at
which, such returns, particulars and information shall be furnished;

(e) any other matter which is to be, or may be, provided for by
rules under this Chapter.

105. Every rule made under this Chapter and every notification. issued
under section 101 shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made or
issued before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two
or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session imme-
diately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both
Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or notification or
both Houses agree that the rule should not be made or the notification
should not be issued, the rule or notification shall thereafter have effect
only in such modified form or be, of no effect, as the case may be; so,
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without pre-
judice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule or
notification.

* क्र ® * *

Rules
and
notifica-
tions to
be laid
before
Parlia-
ment.