5 
'1of18J3. 
1 of lS156. 10 
1 of 1958. 
15 
As INTRoDUCED IN 1.01: SABRA ON 
,. 
'" 
I.. 
~ 
Bill He. lzt of 1183 
2 ; _n:" I\. 
THE PUBLIC FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS (OBLIGATION AS 
TO FIDELITY AND SECRECY) BILL, 1983 
A 
BILL 
to pr01!ide for the obligation of public financial institutions lIS tQ 
fidelity and secrecy. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-fourth Year of the ReJYUblic 
of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Public Financial Institutions (Obligation Short 
as to Fidelity and Secrecy) Act, 1983. title. 
2. (n In this Act, "public financial institution" means-
Detlni-
(a) the Industrial Credit and Investment Corporation of India lions. 
Limited, a company formed and registered under the Indian Companies 
Act, 1913; 
(b) the Industrial Reconstruction Corporation of India Limited, 
a company formed and registered under the Companies Act, 19[.6: or 
(c) any other institution, being a company as defined in section 
.617 of the Companies Act, 1956 or a company to which the provisions 
of section 619 of that Act apply, which the Central Government may, 
having regard to the nature of the business carried on by such institu 
tlon, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify to be a pu"lfc 
1lnancial institution for the purposes of this Act. 

Obliga-
tion 88 
to fide-
lity and 
secrecy. 
Declara-
tion of 
fidelity 
and se-
crecy. 
Amend-
ment of 
Act 15 
of 1948. 
(2) Every notification issued under clause (c) of sub-section (1) shall, 
as soon as may be, after it is issued, be laid before each House of Parlia-
ment. 
3. (1) A public financial institution shall not, except as otherwise 
provIded in sub-section (2) or in any other law for the time being in 5 
force, divulge any information relating to, or to the aftairs of, its L'On-
stituents except in cirC'WDstances in which it is, in accordance with the 
law or practice and usage, customary among bankers, necessary or appro-
priate for the public financial institution to divulge such information. 
(.2) A public financial institution maYJ for the purpose of efBcient 10 
discharge of its functions, collect from, or furnish to,-
(a) the Central Government; or 
(b) the State Bank of India constituted under section 3 of the 
State Bank of India Act, 1955, any subsidiary bank within the meaning 23 of 195&. 
of the State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1959, any 15 38 of 1959. 
corresponding new bank constitlUted under section 3 of the Banking 
Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970 5 of 1970. 
or under section 3 of the Banking Companies (Acquisition and 
Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1980, any other scheduled bank with- 40 of 1980. 
in the meaning of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934; or 202 of 1934. 
(e) any other public financial institution, 
sueh credit information or other information as it may consider useful 
for the purpose,tn 'SUch manner and at such time as it may think fit. 
Expla"ot~.-Fot tlIe purp<a!S of this su1HlecUon, the expression 
"credit information" shall have the same meaning as in clause (c) of 
section 45A of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 subject to the modi- 25 2 of 1934. 
fication that the banking company referred to therein shall mean a bank 
referred to in clause (b) of this sub-section or a public financial insti-
tution. 
4. Every director, member o!- any eommittee, auditor or oftlcer or 30 
any other employee of a public financial institution to which this Act 
applies, IIhall,-
(0) before entering upon his duties; or 
(b) where he has entered upon his duties as such before the date 
on which this Act became applicable to such institution, within 35 
thirty days from the 'date on which this Act became appUcable to 
such institution, 
make a declaration of fidelity and secrecy in the form set out in tbe 
Schedule to this Act. 
5. In the Industrial Finance Corporation Act, 1948,- 40 
(a) section 39 shall be re-numbered as aub-aectioD (3) thereof 
and before aub-aection (3) as 10 re-numbered, the fol1ow1nl mb-
sections shall be inserted, ,namely:-
'(1) The Corporation shall not, exeept; as otherwise required 
by this Act or any other law fnr the time being in force, divulge 45 

'))61 JO EZ 10 
'0861 JO 0 .. 
38 of 1959. 
5 of 1970. 15 
10 
1 of 1934. 
so 
any information relating to, or to the affairs of, its constituents 
except' in circumstances in which it is, in accordance with the· 
law or practice and usage, customary among bankers, necessary 
nr Rppropriate for the Corporation to divulge such information. 
(2) The Corporation may, for the purpose of efficient dis-
charge of its functions under this Act, collect from, or furnish 
to-
(a) the Central Government; 
(b) the State Bank of India constituted under section 3 
of the State Bank of India Act, 1955, any subsidiary bank 
within the meaning of the State Bank of India (Subsidiary 
Banks) Act, 1959, any corresponding new bank constituted 
under section 3 of .the Banking Companies (Acquisition and 
Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970 or under section 3 of 
the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Under-
takings) Act, 1980, any other scheduled bank, any Sta,e co-
operative bank or the Development Bank, 
such credit information or other information as it may consider 
useful for the purpose, in such manner and at such time as it 
may think fit. 
E:cplanatioll.-For the purposes of this sub-section, the ex-
pression "credit information" shall have the same meaning as in 
clause (c) of section 45A of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1"934 
subject to the modification that the banking company referred to 
therein shall mean a bank referred to in clause (b) of this sub-
section.'; 
(b) in the Schedule, for the brackets, words and figures" (See 
section 39) to, the brackets, words and figures "[See section 39 (3)]" 
shall be substituted. 
6. In the State Financial Corporations Act, 1951,-
(a) section 40 slWll be re··numbered as sub-section (3) thereof, 
and before sub-section (3) as so re-numbered, the following sub-
sections shall be inserted, namely:-
'(1) The Financial Corporation shall not, except as otherwise 
required by this Act or any other law for the time bein~ in for~e, 
divulge any information relating to, or to the affairS of, 1tS 
constituents except in circumstances in which· it is, in accordance 
with the law or practice and usage, customary among bankers, 
necessary or appropriate for the Financial Corporation to divulge 
such information. 
(2) The Financial Corp~ratlon may, f~r theptirpose of 
efficient discharge of its functIons under thls Act, collect from, 
or furnish to-
(a) the Central Government; 
Amend-
ment of 
Act 63 of 
1951. 

4 
(b) the State Bank of India constituted under section 3 
• t the State Bank of India Act; 1956, any subsidiary bank 
within the meaning of the State Bank of India (Subsidiary 
Banks) Act, 1959, any corresponding new bank constituted 
under section 3 of the Banking Companies (Acquisition and 
Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970 or under section 3 of 
the Banking Companies (Acquisition ancrTrandet of Under-
takings) Act, 1980, any other scheduled bank, any State co-
operative bank or the Development Bank, 
5 
such credit information or other information as n may consider 10 
useful for the purpose, in such manner and at such time as it 
may think. fit. 
ExplGna.tion.-For thE; purposes of this sub-section, the ex-
pression "credit information" shall have the .arne meaning as in 
23 of 1955 . 
38 of It 59. 
5 of 1970. 
40 of 1980. 
clause (c) of section 45A of the Reserve Bank of Inaia Act, 1934 152 of 1934. 
subject to the modification that the banking company referred to 
therein shall mean a bank referred to in clauSe· (b) of this sub-
section.'; 
(b) in the Schedule, for the brackets, words and figures II (See 
section 40) ", the brackets, words and figures "[See section 40(3)]" 20 
shall be substituted 
THE SCHEDULE 
(See section 4) 
DIJCLARATION OF rJDBUn' AND UCUCY 
I, , do hereby declare that !l5 
I will faithfully, truly and to the best of my skill and ability, execute 
and perform the duties required of me as direetor, member of any Com-
mittee, auditor, ofBeer or otht!r employee (81 the case may be) of the 
• and whim properly relate 
to the office or position held by me in, or in relation to, the 
•• 
I further declare that I will not communicate or allow to be com-
municated to any person not legally entitled thereto any information 
relating to the affail'l of the • 
or to the aftaIra of any person havina any deaJinl with the 
• nor will I allow any l\lch perIOn to inspect, 35 
or have access to, any books or document. belonging to, or in the poaes-
lion of, the • and relating 
to the busiDeu of the • 
or the business of any person having any dealing with the 
• 
·Signed before me. 
Signature. 
-Here insert tJae name of the publlc financial institution eonc:emed. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The duty of bankers as to secrecy concerning their customers' affairs 
arises out of their contractual relationship and it has been universally 
accepted as a customary usage in banking and has also been recognised 
in law. The various enactments providing for the establishment of pub-
lic se:tor financial institutions contain provisions in respect of this 
obligation as to fidelity and secrecy. It is considered appropriate to 
make similar statutory provisions with respect to companies functioning 
as publie financial institutions. 
2. This opportunity is proposed to be availed of to make the provi-
sions as to the obligation of secrecy and fidelity contained in the 
Industrial Finance Corporation Act, 1~8, and the State Financial 
Corporations Act, 1951, more comprehensive. 
3. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 
NEW DmlI; PRANAB MUKHERJEE. 
The 18th November, 1983. 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACT FROM THE INDUSTRIAL FINANCE CoRPORATION ACT, 1948" 
(15 OF 1948) 
• • • • • 
THE SCHEDULE 
(See section 39) 
DECLARATION OF FIDELITY AND SIX:UCY 
I, .................. " .... , do declare that I will faithfully, truly and 
to the best of my judgment, skill and ability, execute and perfonn the 
duties required of me as a Director, officer, employee or auditor (as the 
case may be) of the Industrial Finance Corporation of India and which 
properly relate to any office or position in the said Corporation held by 
me. 
I further declare that I will not communicate or allow to be communi-
cated to any person not legally entitled thereto any information relating 
to the affairs of the Corporation nor will I allow any such person to 
inspt'ct or have access to any books Or documents belonging to or in the 
possession of the Corporation and relating to the business ol the Corpora-
tion. 
Sign.a.t'Uh'e . ........ . 
Signed before me. 
Date ......... . 
EXTRACT FROM THE STATE FINANCIAL CORPORATIONS Acr, 1951 
(63 or 1951) 
• • • • 
THE SCHEDULE 
(See section 40) 
DECLARATION OF FmELITY AJO) SacucY 
• 
I, ......... " ..... " ........ , do hereby declare that I will faithfully, 
tr'..lly and to the best of my skill and ability execute and perform the 
duties required of me as a director, ofticer, employee or auditor (as the 
case may be) of the Financial Corporation and which property relate to 
any office or position in the said Financial Corporation held by me. 
I further declare that I will not communicate or allow to be communi-
cated to any person not legally entitled thereto any information relating 
to the affairs of the Financial Corporation, nor will I allow any such 
person to inspect or have access to any books or documents belonging to 
or in the possession of the Financial Corporation and relating to the 
business of the Financial Corporation. 
Signature. 
Signed before me: 
6 

LOK SABHA 
It. 
BILL 
to provide for the obligation of public ftDanclal institutions as to &delity 
and secrecy. 
(Shri Pnmab Ku7nClf' 
Mukherjee. .II in.ilte,. 
of FtMnce.) 