THE PRIV ATE SCHOOLS (REGULATION) BILL, 2014
By
SHRI SUNIL KUMAR SINGH, M.P.
A
BILL
to regulate the functioning of private schools and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Private Schools (Regulation) Act, 2014.
(2) It extends to the whole of  India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appointed day" means the date of commencement of this Act;
(b) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
Bill No.  129 of  2014
Definitions.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(c) "Authority" means the Private Schools Education Authority constituted by
the appropriate Government under section 3;
(d) "Prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(e) "Private School" means an unaided school, whether recognized or not, which
is not run by the appropriate Government, or its local authority or any other authority
designated or sponsored by appropriate Government and includes a pre-primary,
primary, middle, higher secondary and senior secondary school and also other
institutions which impart education or training below the degree level but does not
include an institute which imparts technical education.
3. (1) With effect from the appointed day, the appropriate Government shall, by
notification in the Official Gazette, constitute an Authority to be known as the Private
Schools Education Authority to regulate within its territorial Jurisdiction, the functioning
of private schools and conditions of service of teachers working in such schools.
(2) The Authority shall consist of,—
(a) a Chairperson to be appointed by the appropriate Government; and
(b) a maximum of twelve members to be appointed by the appropriate Government:
Provided that the number of members shall, in no case, be less than six.
(3) The Chairperson and other members referred to in sub-section (2) shall be chosen
from amongst the persons who have special knowledge and at least twenty years of experience
in the field of education.
(4) The term of office and conditions of service of the Chairperson and the other
members shall be such as may be prescribed.
(5) The appropriate Government shall appoint such number of officers and staff to
assist the Authority, as it considers necessary for its efficient functioning.
4. (1) It shall be the duty of every Authority to regulate the functioning of private
schools and conditions of service of teachers, under its jurisdiction.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions contained in sub-section (1),
the Authority may,—
(a) fix the student-teacher ratio for each standard;
(b) put a ceiling on the tuition fee and other charges, including payments in the form of
sports fee, computer fee or any other fee of similar nature, which is charged by a private
school for a particular class;
(c) fix the hours of duty for teachers;
(d) monitor the funds collected by the schools; and
(e) perform such other functions as may be prescribed.
5. (1) The Authority, with the previous approval of the approval of the appropriate
Government, may make regulations consistent with this Act for regulating the minimum
qualifications for recruitment, and the conditions of service of teachers of the private schools.
(2) Subject to any regulation that may be made in this behalf, no teacher of a private
school shall be dismissed, removed or reduced in rank nor shall his service be otherwise
terminated except with the prior approval of the Authority.
6. The salary, allowances, medical facilities, pension, gratuity, provident fund and
other benefits of the teachers of private schools shall not be less than those of the teachers
of the corresponding status in schools run by the appropriate Government.
Constitution
of Private
Schools
Education
Authority.
Functions of
the Authority.
Power to
make
regulations.
Salary,
allowances
and other
benefits to
teachers.
5
10
15
25
20
30
35
40

3
7. No private school shall charge a tuition fee or collect other charges or receive
payments, in excess of the amounts specified by the Authority:
Provided that every private school shall obtain prior approval of the Authority for
charging tuition fee or collecting other charges or receiving payments, exceeding the amounts
specified by the Authority.
8. If the appropriate Government, on receipt of a report from the Authority, is satisfied
that the managing committee of any private school has neglected to perform any of the
duties imposed on it by or under this Act or any rules or regulations made thereunder and
that it is expedient in the interest of school education to close down such school, it may, after
giving reasonable opportunity of being heard to the managing committee of the school,
order closing down of such school for such period as it may consider appropriate:
Provided that if the school is a recognized private school, the appropriate Government
may also withdraw its recognition.
9. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law or rules made thereunder for the time being in force.
10. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to be necessary for removing the
difficulty:
Provided that no order shall be made under this sub-section after the expiry of two
years from the appointed day.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament.
11. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament , while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
(3) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before the State legislature.
Fee and other
charges.
Closing down
of school.
Act not in
derogation of
other laws.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
25
20
30
35

4
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Nowadays running an unaided private school has become a business. There are a
number of unaided private schools throughout the country being run by a handful of persons.
The main aim of these persons is to earn money rather than to impart quality education.
These schools are charging hefty tuition fee besides other charges in the name of donations,
building funds, computer fee, etc. These schools after availing the necessary tax concessions
are not investing the funds collected by them for the development of the schools. The
teachers in these schools are underpaid and are also not given service benefits like medical
facilities, provident fund, etc. There are cases of arbitrary retrenchment and suspension of
teachers. The management works in connivance with officials of education department. The
women teachers are subjected to various kinds of harassment. Thus, education is not safe in
the hands of such unscrupulous persons. Overcharging of fee on one hand and underpayment
to teachers on the other hand is the modus operandi of these people. The tax laws are
violated with impunity. Therefore, it has become necessary to set up an adequate mechanism
to monitor, regulate and control the thriving education business not only to ensure that
children get good quality education, but also to protect the parents from exploitation.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SUNIL KUMAR SINGH
November 3, 2014.

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides that the appropriate Government shall, within its territorial
jurisdiction, establish Private Schools Education Authority to regulate the functioning of the
unaided private schools. The expenditure relating to States shall be borne out of the
Consolidated Funds of the respective States. However, the expenditure in respect of
Union territories shall be borne out of the Consolidated Fund of India. The Bill, therefore, if
enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that
a sum of rupees one crore will be involved as recurring expenditure per annum from the
Consolidated Fund of India.
Non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees twelve lakh is also likely to be involved.

6
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 5 of the Bill empowers the Authority to make regulations for regulating the
minimum qualifications for recruitment and conditions of service of teachers of private schools.
Clause 11 empowers the appropriate Government to make rules for carrying out the
purposes of the Bill. The matters in respect of which rules and regulations may be made are
matters of administrative details and procedure and, as such, the delegation of legislative
power is of a normal character.

GMGIPMRND—2664LS(S3)—01-12-2014.
LOK  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
to regulate the functioning of private schools and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Sunil Kumar Singh, M.P .)