A s INTBODVCED IM LOK SABHA OK
B ill y g  12> of 198S
THE CONSTITUTION (SIXTY-SECOND AMENDMENT)
BILL, 1968
A
BILL
further  to amend the  Ootutituticn of India. ^ , j
Bb it enacted by Parliam ent in the Thirty-ninth Year of the Rep »Wic 
of India as follows:—
1. H iis Act may be called the Constitution (Sixty-second Amendment) Short 
Act. 1988.
5 2. In article 326 of the Constitutioii, for the words “tweiity-wie years”, ^ ,
the words “eighteen years’ *  shall he substituted.
article
S26.


Article 326 of the Constitution provides that the elections to the 
House ol the People and to the Legislative Assembly of every State 
shaii ce on the basis of adult suffrage, that is to say, a person sliould not 
be less than 21 years ol age. It has been found th at many of the 
countries have specified 18 years as the voting age. In our country s o m e 
of the S tate Governments have adopted 18 years of age for elections to 
the local authorities. The present-day youth are literate and enlighten­
ed and the lowering of the voting age would provide to the unrepre­
sented youth of the country an *  opportunity to give vent to their 
feelings and help them  become a p art of the political process. The 
presoit-day youth are very much politically conscious. It is, therefore, 
proposed to reduce the voting age from  21 years to 18 years.
2 The Bill seeks to adiieve the above object.
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
N ew  D elhi; B. SHANKAR AN AND
The 9th  December, 1988.


Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to amend article 326 of the Constitution to 
reduce the voting age from 21 years to 18 year*. It is estimated that as 
a result of this reduction in voting age, the number of voters will be in­
creased by 47 million. If the Bill is enacted and brought into operation, 
the electoral rolls have to be revised to include all those persons who 
are between the age of 18 and 21 years. It is not possible to precisely 
estim ate the expenditure involved in the revision of electoral rolls, On 
a modest estimate given by the Selection Commission, it is estimated that 
this would come to ansrwhere between rupees 1 drore and 1.50 cr<wes. 
Some more expenditure is also likely to be involved in the conduct of 
elections, in the form of printing of additional baUot papefs. the tftab- 
lishm ent of more num ber of polling stations, etc. It is not possible to 
precisely estimate the expenditure that would be incurred on this 
accoimt.
The Bill, if enacted and brought into operation, would not involve 
any other expenditure, either recurring or non-recurring.
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM


ANNBXURE 
E x t r a c t  f r o m  t h *  C o n s t t t u t i o n  o r  I n » ia
Bcctkm s 
lo the  
^ u s e  of 
the Peo.  
pie and  
to the  
Legialati\'e 
Afltemb- 
lies of  
Statee to  
be O B  the 
basic o t
sat. ll ie  d e c tio is to the House of the People and to the Legislative 
Assembly of every S tate shall be on the basis of adult su£Erage, that 
is to say, every person who is a citizen of India and who is not less than 
twenty-one 3rears of age cm sudi date as m ay be fixed in th at behalf by 
or under any law  made by the appropriate Legislature and is not 
otherwise di^ualified under this Constitution or any law made 
by the appropriate Legislature on the ground of non-residence, un- 
soundness of mind, cxime or corrupt or illegal practice, shall be entitled 
to be registered as a voter at any such election.
sOBnt^.


LOK SABHA
A
BILL
further to amend the Cm utitution of India.
(Shri B. Shaakaranand, Minigter of Laiv and Justice)
