Bm .0. 119 of len 
THE INDUSTRIES (DEVELOPMENT AND REGULATION) 
AMENDMENT BILL, 1952 
(As INTRODUCED IN THB HOUSB OF THB PSOPLB) 
A 
BILL 
to amend the Induatrie8 (Development and Regulation) Act. 1951. 
BB it enacted by Parliament as follows:-
1. Short title &ad commeneement.--{l) This Act may be called the 
Industries (Development and Regulation) Amendment Act. 1952. 
(2) It shall come into foroe on such date as the Central Government 
J lay. by notification in the Official Gazette. appoint. 6 
2. OmllllDn of IICtiOll', .Act LZV of 1911.-In the Industries (Develop-
went and Regulation) Act. 1951 (hereinafter referred to as the principal 
Act). section 4 shall be omitted. 
8. Amendment of section 10, Act LXV of 191i1.-In section 10 of the 
principal Act, fOIl' sub-sectlion (1), the following sub-section shall1be substi- 10 
tuted, na.mely:-
"(1) The owner of every. existing industrial undertaking, not 
being the Central Government, shall, within such period as the Cen-
tral Government may, by notifiea.tion in the Official Gazette, fix in 
this behalf with respect to industrial undertakings generally or with 15 
respect to any class of them. register the undertaking in the pres-
cribed manner. 
Ezplanation.-For the purposes of this sub-section. the expression 
"existing industrial undertaking" means-
(a) in the case of an industrial undertaking pertaining to any 20 
of the industries specified in the. Schedule as originally enacted. 
an industlia.l undertaking which was in existence on the com-
mencement of this Act or for the establishment of which eftec· 
tive steps had been taken before such commencement,. and 

6 
10 
15 
20 
26 
'30 
46 
50 
~ 
(b) in the case of an industrial undertaking pertaining to 
any of the industries added to tlhe Schedule by an amendment 
thereof, an industrial undertaking which is in existence on the 
coming into force of such amendment or for the establishment of 
which effective steps have been taken before the coming into 
force of such amendment." 
,. InSertion of new Mctlon lOA In Act LXV of llll.-After section 10 
of the principol Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:-
"lOA" Revol:ation 01 r6giBtration in certain ca.e •. -If the Central 
Government is satiRfied that the registration of any industrial under· 
taking has been obtained by misrepl'aSf!ntlltioll I1S t.o an f:s¥(!ntial fact 
or that any indust.rial undertnking has celUied to be regiAtrable under 
this Act by reason of any exemption granted under this Act becoming 
applicable thereto or that for any other reason the registration has 
become useleaa or ineffective and therefore requires W be revoked, the 
Central Government may revoke the registration." 
5. SubStitution Orne9 section for aectIon18 lD Act. r.zvof 1051.-
For section 13 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substitute 
ed, namely:-
"13. Further provision for licensing of induBtrial undertaking, in 
special cases.-(l) No person or authority, other than the Central 
Government, shall 
(a) in thli case of an industrial unlertaking required to be 
registered under section 10, but which haa not been registered 
within the time fixed for thfl purpose under that section, carry 
on the business of that undertaking after the expiry of luch period. 
or 
(h) in the case of an industrial undertaking to which the 
provisions of this Act did J10~ originally apply but became appli. 
cable after the commencement of t.his Act for any rea9OoD, carry 
on the ,business of the undertaking after the expiry of three months 
from the date on 1I'hich tlhe provisions of this Act became so 
applicable, or 
(c) effect Any substantial expansion of an industrial undertake 
ing which has been registered, or 
(d) change the location of the whole or any part of an industrial 
undertaking which has been registered, 
except under, and in accordance with, a licence issued in that behalf 
by the Central Government, and, in the case of a State Government, 
except under, and in accordance with, the previous permission of the 
Central Government. 
(9) The provisions of sections 11 and 12 shall apply, 80 far aa may 
be, in relation to the grant of licences or permissioDB to any industrial 
undertoking referred to in this section as they aprly in relation to the 
grant of licences ~r permissions to a.. new industria undertaking. . 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section, "substantial expan· 
sion" means the expansion of an existing industrial undertaking which 
is of such a nature as to amount virtuallv to a Dew industrial undertaking 
but doei not incJ.ude Bny such expansion as is normal to the undertaking 
ha.ving regard to ita nature and the circumstances relating to such expan· 
sion," 

3 
6. OmJlllOa., IIOUoD 18, Act LZV of 1911.-Section 28 of the principal 
Act shall be omitted. 
7; AmeDdment of IIcUcm 16, Act LXV of 1951.-1n section 24 of the 
principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the words, brackets and figures "or 
of sub-section (1) of section 11 read with section 18", the words, brackets j 
and figures "or of sub-section (.1).of section 13" shall be substituted. 
8. SubstituUoD of Dew sectloD for sectioD 28, Act LXV of 1961.-1"or 
section 28 of the princip'eJ Act, the following section shall be ~\1bstituted. 
namely:-
"28. POW6' to 6:J:6mpt in Bp6cial 04B68.-If the Central Govern-
ment is of opinion, having regard to the swalqness of the number of 10 
workers employed or to the amount invested in any industrial under-
. takibg or to the desirability of encouraging small undertal{ingll 
generally or having regard to the stage of development of any scheduled 
industry, that it would not be in the publie interest tQ. apply aU or 15 
any of the provisions of thir; Act thereto, it may, by not.ification in the 
Official Gazette, exempt, subject to such conditions 8S it may think 
fit to impose, any industrial undertaking or class of industrial under· 
takings or any scheduled industry or class of scheduled industries as 
it may specify in the notificatlion from the operation of all. or any of 20 
the provisions of this Act or of any rues made thereunder." 
9. AmeDdment of I'lnt Schedule, Act LXV of 1961.-1n the !,'irst 
~'chedule to the principaJ Act,-
(a) (i) for item (5), the following item shall be subRtituted. 
namely:- 25 
"(5) ;Mathematical, surveying, drawing Rnd other scientifie 
instruments" ; 
(ai) for item (10), the following item shal~ be substituted. 
namely:-
"(10) textilea- 30 
(a) made wholly or in part of ootton, including cotton 
yarn, hosiery and rope, 
Cb) made wholly or in part of jute, including jute ylirn. 
twine and rope, 
(0) made of wool, including woollen yam, hosiery, 
carpets and druggets, 
Cd) made of silk. 
(e) made of art~ftcial silk, including artificial silk yam"; 
(iii) in item (16), the word 'heavy', shall be omitted ; 
(iv) to item (20), the following words shall be added at the end, 40 
namely:-
.. and lIemi-Planufactures thereof"; 
(v) in item (21), for the words ·'a.n.d paper board". thll words 
"paper board and enw board" shall be substituted; 

10 
• 
(vi) for items (25) Bnd (26). the following items shall be lubsti-
tuted. namely :-
"(25) Leather. ~ather goods and pickers ; 
(26) Glue aDd gelatine"; 
(vii) in item (80). the words "and parts thereof" shan be omitted; 
(viia) after item (87). the following items shall be inserted. 
namely :-
.. (88) Dye stuffs. 
(89) Soap. 
(40) Plywood."; 
(b) to the First Schedule. the following E~laf&tJtiofWI shan be 
added. namely:-
'Ezp14f&tJtion I.-In item (4). "Iron and steel" shall inolude 
any manufactured product of iron Bnd steel. 
16 Ezplaf&tJtion S.-In item, (1). (7). (9). (11). (18). (17). (29). (SO). 
(82). (88). (84.) and (85). tobe article specified therein shall include 
any of their component parts also'. 

I) 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951, came into force 
on the 8th May, 1952. In the course of the working of this Act, certain 
practical difficulties have come to light and the object of this Bill is mainly 
to remove those difficulties. 
2. I:;ome of t.hoRe difficulties are:-
(a) the period allowed under section 10 of the Act for the regis· 
tration of undertakings has not been foulid to 'De &dequate in actual 
practice, and therefore requires to be extended; 
(b), while powers are available in the existing Act to revoke licences 
in certain cRRes, no such powers are available for the revocation of 
registration where it is necessary to do so; 
(c) the provision!! relating to licensing are not complete in 1>8 much 
OR they do not apply to-
(i) industrinJ undertakings which though required to be re-
gistered are not registered within the time limited for the purpose; 
(ii) industrial undertakings which though not registrable nt 
the commencement of the Act become registrable subsequently by 
reRson of the definitions in the Act becoming applicable thereto; 
(iii) industrial undertakings proposing to change their looatlon. 
U. Certain items in the First Schedule lire not sufficienUy descriptive 
so 88 to include all important sections of the industries concerned and they 
are now being clarified. 
4. Opportunity is also taken to remove a doubt which may arise by 
reason of the phraseology of sect.ion 4 wh 'ch says that' nothing in the Act 
shllll apply to induRtrial undertakings of which the capital invested does 
bOt. exceed rupees one lakh. This provision is liable to be misconstrued 
to mean that even the declaration oontBined in section 2 is inapplicable to 
such undertakings. It is also difficult to define "capital invested" suitably 
ror the purpose of this Act. It is therefore proposed to omit section 4, 
and wherever necessary, exemptions would be granted under the new &eO-
tion 28 to any undertakings or scheduled industries. Incidentally, five 
more important industries, namely, the silk, the artificial silk, the dye-
stuft, the soap and the plywood industrieB are being added to the Schedule. 
T. T. XRISHNAMACHABI. 
Nsw DBI'JlI; 
Tile 29th Novembe1', 195~. 

6 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE INDUSTRIES (DBVBLOPMENT AND REGULATION) AOT, 
1951 (LXV OF 1951) 
... ... * * ... 
Seotion 4 
. ,. 8a~.-:-Nothing in t~is Act shall apply to an industrial undertaking 
.f the caplt&l mvested thereIn does not exoeed rupees one lakh. 
... ... .. * * ... 
Bection 10 (1) 
10. Be&latraUon of eldltlDg badustrlaJ. U!Dde11aJ$Ia.-(l) The owner of 
"very existing industrial undertaking and the .owner of &:lIy industrial 
undertaking for the establishment of which effective steps han been 
taken, not beins the Central Government. shall within a period ot six 
months from the commencement of this Act, register the undertaking ill 
the prescribed ma.nner. 
• • ... ... * ... 
Bection 13 
13. LACeD.!n, of .ab8tant.i&l 8ZpulioDl of Indutrta1 anclert&ldDp.-The 
provisions of sections 11 Bnd 12 shall apply in relr..tion to the effecting of 
any substantial expansion of an industrial undertaking as they apply in 
relation to the esta.blishing of any new industri.lll undertaking. 
Ezplanation.-For the purposes of this section "substantial expansion" 
means the expansion of an existing industrial undertaking whioh is of such 
a nature 80S to amount virtually to a. new industrial undertaking, but docs not. 
include any such expansion as is normal to the undertaking having regard to 
its nature and the circumstances relating to such expansion. 
• • • ... * ... 
8eotion 9., 
23. QueRIou relatlDc to &mount of oa.pital Invested in an undert&JdJlC 
to be decided by Oentrll· Govenunen.t.-If. for the purpose of sectiQn 4, 
t.n)·question arises with respect to the amount of capital invested in an 
industrial undertaking. the decision of the Centrlll Government thereon 
iihall be final. 
Section .e4(1) 
M. Pen.alUes.--(l) Whoever contmvenes or attempts to contravene, or 
abets the oontravention of, the provisions of sub-scotion 1 of scction 10 or of 
sub.aec1lion (1) of seotion 11. or of sub-sectioo (1) of section 11 reud with .sec· 
tion 18, or of sub· section (8) of seotion 17 or of Bny direotion issued under.seo-
tieD 16, or of any rule the contravention of whioh is punishable under this seo· 
tion shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to aix rllontbs, 
or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with I,oth, and, 
in the case of a continuing contravention. with an additional fine which In"Y 
extend to five hundred rupees for every da.y during which such contravention 
continues after conviction for the first such contra.vention. 
... ... ... ... * ... 
Beotion 98 
II •• umpUclli in 8p8C'1&l c ..... -The Central Government! mBY, if satis· 
fied tha.t it is in the public interest so to do. exempt any scheduled industry 
or any industrial undertaking for auch period 88 it may specify, from the 
operation of all or any of the provisions of this Aot or any. rules made 
t·hereundier . ., • * *. II 

, 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
[866 seotions 2 and 8 (I)] 
Any industry engaged 
folowing, namely:....., 
in the manufacture or produotion of any of the 
(1) Aircraft. .. .. * • .. 
(5) Mathematioal and soientifio instruments. 
.. .. * • • 
(7) Ships Ilnd other Vessels propelled by the agenoy of steam, or 
by electricity or other meohanioal power 
• • • • * • 
(9) Telephones, telegraph a.pparatus and wireless communication 
appara.Uus 
(lO) '!'extiles m&de wholly or in part, of cotton or jute. 
(11) Automobiles, including tractorll 
.. • .. * • 
(18) Electric lamps ond fans 
· . .. • * • 
(16) Heavy machinery used in industry including ball and roller 
bearing and genr wheels and parts thereof, boilers and steam generating. 
equipment. 
(17) Locomotives and rolling stock .. 
.. .. * * • 
(20) Non·ferrous metals including alloys. 
(21) Paper inc:uding newsprint and pdper board. 
.. • * • • 
(\a5) Leather Rnd le&ther goods. 
(26) Textiles made of wool. 
.. • * 
(29) Ba.tteries, dry cells and storage 
(80) Bicycles, and parts ~ereof. 
.. .. * (82) Intemnl combustion engines. 
(88) Power·driven pumpa. 
(84) Radio reoeivers. 
(35) Sewing and knitting machines. 
• • • • 
* • 
* • 
* • 

HOUSE O!' TH:t PEOPLE 
BILL 
to amend the Industries (Development and Regulation) 
Aot,1951. 
(81m T. T. K ri8hnamaMari, 
Jli."ter lor OMnmerce and In(l1llllr!l) 
nll'n-LAD-1l1O P8-1o-1Z-II-l,1500 