THE REGIONAL CENTRE FOR BIOTECHNOLOGY BILL, 2011
————
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
————
CLAUSES
1. Short title and commencement.
2. Definitions .
3. Establishment of Regional Centre for  Biotechnology.
4. Declaration of Regional Centre for Biotechnology as an institution of national
importance.
5. Jurisdiction.
6. Objects of Regional Centre.
7. Transfer of assets, liabilities, etc., of existing Regional Centre to Regional Centre
established under this Act and other provisions, etc.
8. Functions of Regional Centre.
9. Regional Centre to work in collaboration with other centres of UNESCO.
10. Powers of Regional Centre.
11. Regional Centre open to all castes, creed, race or class.
12. Privileges and immunities of academic staff, etc.
13. Authorities of Regional Centre.
14. Board of Governors.
15. Powers and functions of Chairperson.
16. Programme Advisory Committee.
17. Executive Committee.
18. Finance Committee.
19. Board of Studies.
20. Other authorities of Regional Centre.
21. Officers of Regional Centre.
22. Executive Director.
23. Deans and Associate Deans.
24. Associate Director (Administration).
25. Registrar.
26. Finance Officer.
27. Other officers.
28. Payment to Regional Centre.
29. Fund of Regional Centre.
30. Annual report.
31. Annual accounts.
Bill No. 129  of 2011
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

32. Returns and information.
33. Review of functioning of Regional Centre.
34. Appointment of staff of Regional Centre.
35. Conditions of service.
36. Arbitration.
37.  Meetings.
38. Filling of casual vacancies.
39. Proceedings of authorities or bodies not invalidated by vacancies.
40. Protection of action taken in good faith.
41. Statutes.
42. Matters to be provided by Statutes.
43. Ordinances.
44. Regulations.
45. Statutes, Ordinances and Regulations to be published in the Official Gazette and to
be laid before Parliament.
46. Power to remove difficulties.
(ii)
C
LAUSES

1
THE REGIONAL CENTRE FOR BIOTECHNOLOGY BILL, 2011
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of an institution of national importance to be known as
the Regional Centre for Biotechnology for training and education as a category II
institution under the auspice of  the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organisation, to undertake research in the field of biotechnology and to
provide for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
W
HEREAS  the General Conference of  the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organisation, at its thirty-third session held in Paris, France during the 3rd to 21st
October, 2005, decided that a Regional Centre for Biotechnology Training and Education
shall be established in India under its auspices;
A
ND WHEREAS an Agreement for the establishment and operation of the Regional
Centre for Biotechnology Training and Education in India was entered between the
Government of India and the  United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organisation on the 14th day of July, 2006 to give effect to the aforesaid decision;
A
ND W HEREAS  it is expedient to make provisions for giving effect to the said
Agreement for establishment of an institution to be known as the Regional Centre for
Biotechnology Training and Education in India and declare it to be an institution of national
importance.
Bill No. 129  of 2011
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-second Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Regional Centre for Biotechnology Act, 2011.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "academic staff" means Professors, Assistant Professors, Associate
Professors, Deans, Sub-Deans, Executive Director and such other persons as may be
appointed or engaged for imparting education, training or conducting research in the
Regional Centre for Biotechnology or in any institution recognised by the Regional
Centre for Biotechnology;
(b) "Board of Governors" means the Board of Governors constituted under
sub-section (1) of section 14;
(c) "Board of Studies" means the Board of Studies of the Regional Centre
referred to in section 19;
(d)  "Chairperson" means the Chairperson of the Board of Governors;
(e) "employee" means any person appointed by the Regional Centre and
includes academic and other staff of the Regional Centre for Biotechnology;
(f) "Executive Committee" means the Executive Committee of the Regional
Centre constituted under section 17;
(g) "Executive Director" means  the Executive Director of the Regional Centre
appointed under sub-section ( 1) of section 22;
(h) "existing Regional Centre" means the UNESCO Regional Centre for
Biotchnology Training and Education at Faridabad established vide Order of the
Government of India in the Ministry of Science and Technology, Department of
Biotechnology, number BT/MED-II/UNESCO/01/2008, dated the 20th April, 2009;
(i) "Hall" means a unit of residence for the students of the Regional Centre;
(j) "institution" means autonomous organisations conducting research, training
or education, supported by the Government or industry, Universities and other similar
organisations and recognised by the Regional Centre for the purposes of this Act;
(k) "Programme Advisory Committee" means the Programme Advisory
Committee of the Regional Centre constituted under section 16;
(l) "Region" means the countries in the South Asian Association for Regional
Cooperation  region, and more generally in the Asia region;
(m) "Regional Centre" means the Regional Centre for Biotechnology established
under sub-section (1) of section 3;
(n) "Regulations" means Regulations made by any authority of the Regional
Centre under section 44, for the time being in force;
(o) "Statutes" means the Statutes of the Regional Centre for the time being in
force framed by the Board of Governors under section 41;
(p) "Ordinances" means the Ordinances of the Regional Centre for the time
being in force framed by the Programme  Advisory Committee under section 43;
(q) "UNESCO" means the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organisation.
Short title and
commence-
ment.
Definitions.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
3.  (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish,
for the purposes of this Act, an institution to be known as the Regional Centre for
Biotechnology in India.
(2) The Regional Centre for Biotechnology shall be a body corporate by the name
aforesaid having perpetual succession and a common seal with power, subject to the
provisions of this Act, to contract and shall, by the said name, sue and be sued.
(3) The head office of the Regional Centre shall be in the National Capital Region
referred to in clause (f) of section 2 of the National Capital Region Planning Board Act, 1985.
4. Whereas the objects of the institution known as the Regional Centre for
Biotechnology are such as to make the institution one of national importance, it is hereby
declared that the institution known as the Regional Centre for Biotechnology is an institution
of national importance.
5. The jurisdiction of the Regional Centre shall extend to whole of India and to centres
established within or outside India.
6.  The objects of the Regional Centre, shall be—
(a) to disseminate and advance knowledge by providing instructional and
research facilities in such branches of biotechnology and related fields as it may
deem fit  including technology policy development;
(b) to provide capacity-building through education, training, research and
development in biotechnology and related academic fields for sustainable development
objectives through regional and international cooperation;
(c) to facilitate transfer of knowledge and technology relating to biotechnology
at the regional level;
(d) to create a hub of biotechnology expertise in the countries in South Asian
Association for Regional Cooperation region, and more generally in the Asia region,
and to address human resources needs in the region;
(e) to promote and strengthen international cooperation to improve the social
and economic conditions and welfare of the people;
(f) to promote and facilitate a network of satellite centres in the region as well as
within India.
7. (1) On and from the date of establishment of the Regional Centre,—
(a) any reference to the existing Regional Centre in any law other than this Act
or in any contract or other instruction shall be deemed as a reference to the Regional
Centre;
(b) all properties and assets, movable and immovable, of, or belonging to, the
existing Regional Centre, shall vest in the Regional Centre;
(c) all rights and liabilities of the existing Regional Centre shall be transferred to,
and be the rights and liabilities of, the Regional Centre;
(d) without prejudice to the provisions of clause (c), all debts, obligations and
liabilities incurred, all contracts entered into and all matters and things engaged to be
done by, with or for, the existing Regional Centre immediately before the said date, for
or in connection with the purpose of the said existing Regional Centre shall be deemed
to have incurred, entered into or engaged to be done by, with or for, the Regional
Centre;
Establishment
of Regional
Centre for
Biotechnology.
Declaration
of Regional
Centre for
Biotechnology
as an
institution of
national
importance.
Jurisdiction.
Objects of
Regional
Centre.
Transfer of
assets,
liabilities, etc.,
of existing
Regional
Centre to
Regional
Centre
established
under this Act
and other
provisions,
etc.
2 of 1985.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

4
(e) all sums of money due to the existing Regional Centre immediately before
that date shall be deemed to be due to the Regional Centre;
(f)  all suits and other legal proceedings instituted or which could have been
instituted by or against the existing Regional Centre immediately before that date may
be continued or may be instituted by or against the Regional Centre;
(g) every employee (including those appointed for imparting instruction or
giving training or conducting research in the existing Regional Centre) holding any
office under the existing Regional Centre or teaching therein immediately before that
date shall hold his office in the Regional Centre or continue teaching therein by the
same tenure and upon the same terms and conditions of service as respects
remuneration, leave, provident fund, retirement and other terminal benefits as he
would have held such office if the Regional Centre had not been established and shall
continue to do so as an employee of the Regional Centre or until the expiry of the
period of six months from that date if such employee opts not to be the employee of
the Regional Centre within such period.
(2) Notwithstanding anything in the Industrial Dispute Act, 1947 or in any other law
for the time being in force, absorption of any employee by the Regional Centre in its regular
service under this section shall not entitle such employee to any compensation under that
Act or any other law and no such claim shall be entertained by any court, tribunal or other
authority.
8. The functions of the Regional Centre, shall be—
(a)  to establish infrastructure and technology platforms which are directly
relevant to biotechnology education, training and research;
(b)  to execute educational and training activities including grant of degrees in
research in biotechnology and related fields;
(c) to produce human resource tailored to drive innovation in biotechnology,
particularly in areas of new opportunities and to fill talent gap in deficient areas;
(d) to undertake research and development and scientific investigations in
collaboration with relevant research centres in the region;
(e) to hold scientific symposia and conferences within India or in the region or
outside the region and to conduct short-term and long-term training courses and
workshops in all areas of biotechnology;
(f) to collect universally available information with a view to setting up a data
bank  for bio-information;
(g) to collect and disseminate, through networking, the relevant local knowledge
in the field of biotehcnology;
(h) to disseminate the outcome of research activities in different countries
through the publication of books and articles;
(i) to promote collaborative research and development networking programme
in specific areas of biotechnology with national, regional and international networks
and promote exchange of scientists, at the regional level having regard to issues
pertaining to intellectual property rights of collaborating institutions promoting
equitable sharing of benefits with collaborating institutions;
(j) to frame Statutes and Ordinances and to alter, modify or rescind the same.
9. The Regional Centre shall pursue its objects and discharge its functions in close
collaboration with other national, regional and international centres (including those located
in the member States of the UNESCO).
Functions of
Regional
Centre.
Regional
Centre to
work in
collaboration
with other
centres of
UNESCO.
14 of 1947.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
45
40

5
10.  (1) The Regional Centre shall have the following powers, namely:—
(a) to provide for masters and doctoral degree in biotechnology and related
subjects at the interface of varied disciplines including physical, chemical, biological,
medical, agricultural and engineering and other relevant sciences as the Regional
Centre may, from time to time, determine;
(b) to provide for short-term and long-term training courses in biotechnology
on specific issues related to the development, extension, implementation and regulation
of biotechnology and related areas, as the Statutes may, from time to time, provide;
(c) to organise and undertake extramural studies, training and extension services
in biotechnology;
(d) to confer honorary degrees or other distinctions in the manner specified by
the Statutes;
(e) to institute Professorships, Associate Professorships, Assistant
Professorships and other academic positions, required by the Regional Centre and to
appoint or engage persons to such Professorships, Associate Professorships,
Assistant Professorships or other academic positions;
(f) to recognise an institution of higher learning within India for the purposes of
this Act  and to withdraw such recognition in accordance with the norms laid down in
the Statutes;
(g) to appoint persons working in any other institution, including those located
outside the country, as academic staff of the Regional Centre for a specified period as
may be specified by the Statutes;
(h) to create administrative, technical and other posts and to make appointments
thereto as may be specified by the Statutes;
(i) to co-operate or collaborate or associate with any institution, including
those located outside the country, in such manner and for such purposes as the
Regional Centre may determine in accordance with the guidelines specified by the
Statutes;
(j) to establish such centres and specialised laboratories or other units for
research, development and instruction as are, in the opinion of the Regional Centre,
necessary for the furtherance of its objects;
(k) to institute and award fellowships, scholarships, studentships, medals and
prizes as may be specified by the Statutes;
(l) to make provision for research and advisory services and for that purpose to
enter into such arrangements with other institutions, industrial or other organisations,
including those located outside the country, as the Regional Centre may deem
necessary as may be specified by the Statutes;
(m) to organise and conduct refresher courses, workshops, seminars and other
programmes for teachers, evaluators and other stakeholders;
(n) to appoint on contract basis or otherwise Visiting Professors, Honorary
Professors, Adjunct Professors, Emeritus Professors, Consultants and such other
persons who may contribute to the advancement of the objects of the Regional
Centre;
(o) to determine standards of admission to the Regional Centre, which may
include examination, evaluation or any other method of testing;
(p) to demand and receive payment of fees and other charges;
(q)  to supervise the residences of the students of the Regional Centre and to
make arrangements for promoting their health and general welfare;
Powers of
Regional
Centre.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

6
(r) to lay down conditions of service of all categories of employees, including
their code of conduct;
(s) to regulate and enforce discipline among the students and the employees,
and to take such disciplinary measures in this regard as may be considered necessary
by the Regional Centre;
(t) to make arrangements for promoting the health and general welfare of the
employees;
(u) to receive benefactions, donations and gifts and to acquire, hold  and
manage, and to dispose of, with the prior approval of the Central Government, any
property, movable or immovable, including trust and endowment properties, for the
purposes of the Regional Centre;
(v) to borrow, with the prior approval of the Central  Government, on the security
of its property of the Regional Centre, money for the purposes of the Regional Centre;
and
(w) to do all such other acts and things as may be necessary, incidental or
conducive to the attainment of all or any of its objects.
(2) In exercising its powers under  sub-section ( 1), it shall be the endeavour of the
Regional Centre to maintain high standards of education, training and research, and the
Regional Centre shall, among other measures which may be necessary for the said purpose,
take, in particular, the following measures, namely:—
(i) admission of students from India and outside India in such manner as may
be specified by the Statutes;
(ii) conduct innovative courses and programmes of studies with a provision for
periodic review and restructuring; and
(iii) promote e-governance with an effective management information system.
11. The Regional Centre or any institution recognised by it shall be open to persons
of either sex and whatever caste, creed, race, ethnicity, nationality or class, and it shall not
be lawful for the Regional Centre or such institution to adopt or impose on any person, any
test whatsoever of religious belief or profession in order to entitle him to be appointed as a
member of the academic staff of the Regional Centre  or such institution or to hold any other
office therein or to be admitted as a student in the Regional Centre  or such institution or to
enjoy or exercise any privilege thereof.
12. The members of the academic staff and, where applicable, their dependents or
members of the family, shall enjoy such privileges and immunities as the Central Government
may, after entering into an agreement with the Regional Centre, notify under section 3 of the
United Nations (Privileges and Immunities) Act, 1947.
13.  The following shall be the authorities of the Regional Centre, namely:-—
(a) the Board of Governors;
(b) the Programme Advisory Committee;
(c) the Executive Committee;
(d) the Finance Committee; and
(e) such other authorities as may be declared by the Statutes to be the authorities
of the Regional Centre.
14. (1) The Board of Governors shall consist of the following members, namely:—
(i)  Secretary to the Government of India in the Department of Biotechnology,
ex officio  Chairperson;
Regional
Centre open
to all castes,
creed, race or
class.
Privileges and
immunities of
academic
staff, etc.
Authorities of
Regional
Centre.
Board of
Governors.
46 of 1947.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

7
(ii)  a representative of the Government of India, to be nominated by the Secretary
to the Government of India in the Department of Biotechnology who would be an
eminent scientist in the relevant field and in the grade not less than that of a Head of
an antonomous institution supported by Government of India;
(iii) a representative of the Director-General of UNESCO;
(iv) a representative of each of the other Member States of UNESCO in such
manner as may be specified by the Statutes.
(2) The Chairperson of the Programme Advisory Committee shall be a permanent
invitee of the Board of Governors.
(3) The Executive Director of the Regional Centre shall be the Convenor of the meetings
of the Board of Governors.
(4)  Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Board of Governors shall have the
following powers and functions, namely:—
(a) to approve the annual plan and budget of the Regional Centre;
(b) to review, from time to time, the broad policies and programmes of the
Regional Centre, and to suggest measures for the improvement and development of
the Regional Centre;
(c) to consider the annual report and the annual accounts of the Regional
Centre and the audit report on such accounts;
(d) to study and approve the internal procedures, including financial procedure
and staff regulations of the Regional Centre;
(e)  to approve the organisational structure and number of academic staff and
other employees at the Regional Centre;
(f) to convene special consultative sessions to which it shall invite, in addition
to its own members, the Executive Director of the Regional Centre, and may also
invite representatives of other interested countries and international organisations in
order to obtain proposals for strengthening the scope of services of the Regional
Centre and for carrying out the projects and activities relevant to the Regional Centre,
and to expand the fund-raising strategy and capabilities;
(g)  to prescribe fees and other charges;
(h) to frame Statutes.
(5) The Chairperson shall ordinarily preside over the meetings of the Board of
Governors.
(6) The Board of Governors shall meet at least once in every year or such other time
as the Chairperson may decide in such manner as may be specified by the Statutes.
(7) The Board of Governors may evolve its own rules of procedure for the purpose of
conducting its meetings and transacting business therein.
15.  (1) The Chairperson shall exercise and discharge such powers and functions of
the Board of Governors as may be delegated by the Board and such other powers and
functions as may be specified by the Statutes.
(2) If the Chairperson is not present at a meeting of the Board of Governors, another
member of the Board authorised by the Chairperson may preside over the meeting.
16.  (1) The Programme Advisory Committee shall be the principal academic body of
the Regional Centre and shall, subject to the provisions of this Act, advise planning,
execution, review and monitoring of the scientific and academic programmes of the Regional
Centre.
(2)  The Programme Advisory Committee shall consist of the following persons who
shall be eminent experts of international repute in biotechnology relevant to the core activities
Powers and
functions of
Chairperson.
Programme
Advisory
Committee.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

8
of the Regional Centre, namely:—
(a) a chairperson to be nominated by the Board of Governors;
(b) two members to be nominated by the UNESCO;
(c) three members from amongst the member States of UNESCO which provide
maximum financial assistance during a period of three years to be nominated by the
member States;
(d) two members having expertise and experience in biotechnology policy and
legal matters to be nominated by the Central Government;
(e) six members from amongst the persons being renowned scientist  or
academician, to be nominated by the Board of Governors;
(f) the Executive Director, Member-Secretary ex officio.
(3) The Programme Advisory Committee shall be responsible to—
(a) make recommendations on the matters of planning and coordinating of the
education, training and research activities;
(b) recommend modifications or revision of education, training and research
programmes of the Regional Centre and on the reports thereon;
(c) review annually the programmes of the Regional Centre, evaluate its progress
and submit the report thereon;
(d) consider and report on  any matter concerning scientific and technical
issues referred to it by the Board of Governors or by the Executive Director;
(e) perform all such duties and to do all such acts as may be necessary in the
furtherance of education, training and research under this Act;
(f) frame Ordinances;
(g) perform such other functions as may be specified by the Statutes.
(4) The fees and allowances payable to members of the Programme Advisory
Committee and their term of office shall be such as may be specified by the Statutes.
17.  (1) The Executive Committee shall be the advisory body for issues concerning
the management of the Regional Centre and advise from time to time to the Board of
Governors.
(2) The constitution of the Executive Committee, the term of office of its members and
its powers and functions shall be  such as may be specified by the Statutes.
18.  The constitution, powers and functions of the Finance Committee shall be such
as may be specified by the Statutes and the Finance Committee shall report to the Board of
Governors.
19.  The constitution, powers and functions of the Board of Studies shall be such as
may be specified by the Statutes.
20.  The constitution, powers and functions of other authorities, as may be declared
by the Statutes to be the authorities of the Regional Centre, shall be such as may be
specified by the Statutes.
21. The following shall be the officers of the Regional Centre, namely:—
(a)   the Executive Director;
(b)   the Deans;
Executive
Committee.
Finance
Committee.
Other
authorities of
Regional
Centre.
Officers of
Regional
Centre.
Board of
Studies.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

9
(c)   the Associate Deans;
(d)   the Associate Director (Administration);
(e)   the Registrar;
(f)   the Finance Officer; and
(g) such other officers as may be declared by the Statutes to be the officers of
the Regional Centre.
22.  ( 1) The Executive Director shall be appointed on the recommendation of the
Board of Governors in such manner as may be specified by the Statutes.
(2) The Executive Director shall—
(a) be the principal executive and academic officer of the Regional Centre;
(b) direct the work of the Regional Centre in conformity with the programmes
and directives established by the Board of Governors;
(c) propose the draft work plan and budget to be submitted to the Board of
Governors for approval;
(d)  prepare the agenda for the sessions of the Board of Governors;
(e)  prepare reports on the Regional Centre's activities for submission to the
Board of Governors; and
(f)  exercise such other powers and perform such other functions as may be
specified by the Statutes.
(3) The financial powers delegated to the Executive Director shall be such as may be
specified by the Statutes.
(4) The Executive Director may, if he is of the opinion that immediate action is necessary
on any matter, exercise any power conferred on any authority of the Regional Centre by or
under this Act and shall report to such authority at its next meeting the action taken by him
on such matter.
23.  The Deans and Associate Deans shall be appointed in such manner and on such
terms and conditions of service, and shall exercise such powers and perform such duties, as
may be specified by the Statutes.
24.  (1) The Associate Director (Administration) shall be appointed in such manner,
and on such terms and conditions of service, as may be specified by the Statutes.
(2) The Associate Director (Administration) shall have the power to enter into
agreements, sign documents and authenticate records on behalf of the Regional Centre,
and shall exercise such powers and perform such duties, as may be specified by the Statutes.
25. The Registrar shall be appointed in such manner and shall exercise such powers
and perform such duties, as may be specified by the Statutes.
26.  The Finance Officer shall be appointed in such manner, and shall exercise such
powers and perform such duties, as may be specified by the Statutes.
27. The manner of appointment and powers and duties of other officers of the Regional
Centre shall be such as may be specified by the Statutes.
28. The Central Government may, after due appropriation made by Parliament by
law, in this behalf, make to the Regional Centre grants and loans of such sums of money
and in such manner as that Government may consider necessary for being utilised for the
purposes of this Act.
Executive
Director.
Deans and
Associate
Deans.
Associate
Director
(Administration).
Registrar.
Finance
Officer.
Other officers.
Payment to
Regional
Centre.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

10
29. (1) The Regional Centre shall maintain a Fund to which there shall be credited—
(a) all moneys provided by the Central Government;
(b) all fees and other charges received by the Regional Centre;
(c) all moneys received by the Regional Centre by way of grants, gifts, donations,
benefactions, bequests or transfers; and
(d) all moneys received by the Regional Centre in any other manner or from
any other source.
(2) All moneys credited to the Fund shall be deposited in such banks or invested in
such manner as the Regional Centre may, with the approval of the Central Government,
decide.
(3)  The fund shall be applied for meeting—
(a)  the salary, allowances and other remuneration of chairperson, members of
the Board or committees, or academic staff, officers and other employees, of the
Regional Centre or members of other committees set up by it;
(b)  the expenses of the Regional Centre in discharge of its function under this
Act;
(c) the expenses on objects and for purposes authorised by this Act.
30.  (1) The annual report of the Regional Centre shall be prepared under the direction
of the Executive Director, which shall include, among other matters, the steps taken by the
Regional Centre towards the fulfilment of its objects and shall be submitted to the Board of
Governors on or before such date as may be specified by the Statutes and the Board of
Governors shall consider the report in its annual meeting.
(2)  A copy of the annual report, as prepared under sub-section (1), shall be submitted
to the Central Government, which shall, as soon as may be, cause the same to be laid before
both Houses of Parliament.
31.  (1) The annual accounts and the balance sheet of the Regional Centre shall be
prepared under the directions of the Board of Governors and shall, once at least every year,
and at intervals of not more than fifteen months, be audited by the Comptroller and
Auditor-General of India.
(2) A copy of the accounts together with the audit report shall be submitted to the
Central Government along with the observations, if any, of the Board of Governors.
(3) A copy of the annual report and annual accounts together with the audit report, as
submitted to the Central Government shall, as soon as may be, cause to be laid before both
Houses of Parliament.
(4) The audited annual accounts, after having been laid before both Houses of
Parliament, shall be published in the Gazette of India.
(5) A copy of the audited annual accounts shall also be submitted to the Member States.
32.  The Regional Centre shall furnish to the Central Government such returns or
other information with respect to its property or activities as the Central Government may,
from time to time, require, within such period as may be specified by the Central Government.
33.  (1) There shall be a review of the functioning of the Regional Centre once in every
four years by persons of eminence to be appointed by the Central Government.
(2) The Regional Centre shall meet the expenses for conducting the review under sub-
section (1) and upon receipt of the report of such review, the Board of Governors may take
appropriate action.
Fund of
Regional
Centre.
Annual report.
Annual
accounts.
Returns and
information.
Review of
functioning of
Regional
Centre.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

11
(3) In addition to the review under sub-section ( 1), the Board of Governors may
conduct review of functioning of administrative and academic wings of the Regional Centre,
in such manner and at such intervals, as may be specified in the Statutes.
34.  All appointments of the staff of the Regional Centre, (except appointment of the
Executive Director) shall be made in accordance with the procedure laid down in the Statutes,
by—
(a) the Board of Governors for the academic staff;
(b) the Executive Director, in any other case.
35.  ( 1) Every employee of the Regional Centre shall be appointed on contractual
basis under a written contract, which shall be lodged with the Regional Centre and a copy
of which shall be furnished to the employee concerned.
(2) The Regional Centre shall have a flexible compensation system which recognises
performance, as laid down in the Statutes, to bring the best talent in the Regional Centre.
36.  (1) Any dispute arising out of a contract between the Regional Centre and any of
its employees shall, at the first instance, be resolved through such grievance redressal
mechanism as may be specified by Statutes.
(2)  If the dispute referred to in sub-section (1) is not resolved through the grievance
redressal mechanism, the same shall, at the request of the employee concerned or at the
instance of the Regional Centre, be referred to a Tribunal of Arbitration consisting of one
member appointed by the Executive Director, one member nominated by the employee, and
such two arbitrators shall appoint the third arbitrator who shall act as the Presiding arbitrator.
(3) The arbitration under sub-section ( 1) shall be governed by the provisions of the
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996.
37. The meetings of the Board of Governors, Programme Advisory Committee,
Executive Committee or other committees constituted by the Regional Centre may be held
using contemporary tools of information and communication technologies (including video
conferencing) without the members necessarily having to be physically present.
38. All casual vacancies among the members (other than ex officio members) of any
authority or other body of the Regional Centre shall be filled, as soon as may be, by the
person or body who appoints, elects or co-opts the member whose place has become
vacant and the person appointed, elected or co-opted to a casual vacancy shall be a member
of such authority or body for the residue of the term for which the person whose place he
fills would have been a member.
39.  No act or proceedings of any authority or other body of the Regional Centre shall
be invalid merely by reason of the existence of a vacancy or vacancies among its members.
40. No suit or other legal proceedings shall lie against any officer or other employee
of the Regional Centre for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in
pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act, the Statutes, Ordinances and Regulations
made thereunder.
41. (1) The Statutes of the Regional Centre shall be enacted by the Board of Governors.
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub-section ( 1), the Executive
Committee may make recommendations for enactment of Statutes to the Board.
(3) The Board of Governors may, from time to time, make new Statutes or may amend
or repeal the Statutes with effect from such date, not earlier than the date of commencement
of this Act, as it may direct.
Appointment
of staff of
Regional
Centre.
Conditions of
service.
Arbitration.
Meetings.
Filling of
casual
vacancies.
Proceedings
of authorities
or bodies not
invalidated by
vacancies.
Protection of
action taken
in good faith.
Statutes.
26 of 1996.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

12
42.  Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes may provide for all or any of the
following matters, namely:—
(a) the constitution, powers and functions of authorities, term of office of its
member and other bodies of the Regional Centre, as may be constituted from time to
time;
(b) the manner of nomination of representative of the Member  States of  UNESCO
in the Board of Governors;
(c) other powers and functions of the Chairperson of the Board of Governors;
the other functions of the Programme Advisory Committee, and term of office of its
members; the constitution, powers and functions  of the Finance Committee, the
Board of Studies and constitution, powers and functions of other authorities;
(d) the manner of appointment of Executive Director, his  other powers and
other duties, financial powers to be delegated to the Executive Director and the
manner of appointment, powers and duties of the officers of the Regional Centre and
their emoluments;
(e) the time and date for submission of annual report of the Regional Centre;
manner of conducting review of functioning of administrative and academic wings of
the Regional Centre;
(f) the appointment of regular academic staff and other employees of the Regional
Centre, their emoluments and conditions of service, flexible compensation system,
their benefits and privileges, including principles governing the seniority of service,
age of superannuation, provisions for pension, insurance, provident fund, the manner
of termination of service and disciplinary action consistent with such staff engaged
in higher education and research at Central Universities;
(g) the manner of co-operation and collaboration with other Universities,
institutions and other agencies including learned bodies or associations;
(h) creation, composition and functions of any other body which is considered
necessary for improving the academic life of the Regional Centre;
(i)  conferment of honorary degrees and distinctions;
(j) delegation of powers vested in the authorities or officers of the Regional
Centre;
(k) the terms and conditions of service for engagement of experts as adjunct
and visiting faculty;
(l) the terms and conditions of service for hiring appropriate human resource,
Indian or foreign, especially at higher levels in specific areas, with fixed tenure, not
exceeding three years at a time and with higher compensation, with the approval of
the Board of Governors;
(m)  grievance redressal mechanism for resolution of disputes arising out of a
contract between the Regional Centre and any of its employees;
(n) the manner of making Regulations by any of the authorities of the Regional
Centre;
(o) the manner of recognition of institutions to be affiliated with the Regional
Centre and grounds for withdrawal of recognition thereof;
(p) any other matter which may be required or necessary for the purposes of
this Act.
Matters to be
provided by
Statutes.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

13
43.  (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the Statutes, the Ordinances of the
Regional Centre may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) admission of students from within India and from the Region to the Regional
Centre and their enrolment as such;
(b) the course of study;
(c) the conditions under which students shall be admitted and shall be eligible
for degrees, diplomas and certificates and to the  examinations of the Regional Centre,
and shall be eligible for the degrees, diplomas and certificates;
(d) the conditions of award of the fellowships, scholarships, medals and prizes;
(e) the conditions and mode of appointment and duties of examining bodies,
examiners and moderators;
(f) the conduct of examinations, including the term of office and manner of
appointment and the duties of examining bodies, examiners and moderators;
(g) the conditions of residence of the students of the Regional Centre;
(h) the maintenance of discipline among the employees and students;
(i) the courses of study to be laid down for all degrees, diplomas and certificates
of the Regional Centre including the medium of instruction and examination;
(j) the award of degrees and other academic distinctions, the qualifications for
the same and the means to be taken relating to the granting and obtaining of the
same;  the withdrawal of degrees, diplomas, certificates and other academic
distinctions;
(k) fees to be charged for courses of study in the Regional Centre and for
admission to examinations, degrees and diplomas of the Regional Centre;
(l) institution of and conditions for award of fellowships, scholarships,
studentships, medals and prizes;
(m) the special arrangements, if any, which may be made for the residence and
teaching of women students and the prescribing of special courses of studies for
them;
(n) establishment, management and abolition of Centres of Studies, Schools,
Departments, Specialised Laboratories, Halls and Institutions;
(o) any other matter which by this Act or the Statute, is to be, or, may be,
provided for by the Ordinances.
(2) Save as otherwise provided in this section, Ordinances shall be made by the
Programme Advisory Committee.
(3) All Ordinances made by the Programme Advisory Committee shall have the effect
from such date as it may direct.
(4) The Programme Advisory Committee shall have the power by resolution to modify
or cancel any of its Ordinances and such Ordinances shall, from the date of such resolution
stand modified accordingly or cancelled, as the case may be.
44. The authorities of the Regional Centre may make Regulations, consistent with the
provisions of this Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances, for the conduct of their own
business and that of the Committees, if any, appointed by them and not provided for by this
Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances, in the manner specified by the Statutes.
Regulations.
Ordinances.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

14
45.  (1) Every Statute or Ordinance or Regulation made under this Act shall be published
in the Official Gazette.
(2)  Every  Statute or Ordinance or Regulation made under this Act, shall be laid, as
soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for
a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the
session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification
in the  Statute or Ordinance or Regulation  or both Houses agree that the  Statute or
Ordinance or Regulation  should not be made, the  Statute or Ordinance or Regulation  shall
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so,
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity
of anything previously done under that  Statute or Ordinance or Regulation.
(3) The power to make Statutes or Ordinances or Regulations shall include the power
to give retrospective effect, from a date not earlier than the date of commencement of this
Act, to the Statutes or Ordinances or Regulations or any of them but no retrospective effect
shall be given to any Statutes or Ordinances or Regulations so as to prejudicially affect the
interests of any person to whom such Statutes or Ordinances or Regulations may be
applicable.
46.  (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of two
years from the commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is
made, before each House of Parliament.
Statutes,
Ordinances
and
Regulations to
be published in
the Official
Gazette and to
be laid before
Parliament.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
5
10
15
20
25

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Modern biotechnology has been recognised globally as a rapidly advancing science
wherein molecular techniques and processes are employed to develop health care solutions
for human and animal sector, for agriculture and environment technologies. This would
require creation of high quality human resource in disciplinary and interdisciplinary areas by
engaging students in research by integrating science, engineering and medicine.  Similarly,
interface amongst agriculture or veterinary sciences and engineers and environmental
biologists, ecologists and engineers for agricultural and environmental technologies
respectively would also be necessary for molecular breeding, bio-energy and green
technologies. For this purpose, it is necessary to create physical infrastructure in critical
platform technologies to support interdisciplinary education training and research in
biotechnology.
2. The General Conference of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organisation (UNESCO), at its thirty-third session held in Paris, France during the
3rd to 21st October, 2005, decided that a Regional Centre for Biotechnology Training and
Education shall be established in India under its auspices. An Agreement for the establishment
and operation of the Regional Centre for Biotechnology Training and Education in India was
entered between the Government of India and the  United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organisation on the 14th day of July, 2006 to give effect to the aforesaid
decision. The Regional Centre for Biotechnology shall be an autonomous institution and
pursue its objects and discharge its functions in close collaboration with other national,
regional and international centres (including those located in the member States of the
UNESCO). The UNESCO shall provide technical assistance as and when required and as
appropriate for the establishment and operation of the Regional Centre including assistance
in the formulation of the short-term, medium-term and long-term programmes of the Regional
Centre.
3. In view of the aforesaid, it is expedient to enact a law for giving effect to the said
Agreement for establishment of an institution of national importance to be known as the
Regional Centre for Biotechnology for training and education as a Category II Centre under
the auspice of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation, to
undertake research in the field of biotechnology and to provide for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.  The Regional Centre for Biotechnology Bill, 2011, inter alia,
provides for the following, namely:—
(a) establishment of the Regional Centre for Biotechnology and to declare it as
an institution of the national importance;
(b) to make provision for objects of the Regional Centre for Biotechnology, inter
alia,—
(i) to provide for masters and doctoral degree in biotechnology and related
subjects at the interface of varied disciplines including the physical, chemical,
biological, medical, agricultural and engineering and other relevant sciences as
the Regional Centre may, from time to time, determine;
(ii)  to provide for short-term and long-term training courses in
biotechnology on specific issues related to the development, extension,
implementation and regulation of biotechnology and related areas, as the Statutes
may, from time to time, require;
(iii) to organise and undertake extramural studies, training and extension
services in biotechnology;
(iv) to institute Professorships, Associate Professorships, Assistant
Professorships and other academic positions, required by the Regional Centre
and to appoint or engage persons to such Professorships, Associate
Professorships, Assistant Professorships or other academic positions;
15

16
(v) to recognise an institution of higher learning within India for the
purposes of this Act  and to withdraw such recognition in accordance with the
norms laid down in the Statutes;
(vi) to appoint persons working in any other institution, including those
located outside the country, as academic staff of the Regional Centre for a
specified period as may be specified by the Statutes;
(vii) to create administrative, technical and other posts and to make
appointments thereto as may be specified by the Statutes;
(viii) to co-operate or collaborate or associate with any institution,
including those located outside the country, in such manner and for such
purposes as the Regional Centre may determine in accordance with the guidelines
specified by the Statutes;
(ix) to establish such centres and specialised laboratories or other units
for research, development and instruction as are, in the opinion of the Regional
Centre,  necessary for the furtherance of its objects;
(c) constitution of the Board of Governors, the Programme Advisory Committee,
the Executive Committee, the Finance Committee, the Board of Studies and other
authorities for the purpose of the proposed legislation;
(d) to provide for the members of the academic staff and, where applicable, their
dependents or members of the family, such privileges and immunities as the Central
Government may, after entering into an agreement with the Regional Centre, notify
under section 3 of the United Nations (Privileges and Immunities) Act, 1947;
(e) make provisions for appointment of officers and staff of the Regional Centre
and defining their powers, duties and conditions of service;
(f) confer power upon  the Central Government to review the functioning of the
Regional Centre for Biotechnology once in every four years by persons of eminence to
be appointed by it;
(g) make provision for arbitration of disputes arising out of a contract between
the Regional Centre and any of its employees, at the first instance, to be resolved
through such grievance redressal mechanism as may be specified by Statutes;
(h) confer power upon the Board of Governors to enact Statutes of the Regional
Centre and Ordinances to be made by the Programme Advisory Committee and
Regulations by the authorities of the Regional Centre;
4. The notes on clauses explain in detail various provisions in the Bill.
5. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; VILASRAO DESHMUKH.
The 13th December,  2011.
————
PRESIDENT'S  RECOMMENDATION  UNDER  ARTICLE  117  OF  THE
CONSTITUTION  OF  INDIA
————
[Copy of the letter No. BT/Med/RCB/AP/2010 dated 15.12.2011 from Shri Vilasrao
Deshmukh, Minister of Science and Technology and Earth Sciences to the Secretary-General,
Lok Sabha]
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the Regional Centre for
Biotechnology Bill 2011 recommends  the introduction and consideration of the Bill under
article 117(1) and (3) of the Constitution.

Notes on Clauses
Clause 1.—  This clause provides for short title and commencement.  It provides that
the proposed legislation shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may
appoint by notification in the official Gazette.
Clause 2.— This clause seeks to define certain expressions used in the proposed
legislation.  These definitions, inter alia, include “academic staff”, “Board of Governors”,
“Board of Studies”, “Chairperson”, “employee”, “Hall” and ‘‘Region”, etc.
Clause 3.— This clause provides for the establishment of an institution to be known
as the Regional Centre for Biotechnology which shall be a body corporate having perpetual
succession and a common seal with power to contract. The head office of the Regional
Centre to be in the National Capital Region.
Clause 4.—  This clause provides for the declaration of the Regional Centre for
Biotechnology as an institution of national importance.
Clause 5.— This clause provides for the jurisdiction of the Regional Centre which
shall extend to whole of India and to centres established within or outside India.
Clause 6.—  This clause specifies the objects of the Regional Centre.  It,  inter alia,
provides that the Regional Centre shall disseminate and advance knowledge by providing
instructional and research facilities in such branches of biotechnology and related fields as
it may deem fit including technology policy development; provide capacity-building through
education, training, research and development in biotechnology and related academic fields
for sustainable development objectives through regional and international cooperation;
facilitate transfer of knowledge and technology relating to biotechnology at the regional
level and create a hub of biotechnology expertise in the countries in South Asian Association
for Regional Cooperation region, and more generally in the Asia region, and to address
human resources needs in the region; and promote and strengthen international cooperation
to improve the social and economic conditions and welfare of the people and promote and
facilitate a network of satellite centres in the region as well as within India.
Clause 7.— This clause provides for the transfer of assets, liabilities, etc., of the
existing Regional Centre to the Regional Centre for Biotechnology established under the
proposed legislation.
It provides that any reference to the existing Regional Centre in any law other than this
Act or in any contract or other instruction shall be deemed as a reference to the Regional
Centre; all properties and assets, movable and immovable, of, or belonging to, the existing
Regional Centre, shall vest in the Regional Centre;  all rights and liabilities of the existing
Regional Centre shall be transferred to, and be the rights and liabilities of, the Regional
Centre.
It further provides that all debts, obligations and liabilities incurred, all contracts
entered into and all matters and things engaged to be done by, with or for, the existing
Regional Centre or in connection with the purpose of the existing Regional Centre shall be
deemed to have incurred, entered into or engaged to be done by, with or for, the Regional
Centre established under the proposed legislation.
It also provides that all sums of money due to the existing Regional Centre shall be
deemed to be due to the Regional Centre established under the proposed legislation and all
suits and other legal proceedings instituted or which could have been instituted by or
against the existing Regional Centre may be continued or may be instituted by or against the
Regional Centre established under the proposed legislation.
17

18
It also provides that every employee (including those appointed for imparting
instruction or giving training or conducting research in the existing Regional Centre) holding
any office under the existing Regional Centre or teaching therein immediately before that
date shall hold his office in the Regional Centre established under the proposed legislation
or continue teaching therein by the same tenure and upon the same terms and conditions of
service as respects remuneration, leave, provident fund, retirement and other terminal benefits
as he would have held such office if the Regional Centre had not been established under the
proposed legislation and shall continue to do so as an employee of the Regional Centre or
until the expiry of the period of six months from that date if such employee opts not to be the
employee of the Regional Centre established under the proposed legislation.
It also provides that absorption of any employee by the Regional Centre established
under the proposed legislation in its regular service shall not entitle such employee to any
compensation under any Act or law and no such claim shall be entertained by any court,
tribunal or other authority.
Clause 8.— This clause provides for the functions of the Regional Centre. It, inter
alia, provides that the Regional Centre shall establish infrastructure and technology platforms
which are directly relevant to biotechnology education, training and research; execute
educational and training activities including grant of degrees in research in  biotechnology
and related fields; produce human resource tailored to drive innovation in biotechnology,
particularly in areas of new opportunities and to fill talent gap in deficient areas; undertake
research and development and scientific investigations in collaboration with relevant research
centres in the region; hold scientific symposia and conferences within India or in the region
or outside the region and conduct short-term and long-term training courses and workshops
in all areas of biotechnology; collect universally available information with a view to setting
up a data bank for bio-information; collect and disseminate, through networking, the relevant
local knowledge in the field of biotechnology; disseminate the outcome of research activities
in different countries through the publication of books and articles; promote collaborative
research and development networking programme in specific areas of biotechnology with
national, regional and international networks and promote exchange of scientists, at the
regional level having regard to issues pertaining to intellectual property rights of collaborating
institutions promoting equitable sharing of benefits with collaborating institutions; frame
Statutes and Ordinances and alter, modify or rescind the same.
Clause 9.— This clause provides that the Regional Centre shall pursue its objects and
discharge its functions in close collaboration with other national, regional and international
centres (including those located in the member States of the UNESCO).
Clause 10.— This clause lays down the powers of the Regional Centre.  It, inter alia,
provides that the Regional Centre shall have power to conduct courses leading to masters
and doctoral degree in biotechnology and related subjects at the interface of varied disciplines
including physical, chemical, biological, medical, agricultural and engineering and other
relevant sciences;  to provide for short-term and long-term training courses in biotechnology
on specific issues related to the development, extension, implementation and regulation of
biotechnology and related areas; organise and undertake extramural studies, training and
extension services in biotechnology; confer honorary degrees or other distinctions in the
manner specified by the Statutes; institute Professorships, Associate Professorships,
Assistant Professorships and other academic positions, required by the Regional Centre
and to appoint or engage persons to such Professorships, Associate Professorships, Assistant
Professorships or other academic positions; recognise an institution of higher learning
within India for the purposes of this Act  and withdraw such recognition in accordance with
the norms laid down in the Statutes; appoint persons working in any other institution,
including those located outside the country, as academic staff of the Regional Centre for a
specified period as may be specified by the Statutes; create administrative, technical and
other posts and to make appointments thereto  as may be specified by the Statutes; co-
operate or collaborate or associate with any institution, including those located outside the

19
country, in such manner and for such purposes as the Regional Centre may determine in
accordance with the guidelines specified by the Statutes; establish such centres and
specialised laboratories or other units for research, development and instruction as are, in
the opinion of the Regional Centre, necessary for the furtherance of its objects;  institute and
awards fellowships, scholarships, studentships, medals and prizes  as may be specified by
the Statutes; to make provision for research and advisory services and for that purpose to
enter into such arrangements with other institutions, industrial or other organisations,
including those located outside the country, as the Regional Centre may deem necessary as
may be specified by the Statutes; to organise and conduct refresher courses, workshops,
seminars and other programmes for teachers, evaluators and other stakeholders; to appoint
on contract basis or otherwise Visiting Professors, Honorary Professors, Adjunct Professors,
Emeritus Professors, Consultants and such other persons who may contribute to the
advancement of the objects of the Regional Centre; to determine standards of admission to
the Regional Centre, which may include examination, evaluation or any other method of
testing; to demand and receive payment of fees and other charges; to supervise the residences
of the students of the Regional Centre and to make arrangements for promoting their health
and general welfare; to lay down conditions of service of all categories of employees, including
their code of conduct; to regulate and enforce discipline among the students and the
employees, and to take such disciplinary measures in this regard as may be considered
necessary by the Regional Centre;  to make arrangements for promoting the health and
general welfare of the employees; to receive benefactions, donations and gifts and to acquire,
hold  and manage, and to dispose of, with the prior approval of the Central Government, any
property, movable or immovable, including trust and endowment properties, for the purposes
of the Regional Centre; to borrow, with the prior approval of the Central  Government, on the
security of its property of the Regional Centre, money for the purposes of the Regional
Centre; and to do all such other acts and things as may be necessary, incidental or conducive
to the attainment of all or any of its objects.
It further provides that the Regional Centre shall maintain high standards of education,
training and research, and take measures for admission of students from India and outside
India in such manner as may be specified by the Statutes; conduct innovative courses and
programmes of studies with a provision for periodic review and restructuring; and promote
e-governance with an effective management information system.
Clause 11.—  This clause lays down that the Regional Centre or any institution
recognised by it shall be open to all castes, creed, race or class.
Clause 12.— This clause provides for the privileges and immunities of academic staff,
etc. It provides that  the members of the academic staff and, where applicable, their dependents
or members of the family, shall enjoy such privileges and immunities as the Central Government
may, after entering into an agreement with the Regional Centre, notify under section 3 of the
United Nations (Privileges and Immunities) Act, 1947.
Clause 13.—  This clause provides for the Authorities of the Regional Centre. It
provides that the Board of Governors; the Programme Advisory Committee; the Executive
Committee; the Finance Committee; and such other authorities as may be declared by the
Statutes to be the authorities shall be the authorities of the Regional Centre.
Clause 14.— This clause provides for the Board of Governors. It provides that the
Board of Governors shall consist of the Secretary to the Government of India in the Department
of Biotechnology, as ex officio  Chairperson; and a representative of the Government of
India, to be nominated by the Secretary to the Government of India in the Department of
Biotechnology who would be an eminent scientist in the relevant field and in the grade not
less than that of a Head of an autonomous institution supported by Government of  India; a
representative of the Director-General of UNESCO; a representative of each of the other
Member States of UNESCO in such manner as may be specified by the Statutes.

20
It further provides that the Chairperson of the Programme Advisory Committee shall
be a permanent invitee of the Board of Governors and the Executive Director of the Regional
Centre be the Convenor of the meetings of the Board of Governors.
It also provides that the Board of Governors shall approve the annual plan and budget
of the Regional Centre; review, from time to time, the broad policies and programmes of the
Regional Centre, and suggest measures for the improvement and development of the Regional
Centre; consider the annual report and the annual accounts of the Regional Centre and the
audit report on such accounts; study and approve the internal procedures, including financial
procedure and staff regulations of the Regional Centre; approve the organisational structure
and number of academic staff and other employees at the Regional Centre; convene special
consultative sessions to which it shall invite, in addition to its own members, the Executive
Director of the Regional Centre, and may also invite representatives of other interested
countries and international organisations in order to obtain proposals for strengthening the
scope of services of the Regional Centre and for carrying out the projects and activities
relevant to the Regional Centre, and expand the fund-raising strategy and capabilities;
prescribe fees and other charges, and frame Statutes.
It also provides that the Chairperson shall ordinarily preside over the meetings of the
Board of Governors and that the Board of Governors shall meet at least once in every year or
such other time as the Chairperson may decide in such manner as may be specified by the
Statutes.  It also lays down that the Board of Governors may evolve its own rules of procedure
for the purpose of conducting its meetings and transacting business therein.
Clause 15.— This clause provides for the powers and functions of the Chairperson.  It
provides that the Chairperson shall exercise and discharge such powers and functions of the
Board of Governors as may be delegated by the Board and such other powers and functions
as may be specified by the Statutes. It further provides that if the Chairperson is not present
at a meeting of the Board of Governors, another member of the Board authorised by the
Chairperson may preside over the meeting.
Clause 16.— This clause provides that the Programme Advisory Committee shall be
the principal academic body of the Regional Centre to advise planning, execution, review
and monitoring of the scientific and academic programmes of the Regional Centre.
It further provides for the constitution of the Programme Advisory Committee with a
Chairperson to be nominated by the Board of Governors; two members to be nominated by
the UNESCO; three members from amongst the member States of UNESCO which provide
maximum financial assistance during a period of three years to be nominated by the member
States; two members having expertise and experience in biotechnology policy and legal
matters to be nominated by the Central Government; six members from amongst the persons
being renowned scientist  or academician, to be nominated by the Board of Governors; and
the Executive Director, Member—Secretary ex officio.
It also provides for the responsibilities of the Programme Advisory Committee which
include making  recommendations on the matters of planning and coordinating of the
education, training and research activities; recommending modifications or revision of
education, training and research programmes of the Regional Centre and on the reports
thereon; reviewing annually the programmes of the Regional Centre, evaluating its progress
and submitting the report thereon; considering and reporting on  any matter concerning
scientific and technical issues referred to it by the Board of Governors or by the Executive
Director;  performing all such duties and to do all such acts as may be necessary in the
furtherance of education, training and research under this Act; framing Ordinances; and
performing such other functions as may be specified by the Statutes.
It also provides that the fees and allowances payable to members of the Programme
Advisory Committee and their term of office shall be such as may be specified by the
Statutes.

21
Clause 17.—  This clause provides that the Executive Committee shall be the advisory
body for issues concerning the management of the Regional Centre and advise from time to
time  to the Board of Governors.
It further provides that the constitution of the Executive Committee, the term of office
of its members and its powers and functions shall be such as may be specified by the
Statutes.
Clause 18.— This clause provides that the constitution, powers and functions of the
Finance Committee shall be such as may be specified by the Statutes and the Finance
Committee shall report to the Board of Governors.
Clause 19.— This clause provides that the constitution, powers and functions of the
Board of Studies shall be such as may be specified by the Statutes.
Clause 20.— This clause provides that the constitution, powers and functions of
other authorities, as may be declared by the Statutes to be the authorities of the Regional
Centre, shall be such as may be specified by the Statutes.
Clause 21.— This clause provides for the officers of the Regional Centre. It provides
that the Executive Director; the Deans; the Associate Deans; the Associate Director
(Administration); the Registrar; the Finance Officer; and such other officers as may be
declared by the Statutes to be the officers of  the Regional Centre.
Clause 22.— This clause provides that the Executive Director shall be appointed on
the recommendation of the Board of Governors in such manner as may be specified by the
Statutes.
It further provides that the Executive Director shall be the principal executive and
academic officer of the Regional Centre and direct the work of the Regional Centre in
conformity with the programmes and directives established by the Board of Governors.  It
further lays down that he shall propose the draft work plan and budget to be submitted to the
Board of Governors for approval and prepare the agenda for the sessions of the Board of
Governors.  It also lays down that the Executive Director shall prepare reports on the Regional
Centre’s activities for submission to the Board of Governors and exercise such other powers
and perform such other functions as may be specified by the Statutes.
It also provides that the financial powers delegated to the Executive Director shall be
such as may be specified by the Statutes and that the Executive Director may, if he is of the
opinion that immediate action is necessary on any matter, exercise any power conferred on
any authority of the Regional Centre by or under the proposed legislation and shall report to
such authority at its next meeting the action taken by him on such matter.
Clause 23.— This clause provides for Dean and Associate Deans. It provides that the
Deans and Associate Deans shall be appointed in such manner  and on such terms and
conditions of service, and shall exercise such powers and perform such duties, as may be
specified by the Statutes.
Clause 24.— This clause provides Associate Director (Administration). It provides
that the Associate Director (Administration) shall be appointed in such manner, and on such
terms and conditions of service, as may be specified by the Statutes and that the Associate
Director (Administration) shall have the power to enter into agreements, sign documents
and authenticate records on behalf of the Regional Centre, and shall exercise such powers
and perform such duties, as may be specified by the Statutes.
Clause 25.— This clause provides that the Registrar shall be appointed in such manner
and shall exercise such powers and perform such duties, as may be specified by the Statutes.
Clause 26.— This clause provides that the Finance Officer shall be appointed in such
manner, and shall exercise such powers and perform such duties, as may be specified by the
Statutes.

22
Clause 27.— This clause provides that the manner of appointment and powers and
duties of other officers of the Regional Centre shall be such as may be specified by the
Statutes.
Clause 28.— This clause makes provision for payment to the Regional Centre. It
provides that the Central Government may, after due appropriation made by Parliament by
law, in this behalf, make to the Regional Centre grants and loans of such sums of money  and
in such manner as that Government may consider necessary for being utilised for the purposes
of the proposed legislation.
Clause 29.— This clause makes provision for Fund of the Regional Centre. It provides
that the Regional Centre shall maintain a Fund to which there shall be credited all moneys
provided by the Central Government; all fees and other charges received by the Regional
Centre; all moneys received by the Regional Centre by way of grants, gifts, donations,
benefactions, bequests or transfers; and all moneys received by the Regional Centre in any
other manner or from any other source.
It further provides that all moneys credited to the Fund shall be deposited in such
banks or invested in such manner as the Regional Centre may, with the approval of the
Central Government, decide.
It also provides that the fund shall be applied for meeting the salary, allowances and
other remuneration of  Chairperson, members, of the Board or committees, or academic staff,
officers and other employees, of the Regional Centre or members of other committees set up
by it; the expenses of the Regional Centre in discharge of its function under the proposed
legislation; and the expenses on objects and for purposes authorised by the proposed
legislation.
Clause 30.— This clause provides for annual reports of the Regional Centre. It provides
that the annual report of the Regional Centre shall be prepared under the direction of the
Executive Director, which shall include, among other matters, the steps taken by the Regional
Centre towards the fulfilment of its objects and shall be submitted to the Board of Governors
on or before such date as may be specified by the Statutes and the Board of Governors shall
consider the report in its annual meeting.
It further provides that a copy of the annual report shall be submitted to the Central
Government, which shall, as soon as may be, cause the same to be laid before both Houses
of Parliament.
Clause 31.— This clause provides for annual accounts. It provides that the annual
accounts and the balance sheet of the Regional Centre shall be prepared under the directions
of the Board of Governors and shall, once at least every year, and at intervals of not more
than fifteen months, be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
It further provides that a copy of the accounts together with the audit report shall be
submitted to the Central Government along with the observations, if any, of the Board of
Governors.
It also provides that a copy of the annual report and annual accounts together with the
audit report, as submitted to the Central Government shall, as soon as may be, cause to be
laid before both Houses of Parliament.
It also provides that the audited annual accounts, after having been laid before both
Houses of Parliament, shall be published in the Gazette of India and a copy of the audited
annual accounts shall also be submitted to the Member States.
Clause 32.— This clause provides for returns and information.  It provides that the
Regional Centre shall furnish to the Central Government such returns or other information
with respect to its property or activities as the Central Government may, from time to time,
require, within such period as may be specified by the Central Government.

23
Clause 33.— This clause provides for review of the functioning of the Regional Centre.
It provides that the functioning of the Regional Centre shall be reviewed once in every four
years by persons of eminence to be appointed by the Central Government.
It further provides that the Regional Centre shall meet the expenses for conducting the
review and upon receipt of the report of such review, the Board of Governors may take
appropriate action.
It also provides that in addition to the aforesaid, the Board of Governors may conduct
review of functioning of administrative and academic wings of the Regional Centre, in such
manner and at such intervals, as may be specified by the Statutes.
Clause 34.— This clause provides for the appointment of staff of Regional Centre. It
provides that the appointments shall be made in accordance with the procedure laid down in
the Statutes, by the Board of Governors for the academic staff; and the Executive Director, in
any other case.
Clause 35.— This clause lays down the conditions of service of the employees.  It
provides that every employee shall be appointed on contractual basis under a written contract,
which shall be lodged with the Regional Centre and a copy of which shall be furnished to the
employee concerned.
It further provides that the Regional Centre shall have a flexible compensation system
which recognises performance, as laid down in the Statutes, to bring the best talent in the
Regional Centre.
Clause 36.— This clause makes provision for arbitration. It provides that  any dispute
arising out of a contract between the Regional Centre and any of its employees shall, at the
first instance, be resolved through such grievance redressal mechanism as may be specified
by  the Statutes.
It further provides that if the dispute is not resolved through the grievance redressal
mechanism, the same shall, at the request of the employee concerned or at the instance of the
Regional Centre, be referred to a Tribunal of Arbitration consisting of one member appointed
by the Executive Director, one member nominated by the employee, and such two arbitrators
shall appoint the third arbitrator who shall act as the Presiding arbitrator.
It also provides that the arbitration shall be governed by the provisions of the
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996.
Clause 37.—  This clause provides that the meetings of the Board of Governors,
Programme Advisory Committee, Executive Committee or other committees constituted by
the Regional Centre may be held using contemporary tools of information and communication
technologies (including video conferencing) without the members necessarily having to be
physically present.
Clause 38.— This clause provides that all casual vacancies among the members (other
than ex officio members) of any authority or other body of the Regional Centre shall be filled,
as soon as may be, by the person or body who appoints, elects or co-opts the member whose
place has become vacant and the person appointed, elected or co-opted to a casual vacancy
shall be a member of such authority or body for the residue of the term for which the person
whose place he fills would have been a member.
Clause 39.— This clause provides that that no act or proceedings of any authority or
other body of the Regional Centre shall be invalid merely by reason of the existence of a
vacancy or vacancies among its members.
Clause 40.— This clause provides that no suit or other legal proceedings shall lie
against any officer or other employee of the Regional Centre for anything which is in good
faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of any of the provisions of the proposed
legislation, the Statutes, Ordinances and Regulations made thereunder.

24
Clause 41.— This clause provides for Statutes. It provides that the Statutes of the
Regional Centre shall be enacted by the Board of Governors.
It further provides that the Executive Committee may make recommendations for
enactment of Statutes to the Board.
It also provides that the Board of Governors may, from time to time, make new Statutes
or may amend or repeal the Statutes with effect from such date, not earlier than the date of
commencement of the proposed legislation, as it may direct.
Clause 42.—  This clause specifies the matters to be provided by Statutes.
Clause 43.— This clause provides for Ordinances. It specifies the matters which may
be provided in the Ordinances.  It further provides that the Ordinances made by the Programme
Advisory Committee and that the Ordinances shall have the effect from such date as it may
direct.
It also provides that the Programme Advisory Committee shall have the power by
resolution to modify or cancel any of its Ordinances and such Ordinances shall, from the
date of such resolution stand modified accordingly or cancelled, as the case may be.
Clause 44.— This clause provides for Regulations. It provides that the authorities of
the Regional Centre may make Regulations, consistent with the provisions of the proposed
legislation, the Statutes and the Ordinances, for the conduct of their own business and that
of the Committees, if any, appointed by them and not provided for by the proposed legislation,
the Statutes or the Ordinances, in the manner specified by the Statutes.
Clause 45. – This clause provides that every Statute or Ordinance or Regulation made
under the proposed legislation shall be published in the Official Gazette and shall be laid, as
soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament.
It further provides that the power to make Statutes or Ordinances or Regulations shall
include the power to give retrospective effect, from a date not earlier than the date of
commencement of the proposed legislation, to the Statutes or Ordinances or Regulations or
any of them but no retrospective effect shall be given to any Statutes or Ordinances or
Regulations so as to prejudicially affect the interests of any person to whom such Statutes
or Ordinances or Regulations may be applicable.
Clause 46.— This clause provides for power to remove difficulties. It provides that if
any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of the proposed legislation, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of the proposed legislation, as appear to it to be necessary
or expedient for removing the difficulty.
It further provides that no such order shall be made under this clause after the expiry
of two years from the commencement of the proposed legislation.
It also provides that every order made under this clause shall be laid, as soon as may
be after it is made, before each House of Parliament.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Sub-clause (1) of clause 3 of the Bill provides that the Central Government shall establish
an institution to be known as the Regional Centre for Biotechnology. Sub-clause (4) of
clause 16 provides that the fees and allowances payable to members of the Programme
Advisory Committee and their term of office shall be such as may be specified by the
Statutes.
2. Clause 28 of the Bill provides that the Central Government may, after due appropriation
made by Parliament by law, in this behalf, make to the Regional Centre for Biotechnology
grants and loans of such sums of money and in such manner as that Government may
consider necessary for being utilised for the purposes of the proposed legislation. Clause 29
of the Bill provides for the maintenance of a Fund to which,—(a) all moneys provided by the
Central Government; (b) all fees and other charges received by the Regional Centre; (c) all
moneys received by the Regional Centre by way of grants, gifts, donations, benefactions,
bequests or transfers; and ( d) all moneys received by the Regional Centre in any other
manner or from any other source, shall be credited.  Sub-clause (3) of clause 29 of the Bill
provides that the Fund shall be applied for meeting the salary, allowances and other
remuneration of Chairperson, Members of the Board or Committees or academic staff, officers
and other employees of the Regional Centre or Members of other Committees set up by it and
for meeting the expenses of the Regional Centre in discharge of its functions as specified
under the proposed legislation.
3. The one-time capital investment for setting up the Regional Centre for Biotechnology
is estimated to be 53.11 crore rupees.  The recurring expenditure on manpower requirements,
consumables, office expenses, fellowship, meetings, travel, etc., is estimated to be in the
range of 15 crore rupees per year.  The expenditure is to be borne by the Central Government.
4. The Bill does not involve any other expenditure of recurring or non-recurring nature
from the Consolidated Fund of India.
25

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Sub-clause (1) of  clause 41 and item (h) of sub-clause (4) of clause 14 empowers the
Board of Governors of the Regional Centre for Biotechnology to enact statutes. Clause 42
specifies the matters in respect of which such  Statutes may be made. These matters, inter
alia, include (a) the constitution, powers and functions of authorities, term of office of its
member and other bodies of the Regional Centre; (b) the manner of nomination of
representative of the Member States of UNESCO in the Board of Governors; (c) other powers
and functions of the Chairperson of the Board of Governors; the other functions of the
Programme Advisory Committee, and term of office of its members; the constitution, powers
and functions  of the Finance Committee, the Board of Studies and constitution, powers and
functions of other authorities; (d) the manner of appointment of Executive Director, his  other
powers and other duties, financial powers to be delegated to the Executive Director and the
manner of appointment, powers and duties of the officers of the Regional Centre and their
emoluments; (e) the time and date for submission of annual report of the Regional Centre;  if
manner of conducting review of functioning of administrative and academic wings of the
Regional  appointment of regular academic staff and other employees of the Regional Centre,
their emoluments and conditions of service, flexible compensation system, their benefits and
privileges, including principles governing the seniority of service, age of superannuation,
provisions for pension, insurance, provident fund, the manner of termination of service and
disciplinary action consistent with such staff engaged in higher education and research at
Central Universities; (g) the manner of co-operation and collaboration with other Universities,
institutions and other agencies including learned bodies or associations; (h) creation,
composition and functions of any other body which is considered necessary for improving
the academic life of the Regional Centre;  (i)  conferment of honorary degrees and distinctions;
(j) delegation of powers vested in the authorities or officers of the Regional Centre;  (k) the
terms and conditions of service for engagement of experts as adjunct and visiting faculty; (l)
the terms and conditions of service for hiring appropriate human resource, Indian or foreign,
especially at higher levels in specific areas, with fixed tenure, not exceeding three years at a
time and with higher compensation, with the approval of the Board of Governors; (m)  grievance
redressal mechanism for resolution of disputes arising out of a contract between the Regional
Centre and any of its employees; (n) the manner of making Regulations by any of the
authorities of the Regional Centre; and (o) the manner of recognition of institutions to be
affiliated with the Regional Centre and grounds for withdrawal of recognition thereof.
2. Item (f) of sub-clause (3) of  clause 16 empowers the Programme Advisory Committee
of the Regional Centre for Biotechnology to frame Ordinances. Sub-clause (1) of clause 43
specifies the matters in respect of which such Ordinances may be made. These matters, inter
alia, include: (a) admission of students from within India and from the Region to the Regional
Centre and their enrolment as such; (b) the course of study; (c) the conditions under which
students shall be admitted and shall be eligible for degrees, diplomas and certificates and to
the  examinations of the Regional Centre, and shall be eligible for the degrees, diplomas and
certificate; (d) the conditions of award of the fellowships, scholarships, medals and prizes;
(e) the conditions and mode of appointment and duties of examining bodies, examiners and
moderators; (f) the conduct of examinations, including the term of office and manner of
appointment and the duties of examining bodies, examiners and moderators; (g) the conditions
of residence of the students of the Regional Centre; (h) the maintenance of discipline among
the employees and students; (i) the courses of study to be laid down for all degrees, diplomas
and certificates of the Regional Centre including the medium of instruction and examination;
(j) the award of degrees and other academic distinctions, the qualifications for the same and
the means to be taken relating to the granting and obtaining of the same; the withdrawal of
degrees, diplomas, certificates and other academic distinctions; (k) fees to be charged for
courses of study in the Regional Centre and for admission to examinations, degrees and
26

27
diplomas of the Regional Centre; (l) institution of and conditions for award of fellowships,
scholarships, studentships, medals and prizes; (m) the special arrangements, if any, which
may be made for the residence and teaching of women students and the prescribing of
special courses of studies for them; and (n) establishment, management and abolition of
Centres of Studies, Schools, Departments, Specialised Laboratories, Halls and Institutions.
3. Clause 44 empowers the authorities of the Regional Centre for Biotechnology to
make Regulations for the conduct of their own business and that of the Committees, if any,
appointed by them and not provided for by the proposed legislation, the Statutes or the
Ordinances, in the manner specified by the Statutes.
4. Sub-clause (1) of clause 45 specifies that the Statutes, Ordinances and Regulations
to be published in the Official Gazette.  Sub-clause (2) of clause 45 provides that every
Statute or Ordinance or Regulation made under the proposed legislation shall be laid, as
soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament.
5. The matters in respect of which Statutes, Ordinances and Regulations may be made
are matters of procedures or administrative detail and it is not practicable to provide for them
in the Bill itself.  The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of an institution of national importance to be known as the
Regional Centre for Biotechnology for training and education as a category II institution
under the auspice of  the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organisation, to undertake research in the field of biotechnology and to provide for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
—————
(Shri Vilasrao Deshmukh, Minister of Science and Technology and Earth Sciences)
GMGIPMRND—3323LS(S3)—16-12-2011.