25 of 1961. 
As INTRODUCED IN Loll: SABRA ON 
Bill No. 129 of 1'77 
THE ADVOCATES {AMENDMENT) BILL, 1977 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Advoca.tes Act, 1961. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-eighth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Advocates (Amendment) Act, 1977. 
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 31st day of 
5 October, 1977. 
10 
IS 
Z. In section 3 of the Advocates Act, 1961 (hereinafter referred to as 
the principal Act), for sub-sections (3) and (3A) , the following sub-
sections shall be substituted, namely:-
"(3) There shall be a Chairman and a Vice-Chairman of each 
State Bar Council elected by the Council in such manner as may be 
prescribed. 
(3A) Every person holding office as Chairman or as Vice-
Chairman of any State Bar Council immedia*ely before the com-
m~ncement of the Advocates (Amendment) Act, 1977, shall, OIl such 
com~encement, cease to hold ofBce as Chairman or Vice-Chairman, 
as. the case may be: 
Provided that every such person shall continue to carry on the 
duties of his office until the Chairman or the Vice-Chairman, as 
Short 
title and 
CoDl-
mence-
ment. 
Amend-
ment ot 
section 3. 

Amend-
ment of 
section 4. 
the case may be, of each State Bar Council, elected after the com-
mencement of the Advocates (Amendment) Act, 1977, assumes 
charge of the office.". 
3. (1) In secti:m 4 of the principal Act,-
(i) in sub-section (1), clause (bb) shall be omitted; 
(ii) for sub-sections (2) and (2A) , the following sub-sections 
shall be substituted, namely:-
"(2) There shall be a Chairman and a Vice-Chairman of the 
Bar Council of India elected by the Council in such manner as 
5 
may be prescribed. 10 
(2A) A person h:>lding office as Chairman or as Vice-
Chairman of the Bar Council of India immediately before the 
commencement of the Advoca~es (Amendment) Act, 1977, shall, 
on such commencement, cease to hold office as Chairman or 
Vice-Chairman, as the case may be: IS 
Provided that su'ch person shall continue to carryon the 
duties of his office until the Chairman or the Vice-Chairman, as 
the case may be, of the Council, elected after the commencement 
of the Advocates (Amendment) Act, 1977, assumes charge of the 
office.". 20 
Amend- •. ~l~ br sub-aeeUon (1) of section 8 of the principal Act, for the 
ment of words "four years", the. words "five years" shall be substituted. 
section 8. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 15. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 34. 
(2) The amendment made by sub-section (1) to sub-section (1) of 
section 8 of the principal Act shall apply also to an elected member of 
every State Bar Council who has no! completed the term of four years 2S 
at the commencement of this Act. 
5. In sub-sectbn (2) of section 15 of the principal Act;-
(i) before clause (d), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:-
"(c) the manner of election of the Chairman and the Vice- 30 
Chairman of tpe Bar Councilj"; 
(ii) in clause (d), after the words "election to the Bar Council", 
the words "or to the office of the Chairman or Vice-Chairman" shall 
be inserted. 
6. In section 34 of the principal Act, after SUb-section (lA), the 35 
follOWing sub-section shall be inserted, name1y:-
II (2) Without pr~judic~ to the provia,ions contained in' ~ub-section 
, (1), the High Court at Calcutta may make rules providing 'for the 
holding of the Intermediate and the Final examinations for articled 
clerks to be passed by the persons referred to In section !SAG for the 40 
pw-.pose of being admitted as advocates on the State roll and any 
au.. matter conneeted therewith.... . 

107 of 1976. 
S 
10 
3 
7. In the principal Act, after section 58AF, the following section shall lnser-
be inserted, namely: - tion of 
new sec_ 
tion 58AG. 
"58AG. Notwithstanding anything contained in this' Act, every 
person who, immediately before the 31st day of December, 1976, has 
eommenced ~is arti~l~~ihip ~nd pasSed the Preliminary. examination, 
for the. putpose of enrolm,ent as ari attorney of the HIgh c.ourtat 
Cal'c1.!tta in accordance with the rules made under suq-section (2) of 
section 34, before the omission of that sub-section by the Advocates 
(Amendment) Act, 1976,may be admitted as an advocate on the 
State roll if he-
(i) paslles, on or before the 31st day of December, 1980,-
(a) the Final examination in a case where such person 
has, before the 31st day of December, 1976, passed the Inter-
mediate examination, 
Special 
provisions 
in relation 
to articL 
ed clerks. 
IS (b). the Intermediate and the Final examinations in any 
other case. 
Explanation.-For the purpose of this dause, the High Court 
at Calcutta may prescribe such rules as may be necessary under 
sub-secti:>n (2) of section 34, specifying the nature of the exami-
20 nations and any other matter relating thereto; 
(ii) makes an appl1aation for such enrolment in accordance 
with the provisions of this Act; and 
(iii) fulfils the conditions specified in clauses (a), (b), (e) 
and (f) of sub-section (1) of section 24.". 
16 ot 1977. 2S 8. (1) The Advocates (Amendment) Ordinance, 1977, is hereby Repeal 
and 
savin,. repealed. 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken 
under the principal Act as amended by the said Ordinance shall be 
deemed to have been done or taken under the principal Act, a8 amended 
30 by this Act. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Advocates (Amendment) Act, 1976 made several changes in the 
Advocates Act, 1961. According to the 8JIlended Act, the Attorney-
General of India and the Advocates-General of the States became the 
ex otficlo Chairman of the Bar Council of India and the State Bar Councils, 
respectively. The S:>licitor-General of India became the ex officio Vice-
Chairman of the Bar Council of India; and the senior-most Advocate from 
among the elected members of the State Bar Council became the Vice-
Chairman of the Council. In the case of the State Bar Council of Delhi, 
.an advocate, nominated by the Central Government, became the Chair-
man. The Central Government was also empowered to nominate one 
officer as a member of the Bar Council of India for a period of two years. 
2. This amendment has been criticised by several Bar Councils and 
the members of the public and the legal profession as a retrograde step 
and as not conducive to the efficient and proper running of the Bar 
Councils and one which sets at naught the very fundamentals of auto-
nomy of an independent, profession. The G:entral Government has consi-
dered the matter de novo and it is proposed to amend the Act to restore 
the democratic principle of elected Chairman and Vice-Chairman for the 
Bar Council of India and the State Bar Councils. The provision empower-
ing the. nomination of an ofticer fJD the Bar Council of India is also 
proposed to be omitted. 
To avoid any disruption in the day-to-day working of the Bar Councils, 
i~ is provided that the existing Chairman and Vice-Chairman shall carry 
on the duties of his respective office till the new Chairman or Vice-
Chairman, as the case may be, duly elected, assumes charge of the office. 
3. Section 8 of the Act provides for a term of four years for oftice of 
elected members of the State Bar CounciL As electioD to the State Bar 
Councils is a time-consuming process and involves considerable expendi-
ture, the term of office of the members of the State Bar Councils, in 
relation to which the term has not already expired, is proposed to be 
increased to five years from the existing bur years. 
4. One of the major changes brought about by the Advocates (Amend-
ment) Act, 1976, was the abolition of the dual system in the High Courts 
of B:>mbay and Calcutta. In Calcutta, however, it was Dot necessary to 
possess a Degree in Law for a person to enter into agreement of article-
ship. In order to remove the hardship caused to the articled clerks who 
have entered inb agreement of articleship before the 31st December, 
1976 and who have passed the preliminary examination but not passed 
th{' Intermediate/Final . examination, it is proposed to empower the 
Calcutta High Court to hold the Intermediate/Final examination up t'J 
31st December, 1980 for the aforesaid artiJCled clerks, and such of those-
articled clerks who pass the Final examination will be eligible to be 
enrolled' as adv:lcates. 

5. Since Parliament was not in session aad urgent action was called 
for, it was considered necessary to issue the Advocates (Amendment) 
Ordinance, 1977 and the same was promulgated on the 31st October, 1977. 
6. This Bill seeks to replace the Ordinance by an Act of Parliament. 
NEW Dam; SHANTI BHUSHAN. 
The 7th November, 1977. 

State Bar 
Councils. 
Bar Coun-
cil of 
India. 
Term of 
office of 
members 
of State 
Bar 
Council. 
Power to 
make 
rules. 
" 
• 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRNCTS FROM THB ADVOCATES ACT, 1961 
(25 or 1961) 
• • • 
3. (1) There shall be a Bar Council-
• • • • 
• 
• 
(3) There shall be a Chairman of each State Bar Council as follows:-
(a) in the! ease of the State Bar Council of Delhi, such advocate 
as may be nominated by the Central Governmtmt: snan be the Chair-
man for a period of two years; 
(b) in the case of the State Bar Council of Assam, Nagaland, 
Meghalaya, Manipur and Tripura, the Advocate-General of each of 
the States of Assam, Manipur, Meghalaya, Nagaland and Tripura, 
ex-officio shall, by rotation in that order, be the Chairman for a 
period of two years; 
(c) in the case of the State Bar Council of Punjab and Haryana, 
the Advocate-General of each of the States of Punjab and Haryana, 
ex-officio shall, by rotation in that order, be the Chairman for a 
period of two years; and 
(d) in the case of any other State Bar Council, the Advocate-
General of the State, ex-officio, shall be the Chairman. 
(3A) There shall be a Vice-Chairman of each State Bar Council who 
shall be the senior-most advocate amongst the members of that Council. 
• • • • • 
4. (1) There shall be a Bar Council for the territories to which this 
Act extends to be known as the Bar Council of India which shall consist 
of the following members, namely:-
• • • • • 
(bb) a person appointed by virtue of office (whether or not 
under Government) by the Central Government; 
• • • • • . 
(2) The Attorney-General of India ex-officio and the Solicitor-General 
of India ex-officio shall be the Chairman and Vice-Chairman respectively 
of the Bar Council of India. 
(2A) The term of office of the member of the Bar Council ,of India 
appointed under clause (bb) of sub-section (1) shall be two years from 
the date of his appointment or till he ceases to hold the office by virtue 
of which he was appointed, whichever is earlier. 
• • • • • 
8. (1) The term of office of an elected member of a State Bar Council 
(other than an elected member thereof referred to in section 54) shall be 
feur years from the date of publication of the result of his election. 
• • • • • 
15. (1) • • • * • 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the fore-
going power, such rules may provide for- ' 
* • • • • 
(d) the manner in which and the authority by which doubts and 
disputes as to the validity of an election to the Bar Council shall be 
ftnally decided; 
• • • • • 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 5 of the Bill empowers a Bar Council to make rules with res-
pect to the manner of election of the Chairman and the Vice-Chairman 
and the manner in which and the authority by which doubts and dis-
p~tes as to the validity of such elections shall be decided. 
2. Clause 6 of the Bill seeks to insert a new sub-sectIon (2) in section 
34 of the Advocates Act, 1961 empowering the High Court of Calcutta 
to make appropriate rules providing for the holding of the Intermediate 
and the Final examinations for articled clerks to be passed by the 
persons referred to in section 58AG for the purpose of being admitted 
as advocates on the State roll and any other matter connected therewith. 
3. The matters in respect of which such rules may be made are matters 
of detail and it is not practicable to provide for them in the Bill. The 
delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character. 
7 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend I the Advocates Act, 1961. 
'"':l 
(Shri Shanti Bhushan, Minister of Law, Justice and Company Affairs.) 