AS INTRODUCED IN Lok Sanita

25 ane 20D

Bill No. 129 of 2000

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000
By

. ‘Suet Anant GaNGcAraM Geere, M.P.
A
BILL

further to amend the Constitution of India.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2000.

2. In Part V of the Constitution, after Chapter V, the following Chapter and articles
5. thereunder shall be inserted, namely:—

“CHAPTER VI. COMMITTEE TO MONITOR FUNDS

151A. (J) There shall be established a Committee to monitor the uti
funds allocated to a State or a Union territory by the Union.

sation of

(2) The Committee constituted under clause (1) shall comprise the following
10. namely:—

Short title

Insertion of
new article
1514.

Constitution of
new Commit-
ee.


Functions of the
Committee,

Powers of the
Committee,

Submission of
statement and
account by
Committee.

Release of
funds on the
recommenda-
tion of the Com-
mittee,

Suggestions
and recommen-
dations of the
Committee,

Annual report
of the Commit.

2

(04 Chairman, who shall be Deputy Chairman of the Planning Commission;
and

(ii) four other members who shall represent Rural and Urban Development,
Planning, Finance and Audit and Accounts, to be appointed by the Union

(3) The terms and conditions of appointment, salaries, allowances and other
conditions of service of members shall be such as may be determined by Parliament
by law.

1518, The Committee shall perform the following functions:—

(1) to monitor whether funds allocated to a State or a Union territory by the
Union are wulised properly for the purpose for which they were allocated;

(i) to ensure that funds are utilised within specified period; and
(iit) to Suggest measures for proper and effective utilisation of funds,
152C. The Committee shall have power to:—

(0 call for any information, document or record from any State or a Union
territory which are required in connection with its duties;

(ii) investigate into any complaint regarding diversion or misutilisation of |
and

152D. The Committee shall submit a statement and accounts containing details of
utilisation of funds by each State and Union territory within three months from the release
of funds by way of first instalment,

152E. (J) The Union shall release the funds in instalments to a State or a Union
territory for any purpose on the recommendation of the Committee,

(2) The funds allocated to a State or a Union territory for any purpose shall not be
released in case a State or Union territory fails to submit the account of utilisation of
funds to the Committee,

152F. The Union shall carry out the suggestions and recommendations of the
Committee.

1526, The Committee shall submit an annual report to the Union about its activities

during a year and the Union shall cause the same to be laid before both Houses of
Parliament.”

5



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

‘The Central Government allocates funds in huge quantities to State Governments
and Union territories for various schemes, However, the funds are not utilised hy States
Properly and in time. Instances of diversion of funds for other purposes like payment of
salary to employees, purchase of vehicles, furniture, etc, have come to notice. Thus,
Government money is grossly wasted and misused by State Governments. As a result, the
schemes for which funds were allotted are not implemented. Due to financial
mismanagement, money allotted for various schemes are misused by States, At present.
there is no check or any sort of control for monitoring of these funds.

With this in view, it is proposed to amend the Constitution to set up a Committee
to monitor the utilisation of funds by State Governments. The Proposed measure will
check to a great extent misuse of funds. The Stale Governments which are not complying
with directions of the Committee will not be allocated any more funds for any scheme.

Hence this Bill.

New Dew, ANANT GANGARAM GEETE
July 25, 2000.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 2 of the Bill provides for establishment of a Committee to monitor the
utilisation of the funds allocated to a State or a Union territory by the Union Government.
The Committee shall consist of the Deputy Chairman of Planning Commission and four
other members. The Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India. It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees twenty
five lakh is likely to be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.

A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees ten lakh is also likely to be involved,