1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010
By
SHRI P.L. PUNIA, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. This  Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment)  Act, 2010.
2.  After article 30 of the Constitution, the following heading and article thereunder
shall be inserted, namely:—
‘‘Right to Safe and Adequate Drinking Water
30A. (1) Every citizen shall have access to safe and adequate quantity of drinking
water.
(2) The State shall, within a period of five years from the date of coming into
force of the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2010, provide adequate number of
handpumps or piped water connections alongwith installation of required number of
water treatment plants in every village or habitation in order to ensure adequate
availability of safe drinking water to every citizen.".
Short title.
Bill No.   129 of  2010
Insertion of
new article
30A.
Provision of
safe and
adequate
drinking
water.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5
10

2
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Water is an essential element for the existence of all living beings on earth. In our
country, there is adequate water in ponds, lakes, rivers and oceans. However, in the absence
of effective water management policy, river waters and other water bodies remain untapped.
Moreover, due to lack of awareness regarding the importance of water among the common
man, the condition of ponds and lakes has been deteriorating for the last several years.
There is acute shortage of drinking water everywhere in the country including the
metropolitan cities. In most of the villages, particularly in Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Bihar,
Madhya Pradesh and Rajasthan, the villages collect the rainwater in ponds which is utilized
by them mainly for drinking purpose. Due to lack of any other alternative, they are forced to
utilize this water which is unhygienic and unfit for human consumption.
In a welfare State like ours, it is the duty of the State to fulfil the basic needs of its
citizens. Therefore, the State is required to provide safe drinking water to every citizen.
If the right to get safe drinking water is made a fundamental right, the State shall have
to provide potable water to the citizens. Otherwise, the rural and urban people will have the
right to take recourse to the court collectively or individually with the purpose of compelling
the Government to provide safe and adequate quantity of drinking water to them. Such a
step shall give a new direction to the Government to tackle this serious problem. The Bill,
accordingly, seeks to amend the Constitution.
N
EW DELHI; P.L. PUNIA
October 25, 2010.

3
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides for giving the citizens the right to potable water and the
State shall provide facility of piped water connections or handpumps in every village or
habitation. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, is likely to involve an annual recurring expenditure
of about rupees fifteen thousand crore from the Consolidated Fund of India.
An amount of about rupees seventy crore will also be involved from the Consolidated
Fund of India towards non-recurring expenditure.

GMGIPMRND—4948LS(S3)—11-11-2010.
LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri P.L. Punia, M.P .)