As INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

2 JUN 1998

THE PRIVATE INVESTIGATORS BILL, 1998
By
Suet Amar Pat SincH, M.P.

A
BILL

10 provide for the licensing of private investigators and vest them with certain powers.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as

follows:—
1. (/) This Act may be called the Private Investigators Act, 1998. Short title,
(2) It extends to the whole of India. पक कु
5 (3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notifi-
cation in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— Definitions.

(i) ‘company’ means a company incorporated under the Companies Act, 1956;

(é) ‘Controller’ means the Controller of private invetigators in the concerned State/
10 Union territory:

(iii) ‘licence’ means a licence issued to a private investigator;


Private
Investigator

Controller of
Private
Investigators.

Maintenance of
registers,

Licences,

Punishment

Application for
cence,

Police verifica-
tion before issu-
ance of licence,

Issuance of
licence,

2

(iv) ‘licensee’ means a Person who has been issued a Private investigator's licence;
(¥) Office’ means Office of the Controller;
(४) ‘prescribed’ means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and

(vii) ‘public record’ means a register, file or a document that any member of the
Public is entitled, by virtue of any enactment, to inspect or peruse whether on payment of
a fee or otherwise, or from which any member of the Public is entitled, by virtue of any
Gnactment, to obtain a copy or extract, whether on payment of a fee or otherwise.

3. In this Act, a private investigator means a Person who carries on any business,
either by himself or i

4. (/) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette,
appoint a Controller of private investigators in every State.

(2) The Controller shall be assisted by a Deputy Controller and such other
administrative staff, as may be necessary to enable the Controller to exercise his
functions and powers and to perform his duties under this Act

5. (/) The Controlter shall compile and maintain in his office a register of persons
to whom private investigators licences have been issued.

(2) Every such register shall indicate the following:—
(2) the full name, office/residential address and occupation of every licensee:
(6) the date on which licence was issued;
(2 the date on which the licence was renewed/is due for renewal:

(d) the registered office of the licensee and every other place of business speci-
fied in the licence;

(2) details including dates of any suspension or cancellation of licence; and
(0 any other matter as may be prescribed.

6. No person shall work as a private investigator unless he has been issued a licence
to that effect

7. (1) Any person who contravenes the provisions of section (6) shall be liable to
imprisonment for a term not exceeding three months or a fine of Tupees ten thousand or
with both.

(2) Any person convicted under this section shall be permanently disqualified from
applying for a licence during his lifetime.

8. Any person who wishes to obtain a licence shall apply to the Controller in writ-
ing in the form, as may be prescribed, alongwith the prescribed ligence fee ry be fixed by
the Central Government,

9. The Controller may refer any or all applications for licence to the respective local
Police authority for verification and objection, if any.

10. (1) Where the Controller is satisfied, in respect of an application for a licence,
that provisions of this Act have been complied with and that the applicant is qualified to
be a private investigator, he shall issue a licence in the form provided in the Schedule

5

20

25

35

40

7


(2) The Controller shall issue a receipt for the amount of licence fee collected for
issue of a licence.

11. Every licence, unless otherwise terminated earlier in accordance with this Act,
shall be valid for a period of one year from the date of issue and shall be renewed for a
futher term of cne year on an application submitted to the Controller fifteen days before
the expiry of the previous licence.
12. Every licensee shall produce his licence on demand to—
(a) the Controller/Deputy Controller;
(b) any member of the police; and

है __ (©) any person with whom he is dealing with in the course of transaction of
business to which the licence relates.

___ 13. Every licensee who changes his employment shall, within seven days, notify to
_ the Controller/Deputy Controller in writing to that effect and also the name and address
of his new employer/occupation,

14. Every licensee shall, at all times, exhibit at a conspicuous place in the place of
his business as specified in the licence, the following details:

(a) his full name;

(b) a copy of private investigator's licence;
(2). the name(s) of person(s) who are carrying on the business; and
(a) any other information relating to his business.

हे 15. On receipt of a complaint regarding the working of a licensee or on his own, the
Controller shall get the facts of such a complaint verified through the local police.

16. Where a complaint against a licensee has been found to be true on verification,
_ the Controller shall issue a notice to the licensee to explain the charge within seven days
of the receipt of the notice, and on being satisfied that the explanation given by the
licensee is not satisfactory, he shall suspend the licence for a period to be specified or
terminate his licence.

17. Any licence suspended or terminated shall be surrendered to the Controller/
४ Controller within twenty-four hours of such suspension or termination.

18. An appeal shall lie to the Central Government against the decision of the

19, Except on being authorised or required, a person who holds or has held a licence
der this Act shall not divulge to anyone, any information acquired by him in the course
of the business or employment ip respect of which the licence is or was held.

20, If any licensee while carrying on his business gets or has access to such infor-

ion which is prejudicial to the national interest or security or unity and integrity of the

uuntry or such information which is likely to create communal disharmony or civil dis-

ances or riots, he shall pass on immediately such information to the Controller/Deputy
ontroller,

21, Where on an application, the Controller/Deputy Controller is satisfied that the
older of a licence has lost his licence, the Controller/Deputy Controller, on payment of
prescribed fee, may issue a duplicate of the licence with entries to the effect.

22. In the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973,—

(din section 2, after clause (t), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—

"(tt) Private investigator” means any person who has been issued a licence to act as
‘a private investigator under the Private Investigators Act, 1998;"; and

(Change in Em-
ployment by the
licensee.

Display of
licence.

Surrender of
licence.

Appeal.

Information not
to be divulged.

Private investi-
‘gator to furnish
information
prejudicial to
national
interest, et

Loss of Licence.

Amendment of
Act No. 2 of
1974,


Private investi-
gator's powerto
investigate
‘congnizable
cases,
Examination

of witnesses

by private
investigator.

Statement to
private
Wvestigator not
tobe signed
and use of as,
statements in
evidence.

No inducement
tobe offered,

Report of
private
investigatoron
completion of
investigation,

4

(ii) after Chapter XII, the following Chapter and the heading thereunder shall be
inserted, namely:—

“Cuarter XIA.
POWERS OF PRIVATE INVESTIGATORS TO. INVESTIGATE CRIME

176A. Any private investigator when engaged to investigate any criminal case may,
without the order of a Magistrate, investigate a cognizable case.

176B. (7) Any private investigator may, on the basis of information furnished to
him by his client or otherwise, investigate or cause to be investigated any crime and for
this purpose he may orally examine any person supposed to be acquainted with the facts
and circumstances of the case.

(2) If any person makes any statement to a private investigator or gives any infor-
mation during investigation of a case, the private investigator may reduce into writing
Such statement or information made to him and if he does so, he shall make a separate
and true record of the statement or information of each such person,

1760. (1) No statement made by any person to a private investigator in the course
of an investigation under this Chapter shall, if reduced to writing, be signed by the person
making it; nor shall any such statement or record or information thereof or any part of
Such statement or information or record, be used for any purpose, save as hereinafter
Provided, at any inquiry or trial in respect of any offence under investigation at the time
when such statement or information was given:

Provided that when any witness whose statement has been reduced into writing as
aforesaid, is called to depose in such inquriy or trial any part of his statement. if duly
Proved, may be used by the accused and with the permission of the Court, by the prosecu-
tion, to contradict such witness in the manner provided by section 145 of the Indian
Evidence Act, 1872; and when any part of such statement is so used, any-part thereof may
also be used in the re-examination of such witness, but for the purpose only for explain-
ing any matter referred to in his cross-examination,

(2) Nothing in this section shail be deemed to apply to any statement falling within
the provisions of clause (1) of section 32 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, or to affect the
Provisions of section 27 of that Act.

Explaination—An omission to state a fact or circumstance in the statement relerred
10 in sub-section (1) may amount to contradiction if the same appears to be significant
and otherwise relevant having regard to the context in which such omission occurs and
whether any omission amounts to a contradiction in the particular context shall be a
question of fa

176D. (/) No private investigator shall offer or make or cause to be offered or made,
any such inducement or threat or Promise as is mentioned in section 24 of the Indian
Evidence Act, 1872.

(2) No private investigator shall Prevent, by any action or otherwise, any person
from making in the course of any investigation under this Chapter, any statement which
he may like to dispose on his own free will,

1768. Every private investor as soon ay an investigation is completed, shall for-
ward 0 the Magistrate empowered to take cognizance of the offence, a report stating

(a) the names of the parties:
(0) the nature of information;

(c) the names of persons who appear to be acquainted with the circumstances
of the case; and

10

15

20

25

30

40

45

1५

10


(d) any such information which in the opinion of the private investigator is
ired or will be useful in connection with the case.

68. (1) Every private investigator after submitting a report to the Magistrate
forward to the magistrate alongwith the report—

(a) all documents or relevant extracts thereof on which the private inves-
ator proposes to rely; and

(b) the statements recorded under section 176B of all the persons whom the
te investigator proposes to examine or cause to be examined as his witnesses.

private investigator may furnish to the concerned parties of the case, copies
any of the documents referred to in sub-section (1)."

23. The Central Government may, by notification in the official Gazette, make

or carrying out the purposes of this Act.
है

Power to make
rules.



‘THE SCHEDULE
(See section 10)
PRIVATE INVESTIGATOR'S LICENCE
= (Full Name) is authorised (here affix photograph of the
Licensee) by this licence to carry on the business of a Private Investigator either on his

wn account or in partnership with any other person who is holder of a private investiga-
tor's licence, from the following places of business, namely:—

(a) ane oe ae
() ooo ee Pod
(© Pod He cor
until the.

uw (address of registered office)
Dated...

Sd/-
Controller of Private Investigators


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

In our country, crime has been on the increase from day to day. We have not been
to prevent or to check the rise in crime. Many of the crimes go unnoticed and
persons who are victims of such crimes are put to great hardships. Many crimi-
‘are not solved at all and because of this the persons affected do not get any relief
ensation.

Because of the numerous crimes and a perennial shortage of police officials, the

go scot free. Moreover, many of the cases are not at all registered by police and

use of inefficient and corrupt practices, no case is filed against accused persons and
ms are instead harassed by them.

In the recent years, the concept of private investigators has gained momentum.
a days, individuals, companies, business organisations take the services of private
‘igators for solving their problems. In the existing circumstances, it is high ti
private investigators be allowed to practice and be encouraged to carry on the busi-
ss smoothly although with certain restrictions on their practice.

‘The number of cases of cognizable crimes have been increasing every year. Statis-
prove that in 1953, 9802 murder cases were reported. In 1992, 40105 cases of murder
reported. Even in cases of rape, kidnapping, abduction, dacoity, robbery, etc., the
in the percentage has been manifold since 1953 and out of them only a few cases
been solved and accused have been punished. With the existing police force, the
288९ in crime cannot be checked. The police force has to be supplemented with the
of private investigators. Although, the services of private investigators may prove
to the poor, yet in certain cases, the community can come forward and collectively

Ip those poor persons and take up their cases effectively.

With this in view, it is proposed to legalise the services of private investigators
certain restrictions. In order to arrest the increase in rates of crime, it is proposed to
power the private investigators with the powers of police in the matters of inve:

॥ ofcrimes and trial before Courts.

The Bill seeks to achieve the above objective.

New Deut; AMAR PAL SINGH
uch 23, 1998.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 4 of the Bill provides for appointment of administrative staff to assist the
respective Controller of private investigators. The Bill would, therefore, involve expendi-
ture from the Consolidated Fund of India. An annual recurring expenditure of about
rupees fifty lakh is likely to be involved.

A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees ten lakh is also likely to be involved.


SARUM
!30्ञ1 JAMIMIAD 40 AGO HP MOM 10/जआार थे
|ORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

e 23 of the Bill empowers the Centrat Government to make rules to carry out
of the Bill, The rules will relate to matters of detail only and as such the
legislative power'ts ofa hétiial tharacte

EVOL ga

gaps आ॥ २२०१४ abo’) aid al ©

sha") सह vebow shane zolur yd Dadinvestq amuse “bodirozetq” (1)
baw FS nowaae 1917

Lolmiaqge moztxy (कफ साध
told stort ऊतिएप 5 tu ecort sei!

eased 60१"
iataw gaitae noztaq yn



ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE 0008 oF CRIMINAL PRoceDuRE, 1973
(Acr No. 2 of 1974)
ee le 1
2. In this Code, unless the context otherwise requires, —
ee a *

(1) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Code;

(४) “Public Prosecutor” means any person appointed under section 24, and includes
any person acting under the directions of a Public Prosecutor;

oe a ae