As INTRODUCED IN LOK SAHHA ON' 
Bill No. I~ of 1966 
THE DELHI LAND REFORMS (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 1966 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Delhi Land Reforms ,lct, 1954. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventeenth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Delhi Land Reforms (Amendment) Short 
Act, 1966. : I title. 
~ 
5 2. In section 3 of the Delhi Land Reforms Act, 1954 (hereinafter Amend-
referred to as the principal Act),- ment ot 
section 3. 
10 
(a) for clause (6), the following clause shall be, and shall 
be deemed always to have been, substituted, namely:-
'(6) "Deputy Commissioner" includes-
(i) a Collector; 
(ii) an Additional Collector; 

1.1 
• 
end-
nt of 
: ction 
Valida-
tion of 
action 
taken 
under 
sections 
llf.'1d 13. 
1 j 
2 
(iii) a Revenue Assistant empowered by the Chief 
Commissioner by notification in the Official Gazette to 
discharge all or any of the functions of a Deputy Com-
missioner under this ·Act; and 
(iv) an Assistant Collector of the first grade or S 
class empowered as aforesaidj'; 
(b) for clause (19A), the following clause shall be, and 
shall be deemed always to have been, substituted, namely:-
'(19A) "Revenue Assistant" includes any Assistant 
Collector of the first grade or class empowered by the Chief 10 
Commissioner to perform all or any of the functions of a 
Revenue Assistant under this Act;'. 
3. In section 13 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for 
clause (f), the following clause shall be, and shall be deemed always 
to have been, substituted, namely:- 15 
jc (f) a tenant of or over twelve years in Shahdara Circle 
and a non-occupancy tenant in any part of the Union territory 
of Delhi other than a non-occupancy tenant ref~rred to in 
clause (d) ;". 
4. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in the 20 
principal Act or in any other law for the time being in force or in 
any judgment, decree or order of any court,-
(a) all declarations (whether general or individuaJ) confer-
ring or purporting to confer Bhumidhari rights in favour of any 
person or class of persons under any of the clauses (a) to (c) 25 
of sub-section (1) of section 11, or in favour of any tenant or 
class of tenants under any of the clauses (a) to (h) of sub-sec-
tion (1) of section 13, of the principal Act, made before the 5th 
day of February, 1966, by the Deputy Commissioner or a 
Revenue Assistant (whether or not such Revenue Assi~tant was 30 
empowered by the Chief Commissioner to discharge all or "ny 
of the functions of a Deputy Commissioner), shall be deemed 
to be, and to have always been, made by such Deputy Com-
missioner or, as the case may be, Revenue Assistant in accordance 
with law and the persons or class of persons or the tenants or 3S 
class of tenants in whose favour any such declaration has been 
made shall be deemed to have been validly and lawfully declar-
ed as Bhumidhars: 
Provided that nothing herein contained ~hall affect the 40 
right of any person to call in question any such declaration on 

5 
3 
the ground only that the entries in the revenu~ records on the 
basis 'Of which such declaration has been. made are incorrect; 
(b) all suits, appeals and other proceedings relating to any 
such declaration pending before any court or other authority 
immediately before the 5th day of February, 1966, other than 
those based on the ground referred to in the proviso to clause 
(a), shall, on that date, be deemed to have abated. 
5. (1) The Delhi Land Reforms (Amendment) Ordinance, 1966, Repeal 
is hereby repealed. and saving. 
10 (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any aCtion 
taken under the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done 
or taken under this Act as if this Act had commenced on the 5th 
day of February, 1966. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Bhumidhari righ~s were conferred. under sections 11 and 13 of 
the Delhi Land Reforms Act, 1954, by general declarations issued 
by the Deputy Commissioner, Delhi, followed by specific declara-
tions in individual cases made by the Revenue Assistant. Recently, 
the Punjab High Court held these declarations to be void on the 
ground that· the Deputy Commissioner ought to have made the 
declarations in individual cases and that the Revenue Assist·ant who 
made the declarations did so without being empowered to discharge 
the functions of the Deputy Commissioner. The Court also held 
that the scope of clause (f) of section 13(1) ·of the Act did not extend 
to areas outside the Shahdara Circle and that Bhumidhari rights 
could not have been conferred on non-occupancy tenants outside 
the Shahdara Circle under that clause. Over 75,000 persons had 
been declared as Bhumidhars under sections 11 and ~3 and these 
included over 16,000 non-occupancy tenants outside the Shahdara 
Circle, declared as Bhumidhars under clause (1) of section 13 (1). 
The judgment had the effect of rendering nugatory the entire action 
taken under sections 11 and 13 of the Delhi Land Reforms Act, 1954 
and gave rise to considerable anxiety among the peasantry in Delhi. 
In order to protect the interests of persons who had been enjoying 
Bhumidhari rights under the Delhi Land Reforms Act, 1954, the 
Delhi Land Reforms (Amendment) Ordinance, 1966, was promul-
gated on 5th February, 1966. 
This Bill seeks to replace the Ordinance. 
. NEW DELHI; G. L. NANDA . 
The 9th February, 1966. 
4 

ANNEXURE r 
EXTRACTS FROM THE DELHI LAND REFORMS ACT, 19'4 
... • • • • • 
3. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
• • • • • • 
(6) "Deputy Commissioner" includes Collector and a 
Revenue Assistant or an Assistant Collector of the first class 
empowered by the Chief Commissioner by a notification in the 
official Gazette to discharge all or any of the functions of a 
Deputy Commissioner under this Act; 
... ... ... • ... 
(19A) "Revenue Assistant" means an Assistant Collector of 
the first grade or class and includes any officer· empowered by 
the Chief Commissioner to perform all or any of the functions 
of a Revenue Assistant under this Act; 
• • • • • ... 
Defini-
tions . 
13. (1) On the commencement of this Act, the Deputy Commis- Bhumi. 
sioner shall also declaxe the following classes of tenants as dhari 
Bhumidhars, who shall, with effect from the same date, have all rights m 
the rights and be subject to all the liabilities conferred or imposed other . cases upon Bhumldhars under this Act, namely:- . 
... ... ... ... • ... 
(f) a non-occupancy tenant, including a tenant of or over 
twelve years in Shahdara Circle; 
• ... ... • • '" 
5 

L.OK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
funher to "amend the Delhi Land Reforms Act, 1954. 
(S hri Gulzarilal N antia, 
Minister of Home Affairs.) 