. 8W No. U of 1,,1 
THE SALT CESS (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 1961 
• 
lAs INTRODtJCBD IN l.OIC SABHA 
ON 16TH MARCH, I¢I) 

Bill No. IZ of 1"1 
THE SALT CESS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 19€)1 
(As INTRODUCED IN LoK SADA) 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Salt Cess Act, 1953. 
BB it enacted by Parliament in the Twelfth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Salt Cess (Amendment) Act, 1961. Shon tide. 
49 of 1953. 2. In section 2 of the Salt Cess Act, 1953 (hereinafter referred to Amendment 
S as the principal Act) ,-. I of lection 2. 
(i) in clause (c), the words "and a 'private salt factory' is 
one not solely owned or not solely worked by the Central Gov-
ernment;" shall be omitted; 
(ii) clause (d) shall be omitted . • 
10 3. For section 3 of the principal Act, the following section shall Substitution 
be substituted, namely:- :::: for 
IS 
section 3. 
"3. There shall be levied and collected in such manner as Levy and 
may be prescribed, a cess in the nature of an excise duty at <fCction 
the rate of fourteen naye paise per forty kilograms on all salt ~t:="' on 
manufactured in India in any salt factory, whether owned by 
Government or nol". ! 
" In section 6 of the principal Act, after sub-section (2), the Amendment 
following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:- of HCtion 6. 
• 
u (3) Every rule made by the Central Govermnent under 
this aection shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made 

t 
before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a 
total period. of thirty days which may be comprised in one 
session or in two successive sessions. and if before the expiry of 
the session in which it is so laid or the session immediately 
following both Houses agree in making any modification in the S 
rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, 
the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form 
or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any 
such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to 
the validity. of anything previously done under that rule.". 10 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Section 3 ef the Salt Cess/Act,1953, lays down that Cess shall be 
levied OIl salt at two annas per standard maund if manUfactured in 
a private salt factory and at three and a half annas'per standard 
maund if manufactured in a ,salt factory solely owned or solely 
worked by the Central Government. With the transfer Of mast of 
the Government salt works to the company form of management, 
the Government salt works find, it dUileult ,to compete on equal 
terms with private manufacturers of salt, who are in an advanta-
geous ,position in' that tlley pay 'eess at 'less '1I8tes. In· order, there-
'fore, to provide "for levy Gf cess at ' a uniform. 'rate . OIl both private 
and Government produetion it is proposed -toamead Metion 3 of 
the Act. ''!'his opportunity is also proposed to,be lltilUed -.for laying 
down by legislation 'the'rate of ' cess in ~termsof,M.tric,aeasures. 
NEW DELHI; 'MANUBHAI SHAH. 
,.The 25th Feb1:u.ary, '1961,' 
• 
• 
3 

I of I 944-
ANNEXURE 
ExTRACTS FROM THE SALT CESS ACT, 1953 (49 01' 1953) 
• • • 
Z. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requ.ires,-
• • • • 
(c) 'salt factory' includes-
(i) a place used or intended to be used in the manu-
facture of salt and all embankments, reservoirs, condensing 
and evaporating pans, buildings, and waste places situated 
within the limits of such place, as defined from time to time 
for the purposes of the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944: 
(ii) all drying grounds and storage platforms and store-
houses appertaining to any such place; 
(iii) land on which salt is spontaneously produced; and 
a 'private salt factory' is one not solely owned or not solely 
worked by the Central Government: 
(d) 'standard maund' means a maund of 822/7 pounds 
avoirdupois; 
• • • 
Ddlnitiona • 
3. There shall be levied and collected in such manner as may be Levy and 
prescribed a cess in the nature of an excise duty on all salt manu- ~ectiOD 
famured in India- .. ~ on 
(4) in the case of salt manufactured in a private salt fac-
tory, at the rate of two annas per standard maund; 
(b) in the case of salt manufactured in a salt factory solely 
owned or solely worked by the Central Government, at the rate 
of three and a half annas per standard maund. 
• • • 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Salt Cess Act, 1953· 
The President has, in pursuance of clause (I) of article 117 
of the Constitution of India, recommended to Lok Sabha the 
introduction of the Bill. 
M.N. KAUL, 
SeqeUJry. 
(8hri MtmubluJi SIuJIJ, 
Minister 0/ Industry.) 