AJS INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA ON 
1'1 APn 1917 
Bill NQ. U.' 1977 
THE CAL TEX rACQUISITION OF SHARES OF.CAL TEX 
OIL REFINING (INDIA) LIMITED :AND OF THE 
UNDERTAKINGS IN INDIA OF CAL TEX eINDIA) 
L {MITED] BILL, 1977 
A .~, 
BILL 
to provide, in the public i1lNrest, for the acquisition of . the shares of 
Coltez Oil Refining (India) Limited and for the acquisition and 
trafUJl/81' af the right, title aM intet'8.t of Cal tea: ~In4ia~ Limited in 
"elation to it. u7l.dertakings in IndiG. and thereby to securethtlt the 
ownership and control of the petroleum products produ.ced blJ the 
CtJltez Oil Refining (India) Limited, and marketed and distTibuted 
btl the aid .u.ndertaking.', in I1'UUa, a:re 80 distributed. as best to sub. 
serve the common .good. 
WHEREAS the Caltex Petroleum Corporation (a foreign COJllpany) 
has at present the ownership of, and control over, a significant portion 
of the petroleum products produced, marketed and distributed in India 
by reason of the fact that one of its subSidiaries, namely, the Caltex 
S Oil Refining (India) Limited (an Indian company), is carrymg on the 
business of refining crude oil and producing petroleum products in 
India and another of its subsidiaries, namely, the Caltex (India) Limited 
(a foreign company), is carrying on through its undertakings in India 
the bt.Jsiness of marketin~ ~nd distributing petroleum products; . . , 

Shorttit1e 
and corn_ 
menc'e_ 
meDt. 
Deftnf.-
tionI. 
2 
AND WHEREAS it is expedient in the public interest that the shares 
of the said Caltex Oil Refining (India) Limited and the undertakings 
in India of the said Caltex (India) Limited should be acquired: 
ANn WHEREAS such acquisition is for giving effect to the policy ot 
the State towards securing the principle specified in clause (b) ot S 
article S9 at the Constitution as the o~p ann control of the 
material resources of the community, to wit the petroleum products 
produced by the said Caltex Oil Refining (India) Limited and marketed 
and distributed by the undertakings of the said Caltex (India) Limited, 
in India, would by reason of such acquisition become vested in the 10 
State and tHereby so distributed as best to subserve the common good. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-eighth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
CHAPTER I 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Caltex [Acquisition of Shares of 
Caltex Oil Refining (India) Limited and of the Undertakings in India 
of Caltex (India) Limited] Act, 1977. 
(2) It ,shall be deemed to have come into force on the 30th day of 
IS 
DeeeaDer, Iml. 20 
.. In: this Act, unless the context otherwise requfres,-
(a) "appointed day" means the 30th day of December, U)76; 
(b) "Caltex (India)" means the Caltex (India) Limited, a 
foreign company within the meaning of section 591 of the Companies 
Act, 1956, incorporated in Bahamas Islands and having its registered 2S 1 of 1968. 
oftlce in the City of Nassau in the Island of New Providence: 
(e) "Caltex on Refining" means the Caltex on Refining (India) 
Limited, being a company as defined in the Companies Act, 1956, and 1 of 1968. 
havfng its registered office at Shoorji Vallabhdass Marg, Bombay; 
(d) "Caltex Petroleum" means the Caltex Petroleum Corporation, 30 
a company incorporated in the State of Delaware in the United States 
of America and having its prinCipal business office at 380, Madison 
Avenue, New York, United States of America; 
(e) "Government company" means a company as deflned in 
section 617 of the Companies Act, 1956; 35 1 of 1958. 
(J) "notification" means a notification pUblished in the Oftlcial 
Gazette; 
(g) "prescribed" means rY'r:'E'(;ribed by rules made under this Act. 

10f 1966. 
3 
CHAPTER n 
ACQUISJ'li'ON OF THE SHARES or CALTEx On RErnmfa 
3. (1) On the appointed day. all the shares in the capital of Caltex Oil 
Refining shall, by virtue of this Act, stand transferred to, and vested in, 
5 the Central Government. 
Transfer 
andV8lt-
ingln the 
Central 
Govern. 
ment (2) All the shares which have vested in the Central Government 
under sub-section (1) shall, by force of such vesting, be freed and dis-
Charged of all trusts, liabilities, obligations, mortgages, charges, liens 
and other encumbrances affeCting them. 
10 '(3) Any dividend payable by Caltex Oil Refining in respect of any 
period beginning from the 1st day of JanWU'Y, 1976, shall be payable to 
the Central Government . 
... (1) For the purpose of enabling Caltex Oil Refining to function as 
a Government company, the Central Government may, by notification, 
I S make such amendments in. the memorandum and articles of association 
of that company and such otherprovision& as it may consider necessary. 
(2) Any amendments in the memorandum and articles of association 
of Caltex Oil Refining and any other provisions made under sub-section 
'(1), shall have effect notwithstanding anything contained in the Com-
20 panfes Act, 1956. 
CHAPTER In 
AcQUISITION OF THE UNllf:RTJdWUJS OF CALTEX (bDlA) IB INDIA 
5. On the appointed day, the right, title and interest of Caltex 
(India) in relation to its undertakings in India shall, by virtue of this 
25 Act, stand transferred to, and vested in, the Central Government. 
of mares 
of 
Caltex 
011 
BeftnJn,. 
Manlle_ 
mental 
Caltex 
Oll 
Refining. 
Tranafer 
and 
Vesting in 
the 
Central 
Govern. 
ment of 
the 
under. 
takJn,. 
of 
Caltex 
(Inctia) 
in India. 
' •. (1) The·undertakings of Caltex (India) referred to in section 5 shall 
be deemed to include all assets, rights, powers, authorities and privileges 
and all property, movable and immovable, cash balances, reserve funds, 
book debts, investments and all other rights and interests in, or arising 
General 
eftect· of 
rveJting. 
30 out of, such property: as were, immediately before the appointed day, in 
the ownership, posSession,power or control of CaIto: (India), in relation 
to itsunderiakings in India; and all books of account, registers, records 
ahd all othler doCuments of whatever nature relating thereto and Ihall 
Bl!o be deemed to include allbol'rowings, Uabilities (including the liability 
3S fbr the paym~t of any pel'lIion and other pensionary beneftts !o ~e per-
sons employed In relation to Us undertakings in India) and obligahons of 
whateVer kind then subsisting of Caltex (India) in relation to its under-
takings in India~ 
Provid.eq. that re~ttances outside India of any money for the payment 
4'0,qf·.pen8iqn qr other pensionary benefits shall be subject to the rules and 
nguiations f!>r t.b.e time being in force in relation to such remittances. 

Special 
provilioD8 
8. to 
certa1D 
rigbtl 
and 
intereata 
held by 
Caltu 
(Inella) 
befon 
the ap.. 
pomMel 
day. 
(2) The profits earned by Caltb:' (India) in relation to its undertakings 
in India from the lst day of January. 1976 shall be payable to the Central 
Government. 
(3) Unless otherwise expressly provided by this Act, all deeds, 
bonds, agreements, powers of attorney, grants of legal representation and S 
other instruments of whatever nature in relation to the undertakings of 
Caltex (India) in India subsisting or having effect immediately before the 
appointed day, and to which Caltex (India) is a party or which ate ill 
favour of Caltex (India) shall be of as full force and effect against or 
in favour of the Centrill GoverllMent and may be enforced or acted as 10 
lully and effectually as' if in: the' place of Caltex (India), the Central 
Government had been a party thereto or as if they had' been issued in 
favour of the Central Government. 
( .. ) If on the appointed day, any suit, appeal or other proceediDg of 
whatever nature in relation to the undertakings of Caltex (India) in India. 15 
which have been transferred to, and vested in, the Central Government 
under section 5, is pending by or against Caltex (India), the same sh8l1 
DDt abate, be discontinued or be, in any way, pz-ejudicially affected by 
reason of the transfer of the undertakings of Caltex (India) in India or 
of anything, contained in this Att but the suit, appeal or other pro- 20 
ceedmg may be continued, prosecuted and enforced by or agAinst the 
Cehtral Government. 
'I. (1) Every right or interest in respect of any property in India (in~ 
cluding a right under any lease or under any right of tenancy or any 
right under any arrangement to secure any premises for any purpose), 25 
which Caltex (India) held immediately before the appointed day, shall, 
notwithstanding anything contained in any other law or in any agr~ 
ment or instrument relating to such right or interest, vest in, and be held 
by, the Central Government on and after the appointed day on the same 
terms and conditions on which Caltex (India) would have held it, if no 30 
negotiations had taken place for the acquisition by the Central Govern~ 
triefttof the undertakings of Cattex (India) in India or, as the Cite may 
be, if this Att had nat been paued. 
(2)' If at anytime a~r the' 2nd: day of February, 1974 (being the dale 
on Which the Central Go'Vemment~s policy for acquiring undertakinSS 3S 
engaged in the production, marketing or distribution of petroleum pro-
duets was made known) and' before the commencement of this Act, Cal-
teX (India) surrendel'ed ot 0Ule0rwise relinquished any right or interest 
in respect of any property in India (including a right uDder any lease 
or under any right of tenancy or a right under any arrangement to secure ¥J 
any premises for any purpose), then~ for the purposes of this Act, not-
withstanding anything con.tained in any other law or in any agreement 
or instrument relating to such right or interest, the Central Govern-
merit shall, on and after the appointed day, be entitled. to sueh'rlpt or 
interest on the same terms and conditions on 'Which Caltex (india) wbuld 45 
have been eil'tiUedto such tight or tntereit if it had trot lftIrreildere4 or 

5 
otherwise relinquished such right or interest and this Act had not been 
passed: 
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall apply to any right or 
interest surrendered or otherwise relinquished by Caltex (India) before 
S the commencement of this Act for sufficient monetary consideration. 
(3) On the expiry of the term of any lease, tenancy or arrangement 
referred to in sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), such lease or tenancy 
or arrangement shall, if so desired by the Central Government, be renewed 
or continued, so far as may be, on the same terms and conditions on 
10 which the lease or tenancy or arrangement was originally granted or 
entered into. 
8. (1) For the remOval of doubts, it is hereby declared that the pro-
visions of sections 5, 6 and 7 shall apply to the extent to which any pro-
petty appertains to the business carried on by Caltex (India) in Inrlia: 
1$ and to the rights and powers acqu!red, and to debts, liabilities and 
obligations incurred, and to contracts, agreements and other instruments 
made, by Caltex (India) in India, and to legal proceedings relating to 
those matters pending in any court or tribunal in India. 
(2) If any question arises as to whether any property appertained, 
20 immediately before the appointed day, to any business of Caltex (India) 
in India, or whether any rights, powers, debts, liabilities or obligations 
were acquired or incurred or any contract, agreement or other instru~ 
ment was made by Caltex (India) for the purposes of its business in 
India, or whether any documents. relate to those purposes, or whether 
25 the provisions of section 7 apply in relation to any property, the question 
shall be referred to the Central Government which shall, after giving 
an opportunity of being heard to the persons interested in the matter, 
decide it in such manner as it may think fit. 
9. J1) Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 5, 6 and 7, 
30 the Central Government may, if it is satisfied that a Government 
eompany is Willing to comply, or has complied, with such terms and can-
ditiaDs as that Government may think fit to impose, direct by notifica-
tion,· that the right, title and interest and the liabilities of Caltex (India) 
in relation to any of its undertakings in India shall, instead of continuing 
35 to Vest in the Central Government, vest in the Government company 
either on the date of the notification or on such earlier or later date 
(not being a date earlier than the appointed day) as may be specified in 
the notification. 
(2) When the right, title and interest and the liabilities of Caltex 
40 (India) in relation to its undertakings in India vest in a Government 
company under sub-section (1), all the rights and liabilities of the Cen-
tral Government in relation to such undertakings shall, on and from the 
date of such vesting, be deemed to have become the rights and liabilities, 
respectively, of the Government company. 
~ (3) The provisions of sections 5, 6 and 7 shall, so far as may be, 
apply in relation to such Government company as they apJ>ly in relation 
to the Central Government and for this purpose references therein to 
the "Central Government" shall be construed as references to such 
Government company. 
Removal 
of 
dou.bts. 
Power of 
Central 
Govern-
ment to 
direct 
vestinc 
of the 
under-
takings of 
Calto: 
(India) 
ina 
Govem_ 
ment 
company. 

Payment 
of 
amount 
to Caltex 
Petroleum 
and 
Caltex 
(India). 
Transfer 
of service 
ot exist-
ing em-
ployees of 
Calt:ex 
(fndla), 
ete. 
6 
CHAPTER IV 
PAYMENT OF AMOUNT 
10. (1) For the transfer to, and vestiDg in, the Central Government 
under section 3 .;f the shazes of Caltex Oil Refining and for the transfer 
to, and vesting in, the Central Government under sectioD 5 of the r~ht, 5 
title and interest of Caltes (India) in relation to its undertakings in India, 
there shall be paid by the Central Government an aggregate amount of 
rupees thirteen croresto Caltex Petroleum and Caltes (India) in the 
proportions agreed to by them. 
(2) The amount specified in sub-section (1) shall carry interest free 10 
of income-tax a't the rate of eight per cent per 'annum from the lst day 
of January, 1977, till the date of payment in the manner specified in the 
Sdledule. 
(3) The aDlO(Wlts payable under sub-sections (1) and (2) shall be pay-
able in instalments in accordance with the provisions of the Schedule. 
(4) In addition to the amounts mentioned in sub-sections (1) and (2), 
the Central Government shall pay to Caltex: Petroleum or Caltex (India), 
IS 
as the case may be, such amolUlt in Indian currency as may be req .... 
by the said companjes to pay towards all taxes in India on the amounts 
payable under the said sub-sections and all other taxes in India the 20 
liability for the payment of which arises directly on the transfer to, and 
vestiDg 'in, the Central Government of the shares Of Caltex Oil Refining 
and of the widertakimlgs of Caltex (India) in India. 
CHAPTER V 
PROVISIONS RELATING TO EMPLOYEES 2S 
11. (1) Every whole-time officer or other employee of Caltex (India) 
who was, immediately before the appointed day, employed by Caltex 
(India) in connection with its undertakings in India, and every whole-
time officer or other employee of Caltex (India) who was, immediately 
before the appointed day, temporarily holding any assignment outside 30 
India shall, on the appointed day, become an officer or other employee, 
as the case may be, of the Central Government or the Government com-
pany (hereinafter referred to as the successor Government company) in 
which the right, title and interest of Caltex (India) in relation to its 
undertakings in India have vested under this Act and shall hold office 35 
or service under the Central Government or the successor Government 
company, as the case may be, on the same terms and conditions and 
with the same rights to pension, gratuity and other matters as would 
have been admissible to him if there had been no such vesting and shall 
continue to do so unless and until his employment under the Central 40 
Government or the successor Government company is duly terminated 
or until his remuneration and conditions of service are duly altered by 
the Central Government or the successor Government company. 
(2) Subject to rules made in this behalf under section 23, every whole-
time officer or other employee of Caltex Oil Refining who was, imme- 45 
diately before the appointed day, employed by Caltex Oil Refining in 
India, and every whole-time officer or other employee of Caltex Oil Refin-
ing who was, immediately before the appointed. day, temporarily holding 
any assignment outside I,ndia shall, on and from that day, continue to be 

140f 1947. 
39011972. 
7 
In officer or other employee of Cal tex Oil Refining on the same terms 
and conditions and with the same rights to pension, gratuity and other 
matters as are admissible to him immediately before that day and shall 
continue to hold such oftice unless and until his employment under the 
$ Caltex Oil Refining is duly terminated or until his remuneration and 
conditions of service are duly altered by that company. 
(3) If any question arises as to whether any person was a whole-time 
officer or other employee of Caltex (India), or as to whether any officer 
or other employee was employed wholly or mainly in connection with the 
10 undertakings of Caltex (India) in India immediately before the appointed 
day, or whether any whole-time officer or other employee of Calt~ 
(India) was temporarily hOl1.ding any assignment outside India, the ques-
tion shall be referred, within a period of two years from the appointed 
day, to the Central Government which shall, after giving an opportunity 
15 of being hleard tc the person concerned in the matter, decide i11 in such 
manner as it thinks fit and such decision shall be final. 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial DisFutes 
Acf, 1947, the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972, or in any other law for the 
time being in force, the transfer of the services of any officer or other 
20 employee under sub-section (1) shall not entitle any such officer or other 
employee to any ~ompensation or gratuity under those Acts or such other 
law, and no such claim shall be entertained by any court, tribunal or 
other authority. 
12. (1) Where a provident, superannuation, welfare or other fund 
25 has been established by Caltex (India) for the benefit of the persons 
employed by it in connection with its undertakings in India, the moneys 
relata-ble to the employees-
(i) whose services are transferred by or under this Act to tlie 
Cent'ral Government or the successor Government company, or 
(ii) who are in receipt of pension or other pensionary benefits 
immediately before the appointed day, 
shall, out of the moneys standing, on that day, to the credit of such provi-
dent, superannuation, welfare or other fund stand transferred to, and 
vested in, the Central Government or the successor Government com-
35 pany, as the case may be, free from any trust that may have been consti-
tuted by Caltex (India) in respect thereof. 
(2) The mooeys which stand transferred, under sub-section (1), to 
the Central Government or the successor Government company shall be 
dealt with by the Central Government or that company, as the case may 
40 be, in such manner as may be prescribed. 
(3) The successor Government company shall, as soon as may be 
after the undertakings of Caltex (India) in India become vested in it, 
constitute, in respect of the moneys and other assets which are transfer-
red to, and vested in, it under thls section, one or more trusts having 
45 objects as similar to the objects of the existing trusts, as in the circum-
stances may be practicable, so, however, that the rights and interests ot 
the beneficiaries of the trust referred to in sub-section (1) are not, in any 
way, prejudiced or diminished. . 
(4) Where all the moneys and other assets belonging to an existing 
trust are transferred to, and vested in, the Central Government or the So 
Provi-
dent, 
superan-
nuation, 
welfare 
fund, etc. 

Effect of 
Act 
on other 
laWi. 
Duty to 
deliver 
pos&easion 
of proper-
ti'eI. etc. 
Contracts 
to cOn-
tinue 11).1-
less tenni-
natedby 
Central 
Govem-
ment 
8 
successor ,Government company under this section, the trustees of ,such 
trust shau, as from the date of such vesting, stand discharged f-rom the 
trust exeept as respects things done ,or omitted to be donebefo~etbe:'Cl.-te 
of such vesting. 
CHAPTER VI 
MISCELLANEOUS 
,13. The provi:-ions of this Act shall have effect notwithstariding 
~nything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time 
being in force or in any instrument having effect by virtue of any law 
o,ther than this Act or in any decree or order of any court, tribunal or 10 
other authority. 
14. (1) Where any property, apperhining to any undertaking of Cal-
tex (India) in India has been transferred to, and vested in, the Central 
Government or the successor Government company under this Act,-
(,,)every person in whose possession, custody or control any IS 
such property may be, shall, on a demand by the Central Government 
or the successor Government company, as the case may be, deliver 
the property to the Central Government or the successor Govern-
ment company, as the case may be, forthwith; 
(b) any person who, immediately befor.e such vesting, bas, in his 20 
possesSion, custody or control, any books, documents or other papers 
relating to the undertakings of Caltex(I~dia) in India, shall be liable 
to account for the said books, documents and papers to the Central 
Government or the successor Government company, as the case may 
be, and shall deliver them up to the Central Government or that com- 2, 
pany or to such person ?s the Central Government or that company 
may authorise in this behalf. 
(2) Without prejudice to tht> other provisions cont~l.ne:l b this section, 
it shall be lawful for the Central Government or the successor Govern-
ment company to take all necessary steps for taking possession of all pro- 30 
perties, which have been transferred to, and ve9ted in, it under this Act. 
15. (1) Every contract entered into by Caltex (India) for any service, 
sale or supply in India. and in force immediately before the appointed day. 
shqJl, unless ~erminated under sub-section (2), within a period of two 
years from the appointed day, continue to be of full force and effect 3S 
against or, in favour of the Central Goverl'lment or, as the case may be, 
the successor Government company. 
(2) The Central Government may, if it is s;t~sfied that any c:ontract 
referred to in sub-section (1) is unduly' onerous or has been enteredtnto 
in bad faith or is detrlmtc"ntal to the interests of that Governm,ent or the 40 
succeo;sor Government company, as the case may be, by order in writing, 
either terminate such contract or make such alterations or modifications 
'fherein as it may think fit: 
Provided that the Central Government shall ,not terminate any con-
tract or make any alteration or modification therein except ,fter giving 45 
to the parties to the contract, a n~aSQ!la"l~ opvortqnlty of being heard a'nd 

acept after .record1D'g in wrttJng, ita reastm8 for 8Ueh termination, altera .. 
Uon . or modi1lcatlon, as the ease may be. 
18. Nothing ill this Act shall be construed to enl.'ltle cal_ on Beftt1ng 
or the Central Government or the successor Government company to US&-
$ (0) any designs, trade marks, trade names (including the name 
'Caltex or any part thereof), styles of labelling, belongillg to Caltex 
Petroleum or Caltex (India), after the expiry of a period of twelve 
months from the appointed day; and 
(b) any station decor (including distinctive colour schemes) 
10 belonging to Caltex Petroleum or Caltex (India), after the expiry of 
a period of twenty-four months from the appointed day. 
17. AsJ.y person who,-
(0) having in his possession, custody or control any property 
forming part of any undertaking of Caltex (India) in India ~4g-
IS fully withholds such property from the Central Govel'lllDent or the 
successor Government company, or 
20 
(b) wrongfully obtains possession of, or retains, any property 
fonning part of any underlaIdng of Caltex (India). in India; or 
(c) wilfully withholds or fails to furnish to the Central Govern-
ment or the successor Government company or any pelllOD specified 
by the Central Government or that company, any books, documents 
or other papers relating to any undertaking of Caltex (India) in India 
which may be in his possession, custody or control; or 
(d) falls to deliver to the Central Government or the successor 
Government company, any assets, books of account, registers or other 
documents in his possession, custody or ·control relat1ng to any under-. 
taking of Caltex (India) in India; or • (e) wrongfully removes or destrbys any property forming part 
of any undertaking of Caltex (India), in India; or 
(I) wrongfully uses any property forming part of any under-
~g~Caltex (India)inIndi~ 
shall be pun1sbable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
two years. or with tlne which may f'xtend to ten thousand rupees, or with 
both. . 
3S 18. (1) Where an C!ffence under this Act has been committed by 
a company, every person who, at the t1me the offence was committed wu 
in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for. the conduct of the 
business of the company. as well as the company. shall be deemed to be 
guilty of the offence and shall be: liable to be pl"t)r.cetied again!t and 
40 punished accordingly: 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any 
such person liable to any punishment, If he proves that the~ offence was 
committed without his knowledge or that he had exerc:lIed an due diU-
gence to prevent the commission of such offence. 
.. , (2) Not'W1thsta.ncUng anything contained in sub-section (1), where any 
offence under this Act has been committed by a company and It" 
proved. that the offence bas been committed with ~he COJl8ent or CODftiVUlC!e 
u.ot deetan. 
trade 
marks, 
etc., 
beJonetDg 
to Calta: 
Petroleum 
orCaltex 
CIDdIa). 

Prot..-
of action 
taken in 
good 
faith. 
Cogni.za$:e 
of offen-
ces. 
Indemnity. 
PofI/II/t' 
toremove 
difBcul-
ties. 
Power 
to make 
rules. 
Repeal 
aDd 
savini-
.... ".---..... 
ot, or is attributable to any neglect.on. the part of, aD)' ctirec:tor, ma11"p, 
secretary or othei-officer of the company, such director, mlDager. ~taq 
or other officer shall be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be 
liable· to be proQeede4 apin8t and puniIheG acx:ordiDIlY. 
E~lG.714tion.-Fbr the purposes of this section-
(4) "company" means any body corporate and includes a firm 01' 
other association of individuals; and 
') . 
(b) "director", in relation to a finn, means a partner in: tbe Ann. 
I 
5 
11. No sult, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the I 
Central Government or the successor Government company or any of ita 10 
officers or other employees for anything which is in good faith done or 
intended to .be done under this Act. 
,ao. .Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal ~ 
cedure, 1~'l3, no court shall take cognizance of any ojfence against this 2 of 117"-
Ad except on a complaint, in writing, made by the Central Govem- IS 
ment or any officer authorised in this behalf by that Governmeo.t. 
%1. Everyoftlcer of the Central Government and every officer or other 
employee of the successor Government company shall be indemnified by 
the CeDtral Government or the successor Government company, as the 
cue may be, against all losses and P.XpeD.se8 incurred by him in, or in ao 
relation to; the discharge of his duties under this Act except such as have 
been " .. used by'his own wilful act or default. 
22. If any difficulty arises in giving e.fl'ect to the proviaions of this 
Act, the Central Government may, by order, not inconsistent With the 
provisions of this Act, remove the dUJlculty: 25 
Provided that no such order shall be made aftef the expiry of a period 
of two years from the appointed d8y. 
23. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules to 
carry out the provisions of this Act. 
~) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act 0 
shtll be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of 3 
pa~J.iament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session 01' in two or more successive sessions, anc\ 
if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the sess10n or 
the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any. modi- .35 
fication in the rule Or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, 
the rule shall thereafter have effect only. in such modified form or be of 
no effect, as the case maY'be; so, however, that any such modiftcat1on or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of 8JlY,th1ng previ-
ously done under that rule. ., 
26. (l) The Caltex [Acquisition. of Shares of Caltex 011 B.e1lning 
(India) Limited and of the Undertakings in India of Caltex (India) Limi-
ted] Ordinance, 1976, is hereby repealed. 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken 
under the Ordinance so repealed shall be deemed· to have been.done ar4S 
taken under the corresponding proviSion of this Act. 
Ont. 
1101 1878. 

THE SCHEDULE 
[See section 10] 
1. The amount specified in sub-section (1) of section 10 shall be deemed 
to correspond to fCJlU:l'teeft m~on, five hundred· and sixty thousand doBul 
S (hereafter in this &bedule referred to _ the principal amount); . 
10 
IS 
2. The amount reCerred to in the fOl"egoiug paragraph and the interest 
due thereon shall be paid in instabnents in accordance with theprovi,. 
dons of the Table below, namely:-
Table· 
Instalm.ents in dotlilrt 
Date of Principal Interest Total 
Payment amount 
(i) 31-3- 1977 10,080,000 10,080,000 
(ii) 31-3- 1978 1,120,000 642,419 1,762,419 
(iii) 31-3-1979 1,120,000 268,800 1,388,800 
(iv) 31-3- 1980 1,120,000 179,200 IJ299,~ 
(v) 31-3-1981 1,120,000 89,600 1,209,600 
Exp ...... tion.-In this Schedule "'dollar" means the unit of currency in 
the United States of America. I 
, 
II 

The Caltex Petroleum Corporation (a foreign company) had the 
ewnership of, and control over, a significant portion of the petroleum 
products marketed and distributed in India. One of its subsidiaries, 
namely, the Caltex Oil Refining (India) Limited (an Indian company) was 
carrying on the business of refining crude oil and producing petroleum 
products in India and another of its subsidiaries, namely, the CaU~x 
(India) Limited (a foreign company) was carrying on through its under-
takings in IInd!a the business of marketing and distributing petroleum 
products. 
2. In implementation of the policy for progressively securing that the 
ownership and control of the products of the nation's petroleum resour-
ce. are vested in ·the State and thereby so distributed as best to subserve 
the common good, Government entered into negotiations with Caltex for 
acquiring hundred per cent. of the shares of Caltex Oil Refining (India) 
Limited free of encumbrances and the undertakings in India of Cal~ 
(India) Limited. These negotiations were completed .in November, 1976 
ad it was agreed that the acquisition of the aforementioned shares and 
undertakings should be completed before the end of that year. As Par-
liament was not in session and was likely to meet only in February, 
19'i"l" the Caltex [Acquisition of Shares of Caltex Oil Refining (India) 
LiInl~ and of the Undertakings in India of Caltex (India) Limited] 
Ordinance, 1976, was promulgated by the President on the 30th Decem-
ber, 1976. The Ordinance, biter alia. provided for the follOwing matters, 
namely:-
(t) acquisition of all the shares of Caltex Oil Reftntng (India) 
Limited and of the undertakings in India of Caltex (India) 
Limited; 
(it) empowering the Central Government to direct the vesting of 
the undertakings in India of Caltex (India) Limited so ae-
quired in a Government company by notification; 
(Hi) transfer of the services of the existing employees of Caltex 
(Inelfa) Limited to the Central Government or the said Gov-
ernment company; 
(tv) continuance of the contracts entered into by Caltex (India) 
for any service, sale or supply in India. 
3. In pursuance of the power given to the Central Government to 
direct the ~g of the undertakings of Caltex (India) in a Governm.ent 
company, a notiftcatlon had already been issued vesting the said under-
takings in the Caltex Oil Refining (lndia) Limited which bas become a 
Government company by virtue of the acquisition of its shares. 
4. The Bill seeks to replace the said Ordinance. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 29th. March, 19'17. 
MORARJI DESAI. 
12 

1"lNANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 3, of the Bill provides that on the appointed day ali the shares 
in thecap'ital of Caltex Oil ReftninJ (India) Limited shall ~tand transfer-
red to, and vested in, the Central Government. Th~ share~'Bhii'll be 
freed and discharged of all trusts, 1iabi~ties, obliga,tions, ~rtgages 
charges, liens and other ~cwnbrances a1fecting theia Alty -diVidend 
payable by Caltex Oil Refining (India) Limited in respect of an 'periOd 
beginning from the 1st day 'Of January, 1976 shall also be payable,to the 
Central Government. Clause 5 of the Bill provides that 'Orl':the appoiltt.: 
ed day, the right, title and interest of Caltex (India) Limited in relation 
to its undertakings in India shall stand transfettedto, andveiltec!'fn,'1he 
Central Government. The profits earned by Caltex (India) in relation 
to its undertakings in India from the 1st day of January, 1976, shall be 
payable to the Central Government. Clause 10 of the Bill provides that 
for the transfer to and vesting in the Central Government under section 
3 of the shares of Caltex Oil Refining (India) lJmited, and for the trans-
fer to and vesting in the Central Government under section ~, of the 
right, title and interest of Caltex (India) Limited in relation to its under-
takings in India, there shall be paid by the Central Government an ag-
gregate amount of rupees thirteen crores to Caltex Petroleum Corpora-
tion and Caltex (India) Limited in the proportions agreed to by them 
and in such instalments and in such manner as is specified in the Sche-
dule to the Bill:. The amount will carry interest (free of income-tax), 
at the rate of eight per cent. pex: annum from the 1st day of January, 
1977, till the date of payment. The payment would be made in U.S. Dol-
lars to Caltex Petroleum Corporation or Caltex (India) Limited, u the 
case may be. In addition, the Central Government shall pay to Caltex 
Petroleum Corporation or Caltex (India) Limited, u the cue may be, 
such amount in Indian cutTency as may be required by the said com-
panies 110 pay towards all taxes in India on the amounts payable under 
the said clause and all other taxes in India the UablUty for the payment 
of which arises directly on the transfer to and ve,sting in the Central 
Government of the shares of Caltex on Refining (India) Limited, and of 
the undertakings of Caltex (India) LimIted in India. 
2. The Bill will involve a total non-recurring expenditure of Rs. 13 
erores on account of prinCipal and Rs. 1,05,35,883 on account 'Of interest 
which will co!respond to U.S. Dollars 14,560,000 and 1.180.019 respective-
ly at the fixed exchange rate (Bank Commercial selling rate of Rs. 100 
equal to $11.20 obtainin~ as on the 22nd November, 1976). The C",.ovem-
ment have also agreed to pay to Caltex Petroleum Corporation or Cal-
tex (India) Limited, as the case may be, an amount to cover payment of 
all taxes, inc1udin,:r capital ~ains tax, payable by the said companies. This 
amount is estimated around Rs. 4.29 crores (non-recurring expenditure) 
and would be payable in rupees to Caltex (India) Limited who would in 
tum pay thIs amount to the- income-tax authorities. The final figure of 
capital gains tax would be known (.nly at the time of asse~srr.ent by the 
said authorities. Thi<; being only an estimate. no specific amount or this 
account has been mentioned in th(' Bill. 
3. The Bill. if enacted. will not involve any other recurring or non-
rer.urring expendltuN. 
13 

lIEM:OR.ANoUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEG~TION 
ClaUle 23 of the Bill seeks to confer on the Central Government the 
pnera! rule-making power for carrying out the provisions of the BW 
when eDaCted. The power of making rules is confined to matter. of de-
tail &Del ~ure. 
2. The deleIBtion of lqislative power I is, therefore, of a normal cha-
racter. 
14 

LOI( SABRA 
BILL 
to provide, in the public interest, 107' the acquisition of the .hares of 
Caltu Oil Refining (India) Limited and f01' the acquisition and tram-
fer of the right, title and interest of Caltez (India) Limited in rela-
tion to its undertakings in India. and thereby to secure that the 
oume1Ship and control of the petroleum products produced by the 
Caltex Oil Refining (India) Limited, and marketed and di,tributed 
bv the laid undet"takingl, in India, are so distributed as best to sub-
.",. the common good. 
(Shri MOf'tIr;i DeIai, 
Prime Minilte?) 