8W No. U of J;.~ 
THE BANKING COMPANIES 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 1959 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABRA 
ON 23RD FEBRUARY, 1959) 

Bill No. IZ of 19S9. 
THE BANKING COMPANIES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1959 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Banking Companies Act, 1949. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Tenth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Banking Companies (Amend- Short title 
ment) Act, 1959. and com--mencemeot. 
5 (3) It shell come into force on such date as the Central Govern-
ment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
%. In section 5 of the Banking Companies Act, 1949, (hereinafter Amendment 
referred to as the principal Act), in sub-section (l) of section s· 
(i) after clause (c)., the following clause shall be inserted, 
10 namely:-
'(cc) "branch" or "branch office", in relation to a bank-
ing company means any branch or branch office, whether 
called a pay office or sub-pay office or by any other name, at 
which deposits are received, cheques cashed or moneys lent, 
] S or where any of the forIrls of business referred to in sub-
section (I) of section 6 is tmnsacted;'; 
(ii) for clause (d), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:-
, (d) "company" means any company as defined in section 
20 3 of the Companies Act, 1956, and includes a foreign com-
pany within the meaning of section 591 of that Act;'; 
(iii) for clause (h), the following clause shall be substitut-
ed, numely:-
2S 
L.S.-l. 
'(h) "managing director", in relation to a banking com-
pany, means a director who, by virtue of an agreement with 

2 
the banking company or of a resolution passed by the bank-
ing company in general meeting or by its Board of directors 
or, by virtue of its memorandum or articles of association, is 
entrusted with the management of the whole, or substan-
tially the whole of the affairs of the company, and includes 5 
a director occupying the position of a managing director, by 
whatever name called;'; 
(iv) clauses (i), (k) and (m) shall be omitted; 
(v) after clause (n), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:- 10 
" (0) all other words and expressions used herein but 
not defined and defined in the Companies Act, 1956, shall 
have the meanings respectively assigned to them in that 
Act.". 
Insertion of 3. After section 5 of the principal Act, the following section shall IS 
~ eection be inserted, namely:-
Al:t to over-
ride memo-
randum. 
articles, 
etc. 
Amendment 
lCCtion 6. 
"5A. Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act,-
(a) the provisions of this Act shall have effect notwith-
standing anything to the contrary contained in the memo-
rondum or articles of a banking company, or in any agree- 20 
ment executed by it, or in any resolution passed by the bank-
ing company in general meeting or by its Board of directors, 
whether the same be registered,executed or passed, as the 
case may be, before or after the commencement of the Bank-
ing Companies (Amendment) Act, 1959; and 2S 
(b) any provision contained in the memorandum, 
articles, agreement or resolution aforesaid shall, to the 
extent to which it is repugnant to the provisions of this Act, 
becl)me or be void, as the case may be.". 
4. In section 6 of the principal Act, in clause (b) of sub-section 30 
(1), for the words "maooging agent", the words "managing agent or 
secretary and treasurer" shall be substituted. E 
Amen~ent 5. In section 7 of the principal Act, for the proviso, the following 
of section 7· proviso shall be substituted, namely:- . I 
"Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to- 3~ 
(n) a subsidiary of a banking company formed for one 
or more of the purposes mentioned in sub-section (1) of 
I of J9S6. 

lof 
J of 1956. 
s 
3 
section 19 whose oome indicates that it is a subsidiary of 
that banking company; 
(b) any association of banks formed for the protection 
of their mutual interests and registered under section 25 of 
the Companies Act, 1956.". 
6. In section 10 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1),-
(i) in clause (b), for the proviso, the following proviso shall 
be substituted, namely:-
"Provided that nothing contained, in this clause shall 
10 apply to the payment by a banking company of-
(a) any bonus in pursuance of a settlement or 
award arrived at or made under any law relating to 
industrial disputes or in accordance with any scheme 
J S framed by such banking company or in accordance with 
the usual practice prevailing in banking business; 
(b) any commission to any broker (including 
guarantee broker), cashier-contractor, clearing and for-
warding agent, auctioneer or any other person, employed 
by the bunking company under a contract otherwise 
20 than as a regular member of the staff of the company."; 
25 
(ii) in clause (c), for sub-clause (i), the following sub-
clause shall be substituted, namely:-
"(i) who is a director of any other company not being-
(a) a subsidiary of the banking company, or 
(b) a company registered under section 25 of the 
Companies Act, 1956: 
Provided that the prohi!Jition in this sub-clause shall not 
apply in respect of any such director for a temporary period 
not exceeding three months or such further period not 
30 exceeding six months as the Reserve Bank may allow.". 
3S 
7. In section 11 of the principal Act,-
(i) in sub-section (1), for the words, "unless it has paid-up 
capital and reserves of such aggregate value .as is hereinafter 
required by the section", the words "unless it complies with such 
of the requirements of this section as are applicable to it" shall 
be substituted; 
Amendment 
of section 10. 
Amendmmt 
of section II. 

4 
(ii) for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be 
substituted, namely,-
"(2) In the case of '.l banking company incorporated 
outside India-
(a) the aggregate value of its paid-up capital and 
reserves shall not be less than fifteen lakhs of rupees 
and if it has a place or pluces of business in the city of 
Bombay or Calcutta or both, twenty lakhs of rupees; and 
(b) the banking company shall deposit and keep 
deposited with the Reserve Bank either in cash or in the ] 0 
form of unencumbered approved securities or partly in 
wsh and partly in the form of such se<:urities an amount 
which shall not be less than the minimum required by 
clause (a): 
Provided that any such banking company may at any 15 
time replace-
(i) any securities so deposited by cash or by any 
other unencumbered approved. securities or partly by 
oosh and partly by other such securities, so however, 
that the total ~mount deposited is not affected; 
20 
(ii) any cash so deposited by unencumbered. approv-
ed securities of an equal value."; 
(iii) in sub-section (4), the words "the proviso to" shall be 
omitted~ 
(iv) for sub-section (5), the following sub-section shall be 25 
substituted, namely:-
'(5) For the purposes of this section,-
(a) "place of business" means any office, sub-office, 
sub-poy office and any place of business at which 
deposits are received, cheques cashed. or moneys lent; 
(b) "value" means the real or exchangeable value, 30 
and not the nominal value which ffiIly be shown in the 
books of the banking company concerned.'. 
Amen4ment 8. In sect:on 12 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), after the 
of secuon 12. words "exercise voting rights", the words "on poll" shall be inserted. 
Insertion. of 9. After section 14 of the principal Act, the following section shall 35 
~J. section be inserted, namely:-
Pro~on "14A. (1) Notwithstanding ap.ything contained in section 6, ". 
~~~;~r: no banking company shall create a floating charge on the under-
assets. taking or any property of the company or any part thereof, unless 
the creation of such floating charge is certified in writing by the 40 
Reserve Bank as not being detrimental to the interests of the 
depositors of such company. 

5 
(2) Any such charge created without obtaining the certincate 
of the Reserve Bank shall be invalid. 
(3) Any banking company aggrieved by the refusal of a certi-
ficate under sub-section (1) may, within ninety days from the 
S date on which such refusal is communicated to it, appeal to the 
Central Government. 
(4) The decis!on of the Central Government, where an appeal 
has been preferred to it under sub-section (3) or of the Reserve 
Bank where no such appeal has been preferred, shall be final.". 
10 10. Section 15 of the principal Act shall be re-numbered as sub- ~=~. 
section (1) thereof, and after sub-section (1) as so re-numbered, the 
following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-
1 of 1956. ,. (2) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in 
sub-section (1) or in the Companies Act, 1956, a banking company 
IS may pay dividends on its shares without writing off the deprecia-
tion, if any, in the value of its investments in approved securities 
in any case where such depreciation has not actually been capita-
lised or otherwise accounted for as a loss.". 
11. For sections 17 and 18 of the principal Act, the following sec- ~f~~tion 
20 tions shall be substituted, namely: _ s~ons for 
SCCtlons 
17 and 18. 
"17. (1) Every banking company incorporated in India shall Reserve 
create a reserve fund and unless the amount in such fund together Fund. 
with the amount in the share premium account is not less than 
its paid-up capittal, shall, out of the balance of profit of each year 
25 as disclosed in the profit and loss account prepared under section 
29 and before any dividend is declared, transfer to the reserve 
fund a sum equivalent to not less than twenty per cent. of such 
profit. 
(2) Where a banking company appropriates any sum or 
30 sums from the reserve fund or the share premium account, it 
shall, within twenty-one days from the date of such appropriation, 
report the fact to the Reserve Bank, explaining the circumstances 
relating to such appropriation: 
Provided that the Reserve Bank may, in any particular case, 
extend the said period of twenty-one days by such period as it 
thinks fit or condone any delay in the making of such report. 
18. Every banking company not being a scheduled bank shall Cash reserve. 
maintain in India, by 'W'.ly of cash reserve with itself or in current 
account opened with the Reserve Bank or the State Bank of India 

or any other bank notified by the Central Government in this 
behalf or partly in cash with itself and partly in such account or 
accounts, a sum equivalent to at least two per cent. of its time 
liabilities in India and five per cent. of its demand liabilities in 
India, and shall submit to the Reserve Bank before the fifteenth 5 
day of every month a return showing the amount so held on 
Friday of each week of the preceding month with particulars of 
its time and demand liabilities in India on each such Friday, or, 
if any such Friday is a public holiday under the Negotmble Instru-
ments Act, 1881, at the close of business on the precednig work 10 
ing day: 
Explanation.-In this section and in section 24, "liabilities in 
India" shall not include-
(a) the paid-up capital or the reserves or any credit 
balance in the profit and loss account of the banking 15 
company; 
(b) any advance taken from the Reserve Bank or from 
the State Bank of India or from the Refinance Corporation 
for Industry (Private) Limited, or from any bank notified by 
the Central Government under clause (c) of the Explana- 20 
tion to sub-section (1) of section 42 of the Reserve Bank of 
India Act, 1934.'. 2 of 19340 
Ament!mellt 12. In section 19 of the Principal Act, in sub-section (1), after the 
of section 19· word "namely", the words "the carrying on of the business of banking 
exclusively outside India," shall be inserted. 
Amendment 
of!leCtion 22. 
13. In section 22 of the principal Act,-
(i) for sub-section (1), the following sub-secfon shall be 
substituted, namely:-
"(1) SavE: as hereinafter provided, no company shall 
carryon banking business in India unless it holds a licence 30 
issued in that behalf by the Reserve Bank and any such 
licence may be issued subject to such condit'ons as the 
Reserve Bank may think fit t9 impose."; 
(ii) in sub-section (2), in the first proviso. for the words. 
figure and brackets "sub-section (2) ", the words "this sect:on" 35 
shall be substituted. 

7 
(iii) for sub-sections (4) and (5), the following sub-sections 
shall be substituted, namely:-
" (4) The Reserve Bank may cancel a licence granted to 
a banking company under this section-
S (i) if the company ceases to carryon banking bus'· 
10 
20 
3S 
ness in India or goes into liquidation; or 
(ii) if the company at any time fails to comply with 
any of the conditions imposed upon it under sub-section 
(1); or 
(iii) if at any time, any of the conditions referred to 
in sub-section (3) is not fulfilled: 
Provided that before cancelling a licence under clause 
(ii) or clause (iii) of this sub-section on the ground that the 
banking company has failed to comply with or has failed to 
fulfil any of the conditions referred to therein, the Reserve 
Bank, unless it is of opinion that the delay will be prejudicial 
to the interests of the company's depositors or the public, 
shall grant to the company on such terms as it may specify, 
an opportunity of taking the necessary steps for complying 
with or fulfilling such condition. 
(5) Any banking company aggrieved by the decision of 
the Reserve Bank cancelling a licence under this section may, 
within thirty days from the date on which such decision is 
communicated to it, appeal to the Central Government. 
(6) The decision of the Central Government where an 
appeal has been preferred to it under sub-section (5) or of 
the Reserve Bank where no such appeal has been preferred 
shall be fina!.". 
14. For section 23 of the principal Act, the following section shall Substituti~n 
b b · of new sectlon e su stltuted, namely: - for section 23. 
'23. (1) Without obtaining the prior permission of the Restri~ona ! 
R onopenmgo 
eserve Bank- new, and 
transfer of 
(a) no banking company shall open a new place of busi- existing, 
ness in India or change otherwise than within the same city, ~!::~~~ 
town or village, the location of an existing place of business 
situated in India; and 
(b) no banking company incorporated in India shall 
open a new place of business outside India or change. other-
wise than within the same city, town or village in any 

AmeDdment 
of ICdion 24. 
8 
country or area outside India, the location of an existing 
place of business situated in that country or area: 
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall apply to the 
opening for a period not exceeding one month of a temporary 
place of business within a city, town or village or the environs 5 
thereof within which the banking company already has a place 
of business, for the purpose of affording banking facilities to the 
public on the occasion of an exhibition, a conference or a mela 
or any other like occasion. 
(2) Before granting any permission under this section, the 10 
Reserve Bank may require to be satisfied by an inspection under 
section 35 or otherwise as to the financial condition and history 
of the company, the general character of its management, the 
adequacy of its capital structure and earning prospects and that 
public interest will be served by the opening or, as the case may ) 5 
be. change of location, of the place of business. 
(3) the Reserve Bank may grant· permission under sub-
section (1) subject to such condtions as it may think fit to impose 
either generally or with reference to any particular case. 
(4) Where, in the opinion of the Reserve Bank, a banking 20 
company has, at any time, failed to comply with any of the con-
ditions imposed on it under this section, the Reserve Bank may, 
by order in writing and after affording reasonable opportunity 
to the banking company for showing cause against the action 25 
proposed to be taken against it, revoke any permission granted 
under this section. 
(5) For the purposes of this section "place of business" in-
cludes any sub-office, pay office, sub-pay office and any place of 
business at which deposits are received, cheques cashed or 
moneys lent or where any of the forms of business referred to 30 
in sub-section (l) of section 6 is transacted.'. 
15. In seetion 24 of the principal Act,-
(i) in sub-section (1),-
(4) after the words "shall maintain", the words "in 35 
India" 'shall be inserted; 
(b) for the Explanaticm. the following Explanation 
shall be substituted, namely:-
'Explanation.-For the purposes of this section, 
"unencwnbered approved securities" of a banking com-
pany shall include its approved securities lodged with 40 

5 
10 
3 .r 1'34· IS 
~o 
at) of 1111. 2S 
30 
36 of 1111. 
3S 
another institution for an advance or any other credit 
arrangement to the extent to which such securities have 
not been drawn against or availed of.'; 
(ii) for sub~section (2), the following sub-section shall be 
substituted, namely:-
"(2) In computing the amount for the purposes of sub-
section (1), the deposit required under sub-section (2) of 
section 11 to be made with the Reserve Bank by a banking 
company incorporated outside India and any balances main-
tained in India by a banking company in current account 
with the Reserve Bank or the State Bank of India or with 
any other bank which may be notified in this behalf by the 
Central Government, including in the case of a scheduled 
bank the balance required under section 42 of the Reserve 
Bank of India Act, 1934, to be so maintained, shall be deemed 
to be cash maintained in India."; 
(iii) in sub-section (3), after the words "its time and demand 
liabilities", the words "in India" shall be inserted. 
1.. In section 25 of the principal Act,- Ameadmellt 
(i) for sub-sections (1) and (2), the following lub-aectionl 
ahall be substituted, namely:-
"(1) The assets in India of every banking company at 
the close of business on the last Friday of every quarter or, 
if that Friday is a public holiday under the Negotiable 
Instruments Act, 1881, at the close of the business on the 
preceding working day, shall not be less than seventy-five 
per cent. of its demand and time liab:1ities in India. 
(2) Every banking company shall, within one month 
from the end of every quarter, submit to the Reserve Bank 
a return in the prescribed form and manner of the assets 
and liabilities referred to in sub-section (1) as at the close 
of business on the last Friday of the previous quarter, or, 
if that Friday is a public holiday under the Negotiable 
Instruments Act, 1881, at the close of business on the preced~ 
ing working day."; 
(ii) in sub-sect;on (3), clause (b) shall be re-Iettered as 
clause (c), and the following shall lDe inserted as clause (b), 
namely:-
'(b) "liabilities in India" shall not include the paid~up 
of MCtiOD a,. 
40 capital or the reserves or any credit balance in the profit 
and 10il account of the banking company;'. 
1.17 (a) L .•. --1. 

to 
Am~ent 17. In section 27 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), for the 
of sectIOn 27. words "the classification of advances and investments of banking 
companies in respect of industry, commerce and agriculture", the 
words ':the investments of a banking company and the classification 
of its advances in respect of industry, commerce and agriculture" 5 
shall be substituted. 
Amendment 18. In section 28 of the principal Act, for the words and figures 
of eection 28. "under section 27", the words "under this Act" shall be substituted. 
~en~ent 19. In section 32 of the principal Act, for sub-section (1), the 
o tecuon 32. following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:- to 
"(1) Where a banking company in any year furnishes its 
accounts and balance sheet in accordance with the provisions 
of section 31, it shall at the same time send to the registrar 
three copies of such accounts and balance sheet and of the 
auditor's report, and where such copies are so sent, it shall not 15 
be necessary to file with the registrar, in the case of a public 
company, copies of the accounts and balance sheet and of the 
auditor's report, and in the case of a private company copies of 
the balance sheet and of the auditor's report as required by sub-
section (l) of section 220 of the Companies Act, 1956; and the 20 I ~ 19". 
copies so sent shall be chargeable with the same fee and shall be 
dealt with in all respects as if they were filed in accordance 
with that section". 
Amendment 20. To section 35 of the principal Act, the following Explanation 
oflection 3S· shall be added, namely:- %5 
Amendment 
ofMCtion 3S 
B. 
'Explanation.-For the purposes of this section, the expres-
sion "banking company" shall include-
(i) in the case of a banking company incorporated out-
side India, all its branches in India; and 
(ii) in the case of 8 banking company incorporated in 30 
Il!dia, all its branches whether situate in India or outside 
India.' 
21. In section 35B of the principal Act.-
(i) in clause (a) of sub-section (1), for the words "manag-
ing or whole-time director or of a director not liable to retire by 35 
rotation", the words "managing director or any other director, 
whole-time or otherwise" shall be substituted; 
(ii) to sub-section (1), the following Explanation shall be 
.It(ided, namely:-
"Explanation.-For the purposes of this sub-section, any 40 
provision conferring any benefit or providing any amenity 

5 
10 
1I 
or perquisite, in whatever form, whether during or after the 
termination of the term of office of the manager or the 
chief executive officer by whatever name called or the 
managing director, or any other director, whole-time or 
otherwise, shall be deemed to be a provision relating to his 
remuneration."; 
(iii) in sub-section (2), for the words, brackets and figures 
"apply to a banking company after the commencement of the 
Banking Companies (Amendment) Act, 1956", the following 
. shall be substituted, namely:-
"apply to any matter in respect of which the approval 
of the Reserve Bank has to be obtained under sub-section 
(1).". 
22. In section 36 of the principal Act, in clause (b) of sub-section Amen'!meot 
15 (1), for the figures "45", the figures and letter "44A" shall be substi- ofaecnoD36. 
tuted. 
23. In Part II of the principal Act, after section 36, the following Insertio~ of . . new section sectIOn shall be Inserted, namely: - 36 A. 
"36A. (1) The provisions of sections 11, sub-section (1) of ~e~tain pthro-
• . • VISIOns of· e 
20 sectIon 12. 17, 18, 24 and 25 shall not apply to a bankIng com- Act not to 
pany- a~ply to ~r­
tam bankmg 
(a) which, whether before or after the commencement companies. 
of the Banking Companies (Amendment) Act, 1959, has 
been refused a licence under section 22, or prohibited from 
25 accepting fresh deposits by a compromise arrangement or 
scheme sanctioned by a court or by any order made in any 
proceeding relating to such compromise, arrangement or 
scheme, or prohibited from accepting deposists by virtue of 
any alteration made in its memorandum; or 
30 (b) whose licence has been cancelled under section 22, 
whether before or after the commencement of the Banking 
Companies (Amendment) Act, 1959. 
(2) Where the Reserve Bank is satisfi'ed that any such 
banking company as is referred to in sub-section (1) has repaid, 
35 or has made adequate provision for repaying all deposits accept-
ed by the banking company, either in full or to the maximum 
extent possible, the Reserve Bank may, by notice published in 
the Official Gazette, notify that the banking company has ceased 
to be a banking company within the meaning of this Act, and 
thereupon all the provisions of this Act applicable to such bank-
ing company shall cease to apply to it, except as respects things 
done or omitted to be done before such notice. 

AMeadment 
of MCtion 
3M-
12 
24. Semon 38A of tht! principal Act shall be re-numbered as 
section 36B. 
~t. 25. In section 37 of the principal Act, after sub-section (3), the 
eet10n 37 following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-
SubItituboD 
01 new sec-
d on for lee-
tion 38. 
~UP 
Court. 
"(4) Where the Reserve Bank is satisfied that the affairs 5 
of a banking company in respect of which an order under sub-
section (1) has been made, are being conducted in a manner 
detrimental to the interests of the depos'tors, it may make an 
application to the High Court for the winding up of the ,com-
pany, and where any such application is made, the High Court 10 
shall not make any order extending the period for which the 
commencement or continuance of all actions and proceedings 
against the company were stayed under that sub-section. 
16. For section 38 of the principal Act, the following section 
shall be substituted, namely:- 15 
"38. (1) NotWithstanding anything contained in section 3!H, 
section 392, section 433 and section 583 of the Companies Act, 
1956, but without prejudice to its powers under sub-section (1) I of It~'. 
of section 37 of this Act, the High Court shall order the winding 
up of a banking company- 20 
(a) if the banking company is unable to pay its debts; 
or 
(b) if an application for its winding up has been made 
by the Reserve Bank under section 37 or this section. 
(2) Tht! Reserve Bank shall make an application under this 25 
section for the winding up of a banking company if it is directed 
so to do by an order under clause (b) of sub-section (4) of 
section 35. 
(3) The Reserve Bank may make an application under this 
section for the winding up of a banking company- 30 
(a) if the banking company-
(i) has failed to comply with the requirements 
specified in section 11; or 
(ii) has by reason of the prOVISlons of section 22 
become disentitled to OBrry on banking business in 35 
India; or 
(iii) h~IS been prohibited from receiving fresh depo-
sits by an order under clause (a) of sub-section (4) of 

t 2 O( 1934. 
5 
10 
~ ... 20 
. . 
J .r 1956. 
~.. 30 
(i,' , , . . 
13 
section 35 or under clause (b) of sub-section (3A) of 
section 42 of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934; or 
(iv) having failed to comply with any requirement 
of this Act other than the requirements laid down in 
section 11, has continued such failure, or, having centra-
vened any provision of this Act, has continued such 
contravention, beyond such period or periods as may be 
specified in that behalf by the Reserve Bank from time 
to time, after notice in writing of such failure or con-
travention has been conveyed to the bank'ng company; 
or 
(b) if in the opinion of the Reserve Bank-
(i) a compromise or arrangement sanctioned by 
a Court in respect of the banking company cannot be 
worlred satisfactorily with or without modifications: or 
(ii) the returns, statements or information furnish-
ed to it under or in pursuance of the provisions of this 
Act disdose that the banking company is unable to pay 
its debts; or 
(iii) the continuance of the banking compony is 
prejudicial to the interests of its depositors . 
(4) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sec-
tion 434 of the Companies Act, 1956, a banking company shall 
be deemed to be unable to pay its debts if it has refused to meet 
any lawful demand made at any of its offices or branches within 
two working days, if such demand is made at a place where 
there is an office, branch or agency of the Reserve Bank. or 
within five working days, if such demand is made elsewhere, 
and if the Reserve Bank certifies in writing that the banking 
company is unable to pay its debts. 
(5) A copy of e~ry application made by the Rp.serve Bank 
under sub-section (1) shall be sent by the Reserve Bank to the 
registrar.". 
27. In section 39 of the principal Act, for the words and figures Afmen~rnent • .. 4" 0 section 39· 35 "in sectlon 448", the words and figures "in secbon 448 or sectIon 49 
shall be substituted. 
28. After section 39 of the principal Act, the followmg section Insertion .oc . new section 
shall be mserted, namely: - 39A. 
'39A. (1) All the provisions of the Companies Act, 1956, Af~cation. 
I . I 'd . f th t . t t 0 mparues re atmg to a iqUI ator, 10 so ar as ey are no mcons!s en Act to 
with this Act. shall apply to or in relation to a liquidator liquidators. 
appointed under section 38A or section 39, 

Amendment 
of section 
43 A. 
Substitution 
of new sec-
tion for sec-
tion 44. 
Powers of 
High Court 
in voluntary 
winding up. 
Omission of 
section 4SK. 
Amendment 
of teCtion 
450 . 
14 
(2) Any reference to the "official liquidator" in this Part 
and Part IlIA shall be construed as including a reference to 
any liquidator of a banking company.'. 
29. In S!!ction 43A of the principal Act, in sub-section (1) t after 
the words "have been made,", the words "or adequate provision to S 
the satisfaction of the High Court for such payments has been 
made" shall be inserted. 
30. For section 44 of the principal Act, the following S'8Ction 
shall be substituted, namely:-
"44. (1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained 10 
in section 484 of the Companies Act, 1956. no banking company I" , .. " 
may be voluntarily wound up unless the Reserve Bank certifies 
in writing that the company is able to pay in full all its debts 
to its creditors as they accrue. 
(2) The High Court may. in any case where a banking 15 
company is being wound up voluntarily, make an order that 
the voluntary winding up shall continue, but subject to the 
supervision of the court. 
(3) Without prejudice to the provislons contained in sec-
tions 441 and 521 of the Companies Act, 1956, the High Court 20 r ef 1956. 
may' of its own -motion and shall on the application of the 
Reserve Bank, order the winding up of a banking company by 
the High Court in any of the following cases, namely:-
(a) where the banking company is being wound up 
voluntarily and at any stage during the voluntary winding 25 
up proceedings the company is not able to meet its debts as 
they eccrue; or 
(b) where the banking company is being wound up 
voluntarily or is being wound up subject to the supervision 
of the court and the High Court is satisfied that the volun- 30 
tary winding up or winding up subject to the supervision of 
the court cannot be continued without detriment to the 
interests of the depositors.". 
31. Section 45K of the principal Act shall be omitted. 
32. In section 450 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), after 3.5 
the words "accruel of such claims", the words "or five years frol'll the 

5 
10 
rs 
date of the first appointment of the liquidator, whichever is longer" 
shall be inserted. 
33. In section 46 of the principal Act,-
(i) for sub-section (4), the following sub-section shall be 
substituted, namely:-
.. (4) If any other provision of this Act is contravened or 
if any default is made in complying with any requirement 
of this Act or of any order, rule or direction made or condi-
tion imposed thereunder, every director, liquidator and other 
officer of the company and any other person who is know-
ingly a party to the contravention or default shall be punish-
able with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, and 
where a contravention or default is a continuing one, with a 
further fine which m.y extend to fifty rupees for every day 
during which such contravention or default continues."; 
(ii) sub-section (5) shall be omitted. 
Amendment 
of aection 46. 
34. In section 49 of the principal Act, for the words, figures and Amen~ent 
brackets "sections 90, 165 and 255, clauses (a) and (b) of sub-section ofaectlOD 49· 
(1) of section 293 and sections 300 and 416 of the Companies Act, 
~o 1956", the following shall be substituted, namely:-
"sections 90, 165, 182, 204 and 255, clauses (a) and(b) of sub-
section (1) of section 293 and sections 300, 384 and 416 of the 
Companies Act, 1956.". 
35. After section 49 of the principal Act, the following 
25 shall be inserted, namely:-
sections Inlertion. of 
new lectlon. 
49A,49B and 
49C. 
"49A. No person other than a banking company, the State Reatrictionon 
Bank of India or any other banking institution notified by the accep~. of 
Centnll Government in this beraIt shall accept from the public =~ieW1t; 
deposits of money withdrawable by cheque: cheque. 
30 Provided that nothing contained in this section shall apply 
to any savings bank scheme run by the Government. 
49B. Notwithstanding anything contained in section 21 of Change of 
the Companies Act, 1956, the Central Government shall not =ng by • 
signify its approval to the change of name of any banking com- company. 
35 pany unless the Reserve Bank certifies in writing that it has no 
objection to such change. 
49C. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Companies Alters lion 0 
Act, 1~56, no application for the confirmation of the alteration of ~e~o= 
c»mpIIIly. 

the memorandum of e banking company shall be maintainable 
unless the Reserve Bank certifies that there is no objection to 
such alteration.". 
Amendment 36. In section 42 of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, in the 2 of 19,4 
;-th~~rfe Explanation to sub-section (1), for clause (c), the following ciauae 5 
Bank of India shall be substituted, namely:-
Act, 1934. 
'(c) "liabilities" shall not include the paid-up capital or the 
reserves or any credit balance in the profit and loss account of 
the bank or the amount of any loan taken from the Bank or 
from the Refinance Corporation for Industry (PriVlllte) Limited, 10 
or from the State Bank or from any other bank notified by the 
Central Government in this behalf.'. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Banking Companies Act, 1949, came into force on the 16th 
March, 1949, and although it was amended in December, 1956, with'it 
view to extending the powers of supervision and control exercisable 
by the Reserve Bank, the question of further amending the Act,. 
in order to remove minor omissions or ambiguities in the 
meaning of certain sections was left over for consideration at a later 
stage. It is now proposed, in the light of the experience gained in 
regard to the administration of the Act, to introduce some amend-
ments, mostly of a non-controversial nature, in order to facilitate 
the application and enforcement of the Act. Opportunity has also 
been taken to clarify the position regarding the application of the 
Act to banking companies which have been prohibited from accept-
ing fresh deposits and are in consequence not functioning, 
normally. 
MORARJI DESAI. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 2nd February, 1959. 

Notu on elaUlea 
A brief aceount at the amendments which are now proposed to 
the Banking Companies Act is given in the notes on clauses below. 
CIaU6e 2.-Some diftlculty has been experienced in the absence 
of a definition of the words "branch" or "branch offices" which 
oecur in some sections of the Act and it is, therefore, proposed to 
lnaert a definition of these words, the criter'on for the deftnition 
being whether banking business, as generally understood, is tran-
acted at an office. Some other expressions, already deftned in the 
Banking Companies Act, have since been defined in the Companies 
Act, 1956; and it is, therefore, proposed to make these later defini-
tions in the Companies Act applicable wherever there is no mcons-
btency. A special definition of the words "managing director" has 
however been proposed, in order to exclude directors of banking 
companies, who are entrusted with supervisory functions in regard 
to some, but not all, of the activities of a bank. 
Some partnership or proprietary concerns, which have been car-
rying on the business of banking, but are not subject to the control 
exercised by the Reserve Bank of Ind: a under the Banking Compa-
nies Act, have been and are using names and styles which include 
words Uke "bank", IIbanker" or IIbanking". It is not considered 
neeessary at this stage to extend to partnerships and individuals the 
prohibition in respect of the use of words like "bank", "banker", etc., 
which now applies to all ineorporated companies, or to brln~ such 
partnerships, etc., within the scope of the Bankin~ Companies Act. 
The deftnition of a company, in seetion S (1) (d) of the Banking 
Companies Aet 11 propoeed to b" modifted suitably h' M'der to !I1Ute 
tlUa etear. 
Cl4U18 3.-A new section, namely, SA. il!! proposed to be added, on 
the lines of section 9 of the Companies Act, in order to clarify the 
position that the Banking Companies Act will prevail, if necessary, 
against any other provision in the memorandum or articles of U80-
dation of a banking company. 
Cla'IUe -i.-According to the existing scheme of the Act, a 
banking company II!! prevented from being a managing agent of any 
other company. The amendment is intended to prohibit a banking 
company from being secretaries and treasurers also. 
II 

-19 
Clau.e &.-The amendment is in~ to clarify the positiOn thai 
fOubsidiaries of banking companies, formed in .accordance with ·tba 
provisions of the law, are not prevented from using the nam~ 
• 'bank" , "banking", etc. 
Clause 6.-Section 10 of the Banking Companies Act prohibit, 
the employment by a banking company of per SODS remunerated on a 
enmmjssionbasis. It is proposed to clarify the intention that this 
prohibition is applicable only in the case of regular members of :tM 
,ataft. 
It has also been considered necessary in the light of experience, 
to exempt from the scope of the restrictions in section 10 the officiat-
ing appointment, for a period which will not exceed nine months in 
any case, of managers or managing directors, who in respect of such 
temporary appointments may find it difficult to comply with the 
provisions of the section. 
Clause 7.-The amendments are of a drafting nature, and provide 
for a prohibition, in a positive from, of any withdrawal by a foreign 
banking company of the cash or securities required under the Act to 
be deposited with the Reserve Bank of India. 
Clause S.-The amendment is clarificatory and is intended to brtng 
the provisions in section 12 of the Banking Companies Act in regard 
to voting on a show of hands inb line wfth section 87 and para 56 
of Schedule I to the Companies Act, 1956. 
Clause 9.-Section 14 of the Bmking Companies Act, prohibita a 
banking com.pany from creating a charge on its unpaid capital. It is 
considered desirable, in the interests of depositors, to ,prevent also the 
creation of a floating charge on the undertaking or' any property of 
the company, without the prior consent of the Reserve Bank of India. 
Clause 10.-Section 15 of the Banking Companies Act contem-
plates that a banking company should maintain its capital intact, 
by making good from its profits any impairment thereof, before 
dividents are declared. It is proposed to exempt banking compan1ee 
specifically from any requirement, direct or implied, that deprecia-
tion on approved securities should be written off fully, before other 
appropriations from profits are made, if the securities concerned 
, have not been sold and if a loss has not actually been incurred. 
Clause ll.-The interpretation of section 17 of the Banking, Com-
panies Act, which deals with the reserve fund of a banking com-
pany baa ilven rise to lome difticu1ty, al it hu been held that the 

-fund has to be maintained intact, and cannot, therefore, be drawn 
upon, even for the purposes for wh.ch it was originally intended. 
The amendments now proposed are intended to introduce some 
degree of flexibility in regard to the maintenance and use of the 
fund 
Section 18 of the Act provides for the maintenance of a minimum 
cash reserve by non-scheduled banks. It is proposed to clarify the 
intention that the reserve should be held in India. Provision has 
also been made for the reserve being held in the form of a deposit 
with the State Bank of India, or a notified bank, where this is con-
venient to a non-scheduled bank. 
Clause 12.-The statutes of certain foreign countries require banks 
which propose to carry on business in those countries to incorporate 
themselves under the applicable local laws. Section 19 (1) of the 
principal Act is, therefore, proposed to be amplified, so as to enable 
Indian banks which are desirous of opening offices abroad to comply 
with the requirements of foreign laws. 
Clause 13.-Section 22 of the Banking Companies Act deals with 
the licensing of banking companies, and has been redrafted so as to 
provide for conditional licences being granted. Opportunity has also 
been taken to indicate in somewhat greater detail, in compliance 
with the principles of natural justice, the circUIIlStances in which a 
licence'may be cancelled. 
Clause 14.-In section 23, which deals with the opening of bran-
ches, provision has been made, as in section 22, for the grant of condi-
tional licences. Opportunity has also been taken to recast the sec-
tion so as to avoid the doubts arising out of the punctuation in the 
existing section. 
Clau.te 15.-Section 24 of the principal Act provides for the main· 
tenanr.e of a minimum percentage of liquid assets, including the cash 
reserve referred to already, under clause 11 above. The amendments 
proposed are intended to clarify the position that the assets in ques-
tion must be maintained in India. For the purposes of this section, 
securities pledged to another bank in respect of a loan obtained from 
that bank will be treated as approved and unencumbered securities 
to the extent to which they are not drawn against but only the 
current account balances, if any, maintained with the State Bank or 
other notified banks will be treated as assets for the purposes of the 
section. Certain minor draft'ng improvements have also been made. 
Clause 16.-The object of the amendment is to provide that all the 
returns under the Act will be as on a Friday. 

Clauses 17 and 18.-The amendments proposed are verbai, and arE! 
intended to improve the language of section 27, and to extend the 
scope of the publication of information in relation to banks, which 
is contemplated in section 28. 
Clause 19.-The amendment is clarificatory, and is intended to 
harmonise the provisions of section 32 of the Banking Companies Act 
with those contained in section 220 of the Companies Act. 
Clause 20.-Section 35 of the Banking Companies Act provides for 
an inspection of banking companies by the Reserve Bank of India. 
Specific provision for the inspection of offices outside India of Indian 
banks is proposed to be made in this section. 
CLause 21.-Section 55B of the Banking Companies Act provides 
for the approval by the Reserve Bank of India of the appointment 
and remuneration of managing or whole-time directors and chief 
executive officers of banking companies. It is proposed to provide 
for control being exercised over the remuneration of ordinary direc-
tors also, as under the Companies Act, and to ensure in addition that 
the effect of the provisions is not nullified in practice by the grant of 
post-retirement benefits without the approval of the Reserve Bank. 
Clause 22.-The reference to section 45 in the existing section 36 
is wrong and is being corrected. 
Clause 23.-The existing position in regard to banking 
companies, which have been prohibited from carrying on the busi-
ness of banking currently is not very satisfactory. The provisions 
proposed are intended to clarify the position regarding the applica-
bility of the Banking Companies Act to institutions to which a 
licence has been refused or which have been otherwise prohibited 
from accepting fresh deposits, etc. 
Clause 25.-lt is desirable to restrict the further extension of the 
period of moratorium. if any, which is granted to a banking com-
pany after it has suspended payments, if the Reserve Bank is of the 
opinion that any such extension will not be in the interests of the 
depositors. Provision has been made accordingly. 
Clause 26.-The drafting of section 38 has been criticised by a 
High Court and a redraft has been proposed, in order to remove 
the existing difficulty in interpretation. Opportunity has also been 
taken to extend the Reserve Bank's powers to apply to the court 
for the winding up of banking companies, wherever this is cona!-
dered necetlsary. 

ti 
etauau 27 and 28.-The existing position under the law is that 
In lieu of the Omcial Liquidator appointed under the Companies 
Act, 1956, non-ofticial liquidators, if any, already appointed before 
the 1st April, 1956, may continue in omce, and if it Is considered 
necessary, either a Court Liquidator to be in charge of the banking 
companies generally, or a special liquidator for any particular bank-
ing company may also be appointed. The amendments are intended 
to provide for the exercise by any liquidator appointed for a tank-
ing company of all the powers and functions of the Omcial Liquida-
tor under the Companies Act, 1956, and to clarify the position 
that fees may be realised, as under the Companies Act, from the 
companies which are in liquidation, towards the expenses of the 
liquidation organisation. 
Clause 29.-Section 43A of the Banking Companies Act, which 
deWs with preferential payments by a company in liquidation, pro-
vides for the depositors of the company being paid after the pre-
ferential payments have been made. It is not considered desira-
ble, where provision for any such preferential payments has beef' 
made, that payments to the depositors should be held up, merely 
because of any delay in the actual disbursement of any amount 
due towards preferential claims. The existing wording in this 
section is, therefore, proposed to be suitably amended. 
Clause 30.-Section 44 of the principal Act which imposes cer-
tain restrictions on the voluntary winding of banking companies 
is now applicable only to banking companies to which a licence 
has been granted. It is proposed to provide for the restriction 
being applicable to all banking companies generally and to enhance 
the powers of the High Court in relation to the control of winding 
up proceedings under this section. 
Clause 3l.-The amendment is of a drafting nature. 
Clause 32.-The special period of limitation which has now 
been prescribed in relation to the claims by or on behalf of banking 
companies in liquidation does not cover the case of banks, the claiJu 
of which are already time-barred on the date of the winding up 
order. Appropriate provision in relation to such banks is. there-
fore, being made. 
Clause 33.-It has been noticed that the returns flIed by ~ 
ing companies in liquidation are in several cases incomplete and 
unsatisfactory. The penalties leviable under the section are. 
therefore, being extended, so 88 to ensure compUance with the 
ftlquirements of the statute by certain otBcers to whom it dDel 
DC» now speciftcally apply. '. 

• 
• 
eJau". H.-The amendment. propoeed are intended te pre,.' 
• private banking company from restricting the voting right. of 
118 .nembers and also from" appointing firms or bodies corporate 
to an office of profit (the prohibition in regard to these mattera 
already applies to all public limited companies, Including those 
engaged in banking). 
Clause 35.-A new section, namely, 49A is proposed to be inser-
ted in the Act in order to restrict the power to open ~r operate 
accounts on which cheques may be issued to:-
(a) banking companies which are governed by the Act; 
and 
(b) Government, which has introduced the system of 
withdrawal by cheques at postal savings banks at several im-
portant towns, and proposes to extend the facility in due 
course. 
Certain safeguards preventing the conversion of banking com-
panies into non-banking companies without the lmowledge or 
approval of the Reserve Bank are also being provided. 
Clause 36.-The provisions contained in sections 18 and 24 of the 
Banking Companies Act require a company to which the Act is 
applicable to maintain certain minimum percentages of its liabili-
ties in the fonn of cash or other approved forms generally. The 
deposits maintained by scheduled banks with the Reserve Bank 
of India under section 42 of the Reserve Bank of India Act are 
treated u eligible assets for the purposes of these provisions. It 
il proposed to amend section 42 of the Reserve Bank of India Act 
and also sections 18 and 24 of the Banking Companies Act so as to 
provide that loans obtained by banking companies from the Reftn-
anee Corporation will not be treated as liabilities for tl:» PurpoHl 
of thetM MCttou. 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS nOM THE BANKING COMPANIES ACT, 1949 (No. 10 OF 1949) 
• • * • • 
IntcrPma- 5. (1) In this Act, unless there 1s anything repugnant in the 
lion. subject or context,-
• 
• 
I • 
• * * * 
(d) "company" means any company which may be wound 
up under the Companies Act, 1956; I of 19,6. 
• • • • • 
(h) "managing agent" means a person, finn or company 
entitled to the management of the whole affairs of a banking 
company by virtue of an agreem~nt with the company or by 
virtue of the memorandum or articles of association relating 
thereto, and under the control and direction of the direeton 
except to the extent, if any, otherwise provided for in the 
agreement, memorandum or articles of association, and includes 
any person, firm or company occupying such position by what-
ever name called; 
ExplanatWn.-1f a person occupying the position of manag-
ing agent calls himself manager or managing director, he shall 
nevertheless be deemed to be 48 managing agent for the purpoIM!8 
of this Act; 
(i) "private company" has the same meaning M in the 
Companies Act, 1958; 1 of t9~. 
• • • • • • 
(k) "registrar" has the same meaning a! in the Companiel 
Act, 1958; I of 19,6. 
• • • • • * 
(m) "scheduled bank" met.na a bank for the time hem. 
included in the Second Schedule to the Reserve Bank of India 
Act, 1934; and 2 or 19540 
• • • • • 
PART U 
BuSIlUlY OJ' BAlfDWO CoMPANIU 
Porms of 8. (1) In addition to the business of banking, a banking company business ir ' which bank- may engage in anyone or more of the following forms of busineu, 
;n, compa'l- namely:-
ie. m,,. en- • • • * • • 
attle. 

• 
25 
(b) acting as agents for any Government or local authority 
or any other person or persons; the carrying on of agency busi-
ness of any description including the clearing and forwarding 
of goods, giving of receipts and discharges and otherwise acting 
as an attorney on behalf of customers, but excluding the business 
of a managing agent of a company; 
• • • • • • 
7. After the expiry of two years from the commencement of this Use of 
Act, no company, other than a banking company, shall use as part :-~rdk" 
of its name any of the words "bank", "banker" or "banking" and r<b:k~:":,. 
no company shall carry on the business of banking in India, unless "bankin, . 
it uses as part of its name at least one of such words: 
Provided that nothing in this S'eCtion shall apply to any associa-
tion of banks formed for the protection of their mutual interests 
I of I~s6. and registered under section 25 of the Companies Act, 1956. 
• • • • • • • 
let. (l) No banking company- Prohibition of employ-
ment of 
(a) shall employ or be managed by a managing agent; or managing 
alents and 
(b) shall employ or continue the employment of any ~~s~:!i:s 
person- forms of employment. 
(i) who is, or at any time Ras been, adjudicated insol-
vent, or has suspended payment or has compounded with 
his creditors, or who is, or has been, convicted by a criminal 
court of an offence involving moral turpitude; or 
(ii) whose remuneration or part of whose remuneration 
takes the form of commission or of a share in the profits of 
the company: 
Provided that nothing contained in this clause shall 
apply to the payment of any bonus by any banking com-
pany in pursuance of a settlement or award arrived at or 
made under any law relating to industrial disputes or in 
accordance with any scheme framed by such banking com-
pany or in accordance with the usual practice prevailing in 
banking business; or 
(iii) whose remuneration is, in the opinion of the 
Reserve Bank, excessive; or 
1917 (B) L.S.-4. 

28 
(e) shall be managed by any person-
(i) who is a director of any other company not beinl 
a subsidiary company of the banking company; or 
(ii) who is engaged in any other business or vocation; 
or 
(iii) who has a contract with the company for 'its 
management for a period exceeding five years at anyone 
time: 
Provided that any contract with the company for its 
management may be renewed or extended for a further period 
not exceeding five years at a time if and so often as the direc-
tara 80 decide: 
Provided further that nothing in this clause shall apply to 
a director, other than the managing director, of a banking eom-
pany by reason only of his being such director. 
ExpIanation.-For the purpose of sub-clause (iii) of clause 
(b), the expression "remuneration", in relation to a person 
employed or continued in employment. shall include salary, 
fees and perquisites but shall not include any allowances or 
other amounts paid to him for the purpose of reimbursing him 
in respect of the expenses actually incurred by him in the per-
fon;nance of his duties. 
• • • • • 
ltequirenteDt 11. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 149 of 
IS to ~i- the Companies Act, 1956, no banking company in existence on the I of 19S6• 
:ua:.f:t~up commencement of this Act. shall. after the expiry of three years 
.,etves. from such commencement or of such further period not exceeding 
one year as the Reserve Bank, having regard to the interests of the 
depositors of the company, may think fit in any particular case to 
allow, carry on business in India. and no other banking company 
shal1, afVer the commencement of this Act, commence or carryon 
business in India, unless it has paid-up capital and reserves of such 
aggregate value as is hereinafter required by this section. 
(2) In the case of a banking company incorporated outside 
India, the aggregate value of its paid-Up capital and reserves shall 
not be less than fifteen lakhs of rupees, and. if it has a plaee or places 
of businesl in the city of Bombay· or Calc'ltta or both. twenty laklu 
of rupees: 
Provided that no such banking company shall be deemed to ha~ 
complied with the provision~ of this sub·section, unless it deposits 
and keeps deposited with th, Reserve Bank an .mount not less than 

2'7 
the minimum required by this sub-section, either in cash or in un 
encumbered approved securities or partly in cash and partly in 
such securities. 
• • • • * 
(4) Any amount ~posited and kept deposited with the Reserve 
Bank under the prOVISO to sub-section (2) by any banking company 
incorporated outside India shall, in the event of the company ceasing 
for any reason to carry on banking business in India, be an asset 
of the company on which the claims of all the creditors of the com-
pany in India shall be a first charge. 
(5) For the purposes of this section "value" means the real or 
exchangeable value, and not the nominal value which may be shown 
in the books of the banking company concerned . 
• • • • • • 
12. (1) • • • • • Regulation 
of paid-up 
. .. cllpital, sub-(2) No person hold 109 shares 10 a banklOg company shall, in scribed 
respect of any shares held by him, exercise voting rights in excess caPhital.andd . . aut orlle A five per cent. of the total votmg nghts of all the share-holders of capital ana 
the banking company. voting rights of share-
holders . 
• • • • • 
15. No banking company shall pay any dividend on its shares Relt!ictions 
until all its capitalised expenses (including preliminary expenses," to paY-f . . h II' .. b k ts mcnt 0 orgarusatIOn expenses, s are-se 109 commISSIon, ro erage, amoun dividend. 
of losses incurred and any other item of expenditure not represented 
by tangible assets) have been completely written off. 
• • • * '" 17. Every banking company incorpoMted in India shall maintain a Reserve 
reserve fund, and shap, out of the net profits of each year and before fund. 
any dividend is declared, transfer a sum equiWllent to not less than 
twenty per cent. of such profits te· the reserve fund until the amount 
of the said fund is equal to the paid-up capital. 
Explanation.-The provisions of section 349 of the Companies Act, 
I of 19~6. 1956, shall apply for the purpose of computing net profits under this 
section as they apply for the purpose of computing net profits under 
section 348 of the S6id Act. 
18. Every banking company not being a scheduled bank shall main- eaah 
tain by way of cash reserve in cash with itself, or in an account opened re8erve. 
with the Reserve Bank, or partly in cash with itself and partly in such 
\lccount, a sum equivalent to at least two per cent of its time liabili-
ties and five per cent. of its demand liabilities and shall file with the 
Reserve Bank before the fifteenth day of every month three copies of 

28 
a statement of the amount so held on Friday of each week of the pre-
ceding month with particulars d its time and demand liabilities on 
ooch Friday. 
RelU'iction 19. (I) A banking company shall not form any subsidiary company 
:b:::Y of except a subsidiary company formed for one or more of the following 
companies. purposes, namely, the undertaking and executing of trusts, the under-
Licens!ni of 
banking 
companies. 
taking of the administration of estates as executor, trustee or other-
wise, the providing of safe deposit vaults or, with the previous permis-
sion in writing of the Reserve Bank, such other purposes as are inci-
dental to the business of banking . 
• • • • • • 
22. (1) Save as hereinafter provided, no company shall carry on 
banking business in India unless it holds a licence granted by the 
Reserve Bank in such behalf. 
(2) Every banking company in existence on the commencement of 
this Act, before the expiry of six months from such commencement, 
and every other company before commencing banking business in 
l;ldia, shall apply in writing to the Reserve Bank for a licence under 
this section: 
Provided that in the case of a banking company in existence on the 
commencement of this Act, nothing in sub-section (1) shall be deemed. 
to prohibit the company from carrying on banking business until it is 
granted a licence in pursuance of sub-section (2) or is by notice in 
writing informed by the Reserve Bank that a licence cannot be 
granted to it: 
Provided further that the Reserve Bank shell not give a notice as 
~foresaid to a banking company in existence on the commencement 
of this Act before the expiry of the three years referred to in sub-
section (1) of section 11 or of such further period as the Reserve 
Bank may under that sub-section think fit to allow . 
• • • • • • 
(4) The Reserve Bank may-
(a) cancel any licence granted under this section where any 
of the conditions set out in sub-section (3), on the fulfilment of 
which it required. to be satisfied when granting the licence, 
ceases to be fulfilled or if the c6mpany ceases to carry on banking 
business in India or goes into liquidation; 
(b) at any time after grnnting a licence under this section 
require that any of the said conditions, on the fulfilment of which 
it did not require to be satisfied when granting the licence, shall 

29 
be fulfilled to its satisfaction within such time as it may specify, 
and if the condition is not so fulfilled, cancel the licence. 
(5) Any banking company aggrieved by the cancellation of its 
licence under sub-section (4) may appeal to the Central Government, 
and the decision of the Central Government on such appeal shall be 
final. 
23. No banking company shall open a new place of business in .ny Restriction, 
part of India or change, otherwise than within the same city, town or ~ :W~~d 
village, the location of an existing place of business situated in any transfer of 
part of India, and ftO banking company incorporated in India shall ~=~f 
open a new place of business outside India or change, otherwise than business. 
within the same. city, town or village in any country or area outside 
India, the location of an existing place of business situated in that 
country or erea without first obtaining the prior permission in writing 
of the Reserve Bank; and before giving any such pennission the 
Reserve Bank may require to be satisfied by an inspection under 
section 35 or otherwise as to the financial condition and history of 
the company, the general character of its management, the adequacy 
of its capital structure and earning prospects and that public interest 
will be served by the opening or, as the case may be, change of 
location, of the pIece of business: 
Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to the opening for 
a period not exceeding one month of a temporary place of business 
within a city, town or village or the environs thereof within which 
the banking company already has a place of business for the purpose 
of raffording banking facilities to the public on the occasion of an 
exhibition, conference or mela. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section "place of business" 
includes any sub-office, pay office, sub-pay-office and any place of 
business at which deposits are received, cheques cashed or moneys 
lent. 
24. (1) After the expiry of two years from the commencement of Maintenanee 
this Act, every banking company shall maintain in cash, gold or of I perceDt-
b ed ed 't' I ed t' eed aae of 1.leta. unencum er approv seCUrI les, va u a a prIce not exc lng 
the current market price, an amount which shall not at the close of 
business on any day be less than 20 per cent. of the total of its time 
and dernend liabilities in India, 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section liabilities shall not 
include the paid-up capital or the reserves or any credit balance in 
the profit and loss account of the company or the amount of any loan 
.ken from the Reserve Bank. 

Alleu in 
India. 
38 
(2) In computing the amount for the purposes of sub-section (I), 
the deposit required under the proviso to sub-section (2) of section 
11 to be made with the Reserve Bank by a banking company incor-
porated outside India and any balance maintained. by a banking com-
pany with the Reserve Bank or its agent or both, including in the 
case of a scheduled bank the balance required under section 42 of 
the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, to be so maintained, shall be z of 1934. 
deemed to be cash maintained. 
(3) For the purpose of ensuring compliance with the provisions 
of this section, every banking company shell, not later than fifteen 
days after the end' of the month to which it relates, furnish to the 
Reserve Bank in the prescribed form and manner a monthly return 
showing particulars of its assets maintained in accordance with this 
section, and its time Qnd demand liabilities at the close of business 
on each Friday during the month, or if any Friday is a public holiday 
under the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881, at the close of business 26 of 1881. 
on the preceding working day. 
25. (1) The assets in India of every banking company at the close 
of the IlQSt working day of every quarter shall not be less than 
seventy-five per cent. of its demand and time liabilities therein. 
(2) Every banking company shall, within one month from the end 
of ev;ery quarter, submit to the Reserve Bank a return in the pres-
cribed form and manner of the assets and liabilities referred to in 
sub-section (1) as et the close of the last working day of the previous 
quarter. 
(3) For the purposes of this section,-
(a) "assets in India" shall be deemed to include export bills 
drawn in, and import bills drawn on and payable in, India and 
expressed in such currencies as the Reserve Bank may from time 
to time approve in this behalf and also such securities as the 
Reserve Bank may approve in this behalf notwithstanding that 
all or any of the said bills or securities are held outside Indie; 
(b) "quarter" means the period of three months ending on 
the last day of March, June, September or December . 
... * * ... ... ... 
MonthJy 27. (I) * * * * * * return. and 
power to 
cp.11 for 
:~efn~~t~~ .(2) The Reserve Bank may at any time direct a banking company 
to furn;sh it within such, time as may be specified by the Reserve 
Bank, with such statements and information relating to the business 
tion. 
or affairs of the banking company (including any bUliness or affairs 

31 
with which such banking company is concerned) as the Reserve B,ank 
~y consider necessary or expedient to obtain for the purposes of 
this Act, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing 
power may call for information every half-year regarding the classi-
fication of advances and investments of banking companies in respect 
of industry. commerce and agriculture. 
28. The Reserve Bank, if it considers it in the public interest so to Power te 
do, may publish any information obtained by it under section 27 in publi.~ in-
such consolidated form as it thinks fit. . fOfm&tlor . 
• • • • • • 
32. (I) Where a banking company in any year furnishes its Copiea of ba. 
balance-sheet and accounts in accordance with the provisions of IIndce-'h~ 
. 31' h" hall h an IOCOU-sectIon It may, or w en It is a prIvate company. 8 at t e same Dts to be 
time send to the registrar three copies of such balance-sheet and I~nt to re-I1ltr l r. 
accounts and of the auditor's report, and where such copies are so 
sent, it shall not be necessary for the company to file copies of the 
balance-sheet and accounts with the registrar es required by sub-
section (1) of section 220 of the Companies Act. 1956. and such copies 
so sent shall be chargeable with the same fees and shall be dealt with 
in all respects as if they were filed in accordance with that section . 
• • • • • • 
35B. (1) In the case of a banking company- ,t,mendmenu 
of provisions 
(a) no amendment of any provision relating to the appoint- =~ent 
ment or re-appointment or remuneration of a managing or whole- ~f managin, 
. di f d' l' bl . b I rectors, tIme rector or 0 a Irector not la e to retIre y rotation or etc., to be 
of a manager or a chief executive officer by whatever name subj~t to • " prevIous ap-called, whether that proviSIOn be con tamed m the company's prow of the 
memorandum or articles of association, or in an agreement RBesckrve 
an . 
entered into by it. or in any resolution passed by the company 
in general meeting or by its Board of directors shall have effect 
unless approved by the Reserve Bank; 
(b) no appointment or f.:!-appointment of a managing or 
whole-time director, maneger or chief executive officer by what-
ever name called, shall have effect unless such appointment or 
re-appointment is made with the previous approval of the 
Reserve Bank. 
(2) Nothing contained in sections 268, 269, 310, 311 and 388 in 
so far as section 388 makes the provisions of sections 310 and 311 
apply in relation to the manager of a company) of the Companies 
Act, 1956, shall apply to a banking company after the commencement 
of the Banking Companies (Amendment) Act, 1856 . 
• • • • 

PUrtherpo-
wen and 
fuocdoo. of 
Reeerve 
Bank. 
32 
31. (1) The Reserve Bank may-
(a) caution or prohibit banking companies generally or any 
banking company in particular against entering into any parti-
cular transaction or class of transactions, and generally give 
advice to any banking company; 
(b) on a request by the companies concerned and subject to 
the provisions of section 45, assist, as intermediary or otherwise, 
in proposals for the amalgamation of such banking companies; 
• • • • 
up 38. (1) Without prejud;ce to the provisions contained in section 
433 or section 583 of the Companies Act, 1956 and without prejudice 
to its powers under section 37, the High Court shall order the winding 
up of a banking company if it is unable to pay its debts and the High 
Court shall also order the winding up of a banking company if the 
Reserve Bank applies in this behalf to the High Court. 
(2) The Reserve Bank may make an application under thil> section 
only if it is directed so to do by order under clause (b) of sub-section 
(4) of section 35 or if the banking company has failed to comply 
within due time with the demand contained in a notice under sub-
section (5) of section 46. 
(3) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in section 434 
I of 1956. 
of the Companies Act, 1956, a banking company shall be deemed to I of 1956. 
be unable to pay its debts if it has refused to meet any lawful 
demand for payment made at any of its offices or branches within 
two working days, if such demand is made at a place where there 
is an office, branch or agency of the Reserve Bank, or within five 
working days, if such demand is made elsewhere, and if the Reserve 
Bank certifies in writing that the banking company is unable to 
pay its debts. 
(4) A copy of every application by the Reserve Bank under sub-
section (1) shall be sent by the Reserve Bank to the registrar. 
• • • • 
~ B~k 3t. Notwithstanding anyth;ng contained in section 38A of this 
I'fc.~d:'ial Act or in section 448 of the Companies Act, 1956, where in any I of 19s'. 
proceeding for the winding up by the High Court of a banking com-
pany, an application is made by the Reserve Bank in this behalf, the 
Reserve Bank, the State Bank of- India or any other bank notified by 
the Central Government in this behalf, as stated in such application 
shall be appointed as the offic;ial liquidator of the banking company 
in such proceeding. 
• • • • 

33 
43A. (1) In every proceeding for the winding up of a banking Preferential 
company, after the preferential payments referred to in section 530 ~:~ 
of the Companies Act, 1956, have been made, there shall be paid, siton. 
to every depositor in the sav;ngs bank account of the banking com-
pany, a sum of one hundred rupees or the balance at his credit, 
whichever is less, in priority to all other debts from out of the 
remaining assets of the banking complny available for payment of 
general creditors. 
• • • • 
44. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in section Restriction 
I of J956. 484 of the Companies Act, 1956, no banking company which holds a ~in~~'::. 
licence granted under section 22 may be voluntarily wound up unless 
I of 1956. 
I of 1956. 
J of 1956. 
1 of 1956. 
52 of 19S3. 
the Reserve Bank certifies in writing that the company is able to 
pay in full all its debts to its creditors as they accrue, end without 
prejudice to the provisions contained in sections 521 and 441 of that 
Act, the High Court shall, on the application of the Reserve Bank, 
order the winding up of the company by the High Court if at any 
stage during the voluntary winding up proceedings the company is 
not able to meet such debts as they accrue . 
• • • • 
45K. (1) Where a High Court makes an order under sf'ction 391 i,?whercof 
f th C . A 1956 .. . t -lig oUrt o e omparues ct, sanctlOnmg a comprOffilse or arrangemen to enforce 
in respect of a banking company, it shall have power to supervise schemes of arrange-
the carrying out of the compromise or arrangement and may at the menu. etc. 
time of making such order or at any time thereafter give such 
d;rections in regard to any matter or make such modifications: in the 
compromise or arrangement as it may consider necessary for the 
proper working of the compromise or arrangement. 
(2) H the High Court is satisfied that a compromise or nrrange-
ment sanctioned under section 391 of the Companies Act, 1956 cannot 
be worked satisfactorily with or without modifications, it may, either 
on its own motion or on the application of any person interested in 
the affairs of the banking company, make an order winding up the 
banking company and such an order shall be deemed to be an order 
made under section 433 of the Companies Act, 1956. 
(3) The provisions of this section shall. so far as they may, also 
apply to a banking company in respect of which an order under 
section 391 of the Companies Act, 1956 sanctioning a compromise or 
arrangement has been made before the commencement of the Bank-
ing Companies (Amendment) Act, 1953. 
• • • • 

Special 
period of 
lliDitatioa. 
Penaltiet. 
34 
'50. (1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in 
the Indian Limitation Act, 1908 or in any other law for the time 9 of 1908. 
being in force, in computing the period of limitation prescribed for 
a su't or application by a banking company which is being wound 
up, the period commencing from the date of the presentation of the 
petition for the winding up of the banking company shall be 
excluded. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in the 
Indian Limitation Act, 1908 or section 543 of the Companies Act, S of ]908. 
1956 or in any other law for the time being in force, there shall be no 1 of ]9S6. 
period of limitation for the recovery of arrears of calls from any 
director of a banking company which is being wound up or for the 
enforcement by the banking company against any of its directors of 
any claim based on a contract, express or implied; and in respect of 
all other claims by the banking company against its directors, the 
period of limitation shall be twelve years from the date of the eccrual 
of such claims. 
(3) The provisions of this section, in so far as they relatE" to 
banking companies being wound up, shall also apply to a banking 
company in respect of which a petition for the winding up has been 
presented before the commencement of the Banking Companies 
(Amendment) Act, 1953. sa of 19S3 • 
• • • • 
PART IV 
MISCELLANEOUS 
faa. (1) • . • • • • 
(4) If any other provision of this Act is contravened, or if any 
default is made in complying with any requirement of this Act, or 
of sny order or direction made thereunder, every director and other 
officer of the banking company who is knowingly a party to the 
contravention or default shall be punishable with a fine not exceeding 
five hundred rupees, and where the contravention or default is a 
continuing one, with a further fine not exceeding ruty rupees for 
every day during which it continues. 
(5) Without prejudice to the provisions of Bub-section (4), if any 
banking company fails to comply with the provisions of section 24 
or section 25, the Reserve Bank shall by notice in writing make 6 
demand on the banking company to comply with the said provisions 
within thirty days from the receipt of the notice, and if the banking 

I of Ip$6. 
35 
company fails so to do, the Reserve Bank may apply under section 38 
~or the winding up of the banking company. 
• • • • 
49. The exemptions, whether express or implied, in favour of a S'p~cia1 f~ 
• VlSlons lOr 
private company in sectIons 90, 165 and 255, clauses (a) and (b) of private bank-
sub-section (1) of section 293 and sections 300 and 416 of the Com- 1111.1 COOlpan-
panies Act, 1956, shall not operate in favour of a private company le8. 
which is a banking company. 
• • • • 
EXTRACTS FROM THE RESERVE BANK OF INDIA ACT, 1934 
(No.2 OF 1934) 
• • • • 
42. (1) Every Bank included in the Second Schedule shall main- Cash resene 
tain with the Bank an average daily balance the amount of which b~S:~u~ 
shall not be less than five per cent. of the demand liabilities and two kept with 
per cent. of the time liabilities in India of such bank as shown in the the Bank. 
return referred to in sub-section (2): 
Provided that the Bank may, by notification in the Gazette of 
India, increase the said rates to such higher rates as may be specified 
in the notification so however, that the rate shall not be more than 
twenty per cent., in the case of demand liabilities and more than 
eight per cent., in the case of time liabilities. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section,-
(a) "average daily balance" shall mean the average of the 
balances held at the close of business on each day of a week; 
(b) "week" shall mean the period from Saturday to the 
following Friday, both days inclusive; 
(c) "liabilities" shall not include the paid up oapital or the 
reserves, or any credit balanc~ in the profit and loss account of 
the bank or the amount of any loan taken from the Bank, the 
State Bank, or any other bank notified by the Central Govern-
ment in this behalf. 
• • • • • 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Banking Companies Act, 1949. 
GMG1PND-LS 1-1917 (B) LS-I9-2-1959-I.6so 
. 
(Shri Morarji Desai, 
Minister of Finance.) 