IJJJI No. U of I'S1 
THE LIFE INSURANCE CORPORATION 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, I9I7 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 

BiII:No. I2 of 1957_ 
THE LlFE,INSURANCE CORPORATION (AMENDMENT) 
BILL,1957 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABRA) 
A 
BILL 
to amend the Life Insurance Corporation Act, 1956. 
B. it enacted by Parliament in the Eighth Year of the Republic 
fJl lQdi. u follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Life Insurance Corporation Shan title. 
'~ent) Act, 1957. 
, Z~ In section 11 of the Life Insurance Corporation Act, 1956 Amendment 
.. e-
(hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), for sub-section (2), of section II. 
ab. following sub1ieCtion shall be substituted, namely:-
.. (2) Where the Central Government is satisfied that for 
:the purpose of securing uniformity in the scales of remunera-
tion and the other terms and conditions of service applicable 
to employees of insurers whose controlled business has been 
transferred to, and vested in, the Corporation, it is necessary 
10 to do, or that, in the interests of the Corporation and its 
policy-holders, a reduction in the remuneration payable, or a 
reviSion of the other terms and conditions of service applicable, 
to employees or any class of them is called for, the Central 
Government may, from time to time, notWithstanding anything 
contained in sub-section (1), or in the Industrial Disputes Act, 
1947, or in any other law for the time being in force, or in any 
.ward, settlement or agreement for the time being in force, 
alter (whether by way of reduction or otherwise) the remunera-
tion and the other terms and conditions of service to such 

2 
extent and in such manner as it thinks fit; and if the alteration 
is not acceptable~ to any employee, the Corporation may termi-
nate his employment by giving him compensation equivalent 
to three months' remuneration unless the contract of service 
with such employee provides for a shorter notice of termination. s 
Explanation.-The compensation payable to an employee 
under this sub-section shall be in addition to, and shall not 
affect, any pension, gratuity, provident fund money or any other 
benefit to which the employee may be entitled under his contract 
of service.". 10 
Amendment 3. In section 43 of the principal Act, after sub-section (2), the 
of section 43· 
Substitution 
ofne ..... 
section for 
section 45. 
Special 
provisions 
regardin~ 
transfer of 
controlled 
business of 
certain 
composite 
insurers. 
following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-
"(2A) Section 42 of the Insurance Act shall have effect in 
relation to the issue to any individual of a licence to act as an 
agent for the purpose of soliciting or procuring life insurance IS 
business for the Corporation as if the reference to an officer 
authorised by the Controller in this behalf in sub-section (1) 
thereof included a reference to an officer of the Corporation 
authorised by the Controller in this behalf.". 
, 4. For section 45 of the principal Act, the following section 20 
shall be substituted, namely:-
"45. Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (c) -Of 
section 44, the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, direct that on and with effect from such date 
as may be specified in the notification the assets and liabilitiea 25 
appertaining to the controlled business of a composite insurer' 
in respect of the management of whose affairs an Admiriistra-
tor has been appointed under section 52A of the Insurance Act 
shall be transferred to and vested in the Corporation, and on 
the issue of such a notification the provisions of this· Act shall, 30 
so far as may be, apply in relation to such insurer and to the'"" 
transfer and vesting of the assets and liabilities of his controlled 
business in the Corporation as they apply in relation to all other 
insurers and to the transfer and vesting of the assets end .Uablli- , 
ties of their controlled bu,siness in the Corporation, subject to3S" 
the modification that references in this Act to the appointed day 
shall be construed as references to the day speoified in th~ noti-
fication.". . 

3 
5. In section 49 of the princip~l Act, after clause 
section (2), the following clause shall be, and shall 
alWAYS to have been, inserted, namely:-
(b) of sub- Amendment 
be deemed of Acction 
49· 
"(bb) the terms and conditions of service of persons who 
have become employees of the Corporation under sub-section 
(1) of section 11;" . 
. - 8. Any order altering the remuneration and the other terms and Validation of 
conditions of service of the employees referred to in sub-section (2) 0br~ers passed • . . elorc com-
of section 11 of the prmclpal Act made or purportmg to have been mencemcnt 
10 made under that sub-section before the commencement of this Act ?f Act alter-mg remune-
by the Central Government for any of the purposes specified in ration, etc. 
that Bub-section as amended by this Act, shall, notwithstanding any-
thing contained in any judgment, decree or order of any court, be 
deemed to have been made under that sub-section as amended by 
15 this Act as if this Act were in force on the date on and from which 
the order was intended to take effect, and the order shall continue 
in force and have effect accordingly, unless and until superseded by 
,anything done or action taken under the principal Act. 
7. The Life Insurance Corporation (Amendment) 
.2e 1967, is hereby repealed. 
• 
Ordinance, Repeal of 
Ordinance 3 
of 1957 . 

, 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
After the passing of the Life Insurance Corporation Aet, 19M, it 
became necessary for the Corporation to examine the widely vary-
ing terms and conditions of service of employees whose services had 
been statutorily transferred to it with a view to ensuring uniformitt 
in the pay scales and other terms and conditions of service appu-
cable to them. An order altering the terms and condi~ions ot lernce 
in this behalf was passed by the Corporation under section 11(1) 
which was later approved by the Central Government and issued iA 
the form of an order under section 11 (2). In a recent decision, the-
Bom~ay High Court held that the power given to the Central GOY-
ernment under section 11 (2) was confined to altering the remunera.. 
tion only and the order which dealt not only with the remunera-
tion but also with other terms and conditions of service was, there-
fore, bad in law. To prevent confusion in the working of the Cor-
poration an Ordinance had to be promulgated immediately amend-
ing section 11 (2) and validating the order made by Government. 
The present Bill seeks to replace the Ordinance. 
2. Advantage has been taken of this opportunity to make the 
following further amendments:- • 
(i) Section 42 of the Insurance Act, 1938, empowers the Con-
troller or any officer authorised by him in this behalf to issue 
licences to insurance agents. It is felt that officers of the Cor-
poration should also be enabled to issue licences on behalf of 
the Controller. 
(ii) A doubt has arisen whether in respect of a transfer 
under section 45 of the controlled business of a composite insur-
er now vested in an Administrator the provisions of this Act 
apply. A redraft of section 45 seeks to make the position clear. 
(iii) Section 49 (2) is sought to be amended. to make it 
clear that the power conferred by section 49 (2) (b) is 8ya1labJe. 
with respect to all employees whether recruited by the eorpo.. 
ration or taken over on its incorporation. 
I , 'I T. T. KRISHNAMA,CHABI. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 14th May, 1957 . ".- ,', '.;':''' 
4 '-, 

• 
11. (1) 
• 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS PROM THE LIFE INSURANCE Ac:r, 1956 
No. 31 OF 1956 
• • • • • • 
• • • • • • 
• 
• 
Transfer of 
serv'ce of 
existing 
employees 0 
inamers to 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) or the C~r-
in any contract of service, the Central Government may, for the poratlon. 
purpose of rationalising the pay scales of employees of insurers 
whose controlled business has been transferred to and vested in it 
or for the purpose of reducing the remuneration payable to 
employees in cases where in the interest of the Corporation and its 
policy-holders a reduction is called for, alter the terms of service 
of the employees as to their remuneration in such manner as it 
thinks fit; and if the alteration is not acceptable to any employee 
the corporation may terminate his employment on giving him com-
pensation equivalent to three months' remuneration unless the 
contract of service with such employee provides for a shorter notice 
of termination. 
Ezplanation.-The compensation payable to an employee under 
this sub-section shall be in addition to and shall not affect any 
pension, gratuity, provident fund money or any other benefit to 
which the employee may be entitled under his contract of service . 
• • • • 
45. Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (c) of section Special 
44, the Administrator appointed to manage the affairs of a composite ~:::~N:a' 
Insurer under the Insurance Act shall, as soon as may be practicable certain. 
after the commencement of this Act, take steps in the prescribed f~~~::.lte 
manner,-
(a) to transfer the assets and liabilities appertaining to the 
controlled business of the insurer, to the Corporation; and 
(b) to vest the management of the affairs of the insurer in 
respect of any other kind of business. in the person entitled 
thereto. 
• • • • 
s . 

Power to 
make 
N.1I1.tionl. 
• 
49. (1) 
• • • • 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the aenerality of the 
foregoing power, such regulations may provide for-
.... 
(a) 
• • • • 
(b) the method of recruitment of employ", and -aents of 
the Corporation and the termll and condition. of service of IUch 
employees or aients; . 
• • • • 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to amend the Life Insurance Corporation Act, 1956. 
(Shri T. T. Krishnamachari, 
Minister of Finance.) 
GIPND-LS 1-320 L5-16-5-57-I,7S0 