8W No. 12 of 1955 
THE SALARIES AND ALLOWANCES OF MEMBERS OF 
PARLIAMENT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 19S5 
(As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABRA) 
A 
BILL 
to amend the SalCJTies and Allowances of Members of Parliament 
Act, 1954. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Salaries and Allowances 
Members of Parliament (Amendment) Act, 1955. 
5 (2) It shall come into force on the first day of April, 1955. 
of Short title 
IDd com-
mencement. 
2. In clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 4 and in clause (a) Amendment 
of section 5 of the Salaries and Allowances of Members of Parlia- ~d~~t~: 4 
ment Act, 1954 (hereinafter referred to as the ;>rincipal Act), for the 30 of 1954· 
words "one second class fare", the words "one first class fare" shall 
10 be substituted. 
3. In section 6 of the principal Act, for the words "second class Amen~ment 
pass", the words "first class pass" shall be substituted. ~:ec;~ono1' 
I954' 

2 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Bill seeks to amend the Salaries and Allowances of Members 
of Parliament Act, 1954 and provides for the issue of first class passes 
to and drawal of first class fare by Members of Parliament with 
effect from 1st April, 1955, consequent on the re-designation cf the 
present second and intennediate classes on Railways as first and 
second classes respectively from that date. 
S. N. SINHA. 
Nl;w Da.m; 
The 19th March, 195~. 

3 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE SALARIES AND ALLOWANCES OF MEMBERS OF 
PARLIAMENT ACT, 1954 (30 OF 1954). 
• • • • • • • 
t. Travellbar AUowaaees..-(l) There shall be paid to each mem-
ber in respect of every journey performed by him for the pw-pose 
of attending a session of a House of Parliament or a meeting of a 
Committee or for the purpose of attending to any other business 
connected with his duties as a member, from his usual place of 
residence to the place where the session or the meeting is to be 
held or the other business is to be transacted and for the return 
journey from such place to his usual place of residence-
(·a) if the journey is performed by raIl, an amount equal 
to one second class fare plus one third class fare for each such 
journey, irrespective of the class in which the member actually 
travels; 
• • • • • • • 
5. Trave11lnr allowaaees for Intermediate journeYI.-Where a 
member absents himself for less than fifteen days during a session 
of a House of Parliament or a sitting of a committee for visiting 
any place in India, he shall be entitled to receive travelling allow-
ances in respect of such journey to such place and for the return 
journey-
(a) if the journey is performed by rail, equal to one second 
class fare for each such journey irrespective of the class in 
which the member actually travels: 
• • • • • • • 
6. Free transit by Railway.-Every member shall be prOVided 
with one free non-transferable second class pass which shall entitle 
him to travel by any railway in India at any time, but nothing 
contained in this section shall affect the payment of any travelling 
allowance payable to.a member under any other provision of this 
Act. 

LOKSABHA 
·A 
BILL 
to amend the Salaries and Allowances of Members of 
Parliament Act, 1954. 
(Sltri StJlya Narayan Sinha, 
Minister of Parliamentary Affairs) 
• 