... 
BILL No. u of "M 
THE TRANSFER OF EVACUEE DEPOSITS 
BILL, 1954 
[As INTRODUCED IN THE HOUSE OF THE PEOPLE] 
A 
BILL 
to provide, in pursuance of an agreement with Pakistan, for the 
transfer to that country of certain deposits beZonging to evacuee" 
the reception in India of similm' 8eposits .beZongi1tg to displaced 
persons, and matters connected therewith. 
WHEREAS an agreement has been arrived at with Pakistan for 
the transfer to that country of certain deposits belonging to evacuees, 
the reception in India of similar deposits belonging to displaced 
persons, and matters connected therewith; 
BE it enacted by Parliament as follows: - 5 
1. Short title, extent and commencement.-(l) This Act may be 
called the Transfer of Evacuee Deposits Act, 1954. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India, except the States of Assam, 
West Bengal,_ Tripq.ra, Manipur and Jammu and Kashmir. 
(3) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 1st day of 10 
February, 1954. 
2. Definitions.-In this Act, unless the context otherwise 
requires,- • 
(a) "CUstodian" means a Custodian of Deposits appointed 
under section 3, and includes an Assistant Custodian of Deposits; 
(b) "deposit" means~ . 
(i) any movable property in the custody or under the 
control of any civil or revenue court in respect of any pro-
ceedings before it; or 
(ii) any movable property under the superintendence or 20 
in .the custody of a court of wards under any law for the time 
being in force, whether such movable property is in the actual 
custody of the court of wards, or in that of some other 
authority on its behalf; or 

S 
10 
15 
20 
2S 
~o 
2 
(iii) any movable property in the custody or under the 
'control of a manager; 
and includes any securities, insurance policies and negotiable 
instruments in the custody or under the control of any such civil 
or revenue court or under the superintendence or in the custody 
of such court of wards or in the custody or under the control of 
such manager. 
Explanation 1.-' Securities' include shares, scrips, stocks, 
bonds, debentures, debenture stocks or other marketable securities 
of a like nature in or of any body corporate and also Government 
securities. ' 
Explanation H.-Where any deposit in the custody or under 
the control of any civil or revenue court or under the superinten-
dence or in the custody of a court of wards or in the custody or 
under the control of the manager has vested in the Custodian of 
Evacuee Property as evacuee property, such deposit shall, for the 
purposes of this Act, be deemed to be in the custody or under 
the control of such civil or revenue court or under the superin~ 
tendence or in the custody of the court of wards or in the custody 
or under the control of the manager, as the case may be; 
(c) "displaced person" means any person who, on account of 
the setting up of the Dcminions of India and Pakistan or on 
account of civil disturbances or the fear of such disturbances in 
any area now forming part of Pakistan, has, on or after the 1st 
day of March, 1947, left, or been displaced from, his place of 
residence in such area and who has been subsequently residing in 
India; 
(d) "evacuee" means any person who, on account of the 
setting up of the Dominions of India and Pakistan or on account 
of civil disturbances or the fear of such disturbances, has, on or 
after the 1st day of March, 1947, left any place in the territories 
to which this Act erlends and who is now residing in any place 
forming part of Pakistan; . 
(e) "manager" means the manager of an encUJnbered estate 
appointed under any law for the time being in force relating to 
encumbered estates; 
(f) "transferable deposit" tneans a deposit in which an 
evacuee has any right or interest, to the extent of that right or 
interest; 
(g) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this 
Act. 
3. Appointment of Custodian and Assistant Custodians of 
Deposits.-(l) The Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint a Custodian of Deposits and as many 
45 Assistant Custodians of Deposits as may be necessary for the purpose 
of discharging the duties imposed upon the Custodian and Assistant 
Custodians by 0'1' under this Act. 

, 
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Custodian and 
Assistant Custodians of Deposits shall discharge the duties imposed 
on them by or under this Act under the general superintendence 
and control of the Central Government, and the Central Govern-
ment may, by general or special order, provide for the distribution S 
of work among them. 
(3) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Assistant Custodians 
of Deposits shall discharge the duties imposed on them by or under 
this Act under the general superintendence and control of the 
Custodian. 10 
4. Transfer of deposits In mass mlgrattoq area.-(l) Where a civil 
or revenue ~ourt or a court of wards situated in a mass migration 
area or the manager exercising jurisdiction in any such area is satis-
fied-
(a) in the case of a civil or revenue court other than a civil I, 
court exercising jurisdiction und~ the Guardians and Wards "ct. 
1890 (VIn of 1890) or the manager, that all the parties interested 
in a deposit are Muslims; " 
(b) in the case of a civil court exe"rcisin(:! jurisdiction under 
the Guardians and Wards Act, 1890 (VIII of 1890), that both the 20 
guardian and the minor interested in a deposit are Muslims; 
I 
(c) in the case of a cdUrt of wards having under its superin-
tendence or custody a deposit, that the ward is a Muslim; 
the civil or revenue court or the court of wards or the manager, as 
the case may be, shall, as soon as may be after the commencement of 2S 
this Act, transfer the deposit along with the records relating thereto, 
to such authorised officer or authority in Pakistan as the Central 
Government may, by general or special order, specify in this behalf: 
" Provided that where, in the opinion of any such civil or revenue 
court or the court of wards or the manager. any of the persons inte.... lO 
ested in a deposit is not an evacuee, the deposit shall not be trans-
ferred to Pakistan under this section. 
(2) Every civil or revenue court and every court of wards and the 
manager shall, as soon as may be, send to the Custodian in such form 
as may be prescribed, particularS of all deposits transferred to l$ 
Pakistan under sub-section (1). 
Explanation.-In this section, the expression 'mass migration 
area' means the territories comprised in the following States or areas, 
namely:-
~i) the State of Punjab; 40 
(ii) the State of Patiala and East Punjab States Union; 
(iii) the State of Ajmer; 
(iv) the State of Delhi; 
(v) the State of Himachal Pradesh; 

.. 
(vi) the districts of Alwar, Bharatpur and Bikaner in the 
State of Rajasthan. and the districts of Saharanpur, Dehra Dun, 
Meerut and Muzaffarnagar in the State of Uttar Pradesh. 
5. Procedure for transfer of certain other deposits to Paklstan.-
, (1) Where either on a request received in this behalf from any'such 
officer or authority in Pakistan as may be specified in this behalf 
by the Central Government by notification in the Official Gazette, 
or on any other information available to him, the Custodian is of 
opinion that there is a transferable deposit to which the provisions of 
10 section 4 do not apply, he may send for the record relating thereto 
from any court or other authority and inspect the same. 
(2) If, after making any such inspection as'is referred to in sub-
section (1) and after making such further inquiry into the matter as 
may be prescribed, the Custodian is satisfied that the deposit is a 
IS transferable deposit within the meaning of this Act, he may, by 
order, direct that the deposit ihall be transferred to such authorised 
officer or authority in Pakistan as the Central Government may, by 
general or special order, specify in this behalf, and any cO':1rt or other 
authority holding in its custody or under its control any such deposit 
20 shall comply with the direction. 
(3) ~otwithstanding anything contained in this section, where in 
I respect of any deposit the extent of the right or interest of an evacuee 
in such deposit is not easily ascertainable or, having regard to the 
nature of the deposit, it is in the opinion of the Custodian not practi. 
25 cable to separate the right or interest of the evacuee from the right 
or interest of other persons in such deposit, the Custodian shall I\ot 
transfer any part of the deposit to Pakistan, 
6. Transfer of records relating to transferable deposlts.-( 1) 
Where a transferable deposit is directed to be transferred to Pakistan 
]0 under the provisions of section 5, the Custodian may send the record 
relating to the deposit, or, if it is expedient so to do, only a certified 
copy of such part of the record as, in the opinion of the Custodian, 
is material to the case to the Government of Pakistan or to such 
officer or authority to whom or to which the deposit has been directed 
'35 to be transferred. 
(2) If a certified copy only is sent in pursuance of sub-section (1)~ 
the original record. together with a copy of the order of the Custodian 
under section 5, shall be returned to the court or other authority 
from which it was obt~ined, 
40 7. Power of Court or Custodian to convert deposits into money 
before transmission to Pakistan.- Where the transfer to Pakistan of 
any artIcle which is a transferable deposit is prohibited under any 
law for the time being in force, it shall be lawful for a civil or a 
revenue court, or the court of wards or the manager or the Custo-
4' dian, as the case may be, to convert such article into money in such 
manner as may be prescribed, and upon such conversion the provi-
sions of this Act shall apply to th~ proceeds thereof. a8. they apply 
to a transferable deposit. _ •. _ 

~ 
8. Cesser of jurisdiction in respect of deposits transferred.--Upon 
the transfer of any transferable depOSIt undc)' section 4 or in pur-
suancc of an order of the Custodian under section 5. all courts and 
authorities in India shall, save as oihcrwi:.;l' PI'()';ided in this Act, 
cSie to have or exercise any jurisdictiol1 in re];'ii.Ol1 to the deposit 
so ferred in so far as it relates to the right or interest of any 
eva ee in the deposit. 
9. Reception in India of deposits transferred from Pakistan.-
(1) It shall be lawful for the Custodian to receive and hold in his 
custody any deposit transferred by any such o/licer or authority in 
Pakistan as may be specified by the Cel1 t ral Govprnment by general 
or special order as being a deposit belonging to any displaced person 
in India. 
(2) On receipt of any such deposit as is referred to in sub-section 
5 
10 
(1). the Custodian shall cause notice thereof to be given in such 15 
manner as may be prescribed to all persons who may. in his opinion. 
be interested in the deposit. and after giving a reasonablC' opportunity 
to such persons to be heard in the matter and after inspecting any 
such record relating io the deposit as may be transfern;·d frQj11 
Pakistan, dispose of the deposit in the manner [allowing. that is to 20 
say-
(a) if there is only one claimant entitled to the deposit or if 
all the claimants, where there are more than one. appeal before 
the Custodian and there is no dispute as to the dist rihlltiull of the 
deposit. pay the deposit to that Claimant or. as the ease may be, 25 
distribute the deposit among the claimants in the manner agreed 
to by them; 
(b) if all the claimants do not appear bdol't' the Cu:·todian 
or if all such claimants apppar but do not agree as to the person 
or persons entitled to the deposit or to til(' md'1IlCr of its distribu- 30 
tion among them, the Custodian shall forward t he deposit <tnri the 
records relating thereto to the principal civil court of original 
jurisdiction within whose jurisdi(~t ion :lll. or the largest number 
of claimants, reside. or when' the claimants residing within the 
jurisdiction of two or more courts an' eqll;)l in nl1mbpr. to the 3S 
court which, in the opinion of the Custodian, wo'l.lld bf'st serve the 
convenience of the claimants. 
(3) The court to which a deposit and any fl'rnl'd relating thereto 
are forwarded under sub-section (2) shall proceed 10 0('<11 \,,·ith the 
matter as if the deposit had been made in ('()mpliClnc{' with an order 40 
made by it in a proceeding before it and. aftcl" making c;uch furtlwr 
inquiry into the matter as it thinks fit. award the dprl()si1 to or distri-
bute it among the person or persons who in its opinion is or arc entitl-
ed thereto. 
(4) An appeal shall lie from every order passed hy any court llnder4~ 
sub-section (3) to the court authorised to hl'ar appC'als from the deci-
sions of such court if the amount or value of the subject matter of 
the claim made in the' appeal exc('cds two thnusnno rupees. 

6 • 
(5) The disposal of any deposit in accordance with the provisions 
pi this..section shall discharge the Custodian from any liability to any 
"rson in respect of the deposit. 
to.. "owers of Custodlan.-The Custodian shall have all the powers 
S ve1ited in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 U. V 
of 1908), when trying a suit, in respect of the following ~rs, 
namely:-
(a) discovery and inspection; 
JO 
(b) enforcing the attendance of witnesses and requiring the 
deposit of their expenses; . 
(c) compelling the production of docwnents; -
(d) examining witnesses on oath; 
(e) reception of evidence on affidavits; 
(1) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses; 
IS &Dthnay summon and examine suo motu any person whose evidence 
.appeArs to him to be material; and shall be deemed to be a civil court· 
within the meaning of section 480 and section 482 of the Code of 
.Qriminal Procedure, 1898 (Act V of 1898). 
ExpZanation.-For the purpose of enforcing the attendance of wit-
20 nesses, the local limits of the jurisdiction of the Custodian shall be 
the local limits for which he is appointed. ' 
Iii. JlII'IadIdIIoDof civil courts barred-No civil court shall have 
jurisdiction to question the legality of any action taken or of any 
decision given by the Custodian in connection with the transfer of 
25 any transferable deposit or with the disposal of any deposit received' 
from Pakistan as belonging to a displaced person. 
12. Protection of action taken in good falth.-No suit, prosecution 
01: other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central Government or 
my Custodian or any other person in respect of anything which is 
·30 in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act 
or of any rule or order made thereunder. 
loS 
.. , 
13. Power, to, make rules.-( 1) The Central Government may, by 
QDtiflcation in the Official Gdette, make rules to carry out the pur-
poses of this Act. 
(-2). In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such rules may-
(a) define the terms and conditions of service of the Custo-
dian and Assistant Custodians and the local limits of their 
respective jurisdictions and the distribution of work among them 
or the transfer of work from one to another of the Custodian and 
Assistant Custodians; 
(b) the manner in which deposits and reeOrdltelating thereto 
may be transferred to Pakistan; 
(e) prescribe the manner in which any i)1q.uiry under this 
A.ct may be held; . 
(d) the manner in which a transfer(lQl~ depos.it ~ay }:)~ CO~­
verted into money under section 7; 

7 
(e) specify the persons to whom and the manner in which 
notices of any proceedings under this Act shall be given; 
(/) prescribe' the manner in which certified copies of any 
record may be prepared under this Act and the fees, if any, 
which may be levied in respect of such certified copies; 
. (g) prescribe the form in which any application may be made 
to the Custodian under this Act. 
14. Repeal of Ordinance 6~f 19M.-The Transfer of Evacuee 
Deposits Ordinance, 1954 (6 of 1954) is hereby repealed. 

M 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The question of transfer from Pakistan to India and vice· verBa 
Q.{ depc;>sits in the custody or control of civil or revenue courts and 
of movable properties in the custody or control of courts of wards 
which apply to persons who have migrated from one country to the 
other was first considered in June, 1950 by the Governments of India 
and ·Pakistan and it was then agreed that legal power should be 
taken to enable the transfer of such deposits or other movable pro-
perties. The question was further discussed when the representa-
tives of the two Governments met in Karachi in July-August of last 
year. It has now been agreed that such deposits and movable pro-
perties should be transferred to the other country under a law made 
for the purpose and the Government of Pakistan would take simllar 
action on the other side. The law is to ~rovide for en bloc transfers 
of such properties from what are called mass migration areas' where 
both the parties interested in the deposits happen to be evacuees. 
In respect of other cases, where only one of the parties happens to 
be an evacuee, the Custodian is vested with the power to transfer 
any deposit or other movable property if he ftpds that any person 
interested in it is an evacuee. Provision is also to be made for 
receipt of deposits and other properties from Pakistan and for their 
distribution to their rightful owners in this country. As the 
arrangements between the two countries had to be given effect to 
on the 1st February, 1954, an Ordinance had to be yromulgated 
which is now being replaced by this Bill. This law wil apply only 
to those areas in which the Administration of the Evacuee Property 
Act, 1950, is now in operation. 
The Government of Pakistan bas also taken action to implement 
the agr~ement between the two countries by promulgating the 
Transfer of Evacuee Deposits Ordinance, 1954 (I of 1954). 
NEW DELHI; 
The 8th March, 1954. AJIT PRASAD JAIN. 

9 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM .. 
The Bill provides for the appointment of a Custodian and 
Assistant Custodians of Deposits who will discharge the duties under 
the general superintendence and control of the Central Government. 
There will be one Custodian and three Assistant Custodians for the 
areas to which the provisions of this law will apply, They will be 
given necessary staff for the discharge of their duties under the Act. 
It is estimated that the total 'expendjture on the staff would be 
Rs. 95,000 during the year 1954-55. • 

• 
10 
MEMORANDUM RE DELEGATED LEGISLATION , 
The scope of clause'13 is ·limited to routine matters which may 
arise in the implementation of this law; and the rule making power 
is of a normal character. 

HOUSE OF THE PEOPLE 
A 
BILL 
to provide, in pursuance of an agreement with Pakistan, for the 
transfer to that country of certain deposits belonging to 
evacuees, the reception in India of similar deposits 
belonging to displaced persons, and matters connected 
therewith. 
The President has, in pursuance of clause (3) of articg 
117 of the Constitution of India, recommended to the House 
of the People the consideration of the Bill. 
M. N. KAUL, 
Secretary. 
(S hri Aji! Prasad Jain,.. . 
Minzster for R.ehabilt~atton) 