As inrrobuceD IN Lox SABHA

20 sp.

नि Bill No. 12 of 2000
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) छा LL, 2000
By
Suri G.M. Banatwatta, M.P,
A
BILL

further to amend the Constitution of India.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-First Year of the Republic of India as
|

1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2000, Short title.
2. In article 15 of the Constitution, after clause (4), the following clause shall be Amendment of
added, namely:— article 15.

<(5) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, save the provisions of arti-
cles 25, 26, 28 and 29, the State shall, in exercise of its authority, under clauses (3)
and (4) of this article, have free and complete Power to decide in its discretion the
nature and extent to any Special provision, including the Percentage of reservation, if
any, made to give effect to any special Provision.”.


2
Amendment of 3. In article 16 of the Constitution, —

article 16.
(iin clause (4A), for the words “the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes”
substitute “the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and the backward classes of
citizens”; and

(ii) after clause (4A), the following clause shall be added, namely:—
“(4AA) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution —

(a) the State shall, in exercise of its authority under clauses (4) and
(4A) of this article, have free and complete power in regard to the identi-
fication of a class or classes of its citizens and in regard to the percent-
ages of reservation made for any or all of such backward classes.

Explanation.—The expression “free and complete power” shall in-
clude the free and complete power to decide in its discretion whether the
benefit of reservation may or may not apply to any specific appointments
or posts and also whether the benefit of reservation may or may not be

पु subject to any restriction the State may deem fit without in any way
affecting the operation of the provision contained in sub-clause (b) of
this clause; and पर

(0) the State shall not deny benefit of reservation to any section of
a class identified as a backward class of citizens on economic considera-

tion.”.
‘Amendment of 4.10 the Ninth Schedule to the Constitution, after entry 257A and before the Explana-
be - aaa tion, the following entry shall be inserted, namely:—
ul

“257B. The Kerala State Backward Classes (Reservation of Appointments or Posts in
the Services under the State) Act, 1995.”.

20


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Reservation of seats in educational institutions and of appointments or posts in
services are key factors in a policy directed towards scouring social justice for various
sections of the society. The practice of reservation, has a long history, particularly in the
South. Articles 15(4), 16(4) and 16(4A) form the constitutional basis for reservations in the
policy of social justice. However, some recent judicial pronouncements have created
certain difficulties. Reservations have been hedged by certain exclusions and restrictions.
These exclusions and restrictions seriously impair and fracture the policy of social justice.

2. In Indira Sawhney and others versus Union of India and others (AIR 1993 SC
477), the Supreme Court held that the total reservations under article 16(4) should not
exceed fifty per cent.

3. Judicial pronouncements have placed certain sections outside the purview of reser-
vation and have also led to the denial of benefit of reservation to certain sections of the
Backward Classes, styled as the ‘creamy layer’, on extraneous economic considerations,
These restrictions and exclusions not only upset the age-long schemes of reservations in
States, particularly in Tamil Nadu and Kerala, but are also destructive of any effective
policy of reservation and social justice.

4. The Bill seeks to restore the derailed policy of reservation by providing that the
State shall have free and complete power (i) to decide, in its discretion, the nature and
extent of any special provisions made pursuant to articles 15(3) and 15(4) and (ii) to decide,
inits discretion, whether the benefit of reservation, made pursuant to clauses (4) and (4A)
of article 16, may or may not apply to any specific appointments or posts and also whether
the benefit of such reservations may or may not be subject to any restrictions. The Bill also
seeks to provide that the State shall not deny benefit of reservation to any section of the
backward class, on economic consideration.

5. Reservation in promotion available to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled
Tribes is also ought to be extended to Backward Classes.

6. Clause 4 of the Bill seeks to bring the Kerala State Backward Classes (Reservation
of Appointments or Posts in the Services under the State) Act, 1995 within the purview of
the Ninth Schedule to the Constitution so that it gets due protection in regard to judicial
review. Earlier, the Constitution (Seventy-sixthAmendment) Act, 1994 had. placed the Tamil
Nadu Backward Classes, Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Reservation of seats in
Educational Institutions and of appointments or posts in the services under the State) Act,
1993, in the Ninth Schedule.

The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.

New Det; G.M. BANATWALLA.
February 3, 2000.


Prohibition of
discrimination
on grounds of
religion, race,
caste, sex or
place of birth.

Equality of op-
portunity in
‘matters of pub-
lic employ-
ment,

Amendment of
the Ninth
Schedule.

ANNEXURE

EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

* * * * * * *

15. (1) The State shall not discriminate against any citizen on grounds only of reli-
gion, race, caste, sex, place of birth or any of them.

* * * * * * *
(4) Nothing in this article or in clause (2) of article 29 shall prevent the State from

making any special provision for the advancement of any socially and educationally back.
ward classes of citizens or for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes.

16. (1) There shali be equality of opportunity for all citizens in matters relating to
employment or appointment to any office under the State,

. * * . . i *

(4A) Nothing in this article shall Prevent the State from making any provision for
reservation in matters of promotion to any class or classes of posts in the services under the

State in favour of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes which, in the opinion of the
States, are not adequately represented in the ‘services under the State,

* + « * * * *
NINTH SCHEDULE
(Article 31B)

* * * * * * *

257A. The Tamil Nadu Backward Classes, Scheduled Castes and Scheduled ‘Tribes
(Reservation of Seats in Educational Institutions and of appointments or posts in the
Services under the State) Act, 1993,

+ * * * * * *


LOK SABHA.

A
BILL

further to amend the Constitution of India,

(Shri 6.8. Banatwalia, MP)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—3444LS—17-02-2000,