AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
THE WOMEN FARMERS' ENTITLEMENTS BILL, 2018
By
SHRI SUNIL KUMAR SINGH, M.P.
—————
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
—————
CLAUSES
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. Short title, extent and commencement.
2. Definitions.
CHAPTER II
C
ERTIFICATION OF WOMEN FARMER
3. Certification of Women Farmer.
4. Acceptance of certificate as evidence.
CHAPTER III
LAND RIGHTS
5. Equal land rights to women farmers.
CHAPTER IV
WATER RIGHTS
6. Equal right to water resources.
7. No discrimination for irrigation purposes.
CHAPTER V
LEGAL ACCESS TO CREDIT AND OTHER AGRICULTURAL INPUTS
8. Entitlement of women farmers to get credits, loans and other financial supports.
CHAPTER VI
FUND FOR SUPPORT SERVICES TO WOMEN FARMERS
9. Establishment of Fund.
10. Women farmer friendly technology.
11. Market facilities.
12. Training and capacity building.
CHAPTER VII
I
MPLEMENTATION AND MONITORING AUTHORITIES, THEIR RESPONSIBILITIES
13. Responsibilities of Central Government.
Bill No.  12 of  2018

14. Responsibilities of State Governments.
15. Responsibilities of local authorities.
16. Women Farmers' Entitlement Board.
17. District Vigilance Committees.
18. Redressal of grievances
CHAPTER VIII
P
ENALTIES AND PROCEDURES
19. Penalty for non-compliance of provisions of this Act.
20. Cognizance of offences.
21. Actions in good faith.
CHAPTER IX
M
ISCELLANEOUS
22. Overriding effect.
23. Power to give directions.
24. Power of State Government to restrict the application of the Act to certain areas.
25. Power to remove difficulties.
26. Power of Central Government to make rules.
(ii)
C
LAUSES

1
THE WOMEN FARMERS' ENTITLEMENTS BILL, 2018
By
SHRI SUNIL KUMAR SINGH, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the gender specific needs of women farmers, to protect their legitimate
needs and entitlements and to empower them with rights over agricultural land,
water resources and other related rights and for other functions relating
thereto and for matters connected therewith.
WHEREAS women constitute more than fifty per cent of Indian farmers and about sixty
per cent of the workforce in the farming sector; and in view of the increasing feminisation of
agriculture as a result of out-migration of men, entitlements for women farmers are essential
for the future growth and health of agriculture, as well as protection of food security in an era
of climate change;
A
ND WHEREAS it is necessary to recognize and protect the gender specific needs and
rights of the women by empowering and entitling them with enforceable rights over agricultural
land, water resources, credit and other related rights;
Bill No. 12 of  2018
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
AND WHEREAS the Married Women's Property Act, 1874 recognised the wages, earnings
and other property acquired by a married woman in any employment, occupation or trade
carried on by her in her individual capacity as her separate property; the Hindu Succession
(Amendment) Act, 2005 entitled the daughter of a Joint Hindu family governed by the
Mitakshara law, to become a coparcener in her own right in the same manner as the son and
clothes her with the same rights and liabilities in the coparcenary property as she would have
had if she had been a son; the Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers
(Recognition of Forest Rights) Act, 2006 recognised the rights of forest-dwelling communities
to the forest land and other forest resources;
A
ND WHEREAS the Government of India has recognized the special needs of women
farmers by initiating a "Mahila Kisan Shashaktikaran Pariyojana" programme under the
National Rural Livelihood Mission;
AND WHEREAS India is a party to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women (CEDAW), 1979 which calls for elimination of all forms of
discrimination of women by ensuring equal access to agricultural credit and loans, marketing
facilities, appropriate technology and equal treatment in land and agrarian reform as well as
in land resettlement schemes;
A
ND WHEREAS the Fourth World Conference on Women in September, 1995, in which
India participated, called for legislative and administrative reforms to give women equal
rights with men to economic resources, including access to ownership and control over land
and other properties, credit inheritance, natural resources, and appropriate new technology,
etc. as embodied in the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action;
A
ND WHEREAS it is considered necessary to implement the decisions in so far as they
relate to the women farmers' entitlements under Article 253 of the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Women Farmers' Entitlements Act, 2018.
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires—
(a) "agriculture" means and includes, all activities related to cultivation of crops,
animal husbandary, poultry, livestock rearing, apiculture, gardening, fishing, aquaculture,
sericulture, vermiculture, horticulture, floriculture, agro-forestry, or any other farming
activity carried out through self-employment, tenurial cultivation, share cropping, or
other types of cultivation including shifting cultivation, collection, use and sale of minor
or non-timber forest produce by virtue of ownership rights or usufructory rights;
(b) "agricultural activity" means any activity related to agriculture;
(c) "farmer" means any person who is, individually or jointly with any other
person,—
(i) engaged in agriculture directly or through the supervision of others; or
(ii) contributes to conservation or preservation of agriculture related
varieties or seeds or breeds of farm animals; or
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Definitions.
5
10
15
20

3
(iii) contributes through traditional knowledge to any type of innovation,
conservation or to propagation of new agricultural varieties or to agricultural
cultivation methods or practices or to the practice of crop-livestock integrated
farming system; or
(iv) promotes agro-processing, and value-addition to primary products.
Explanation.—The term "farmer" will include, but not limited to, agriculture operational
holders, landless cultivators, agricultural labourers, planting labourers, pastoralists,
sharecroppers and tenants. The term shall not include corporate entities operated by or
involving farmers. In case of landless farmers migrating or moving from one State to another,
if anyone stays in a State for at least six months, such person may be considered as a farmer
in that particular State.
(d) "guidelines" means the guidelines framed by the Authority under this Act
with the previous approval of the Central Government by notification in the Official
Gazette.
(e) "land" means any land or water body utilised for the purpose of agriculture.
(f) "woman farmer" means and includes, irrespective of marital status or ownership
of land, any woman who is a farmer as defined in sub-section ( c) of section 2 and
includes—
(i) any woman living in rural area and primarily engaged in agricultural
activity, though occasionally engaged in non-agricultural activity; or
(ii) any woman living in urban or semi-urban areas and engaged in
agriculture; or
(iii) any tribal woman directly or indirectly engaged in agriculture or shifting
cultivation or in the collection, use and sale of minor or non-timber forest produce
by virtue of usufructary rights.
(g) "rules" means rules notified by the Central Government under this Act.
CHAPTER II
C
ERTIFICATION   OF  WOMAN  FARMER
3. (1) A Woman Farmer Certificate issued by the Gram Panchayat, after the approval of
the Gram Sabha and authenticated by the Village Administrative Officer or an authorized
officer of the Gram Panchayat as may be prescribed in the rules, shall be the conclusive proof
of declaring a person as a woman farmer.
(2) For urban or peri-urban areas, the certificate shall be issued by the urban local body
with the approval of any corresponding authority as notified under the rules:
Provided that a group of women farmers may obtain the Group Women Farmers'
Certificate in the same process as may be prescribed.
4. The woman farmer certificate issued under section 3, shall be accepted as evidence
for the purposes of establishing the status of a person as a woman farmer under this Act
including in all administrative and judicial proceedings.
CHAPTER III
L
AND RIGHTS
5. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
every woman shall have equal ownership and inheritance rights over her husband's self
acquired agricultural land, or his share of family property, or his share of land transferred by
the Government under land reform or resettlement scheme:
Certification
of Woman
Farmer.
Acceptance of
Certificate as
evidence.
Equal land
rights to
women
farmer.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
Provided that concurrence of both the spouses shall be necessary in the case of land
transfer or acquisition as per the provision of the provided land acquisition and rehabilitation
law.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, a woman farmer shall be deemed to
have ownership and possession of equal and proportional share of agricultural property in
her husband's property even, if, it is not mentioned in any of the relevant documents and the
fact that she is the wife of a particular person is the conclusive proof to claim ownership and
possession of her share of property and to have effective control over such share of property.
CHAPTER IV
W
ATER RIGHTS
6. A woman farmer shall have equal right, as enjoyed by male farmers, to all water
resources connected with the agricultural land to which she is the owner, shareholder,
possessor or uses for farming activity and shall have access to water, water resources and
irrigation facilities for carrying out agricultural activities as defined in this Act.
7. The woman farmers shall not be discriminated on the grounds of marital status,
religion, caste, ownership or possession of agricultural land while accessing water resources
for irrigation purposes.
CHAPTER V
L
EGAL  ACCESS  TO  CREDIT  AND  OTHER
AGRICULTURAL INPUTS
8. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force and
subject to the provisions of this Act,—
(i) every woman farmer or group of women farmers who have a certificate of
Woman Farmer from the appropriate authority shall be entitled to Kisan Credit Card
which as of now available mainly to male farmers.
(ii) a woman farmer or group of women farmers shall be entitled to borrow money
and other financial support for agricultural activity either on her own capacity or as a
member of a women group as may be prescribed in the Rules without any discrimination
on the grounds of marital status, place of residence, caste, religion, or absence of
collateral security.
CHAPTER VI
F
UND  FOR  SUPPORT  SERVICES  TO  WOMEN  FARMERS
9. (1) The Central Government shall set up a Central Agricultural Development Fund
for Women Farmers (CADFWF) under this Act, which shall be used to empower women
farmers like, incentives for development of women farmer friendly technologies, training
and capacity building, creation of market facilities, organization of creches and day care
centres, social security for women farmers, old age pensions and other related issues as
may be prescribed in the Rules.
(2) The Fund shall operate at the Central, State and District levels and shall be
administered under the guidance of an appropriate Authority to be appointed by the Central
Government at the Central level and offices of the authority appointed in consultation with
the State Governments at the State and District level in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) The Fund shall receive contributions and grants from the Central and State
Governments, user fees as specified under the Rules and guidelines framed under this Act.
(4) The Authority shall support individual and groups of women farmers organized in
the form of registered women's cooperatives or Mahila Kisan Kendras as per the guidelines
framed under the Act.
Equal right to
water
resources.
No
discrimination
for irrigation
purposes.
Entitlement
of women
farmers to get
credits, loans
and other
financial
supports.
Establishment
of fund.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

5
(5) The appropriate authority shall frame guidelines with the previous approval of the
Central Government by notification in the official gazette for distribution and utilization of
the Fund.
(6) The Central Government shall frame a scheme for social security of women farmers,
especially old age pension as may be prescribed.
(7) The appropriate authority shall also have the power to secure lands from the
Government and other sources for distribution of lands to women farmers as prescribed
under this Act.
10. Any person who wants to develop women-friendly technology, may qualify for
short term and long term loans or grants or subsidies or venture capital from the Fund as per
the guidelines framed under the Act.
Explanation.—The terms 'any person' in this section means individuals and small and
medium scale industries.
11. The appropriate authority shall create and facilitate market facilities for women
farmers with the assistance of group of women farmers or of its own in different parts of the
country including the establishment of rural godowns.
12. The appropriate authority shall organise regular and periodical training and
capacity building programmes for women farmers in different parts of the country to make
them aware of the provisions of this Act and to help them in realizing their entitlements and
empowerments envisaged under this Act.
CHAPTER VII
I
MPLEMENTATION AND MONITORING AUTHORITIES, THEIR
RESPONSIBILITIES
13. The Central Government shall be responsible for overall implementation and
monitoring of the Act, except as provided in this Act.
14. (1) The State Governments shall be responsible for implementation and monitoring
of provisions relating to certification of women farmers, realization of land and water rights,
operationalization of the Fund at the State and District levels and other responsibilities as
mentioned in this Act.
(2) The State Government shall appoint appropriate authorities for carrying out such
functions.
(3) The offices of the authority set set up in consultation with the State Government
shall ensure that the land rights and water rights of the women farmers are institutionalized
within the State with suitable amendments to the laws and/or Gazette notification.
15. For implementing different provisions and schemes of this Act, the local authorities
like the Panchayati Raj Institutions in rural areas and Urban local bodies in urban areas shall
be responsible for discharging such duties or responsibilities as may be assigned by
notification to them by the concerned State Governments.
16. (1) Each State Government shall set up a Women Farmers' Entitlement Board
at the State level to advice the State Government in implementation and monitoring of the
Act.
(2) The Board shall consist of a practising woman farmer as its Chairperson and two
other members dealing with or experienced in technology, credit, inputs and marketing.
(3) The tenure of the Board members shall be such as prescribed under the Rules.
(4) The Board shall follow such procedure in its proceedings as may be prescribed in
the rules.
Women
farmer
friendly
technology.
Market
facilities.
Training and
capacity
building.
Responsibilities
of Central
Government.
Responsibilities
of State
Governments.
Responsibilities
of local
authorities.
5
10
15
20
30
35
40
45
25
Women
farmers'
Entitlement
Board.

6
17. (1) For ensuring transparency in functioning of this Act and accountability of the
functionaries, every State Government shall set up a District Vigilance Committee in every
district.
(2) The Composition of the Vigilance Committee shall be such as may be prescribed.
(3) The Vigilance Committees shall look into effective implementation of all the provisions
of the Act at the district level.
18. For expeditious and effective redressal of grievances of women farmers, each
State Government shall set up effective institutional mechanisms at the taluka or tehsil or
block level and an appellate mechanism at the District level in such manner as may be
prescribed under the Rules.
CHAPTER VIII
P
ENALTIES AND PROCEDURES
19. Whoever fails to comply with provisions of this Act, rules or guidelines made
under this Act shall be punished  with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than
six months but which may extend to one year and with fine, or with both.
20. ( 1) Any person aggrieved by violation of any provision of this Act, rules or
guidelines made under this Act may file a complaint, within ninety days from the date of such
violation, to a Court not inferior to that of a Judicial Magistrate of the first class or a
Metropolitan Magistrate:
Provided that the Court may entertain any complaint after the expiry of the said
period of ninety days if its is satisfied that the complainant was prevented by sufficient
cause from filing the complaint within time.
(2) For the purposes of sub-section ( 1), person means—
(a) any women farmer who is affected;
(b) husband or representative of the women farmer who is affected; Actions in
good faith. Overriding effect. Power to give directions;
(c) any association of person of farmers (whether incorporated or not), if it is
affected or on behalf of an affected women farmer;
(d) any local authority within whose local limits the affected women farmer or
association of persons or farmers live.
21. No prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against any person for anything
done or intended to be done in good faith.
CHAPTER IX
M
ISCELLANEOUS
22. The Provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force other than this Act.
23. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force
but subject to the provisions of this Act, the Central Government may, issue directions in
writing to any person, officer or any authority in order to give effect to the provisions of this
Act and such person, officer or authority shall be bound to comply with such directions.
24. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, if the State Government, after
consultation with, or on the recommendation of  the local body or authority, is of opinion that
certain provision or provisions of this Act need not apply to certain areas of the State, it may,
by notification in the Official Gazette, restrict the application of such provisions of this Act
to such area or areas as may be declared therein and thereupon such provisions of this Act
shall not apply to such area or areas.
District
Vigilance
Committee.
Redressal of
grievances.
Penalty for
non-compliance
of provisions
of this Act.
Cognizance of
offences.
Protection of
action taken
in good faith.
Overriding
effect.
Power to give
directions.
Power of State
Government
to restrict the
application of
the Act to
certain areas.
5
10
15
20
30
35
40
45
25

7
25. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act to remove the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two
years from the commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament.
26. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) issuance of Women Farmer Certificate under Section 3;
(b) facilitating financial support for women farmers under section 8;
(c) utilization of Central Agricultural Development Fund for Women Farmers
(CADFWF) under section 9;
(d) functions and proceedings of the Women Farmers' Entitlement Board under
sub-section (3) of section 16;
(e) Composition of District Vigilance Committee in every district under
section 17;
(f) institutional mechanism for expeditious and effective redressal of grievances
of women farmers under section 18.
(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule
or regulation should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified
form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that
rule.
Power to
remove of
difficulties.
Power to
make Rules.
5
10
15
20
30
25

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
With a gradual decline in the size of farm holdings, small and marginal farmer families
are in need of multiple sources of income to come out of the poverty trap. Rural men belonging
to resource poor families increasingly tend to go to towns and cities seeking work and
income earning opportunities. Consequently, there is an increasing feminization of agriculture.
While women farmers are extremely hard working and are also conversant with sustainable
agriculture practices, they suffer from several handicaps such as title to land, and access to
credit, inputs, insurance, technology and market. As early as 1995, the Fourth World
Conference on Women held in Beijing urged developing countries to pay attention to the
gender specific needs of women farmers. India is on the threshold of enacting a landmark
Food Security Bill. Legal entitlements to food can be implemented only by improving the
productivity, profitability and sustainability of small farm holdings, since small and marginal
farmers produce nearly fifty percent of the foodgrains in the country, as well as milk and a
wide variety of vegetables and fruits. In order to safeguard national food security, and to
strengthen the livelihood security of rural women, a majority of whom are engaged in crop
and animal husbandry, fisheries, agro-forestry and agro-processing, the Bill is being proposed.
It is necessary to implement the aforesaid decisions under article 253 of the Constitution of
India in so far as they relate to the women farmers' entitlements.
N
EW DELHI; SUNIL KUMAR SINGH
January 1, 2018.
8

9
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 9 of the Bill provides for Establishment of a Central Agricultural Development
Fund for Women Farmers. It also provides for appointment of an appropriate Authority to
administer the Fund at Central, State and District level. Clause 11 empowers the appropriate
Authority to create and facilitate market facilities for women farmers. Clause 12 provides for
organising training and capacity building programmes for women farmers. Clause 16 provides
that State Governments shall set up Women Farmers' Entitlement Board as State level. It also
provides for appointment of a practising woman farmer as its chairperson. Clause 17 provides
for setting up of District Vigilance Committee. Clause 18 provides for setting institutional
mechanisms at taluka or tehsil level for redressal of grievances. The expenditure relating to
State shall be borne out of the Consolidated funds of the State Government concerned.
However, the expenditure relating to Union territories shall be borne out of the Consolidated
Fund of India. The Bill, therefore, if enacted would involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about rupees ten crore per
annum would involve from the Consolidated Fund of India. A Non-recurring expenditure of
about rupees one thousand crore is also likely to be involved.

10
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Authority to make guidelines with the previous
approval of the Central Government by notification in the Official Gazette. Clause 26 empowers
the Central Government to make rules for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. As the
matters in respect of which rules, guidelines may be made or framed relate to matters of
procedure or administrative detail and it is not practicable to provide for them in the Bill itself,
the delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the gender specific needs of women farmers, to protect their legitimate
needs and entitlements and to empower them with rights over agricultural land,
water resources and other related rights and for other functions relating
thereto and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Sunil Kumar Singh, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—3647LS(S3)—20.01.2018.