1
THE SPECIAL FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO THE STATE OF
PUNJAB BILL, 2020
By
SHRI SANTOKH SINGH CHAUDHARY, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for special financial assistance to the State of Punjab for the purpose of sustainable
agriculture, development of growth-oriented infrastructure and industry, skill
development and generation of employment, welfare schemes for farmers, agricultural
labourers, the Scheduled Castes, Other Backward Classes and other weaker sections,
reducing groundwater extraction and combating possible desertification, development
of border areas and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-first Year of the Republic of  India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Special Financial Assistance to the State of Punjab
Act, 2020.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No.  12 of  2020
Short title and
commencement.
 AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
2. There shall be paid such sums of money out of the Consolidated Fund of India, every
year,  as Parliament may by due appropriation by law provide, as special financial assistance to
the State of Punjab to meet the costs of such schemes of development as may be undertaken by
the Government of the State of Punjab with the approval of Union Government for the purposes
of —
(a) promoting the welfare of persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes and Other
Backward Classes, including providing scholarships, fellowships and pensions;
(b)  providing financial assistance to small and marginal farmers;
(c) initiating welfare measures for improving the conditions of senior citizens, women,
children and poor persons living in the State;
(d) providing for welfare measures aimed at improving the condition of agricultural
labourers;
(e) research and development to boost agricultural growth rate, including new varieties
of seeds to boost yields, fertilizers and pesticides;
(f) schemes to incentivise investment in crop diversification, food processing
industries based on local products, modern warehouses, cold storage and transport
infrastructure for agricultural produce;
(g)  providing quality higher education and promoting research in all disciplines;
(h) skill development and generation of formal employment opportunities for
unemployed youth;
(i) revival of micro, small and medium enterprises (MSMEs);
(j) establishing drug de-addiction centres and mental health institutions;
(k) development of infrastructure in border areas, acquisition of farmers’ land beyond
the border fence by the Government of India, compensation to the farmers for their land
rendered ineffective for farming due to periodic military deployment, and improving internal
security and police infrastructure, including new police stations, police lines and residential
quarters;
(l) creating awareness amongst people about declining water lable and reducing
groundwater extraction;
(m) promotion of rain water harvesting and watershed development to ensure
replenishment of groundwater;
(n) capping of water guzzling paddy area and promotion of drought resilient crops
like maize, jawar, bajra, sunflower, tur and potato;
(o) settling the debt of farmers;
(p) providing compensation and relief to farmers and agricultural labourers for any
damage to crops caused due to rainfall deficit, pest attack, flood, hailstorm or any other
natural calamity;
(q) encouraging and providing for sustainable practices like organic farming coupled
with modern irrigation facilities like drip irrigation, contour bunding and sprinklers to
farmers;
(r) training of farmers in new agricultural techniques and promoting allied sectors
like dairy and poultry;
(s) implementation of social awareness campaigns through non-governmental
organisations and self-help groups about farmer credit, water literacy and drought
management through change in cropping pattern;
Special
Financial
Assistance to
the State of
Punjab.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(t) effective development, exploitation and proper utilisation of resoures in the State;
(u) such other provisions as the Government of the State of Punjab may deem necessary
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
3. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order, make such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of
this Act which appears to him to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of two years from the date of
commencement of this Act.
4. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force dealing with the subject-matter of this Act.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Act not in
derogation of
other law.
5
10

4
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The State of Punjab remained at the forefront of India's struggle for freedom.
Post-Independence, its industrious farmers were responsible for ushering in the Green
Revolution. Thanks to them, the nation became self-sufficient in terms of foodgrains. However,
with declining growth rates, falling average farm sizes and depleting groundwater table, the
agricultural economy is facing stagnation. The farmers and their families have borne the
brunt of this situation. Burdened by burgeoning debt, many of them committed suicide. The
agricultural labourers, most of whom belonging to the Scheduled Castes and marginalized
sections of society, have been rendered jobless and forced to move to urban areas. With
agriculture no longer considered a profitable enterprise, unemployed  educated rural youth
have been  moving abroad in search for greener pastures.
Additionally, Punjab being a border State, internal and external security is of paramount
importance. Its people have endured militancy and cross border terrorism for a long time. The
State police is second line of defence and its capabilities need to be enhanced. To improve
quality of life of residents living in border areas, basic infrastructure needs to be improved
and upgraded.
Moreover, the mismanagement of State finances by the previous Government has led
to massive public debt. While the Government is trying to bring the State back on high
growth and development trajectory, the limited amount of available finances are not sufficient.
The schemes for welfare of the Scheduled Castes, Other Backward Classes, farmers and
agricultural labourers need to be expanded to include every deserving beneficiary.
The people of Punjab are in need of a large scale investment in infrastructure, industry
and agriculture. The development of the State can be ensured only with the active involvement
and cooperation of the Central Government. For this, it is necessary that the Central
Government provides special financial assistance to the State for its all-round development
including the welfare of weaker sections and for the development and exploitation of its vast
resources. Such a step would go a long way in building a strong nation.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SANTOKH  SINGH  CHAUDHARY
November 23, 2019.

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides that there shall be paid such sums of moneys out of the
Consolidated Fund of India, every year, as Parliament may by due appropriation provide, as
special financial assistance to the State of Punjab to meet the costs of such schemes of
development, as may be undertaken by the State of Punjab with the approval of the Central
Government. The Bill, therefore, on enactment, will involve expenditure out of the Consolidated
Fund of India for providing special financial assistance to the State of Punjab. As the sums
of moneys which will be given to the State of Punjab as special financial assistance by
appropriation by law made by Parliament will be known only after the welfare schemes to be
implemented by the State Government are identified, it is not possible to give the estimates
of recurring or non-recurring expenditure, which would be involved out of the Consolidated
Fund of India at this stage.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be incurred from the Consolidated Fund of
India.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for special financial assistance to the State of Punjab for the purpose of sustainable
agriculture, development of growth-oriented infrastructure and industry, skill development
and generation of employment, welfare schemes for farmers, agricultural labourers, the
Scheduled Castes, Other Backward Classes and other weaker sections, reducing
groundwater extraction and combating possible desertification, development of border
areas and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Santokh Singh Chaudhary, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—4396LS(S-3)—13-01-2020.