As InTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

j 3 th anh

Bill No. 12 of 2006

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2006
By
Suri C.K. CHANDRAPPAN, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2006. Short title.
2. In article 253 of the Constitution, the following proviso shall be added at the end, Amendment
namely: of article
“ 253.

"Provided that every treaty, agreement or convention entered into by India with
any other country or countries or multilateral organisation shall be ratified by Parliament
before implementation of such treaty, agreement or convention.”


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The Government of India commits the country and people into many obligations and
duties while signing treaties and agreements with other countries or while participating in
multilateral or International Conferences or conventions. The Constitution empowers the
Government to enter into and implement any treaty, agreement or convention with other
country or countries.

Practically, the Parliament plays no role in entering into or implementing any treaty,
agreement or convention with other country or countries. This is not a healthy practice fora
vibrant democracy like India.

In the country like United States of America, Government cannot implement any treaty
or agreement with other country or countries without its ratification by the Congress. Such
a position is more just, democratic and correct. The practice of entering into an agreement or
treaty with any other country or countries by the Government without taking into confidence
both the Houses of Parliament does not appear sound and it requires to do away with.

The Bill seeks to amend the Constitution with a view to provide that every treaty,
agreement or convention entered into by India with any other country or countries or
multilateral organisation shall be ratified by Parliament before implementation of such treaty,
agreement or convention.

The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.

»
New Deu; C.K. CHANDRAPPAN
December 8,2005.



ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA.

* * * * * * *

253. Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of this Chapter, Parliament Legislation
has power to make any law for the whole or any part of the territory of India for implementing Socgiving

5 ith 5 toe ct 10

any treaty, agreement or convention with any other country or countries or any decision ३0057

made at any international conference, association or other body. agreements.
* * * * * * *



LOK SABHA

A
BILL
further to amend the Constitutioa of India.