1
Short title.
Bill No. 12 of  2012
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2012
By
SHRIMATI SUMITRA MAHAJAN, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Code of Criminal Procedure,1973.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-third Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Act, 2012.
2. In section 164A of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, for sub-section (1), the
following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
"(1) Where, during the stage when an offence of committing rape or attempt to
commit rape is under investigation, it is proposed to get the person of the woman, with
whom rape is alleged or attempted to have been committed or attempted, examined by
a medical expert, such examination shall be conducted, as far as possible, by a female
registered medical practitioner employed in a hospital run by the Government or a local
authority and in the absence of such a female practitioner, by any other female registered
medical practitioner, with the consent of such woman or of a person competent to give
such consent on her behalf and such woman shall be sent to such registered medical
practitioner within twenty-four hours from the time of receiving the information relating
to the commission of such offence.".
Amendment
of section
164A.
2 of 1974
5
10

2
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
India is a vast country, with majority of population being illiterate, living in rural areas
and not aware of their rights. It is, therefore, essential that law should adequately address the
problems of vulnerable group of the society and take care of their interests.
Instances of rape have become very common not only in rural areas but also in urban
areas. Of late, most of the urban areas have become unsafe to live and it has become very
difficult for girls and women to go anywhere without proper escort and protection. The
plight of working women who stay in office to work during late hours is distressing.
In accordance with section 164A of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973,   medical
examination of a victim of rape shall be conducted by a registered medical practitioner
employed in a hospital run by the Government or a local authority and in the absence of such
a practitioner, by any other registered medical practitioner with the consent of such woman
or of such a person competent to give  such consent on her behalf.
Due to liberal interpretation of section 164A of the Code by several High Courts, it has
become a mandatory practice that medical examination of a rape victim is conducted by a
female doctor only (wherever female doctor is available), as the victims would be more
comfortable with female doctors. It is, therefore, urgently required to make explicit provision
in section 164A of the Code that the rape victims shall be examined/investigated by female
registered medical practitioner only and, in hospitals run by the Government or a local
authority where such female doctor is not available, by any other available female registered
medical practitioner so that the victim is comfortable and does not face any other problem.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SUMITRA MAHAJAN
February 22, 2012.

3
Medical
examination
of the victim
of rape.
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE, 1973.
* * * * * *
164 A. (1) Where, during the stage when an offence of committing rape or attempt to
commit rape is under investigation, it is proposed to get the person of the woman with whom
rape is alleged or attempted to have been committed or attempted, examined  by a medical
expert, such examination shall be conducted by a registered medical practitioner employed in
a hospital run by the Government or a local authority and in the absence of such a practitioner,
by any other registered medical practitioner,  with the consent of such woman or of a person
competent to give such consent on her behalf and such woman shall be sent to such
registered medical practitioner within twenty-four hours from the time of receiving the
information relating to the commission of such offence.
* * * * * *

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
————
(Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—4107LS(S3)—06.03.2012.