RRSB

28.

30.
31.
32.
33.

As intRopuCED IN Lok SABHA

05 url 209?
है But No, 1207 2002
THE TRUST CORPORATIONS BILL, 2002
By \
‘Suri ManBoos Zanepi, M.P.
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES

Short title, extent and commencement.

Definitions.

Provisions to have effect notwithstanding any law in force.
Formation of a Trust Corporation.
Information to Registrar.

Interim management.

‘Company Panchayat of trustees.

Right of workers to vote.
Qualification for election as trustees.
Functions of Company Panchayat,

Profits to be credited to Government of India.
Wages of employees.

Payment of Bonus,

Works Committees.

Managing Trustees.

Term of Office of Managing Trustee.
Removal of Managing Trustee.
Remuneration of Managing Trustee.
‘Successor of Managing Trustees.

Salaries.

Chairman of Company Panchayat.

‘Company Panchayat to act through the Managing Trustee.
Control over employees.

Power of Managing Trustee.

Audit.

Scrutiny of accounts. ४
Government to acquire Trust Corporation in certain cases.
Coordination with national plans.

‘Acquired undertakings.

New Trust Corporations.

Application of rules.

Managing Trustee of a new Trust Corporation.
Power to make rules.


AS INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA

Bill No. 12 of 2002.

THE TRUST CORPORATIONS BILL, 2002
By
Sixt MaHBoo8 Zanes, M.P.
A
BILL
{0 provide for the creation of Trust Corporations for further development of enterprises with
social obligation and for matters connected therewith.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-third Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. (1) This Act may be called the Trust Corporations Act, 2002. "Short title,
(2 It extends to the whole of India. 225 “कद
(3) Itshall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification ™ent.
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act unless the context otherwise requires,— Definitions.
(@) “business” means and includes industries, plantations, banks, trade, transport
or any other activity carried on for profit;
10 () “Company” means any public or private limited company registered under

the Companies Act, 1956, and having a subscribed capital of more than rupees one

crore;


Provisions to
have effect
notwithstanding
any law in
force.

Formation of
Trust
Corporation.

Information
to Registrar.

Interim
management.

Company
Panchayat of
trustees.

Right to
workers to
vote.

Qualification
for election as
trustees,

Functions of
Company
Panchayat.

Profits to be
credited to
Government
of India,

2

(© “Company Panchayat” means the organ of management | a
Corporation constituted in the manner provided in this Act; and

(9 "Trust Corporation" means any public or private limited company

has declared itself a Trust Corporation under this Act,

3. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything to the
contained in any law for the time being in force.

4. Acompany may, by a resolution passed by a majority of shareholders present
voting at its general meeting, declare itself to be a Trust Corporation.

5. Immediately after the passing of the resolution referred to in section 4, the manager
or the secretary of the company shall notify the same to the Registrar of Joint Stock Companies
in whose jurisdiction the head office of the Company is situated.

6. The Registrar, on receiving such notice, shall direct the manager or the secretary,
the case may be, to carry on the day to day business of the Company as an interim i
trustee.
‘The Registrar shall, as soon as possible, arrange to take stock of the assets and
liabilities of the Company and shall constitute a Company Panchayat of Trustees consisting,
of not more than sixteen members, in the following manner, to supervise, control and direct
the managing trustee:
(a) not more than five trustees to be nominated by the shareholders of the
company as its general meeting; e
() not more than five trustees to be elected by the trade union of the employees
of the company of whom at least one shall be from the managerial staff, one from the
workers and the rest from any section of the employees;

(0 five trustees, to be nominated by the Registrar of Joint Stock Companies,
experts, representing the Ministries/Departments of the Central Government dealing
with Planning, Industry, Commerce, Company Law, and the Department of Labour of
the State Government concemed and a nominee of Municipality or Panchayat of the
locality in which the Head Office of the Company is situated;

(०) the interim managing trustee shall be an ex-officiomember of the Company
Panchayat.

8. Every worker who has been in the employment of the company for not less than six .
months shall have the right to vote in the election of the trustees.

9.No representative of workers shall be included in the Company Panchayat unless he
belongs to a united trade union which makes an active demand for responsible participation
in the management of the Trust Corporation.

10, The Company Panchayat shall decide all major questions relating to the management
of the business of the Trust Corporation and, in particular, frame rules for the efficient
management of the Trust Corporation, approve its annual production, trade or business
plans and annual accounts, construction and development programme, purchases, sales,
loans, credits, wages, salaries, bonus to employees and interest, if any, to shareholders.

11. The profits of the Trust Corporation after due provision being made for depreciations
and provident funds, shall be credited to the income tax folio of the Ministry of Finance,
Government of India for being allocated to the different States according to the
recommendations of the Finance Commission.


20

25

30

35

3

12, The employees of the Trust Corporation shall not demand any rise in wages,
which is not commensurate with the earnings of an average villager or the uniform scales of
wages determined by the Ministry of Labour of the Government of India,

13. The Company Panchayat may sanction payment of general bonus or individual
merit bonus for surpassing the annual production targets fixed for the Trust Corporation.

14, Works Committees of employees shall be formed in every department of the Trust
Corporation and they shall be entrusted with the job of explaining the decisions of the
Trust Panchayat to the employees, maintenance of the discipline and execution of welfare
schemes of the Trust Corporation.

15. The manager and the secretary of the company, which has declared itself to be 8
Trust Corporation, shall become the ex-officio managing trustees of the Corporation.

16. The first managing trustee shall continue of office, unless removed earlier, for five
years or till he attains the age of sixty years, whichever is longer.

17. The managing trustee shall be liable to be removed from office by the Company
Panchayat on the ground of breach of trust or mismanagement.

18, (1) The remuneration of the first managing trustee shall be fixed by a contract
between him and the Company Panchayat.

(2) In case of a dispute regarding the remuneration of the first managing trustee, the
Registrar of Joint Stock Companies shall fix the same after taking into consideration the
standard of life to which the first managing trustee is accustomed and the financial health of
the Corporation.

19. The first managing trustee may recommend a successor to his office but the final
appointment shall be made by the Company Panchayat.

20. The salaries of subsequent managing trustees and other supervisory or technical
staff shall be fixed by the Company Panchayat.

21. The Company Panchayat shall elect a Chairman from among its members, who shall
summon its meetings from time to time and shall preside over the same.

22, The Company Panchayat shall supervise the work of the managing trustee, examine
his reports and give him instructions in regard to the day to day administration as also the
policies and programme of the Trust Corporation.

23. All employees of the Trust Corporation shall be subject to the authority of the
managing trustee in performing their duties.

24. The managing trustee shall be empowered to impose disciplinary penalties on
defaulting employees.

25. The accounts of the Trust Corporation shall be audited by the Comptroller and
Auditor General of India and/or his nominee.

26. Statements of income and expenditure, balance-sheets and statement of assets
and liabilities shall be placed before a joint annual general meeting of all employees of the
‘Trust Corporation and the shareholders of the company.

Wages of
employees.

Payment of
Bonus.

Works
Committees.

Managing
Trustees

Term of Office
of Managing
Trustee.

Removal of
Managing
Trustee.

Remuneration
‘of Managing
Trustee.

Successor of
Managing
Trustees.

Salaries.

Chairman of
Company
Panchayat,

Company
Panchayat to
act through
Managing
Trustee.

Control over

employees.

Power of
Managing
Trustee.

Audit.

Scrutiny of
accounts.


New Trust
corporations,

Application
of rules,

Managing
Trustee of
new Trust
Corporation.

Power to
make rules.

27. The Registrar of Joint Stock Companies, on!
report that the affairs of the Trust Corporation are
the interests of the society, may, after consultinj
Central Government to take over the assets of the Corporati

‘manner it deems fit.

28. The coordination of the industrial or commercial activities of the Trust Corporation
with the national plans for economic developments shall be the responsibility of the repre-
‘entative of the Planning Commission on the Company Panchayat, whose decisions inthis

regard shall be final.

29. Any industry or undertaking whose

4

as a Trust Corporation for the purposes of this Act.

30. New Trust Corporations
fifty percent of the subscribed

concerned agreed to contribute
that the total equity capital does not exceed rupees one crore.

=
are applicable to any other Trust Corporation formed under this Act.

32, The terms agreed to between the
section 30 and the Government in respect

service of the original managing trustee.

33. (0) The Central Government may, by notification in the official Gazette, make rules

for carrying out the purposes of this Act.

(2 Every rule made under
‘before each House of Parliament
‘may be comprised in one session or in two successi
qe session in which its so laid or the session immediately following, both Houses agree in
making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree thatthe rule should not be made,

may be; so however, that any such modification or annulment

the validity of anything

being satisfied on the basis of the audit
being conducted in a manner harmful to
g the Company Panchayat, recommend to the
ion and dispose them of in any

management has been taken over by the
Government under the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951, may be treated

ay be floated by an individual entrepreneur investing
provided that the Central or the State Government
ithe other half of the subscribed capital; so, however,

managing trustee of a corporation formed under
‘of remuneration shall be valid during the active

this section shall be laid, as soon as may b+ after it is made,
while it is in session fora total period of thirty days which
ive sessions, and if before the expiry of

‘or be of no effect, as the case


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND, REASONS

Production of ‘wealth’ or ‘capital’ is possible only in 'Society' and not in isolation.
Hence an obligation not only to sustain that society but also to promote its welfare and to
improve quantitatively the quality of life of all individuals constituting the whole society is
cast on those who happen to own or possess the wealth created therein. This social obliga~
tion is referred to as the principle of ‘trusteeship’.

It has been the experience of humanity through the ages that ownership of ‘capital’
whether in private or public, if bereft of social obligation, has always tended to concentrate
power in few hands and reserved the privileges of creativity and production for those
already rich and powerful—multinationals, tycoons, bureaucrats commissars and the likes
and leaves behind the major segment of the society undeveloped or underdeveloped leading
to class, caste or group conflicts and disarray in social order.

Ours is a Socialist Repubic. In the context of the present day controversy about
liberalisation, privatisation and globalisation it is appropriate that State regulated trustec-
ship system is introduced in the Country for rapid development of economic and social life
of its people.

‘The present Bill seeks to provide an opportunity to the owners of large companies to
convert them into Trust Corporations and proposes necessary provisions for the democratic
management of such trust corporations. The provisions of the Bill are intended to usher
peacefully an era of a socialist society, which will be built not solely on monetary incentives
but on ideas of service to society.

The provisions of the Bill are expected to promote increased productivity by giving
the workers a sense of full and intelligent participation in the process of production,
purchases, sales and investment of the trust corporations.

The Bill is not a compulsory measure but a permissive one enabling the present

owners of large companies to transform their existing titles based on absolute rights into
‘trust ownership.

New एच; MAHBOOB ZAHED!
June 20, 2001

PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLES 117 AND 274
OF THE CONSTITUTION

[Copy of letter No. 7/39 /2001-CL.V, dated 20 February, 2002 from Shri Arun
Jaitley, Minister of Law, Justice and Company Affairs to the Secretary-General,
‘Lok Sabha].

‘The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the Trust Corporations
Bill, 2002 by Shri Mahboob Zahedi, M.P. recommends to the House the introduction
under articles 117(1) and 274(1) and consideration of the Bill under article 117(3) of the
Constitution.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 30 of the Bill provides that the Central Government may invest fifty per cent.
of the authorized capital of a new Trust Corporation that may be set up by any entrepreneurs.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, is likely to involve a recurring expenditure of about rupees
fifty lakh from the Consolidated Fund of India.

No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.



MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 33 of the Bill seeks to empower the Central Government to make rules for
carrying out the purposes of the Bill. The delegation of legislation power is of a normal
character. .


LOK SABHA,

A
= BILL

to provide fo: the creation of Trust Corporations for further development of enterprises
with social obligation and for matters connected therewith.

(Shri Mahboob Zahedi, M.P)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—1128LS—02-03-2002.