THE COMPULSORY INSTALLATION OF SOLAR PLANTS
BILL, 2021
By
DR. MOHAMMAD JAWED,  M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory installation of the solar panels, promote production of
energy from renewable energy resources in order to reduce dependence on fossil
fuels, ensure energy security and reduce local and global pollutants keeping in
view economic, financial, social and environmental considerations and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
WHEREAS it is expedient to increase the proportion of renewable sources of
energy in India's energy mix and to reduce the reliance on fossil fuels in order to
achieve economic and environmental objectives;
A
ND W HEREAS it is necessary to facilitate a transition from fossil fuels to
renewable sources of energy with an appropriate legal framework;
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
   Bill No. 12 of  2021

2
AND W HEREAS increased use of renewable energy sources raises important
issues relating to electricity systems infrastructure, land allocation, cost of access
and finance which require inter-ministerial coordination and expert assistance to seek
resolution;
A
ND WHEREAS there is need to move towards installation and Integrated Energy
Resource Panels;
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-second Year of the Republic of India
as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Compulsory Installation of Solar Plants Act,
2021.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government
of that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "building" includes all such structures, sheds, houses and buildings
as may be notified by the appropriate Government under this Act;
(c) "commercial establishment" means any building which is being used
as an office or factory or for any other commercial purpose in connection with
any trade or business;
(d) "government building" means any building occupied or being used
by any Government department or Ministry and includes offices of public
sector enterprises, statutory bodies, bodies owned or administered by the
Government, autonomous bodies, bodies of local self government and residential
complex allotted to its employees by the appropriate Government;
(e) "household" means a dwelling unit of any description or privately
owned buildings;
(f) "housing society" means a dwelling unit in a complex or building; and
(g) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any law for the time
being in force, the appropriate Government shall take steps for installation of solar
panels in every government building within such time, as may be prescribed, so as to
ensure that atleast one-third of the total requirement of electricity in that building
is met by generation of electricity through solar panels.
4. (1) Every owner of an independent household building having area of not
less than two thousand square feet or every owner who proposes to construct on an
area of not less than two thousand square feet an independent household building
shall have provision of solar panel unit in the proposed map of the structure to be
approved by the municipal or any such other local authority.
(2) On approval of map of structure by the municipal or such other competent
local authority, the owner shall install solar panels for generation of electricity.
(3) Every developer or builder of a building or housing society shall submit a
compliance report of installation of solar panel along with the map of the proposed
property within such time, as may be prescribed, to such Nodal Officer or competent
Authority, as the appropriate Government may, by notification, appoint.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Definitions.
Compulsory
installation of
solar panels in
Government
buildings.
Compulsory
installation of
solar panels by
privately owned
buildings,
structures,
households and
residential
establishments.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section "builder" or "developer"
includes the company or individual or group of individuals responsible for the planning
and construction of the building or the housing society.
5. (1) Every commercial, institutional, corporation and any other establishment
shall install solar panels, for generation of electricity within the premises of the
commercial establishment.
(2) The responsibility to ensure compliance of the provision of sub-section (1)
shall lie on the person or the company who is primarily responsible for the affairs of
that establishment.
(3) Every person or the company, owner or holder of the commercial building or
establishment, as the case may be, shall submit a compliance report of installation of
solar panels, within such time, as may be prescribed, to such Nodal Officer or competent
Authority, as the appropriate Government may, by notification, appoint.
6. (1) The appropriate Government shall, within such time as may be prescribed,
prepare programmes plans and policies aimed at creating awareness and education
among the masses about the technology and the benefits of installation of solar
panels.
(2) The appropriate Governments shall organise awareness programmes for
promotion and use of solar panels through social media, print media, advertising and
electronic media.
(3) The appropriate Government shall encourage non-Governmental
Organisations and other agencies or institutions, engaged in the field of promoting
use of renewable energy for generation of electricity by providing them adequate
financial assistance for running awareness programmes.
7. The appropriate Government shall ensure the implementation of the
provisions of this Act within the establishments controlled or managed, partially or
wholly by it.
8. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament
by law in this behalf, provide requisite funds to the State Governments for the purposes
of this Act.
9. Every State Government shall, for the purposes of this Act, further allocate
the requisite funds to Nodal Officer, responsible for adopting or implementing the
provisions of this Act.
10. (1) The appropriate Government may, for the purpose of installing solar
panels, provide subsidy or financial assistance of atleast forty percent of the cost of
solar panel in residential sector in such manner, as may be prescribed.
(2) The appropriate Government, shall provide financial assistance of atleast
fifty percent of the benechmark cost of installation of solar panel in farming sector
in such manner, as may be prescribed.
(3) The appropriate Government shall provide financial assistance of atleast
thirty percent of the benechmark cost of installation of solar panel in commercial,
industrial, institutional and other establishments in such manner, as may be
prescribed.
11. Whosoever contravenes the provisions of this Act shall be punished with
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than six months but which may extend
upto two years or with fine which shall not be less than rupees one lakh but may
extend upto rupees five lakh or with both.
Compulsory
installation of
solar panels by
commercial,
institutional,
corporation and
other
establishments.
Programmes for
awareness and
education in the
masses about
benefits of
installation of
solar panels.
Apppropriate
Government to
ensure
implementation
of the
provisions of
the Act.
Central
Government to
provide requisite
funds.
State
Government to
allocate funds to
the Nodal Officer.
Financial
assistance
provided by the
appropriate
Government.
Punishment.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
12. The provisions of this Act and rules made thereunder shall have overriding
effect, notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law,
for the time being in force.
13. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law, the provisions of
this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any law, to meet the purpose
of this act, for the time being in force.
14. (1) The appropriate Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette,
make rules for the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act, by the Central Government, shall be laid as
soon as may be, after it is made, before each House of the Parliament, while in session,
for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or
more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following
the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any
modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the
rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the
case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
(3) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as
soon as may be after it is made, before each House of the State Legislature.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Act not in
derogation with
existing laws.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The availability of electricity is less as compared to the demand. With the
dependence upon solar energy, the want of electricity will not only be fulfilled but
non-dependence on scarce resources would help preserve the resources and
environment.
Compulsory installation of solar panels is also the need of the hour. It will help
generations to maintain sustainable resources, environment and ecological balance.
The need is to promote the production of energy through the use of renewable
energy sources in accordance with climate, environment and macroeconomic
consideration in order to reduce dependence on fossil fuels, ensure security of supply
and reduce emissions of CO
2 (Carbon dioxide) and other greenhouse gases.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to provide for a legislative framework to promote the
use of solar energy in residential, commercial and Government establishments.
Hence this Bill.
NEW DELHI; MOHAMMAD JAWED
September 10, 2020
5

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for compulsory installation of solar panels in
Government buildings. Clause 6 provides that the appropriate Government shall provide
adequate financial assistance to non-Governmental organisations and other agencies
or institutions engaged in the field of energy generated from solar panels, for the
purpose of spreading awareness among people about the importance of generation
of electricity through solar panels. Clause 8 provides that the Central Government
shall provide requisite funds to the State Government for carrying out the purposes
of this Act. Clause 9 provides for the State Government to further allocate funds to
Nodel Officer for carrying out the purposes of the Act. The Bill, therefore, if enacted,
would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a
recurring expenditure of about rupees three thousand crore per annum would involve
for the Consolidated Fund of India.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.
6

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 14 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to make rules for
carrying out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only,
the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.
7

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory installation of the solar panels, promote production of
energy from renewable energy resources in order to reduce dependence on fossil
fuels, ensure energy security and reduce local and global pollutants keeping in
view economic, financial, social and environmental considerations and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Dr. Mohammad Jawed, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—1141LS—14.01.2021.