1
THE EURY ALE FEROX NUT GROWERS (REMUNERATIVE PRICE
AND WELFARE) BILL, 2016
By
SHRI KIRTI AZAD, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for payment of remunerative price to euryale ferox nut growers, insurance of
euryale ferox nut crop free of cost and for overall welfare of euryale ferox nut growers
and for matters connected therewith.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Euryale Ferox Nut Growers (Remunerative Price and
Welfare) Act, 2016.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 12 of  2016
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “Fund” means the Euryale Ferox Nut Growers Welfare Fund constituted
under section 6;
(b) “grower” means any person who cultivates euryale ferox; and
(c) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) The Central Government shall procure the entire euryale ferox nut crop from
growers through such agency as may be prescribed.
4. The Central Government shall fix remunerative price of euryale ferox nut every year
after taking into consideration—
(a) increase in the price of euryale ferox nut seeds, pesticides, fertilizers and
other inputs;
(b) total investment made by the euryale ferox nut growers; and
(c) such other factors, as may be prescribed.
5. The entire euryale ferox nut cultivated by every grower shall be
compulsorily insured free of cost by the Central Government against natural
calamities, fall in the yield of euryale ferox nut, fall in the price of euryale ferox
nut and such other eventualities as may be prescribed.
6. ( 1) The Central Government shall constitute a Fund to be known as the
Euryale Ferox Nut Growers Welfare Fund.
(2) The Central Government and the State Governments concerned shall contribute
to the Fund in such ratio as may be prescribed.
7. The Fund shall be utilized—
(a) to provide financial assistance to euryale ferox nut growers for purchasing
euryale ferox nut seeds, pesticides and fertilizers and in cases of low yields of
euryale ferox nut or loss of their crops due to rains, storms, floods, hailstorms or
drought;
(b) to pay compensation to the next of kin of euryale ferox nut growers in the
event of their death;
(c) to provide free health facilities to euryale ferox nut growers and their
families;
(d) to provide assistance to the euryale ferox nut growers in the event of
disability; and
(e) for such other purposes as may be prescribed by the Central Government.
8. (1) The Central Government may make rules for carrying out the purposes of this
Act.
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Definitions.
Insurance.
Procurement
of euryale
ferox nut
crop.
Fixation of
remuneration
price of
euryale ferox
nut.
Euryale Ferox
Nut Growers
Welfare Fund.
Power to make
rules.
Utilisation of
the Fund.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The States of Bihar, Assam, Odisha and Manipur have conducive conditions for the
production of euryale ferox nut. The euryale ferox nut, as a food product, is used as a
salty item by roasting it, and as sweet item in kheer, prasada etc. Particularly in North
India, it is served to women post natal for medicinal purposes. But of late, euryale ferox
nut growers in the country are facing problems as they are not getting remunerative price
for their produce. Euryale ferox nut cultivation is turning out to be a non-profitable venture
for the farmers due to increase in the prices of euryale ferox nut seeds, fertilizers,
pesticides and other inputs. Due to high investment involved in the cultivation of euryale
ferox nut, farmers have to go for loans and on account of being unable to repay the loans,
they are living under great distress. Being a cash crop, insurance facility is also not available
to the euryale ferox nut farmers.
The condition of euryale ferox nut growers in the leading euryale ferox nut producing
States of Bihar, Assam, Odisha and Manipur is pitiable. Farmers of these States are getting
into debt trap and in many cases, their financial condition is compelling them to take the
extreme step of committing suicide.
Therefore, it is the responsibility of the Central Government to fix the remunerative
price of euryale ferox nut; provide for free and compulsory insurance of euryale ferox
nut crops and constitute a Euryale Ferox Nut Growers Welfare Fund to meet various
needs of euryale ferox nut growers.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; KIRTI  AZAD
December 11, 2015.

4
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for procurement by the Central Government of entire
euryale ferox nut produced in the country. Clause 5 provides for compulsory insurance of
euryale ferox nut crop free of cost against natural calamities, fall in the yield of euryale ferox
nut, fall in price of euryale ferox nut and such other eventualities. Clause 6 provides for the
constitution of a Euryale Ferox Nut Growers Welfare Fund. The Bill, therefore, if enacted,
would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a
recurring expenditure of about rupees two thousand crore may be involved per annum from
the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees seven hundred crore is also likely to
be involved.

5
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation
of legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for payment of remunerative price to euryale ferox nut growers, insurance
of euryale ferox nut crop free of cost and for overall welfare of euryale ferox nut
growers and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Kirti Azad, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—4105LS(S3)—12-02-2016.
6