As INTRODUCED IN Lon Sai

09 JUL 2008

ill No, 12 of 2004

| GOVERNMENT SERVANTS (DECLARATION OF ASSETS
AND INVESTIGATION) BILL, 2004
by
Suet Bactt Styatt Raw \t,M.P.
A
BILL.

10 provide for declaration and investigation of assets held by Governmem servants
employed in certain departments and for matters connected therewith

Be itenacted by Parliament in the Fifty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows: ~

1. (/) This Act may be called the Government servants (Declaration of Assets and
‘igation) Act, 2004,

(2) It shall apply to Government servants holding posts or appointments under the
jion Government or the Union Territory Administration.

Short ttle,
application
and
commencement


Detinitions

Constitution
of the
Government
Servants,
Assets
investigation
Authority,

Funetion of
authority

Declaration of
assets by
Government
servants.

Maintenance
of a Register
showing
returns Bled
by
Government
servants

Disciplinary
action.

Provision for
inclusion of
other
departments
in the
Schedule

Power to
make rules,

(3) Itshall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the official Gazette, appoint.

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, —

(a) "assets" includes all properties, movable and immovable. legal or benami,
held by the Government servants or by their dependants, within the country and/or
abroad:

(6) "Authority" means the Government Servants Assets Investigation Authority
constituted under section 3;

(6) “dependants” includes spouse, parents, sons and unmarried daughters;

(4) "Government servants" means persons employed in Government departments
specified in the Schedule to this Act and holding any post or appointment under the
Union Government or the Union Territory Administration; and

(०) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.

3.(/) There shall be constituted an authority to be called the Government Servants
Assets Investigation Authority.

(©) The Authority shall consist of such number of members’ not exceeding ten, chosen
from different fields like finance, social welfare, education, etc, in such manner as may be
prescribed.

(3) The Chairperson of the Authority shall be a retired Judge of the Supreme Court
or ofa High Court and shall be appointed by the President.

4. The Authority shall look into and investigate such cases of assets disproportionate
to the known sources of his income held by a Government servant, on its own or otherwise

5. () Every Government servant employed in Government Departments as specified in
the Schedule shall, within a period of one month from the coming into force of this Act,
declare the particulars of all the assets possessed by him and his dependants to the Authority.
in such manner and form, as may be prescribed.

(2) Every Government servant shall, throughout the term of his office, submit annual
return of the assets held or acquired by him and any of his dependants within one month of
the beginning of the next financial year to the Authority.

6. Acopy of the return filed by the Government servant and of the declaration made by
him under section 4 shall be maintained by the Authority in a Register to which any member
of the general public shall have access.

7. The Government servants found to be having assets disproportionate to the known
Sources of their income shall be subject to such disciplinary action, as may be prescribed.

8. The Central Government may by order add any other Department of the Government
to the Schedule to this Act.

9.(/) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act,,

(2) Without prejudice to the generality ofthe foregoing power, such rules may provide
for all or any of the following matters: —

(3) the manner in which members of the Authority shall be appointed:

Is

35


3

(ii) the form in which declaration of assets shall be furnished:
(iii) the manner in which the declaration shall be scrutinized:
tion of assets of

(iv) the procedure to be followed by the Authority for investi
a Government servant,

(४) action to be taken in case declaration of assets furnished is false or
investigation of assets leads to the fact that the Government servant has assets
disproportionate to the known source of his income: and

(vi) any other matter that is necessary to carry out the provisions of this Act.


THE SCHEDULE

[See sections 2 (d), 51) & 8 314), 41) & 6]
1. Department of Revenue-—Income-tar. ( ustoms dind Central Excise.

. Department of Sale Tax.

- Municipal Corporation

=

- Departments dealing with Public Uility Services like Water, Electricity, Civil Supplies et

- Department dealing with Housing.

2

Police.


LOK SABHA.

CORRIGENDUM

TO
GOVERNMENT SERVANTS (DECLARATION OF ASSETS AND INVESTIGATION)
BILL, 2004 BY SHRI BACHI SINGH RAWAT, M.P.
(Bill No. 12 of 2004)
[To be/As introduced in Lok Sabha]

4, inthe Schedule, line 2,-
for “[See sections 2(d), 5(i) & 83(4), 4(1) & 6]” read “See sections 2(d), S(i) & 8)”

NEW DELHI ;

6 July 2004

15 Asadha 1926 (Saka)


STATEMENT OF OB:

ECTS AND REASONS

There has been a large scale corruption in certain departments of the Government
dealing with Income-Tax. Customs and Central Excise. Housing, Water. Electricity, Law and
Order as is evident trom public outcry and reports in newspapers and electronic media, There
are allegations that persons working in these departments despite having very meagre salary
live ina very lavish style with all modern facilities. So far, there has been no initiative by the
Government to look into the life style of these persons and take action inst them. It is a
common fact that an ordinary man has to run from pillar to post to get his work done if he
does not bribe the concerned persons. Everyday. there are reports in’the newspapers and
electronic media about the deep rooted and wide spread corruption in these Departments.
This is also highlighted by articles and letters published in newspapers. It is high time that
the Government took initiative to look into the high level of corruption in these Departments
before the situation becomes explosive. The Bill seeks to achieve this purpose by providing
a deterrent to the effect that assets of Government employees shall be subject to continuous

New Dewi: BACHI SINGH RAWAT
June 21,2004.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of an authority to be known as the
Government Servants Assets Investigation Authority by the Central Government. The Bill, if
enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. I is likely to involve
a recurring expenditure of about rupees one crore per annum.

A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five crore is also likely to be incurred.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
| purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
- legislative power is of a normal character.


LOK SABHA

A
BILL.

10 provide for declaration and investigation of assets held by Government
servants employed in certain departments and for matters connected therewith.

(Shri Bachi Singh Rawat, M.P)

MGIPMRND—811LS—28 06 2004