Bill No. 12 of  2015
THE INSURANCE AGENTS WELFARE FUND BILL, 2015
BY
SHRI SANKAR PRASAD DATTA, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of the Insurance Agents Welfare Fund for the welfare of
insurance agents and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the sixty-sixth year of Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Insurance Agents Welfare Fund Act, 2015.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(i) "Fund" means the Insurance Agents Welfare Fund constituted under
section 3 of this Act;
(ii) the expression "Insurance Agent" shall have the same meaning as is
assigned to it in the Insurance Act, 1938; and
(iii) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
T
O BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title, ex-
tent and com-
mencement.
Definitions.
5
104 of 1938.

2
3. (1) The Central Government shall constitute a Fund to be known as the Insurance
Agents Welfare Fund.
(2) The Fund shall consist of contributions from Central Government, the insurance
companies and the insurance agents in such ratio as may be prescribed.
(3) The Fund shall be administered by a Board, consisting of—
— Chairman, ex-officio;
— Members; and
— Members.
(a) the Union Minister of Finance
(b) two persons representing the Insurance
Regulatory and Development Authority consti-
tuted under section 3 of the Insurance Regulatory
and Development Authority Act, 1999
(c) two persons representing the insurance
agents to be nominated by the Central
Government.
(4) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service
of the members of the Board shall be such as may be prescribed.
4. The Fund shall be utilized for the:—
(i) payment of adequate compensation to the next of kin of insurance agents in
case of death in harness;
(ii) payment of old age pension at such rate, as may be prescribed, to insurance
agent after he has attained the age of sixty-five years;
(iii) payment of family pension at such rate, as may be prescribed, to the depen-
dents of the deceased insurance agents;
(iv) payment of premium for medical insurance of the insurance agents and
their families; and
(v) such other purposes as the Board may deem necessary for the welfare of
insurance agents.
5. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions afore-
said, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree
that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified
form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that
rule.
Insurance
Agents
Welfare Fund.
Utilisation of
the Fund.
Power to
make rules.
S3 \F\BILL 2015\LS\4371LS
41 of 1999.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The insurance agents play a major role in procuring business and in the growth of the
insurance sector. More than a million people are engaged as insurance agents in the public
sector Life Insurance Corporation alone. Majority of them have opted for this profession as
a full time job. The work requires a lot of time, energy and dedication. The competition
amongst insurance companies for business has tremendously increased after the opening
up of this sector to private players at national level and by permitting foreign direct investment
in the insurance sector.
It is estimated that seventy five per cent. of the insurance agents earn less than rupees
sixty thousand per annum which is not sufficient to meet even minimum requirements of a
family. Their contribution to insurance sector is immense in creating assets and increasing
profits of the companies, at the same time providing benefits of insurance to the general
public. Due to absence of any welfare scheme aimed at providing the insurance agents the
necessary social security, they live in pathetic conditions. A portion of profit earned by the
insurance companies through hard work of such agents needs to be devoted for the welfare
of insurance agents and their families. It is the responsibility of the Government in a welfare
State to provide proper medical care, old age pension, family pension, etc. to every citizen of
the country. Therefore, a suitable legislation is urgently required to provide for general
welfare of persons working as agents in the insurance sector.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SANKAR PRASAD DATTA
December 22, 2014.

4
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for constitution of a Fund to be known as the Insurance
Agents Welfare Fund and for the constitution of a Board to administer the Fund. The Bill,
therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely
to involve a recurring expenditure of about rupees fifty crore per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.

5
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 5 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

GMGIPMRND—4371LS(S3)—09-02-2015.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of the Insurance Agents Welfare Fund for the welfare of
insurance agents and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Sankar Prasad Datta, M.P.)