 
Aඌ ංඇඍඋඈൽඎർൾൽ ංඇ Lඈ඄ Sൺൻඁൺ
Bill No. 12 of 2023
THE RIGHTS OF PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2023
By
Dඋ. Sൺඇඃൾൾඏ Kඎආൺඋ Sංඇ඀ൺඋං,  M.P.
ൺ
BILL
to amend the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016.
      Bൾ it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called as the Persons with Disabilities (Amendment) Act, 2023.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 2 of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016 (hereinafter referred 
to as the principal Act), for clause (za), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:— 
“(za) “rehabilitation” refers to a process aimed at enabling and empowering persons 
with disabilities to attain and maintain an optimal level of physical, sensory, intellectual, 
psychological, environmental and social function levels, according to World Health 
Organisation standards and in alignment with the right to an adequate standard of living as 
Short title, and 
commencement.
5 Amendment of 
section 2.
10

enshrined in the Constitution of India.”.
3. In section 7 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section (1), after clause (a), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(aa) establish District Disability Rehabilitation Centres for rehabilitation persons 
with disabilities who have been subjected to abuse, violence and exploitation;”; 
(b) in sub-section (4), for clause (b), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
“(b) the particulars of the nearest District Disability Rehabilitation Centre established 
under clause (aa) of sub-section (1) working for the rehabilitation of persons with 
disabilities.”.
4. In sub-section (2) of section 27 of the principal Act, for the words “non-Governmental 
Organisations” the words “District Disabilities Rehabilitation Centre and non-Governmental 
Organisations” shall be substituted.
Amendment of section 7.
10
5
2
Amendment of section 27.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
To safeguard the rights and well-being of people with disabilities, the Rights of Persons 
with Disabilities Act, 2016, was passed. The Act was a significant piece of legislation in 
India’s history in safeguarding the rights of those who were specially abled.
According to the 2011 census, 2.68 crore, i.e., over 2.2 per cent. of the Indian 
population live with certain mental or physical disabilities. However, the objective of 
guaranteeing a holistic growth through social and educational advancement, welfare,
protection and empowerment for specially abled persons has yet not been achieved 
comprehensively across the country.
The principal act gives responsibility to the appropriate government and local 
authorities for implementing services and programmes of rehabilitation, particularly in 
the areas of health, education and employment for all persons with disabilities. However, 
the act does not mandate responsibility to the appropriate Governments for establishing 
District Disability Rehabilitation Centers. Thus, the amendment proposes to establish these 
centres based on the recommendations of the parliamentary standing committee on the 
“Assessment of Scheme for Implementation of the Rights  of  Persons with  Disabilities  Act, 2016 
(SIPDA)”. Thus, through this amendment we propose mandating establishment of 
District Disability Rehabilitation Centres (DDRC) in every district for physical and mental 
disabilities.
Along the same lines it is only valid to make the definition of Rehabilitation, in the 
Act, more holistic and in accordance with World Health Organisation (WHO) standards, 
which is defined as “a set of interventions designed to optimize functioning and reduce 
disability in individuals with health conditions in interaction with their environment”,  based on 
international standards. 
Hence, this Bill.
      Nൾඐ Dൾඅඁං;                                                                     SANJEEV KUMAR SINGARI 
19, 2022

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for establishment of District Disability Rehabilitation 
Centre by the appropriate Government. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve 
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that an annual recurring 
expenditure of rupees Ten Crore is likely to be incurred from the Consolidated Fund of India. 
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees Twenty Crores  is also likely to be involved.

ANNEXURE
Eඑඍඋൺർඍඌ ൿඋඈආ ඍඁൾ Rං඀ඁඍඌ ඈൿ Pൾඋඌඈඇඌ wංඍඁ Dංඌൺൻංඅංඍංൾඌ Aർඍ, 2016
(49 ඈൿ 2016)
* * * *
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,––
(a) * * * *
(za) “rehabilitation” refers to a process aimed at enabling persons with disabilities to 
attain and maintain optimal, physical, sensory, intellectual, psychological environmental or 
social function levels; 
* * * *
7. (1) The appropriate Government shall take measures to protect persons with 
disabilities from all forms of abuse, violence and exploitation and to prevent the same, 
shall— 
(a) take cognizance of incidents of abuse, violence and exploitation and provide legal 
remedies available against such incidents; 
(b) take steps for avoiding such incidents and prescribe the procedure for its reporting; 
(c) take steps to rescue, protect and rehabilitate victims of such incidents; and 
(d) create awareness and make available information among the public. 
(2) Any person or registered organisation who or which has reason to believe that an act 
of abuse, violence or exploitation has been, or is being, or is likely to be committed against 
any person with disability, may give information about it to the Executive Magistrate within 
the local limits of whose jurisdiction such incidents occur. 
(3) The Executive Magistrate on receipt of such information, shall take immediate steps 
to stop or prevent its occurrence, as the case may be, or pass such order as he deems fit for 
the protection of such person with disability including an order— 
(a) to rescue the victim of such act, authorising the police or any organisation working 
for persons with disabilities to provide for the safe custody or rehabilitation of such person, 
or both, as the case may be; 
(b) for providing protective custody to the person with disability, if such person so 
desires; 
(c) to provide maintenance to such person with disability.
(4) Any police officer who receives a complaint or otherwise comes to know of abuse, 
violence or exploitation towards any person with disability shall inform the aggrieved 
person of— 
(a) his or her right to apply for protection under sub-section (2) and the particulars of 
the Executive Magistrate having jurisdiction to provide assistance; 
Definitions.
Protection from 
abuse, violence 
and exploitation.

(b) the particulars of the nearest organisation or institution working for the 
rehabilitation of persons with disabilities; 
(c) the right to free legal aid; and 
(d) the right to file a complaint under the provisions of this Act or any other law dealing 
with such offence: 
Provided that nothing in this section shall be construed in any manner as to relieve the 
police officer from his duty to proceed in accordance with law upon receipt of information 
as to the commission of a cognizable offence.
(5) If the Executive Magistrate finds that the alleged act or behaviour constitutes an 
offence under the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), or under any other law for the time 
being in force, he may forward the complaint to that effect to the Judicial or Metropolitan 
Magistrate, as the case may be, having jurisdiction in the matter.
* * * *
27. (1) The appropriate Government and the local authorities shall within their 
economic capacity and development, undertake or cause to be undertaken services and 
programmes of rehabilitation, particularly in the areas of health, education and employment 
for all persons with disabilities. 
(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1), the appropriate Government and the local 
authorities may grant financial assistance to non-Governmental Organisations. 
(3) The appropriate Government and the local authorities, while formulating 
rehabilitation policies shall consult the non-Governmental Organisations working for the 
cause of persons with disabilities.
* * * *
Rehabilitation.

LOK SABHA
_______
ൺ
BILL
to amend  the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016.
_______
(Dr. Sanjeev Kumar Singari,  M.P .)