Bill Ko. 180 Of 1961 
THE TEA BILL, 1952 
(As lNTRODUCED IN THE HOUSE OF THB PBOPLB) 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the control by the Union of the tea inq~B'try, and for t/'c.t 
pUrpo.e to eatabli.h a Tea Board and levy a oudoms duty on tea 
exported from India.. 
BE it enacted by Parliament as follows:-
CHAPTER I 
PULIMINARY 
1. Short title, extent aDd commencem&nt.-(l) This Act may ,be called 
the Tea Act, 195~. 5' 
(2) It extends to the whole of India: 
Provided that it sha~l not apply to the State of Jammu and Kashmir 
except to the extent to whioh the provisions of this Act relate to the 
oontrol of the export of tea from, and the cultivation of tea in, India. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government 10 
may, by notifioation in the Offioial Gazette, appoint. 
2. Decl&1'ati011 Ie W ezpecUency of c~trol by the 'D'nlon.-It is hereby 
deolared that it is expedient in the public interest that the Union should 
take under its control the tea industry. 
a. DeBnlttOas.-In this Act, ubless the context otherwise requires,- 15 
(a.) "Board" means the Tea BOArd constituted under section 4; 
(b) .. broker" means a broker of tea; 
(0) "cess" means the oustoms-duty imposed by section 26; 
(d) "Customs-colleotor" means a Customs-oollector as defined in 
clause (0) of section 8 of the Sea Customs Act, 1878 (VIII of 1876) 20 
for the purposes of that Act. or of that Act as applied to the import 
and export of goods by air, or a Collector of Land Customs as defined 
in olause (0) of seotion 2 of the Land Customs Act, 192( (XIX of 
1924), as the oase may be; 
(e) "dealer" means a dealer in tea; 25 
(f) "export" means to uke out of India by land, sea or air to 
any place outside India other than a oountry or territory notified in 
this behalf by the Central Governrtlentby notification in the Offioial 
Oazette; 

10 
16 
20 
26 
• 
(g) "export allotment" means the total quantity of tea whioh 
may be exported during anyone finanoial year; 
(h) "Fund" means the Tea Improvement Fund referred to in 
section 28; 
(i) "grower" means a grower of tea; 
(j) "manufao·turer" means a manufacturer of tea; 
(k) "member" means a member of the Board; 
(l) "owner"--. 
(I) with referenoe to a tea estate or garden or a sub-division 
thereof the possession of which has been transferred by lease, 
mortgage or otherwise, means the transferee so long as his right 
to possession subsists; and 
(ii) with referenoe to a tQa estate or a garden or a sub-
division for whioh an agent is employed, means the agent if, and 
in 80 far as, he has been duly authorised by the .owner in that 
behalf; 
(m) "preaoribed" means presoribed by rules made under this 
Aot; 
(n) "standard export. figure" means suoh quantity as the Central 
Government may, by notification in the Offioial Gazette, specify 
pursuant to any international agreement in this behalf; 
(0) "tea" mean'J the plant Thea.inen.i. _as well as the commodity 
known as tea made from the leaves of the plant Th.aliMn.i. includ-
ing green tea but exoluding tea waste; 
(p) "tea seed" inoludes seeds, roots, stumps, outtings, buds and 
any living portion of the plant Th.a.in.n.i. which may be used to 
propagate that plant. 
CHAPTER II 
TBB TBA BOABD 
30 ,. Elt&bU..,meat aDd coulltutloa. or the 'rea Bolld.-(l) With effeot 
from such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, specify in this behalf, there shall be established for the 
purposes of this Act a Board to be oalled the Tea Board. 
(2) The Board shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having 
30 perpetual succession and a common seal, with power to aoquire, hold 
and dispose of property, both movable and immovable, and to oontraot, 
Hnd shall by the said name Fue and be sued. 
(3) The Board shall consist of a Chairman and suoh number of other 
members not exceeding forty as the Central Government may think 
expedjpnt, to be appointed by that Government by notification in the 
Official Gazette from among persons who are in its opinion capable of 
representing.-
(a) owners of teg. estates and gardens and growers; 
(b) persons emp!oyed in tea estates and gardens; 
(0) manufacturers of tea; 
(d) dealers including both exporters and internal traders of tea; 
(6) cOIlSUIJlers; 
(f) Parliament; 
(g) the Central Government; 
(h) the Governments of the prinoipal tea growing States; 
(i) Chambers of Commerce and Industry; 

8 
(j) such other persons or olass of persons, as scientist., economists 
or business men, who, in the opibion of ttie Central Government, 
ought to be rept'esented on the Board. 
(4) The term of office of, the procedure to be followed in the dis-
charge of their functions by, and the manner of filling casual vacancies I) 
among, the members of the Board shall be such 80S. may be prescribed. 
G. V&C&1lcl.el, etc., not to iDv&Udate acta aDd proceediDgl.-No nct done 
or proceeding taken by the Board under this Act shall be questioned on 
the ground merely of the existence of any vacancy in, or defect in the 
constitution of, the Board. 10 
6. 8&lary and allOW&D.C81 of Ohalrm&D.-The Ohairman shall be entitled 
to such salary and allowances and such conditions of service in respl.'I'3t of 
leave, pension, providElnt fund and other m~tters as may from time to time 
bs fixed by the Central Go\·ernment . 
.,. Vlce-Ohalrm&D.-The Central Government shall appoint from among 16 
the members of the Board a ·Vice-Chairman, who shall exercise such of the 
powers and discharge such of the duties of the Chairman as may be pres-
cl-ibed or as mlly be delegated to him by the Chairman. 
@. I:zecutlve and other Oommltteel.-(l) There shall be an Executive 
ComI.littee of the Board constituted in the manner prescribed. 20 
(9) 'fhe Exe~utive Committee shall exercise such of the powers and 
pl~rforln such of the duties of the Board as may be prescribed, or as the 
Board may delegate to it. 
(3) Subject to such control and restrictions as may be prescribed the 2l1! 
Board may constitute other Standing Committees or ad hoc Committees u 
fo~ exercising any power or discharging any duty of the Board or for en. 
quiring into or reporting and advising on any matter which the Board may 
refer to them. 
(4) A Standing Committee shall consist exclusively of members of the 
Board. 30 
(6) An ad hoc Committee may include persona who are not members of 
U1e Board, but their number shall not ex~eed one h&lf of its strength. 
9. S8cr~tary and IW.-(l) The Central Government shall appoint-
(a) a Secretary to the Board who shall exercise such powers and 
perform such duties as may be preSCribed or I\S may be delegated to as 
hirl by the Board or the Chairman; 
(b) 1111 other officers of the· Board drawing a. salary of rupees one 
thousand or more per month. 
(2) Subject to such control and restrictions BS may be prescribed, the 
B,oard may appoint such. other officers and employees as may b.e necessary 40 
for the efficient performan':le of, its functions and pay them such salaries 
and allowa.nces as it may determine from time to time. 
(3) The Chllirman, Secretary and other employees of the Board shall 
not undertake any work unconnected with th~ir duties under this Act 
exuept with the permission of the Central Government. " 

4; 
10. t.1UlCtiou of· the BOII'd.-.{l) It shall be the duty of the. Board to 
promotE> by such measures as it thi~s fit th~ all round development under 
the oontrol of the Central Government of the tea industry. 
(.e) Without prejudi~ to the generality of the provisions of sub-section 
I (1), the measures referred to therein may provide for-
(a) promoting the sale and increasing the consumption in India 
and elsewhere of Indian tea and carrying on propaganda for that 
purpose; 
(b) increasing the produ'3tion of tea in India; 
10 (0) undertaking, assisting or encouraging scientific, technological 
and economic research, and maintaining and assisting in the main-
tenance of research Institutes and experimental and demonstration 
farms and manufacturing stations; 
(d) collecting statistics from growers, manufacturers, dealers and 
16 su')h other persons as may he prescribed on any matter relating to the 
te:J. industry; the publication of statistics so collected or portions 
t.hereof or extracts therefrom; 
(e) fixing grade standards of tea und providing for training in tea 
tasting: 
20 (f) improving the marketing of tea in India Bnd elsewhere and 
proventing unfair competition; 
(g) regulating and eontrolling the sale of tea for internal OODsump-
tio~1 ot' export, whether by auction or otherwise; 
(h) BBsisting in the control of insects and other pests and diseases 
26 affecting tea; 
(i) promoting co-operative efforts among growers and manufao-
turers of tea; 
(j) ensuring remuperative returns to the growel'S and manu-
facturers of tea.; 
30 (k) regulating the acreage under tea produotion; 
35 
(1) registering and licensing of manufacturers, brokers and tea 
waste dealers; regulating sales and auctions; 
(m) controlling the quality of tea and licensing of blending; 
(n) promoting the adoption of measur~s for increasing the pro-
ductivity of labour, including measure& for securing safer and better 
working conditions and the provisjon and improvemen~ of amenitiel 
and in~entives for workers; 
(0) such other matters as may be prescribed. 
(.1) The Board sha.ll perform its funetions under this section in a'3cord-
40 ance with, and suJ>ject to, such ruleS ... may be made by the ~ntral 
Government, inoluding rules for the allocation ot moneys to different 
object •• 
11. DJI.oIuUoD of the Board.-.{l)The Oentral Government may, by 
notification in the Ofticiat Gazette, declare the Boara to be diSsOlved, aria 

a 
on the date of the publication of any such notifioation the Board shall 
ltand dissolved and thiR Act shall be deemed to be repealed. 
(~) When the Boatd is dissolved the unexpended balance of all money 
received by the Board under this Act shall lapse to the Central Government. 
CHAPTER III 
CONTROL OVER TilE EXTENSION OF TEA CULTI'\'ATION 
5 
IS. MothOd of con\rol of extension of tea cultivaUGn.-{l) No one shall 
plaut teB on any land not planted with tea. on the date of commencement 
of this Act unless permission has been granted to him in writing by or on 
heh&lf of the Board. 10 
(2) No tea area shall be replaced by planting tea .on area not planted 
"'ith tea unless permission has been granted in writing by or on behalf of 
the Board. 
(3) Nothi~·'g in this section shall prohibit the infilling or supplying of 
vacancies on land planted with teo. on the date of commencement of this 15 
Act or the replanting of tea upoIl,-
(i) land planted with tea on the 31st day of March, 1950, from 
which original bushes have been uprooted, or 
(ii) land planted with tea on the Slst day of March, 1948, from 
which the original bushes have been uprooted. 20 
13. LtmitatioDl to th!" nt.ena!oll of tea culUvatlon.-( 1) Subject to the 
provisions contained in sectj'.JtIs Hi and 161 the total area of lIma in l't:!spept 
of which the permission referred to in 3eotiOll 12 m!l~- be granted, shall 
not exceed such area as may be determined by the Board with the previous 
approval of the Central Governmpnt.. 25 
(2) 'fhe total arra of hlln. in any State in respect of which such pm·mis· 
sidn may be granted shall be such 8S may be determined by the Board: 
Provided that the Board may vary the total area. so determined for 
any State in order to increase or diminish for anothrr State the area in 
respect of which such permission may be grauted by an amount correspond. 30 
ing to the extent to which the area in the first mentioned State has been 
-diminished or increased. 
(3) The Board shall publish the total area. detp.rmined for India as well 
as the total areas determined for the VOriOllS States by notification in the 
Official Gazette of the Central Oo,'ernmeot os soon as mav be "fter the 35 
eommeocement of this Act and shall in like manner publish riny IilUbsequent 
variation of such total oreas. 
16. Gr&nt of permilsion to plAnt tea.-{l) Applica.tions for I'('rmission 
to plant tea. on any land not planted with tea on the date of commence-
;roent of this Act shall be made to the Board and shall contain a clear 40 
statement of all special circumstances justifying the application, 
(i) The Board mny require an applicant to supply such information 
as it thinks neoessary to enable the Board to deal with the application.-
(3) Subject to such conditions nnd restrictions as may be prescribed, 
the Board may by order grant or refuse the permission applied for, or may 45 
in like manner grant it in part only or may call for further informa.ion 
from the applicant: 

8 
Provided that permisSion shall not be granted in the case of a tea 
estate owned by a limited liability company if the area planted with tea 
in the estate exceeds three hundred acres, and in ~he case of any tea 
estate owned by an individual proprietor or proprietors if the area planted 
I) with tea in the estate exceeds one hundred and fifty acres. 
(4) No order by the Board under sub-section (3) shall be called in 
question by any court. 
16. GrlDt of permlallioa to plant tea in lPec1&1 clreumataDces.-,-(1} 
Where any land which was Oil the 31st day of Maroh, 1988, planted with 
10 tea (including land planted with tea on the 81st day of March, 1931 from 
which the original bushes had been uprooted and which had not been 
replanted with tea on the said 81Ht day of March, 1938), or where any land 
planted with tea after the Slst day of March, ~9S3-
15 (a) has since b('come wholly incapable of carrying tea through 
circumstances due to war, or through subsidence, flood, erosion, earth-
quake or other irresistible superhuman cause, or 
(h) has since been compulsorily acquired under the provisions of 
the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 (I of 1894), or of any other law for 
the time being in force and no longer carries tea, or 
20 (c) has since been transferred .to the Central or a State Govern-
ment or to a local authority and no longer carries tea, or 
(cl) has since been resumed by the lessor under the terms of any 
lease and no longer carries tea, 
the owner of the tea estate in which such land is situated may apply te> 
26 the Board for permission to plant tea on land not planted with tea. 
E.:rplanation.-Lond taken for purposes connected with the prosecution. 
of war on which tea bushes have been allowed to remain for protective 
purposes though no longer cultivated shall be deemed for the purposes of 
this section to be inoapable of carrying or no longer to carry tea. 
30 (.e) Upon such application being made and upon proof to the satisfaction 
of the Board that the applicant is entitled to the benefit of sub-section (1) 
the Board may by order grant permission to plant tea on land not planted 
with tea: 
Providt>d that the area of land in respect of which such permission is· 
36 granted shall be within the same or an adjacent district 'and shall belong. 
to the same or an adjacent tea estate and shall not exceed in extent the-
area of the land incapable of carrying tea or compulsorily acquired,. 
transferred or resumed, as the case may be. 
(3) All areas of land In respect of which permission to plaQt tea is 
40 granted under this section shall be excluded wht'n computing for the-
purpose of section 18 the total area of land in respect of which the permis-
.ioll referred to in section 12 may be granted." 
(4) If any land falling within the Ezplanation to sub-seotion (1) is: 
subsequently reetor~d to the tea estate from which it was t4ubtrallt"d, the 
46 owner of the estate shall either uproot the tea planted thert'ou, or uproot-
any tea planted by him in pursuance of a permissiOn granted under sub-
.ection (9). . 
18. Tea 1l1l1'lll1 ... -{1) The owner of a tea estate may establish 
nuraerie. on land not previously planted with tea for the growing of plants. 

?I 
intended for infilling or supplying vacancies or for replanting land planted 
with tea within the area of the estate or for any other purpose approved 
by the Board. 
(2) All areas of land utilised for nurseries in accordance with this 
seotion shall be exoluded. when computing for the purpose of !'!ection 13 IS 
the total area of land in respect of which the permissions referred to in 
section .12 may be granted. 
17. Appeal to 08'l1tral Govel'DlDeDt.-Any applicant aggrieved by an 
order of the Board under section 14 or section 15 may appeal to t.he 
Central Government within sixty days from the date thereof and the 10 
Central Government may cancel, modify or suspend any such order. 
CHAPTER IV 
CONTROL OVER THE EXPORT 011' TEA AND TEA SEED 
18. Oontrol of export of tea and tea seetL-(1) No tea shall be exported 
unless covered by a licenoe issued by or on behalf of the Board. lIS 
(2) No tea seed shall be exported unless oovered by a permit issued 
by or on behalf of the Central Government. 
(3) No tea or tea seed shall be taken by land, sea or air out of anI 
State to any of the French or Portuguese Settlements bounded by India, 
unless covered by a permit issued by or on behalf of the Board. 20 
19. Tea for ezport to be covered by liceDce or permlt.-(l) No oonsiill-
ment of tea or tea seed shall be shipped or waterborne to be shipped for 
export or shall be exported until the owner has delivered to the Customs-
collector a valid export licence or special export licence or a valid permit 
issued by or on behalf of the Board or the Central Government, as the 21S 
case may be, covering the quantity to be shipped. 
(2) No consignment of tea or tea seed shall be shipped or waterborne 
to be shipped for carriage (or shall be taken by land or air) to any of the 
French or Portuguese Settlements bounded by Indio. until the owner has 
delivered to the Customs-collector a permit issued by or on behalf of the 30 
Board covering the quantity to be shipped. 
(3) No permit for the passage of any tea or tea seed by land into any 
of the French or Portuguese Settlements bounded by India shall be 
granted undor sub-sectioll (I) of sectioll 5 of the J~and Customs Aot, 1924 
(XIX of 1924), unless the application for such permit is accompanied by 35 
1\ permit granted in this bob .. !f by the Board covering the quantity to be 
passed. 
20. J:zport a.IiIDtJDeDt.-The Central Government shall, after con-
Bulting the Board and paying due regard to all interests concerned and 
to the standard export figure, declare, by notification in the Offioial 40 
Gazette, the export allotment for each financial year; 
Provided that the Central Government may by subsequent notincation 
at any time during 'the financial year alter the export allotment and there-
upon the export allotment 88 so altered shall be the export allotment for 
that year. 
n. .zport quotaa and UC8Dc8l.-(1) Subject to such conditions as 
may be prescribed, any tea estate shall have the right to receive under 
this Act an export. quota for each financial year. 

8 
(9) The export quota of a tea estate, that ii, the total quantity of tea 
which may be exported by the. owner of a tea estate during the finanoial 
year, shall be an amount determined by the Board in acoordance with 
such prinoiples as may be presoribed: 
6 Provided that when an export allotment is altered under the provisions 
of section 20, the export quota shall be liable to be altered ~oordingly. 
(3) The total of export quotas allotted to tea estates at any time during 
any finanoial year shall not exoeed the export allotment for the time 
being for that year. 
010 D. 1I.Ight to ezport UceDC8a.-(I) The owner of a teo. estate to whioh 
an export quota has been allotted for any finanoial year shall have the 
zight to obtain "t any time export lioenoes during that year to cover 
..the export of tea upto the amount; of the unexhausted balanoe of the 
'quota, that is, upto the amount of the quota less the amount for whioh 
16 ~he export lioenoes havQ already been iuued againsj it. 
(9) The right of the owner of a tea estate under this seotion may be 
transferred subject to luch conditions al may be presoribed, and the 
transferee of any luch righOt may again transfer the whole or any part 
of his right to the owner of a tea estate, but not; to any other person: 
20 Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall operate to restriot the 
issue of licenoes for the export of tea expressed ~ be sold with export 
rights. 
(3) The owner of any tea estate to whioh an expo~ quota has been 
allotted or any person to whom he has transferred his rights may at any 
25 time before the 21st day of March of the finanoial year to whioh the quota 
relates apply in writing to the Board for an export lioence to oover the 
export of tea upto the amount of the unexhausted balanoe of the quota.. 
<') Every lioence shall be in duplioate in the prescribed form, shall 
bear the date of its issue and shall be valid upto the end of the finanoial 
30 year in which it is issued: 
3IS 
40 
Provided that, suve as provided in section 23, the Board shall not issue 
any export licence after the end of the finanoial year in whioh the applica-
tion for lioence was made. 
28. Special export RC8JUlII.-(1) Where tea in respect of which an 
export licence has been or could have been granted under this Act has 
not been exported before the end of the finanoial year in which the licence 
was or could have been issued, the person to whom the lioenoe was or 
could have been granted may, before the 14th day of April of the follow-
ing financial year forward an applioation to the Board for a speoial export 
licence covering the 8ame quantity of tea, and the Board shall, on receipt 
of the prescribed fee, if any, Issue a special licence aocordingly. 
(2) A person to whom a special export lioence has been issued under 
sub-section (1) may transfer the special export licence with all the rights 
conferred thereby to. a person or persons nominated by him, but a lioence 
'" 'Once so transferred shall not be further transferable. 
(3) A special export licence shall be in duplicate in the pre80ribed 
form, shall bear the date of its issue and Ihall be valid upto the 8lst day 
of May of the financial year,in which itw88.issued. 

(4) 'l'he quantity of tea covered by a special export licence sha.ll be 
accounted for against the export quota of the year in which the original 
licence WIlS or could have been issued under this Act. 
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing sub-sections 
the Board may, with the general or special previous sanction of the Central is 
Government refuse to issue a special expoFt licence or postpone for so 
long as the Central Government may require the issue of any special 
export licence. 
24. Board to maintain accounts of quotu.-(l) The Board shall main-
tain an account of every export quota showing, in addition to such other 10 
particulars as the Board may think fit, the licences issued against it and 
the unexhausted balance. 
(2) Any owner of a teo. estate shall be entitled, on payment of the 
requisite fee, to a copy of the account relating to his quota, certified in 
the mllnner laid down in the by-laws made by the Board. 
25. Limitation of appUcation of Oh&pter.-Nothing in this Chapter 
shall apply to tea-
(a) proved to the sa.tisfaction of the Customs-collector to have 
been imported into India from any port outside India;, or 
L5 
(b) shipped as stores on board any vessel or aircraft in such 20 
quantity as the Customs-collector considers reasono.ble having regard 
to the number of the crew and passengers and length of the voyage 
on which the vessel or aircraft is about to depart; or 
to) exported by post in packages not exceeding one pound avoir· 25 
dupoiB in weight; or 
(d) exported with the previous sanction of the Central Govern. 
ment, within the limits prescribed in this behalf, by a Red Cross 
Society Or by any organisation for providing amenities for troops 
oversea.s; or 
(e) taken as part of the personal luggage of a passenger. 30 
CHAPTER V 
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT 
26. Imposition of a dUty of customs 011 export of tea.-(l) A dut.v of 
customs shall be Levied and collected on an tea exported or taken outside 
india at IUch rate not exceeding two rupees per one hundred pounds as 35 
the Oentra.l Government may notify in the Ofllcial Gazette. 
(2) The duties of customs lewed under lub-sectlon (1) shall be collected 
by such agenCies and in SIlch manner as may be prelcribed. 
27. Payment of duties of C1Lltoms to the Board.-The Oentral Govern. 
ment may, in each financial year, pay to the Board a sum not exceeding 4:0 
the proceeds of the duties of cU8toms collected during the preceding flnan-
etal year after deducting the expenses of coUection. 
28. Oonstitution C1f J"und.-{l) There shall be formed a. Fund to be 
called. the Tea. Improvement Fund, and there shall be credited thereto-
(a) the proceeds of the duties of customs made over to the Board 4.5 
by the Central Government; 
(b) all fees levied and collected in respect of licences. permits and 
permissions issued under this Act; and 

10 
(c) any other fee that may be levied and collected under this 
Act or the rules made ~hereunder. 
(2) l'ht' Fund shall be applied towards meeting the expenses of the 
DOl:trd and the cost of the measures referred to in section 10 •. 
6 29. BonowtDg power. of Boud.-Subject to such rules as may be 
made in this behalf, the Board shall have power to borrow on the security 
of the Fund or any other asset for any purposes for which the }'und may 
be ·applied. . 
30. AcCOllDta aDd aud1t.-(l) The Boa.rd shall CQuse accounts to be 
10 kept of loll moneys received and expended by it. 
(2) The accounts shall be audited every year by auditors appointed in 
this b(lhalf by tbe Central Government and sU':Jh auditors shall disallow 
every item, which in their opinion is not authorised by the Act or any rule 
made or direction issued thereunder .. 
15 (3) The Board may, within three months from the date of oommunica-
til/u to it of the disallowance of any item, as aforesaid, appeal against suoh 
disullowance to the Ceutral Government whose decision shull be final. 
CHAPTER VI 
CONTROL BY THB CENTRAL·· GOVERN KENT 
20 31. I'lutloD of prlC8I for _ of tea.-(l) The Central Government may, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, fix the price or prices at which tea 
may be sold wholesale or retail by auction or otherwise whether for the 
Indian market or fC71' export .. 
(2) No grower or dealer shall Bell tea wholesale or retail by auction or 
26 otherwise, whether for the Indian market or for export at a price or prices 
higher than the price or prices fixed under this section. 
30 
82. Qeaeral cOILVol over acta aDd proceed.np of the Boa.rd.-{l) All acta. 
ulld proceedings of the Board shall be subject to the control of the Central 
Government which may cancel, suspend or modify as it thinks fit, any 
action taken by the Board. 
(2) 'fhe Board shall carry Qut such directions as may be issued to it. 
from time to time by the Central Government for the efficient administra-
tio:1 of this Act. 
(3) The records of the Board shall be open to inspection at all reasonable 
35 times by any officer authorised in this bebalf by the Central Government. 
CHAPTERVn 
MISCELLANEOtTS 
33. LlceDIIDg of brokers, tea mADufactur&ll, etc.-The Central Govern-
ment may whenever it thinks it necessary so to do, by notification in the 
Official Gazette require that no person shall on and from such date as may 
o be spf:cified in the notifi.,ation E\ngage himself as a broker, m,anufacturer, 
or dealer in tea waste or engage himself in the business of, blending tea 
Ncept und'er and in accordance with the provisions of a licence issued by 
thtl Board in accordance with the rules made under this Act; and any 

11 
person who on and after such date so engages himself without obtaining 
a liCl:'llCe issued by the Board shall be deemed to have contravened the 
provisiolls of this seotion. 
84.. Power of lDIpectton.-Any person authorised in this behalf by the 
CCI.t,ro.l Government or by the Board or any member or officer of the :> 
Boaru may enter at,' all reasona.ble times any teo. estate or any place or 
prcmisl'!I where tea is stored, kept or exposed for sale and may require 
the production for his inspection of any book, register, record or other 
pllpt'r kept therein and aEk for any information relating to the production, 
stora.ge or keeping for sale of tea. 10 
36. Power of Board to call for ret1ll'Dl.-The Board may serve by post 
a l!oticll' upon the owner of any tea esta.te or upon his manager, requirin~ 
him to furnish, within such period as it may specify in the notice, such 
returns r£olating to the production, sale and export of tea produced on the 
e!>tatc or to any other matter as it may deem necessary. 15 
88. PeDalty for l111Cit ezport.-A breo.'3h of the provisions of sub-section 
(1) cr sub-section (2) of ~ection 19 shall be punishable as if it were an 
offence under item No.8 of section 167 of the Sea Customs Act, 1878 
(VIII of 1878), Ilnd the provisiolls of section 168 Ilnd of Chapter XVII of 
that Act shall apply accordingly. 20 
81. Penalty for maJdDg falaeret1ll'D ....... Any person who being required by 
or under this Act to furnish any return fails to furnish such return or fur-
nishc'd a rt'turn containing a.ny particular which is false and which he knows 
to bf, false or does not believe to be true shall be punlshable with fine whbh 
ma.y extAnd to one thousand rupees. 25-
38. Penalty for obetructlJll aD oCIleer or member of the Board 1D the 
Glacharge of h1I dutlll ID4 for fall1l1'8 to produce boOks aDd recorda.-Any 
p~r£on who--
(a) obstructs a membet" or officer of the Board in the eXP.1"cise of 
any power conferred, or in the discharge of any duty imposed, on 30 
him by or under this Act, or 
(b) having the control or custody of any account book or other 
record, fails to produce such book Or record when required to do so 
by or under this Act, 
shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to one year or 35-
with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both, 
89. Penalty tor llUclt cultivatlOD.- Whoever knowingly plants tea or 
causes teo. to be planted on any land in contravention of section 12 shall be 
pU~li&hl1ble with fine which may extend to one thousa.nd rupees for the 
first ofienc,e, and with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees for 
any subsequent offence, 
to. Bemov&l of tea pl&Dted wit.hoat permJalloD.-Where Bny person ha.s 
been convioted of any offenoe under seotion 89, the convicting oourt may 
dir~ It that the tea in respeot of which the offence was committed shall be 
rt:m.nvE'd from the land within a specified time, and in the event of the order 
not being duly complied with, msy cause the tea to be removed and may 
recover th,e cost from the person convicted as if it were an arrear of land 
l't'VCllue due on the tea estate on which the oifen'Je was committed. 

,Ii 
'1. Other peD&ltlll.-Whoever contravenes or attempts to 
contravene or abets the contravention of the provisions of this Act or 
of any rules made 1Ihereurider other than the pJ1>visions, punishment for 
the oontravention whereof hIlS been provided for in sections 36, 87, 88 and 
a 89, shall be punishable with imprisonment which may l~xtend to six 
months, or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with 
both, and in the case of a. continuing oontravention with an additional 
fine which may extend to five hundred rupees for every day during which 
suoh contravention continues aftie~ conviction for the first such con-
10 travention. 
42. Offences by companies.--(I) If the person committing an offenoe 
under this section or the rules therculJder is a company, every person, 
who at the time the contravention was committed was inoho.rge of, and 
was responsible to, the compallY for the conduct of the business of the 
15 company, as well o.s the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the 
contravention and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished 
accordingly: 
Provided that nothing contllined in this sub-section shall render any 
such person liable to any punishment, if he proves t\hat the offence was 
20 committed without his knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence 
to prevent the commission of such offence. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), wh~re an 
offence under this Act has been committed by a company and it is proved 
that the offence has been committJed with the consent or connivance of, 
25 or is attributable to Bny neglect on the part of, any director or manager, 
secretary or otther officer of the comp'o.ny such director, manager, secretary 
or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall 
be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly. 
30 
Ezplanation.-For the purposes of this section-
(a) "company" means any bod:t, oorporate and includes a firm 
or o1her Bssociation of individuals; s.nd 
(b) "director" in relation to a firm means a partner in the firm. 
63 . .T1II'IIdlct.1oD of courta.-No court inferior to t.hat of a Presidency 
35 magistrate or a magistrate of the First Class ihall try any offence punish-
c .. ble under this Act. 
". Prev10aa III1c\tOn of Oentral Government for pl'OleCUtlOn.-No pro-
secution for any offenoe punishable under this Act shall be instituted 
except with the previous sanction of the Central Govemment. 
60 66. PJot,ectloD. of acUcm t&ken In good IIlth.-No suit, proseout.ioD or 
other legal proceeding shall lie against any penon for anything whioh Is 
in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act or the rules made 
thereunder. 
68. Power to delepte.-The Central Government may, by order notifi-
~ ed in the Official Gazette, direc~ that any power exeroisable J:>y it under 
this Act may also be exeroised in such cases and subject to such condi-
tions, if any, as may be specified in the order by such offioer or authority 
88 may be specified therein. 

18 
'7. SuspeDl101l of operation ot Act.-(l) If the Central Government 
is satisfied that circumstances have arisen rendering it necessary that 
certain of the restrictions imposed by this Act should cease to be imposed 
or if it considers it necessary or expedient so to do in the public "interest, 
the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, BUS- 6 
pend or relax to a specified extent ejther indefi,nitely or for such period 
as may be specified in the notification the operation of all or any of the 
provisions of this Act. 
(2) Where the opera.tion of any provisions of this Ant has under sub-
section (1) been suspendecl or relaxed indefinitely, such suspension or 0 
relaxation may at any time while this Act remains in force be removed 
by the Central Government by notification in the Official Gazette. 
48. Power of Oentral Government "to make rules.-(l) The Central 
Government may, subject to the condition of previous publication, make 
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 16 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the fore-
going power, such rules may provide for all or any of ~he following matters, 
namely:- . 
(a) the constitution of the Board, the term ~f office and other 
conditions of service of, the procedure to bl;! followed by, ana the 2& 
manner of filling casual vacancies among, the members of the Board; 
(b) the circumstances in which, and the authority by which mem-
bers may be removed; 
(e) the holding of a mi~imum number of meetings of the Board 
every year; 26 
(d) the pay, allowances and other conditions of service of the 
Secretary Bnd other officers app,olnted by the Central Government ; 
(6) the maintenanoe of records of aU business transacted at meet-
ings of the Board and the submission of oopies of such records to the 
Central Government; 30 
(f) the conditions subject to which, and the mode in which, con-
tracts may be made by or on behalf of the Board; 
(g) the preparation of budget estimate of the receipts Bnd expen-
diture of the Board and the authority by which such estimates shall 
be sanotioneq; 36 
(h) the powers of the Board and the Exeoutive Committee and 
the Chairman, in regard to the incurring of expenditure; and the re-
appropriation of estimated savings in any budget head to another such 
head; 
(I) the conditions subject to which the Board may incur expen- 40 
diture; 
(j) the conditions Bubject to which the Board may borrow; 
(k)" the form and the manner in which aacounts should be kept 
by the Board; 

10 
20 
215 
;I.' 
(l) the basis on which the export quota of a tea estate shall be 
determined; 
(m) the conditions !.ubject to which export quota, export licences 
and special export licences shall be transferable i , 
(n) the conditions subject to which permits for the planting of 
tea on land no~ carrying tea shall be granted; 
(0) tJie collection of any informa~ion or statistics in respect <.If 
the tea industry and the tea trade; 
(p) the fees to be levied in respect of licences, permits and per-
missions issued under this Act; 
(q) the procedure for the grant or issue of licences, permits and 
permissions under this Act, the time within which such licences, per· 
mits or permissions shall be granted or issued including, in particular, 
the publication of notices calling for applications and the holding of 
such public inquiry in regard thereto 88 may be necessary in the 
circumstances; 
(r) the fo~ of application for licences, permits or permissions 
under this Act; 
(.) the manner in which a. broker or a dealer in tea. waste or a 
manufacturer shall be licensed under this Act and the levY of fees in 
respect of such licence i .. 
(t) the ma.tters which may be taken into account in the gl'nlJting 
or issuing of any licence, permit or permission under this Act including 
in particular the previous consultation with the Central Government 
by the Board in regard to the grant or issue of any such licences, 
permits or permissions; 
(u) the conditions which may be included in any licences, permits 
or permissions; 
. (v) the returns to be furnished by owners of tea estates, manu-
80 facturers, dealers and brokers relating to the production, manufacture, 
storage, sale and export of tea and the form and manner in which 
such returns are to be furnished i -; 
(w) the fees to be charged for granting certified copies of accounts 
of quotas; 
36 (z) any other fee that may be necessary for the Board to levy 
in order to determine or redetermine the basis on which export quota 
may be fixed; 
(y) any other matter which is to be or may be prescribed. 
4.9. Power of Board to make by-lawI.-(l) The Board may make by· 
4:0 laws consistent with this Act and the rules made thereunder, to provide 
for-. 
(a) the dates, times and places of its meetings and of the meet-
ings of the E.xecutive Ilnd other Committees and quorum for such 
meetings, and the procedure' thereat; 
4:5 (b) ~he delegation of powers and duties to the Executive or any 
other Committee, or to its Chairman, Vice-Chairman, Secretary or 
any other of its officers; 

1~ 
(0) the travelling .allowances of members and of members of 
Committees ; 
(d) the appointment, promotion and dismissal of its officers and 
otber employees other than those appointed by the Central Govern- is 
ment and the creation and abolition of their posts; 
(6) thQ conditions of service of its officers and other employees 
other than those appointed by the Central Government, including 
thei.r pay, leave, leave allowances, pensions, gratuities, compassionate 
allowances and travelling allowances and th~ establiahmen\ and main-
tenance of a provident fund for them; 
(I) the mainhenance of its accounts; 
(g) the persons b'y whom, and the manner in which payments, 
deposits and investments may be made on its behalf; 
(h) the custody of moneys required for its current expenditure 
and. the investment of moneys not 80 re!luired; 
(i) the preparation of statements showing the sums allotted to 
Departments of the Central and State Governments and other 
institutions. 
10 
15 
(9) No by-law shall take effect until it has been confirmed by the 
Central Government and published in thQ Offioial Gazette, and the Central 20 
Government, in confirmln8 a by-law may make any change therein which 
appears to be necessary. . 
(3) The Central Government may, by notifioation in the Offioial 
Gazette, cancel any by-law which it has confirmed and thereupon ~he 
by-law shall cease to have e1leo\. 25 
50, Keptala &lid 8&vtDga.-(l) The Indian Tea Con.trol Act, 1988 (VIII 
of 1938) and the Central Tea Board Act, 1949 (XIII of 1949) are hereby 
repealed. 
(.2) AU moneys and other property and all rights and interests, of 
whatever kind, owned by, vested in, used, enjoyed or possessed by, or 30 
held in trust by or for, the Indian Tea Licensing Committee constituted 
under the Indian Tea Control Act, ] 988, and the Central Tea Board 
constituted under the Central Tea Board Act, 1949, as well as all liabilities 
legall:v subsisting against that Committee or that Board shall pass to the 
Board with effect from the commencement of this Act; 3iS 
(3) All officers and other employees of the Indian Tea Licensing Com-
mittee and the Central Tea Board who hold office as such immediately 
before the commencement of this Act shall be deemed to have b~en 
appointed .BS officers or other employees of the Board with effect from the 
commencement of this Act and, notwithstanding anything contained in 40 
any contract of service entered into by any such officer or other employee 
with the Indian 1'ea Licensing Committee or the Central Tea Board, shall 
be entitled to sllch pay and allowances Rnd to such conditions of service 
in respect of other matters as may be determined by the Board with the 
approval of the Central Government; 46 
(4) Any proceedings taken by the Indian Tea Licensin~ Commi~tee or 
the Central 'l'ea Board before the commenoement of thiS Act may be 
continued by the.Board after suoh commencemen~, 

18 
(6) Until action in that behalf is otherwise taken under the correspond-
illg provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder, all licences, per-
mits and permissions issued or granted, nIl export quotas allotted and all 
fees fixed under the provisions of the Indian Tea Control Aot, 1988, shall, 
15 unless inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, be deemed to have 
been issued, granted, allotted or fixed under the corresponding proviBions 
of this Act and the rules made thereunder. 
(6) Any offence .punishable under the Indian Tea Control Act, 1988, 
or the Central Tea Board Aot, 1949, shall be punishable and may be dealt 
10 with'as if it were an offence punishable under the corresponding provisions 
of this Act. 
(7) Any other thing or action done or taken before the commencement 
of this Act by the Indian Tea Licensing Committee or the Central Tea 
Board shall so long 8S it is not inconsistent with any of the provisions of 
US this Act, be as valid and effectual. as if it had been done or taken by the 
Board after the commencement of this Act. 
(8) }o'or the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the provisions 
comained in sub-sections (9) to (7) inclusive shall be without prejudice 
to the general application of section 6 of the General Clauses Act .. 1897 
SO (X of 1897). 
(9) If any difficulty ari&es in giving effect to any of the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may as ocoaaion may arise, by order, 
do anything which appears to be necessary for the purpose of removing 
the difficulty. 

..... 
1'7 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Indian Tea Control Act, 1988, and the Central Tea Board Act, 
1949, are the existing enactments relating to the 1;ea industry. The objeot 
of the former Act is "the oontrol of the export of tea and oontrol of the 
extension of the cultivation of tea", while that of the latter is "the develop-
ment of the tea industry under Central oontrol". Since these objects are 
inter-related, the former being in a sense only ancillary to the latter, it is 
proposed that there should be a single Act combining the provisions of the 
two existing enactments, with a view to achieving simplicity and adminis-
tra.tive convenience. The Bill seeks to achieve this object. 
2. The Bill provides for the constitution of a statutory Board called 
the Tea Board, to which win be entrusted, besides the functions now 
Rssigned to the Indian Tea Licensing Committee and the Central Tea 
Board under the existing Acts, additional funotions such 88 the regulation 
and control of tea sold by auction or otherwise, the registration and 
licensing of brokers nnd blenders and quality control. 
8. The manner in which V&Tious bodies are given representation on the 
Central Tea Board, under the existing Act, has created difficulties in its 
implementation, Bnd it is, therefore, proposed to make the composition 
of the Board more flexible by providing that the Central Government shall 
appoint members to the Board from among persons capable in their opinion 
of representing the various interests concel1led, such as growers, esporters, 
labour, Central and State Governments, principal Chambers of Commerce 
and Industry, an economist and a scientist. 
4. It is also proposed to take power for the Central Government to 
fix the wholesale and retail prices at which tea may be sold and also 
to issue directions to the Tea Board so that it may function 88 an 
effective instrument of governmental policies. 
I 
NBW DBLBI; 
. .. -. 
T. T. KRISHNAMACHARI. 
The 4th Deoember, 1952. 

HOUSE OF THE PEOPLE 
.A. 
BILL 
to provide for the control by the Union of the tea induBtry, and for that 
purpose to estoblish a. 'reo Hoard and levy a. customs duty on ito" 
exported from India.. 
The PreIIid8.llt hu. ill PUt'8UMoe of 01a11l88 (1) and (3) of article 117 
of the Constitution of India, reoommended to *he HoW18 of the People the 
introduotion and oonaideration of the Bill. 
(SAri T. P. K rlB1I/IuamtJC1uJr., 
Minister lor Oommeru and JfUltutf'1/.) 
QIPD-T·AD eel P8-11-u .. aa-l.lOO. 