LOK SABHA 
-
CORRIGENDA 
to 
THE GRESlWA AND CR!~ VEN OF INDY",- (Pf.IW.TE) LThHTED 
(J'.CQJISITION /\ND TI~i\NSFER OF UNDERTAKINGS) BILL, 1977 
eTo be/As introduced in Lok S abha 7 
1. Page (i) , against clause 7,-
for "unde rt aking" read "unde rt akings" - -
2. Page (ii) • against clause 22,-
for " ameunts" read "amount sIt - -
3. Page (ii) , against clause 25,-
( a) ill "ret if ied" read "rat if ied" -
(b) for " of" read "or" -
4. Page 3. line 14,-
fOj[ "others" read "other" -
NEW DELHI; 
November 16, 1977 
Kartika 25, 1899 (Saka) 

As INTRODUCED IN Lox SABRA ON 
2 1 NOV 19n1 
BiB No. 130 of 1177 
THB· GRESHAM AND CRAVEN OF INDIA (PRIVATE) LIMITED 
(ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF UNDERTAKINGS) BILL, 1977 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CHAPTER I 
CLAl1SU 
'1. Short title and commencement. 
2. Definitions. 
CHAPTER II 
ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF TiiE UNDERTAKINGS OF THE COMPANY 
3. Transfer of and vesting in the Central Government of the under-
takings Of the Company. 
4. General effect of vesting. 
5. Central Government or the Braithwaite and Company Limited Gl" 
the Government company not to be liable for prior liabilitlel. 
6. Vesting of the undertakings of the Company in the Braithwaite 
and Company Limited. 
7. Power of Central Government to direct vesting of the under-
taking of the Company in a Government Company. 
CHAPTER III 
PAYMENT OF AMOUNTS 
8. Payment of amount. 
9. Payment of further amount. 
CHAPTER IV 
... ANAOJ:MENT ETC. OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF THE COMPANY AU " 
10. Management, etc., of the undertakings of the Company. 
11. Duty of persons in charge of management of the undertakings of 
the Company to deliver all assets, etc. 
CHAPTER V 
PROVISIONS BEl.ATING TO THE EMPLOYEES OF THE COMPAJI'I 
12. Employment of certain employees to continue. 
13. Provident fund and other funds. 

', .. ~ I, (ii) 
CHAPTER VI 
COMMISSIONER OF PAYMENTS 
CLAusa 
14. Appointment of Commissioner of Payments. 
Iii Payment by the Central Government to the Commissioner. 
'" '.1: .r"""-I~· '11(,.,. .' . 
1'~-' Certafln powers of: the Central Government 01' Brlithwaite1 ,-,alliin 
Com,any Limited .or Government company..:.; 
17. Claims to be made to the Commissioner. 
18. Priority of claims. 
19. Examination of claims. 
20. Admission or rejection of claims. 
2l. Disbursement of m:>ney by the Commissioner to claimants. 
22. Disbursement of ameunts to the Company.." " 
23. Undisbursed or unclaimed amount to be deposi~d to, the s~r~l 
revenue account. 
CHAPTER VII 
MISCI!:LLAHEOUS 
~4. ~ct to have overriding effect. " , 
25. Contracts to cease to have effect unless retified by the ,C~nti'al 
Government of Braithwaite and Company Limited or Govem-
ment company. 
26. ;l»rotection of action taken in good faith. 
27. 'D'el~gation of powers. 
28 .. Penalties. 
29. Offences by companies. 
30!iPbwel' to make rules. 
31. Power to remove difficulties. 
32. Declaration as to the policy of the State. 
33. Repeal and saving. 
THE SCHEDULE. 

• .,1t11. 
I:,; 
I,", "~'I' 
BIll No.'11Oof1177 
.J .. ,,(1..--
~: GRESHAM AND CRAVEN OF INDIA (PRIVATE) ~ED 
(6CQUJ6iTION AND TRANSFER OF UNDERTAKINGS) BILL, 1977 
A 
BILL 
to provide ffJr the acquisition and transfer of the undertaking, oj M~BSTS. 
\Gre~ham and Craven of India (Private) Limited for the purpose Of 
_,I, ,:t.nsuring the continuity of production of goods which' are mtal to the 
':""'~ of 'the Railways and of the indu.stries manuja.ctuTin,j'engtfteeT-
I, 'ing product.. and for matters connected therewith or' , incidental 
thereto. 
--:_. \ I :! 
WHDIEAS Messrs. Gresham and Craven of India (Private) Limited 
were engaged in the' manufacture and production of componentS of 
IlIIiWII 'stotk like vacu.u.m brake equipment, ejectors, steam brake valves 
,', and vacuum exhausters and the like needed by the Railways, ~n~ the 
5 'in,d~tries manufacturing engineering products; 
-:+lIl 
:', __ ........ As as a result of the losses suffeJled by the Compal1r ~ there 
IMd been a closure of the works owned by the Company; I 
, ; I iAlGt tWIIEHas for the purpose of speedily bringing the closed works 
, of the Company into operation, the management of the undert~'1 of 
ld f/N!, ;~0r.r':l!an,yVi'.s. taken over by the Central Government for a "~ted 
~~ IJIlder seCtIon 18A of the Industries. (Development 8ud Regulation) 
A't'iiSi· '. (, ,~~, ,o. t (, 
,. 
AND WHERBAS it is necessary to acquire the undertakJngl '''f, (' the 
Company to ensqre t~ continuance of the production of ~oods which 

2 
are vital to the needs of the Railways and of the industries manufactur-
ing engineering products; 
BE it enacted by Parliament jn the Twenty-eighth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
CHAPTER I 
~. 
" 5 
PRELIMINARY 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Gresham and Craven of India 
(private) Limited (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 
urn. I 
(2) The provisions of sections 28 and 29 shall be deemed to have come 10 
into force on the 30'th day of September, 1977 and the remaining provi-
sions of this Act shall be deemed to have come into force on the 1st day 
of August, 1977. 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a.) "appointed day" means the 1st day of August, 1977; 15 
(b) "Braithwaite and Company Limited" means the Govern-
ment company known as the Braithwaite and Company Limited In 
which the undertakings of the Braithwaite and Company (India) 
Limited togetber with the right, tiUe and interest of the SIIld 
Company.thereon vested with effect from the 1st day of December, 20 
1176, in pursuanCe of the notification of the Government of India 
In the Ministry of Industry (Department of Heavy' Industl1) 
No. 8.0. 771 (E), dated the 3rd December, 1976, issued under-sub-
section (1) of section 6 of the Braithwaite and Company (Inaia) 
Limited (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1976; 25 .8 of 1178. 
(e) "Commissioner" means the Commissioner of Payments 
appointed under section 14; 
(d) "Company" means the Gresham and Craven of India 
(Private) IJmited, being a company as defined in the Companies 
Act, 1956, and having its registered office at 22-Gobra Road, Calcutta- 30 1 of li11. 
14; 
(e) "Government company" has the meaning assi~ed to it. by 
section 617 of the Companies Act, 1956; . 1 of 1 .... 
' .. 
(I) "notification" means a notification published in the 0fIlct.l· 
Gazette; 
(g) "Ordinance" means the Gresham and 
(Private) Limited (Acquisition and· Transfer 
Ordinance, 19'1'7. 
. 35 
. :,',':1 . 
Craven of Inella 
of Undertalda'p) 
.~ 
(h) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made UDd .. this 
~ '~ 
(i) "specified date" means such date as the Central Gove1'llllleitt 
may, for the purpose .of any provision of this Act, by no~~~. 
specify and different dates may be specified for different pro~~ 
~f this Act; " 
14 of 1m. 

lofl_ 
s 
3 
(;) words and expressions used herein and not defined but 
deftDed. ,jn the Companies Act, 1956, shall have the meanings, 
't·~'respeetively, assigned to them in that Act. 
~. 
CHAPrER II 
AOQt1ISITION AND TRANSFER 01' THE UNOIiBTAKINGS 01' THB COKPAlft 
,. 
" 13. On ~ appointed day, the undertakings of the Company, and the 
dpt, title apd interest of the Company in relation to its undertaldnp, 
· ,'sQaU, by virtue ~ this Act, stand transferred to, and shall vest in, the 
Centr~ Government. 
10' . ...'- (l)The undertakings of the Company shall be deemed to include 
aU assets, rights" lease-holds, powers, authorities and privileges, and all 
property, movable and immovable, including lands, buildings, workshops, 
stores, instruments, machinery and equipment, cash balances, cash on 
hand, reserve funds, investments, book debts and all others rights and 
I~ interests in, or arising out of, such property as were immediately before 
· ~ the appointed' day in the ownership, possession, power or control of the 
ComJ'a'ny, wllether within or outside India, and all books of account, 
reBtsters and. all other d'ocumen ts of whatever nature relating thereto. 
" (I) All properties as aforesaid which have vested in the Central 
~Gevernment under section 3 shall, by force of such vesting, be freed and 
. discharged from any trust, obligation, mortgage, charge, lien and all 
other encumbrances affecting them, and any attachment, injunction or 
decree or order of any court restricting the use of such property in any 
manner or appointing any rf'('eiver in respect of the whole or any part 
25 oJ. such properties shall be deemed to have been withdrawn. 
~ ~~ • i III, 
, (~) EveJ"y mortgagee of any property which has vested under this 
Act in the Central Government and every person holding any charge, 
lien or other interest in, or in relation to, any such property, shall give, 
within such time and in such manner as may be prescribed, an inti-
30 matioll to t.he Commissioner of such mortgage, charge, lien or other 
tnter~t. • r . ,., .. 
,;(4) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the mort-
gagee·of any property referred to in SUb-section (3) or any other person 
hakting auy charge, lien or other interest in, or in relation to, any such 
35 proper", 'sha~lbe ·entitled to claim, in accordance with his rights and 
"lhlteirMts, payment of the 'mortgage 'Money or other dues, in Whole or 
in part, out of the amounts specified in section 8, and also out of the 
monies d~termine~ under section 9, but no such mortgage, charge, liea 
or.,,'!tPer ,m,terest shall be enforceable against any property which has 
40 ves~ ,in. ~ Ceatral Government . 
. , \. I,. ),1 " 
'"" ~, .. (5) If, on'the appointed day, any suit, appeal or other proceeding of 
wlllU!ver natUre in relation to any property which has vested in the 
C8J1tral . Government, under section 3, instituted or preferred by or 
agefllWt: the Company is pending, the same shall not abate, be discontinued 
.. , or be, in any way; prejudicially affected by reason of transfer ot tilt 
Tr .... 
of ... :,: 
v..-. ... 
the ,c:.., 
tral a..:. 
_ttll 
tile 1UIdIr-
taIdDIt 01 
tile EfIIIa-
~. ' 
.. a.ua.al· 
.ec:t~~, 
vetUq. 

Veltingot 
the under-
takings of 
the Com-
pany in 
the Braith-
waite and 
Company 
Limited. 
undertakings of the Company or of anything contained in this Act. but 
the suit, 'appeal or other proceeding may be continued. pl'08eC1IlteQ' or 
enforced by or against the Central Government, or the Braithwaite '.and 
Company Limited, or, where the undertakings of the Company are 
directed, under section 7, to vest in a Government company. that ~ 
Government company. 
5. (1) Every liability of the Company in respect of any period prior 
to' the appointed day, shall be the liability of the Company aftd shalf 'be 
ettforeeable against it and not against the Central Government, or'the 
Bthltl'lwaite and Company Limited, or, where the undertakings of 'h 10 
Company are directed, under section 7, to vest in a 10vemment "COMpeD,." 
against that Government company. 
(2) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that,-
(a) save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, no liabilit,. 
of the Company in respect of anv period prior to the aWointed day I C 
shall be enforceable against the Central Government, or ,·tlie 
Braithwaite and Company Limited, or, where the undertaJdnp Of' 
the Company are directed, under section 7, to vest in a Governmet'lt· 
company, against that Government company; 
(h) n0 award, decree or order of any court, tribunal or .Qt~.ie 
authority in relation to the undertakings of the Company .. ~ 
after the appointed day, in respect of any matter, claim or dispute 
which a~ose before that day, shall be enforceable against the Central 
Government, or the Braithwaite and Company LUntted, or, wBere 
the undertakings of the Company are directed, under section 7, .'at 
vest in a Government company, against that Government comp~y;' 
(c) no liability incurred by the Company before the appoiated 
day, for the contravention of any provision of law for the time.~ 
in force, shall be enforceable against the Central Government, Of~tb. 
Braithwaite and Company Limited, or, where the undertakings ot the la 
Company are directed, urider section 7, to vest in Q Government 
company, against that Government company. 
6. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 3 arid 4th. 
CehtralGovernment shall, as soon as may be, alter the promulga~D of 
tl.e Ordinance, direct, by notification, that the undertakings ot the Com~ J 
pany, and the right, title and interest of the Company in relatioD to ·It. ! 
u~dertakings, which have vested in. the Central Government under 'aeetioll 
3, shall" instead of continuing to vest in the Central Government., 'i~ 
in the Braithwaite and Co~pany Limited either on the date of the'DOU-
fication or on such earlier or later date (not being a date earlier t~.~'· 
appOinted day) as may be specified in the notiftcatJon. 
(2) Where the right, title and interest ot the Company in relaUdn'to 
its undertakings vest in the Braithwaite and Company Limited1¥Diter 
sub-section (1), the Braithwaite and Company Umited shall, on and :ft'om ,. 
the date of such vesting, Dl" deemed to have become the owner inft.on 45 . 
to such under~gs, and, all the rights and liabilities of the ~ 
Government in ,relation to such undertakings sball, on and froal _ .... 
o(,;iuch vesting, be deemed to have become the rlghtsand liIb..., . 
rwectively, .of th~ araithwaite and Company Limited. . . 

r. (0 Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 3, 4 and 6~ the 
~t~ Gove;nment may. if it is satisfied that a Government companY' is 
YQUina to comply. or has complied, with such terms and COnditlQIlJ as 
tha~_-GgverQ.meJlt may think, fit to impo~e, dllect, by notification, that the 
S .... rtakings of the Company, and the right, ti tie and interest of .tne 
Company in relation to its undertakmgs, which have vestea in the Central 
Government under section 3 and thereafter in the Braithwaite and Com-
pany Limited, under section 6, shall, instead of co;.tlDuing to vest in the 
Braithwaite and Company Limited, vest in the Government company 
~G either on the date of the notification or on such earlier or later date (not 
baiatf_ date earlier than the appointed day) as may be specified in the 
.' , DOti8i!ation. 
(I) Where the right, title and interest of the Company in relation to 
it, undertakings vest in a Government company under sub-section (I)" 
I., ..... Qov.-nmep,t company shall, on and from the date of such vesting, 
,b,,-.emedto have become the owner in relation to such undertakings, 
~ '.u ~e ,rights and liabilities of the Central Government or the Braith-
wait. ~ Companf Limited in relation to such undertakings shaL, on. 
and; from ,the date of such vesting, be deemed to have become the rights 
.ao ~_,liabillties, respectively, of the Government complll1Y· 
CHAPTER III 
PAYMENT OF AMOUNTS 
.. For the transfer to, and vesUn, in. the Central Government, under 
-..:. s., of the und.ertakiagS of the Company and the right, title and 
as ....... of the Company in relation to its undertakings, there shall ~ 
.. by U.e ,Central Government to the Company, in cash, and in tbe, 
•• ., ... r .Ipeeifted in Chapter VI, an amount of rUpees one hundred and 
~~, 
•. (l) For the deprivation of the Company of the management of its 
JO ...... RatiDI., there sha8be elven to the Company by the central Govern. 
.. t .... amount ealeulated at the rate of rupees fifty thousaad per aDDum 
..... ~ perW eOlDmenein, OD the date OD whieh the manapmeDt of at. 
., ~'I of the Company was taken over by the Central Government 
, _. _in, o. the appointed day. 
3' ~., (2) ... ~_at1oa of the retrospective operation of the provisicms of 
~""'3, " -. 5. there shall also be ,iven, in cash, by the Central 
~t .te, the CompaD)", an amount equal to an amount calculated at 
, ... _ oJ .rap~ Ifty thouaand per annum, fOl' the period eommencinJ. ,on 
tile ,........ day and, ending OD the date of promulgatioa of. ~. 
40 ON ..... 
(,3) TIle amount specified in section 8 and the amount :determined 
__ .ub-sections (1) and. (2) shall carry simple interest at the rate of 
leur per eeat per .... um ,for the period commencing OIl the date of 
~m.lptio. of the OrdinaDee aDd ending OD the date on which paym~nt 
4slfIi"1I ....... " is made by the Central Government to the Commissioner. 
; 
(4) The amounts determined in accordance with the provisions '011 
.... ctioDs (1), (2) and (3) shall be given by the Central Government 
te tile Company in addition to the amount specified in section 8. 
Power of 
Central 
Govern-
ment to 
direct 
vestinlof 
the under-
takings of 
the Com-
pany ina 
Govern. 
ment 
com~ . ,.) ,t.:.1IIl 
f.:~t ,C' 
,-U' '.t,b"," 
:1- 20 lla: 
i HlitmOJ 
Payj8etItJ 1;" 
of Illliballa4-
t ~ l .. " ~..;.:t:1 
't . ~. ,,,,,Cl t 
',~ .:Ii 
~I """:'f 
P~~t;Pfr .,iO 
ott~>G 
amount. ' 
..... i,{ .. .,i 
j, •.• ;," ... ..i:f 
; ... \,';;.w;.; 
"" , '.; ~ ~;,;:;u. 
... r.-: .~ 
.4 • .'::tl~ 

Du\Jof 
'JIIIOIII in 
cbarp of 
1MDaP-
.. entof 
'the under-
teIdnp of 
"Com-
'1IU7 to 
..u.tran 
..... ete: 
6 
(5) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the liabilities 
of the Company, in relation to its undertakings which have vestedfn ;twe' 
Central Govem.ment under section 3, shall be' discharged from':' ,the 
amounts referred to in section 8, and also from the amounts' determined 
under sub-sections (I), (2) and (3) in accordance with the rights IItlfl ~ 
interests of the creditors of the Company. 
" 
CHAPTER IV 
MANAGEMENT, ETC., OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF THE 'COMP.\n 
(.~". ..' .. 
10. (1) The Braithwaite and Company LiDlitedin which the ~, 
takings of the Company and the right, title and interest of the CQIlljMa"Io 
in relation to its undertakings vested under section 6 shall be entitled to 
exercise all such powers and do all wch things as the Company it autho-
rised to exercise and do in relation to its undertakings. " ~ I 
(2) The general superintendence, direction, control and. manag_etif "" 
of the affairs and business of the undertakings of the Company, th,e #iht;' IS 
title and interest in relation to which have vested, under section' 3, !W ~. 
Central Government and, under section 6, in the Braithwaite and Comptlly' 
Limited shall, where a direction has been made by the Central GOvern-· 
ment under sub-section (1) of section 7, vest in the Government 'Com;..~ .; ... 
pany specified in such direction, and thereupon the Government company' 20 
so specified shall be entitled to exercise all such powers and do all such 
things as the Company is authorised to exercise and do in relation to its 
undertakings. 
11. (1) On the vesting of the manag~ment of theundertaldligs'df the 
Company in. the Braithwaite and Company Limited, aU persons in ctt,.tg~s 
of the management of the undertakings of the Companyitnme4iatety' .. 
before such vesting shall be bound to deliver to -the Braithwaitei ,_ 
Company Limited all assets, books of account, registers' orotherl~"'\ 
ments in their custody relating to the undertakings of such(!ompan,.~\ ,,.. 
(.?) The Central Government may issue such dir~tiop.s as it ,!pay de~m 30 
desirable in the circumstances of the case to the Braithwaite, and c:W~~" 
~jpli~d as to its powers and duties and th~ Br~thw~~"~~Il~q~I¥fP~, 
Limited may also, if it so desires, apply to ~h~ Cen~al9.,?yer~e~~ a.t/fIll.! 
time for instructions as to the manner in ~~~~. tp'~m~ .. em~t,st.· .. ~f ... 
undertakings of the Company shall be conducted'by it 9r ~ r~~~~n"~~1f3S 
any other matter arising in the course Of such management. . 
(3) On the vesting of the management of the undettalddgs . of 'th~ "' 
Company in a Government company, the prOVisions 'of' sub-sectto!l~ "trr 
and (2) shall apply to, or in relation to, the Govertitnent e6mp6rlf'iV\!tey' 1 
apply to, or in relation to, the Braithwaite and Cotnpany Limited, st.f!~ ~ 
to' the modification that the references to the Braithwaite' , aBCI; ICO*,*IUt,;J 
Limited shall be construed as references to the Government c~!t!'tU '. 
" 1 
CHAPTER V 
PROVISIONS RZloATING 'l'O THE EMPLOYE. or 'l'HII COMPN!ft' 'i,~ l~'!o i 
. : •. .; ... i, : I ~,' '," ~ ld I' ~ • 
12. (1) Every person who has been. immedi~t,ly: bfdo;re ~., {\p.P9ffi~;'J .. 
day, employed in any undertaking of the Company shall become, on 'ani 
from the appointed day or such later date, as the case may be, an employee 
of the Braithwaite and Company Limited, or, as the case may be.of,tba,. 
Government company in which the right, title and interest of the Cam,,: 

, 
~any in relation to its undertakings, have vested under this Act, and shall 
hold office or service under the Braithwaite and Company Limited, or the 
Gov~t com~, as the case may be, with the same rights and pri_ 
vileges as to~on, gratuity and other matters as would have been 
S admiss~bleto him if there had been no such vesting and shall continue 
to do so unless and until his employment under the Braithwaite and 
Company Limned, or the Government company, as the case may be, 
is duly tamrlnated or until his remuneration and other conditions of 
service are duly altered by the Braithwaite and Company Limited, or 
10 by the Government company, as the case may be. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Disputes 
140f1947. Act, 1947, or in any other law for the time being in force, the transfer of 
the servi~es of any officer or other person employed in any undertaking 
of the Company to the Braithwaite anel Company Limited, or the Govern;' 
15 ment company, shall not entitle such officer or other employee'to any 
compensation under this Act or under any other law for the time belng 
in force and no such claim shall be entertained by any court, tribunal 
or other authority. 
(13) Where, under the 'terms of any contract of service or otherwise, 
20 any person, whose services become transferred to the Braithwaite and 
Company Limited, or the Government company, by reason of the pro-
visions of this Act, is entitled to any arrears of salary or wages or any 
payments for any leave not availed of or any other paymeJlt, Dot being 
payment by way of gratuity or pension, such person may enforce his 
25 claim against ~he Company, but not against the Central Government, or 
the Braithwaite and Company Limited, or the Government company. 
13. (1) Where the Company has established a provident fund, super-
annuation fund, welfare fund or other fund for the benefit oi the persons 
employed in any of the undertakings of the Company, the monies relatable 
30 to the officers or other employees, whose services have become transferred 
by or under this Act to the Braithwaite and Company Limited, or the 
Government company, Shall, out of the monies standing, on the appointed 
day, to the credit of such provident fund, superannuation fimd, welfare 
!und or other fund, stand transferred to, and shall vest in, the Braitb-
35 waite and Company Limited, or the Government company, as the case 
may be. ' 
(2) The monies which stand transferred under sub-section (1) to the 
Braithwaite and Company Limited, or the Government company, as the 
case may be, shall be dealt with by the Braithwaite and Company LiIrJt-
40 ed, or the Government company, in such manner as may be prescribed. 
CHAPTER VI 
COMMIssroNER OF PAYMENTS 
Provident 
fund aDd 
other 
tUnda. 
14. (1) The Central GovemmeDt shall, for the purpose of disbun_ !:::':::-
the amounts payable to the Company under sections 8 and 9~ by notUica. Commt •• 
45 don, appOInt a 'CommissioDe1' of Payments. stoner ot 
Pqments. 
(2) fte central Goverament may appoint lDeh other perIOIII as it may 
thiak It to auist the Commissioner and thereupon the Cmmnlsaloner .... 1' 
authorise ODe or more of sueh persons abo to exercise aU or any of the 

Payment 
by the 
Central 
Govern-
ment to 
the Com-
miuioner. 
Certain 
powers of 
the Cen-
tralGov-
ernment 
or Braith-
waite and 
Company 
Limited or 
Govern-
ment 
company. 
8 
powera exercisable by him under thii Ad aDd cWrerent perIODs may .. 
autb~. t4p .. pereise ~t. poW". ' .1, .J." • . , .. :' , . 
'1 . . ~; : .":.... • • .. .' ..: t',' - • 
.(3) A;iy .~o~. aUthon.eclby the C.,..,.., .... e'to .... _ of die 
pow~J:. exereisa~ by the cOIDDIis~ione.r may a.r.eiIe thole ".,weram the, 
~!i';JD.BD.D~" "iui with the same eftect, .. if they have'" eoafeVed on S 
that ,pe~n directly by this Act aDd D!Ot by way: .. autJaeriaUlea. 
". 
(4) The. saiUies aDd allow.~es of the Commissioeer. .aJUI·otIaer .... 
SODa ap~ted~~,. this section shall be defra,ed eat, of;the CoDlOli-_ 
dated Fund of India. 
15~ (1) The Central Government shall, within thirty days from the 10 
speclfied date, pay, in cash, to the Commissioner, for palOXlent to the 
CoDiPanY~ 
(a) an amount equal to the amount specified in section 8, and 
(b) an amount equal to the amount payable to the Company 
under section 9. 15 
(2) A deposit account shall be opened by the Central Government 1ft 
favour of the Commissioner, in the Public Account of India, and every 
amount paid under this Act to the Commissioner shall be deposited' by 
him to the credit of tbe said deposit account and the said deposit accouht 
shall be operated by the Commissioner. 20 
(J) The interest accruing on the amount standing to the credit of the 
deposit account referred to in sub-s'ection' (2) shall ensure to the benefit 
of the Company. 
16, I (1). ,The Central Governmen,t. or th,e Braithwaite and. Company 
Limited, ortlie Government company, as the case may be,~h~lI be entitled 2S 
to receive up· to the specified dat€7, to the exclusion of, all other persons, 
any money due to the Company, in relation to its undertakings which 
have vested )in the Central Government, or the Brait.bwaite and C'or;npany 
Limited, or the Government company, realised 'after the' appointed d,.y 
notWithstanding that the realisation pertains to a period prior to the 30 
appointed day. - ' 
<?> The Central Government, or the 13raithwaite ,ami Company. LtmJ. .. 
ted, Qf the Qovernment company, as the case may ~, may make adaim 
to thQ Commissioner with regard to everypaymentimade by it after the 
appoin~ ,day for discharging any liability of the Company in relation 9S 
to any period prior to the appointed day; and every such claim shall have 
priority in accordance with the priorities attac;hing, under this Act, to 
the matter in relation to which such liability has been ,discharged by the 
Central Government, or the Braithwaite and Company Limited, or the 
Gover.nm~t .W~'pan1· 
Iii : ~ • 
.• i (3) Save as otherwise provided in this .,M't"the liabUiU .. ,qf ithe ea.-
. ':'P~y in respect of any transaction prior to the appointed day, which 
" have :JlPt., ~ :.disch¥iedOD or before the speciilec:bdate,. ·thall be -1I1e 
UabiWiea O~f\tbe·~y. ".', 
! .,' ·"';1,' 

9 
, -, 
" ,1t7. :Every :peqOnhaving a claim againat, tb.e Compauy shall prefer 
.aucb eJaim, before the Commissioner within thirty days· trwm ,the specified 
~: 
Proyided that. if, the Commissioner is s~tiSfied that ,thEr, c~jlnt was 
S prevented by sufficient cause from preferring the claim within the said 
,peri.Qd of ,thirty, AAYs, ,he may en~rtain the claim within ,a fUrther period 
of thirty days and not thereafter. 
10 
. ~ 
18. The claims 'arising out of .the matters specified in the .Schedule 
shall have priorities in accordance with the following principles, namely:-
(a) Categ.:>ry I shall have precedence over all ~thet' categories 
,and Category II shall ~ve precedence over Ca,tegory II,I, flIld so on; 
(b) the claims specified in each of the categories -shall rank 
equally and be paid in full, but, if the amount is insufficient to meet 
such claims in full, they shall abate in equal proportions ahd 'be paid 
IS accordingly; , 
(c) the question of discharging any liability with, regard to a 
matter specified in a lower category shall' arise only if., a surplus is 
Ie±:t after meeting all the liabilities specified in the immediately 
higher category. 
20 11. (1) On receipt of the claims made under section 17, the Com-
missioner shall arrange the claims in .the order of priorities specified in 
the Schedule and examine the same in accordance with such order of 
priorities. 
,(2) It, on examination of the claims, the Commissioner is of -opinion 
zs that the amount paid to him under this "Act is not sufficient to meet the 
liabilities specified in any lower category, he shall not be required to 
examine the claims in respect of such lower category. 
20. (1) After examining the claims with reference to the priorities set 
QU.t in the Sched~, the COplmi~ioner shallfi:x: a certain date on or bef6re 
30 which every c;I.aimant shall file the proof of his claim failing wbich"he 
will be excluded ±:rom the benefit of the disbursements made by the 
Commissioner. 
{Z) No't]e~fi th!io four~ d4ys'AQtice of the date so ~~ shall ~e 
given by advertiseptent iG one ~Qe of a daily newspaper ~ the Eng~h 
3S language and in one issue of such daily newspaper in the regiQ~a1 laJ;l.gl1-
age as the Commissioner may consider suitable, and every such notice 
s~all call upon t~e ,claimant to file th~, prpof of his claim with *Pe Cpm-
mi,Ssioner wltliiP' the time spec,ifi,ed in ·the advertisement. 
(3) Every claimant who'fails to ftle the prodf of his claim within the 
40 de specified by: 'the Commissioner, sh/illI b~ ~~c1uded from the disburse-
meit~ made 'by :t1te CommiSSIoner. ' , , 
(4) The C~PU¢ssioner shall, ,afteri,eucll :investigationas may, in his 
9»in~~n" be n~aary and a,f.ter giving the'l C-pany.an opportunity of 
refuting the claim and after giving, the "imapt a reasonable dpportunfty 
.S of being heard, in writing, admit or reject the claim in whole or in part. 
Claimato 
be made 
tQ tbe 
Commis-
sioner. 
Priority of 
claims. 
Examina-
tion of 
claims. 
~IaBfOh 
orrejec-
t16n df 
c1ifirlia; 
(, 
~. ' , , ! • 

Disbune-
mant of 
money by 
the Com-
milaioner 
to clai-
mants. 
Disburse-
ment of 
amounta 
to the 
Company. 
10 
(5) The Commissioner shall have the power to regulate his own pr0-
cedure in aU 'matters arising out of the discharge of his'functions; includ-
ing the place or places at which he will hold his sittings and shall, for 
the purpoSle of making an investigation under this! Act, have 'the same 
powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Proc:edlure, 
1908, while trying a suit. in respect of the followh1.g matters, namely:-
(II) the summoning and enforcing the attendance of any witness 
and examining him on oath; 
(b) the discovery and production of any document or other 
S 
material object producible as evidence; 10 
(c) the reception of evidence on affidavits; 
(d) the issuing of any commission for the examination of wit-
nesses. 
(6) Any investigation before the Commissioner shall be deemed to 
be a judicial proceeding within the meaning of sections 193 and 228 of IS 
50f 1808. 
the Indian Penal Code and the Commissioner shall be deemed to be a 411 of 1860. 
civil court for the purposes of section 195 and Chapter XXVI of the Code 
of Criminal Procedure, 1973. 2 of 1974. 
(7) A claimant who is dissatisfied with the decision of the Commis-
sioner may prefer an appeal against the decision to the principal civil 20 
court of original jurisdiction within the 10cal1imits of whose jurisdiction 
the registered office of the Company i~ situated: 
Provided that where a person who is a Judge o~ a High Court is 
appointed to be the CommiSSioner, the appeal shall lie to tIie High Court 
'Ilt Calcutta, and such appeal shall be heard and disposed of by not Ie. 
than two Judges of that High Court. 25 
Zl. After admitting a claim under this Act, the amount due in respect 
of such claim shall be paid by the Commissioner to the person or persons 
to whom such sums are due, and, on such payment, the liability of the 
Company in respect of such claim shall stand discharged. 30 
22. (1) If, out of the monies paid to him in relation to the undertakings 
of the Company, there is a balance left after meeting the liabilities as 
specifted in the Schedule, the Commissioner shall disburse such balance 
to the Company. 
(2) Where the possession of any machinery, equipment or other pr07 35 
perty, has vested in the Central Government or the Braithwaite and 
Company Limited, or the Government company, under this Act, but 
such machinery, equipment or other property does not belong to 1be . 
Company, it shall be lawful for the Central Government, or the Braith-
waite and Company Limited, or the Government company to continue 40 
to possess such Inachfnery or equipment or other property on the same 
terms and conditions under which they were possessed by the Compan1 
~mediately before the appointed day. 

II 
Z3. Any money paid, to the Commissioner which remains undisbursed . UDJiM-
or unclaimed for a period of three years from the last day on wbich-the":burMd or 
disbursement was made shall be transferred by the Commissioner to the unclaimed 
general revenue account of the Central Governmentibut a claim to ,any :om~,:t 
S money so transferred may be preferred to the Central Government by deposited 
the person entitled to such payment and shall be dealt with as if s~ch to the 
transfer had not been made, ,the order, if any, for payment of the c1,im general 
being treated as an order for the refund of the revenue. . . . revenue 
10 
CHAPTER VII 
k The' prOvisions of this Act sball have effect notwithstanding any-
thing inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for'the time 
being in force or in any instrument having effect by virtue of any taw, 
other than this Act, or in any decree or order of any court, tribunar or 
IS other authOrity. 
J5,. (1) Every contract entered into by the Company in relaflon to its 
undertakings for any service, sale or supply, and in force immedi.itely 
bef-ore the appointed day, shall, on and from the expiry of one hundred 
and eighty days from the date of promulgation of the Ordinance, cease 
20 to have effect unless such contract is, before the expiry of that period, 
ratified, in writing, by the Central Government, or the Braithwaite and 
Company Limited, or the Government company, and, in ratifying such 
contract, the Central Government, or the Braithwaite and Company 
Limited, or the Government company may make ruch alteration or modi-
2S fication therein as it may think fit: 
Provided that the Central Government, or the Braithwaite and Com-
pany Limited, or the Government company shall not omit to ratify a 
contract,.and shall not make any alteration or modification in a contract. 
unless it is satisfied that such contract is unduly onerous or lias' been 
30 entered into in bad faith or i~ detrimental to the interests of the Central 
Government, or the Braithwaite and Company Limited, or the Govern-
ment company. 
(2) The Central Government, or the Braithwaite and Company 
Limited, or the Government company shall not omit to ratify a contract, 
35 and shall not make any alteration or modification therein, except after 
giving to the parties to the contract a reasonable opportunity of being 
heard and except dter recording, in writing, its reasons for refusal to 
ratify the contract or for making any alteration or modification theretn. 
26. (1) No suit, prosecution, or other legal proceeding shall lie agaiDst 
40 the Central Government or any officer of that Government, or the Braith-
waite and Company Limited, or the Government company, or any offtcer 
or other person authorised by that Government, or the Braithwaite and 
Company Limited, or the Government company, for anything which is 
in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act. 
4S (2) No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central 
G-overnment or any of its officers or other employees, or the BraitTl1vaite 
and Company Limited, or the Government company, or any Offtcer or 
other person authorised by the Braithwaite and Company Limited, or the 
Government Company, for any damage caused 01' likely to be caused by 
SO anything which is in good faith done or intended fa be done under this 
Act. ." <'~ 
acc:ount. 
Act to 
have over-
riding 
effect. 
Contracta 
to ceue 
to have 
effect un. 
leas ratifi-
ed by the 
Central 
Govern-
ment or 
Braith-
waite and 
Company 
Limited or 
Govern-
ment 
company. 
Protectlou 
of action 
taken in 
good faith. 

/' 
Perialtles. 
Offences 
by com-
panies. 
II 
m. (1) ,'The -Central Government may, by notification, direCt that all 
,or.' 'any of thepowerse:xercisable by it under this Act, other than the 
pcswer coRferred 'by section 30, may also be exercised '!iy such person 
or 'pel'SGnS as 'litay be specifted in the notification. ' 
I (2)' Whenever any delegation of power is made under sub .. seetion (.1), S 
'~~ person to wbomSJIch ,power has been delegated shall act under the 
direction, control' and superVision of the C'entral Government. 
lB. Any person who,-
(4) having in his possession, custody or control any property 
formil;lg part of any undertaking of the Company, wrongfully with- 10 
holds such property from the Central Government, or the Braith-
waite and Company Limited, or the Government company; or 
{b) 'Wrongfully obtains possession of, or retains, any property 
forming part of any undertaking of the Company or wilfully with-
holds or fails to furnish to the Central Government, or the Sraith- IS 
waite and Company Umited, or the G()vernment company,I'or any 
,~OD 01' body of persons speCified by that Government, or the 
Brait~waite and Company Limited, or the Government 'Company, 
any document relating to such undertaking which may be in his 
possession, custody or control or fails to deliver to the Central Gov- 20 
emment, or the Braithwaite and Company Limited, or the Govern-
ment company or any person or body of persons specified by that 
Government, or the Braithwaite and Company Limited, or the Gov-
ernment company, any assets, books o~ account, registers or other 
documents in his possession, custody or cOh'trol, relating to the 25 
undertaking of the Company; or ' 
(c) wrongfully removes or destroys any property forming part 
of any undertaking of the Company or prefers any claim under this 
Act which he knows or has reasonable cause to believe to be false 
, or grossly inaccurate, 30 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
two years, or with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees, or 
with both. 
29. (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who at the time the offence was committed was 3S 
in charge of, and was r.esponsible to, the company for the conduct of 
the business 01 the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to 
be guilty of the offence and shl,ill be liable to be proceeded against and 
pui\ished accordingly: . 
,,~vided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any 40 
,.uch ,person liable to any punishment, i$ he proves that the offence was 
committed without his knowledge or that. he had exercised all due dili-
gence to preveat·the commi~ion of such offence. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) I wliere 
Uly olfeDce under this Act has been comi'lrltted by a company and it is 45 
PIO~ed tbatthe-,of!ence has been comrn,ttted With the consent or conn!-
V8DOe of. or ,is attributable to any neglect on tbe part of, any director. 
lIUIDager, secretary, or other officer of the company, ~ch'dfrector, mana-
ger, .. etary, Or ot'her oftlcer ihall be deemed to 'be guilty' of that offence 
and sball be liable to be proceeded againrt and punished acCOr'dingly. So 

E%pl4na.non.-For the purPQS88 of thJs aection,-
,: . ) :. 
(a) "company" means any bocly ~ate and includes a firm 
or other association of individuals; . ,<) 
1"1' 
(b) "director", in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm. 
5 30. (1) The Central Government may. by noWication, make rules for 
carrying out the provisions of this Act 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the fore-
going power, such rules may provide for all or 'any of the following 
matters, namely:-
10 (a) the time within which, and the maIUl~r in whicb, an mtima-
tion shall be given to the C~mmissioner under sub-section (3) of 
section 4; 
(b) the manner in which the monies in any provident fund or 
other fund referred to in section 13 shall be dealt with; 
IS (c) any other matter which is required to be, or may be~pr .. 
cribed. 
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act ~all 
be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parlia-
ment, while it is' in session for a total period of thirty days, which nuly 
20 be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and 
if, before the expiry of, the session immediately following the session or 
the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modi-
fication in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be 
madie\~ the rule s1hall thereafter have effect only in such modified form 
25 or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modifi-
cation or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity 01 any-
thing previously done under that rule. 
31. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of W, 
Act, the Central Government may, by order, not inconsistent with the 
30 provisions of this Act, remove the difficulty: 
Provided that no such order shall be made after .the expiry of a period 
of two years trom the date on which this Act receives the assent of the 
President. 
32. It is hereby, declared that this Act is: for giving effect to the 
35 policy of the State towards securing the principles specified in clause (~~! 
of article 39 of the Constitution. 
Expl.anation.-In this section, "State" has the same meaning· as in 
article 12 of the Constitution. 
33. (1) The Gresham and Craven of India (Private) Ltmrted. (ADqui-
40 sition and Transfer of Undertakings) Ordinance, 1977, is hereby repealed. 14 of 1977. 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken 
under the Ordinance so repealed shall be deemed to have been done 
or taken' under the corresponding provisions of this Act. 
Power to 
make 
rules. 
Power to 
remove 
~cultiar. 
Declara-
tion 
u to the 
j,oUcyof 
the State. 
Repeal 
and 
18vfnI, 

.. '. l'j ...... ~ 
THE SCHEDULE 
(See sectioll$ 18, 19, 20 and 22) 
0a0I:R OJ' PBIOIlI'l'IBS FOR THE DISCHARGE OF LIABILITIES OF THE COMPANY 
PART A 
Post-toke-over management period 
Category I 
Wages, salaries and other dues of the employees of the Company. 
Category II 
(i) Loans advanced by the Central Government. 
(ii) Loans advanced by Banks. 
Cp.tegory III 
Any credit availed of by the Company f()r the purpose of carry-
ing on any trading or manufacturing operations. 
Catef1CW1l IV 
Any other loans. 
Category V 
Revenue, taxes, cesses, rates or any other dues to the Central 
Government or a State Government. 
PART B 
Pre.toke-over management period 
CategMy VI 
Arrears in relation to contributions to be made by the Company 
to the provident fund, salaries, wages and other amounts due to the 
employees of the Company. 
5 
10 
15 
20 
Categcwy VII 25 
Overdrafts from Banks. 
Categcwy VIII 
Revenue, taxes, cesses, rates or any other dues to the Central 
Government, a State Government, a Local Authority or a State 
S1ectri~ty Board. 
,C4tegory IX 
(i) Any credit availed of by the Company for the purpose at 
carrying on any trading or manufacturing operations . 
. (it) Any other dues. 

STATEMENT, OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Messrs. Gresham aDd Craven of India (Private) Limited was a,private 
c:ompany wholly-owned by the Westin,houle Br~e anclSignal Com~y 
Limited of, U.K. and its nominee. For variou,. reasons including mis-
management, the company started inwning WISeS from 1966 and ulti-
mately it had to be closed down on the 6th January, 1971. It remai.,ed 
closed for three months and then the Government of India, after investi-
gation, took over the management of the company Oft the 31st March, 1971, 
under the provisions of section 18A of the Induttries (Dev~lopment and 
Regulation) Act, 1951. 'The factory was reopened on the 12th April, 
1971. The company is mainly engaged in the manufacture of rolling stock 
components Qf the Indian Railways, luch as, vacuum br'llke equipment, 
ejectors, steam valves, vacuum exhausters, etc. Atter take-over of the 
management by the Central Government, there had been eonsidera):\le 
progress in the production performance of the company. The act",al pro-
duction for the year 1976-77 had been of the order of Rs. 177 lakhs. After 
careful consideration of the whole matter, the Government pecided to 
acquire tile undertakings of this company. 
At the time of take-over of the management of the company, it was 
cl'($r that it was not possible for the company to meet all its past dues. 
Accordingly, moratorium was imposed on the 14th August, 1972 in ac-
cordance with the provisions of section 18FB of the InduAtries (Develop-
ment and Regulation) Act, 1951, on realisation of the dues from the com~ 
pany. The period oJ this moratorium which cannot exceed five years in 
aggregate, expired on the 13th August, 1977. Since early action was neces-
sary, the Undertakings of the Company were acquired by promulgation of 
the Gresham and Craven of India (Private) Limited (AcquisLtion and 
Transfer of Undert.akings) Ordinance. 1977 on the 30th September, 1977. 
The Bill seeks to replace the said ()rdinance. 
NE'W DELHI; GEORGE FERNANDES. 
The 10th November, 1977. 
15 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
ClaUSe 8 of the Bill provideS' for the payment, in cash, and in the 
manner specified. in Chapter VI of the Bill, an amount of Rs. 1,76,00,000 
for vesting jn the Central. Government, the right, title and interest of the 
Gresham and Craven of India (Private) Limited. in relation to the under-
takings owned by it. 
2. Sub-clause (1) of clause 9 provides fotr payment of further amount 
in cash, in conllderation for the deprivation of the Company of the 
management of its undertakings, an amount to be calculated at the rate 
of Rs. 50,000 per annum, for the period commencing on the date on which 
the management of the undertakings of the Company was taken over by 
the Central Government and ending on the 1st AuguSt, 1977, the appointed 
day. It is estimate'd that this amount will be of the order of Rs. 3,20,000. 
3. Sub-clause (2) of clause 9 provides that in consideration of the 
retrospective operation of certain provisions of the Bill as specified therein, 
there shall be given, in cash, by the Central Government to the Company, 
an amount ,equal to the amount calculated at the rate of Rs. 50,000 per 
annum for the period commencing on the. appointed day and ending on 
the da1le of promulgation of the Gresham and Craven of India (Private) 
Limited (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Ordinance, 1977. 
This am.ount is estimated ,to be of the ()rder of Rs. 10,000. 
4. Sub-clause (3) of clause 9 provides for payment of simple interest 
at the ralte of four per cent. per annum for the period commencing on 
the date of promulgation of the Ordinance and on the date on which the 
payr6ent of such amQunts is made by the Commissioner of Payments. 
It is estimated that the interest payment in tenns of the provisions of the 
said sub-clause ilt likely to be of 'the order of Rs. 60,000 per month. 
5. Clause 14 of the Bill provides for appointment of Commissioner of 
Payments by the Government with adequate staff to assist him for the 
purpose of disbursing the amounts payable to the Company. The salary 
and allowance of the Commissioner of Payments and his staff and expen-
diture on office and establi!;hment will be dl'frayed out of. the Consolidated 
Fund of India. The estima.ted expenditure on this account is likely to be 
of the order of Rs. 10,000 per month. 
6. Funds. will \ alSCI have to be provided for capital expenditure for 
modernisation and expansion of the undertakings to make them financi· 
ally viable. It is estimated that about Rs. 77,00,000 may have to be pro-
vided on this account during the current financial yellf (19177-78) and the 
next financial year (1978-79). This expenditure will al90 be incurred 
after due appropriation by Parliament by law. 
7. The Bill, if enacted, is not likely to invol~ any other recurring or 
non-recurring expenditure. 
, 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 30 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make 
rules to carry out the provisions of the Bill. Such rules may provide for 
matters, such as-
(a) the time within which, and the manner in which, an intimation 
refen-ed to in sub-clause (3) of clause 4 of the Bill shall be given; and 
(b) the manner in which the monies in any provident fund or 
other fund refl!rred to in clause 13 shall be dealt with. 
The matters in respect of which such rules may be made are matters 
of procedure and administrative detail and it is not practicable to provjde 
for them in the Bill itself. The de-legation of legislative power is, there-
fore, of normal character. 
17 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the acquisition and transfer of the undertakings of Messrs. 
Gresham and Craven of India (Private) Limited for the purpose of 
enSUring the continuity of production of goods which are vital to the 
needs of the Railways and of 'the industries manufacturing engineer-
ing products and for matters connected therewith or incidental 
thereto. 
(Shri George Fernandes, Minister of Industry) 