1
THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015
By
SHRIMATI MEENAKASHI LEKHI, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act, 2015.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 130 of  2015
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In section 357A of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, after clause (2), the following
provisos shall be inserted, namely:—
"Provided that the recommendation for compensation to be awarded may extend
upto ten lakh rupees:
Provided further that while recommending the compensation, the Court shall
take into consideration the interim and other reliefs granted to a victim.".
Amendment
of section
357A.
5

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The current compensation amounts given to acid attack victims does not adequately
cover the expenses incurred on medical treatment. Fine imposed on offenders under
section 326A of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 is paid to the victim for meeting the medical
expenses of treatment. However, the actual expenditure incurred by a victim on medical,
psychological and rehabilitation is always much higher than the amount of fine.
Section 357A was inserted by way of an amendment in the Code to introduce Victims
Compensation Scheme. However, as observed by the Supreme Court, only seventeen States/
Union territories have implemented the Victim Compensation Scheme so far, and, sadly these
amounts range from rupees twenty-five thousand to rupees two lakh at the most. Noting the
insufficiency of these amounts, the Supreme Court in 2013 had directed that States pay a
minimum of rupees three lakh as compensation to victims. The Law Commission, on the other
hand, has recommended in its 226th report that at least five lakh rupees should be paid as
compensation to a victim.
The Bill seeks to increase the minimum compensation to be paid to a victim upto ten
lakh rupees. Medical expenditure to be incurred by a victim alone is a hefty and, in most
cases, it is an unaffordable amount. It involves both short and long term treatments of
corrective surgeries, physiotherapy and skin grafting, among other treatments. For the deep
trauma and social prejudice that a victim faces, intensive psychological counselling also
becomes necessary. In some cases, 25 to 30 corrective surgeries are required for a single
victim and the treatment takes several years. After these procedures, the victims need to be
rehabilitated back in to the society to proceed further with their studies or career.
In view of the immense psychological, financial and social pressure that a victim
undergoes, it is necessary to amend the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 with a view to
increase the amount of compensation upto ten lakh rupees to be paid to a victim of acid
attack.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; MEENAKASHI  LEKHI
March 27,  2015.
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE, 1973
* * * * * *
357A. (1) Every State Government in co-ordination with the Central Government shall
prepare a scheme for providing funds for the purpose of compensation to the victim or his
dependents who have suffered loss or injury as a result of the crime and who require
rehabilitation.
(2) Whenever a recommendation is made by the Court for compensation, the District
Legal Service Authority or the State Legal Service Authority, as the case may be, shall decide
the quantum of compensation to be awarded under the scheme referred to in sub-section (1).
* * * * * *
4
Victim
compensation
scheme.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
————
(Shrimati Meenakashi Lekhi, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—372LS(S3)—28-04-2015.