THE CIVIL AVIA TION AUTHORITY OF INDIA BILL, 2013
——————
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
——————
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
CLAUSES
1. Short title, extent and commencement.
2. Definitions.
CHAPTER II
ESTABLISHMENT OF CIVIL AVIATION AUTHORITY
3. Constitution of  Authority.
4. Composition of Authority.
5. Constitution of  Selection Committee.
6. Disqualification for office of Member.
7. Term of office and conditions of service of Members.
8. Removal and suspension of Members.
9. Eligibility of Member for reappointment.
10. Powers and functions of Chairperson.
11. Meetings.
12. V acancies not to invalidate proceedings of Authority.
13. Authority to work on not-for-profit principles.
CHAPTER III
F
UNCTIONS, DUTIES AND POWERS OF AUTHORITY
14. Functions, duties and powers of Authority.
15. Powers of Authority to call for information, conduct investigations, etc.
16. Power of Authority to issue directions.
17. Power of seizure.
CHAPTER IV
P
ROPERTY AND CONTRACT
18. Transfer of assets and liabilities of Central Government to Authority.
19. Contracts by Authority.
20. Mode of executing contracts on behalf of Authority.
CHAPTER V
F
INANCE,  ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT
21. Power of Authority to levy fees and charges.
22. Additional capital and grant to Authority by Central Government.
23. Fund of Authority and its investment.
24. Allocation of surplus funds.
25. Budget.
26. Accounts and audit.
27. Furnishing of returns, etc., to Central Government.
Bill No. 130 of 2013
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

CHAPTER VI
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES
CLAUSES
28. Punishment for non-compliance of orders or directions under this Act.
29. Punishment for non-compliance with order of Authority.
30. Offences by companies.
31. Offences by Government Department.
32. Compounding of offences.
CHAPTER VII
M
ISCELLANEOUS
33. Directions by Central Government to Authority.
34. Bar of jurisdiction.
35. Protection of action taken in good faith.
36. Appeals.
37. Exemption from certain taxes.
38. Cognizance of offences.
39. Delegation of powers.
40. Power of Central Government to supersede Authority.
41. Application of other laws not barred.
42. Power to make rules.
43. Power to make regulations.
44. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament.
45. Amendment of Act 22 of 1934.
46. Power to remove difficulty.
(ii)

1
THE CIVIL  A VIATION AUTHORITY OF INDIA BILL, 2013
A
BILL
to provide for constitution of a Civil Aviation Authority for administration and regulation
of civil aviation safety, for the better management of civil aviation safety oversight
over air transport service operators, air service navigation operators and operators
of other civil aviation facilities, matters relating to impact of financial stress on
safety operations, consumer protection and environment regulations in civil aviation
sector and for proper implementation of the provisions of the Aircraft Act, 1934 and
the rules made thereunder and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fourth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Civil Aviation Authority of India Act, 2013.
(2) It extends to the whole of India and it applies also—
(a) to all citizens of India wherever they may be;
(b) to aircraft, and to all persons on aircraft registered in India wherever they
may be;
(c) to aircraft, and to all persons on aircraft registered outside India but for the
time being in or over India; and
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. 130 of 2013
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(d) to aircraft operated by a person who is not a citizen of India but has his
principal place of business or permanent residence in India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "aerodrome" means any definite or limited ground or water area  intended to
be used, either wholly or in part, for the landing or departure or surface movement of
aircraft, and includes all buildings, sheds, vessels  and other structure thereon or
appertaining thereto;
(b) "Airports Authority of India" means the Airports Authority of India
constituted under section 3 of the Airports Authority of India Act, 1994;
(c) "air navigation service" includes air traffic management, communications,
navigation and surveillance systems, meteorological services for air navigation, search
and rescue and aeronautical information services provided to air traffic during
approach, aerodrome and en route  and all other phases of operations;
(d) "air traffic service" includes flight information service, alerting service, air
traffic advisory service, air traffic control service, area control service, approach
control service and airport control service;
(e) "air transport operator" means the operator of an air transport service;
(f) "air transport service" means any service, for any kind of remuneration
whatsoever, for the transport by air of persons, mails or any other thing, animate or
inanimate, whether such service relates to a single flight or series of flights;
(g) "air transport undertaking" means an undertaking whose business includes
the carriage, by air, of passengers or cargo for hire or reward;
(h) "appointed day" means such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint;
(i) "Authority" means the Civil Aviation Authority of India constituted under
section 3;
(j) "Chairperson" means the Chairperson of the Authority appointed under
clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 4;
(k) "Convention" means the Convention relating to International Civil Aviation
signed at Chicago on the 7th day of December, 1944 and Annexes thereto relating to
international standards and recommended practices;
(l) "Director-General" means Director-General of the Authority appointed under
clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 4;
(m) "International Civil Aviation Organisation" means the International Civil
Aviation Organisation created under the Convention;
(n) "Member" means a Member of the Authority appointed under clause (c) of
sub-section (1) of section 4  and includes the Chairperson and the Director-General;
(o) "notification" means a notification published in the Official Gazette and the
expression "notify" with its cognate meanings and grammatical variation shall be
construed accordingly;
(p)  "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(q) "regulations" means regulations made under this Act;
(r) "service provider" means any person who provides any service ancillary to
Definitions.
55 of 1994.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
air transport services for any kind of remuneration whatsoever, and includes the air
traffic services, ground safety and ground handling services, aeronautical
communication and navigational aids and meteorological services, but does not include
services for the provision of aviation security.
CHAPTER II
E
STABLISHMENT OF CIVIL AVIATION AUTHORITY
3. (1) With effect from the appointed day, the Central Government shall, by notification
in the Official Gazette, constitute an Authority to be called the Civil Aviation Authority of
India.
(2) The Authority shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid having perpetual
succession and a common seal, with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire,
hold and dispose of property both movable and immovable, and to contract and shall by the
said name sue and be sued.
(3) The head office of the Authority shall be at New Delhi.
4. (1) The Authority shall consist of —
(a) a Chairperson to be appointed by the Central Government;
(b) the Director-General to be appointed by the Central Government; and
(c) not less than seven Members and not more than nine Members to be
appointed by the Central Government.
(2) The Director-General and not more than five other Members shall be appointed as
whole-time Members and they shall not hold any other office.
(3) The Chairperson shall be chosen from amongst persons  who have special
knowledge of and professional experience in civil aviation, engineering or management:
Provided that a person who is or has been in the service of the Government shall not
be appointed unless such person has held the post of the Secretary to the Government of
India or an equivalent post in the Central Government or the State Government.
(4) The Director-General and the whole-time  Members, shall be chosen from amongst
persons who have such qualification, professional experience and competence as may be
prescribed  in the field of—
(a) airworthiness and aircraft engineering;
(b) flight standard operations;
(c) aviation safety;
(d) aerodromes, air navigation systems and air space management;
(e) air transport, matters relating to impact of financial stress on safety of
operations, consumer protection and environment regulations; and
(f) human resource and finance.
(5) The Chairperson, Director-General and other Members shall be appointed by the
Central Government on the recommendation of a Selection Committee referred to in
section 5.
(6) The Director-General shall be the Chief Executive of the Authority.
5. (1) The Central  Government shall, for the appointment of the Chairperson, Director-
General and whole-time Members, constitute a Selection Committee consisting of the
following, namely:—
(a) Cabinet Secretary—Chairperson;
Constitution
of Authority.
Composition
of Authority.
Constitution
of Selection
Committee.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

4
(b) Secretary, in the Ministry of  Civil Aviation  — Member;
(c) Secretary, in the Ministry of Law and Justice — Member;
(d) Secretary (Personnel), in the Department of Personnel and Training— Member;
(e) one expert to be nominated by the Ministry of Civil Aviation  — Member.
(2) The Central Government shall, within one month from the date of occurrence of
any vacancy by reason of death, resignation or removal of the Chairperson or a Member
and six months before the superannuation or end of tenure of the Chairperson or any
Member, make a reference to the Selection Committee for filling up of the vacancy.
(3) The Selection Committee shall finalise the selection of the Chairperson, Director-
General and whole-time Members within one month from the date on which the reference is
made to it.
(4) The Selection Committee shall recommend a panel of two names for every vacancy
referred to it.
(5) Before recommending any person for appointment as a Chairperson or Director-
General or other Member of the Authority, the Selection Committee shall satisfy itself that
such person does not have any financial or other interest, which is likely to affect prejudicially
his functions as a Member.
(6) No appointment of the Chairperson, Director-General or other Member shall be
invalid merely for reason of any vacancy in the Selection Committee.
6. A person shall be disqualified for being appointed as a Member if he—
 (a) has been convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for an offence, which,
in the opinion of the Central Government, involves moral turpitude; or
(b) is an undischarged insolvent; or
(c) is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court; or
(d) has been removed or dismissed from the service of the Government or a
body corporate owned or controlled by the Government; or
(e) has, in the opinion of the Central Government, such financial or other interest
in the Authority as is likely to affect prejudicially the discharge by him of his functions
as a Member.
7. (1) Subject to the provisions of section 8,—
(a) the Chairperson, Director-General and other whole-time Member shall hold
office for a term of five years from the date on which he enters upon his office:
Provided that no whole-time Member shall hold office, as such, after he attains—
(i) in case of the Chairperson, the age of sixty-five years; and
(ii) in case of the Director-General or other  whole-time Members, the age
of sixty-two years;
(b) every part-time Member shall hold office for a period of three years from the
date on which he assumes office.
(2) The salary, allowances and other conditions of service of the Chairperson, Director-
General and other Members shall be such as may be prescribed.
(3)  The salary, allowances and other conditions of service of the Chairperson, Director-
General and other Members shall not be varied to his disadvantage after their appointment.
(4) The Chairperson, Director-General or any Member may resign his office giving
notice, in writing for such period, as may be prescribed, to the Central Government and, on
Disqualification
for office of
Member.
Term of
office and
conditions of
service of
Members.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

5
such resignation being notified in the Official Gazette by the Government, such Member
shall be deemed to have vacated his office.
8. (1) The Central Government may, by order, remove from office the Chairperson or
other Members, if the Chairperson or such other Member, as the case may be, —
(a) has been adjudged an insolvent; or
(b) has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the Central
Government, involves moral turpitude; or
(c) has become physically or mentally incapable of acting as a Member; or
(d) has acquired such financial or other interest, as is likely to affect prejudicially
his functions as a Member; or
(e) has so abused his position, as to render his continuance in office prejudicial
to the public interest; or
(f) has engaged at any time during his term of office in any other employment.
(2) The Chairperson or any other Member shall not be removed from his office except
by an order of the Central Government on the ground of his proved misbehaviour or incapacity
after the Central Government, has, on an inquiry, held in accordance with the procedure
prescribed in this behalf by the Central Government, come to the conclusion that the Member
ought on any such ground to be removed.
(3) The Central Government may suspend any Member in respect of whom an inquiry
under sub-section (2) is being initiated or pending until the Central Government has passed
an order on receipt of the report of the inquiry.
9. Any person ceasing to be a Member shall, unless disqualified under section 6 or
removed under section 8, be eligible for reappointment.
10.  The Chairperson shall have powers of general superintendence and directions in
the conduct of the affairs of the Authority and he shall, in addition to presiding over the
meetings of the Authority, exercise and discharge such powers and functions of the Authority
as may be prescribed or delegated to him by the Authority.
11. (1) The Authority shall meet at such times and places and shall observe such rules
of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings (including the quorum
at such meetings), as may be specified by regulations.
(2) The Chairperson shall preside over the meeting of the Authority and, if for any
reason he is unable to attend any meeting of the Authority, the Director-General or in his
absence any other Member chosen by the Members present at the meeting shall preside at
the meeting.
(3) All questions which come up before any meeting of the Authority shall be decided
by a majority of the votes of the Members present and voting and in the event of equality
of votes, the Chairperson, or in his absence the person presiding, shall have and exercise a
second or casting vote.
12. No act or proceeding of the Authority shall be invalid merely by reason of—
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of the Authority; or
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a Member of the
Authority; or
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Authority not affecting the merits of
the case.
Removal and
suspension
of Members.
Eligibility of
Member for
reappointment.
Powers and
functions of
Chairperson.
Meetings.
Vacancies
not to
invalidate
proceedings
of Authority.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

6
13.  The Authority shall, in the discharge of its functions under this Act, work, as far
as possible, on not-for-profit principles.
CHAPTER III
FUNCTIONS, DUTIES AND POWERS OF AUTHORITY
14. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Aircraft Act, 1934, the Authority
shall be responsible for the proper implementation of the Aircraft Act, 1934 and for that
purpose it shall discharge all the duties assigned to the Director-General of Civil Aviation
under that Act and the rules made thereunder.
 (2) Subject to the rules, if any, made by the Central Government in this behalf, it shall
be the function of the Authority to regulate civil aviation safety, and provide for the better
management of civil aviation through safety oversight of air transport operators, airport
operators, air navigation service operators and providers of other civil aviation services or
facilities.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Aircraft Act, 1934 and the rules, if any,
made by the Central Government in this behalf, it shall be the duty of the Authority—
(a) to issue licences, certificates, permits, approvals, and any other legal authority
or document required to be issued under the Aircraft Act, 1934 and rules framed
thereunder or necessary for the safety of civil aviation sector;
(b) to regulate the activities of air transport operators;
(c) to provide environment regulations for airports, airlines and other civil
aviation activities; and
(d) to protect the interests of consumers under this Act or rules or regulations
made thereunder.
(4) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions contained in sub-sections (1)
to (3), the Authority may—
(a) perform all functions and duties required to be performed by the Director-
General of Civil Aviation under the Aircraft Act, 1934 and the rules made thereunder;
(b) draw up a State Safety Programme and approve safety management systems
and look after their implementation in coordination with other concerned  authorities;
(c) recommend to the Central Government amendments to the Aircraft Act, 1934
and the rules made thereunder for complying with the amendments to Annexes to
Convention and initiate proposals for amendment to any other Act or for passing a
new Act in order to give effect to an international convention or amendment to an
existing convention;
(d) coordinate on  matters  relating to the International Civil Aviation Organisation
with all agencies and send replies to the letters of signatory States to the Convention,
and take all necessary action arising out of the Safety Oversight Audit Programme of
the International Civil Aviation Organisation in consultation with the Ministry of
Civil Aviation;
(e) cooperate with national civil aviation authorities of other countries and
work on cooperative programmes at regional and global level  in consultation with the
Ministry of Civil Aviation;
(f) act as main agency for implementing provisions in India of Annex 9 to the
Convention and coordinating matters relating to facilitation at Indian airports including
meetings of the National Facilitation Committee;
Authority to
work on not-
for-profit
principles.
Functions,
duties and
powers of
Authority.
22 of 1934.
22 of 1934.
22 of 1934.
22 of 1934.
22 of 1934.
22 of 1934.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

7
(g) render advice to the Central Government on matters relating to air transport
including bilateral air services agreements, matters relating to the International Civil
Aviation Organisation and generally on all technical matters relating to civil aviation;
(h) coordinate and regulate Indian air space at national level including all aviation
matters relating to civil and military coordination such as flexi-use of air space by civil
and military air traffic and interact at regional and global levels including the
International Civil Aviation Organisation for issues relating to Indian air space
management;
(i) provide safety oversight of air navigation services in the Indian air space
and the assigned oceanic air space;
(j) provide safety oversight of aviation related meteorological services;
(k) exercise regulatory power over foreign registered aircraft;
(l) prepare and update Aeronautical Information Publications under the rules
made under the Aircraft Act, 1934;
(m) keep a check on aircraft noise and engine emissions in accordance with
Annex 16 to the Convention and collaborate with the environmental agencies in this
matter;
(n) encourage indigenous design and manufacture of aircraft and aircraft
components by acting as catalytic agent;
(o) establish training institutions for the training of civil aviation personnel,
including its own officers and employees;
(p) carry out analysis of traffic data and prepare reports on the overall aviation
developments in the country, make projections for international and domestic traffic
as well as projection of aircraft demand in India, and assist airline and airport operators
to draw up their expansion plans;
(q) issue directions on subjects covered by the above functions, duties  and
powers;
(r) take all such steps as may be necessary or convenient for, or may be incidental
to, the exercise of any  power or the discharge of any function conferred or imposed
on it by this Act, the Aircraft Act, 1934 and rules framed thereunder;
(s) carry out any other function, duty and responsibility which may be entrusted
to it by the Central Government; and
(t)  lay down standards of quality of service to be provided by the air transport
operators, air traffic service providers and air transport service providers, and monitor
and enforce the set performance standards relating to quality, reliability and continuity
of service.
(5) The Authority, for the purpose of enabling it to efficiently discharge its functions
under this Act, may—
(a) create posts of officers and other employees, as it considers necessary with
the prior approval of the Central Government;
(b) select and appoint personnel necessary to carry out the functions and
duties of the Authority;
(c) obtain the services of consultants,  advisors, attorneys and agents as shall
be necessary to carry out the functions of the Authority by engaging them on contract
basis and provide for their remuneration consistent  with industry standards in India:
Provided that the salary, allowances and other terms and conditions of service
of the officers and employees of the Authority other than those referred to in clause (c)
22 of 1934.
22 of 1934.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

8
above shall be the same as that of the officers and employees of the Central
Government.
(6) While discharging its functions and duties under sub-sections ( 1) to ( 5), the
Authority shall not act against the interest of the sovereignty and integrity of India, the
security of the State, friendly relations with foreign States, public order, decency or morality.
(7) The Authority shall ensure good governance including transparency and fairness
while exercising its powers and discharging its functions, inter alia, by—
 ( a) holding due consultations with stake-holders as may be appropriate
including setting up of user council;
(b) allowing stake-holders to make their submissions to it; and
(c) making its decisions fully documented and explained.
15. ( 1) Where the Authority considers it expedient so to do, it may by order in
writing,—
(a) call upon any air transport operator or service provider at any time to furnish
in writing such information, including financial data, or explanation relating to its
functions as the Authority may require;
(b) appoint one or more persons to make an inquiry in relation to the affairs of
any air transport operator or service provider; and
(c) direct any of its officers or employees to inspect the books of account or
other documents of any  air transport operator or service provider.
(2) Where any inquiry in relation to the affairs of any air transport operator or service
provider has been undertaken under sub-section ( 1) —
(a) every office of the Government Department, if such operator or service
provider is a Department of the Government; or
(b) every director, manager, secretary or other officer, if such operator or service
provider is a company; or
(c) every partner, manager, secretary or other officer, if such operator or service
provider is a firm; or
(d) every other person or body of persons who has had dealings in the course
of business with any of the persons mentioned in preceding clause ( b) or clause (c),
shall be bound to produce before the Authority making the inquiry, all such books of
account or other documents in his custody or power relating to, or having a bearing on the
subject matter of such inquiry and also to furnish to the Authority with any such statement
or information relating thereto, as the case may be, required of him, within such time as may
be specified.
(3) Every air transport operator or service provider shall maintain such books of
account or other documents as may be specified by regulations.
(4) The Authority shall have the power to issue such directions to monitor the
performance of the air transport operators or any service provider, as it may consider
necessary for proper functioning by such operator or service provider.
16. The Authority may, for the purpose of discharge of any of its functions and duties
under this Act, issue from time to time to the air transport operators or to any other service
providers such directions as it may consider necessary.
17. The Authority or any other officer specially authorised by it in this behalf may
enter any building or place where the Authority has reason to believe that any document
relating to the subject matter of the inquiry may be found, and may seize any such document
Powers of
Authority to
call for
information,
conduct
investigations,
etc.
Power of
Authority to
issue
directions.
Power of
seizure.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

9
or take extracts or copies therefrom subject to the provisions of section 100 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973 in so far as they may be applicable.
CHAPTER IV
PROPERTY AND CONTRACT
18. (1) On and from the appointed day, there shall be transferred to and vest in the
Authority—
(a) all properties and other assets including the equipment and facilities vested
in the Central Government  and administered by the Director-General of Civil Aviation
immediately before the appointed day;
(b) all properties and other assets vested in the Central Government, for the
purposes of the regional and sub-regional offices or any other offices, administered
by the Director-General of Civil Aviation immediately before the appointed day;
(c) all residential buildings owned by the Central Government for use by the
Director-General of Civil Aviation immediately  before the appointed day .
(2) All debts, obligations and liabilities incurred, all contracts entered into, and all
matters and things engaged to be done by, with, or for the Central Government immediately
before the appointed day for or in connection with the purposes of the Directorate-General
of Civil Aviation shall be deemed to have been incurred, entered into and engaged to be
done by, with or for the Authority.
(3) All non-recurring expenditure incurred by the Central Government for or in
connection with the purposes of the Directorate-General of Civil Aviation up to  the appointed
day and declared to be capital expenditure by the Central Government shall subject to such
terms and conditions as may be prescribed, be treated as capital provided by the Central
Government to the Authority.
(4) All sums of money due to the Central Government in relation to any activities or
purposes of the Directorate-General of Civil Aviation immediately before the appointed day
shall be deemed to be due to the Authority.
(5) All suits and other legal proceedings instituted or which could have been instituted
by or against the Central Government immediately before such date for any matter in relation
to any activities or purposes of the Directorate-General of Civil Aviation may be continued
or instituted by or against the Authority.
(6) If any dispute or doubt arises as to which of the properties, rights or liabilities of
the Central Government have been transferred to the Authority or as to which of the
employees serving under the Director-General of Civil Aviation are to be treated as on
deputation with the Authority under this section, such dispute or doubt shall be decided by
the Central Government in consultation with the Authority and the decision of the Central
Government thereon shall be final.
(7) Every employee holding any office under the Director-General of Civil Aviation
immediately before the commencement of this Act shall be treated as on deputation with the
Authority but shall hold his office in the Authority by the same tenure and upon the same
terms and conditions of service as respects remuneration, leave, provident fund, retirement
or other terminal benefits as he would have held such office if the Authority had not been
constituted and shall continue to do so for a period of three years or until the Authority
duly absorbs such employee in its regular service, whichever is earlier:
Provided that such period of three years may be extended in special cases:
Provided further that during the period of deputation of any such employee with the
Authority, the Authority shall pay the Central Government in respect of every such employee,
such contribution toward his or her leave, salary, pension and gratuity as the Central
Government may, by order, determine:
Transfer of
assets and
liabilities of
Central
Government
to Authority.
2 of 1974.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

10
Provided also that any such employee, who has, in respect of the proposal of the
Authority to absorb him in  regular service, intimated within such time as may be specified
in this behalf by the Authority his intention of not becoming a regular employee of the
Authority, shall not be absorbed by the Authority.
(8) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 or in any
other law for the time being in force, the absorption of any employee by the Authority in its
regular service under this section shall not entitle such employee to any compensation
under that Act or any other law for the time being in force and no such claim shall be
entertained by any court, tribunal or other authority.
19. Subject to the provisions of section 20, the Authority shall be competent to enter
into and perform any contract necessary for the discharge of its functions under this Act.
20. (1) Every contract shall, on behalf of the Authority, be made by the Director-
General or such other Member or such officer of the Authority as may be generally or
specially empowered in this behalf by the Authority and such contracts or class of contracts
as may be specified by the regulations shall be sealed with the common seal of the Authority:
Provided that no contract exceeding such value or amount as the Central Government
may, from time to time, by order, fix in this behalf, shall be made unless it has been previously
approved by the Authority:
Provided further that no contract for the acquisition or sale of immovable property or
for the lease of any such property for a term exceeding thirty years and no other contract
exceeding such value or amount as the Central Government may, from time to time, by order,
fix in this behalf shall be made unless it has been previously approved by the Central
Government.
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section ( 1), the form and manner in which any
contract shall be made under this Act shall be such as may be specified by regulations.
(3) No contract, which is not in accordance with the provisions of this Act and the
regulations, shall be binding on the Authority.
CHAPTER V
F
INANCE,  ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT
21. (1) The Authority may, collect fees and charges chargeable under the Aircraft Act,
1934, the rules and regulations made, requirements issued and the services provided
thereunder, which at present are being collected by the Directorate- General of  Civil  Aviation.
(2) The Authority, for functions not covered under sub-section ( 1), may make
regulations, with the previous approval of the Central Government to levy fees or charges—
(a) for safety oversight function of air navigation services including the
certification of its equipment on the basis of a percentage of revenue collected by air
navigation provider;
(b) for safety of, from, the passengers;
(c) for safety oversight function and surveillance inspections of air transport
operators including cargo operators, airport and aerodrome operators, the operators
providing ground safety services and meteorological services;
(d) for the use and employment by persons of facilities and other services
provided by the Authority;
(e) for the sale of aeronautical publications; and
(f) for any other service provided by the Authority.
Contracts by
Authority.
Mode of
executing
contracts on
behalf of
Authority.
Power of
Authority to
levy fees  and
charges.
14 of 1947.
22 of 1934.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

11
Explanation.— The levy of fees or charges under this section shall not apply to
operations of aircraft belonging to any armed force of the Union and to any aircraft belonging
to the said force.
22. The Central Government may, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf,—
(a) provide any capital that may be required by the Authority for the discharge
of its functions under this Act or for any purpose connected therewith on such terms
and conditions as that Government may determine;
 (b) pay to the Authority, on such terms and conditions as the Central
Government may determine, by way of loans or grants such sums of money as that
Government may consider necessary for the efficient discharge by the Authority of
its functions under this Act.
23. (1) There shall be constituted a Fund to be called the "Civil Aviation Authority of
India Fund" and there shall be credited thereto—
(a) all grants made to the Authority by the Central Government under
section 23;
(b) all fees and charges received by the Authority under this Act; and
(c) all sums received by the Authority from such other sources as may be
approved by the Central Government.
(2) The Fund may be applied for meeting—
(a) the salaries, allowances and other remuneration of the Chairperson,
Director- General, other Members, officers and other employees of the Authority;
(b) the other expenses of the Authority in connection with the discharge of its
functions and for purposes of this Act.
(3) All moneys standing at the credit of the Authority which cannot immediately be
applied as provided in sub-section (2), shall be—
(a) deposited in the State Bank of India or any such Scheduled bank or banks
other than public financial institutions subject to such conditions as may from time
to time be specified by the Central Government; and
(b) invested in the securities of the Central Government or in such manner as
may be prescribed.
Explanation.— In this sub-section "Scheduled bank" has the same meaning as in
clause (e) of section 2 of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934.
24. (1) The Authority may from time to time set apart such amounts as it thinks fit as
a reserve fund or funds for the purpose of enhancing safety-related services, functions or
facilities or for the purpose of providing against any temporary decrease of revenue or
increase of expenditure from transient causes or for purpose of replacement or for meeting
expenditure arising from loss or damage from fire, cyclone, air-crash or other accident or
for meeting any liability arising out of any act or omission in the discharge of its functions
under this Act:
Provided that without prejudice to the right of the Authority to establish specific
reserve for one or more specific purposes, the Authority shall also have the power to
establish a general reserve:
Provided further that the sums set apart annually in respect of each or any of the
specific and general reserves and the aggregate at any time of such sums shall not exceed
such limits, as may, from time to time, be fixed in that behalf by the Central Government.
Additional
capital and
grant to
Authority by
Central
Government.
Fund of
Authority
and its
investment.
Allocation
of surplus
funds.
2 of 1934.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

12
(2) After making provision for such reserve fund or funds and for bad and doubtful
debts, depreciation in assets and all other matters which are usually provided for by
companies registered and incorporated under the Companies Act, 1956, the Authority shall
pay the balance of its annual net profits to the Central Government.
25. The Authority shall prepare, in such form and at such time in each financial year
as may be prescribed its budget for the next financial year, showing the estimated receipts
and expenditure of the Authority and forward the same to the Central Government for
information.
26. (1) The Authority shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records and
prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be prescribed by the Central
Government in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
(2) The accounts of the Authority shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-
General of India at such intervals as may be specified by him.
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and any person appointed by him in
connection with the audit of the accounts of the Authority under this Act shall have the
same rights, privileges and authority in connection with such audit, as the Comptroller and
Auditor-General of India generally has, in connection with the audit of the Government
accounts and, in particular, shall have the right to demand the production of books, accounts,
connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect any of the offices of
the Authority.
(4) The accounts of the Authority, as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor-General
of India or any other person appointed by him in this behalf, together with the audit report
thereon, shall be forwarded annually to the Central Government and the Central Government
shall cause the same to be laid before each House of Parliament.
27. (1) The Authority shall furnish to the Central Government, at such time and in
such form and manner as may be prescribed or as the Central Government may direct, such
returns and statements and such particulars in regard to any matter under the jurisdiction of
the Authority, as the Central Government may,  from time to time, require.
(2) The Authority shall prepare, once every year, in such form and at such time as may
be prescribed, an annual report, giving a summary of its activities during the previous year
and copies of the report shall be forwarded to the Central Government.
(3) A copy of the report received under sub-section ( 2) shall be laid by the Central
Government, as soon as may be after it is received, before each House of Parliament.
CHAPTER VI
O
FFENCES AND PENALTIES
28. Whoever fails to comply with any order or direction given under this Act, or
contravenes, or attempts to contravene or abets the contravention of the provisions of this
Act or of any rules or regulations made thereunder shall be punishable with fine which may
extend to one lakh rupees and in the case of a second or subsequent offence with fine which
may extend to two lakh rupees and in the case of a continuing contravention with an
additional fine which may extend to four thousand rupees for every day during which the
default continues.
29. If any person wilfully fails to comply with an order or direction of the Authority,
passed under Chapter III he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one lakh
rupees and, in the case of a second or subsequent offence, with fine which may extend to
two lakh rupees and in the case of a continuing failure, with an additional fine which may
extend to four thousand rupees for every day during which such failure continues.
Budget.
Accounts and
audit.
Furnishing of
returns, etc.,
to Central
Government.
Punishment
for non-
compliance
of orders or
directions
under this
Act.
Punishment
for non-
compliance
with order of
Authority.
1 of 1956.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

13
30. (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company, every
person who, at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was responsible
to the company for the conduct of, the business of the company, as well as the company,
shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and
punished accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person
liable to any punishment provided in this Act, if he proves that the offence was committed
without his knowledge or that he had exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission
of such offence.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), where an offence under
this Act has been committed by a company, and it is proved that the offence has been
committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of,
any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager,
secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable
to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section,—
(a) "company" means any body corporate and includes a firm or other
association of individuals; and
(b) "director" means a whole-time director of the company and in relation to a
firm, means a partner in the firm.
31. (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by any Department of
Government or any of its undertakings, the Head of the Department or its undertakings
shall be deemed to be guilty of an offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and
punished accordingly unless he proves that the offence was committed without his
knowledge or that he had exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such
offence.
 (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), where an offence under
this Act has been committed by any Department of Government or its undertakings and it is
proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or connivance of, or is
attributable to any neglect on the part, of any officer, other than the Head of the Department,
or its undertakings such officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall
be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
32. (1) The Authority shall, for the purpose of compounding the offences constitute
a Committee consisting of such Members of Authority, as the Chairperson may deem fit, to
be headed by the senior most Member in the Committee and the decision of the Committee
shall be by majority and in case of equality of votes of Members in Committee, the view
taken by the Chairperson shall be final.
(2) The Committee referred to in sub-section (1) shall, before the court has taken the
cognizance of the offence, having regard to the circumstances in which an offence was
committed under this Act or under the Aircraft Act, 1934, compound the offences, for a sum
not exceeding fifty per cent. of the maximum fine provided for the offence under this Act or
as the case may be under the Aircraft Act, 1934, or the rules made thereunder.
(3) No court shall take cognizance of an offence where the offence has been
compounded under sub-section ( 2) and the offender has deposited the compounding
amount with the Central Government.
(4) Where the court has taken cognizance of the offence, the Committee referred to in
sub-section (1), may compound an offence under this Act or the Aircraft Act, 1934 at any
time before judgment is delivered, after having obtained the consent of the court and the
court shall, after the offender deposits the compounding amount with the Central
Government, discharge the offender.
Offences by
companies.
Offences by
Government
Department.
Compounding
of offences.
22 of 1934.
22 of 1934.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

14
CHAPTER VII
MISCELLANEOUS
33. (1) In discharge of its functions, the Authority shall be guided by such directions
in the matter of policy involving public interest as the Central Government may give to  it in
writing.
(2) If any question arises as to whether any such direction relates to a matter of
policy involving public interest, the decision of the Central Government thereon shall be
final.
34. No civil court shall have jurisdiction in respect of any matter, which the Authority
is empowered by or under this Act to determine.
35. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against the Central
Government or the Authority or any Member, officer or other employee thereof for anything
which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act or the rules and regulations
made thereunder.
36. If any person is aggrieved by an order or direction passed or issued by the
Authority, or any of its Members, or officers in its name, in the exercise of the power
conferred by this Act or delegated to him under the Aircraft Act, 1934, he may prefer an
appeal to the Central Government within such period, in such manner and on payment of
such fee as may be prescribed.
37. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Wealth-tax Act, 1957, the Income-tax
Act, 1961, or any other enactment for the time being in force relating to tax on wealth,
income, services, or gains, the Authority shall not be liable to pay wealth-tax, income-tax,
service tax or any other tax in respect of their wealth, income, services, or gains derived.
38. No court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable under this Act, except
upon a complaint in writing made by the Authority or by any officer of the Authority duly
authorised by the Authority for this purpose.
39. The Authority may, by general or special order in writing, delegate to the
Chairperson or any Member or officer of the Authority, subject to such conditions and
limitations, if any, as may be specified in the order, such of its powers and functions under
this Act (except the power to compound offences and the power to make regulations), as it
may deem necessary.
40. (1) If, at any time, the Central Government is of the opinion—
(a) that on account of a grave emergency, the Authority is unable to discharge
the functions and duties imposed on it by or under the provisions of this Act; or
(b) that the Authority has persistently made default in complying with any
direction issued by the Central Government under this Act or in the discharge of the
functions and duties imposed on it by or under the provisions of this Act and as a
result of which default, the financial position of the Authority or the safety of civil
aviation has deteriorated; or
(c) that other circumstances exist which render it necessary in the public interest
so to do,
the Central Government may, by notification, supersede the Authority for such period, not
exceeding six months, as may be specified in the notification:
Provided that before issuing a notification under this sub-section for the reasons
mentioned in clause (b), the Central Government shall give a reasonable opportunity to the
Authority to show cause as to why it should not be superseded and shall consider the
explanations and objections, if any, of the Authority.
Directions by
Central
Government
to Authority.
Bar of
jurisdiction.
Protection
of action
taken in
good faith.
Appeals.
Exemption
from certain
taxes.
Cognizance
of offences.
Delegation of
powers.
Power of
Central
Government
to supersede
Authority.
22 of 1934.
27 of 1957.
43 of 1961.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

15
(2) Upon the publication of a notification under sub-section ( 1) superseding the
Authority,—
(a) all the Members shall, as from the date of supersession, vacate their offices
as such;
(b) all the powers, functions and duties which may, by or under the provisions
of this Act, be exercised or discharged by or on behalf of the Authority, shall until the
Authority is re-constituted under sub-section ( 3), be exercised and discharged by
such person or persons as the Central Government may direct;
(c) all property owned or controlled by the Authority shall, until the Authority
is re-constituted under sub-section ( 3), vest in the Central Government.
(3) On the expiration of the period of supersession specified in the notification issued
under sub-section ( 1), the Central Government may re-constitute the Authority by fresh
appointment and in such case the Members who vacated their offices under clause ( a) of
sub-section (2) shall not be deemed to be disqualified for appointment:
Provided that the Central Government may, at any time before the expiration of the
period of supersession as specified under sub-section ( 1) take action under this sub-
section.
(4) The Central Government shall cause a notification issued under sub-section ( 1)
and a full report of any action taken under this section and the circumstances leading to
such action to be laid before both Houses of Parliament at the earliest opportunity.
41. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of, the
provisions of any other law for the time being in force.
42. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for carrying out the
provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
 (a) the qualification, professional experience and competence of the Director-
General and the whole-time Members under sub-section (4) of section 4;
(b) the salary, allowances and the other conditions of service of the Chairperson,
Director-General and other Members under sub-section ( 2) of section 7;
(c)  the period of giving notice for  resignation from office  by the Chairperson,
Director-General or any Member under sub-section (4) of section 7;
(d)  the procedure for inquiry for removal of the Chairperson or other Member
under sub-section ( 2) of section 8;
(e) other powers and functions of the Chairperson under section 10;
(f) rules subject to which the Authority shall perform its functions under sub-
section (2) of section 14;
(g) rules subject to which the Authority shall perform its duties under sub-
section (3) of section 14;
(h) the terms and conditions subject to which all non-recurring expenditure
incurred by the Central Government for or in connection with the purposes of the
Directorate-General of Civil Aviation to be treated as capital provided by the Central
Government to the Authority under sub-section ( 3) of section 18;
(i) manner of investing the moneys under clause ( b) of sub-section ( 3) of
section 23;
Application
of other laws
not barred.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

16
(j) the form in which and the time at which in each financial year, the Authority
shall prepare its budget under section 25;
(k) the form in which accounts and other relevant records shall be maintained
and the annual statement of accounts shall be prepared by the Authority under sub-
section (1) of section 26;
(l) the time at which and the form and manner in which the returns and statements
shall be furnished by the Authority under sub-section ( 1) of section 27;
(m) the form in which and the time at which the annual report, shall be prepared
by the Authority under sub-section ( 2) of section 27;
(n)  the period within which, the manner in which and the fee on payment of
which appeal may be preferred under section 36;
(o) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed, or in respect of which
provision is to be made by rules.
   (3) The rules made under the Aircraft Act, 1934, in so far as they are not inconsistent
with the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder, shall continue to be in force till
the Central Government makes rules or, as the case may be, the Authority makes regulations
under this Act on the same subject.
43. (1) The Authority may, by notification, may make regulations, not inconsistent
with this Act and the rules made thereunder, to carry out the provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
regulations may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the times and places of meetings of the Authority and the procedure to be
followed  at such meetings under sub-section (1) of section 11 for the transaction of
business by the Authority including the quorum necessary for the meeting;
(b) the books of account or other documents which are required to be maintained
by every air transport operator or service operator under sub-section ( 3) of
section 15;
(c) the contracts or class of contracts which shall be sealed with the common
seal of the Authority under sub-section ( 1) of section 20;
(d)  the form and manner in which any contract shall be made under sub-
section (2) of section 20;
(e) levy of fees and  charges under sub-section ( 2) of section 21; and
(f) any other matter which under the provisions of this Act is required to be, or
may be, specified by regulations.
44. Every rule made by the Central Government, and every regulation made by the
Authority under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House
of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days, which may be comprised
in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree
in making any modification in the rule or regulation or both Houses agree that the rule or
regulation should not be made, the rule or regulation shall thereafter have effect only in
such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule or regulation.
45. In the Aircraft Act, 1934,  in section 2, after sub-section (2A), the following sub-
section shall be inserted, namely:—
Power to
make
regulations.
Rules and
regulations to
be laid before
Parliament.
Amendment
of Act 22 of
1934.
22 of 1934.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

17
 '(2B)  "Director-General of Civil Aviation" means  Director-General appointed
under section 4 of the Civil Aviation Authority of India Act, 2013;'.
46. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to it to be necessary for removing
the difficulty:
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of two years
from the date of commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is
made, before each House of Parliament.
Power to
remove
difficulty.
5
10

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Directorate General of Civil Aviation, an attached office of the Ministry of Civil Aviation
(hereinafter referred to as Directorate) is the safety regulator in the field of civil aviation in
India and is responsible for formulation, implementation, enforcement and monitoring of
stipulated standards and regulations of air transport services to, from and within India, air
safety, airworthiness and coordination of regulatory functions with the International Civil
Aviation Organisation. Directorate with Delhi as its Headquarter  is assisted by its regional
offices in carrying out its responsibility and functions.
2. The functioning of Directorate was audited by International Civil Aviation
Organisation in October 2006 under Universal Safety Oversight Audit Program and the
Federal Aviation Administration of United States of America under International Aviation
Safety Assessment Program in March 2009.  International Civil Aviation Organisation and
Federal Aviation Administration audits pointed out severe deficiencies in the Directorate
set up, such as inadequacy of staff, 40% of posts lying vacant, role of other Ministries in
creation and hiring of personnel, etc., and as a result there was even a risk of Directorate /
India being downgraded to Category II level from Category I level with consequences on
limitation of operations of Indian Carriers to USA. Both International Civil Aviation
Organisation Audit Report and Federal Aviation Administration – International Aviation
Safety Assessment Program Report pointed out the need for an effective organisational
structure of Directorate with administrative and financial flexibility to carry out safety
oversight work. The International Civil Aviation Organisation visited Directorate on a
Validation Mission in December, 2012 to review the implementation of the recommendations
made during the audit conducted in 2006.   The Law  Committee on Review and Restructuring
of Directorate also commented upon the unsatisfactory situation of Directorate and
recommended for appropriate level of administrative and financial autonomy.
3. Keeping in view the above, a need was felt to set up a Civil Aviation Authority
having administrative and financial flexibility to regulate the Civil Aviation sector under
overall oversight of the Ministry of Civil Aviation. The proposed legislation seeks to establish
a Civil Aviation Authority with administrative and financial flexibility and legal status of a
separate entity for effective civil aviation safety oversight capabilities over air transport
service operators, air service navigation operators and operators of other civil aviation
facilities, development and standardisation of civil aircraft and aeronautics, provision of
certain economic regulations, consumer protection and environment regulation in civil
aviation sector and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
4. The Civil Aviation Authority Bill, 2013 provides for establishment of the Civil
Aviation Authority   comprising of a Chairperson, Director-General, who will also act as
Chief Executive Officer of the Civil Aviation Authority and not less than  seven and not
more than nine Members representing various technical areas such as airworthiness, air
safety, etc., out of which,  not more than five members shall be on a  whole-time basis.  The
Authority shall work on not-for-profit principles. Major functions of the Civil Aviation
Authority both, financial and administrative includes—
(a) to regulate civil aviation safety, and provide for the better management of
civil aviation through safety oversight of air transport operators, airport operators,
air navigation service operators and providers of other civil aviation services or
facilities;
(b) to protect the interests of consumers under the proposed legislation or rules
or regulations made thereunder;
(c) to draw up a State Safety Programme and approve safety management
systems and look after their implementation in coordination with other concerned
authorities;
18

19
(d) to coordinate on matters relating to the International Civil Aviation
Organisation with all agencies and send replies to the letters of signatory States to the
Convention and take all necessary action arising out of the Safety Oversight Audit
Programme of the International Civil Aviation Organisation in consultation with the
Ministry of Civil Aviation;
(e) to levy fees and charges chargeable under the Aircraft Act, 1934;
(f) the Authority shall be responsible for the proper implementation of the Aircraft
Act, 1934 and for that purpose it shall discharge all the duties assigned to the Director
General of Civil Aviation under that Act.
5. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
N
EW DELHI; AJIT SINGH
The  6th  August, 2013.
————
PRESIDENT’S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF THE CONSTITUTION
OF INDIA
————
[Copy of letter No. A.60015/119/2010-DG , dated 6 August, 2013 from Shri  Ajit Singh,
Minister of Civil Aviation to the Secretary-General, Lok Sabha]
The President having been informed of the subject matter of the proposed Civil
Aviation Authority of India Bill recommends the introduction of the Bill in the House under
article 117 (1) and consideration of the Bill under article 117 (3) of the Constitution.
.

Notes on Clauses
Clause 1.— This clause seeks to provide for the short title, extent and commencement
of the proposed legislation.
Clause 2.— This clause defines certain words and expressions used in the proposed
legislation.
Clause 3.— This clause seeks to provide for the constitution of the Civil Aviation
Authority of India.
Clause 4.— This clause provides for the composition of the Authority. It further
provides that the Authority shall consist of a Chairperson, a Director-General and not less
than seven Members and not more than nine Members.  It also provides that the Director-
General and five Members as whole-time Members.
Clause 5.— This clause seeks to provide for the constitution of a Selection Committee
which shall finalise the selection of the Chairperson, Director-General and whole-time
Members.
Clause 6.— This clause provides for the disqualification for the office of Member.
Clause 7.— This clause provides for the term of office and conditions of service of
the Chairperson, Director-General and Members.
Clause 8.— This clause provides for the removal and suspension of Members.
Clause 9.— This clause contains provisions regarding the eligibility of a Member for
re-appointment.
Clause 10.—This clause provides the powers and functions of the Chairperson.
Clause 11.—This clause lays down the provisions regarding the meetings of the
Authority.
Clause 12.—This clause provides that vacancies etc. shall not invalidate the
proceedings of the Authority.
Clause 13.—This clause seeks to provide for the Authority to work on not-for-profit
principles.
Clause 14.—This clause provides for the functions, duties and powers of the Authority.
Clause 15.—This clause seeks to provide for the powers of the Authority to call for
information, conduct investigations, etc.
Clause 16.—This clause contains provisions regarding the powers of the Authority
to issue directions.
Clause 17.—This clause provides that the Authority or any other officer specially
authorised by it in this behalf may enter any building or place where the Authority has
reason to believe that any document relating to the subject matter of the inquiry may be
found, and may seize any such document or take extracts or copies therefrom.
Clause 18.—This clause provides provisions regarding the transfer of assets and
liabilities of the Central Government to Authority.
Clause 19.—This clause seeks to provide that the Authority shall be competent to
enter into and perform contracts necessary for the discharge of its functions.
Clause 20.—This clause provides the mode of executing contracts on behalf of the
Authority.
20

21
Clause 21.—This clause provides for the powers of the Authority to levy fees and
charges under the Aircraft Act, 1934.
Clause 22.—This clause seeks to provide provisions for additional capital and grant
to the Authority by the Central Government.
Clause 23.—This clause provides for the constitution of the Civil Aviation Authority
of India Fund and its investment.
Clause 24.—This clause seeks to provide for the allocation of surplus fund for setting
a reserve fund or funds for the purpose of enhancing the safety related services or for
meeting   any liability arising out of any act or omission in the discharge of its functions by
the Authority.
Clause 25.—This clause provides for the preparation of the Budget of the Authority.
Clause 26.—This clause seeks to provide that the Authority shall maintain proper
accounts and other relevant records and prepare an annual statement of accounts.  This
clause also seeks to provide that the accounts of the authority shall be audited by the
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
Clause 27.—This clause provides that the Authority shall furnish to the Central
Government, such returns and statements and such particulars in regard to any matter
under the jurisdiction of the Authority, as the Central Government may, from time to time,
require. This clause also provides that the Authority shall prepare an annual report, and
copies of the report shall be forwarded to the Central Government. This clause further
provides that a copy of the report shall be laid by the Central Government before each
House of Parliament.
Clause 28.—This clause provides for the punishment for non-compliance of orders or
directions under the proposed legislation and for contravention of the provisions of the
proposed legislation or any rules or regulations made thereunder.
Clause 29. —This clause seeks to provide for the punishment for non-compliance
with an order or direction of the Authority, passed under Chapter III of the proposed
legislation.
Clause 30.—This clause makes provisions regarding the offences by companies.
Clause 31.—This clause contains provisions with regard to the offences by the
Government Department.
Clause 32.—This clause provides for the compounding of offences.
Clause 33.—This clause provides that, in discharge of its functions, the Authority
shall be guided by such directions in the matter of policy involving public interest as the
Central Government may give to it in writing.
Clause 34.—This clause provides that no civil court shall have jurisdiction in respect
of any matter, which the Authority is empowered by or under the proposed legislation to
determine.
Clause 35.—This clause seeks to provide that no suit, prosecution or other legal
proceedings shall lie against the Central Government or the Authority or any Member,
officer or other employee thereof for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be
done under the proposed legislation or the rules and regulations made thereunder.
Clause 36.—This clause makes provision for preferring appeal before the Central
Government against an order or direction passed or issued by the Authority, or any of its
Members, or officers in its name.
Clause 37.—This clause provides that notwithstanding anything contained in the
Wealth-tax Act, 1957, the Income-tax Act, 1961, or any other enactment for the time being in

22
force relating to tax on wealth, income, services, or gains, the Authority shall not be liable to
pay wealth-tax, income-tax, service tax or any other tax in respect of their wealth, income,
services, or gains derived.
Clause 38.—This clause seeks to provide that, no court shall take cognizance of an
offence punishable under the proposed legislation, except upon a complaint in writing made
by the Authority or by any officer of the Authority duly authorised by the Authority for this
purpose.
Clause 39.—This clause provides that, the Authority may, by general or special order
in writing, delegate to the Chairperson or any Member or officer of the Authority, subject to
such conditions and limitations, if any, as may be specified in the order, such of its powers
and functions under the proposed legislation (except the power to compound offences and
the power to make regulations), as it may deem necessary.
Clause 40.—This clause provides for the power of the Central Government to supersede
the Authority.
Clause 41.—This clause provides that the provisions of the proposed legislation
shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of, the provisions of any other law for the time
being in force.
Clause 42.—This clause empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the provisions of the proposed legislation.
Clause 43.—This clause seeks to empower the Authority to make regulations.
Clause 44.—This clause seeks to provide for laying of every rule made by the Central
Government and every regulation made by the Authority under the proposed legislation, as
soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament.
Clause 45.—This clause provides for the amendment of the Aircraft Act, 1934 to
define the terms “Director-General of Civil Aviation”.
Clause 46.—This clause seeks to provide for the power to remove difficulty arising in
giving effect to the provisions of the proposed legislation.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the constitution of an Authority to be called as the
Civil Aviation Authority of India.
2. Sub-clause (3) of clause 7 of the Bill provides that the salary and allowances of the
Chairperson, Director-General and other Members shall be such as may be prescribed by
rules.
3. Clause 22 of the Bill provides that the Central Government may after due
appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, provide any capital that may be
required by the Authority for discharge of its functions under the proposed legislation or
for any purpose connected therewith, and pay to the Authority, on such terms and conditions
as the Central Government may determine, by way of loans or grants such sums of money as
that Government may consider necessary for the efficient discharge by the Authority of its
functions under the proposed legislation.
4. Clause 23 of the Bill provides for the constitution of a Fund to be called the Civil
Aviation Authority of India Fund into which all Central Government grants, fees and charges
received by the Authority and all sums received by the Authority from other sources approved
by the Central Government shall be credited.  The Fund is to be used for meeting the
salaries, allowances and other remuneration of the Chairperson, Director-General, other
Members, officers and other employees of the Authority and other expenses of the Authority
in connection with the discharge of its functions and for the purposes of the proposed
legislation.
5. Sub-clause (1) of clause 24 of the Bill provides that the Authority may set apart
such amounts as it thinks fit  as a reserve fund or funds for enhancing safety related
services, functions or facilities and meeting any liability arising out of any act or omission in
discharge of its functions under the proposed legislation.  Sub-clause (2) of clause 24
provides that the Authority, after making provision for reserved fund or funds shall pay the
balance of its annual net profits to the Central Government.
6. The details of the estimated recurring and non-recurring expenditure to be incurred
for the purposes mentioned in above paragraphs shall be as under:—
Statement Showing Estimated Expenditure (Rs. in crore)
    Recurring T otal      Non-Recurring T otal Non-
Recurring Recurring
Expenditure Expenditure
Plan Non Plan Plan Non Plan
First Year 12.00 112.00 124.00 50.00 0.00 50.00
Second Year 12.00 112.00 124.00 100.00 0.00 100.00
Subsequent - - - 385.50 0.00 385.50
three years
Total 24.00 224.00 248.00 535.00 0.00 535.00
7. The Bill, if enacted and brought into operation, would not involve any other
expenditure of recurring or non-recurring nature.
23

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 42 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the provisions of the Bill.  Sub-clause (2) of this clause enumerates the matters in respect of
which the rules may be made under this clause.  These matters, inter alia, relate to,—
(a) the qualification, professional experience and competence of the Director-General
and the whole-time Members under sub-clause (4) of clause 4;
 (b) the salary, allowances and the other conditions of service of the Chairperson,
Director- General and other Members under sub-clause (2) of clause 7;
(c) the period of giving notice for resignation from office by the Chairperson, Director-
General or any Member under sub-clause (4) of clause 7;
 (d) the procedure for inquiry for removal of the Chairperson or other Members under
sub-clause (2) of clause 8;
(e) other powers and functions of the Chairperson under clause 10;
 (f) rules subject to which the Authority shall perform its functions under sub-clause
(2) of clause 14;
(g) rules subject to which the Authority shall perform its duties under sub-clause (3)
of clause 14;
 (h) the terms and conditions subject to which all non-recurring expenditure incurred
by the Central Government for or in connection with the purposes of the Director
General of Civil Aviation to be treated as capital provided by the Central
Government to the Authority under sub-clause (3) of clause 18;
 (i) manner of investing the moneys under item (b) of sub-clause (3) of clause 23;
(j) the form in which and the time at which in each financial year, the Authority shall
prepare its budget under clause 25;
(k)  the form in which accounts and other relevant record shall be maintained and the
annual statement of accounts shall be prepared by the Authority under sub-
clause (1) of clause 26;
(l) the time at which and the form and manner in which the returns and statements
shall be furnished by the Authority under sub-clause (1) of clause 27;
 (m) the form in which and the time at which the annual report shall be prepared by the
Authority under sub-clause (2) of clause 27;
 (n) the period within which, the manner in which and the fee on payment of which
appeal may be preferred under clause 36;
 (o) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed or in respect of which
provision is to be made by rules.
2. Clause 43 of the Bill empowers the Authority to make regulations, not inconsistent
with the proposed legislation and the rules made thereunder, to carry out the provisions of
the proposed legislation.  Sub-clause (2) of this clause enumerates the matters in respect of
which the regulations may be made under this clause.  These matters, inter alia, relate to—
(a) the times and places of meetings of the Authority and the procedure to be followed
at such meetings under sub-clause (1) of clause 11 for the transaction of business
by the Authority including the quorum necessary for the meeting;
24

25
(b) the books of account and other documents which are required to be maintained
by every air transport operator or service operator under sub-clause (3) of clause
15;
(c) the contracts or class of contracts which shall be sealed with the common seal of
the Authority under sub-clause (1) of clause 20;
(d) the form and manner in which any contract shall be made under sub-clause (2) of
clause 20;
(e) levy of fee, and charges under sub-clause (2) of clause 21; and
(f) any other matter which under the provisions of the proposed legislation is required
to be, or may be specified by regulations.
3. Clause 44 of the Bill requires that the rules made by the Central Government and the
regulations made by the Authority shall be laid as soon as may be, after they are made,
before each House of Parliament.
4. Clause 46 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to remove any difficulty
which arises in giving effect to the provisions of the proposed legislation, by order published
in the Official Gazette, not inconsistent with the provisions of the proposed legislation.
This clause requires that every such order shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament.
5. The matters in respect of which rules and regulations may be made and orders may
be issued are generally matters of procedure and administrative details and it is not practicable
to provide for them in the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a
normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for constitution of a Civil Aviation Authority for administration and regulation of
civil aviation safety, for the better management of civil aviation safety oversight over
air transport service operators, air service navigation operators and operators of
other  civil aviation facilities, matters relating to impact of financial stress on
safety operations, consumer protection and environment regulations in civil
aviation sector and for proper implementation of the provisions of the
Aircraft Act, 1934 and the rules made thereunder and for matters connected therewith
or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Ajit Singh, Minister of  Civil  Aviation)
GMGIPMRND—1935LS(S4)—13.08.2013.