5

As INTRODUCED. IN LOK SABHA

Bill No. 130 of 2005

THE INTER-CASTE MARRIAGES (RESERVATION PROVISIONS)

BILL, 2005
By

Suri S.K. KHARVENTHAN, M.P.

A

BILL

to provide for reservation in appointments and posts in the services under the State
and in educational institutions in favour of persons entering into inter-caste
| marriages and their offsprings.

BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—

1. (/) This Act may be called the Inter-caste Marriages (Reservation Provisions) Act,

2005.

(2) It extends to the whole of India.

(3) It shall come into force at once.

2. It this Act, unless the context otherwise requires "intercaste marriage” means any
marriage solemnised between a male and a female, where either of the parties to the marriage

belongs to a Scheduled Caste or a

Scheduled Tribe or an Other Backward Class.

~

Short title,
extent and
commencement.

Definition.


Couples in
inter-caste
marriage and
their children
to be entitled
for reservation
in services and
educational

_ institutions.

Act to have
overriding
effect.

Power to make
10165.

2
3. (1) Any person who enters into an inter-caste marriage shall be entitled to the benefit

of reservation in services under the State and in admission to the educational institutions
maintained or under the control of the State or receiving funds from the State.

(2) Any child born out of wediock in an inter-caste marriage shall be entitled to the
benefit of reservation in services under the State and in admission to educational institutions
maintained or under the controi of the State or receiving funds from the State

Explanation.— For the purpose of this section, State means and includes the Central :

Government, a Union territory administration or all authorities and organizations under the
control of the Central Government

4. This Act shall apply notwithstanding anything contrary contained in any judgment
of any court or tribunal or judicial authority or any law or any instrument or rules having the
force of law for the time being in force

5. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
Carrying out the purposes of the Act



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

With the changes in social structure and outlook of the people, inter-caste marriages
have become very common. Every year thousands of inter-caste marriages are solemnised in
the country. These marriages help in abolishing caste system which has been prevalent in
our society for centuries. It often happens that one of the couple belongs to a Scheduled
Caste or Scheduled Tribe or Other Backward Class and the other person belongs to an upper
caste.

In order to encourage inter-caste marriages, reservation facility was extended to the
children born out of wedlock of an inter-caste marriage wherein one of the spouse belonged
to a caste for which reservation facility was given by the Government. Of late, the Kerala
High Court in a judgement has held that the children born of inter-caste marriages could not
claim the benefits of reservation in educational institutions and in public even if one of the
parents belonged to a scheduled caste or scheduled tribe. It further stated that burden lies on
the person who is claiming the benefit of reservation to establish that he was subject to the
same handicap and disadvantages as someone born as a member of scheduled caste or
scheduled tribe.

In the current scenario, when the cases of divorce are on the rise, the women and the
children who are born out of an inter-caste marriage have to suffer as a result of the above
mentioned judgment. In these cases, the children are generally in the custody of mother and
due to the recent judgment of the High Court, they stand to lose the reservation facility
enjoyed by them till recently. |

To correct this anomaly, it is proposed to provide that even if one of the couple satisfy
the conditions for reservation, then both the couple and their children shall be entitled to the
reservation facility by the State. The Bill, if enacted, will bring suitable relief to the affected
families and also encourage inter-caste marriages which will abolish caste system prevailing
in our society.

Hence this Bill.

New DELHI; : , S.K. KHARVENTHAN
August 11, 2005


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 5 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out J d
the purposes of the Bill 7 ‘

2
Since the rules to be made will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character a4



LOK SABHA

A
BILL
to provide for reservation in appointments and posts in the services under the State and

in educational institutions in favour of persons entering into inter-caste marriages and
their offsprings. |

(Shri S.K. Kharventhan, MP)

MGIPMRND—3373LS(S5)—11-11-2005.