1
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROFESSIONAL SOCIAL WORK
PRACTITIONERS BILL, 2018
By
PROF. RICHARD HAY,  M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of a National Council of Professional Social Work
Practitioners for the coordination, development and regulation of professional
social work practice in India and for matters connected
therewith or incidental
thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. ( 1) This Act may be called the National Council of Professional Social Work
Practitioners Act, 2018.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill  No. 130 of  2018
5
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
Constitution
of National
Council for
Professional
Social Work
Practitioners.
2. In this Act unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "Chairperson" means the Chairperson of the National Council or the State
Council, as the case may be;
(b) "ex-officio member" means the seven members nominated by the Central
Government under section 3;
(c) "National Council" means the National Council of Professional Social Work
Practitioners constituted under section 3;
(d) "post graduate social work teacher" means a qualified professional social
work teacher teaching at post graduate level;
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by regulations made under this Act;
(f) "professional social work practitioner" means a person who is a social work
degree holder and whose name has been entered in the Register maintained under
section 6;
(g) "member" means a member appointed under this Act;
(h) "member-Secretary" means member secretary of the National Council or the
State Council, as the case may be;
(i) "recognized institution" means an institution recognized by the National
Council under this Act;
(j) "Register" means register of professional social work practitioners maintained
by each State Council under section 6;
(k) "regulation" means regulation made under this Act;
(l) "social work degree holder" means a person who has obtained a prescribed
degree in Social Work from any of the recognized University or institution in India or
abroad;
(m) "State Council" means State Council of Professional Social Work Practitioners
constituted under section 5; and
(n) "Vice-Chairperson" means the Vice-Chairperson of the National Council or
the State Council, as the case may be.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
a National Council to be known as the National Council for Professional Social Work
Practitioners for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) The National Council shall consist of—
(a) a Chairperson;
(b) a Vice-Chairperson;
(c) a member-Secretary; and
(d) seven persons as ex-officio-members'
to be appointed by the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed:
Provided that the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and member-Secretary except the
ex-officio members shall be a professional social work practitioner registered under
section 6:
Provided further that twenty per cent. of the members of the National Council shall be
post graduate social work teachers with not less than ten years of teaching experience.
(3) The National Council shall have its headquarters at such place as may be notified
by the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
Definitions.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
Incorporation
of National
Council.
Constitution
of State
Councils for
Professional
Social Work
Practitioners.
(4) The term of office of the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson, member-Secretary and
ex-officio members shall be for five years and they shall also be eligible for reappointment:
Provided that no person shall be elected for more than two consecutive terms.
(5) The Central Government shall appoint such number of officers and staff to the
National Council as it deem necessary for carrying out functions assigned to it under this
Act.
(6) The Salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of
Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson, member-Secretary, ex-officio members and officers and
staff of the National Council shall be such as may be prescribed.
(7) Any casual vacancy in the National Council shall be filled in accordance with the
provisions of this Act and the person so appointed shall hold office only for the remaining
term for which the member in whose place he has been appointed may have held office.
4. The National Council shall be a body corporate by the name of National Council for
Professional Social Work having perpetual succession and common seal, with power to
acquire, hold and dispose of property, both movable and immovable and to contract, and
shall by the said name sue and be sued.
5. (1) The State Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute a
State Council each to be known as the State Council for Professional Social Work
Practitioners for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) The State Council shall consist of—
(a) a Chairperson;
(b) a Vice-Chairperson;
(c) a member-Secretary; and
(d) four persons as ex-officio-members,
to be appointed by the State Government concerned in such manner as may be
prescribed:
Provided that the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and member-Secretary except the
ex-officio members shall be a professional social work practitioner registered under
section 6.
(3) The State Council shall have its headquarters at such place as may be notified by
the State Governments concerned in such manner as may be prescribed.
(4) The term of office of the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson, member-Secretary and
ex-officio members shall be for five years and they shall also be eligible for reappointment:
Provided that no person shall be elected for more than two consecutive terms.
(5) The State Government concerned shall appoint such number of officers and staff
to the State Council as it deem necessary for carrying out functions assigned to it under
this Act.
(6) The Salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of
Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson, member-Secretary, ex-officio members and officers and
staff of the State Council shall be such as may be prescribed.
6. (1) The State Government shall cause to be maintained a Register to be known as
the Register of Professional Social Work Practitioners practicing social work within
their jurisdiction in such form and manner as may be prescribed.
(2) Every professional social work practitioner shall register himself in the Register
maintained under sub-section (1) in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) The Register maintained under sub-section (1) shall contain such details of the
professional social work practitioners as may be prescribed.
Register of
Professional
Social Work
Practitioners.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
(4) The State Governments shall forward a copy every year of the Register maintained
under sub-section (1) to the Central Government for record.
7. The State Social Work Council shall be a body corporate by the name of State Social
Work Council having perpetual succession and common seal, with power to acquire, hold
and dispose of property, both movable and immovable and to contract, and shall by the said
name sue and be sued.
8. No person shall be registered as member of a National Council or a State Council if
he—
(a) does not possess the prescribed degree in social work;
(b) is, or becomes person of unsound mind;
(c) is or has been convicted for any offence by the court of law involving moral
turpitude;
(d) is or at any time has been adjudicated as insolvent;
(e) is declared by court of law to be otherwise incompetent;
(f) is proved to have violated the code of ethics, rules, regulations and guide-
lines of the National Council.
9. (1) The National Council or the State Council, as the case may be, shall meet at such
time and places and shall observe such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of
business at its meetings (including the quorum) as may be prescribed:
Provided that the Council (National or State) shall meet at least twice every year.
(2) The Chairperson, and in the absence of the Chairperson, the Vice-Chairperson, and
in the absence of both member-Secretary shall preside over the meeting of the Council
(National or State):
Provided that in absence of the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and member-Secretary,
any member agreed to by the members of the Council shall preside over the meeting.
(3) Every decision of the Council (National or State) shall be taken by a majority of
votes of the members present and voting and in the event of any equality of votes, the
person presiding the meeting shall have a second and casting vote.
10. (1) The National Council and the State Council shall constitute an Executive
Committee, a Disciplinary Committee and such other Committees as that Council deems
necessary to carry out the purposes of this Act.
(2) The Constitution, function, powers and terms and conditions of the Committees
and its members shall be such as may be prescribed.
11. The National Council shall—
(a) safeguard the rights, privileges and interest of professional social workers
registered with the Council;
(b) draw up a code of ethics and code of conduct for social work professional
and mechanism for their enforcement;
(c) prepare, maintain and implement professional standards for social work
practices in India;
(d) establish and lay down the procedure to be followed by disciplinary commit-
tee constituted under section 9;
(e) exercise general supervision and control over State Councils;
(f) act as a nodal agency for social work in India;
Incorporation
of State
Councils.
Disqualification.
Meetings of
the National
Council and
the State
Council.
Constitution
of Executive,
Disciplinary
and other
Committees.
Functions of
the National
Council.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

5
(g) facilitate networking among social work professionals at the micro and macro
levels to work towards development of both at individual level and at the community
level;
(h) assess the professional social work human power needs in the country
including identification of positions to be filled by social work professionals only;
(i) promote social work education and practice and lay standards of such
education and practice in consultation with the Universities in India and State Boards
of Education imparting such education and State Councils;
(j) recognize Universities and institutions whose course shall be qualification
for registering as a professional social work practitioner and for that purpose to visit
and inspect Universities and institutions;
(k) coordinate and interact with International Social Work Bodies, Universities,
United Nations Agencies and other Developmental Agencies in the area of Social
Work and related areas;
(l) recognize basic foreign qualifications in social work obtained outside India
for the purpose of admission as a professional social worker;
(m) undertake scientific studies, researches, consultation, workshops,
publications relating to various fields of social work education, training and practice
and disseminate results thereof;
(n) promote interact between professional social work and allied disciplines or
professions in the area of teaching, training, workshops, research, extension,
publication, dissemination of knowledge, skills and practice;
(o) manage the funds of the Council;
(p) provide for election of its members; and
(q) perform all other functions conferred on it for improving and promoting
social work practice by or under this Act.
12. The State Council shall,—
(a) function as the State unit of the National Council;
(b) register persons as social workers on its register and issue registration
certificate thereto;
(c) maintain a Register of professional social work practitioners as mentioned
under section 6;
(d) constitute disciplinary committees;
(e) entertain and determine cases of misconduct against professional social
workers;
(f) safeguard the rights, privileges and interests of professional social workers
registered with it;
(g) manage and invest funds of Council; and
(h) perform all other functions conferred on it by or under this Act.
13. Subject to the conditions and restrictions prescribed under this Act every person
whose name is for the time being registered on the Register of any State Council shall be
entitled according to his qualifications to practice social work in any part of India and
recover in due course in respect of such practice any expenses, charges to which he is
entitled to.
Functions of
the State
Council.
Right to
Practice.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

6
14. No person other than persons registered as professional soical work practitioner
shall:
(a) practice professional social work in India;
(b) hold office which has been identified for professional social workers as it
involves discharging social work;
(c) be entitled to give evidence at any court of law, tribunal or authority empowered
to take evidence on oath as an expert under section 45 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872
on any matter related to social work;
(d) be entitled to sign or authenticate certificates required by law to be signed or
authenticated by a duly qualified social worker.
15. (1) The State disciplinary Committee constituted under section 10 shall, either suo-
moto or on receipt of a complaint, hear the cases of misconduct of professional social work
practitioners registered with that State Council.
(2) The State Disciplinary Committee shall suggest appropriate action including the
action for removing the name of person from the Register.
(3) Any person aggrieved by the decision of the State Disciplinary Committee may
appeal to the National Disciplinary Committee constituted under section 10.
(4) The State Disciplinary Committee or the National Disciplinary Committee, as the
case may be, shall follow the principle of natural justice while hearing cases or appeals in
cases of misconduct.
16. (1) The National or State Council shall, as the case may be, by notification in the
Official Gazette, constitute a Fund to which shall be credited any grants, donations, gifts, or
benefactions from Government, public undertakings, national and international bodies or
agencies, corporations, universities, boards, trusts, societies, companies and banking
institutions.
(2) All receipts of the Council (National or State) shall be credited to the Fund and all
payments by the Councils shall be made therefrom.
(3) All funds shall be received only through Bank Accounts opened in nationalized
banks.
17. Every professionals social work practitioner for his registration in the Register and
institutions for its recognition under this Act shall be charged an appropriate fee as may be
prescribed.
18. (1) The Council (National or State) shall prepare, in such form and in such time each
year as may be prescribed, a budget in respect of the financial year ensuing showing the
estimated receipts and expenditure.
(2) Every Council (National or State) shall cause to be maintained such books of
accounts and other books in such form and in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) The accounts of Council (National or State) shall be audited by auditors duly
qualified to act as auditors of companies under the Companies Act, 2013, at such times and
in such manner as may be prescribed.
19. The Council (National or State) shall prepare and submit an Annual Report, in such
form in such manner and at such time as may be prescribed, giving a true and full account of
its activities during the previous year to the Central Government or the State Government, as
the case may be, who shall cause the Report to be laid before both the Houses of Parliament
or State legislature, as the case may be.
20. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Chairperson,
Vice-Chairperson, member-Secretary and ex-officio members of the Councils (National or
State) or members of committees constituted by the Councils under section 10 or officer of
the Council for anything done in good faith or intention under this Act.
Right of
persons
registered as
Professional
Social
Worker.
Disciplinary
Committees.
Funds of the
National and
State Council.
Fee for
registration
recognition of
institutions.
Accounts and
Audits.
Annual
Report.
Protection of
action taken
in good faith.
18 of 2013.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
1 of 1872

7
21. (1) The National Council may, with the previous sanction of the Central Government,
make regulations generally for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) In particular without prejudice to the generality of this power, such regulations may
provide for all or any of the following matter namely:—
(a) the manner of appointment of the Chairperson, member-secretary and other
members of the Council;
(b) the powers and duties of Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson, member-secretary
and other members of the Council;
(c) the terms and conditions of office of Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson, member-
secretary and other members of the Council;
(d) the constitution of Committees of the Council;
(e) the staff requirements of the Councils and the terms and conditions of service
of such staff;
(f) the management of funds and property of the State Social Work Councils and
maintenance of audit and of its accounts;
(g) the form of annual reports;
(h) the procedure of elections;
(i) the manner, quorum and the procedure of meetings of the councils;
(j) the appointment of ex officio members; and
(k) such other matter as it deem necessary for carrying out the purposes of this
Act.
(3) Every regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is
made, before each House of  Parliament , while it is in session, for a total period of thirty  days
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before
the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses
agree that the rule should not be made, the regulation shall thereafter have effect only in
such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that regulation.
Power to
make
regulation.
5
10
15
20
25
30

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Social work education was started in India in the year 1936 at the Tata Institute of
Social Sciences, Mumbai. Within the eighty or so years it has spread over to hundreds of
colleges all over the India. Lakhs of social work professionals are practicing as counselors,
medical social workers, psychiatric social workers, programme officers, project coordinators,
researches, social work teachers and so on in various fields. It is a profession providing
individual care and services to the people that demands the principle of confidentiality,
individualization, acceptance and nonjudgemental attitude. It can be ensurred only through
a professional code of ethics, which can be realized by a National Professional Social Work
Council. In India, so far no legislation has been enacted in this regard. Social Work being a
professional service invariably demands Union legislation at the earliest.
A legislation to ensure the rights of the stakeholders, protecting the evidence based
practice as well as the rights, accountability and responsibilities of the service providers and
service users as well are the need of the hour.
Developed nations like the USA, Canada, UK and Australia have their professional
Council constituted to regulate the practice of professional social work in their respective
field.
The Bill, therefore, with a view to regulate, coordinate and develop professional social
work practice in the country provides for—
(a) constitution of a National Professional Social Work Practitioner Council and
State Professional Social Work Practitioner Councils;
(b) formulation of a code of ethics for the practice of professional social work in
India;
(c) registration of professional social work practitioner;
(d) regulation of professional social work education and institutions offering
courses in professional social work;
(e) licensing and regulation of the institutions practicing professional social
work; and
(f) conferring certain rights on professional social work practitioners.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RICHARD HAY
July 3, 2018.
8

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Cluase 3 of the Bill provides for constitution of the National Professional Social Work
Practitioner Council. It also provides for appointment of Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson,
member-secretary and ex-officio members to the Council. Clause 5 provides for constitution
of the State Professional Social Work Practitioner Council. Clause 6 provides for maintenance
of a Register of professional social work  Practitioners. Clause 10 provides for constitution
of  Executive Committee and Disciplinary Committees by the National Council and the State
Council. Clause 16 provides for the constitution   of Fund by the National Council and the
State Council. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees thirty crores would involve as a recurring
expenditure per annum from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring  expenditure of about rupees twenty crores is also likely to be involved.
9

10
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGA TED LEGISLATION
Clause 21 of the Bill empowers the National counsil to make regulations for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. As the regulations will relate to matters of detail only, the
delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of a National Council of Professional Social Work
Practitioners for the coordination, development and regulation of professional
social work practice in India and for matters connected
therewith or incidental
thereto.
————
(Prof. Richard Hay, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—814LS(S3)—24-07-2018.