1
THE CRIMINAL  LAW (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2012
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973
 and the Indian Evidence Act, 1872.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-third Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Criminal Law (Amendment) Act, 2012.
 (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title
and commence-
ment.
Bill No. 130 of  2012
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
CHAPTER II
AMENDMENTS TO THE INDIAN PENAL CODE
2.  After section 166 of the Indian Penal Code (hereafter in this Chapter referred to as
the Penal Code), the following section shall be inserted, namely:—
“166A. Whoever, being a public servant,—
(a) knowingly disobeys any direction of the law which prohibits him
from requiring the attendance at any place of any person for the  purpose of
investigation into an offence or any other matter, or
(b) knowingly disobeys, to the prejudice of any person, any other direction
of the law regulating the manner in which he shall conduct such investigation,
shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or with
fine, or with both.”.
3. After section 326 of the Penal Code, the following sections shall be inserted,
namely:—
‘326A. Whoever causes permanent or partial damage or deformity to, or burns
or maims or disfigures or disables any part or parts of the body of a person or causes
grievous hurt by throwing acid on or administering acid to that person, with the
intention of causing or with the knowledge that he is likely to cause such injury or
hurt, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which shall
not be less than ten years but which may be for life and with fine which may extend to
ten lakh rupees:
  Provided that any fine imposed under this section shall be given to the person
on whom acid was thrown or to whom acid was administered.
326B. Whoever throws or attempts to throw acid on any person or attempts to
administer acid to any person, with the intention of causing permanent or partial
damage or deformity or burns or maiming or disfigurement or disability or grievous
hurt to that person shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a
term which shall not be less than five years but which may extend to seven years and
shall also be liable to fine.
Explanation.—For the purposes of sections 326A and 326B, “acid” includes
any substance which has acidic or corrosive character or burning nature that is
capable of causing bodily injury leading to scars or disfigurement or temporary or
permanent disability.’.
4.  In section 354 of the Penal Code, for the words “shall be punished with imprisonment
of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both”,
the words “shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term of one year
which may extend to five years and shall also be liable to fine which may not be less than
one thousand rupees” shall be substituted.
5. For sections 375, 376, 376A, 376B, 376C and 376D of the Penal Code, the following
sections shall be substituted, namely:—
Public servant
disobeying
direction
under law.
Insertion of
new sections
326A and
326B.
Hurt by acid
attack.
Attempt to
throw or
administer
acid.
Amendment
of section
354.
Insertion of
new section
166A.
45 of 1860.
Substitution of
new sections
for sections
375, 376,
376A, 376B,
376C and
376D.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
‘375.   A person  is said to commit “sexual assault” if  that person—
(a) penetrates, for a sexual purpose, the vagina or anus or urethra or
mouth of another person with—
(i) any part of  the body  including the penis of such person; or
(ii) any object manipulated by such person,
except where such penetration is carried out for proper hygienic or medical
purposes;
(b) manipulates any part of the body of another person so as to cause
penetration of the vagina or anus or urethra or mouth of such person by any
part of the other person’s  body;
(c) engages in “cunnilingus” or “fellatio”,
under the circumstances falling under any of the following six descriptions:—
Firstly.—Against the other person’s will.
Secondly.— Without  the other person’s consent.
Thirdly .— With the other person’s consent when such consent has been
obtained by putting such other person or any person in whom  such other person  is
interested, in fear of death or of hurt.
Fourthly.—When the  person assaulted is a female, with her consent, when the
man knows that he is not her  husband  and that her consent is given because she
believes that he is another man to whom she is or believes to be lawfully married.
Fifthly.—With the consent of the other person  when, at the time of giving such
consent, by reason of unsoundness of mind or intoxication or the administration by
that person personally or through another of any stupefying or unwholesome
substance, the other person is unable to understand the nature and consequences of
that action to which such other person  gives consent.
Sixthly.—With or without the other person’s consent, when such other person
is under eighteen years of age.
Explanation I.—Penetration to any extent is “penetration” for the purposes of
this section.
Explanation II.—For the purposes of this section, “vagina” shall also include
labia majora.
Exception.—Sexual intercourse or sexual acts by a man with his own wife, the
wife not being under sixteen years of age, is not sexual assault.
 376. (1) Whoever, except in the cases provided for by sub-section (2), commits
sexual assault, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which shall not be less than seven years but which may extend to imprisonment for
life and shall also be liable to fine.
 (2) Whoever,—
(a) being a police officer, commits sexual assault—
(i) within the limits of the police station to which such police officer
is appointed; or
(ii) in the premises of any station house; or
(iii) on a  person in such police officer’s custody or in the custody
of a police officer subordinate to such police officer; or
(b) being a public servant, commits sexual assault on a person in such
public servant’s custody or in the custody of a public servant subordinate to
such public servant; or
Punishment
for sexual
assault.
Sexual assault.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
(c) being on the management or on the staff of a jail, remand home or
other place of custody established by or under any law for the time being in
force or of a women’s or children’s institution, commits sexual assault on any
inmate of such jail, remand home, place or institution; or
(d) being on the management or on the staff of a hospital, commits sexual
assault on a  person in that hospital; or
(e) being a relative of, or a person in a position of trust or authority
towards, the person  assaulted, commits sexual assault on such person; or
(f) commits sexual assault on a woman  knowing her to be pregnant; or
(g) commits sexual assault on a person  when such person is under
eighteen years of age; or
(h) being a member of a group of persons having a common intention and
in furtherance of that intention commits sexual assault; or
(i) being in a position of economic or social or political dominance,
commits sexual assault on a  person  under such dominance; or
(j) commits sexual assault on a person suffering from mental or physical
disability; or
(k) while committing sexual assault causes grievous bodily harm or maims
or disfigures or endangers the life of a person; or
(l) commits persistent sexual assault,
shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than
ten years but which may extend to  imprisonment for life and shall also be liable to
fine.
Explanation 1.—For the purposes of this sub-section,—
(a) “women’s or children’s institution” means an institution, whether called an
orphanage or a home for neglected women or children or a widow’s home or an
institution called by any other name, which is established and maintained for the
reception and care of women or children;
(b) “hospital” means the precincts of the hospital and includes the precincts of
any institution for the reception and treatment of persons during convalescence or of
persons requiring medical attention or rehabilitation.
Explanation 2.— Where a person is subjected to sexual assault by one or more
persons in a group of persons acting in furtherance of their common intention, each
of the persons in the group shall be deemed to have committed sexual assault within
the meaning of this sub-section.
376A. Whoever commits sexual assault on his own wife, who is living separately
under a decree of separation or under any custom or usage, without her consent, shall
be punished with imprisonment of either description, for a term which shall not be less
than two years but which may extend to seven years and shall also be liable to fine.
376B. Whoever,—
(a) being in a position of authority; or
(b) a public servant; or
(c) superintendent or manager of a jail, remand home or other place of
custody established by or under any law for the time being in force, or a women’s
or children’s institution; or
(d) being on the management of a hospital or being on the staff of a
hospital,
Sexual assault
by husband
upon his wife
during
separation.
Sexual
intercourse by
a person in
authority.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

5
takes advantage of the position and induces or seduces any person either in the first
mentioned person’s custody or under the first mentioned person’s charge or present
in the premises and has sexual intercourse with that person, such sexual intercourse
not amounting to the offence of sexual assault, shall be punished with imprisonment
of either description for a term which shall not be less than five years but which may
extend to ten years and shall also be liable to fine.
Explanation 1.—In this section, “sexual intercourse” shall mean any of the
acts mentioned in clauses (a) to (c) of section 375.
Explanation 2.—For the purposes of this section, Explanations I and II to
section 375 shall also be applicable.
Explanation 3.—“Superintendent”, in relation to a jail, remand home or other
place of custody or a women’s or children’s institution includes a person holding any
other office in such jail, remand home, place or institution by virtue of which such
person can exercise any authority or control over its inmates.
Explanation 4. —The expressions “hospital” and “women’s or children’s
institution” shall respectively have the same meaning as in Explanation 1 to sub-
section (2) of section 376.’.
6. In section 509 of the Penal Code, for the words “shall be punished with simple
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both”, the words
“shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and
shall also be liable to fine which may not be less than one thousand rupees” shall be
substituted.
CHAPTER III
A
MENDMENTS OF THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE, 1973
7. In section 154 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (hereafter in this Chapter
referred to as the Code of Criminal Procedure), after sub-section (1), the following proviso
shall be inserted, namely:—
“Provided that if the information is given by the woman against whom an
offence under section 354, section 375, section 376, section 376A, section 376B and
section 509 of the Indian Penal Code is alleged to have been committed or attempted,
then such information shall be recorded, as far as possible, by a woman police officer.”.
8.  In section 160 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, in sub-section (1), in the proviso,
for the words “under the age of fifteen years”, the words “under the age of eighteen years
or above the age of sixty-five years” shall be substituted.
9.  In section 161 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, after sub-section (3), the following
proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
“Provided that the statement of a woman against whom an offence under section
354, section 375, section 376, section 376A, section 376B and section 509 of the
Indian Penal Code is alleged to have been committed or attempted shall be recorded,
as far as possible, by a woman police officer.”.
10.  In section 273 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, before the Explanation, the
following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
“Provided that where the evidence of a person below the age of eighteen years
who is alleged to have been subjected to sexual assault or any other sexual offence,
is to be recorded, the court may take appropriate measures to ensure that such person
is not confronted by the accused while at the same time ensuring the right of cross-
examination of the accused.”.
11.  In section 327 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, in sub-section (2), for the words,
figures and letters “trial of rape or an offence under section 376, section 376A, section 376B,
section 376C or section 376D of the Indian Penal Code”, the words, figures and letters "trial
Amendment
of section
509.
Amendment
of section
154.
45 of 1860.
Amendment
of section
160.
Amendment
of section
161.
45 of 1860.
Amendment
of section
273.
2 of 1974.
Amendment
of section
327.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

6
of sexual assault or an offence under section 376, section 376A or section 376B of the Indian
Penal Code" shall be substituted.
12. In the First Schedule to the Code of Criminal Procedure, under the heading—
“I.—OFFENCES UNDER THE INDIAN PENAL CODE”,—
(a) after the entries relating to section 166, the following entries shall be
inserted, namely:—
12 3 4 5 6
“166A Public Imprison- Non- Bailable. Magistrate
servant ment for cognizable. of the first
disobeying one year, class.”;
direction or fine, or
under law. with both.
(b) after the entries relating to section 326, the following entries shall be
inserted, namely:—
12 3 4 5 6
“326A Hurt Imprisonment Cognizable. Non- Court of
by thro- for not less than bailable. Session.
wing or ten years or
admini- imprisonment
stering for life and fine
acid. of rupees ten lakh.
326B Attempt Imprisonment Cognizable. Non- Court of
to throw or for five years bailable. Session.’’;
administer but which may
acid. extend to seven
years and fine.
(c) in the entries relating to section 354, in column 3, for the words
“imprisonment for two years, or fine, or both” the words “imprisonment of
either description for a term of one year which may extend to five years and fine
of rupees ten thousand” shall be substituted;
(d) for the entries relating to sections 376, 376A, 376B, 376C and 376D,
the following entries shall be substituted, namely:—
12 3 4 5 6
“376 (1) Sexual Imprisonment Cognizable. Non- Court of
assault. for life or bailable. Session.
imprisonment
for not less than
seven years and
fine.
(2) Sexual Imprisonment Co gnizable. Non- Court of
assault by for life or bailable. Session.
a police rigorous
officer or imprisonment
by a public for not less than
servant or ten years and
by a person fine.
being on the
Amendment
of First
Schedule. 45 of 1860.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
45 of 1860.

7
management
or on the
staff of a jail,
remand home
or other place
of custody or
women’s or
children’s
institution or
by a person on
the management
or on the staff
of a hospital,
and sexual
assault committed
by a person in
a position of
trust or authority
towards the
person assaulted
or by a near
relative of the
person assaulted.
376A Sexual assault Imprisonment Cognizable Non- Court of
by the husband for not less than (but only on bailable. Session.
upon his wife two years extendable the complaint
during separation. to seven years of the victim).
and fine.
376B Sexual Imprisonment Cognizable. Non- Court of
intercourse by for not less than bailable. Session.”;
a person in five years extendable
authority. to ten years and fine.
(e) in the entry relating to section 509, in column 3, for the words “Simple
imprisonment for one year, or fine, or both,” the words “Simple imprisonment
for three years and fine of rupees ten thousand” shall be substituted.
CHAPTER IV
A
MENDMENTS OF THE INDIAN EVIDENCE ACT, 1872
13.  After section 53 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (hereafter in this Chapter
referred to as the Evidence Act), the following section shall be inserted, namely:—
“53A. In a prosecution for an offence under section 376 or section 376A or
section 376B of the Indian Penal Code or for attempt to commit any such offence,
where the question of consent is in issue, evidence of the character of the victim or of
his or her previous sexual experience with any person shall not be relevant on the
issue of such consent or the quality of consent.".
14.  For section 114A of the Evidence Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
Insertion of
new section
53A.
Evidence of
character or
previous
sexual
experience
not relevant
in certain
cases.
1 of 1872.
45 of 1860.
12 3 4 5 6
Substitution of
new section
for section
114A.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

8
‘114A. In a prosecution for sexual assault under clause ( a) or clause ( b) or
clause (c) or clause (d) or clause (e) or clause (g) or clause (h) or clause (i) or clause
(j) or clause (k) or clause (l) of sub-section (2) of section 376 of the Indian Penal Code,
where sexual intercourse by the accused is proved and the question is whether it was
without the consent of the other person alleged to have been sexually assaulted and
such other person states in that person’s evidence before the court that she or he did
not consent, the court shall presume that she or he did not consent.
Explanation.—In this section “sexual intercourse” shall mean any of the acts
mentioned in clauses (a)  to (c) of section 375 of the Indian Penal Code.’.
15. In section 146 of the Evidence Act, for the proviso, the following proviso shall be
substituted, namely:—
“Provided that in a prosecution for an offence under section 376 or section
376A or section 376B of the Indian Penal Code or for attempt to commit any such
offence, where the question of consent is in issue, it shall not be permissible to
adduce evidence or to put questions in the cross-examination of the victim as to his
or her general immoral character, or as to his or her previous sexual experience with
any person for proving such consent or the quality of consent.”.
Presumption
as to the
absence of
consent in
certain
prosecution
for sexual
assault.
Amendment
of section
146.
45 of 1860.
45 of 1860.
45 of 1860.
5
10
15

9
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
On the basis of the recommendations of the Law Commission of India in its One
Hundred Seventy Second report on 'Review of Rape Laws' as well as the recommendations
of the National Commission for Women for providing stringent punishment for the offence
of rape, a High Power Committee was constituted consisting of the representatives of the
Ministry of Women and Child Development, Ministry of Law and Justice, National
Commission for Women, Law Commission of India and the Ministry of Home Affairs to
examine the matter considering the suggestions of various quarters on the subject. The
Committee submitted its report along with the draft Criminal Law (Amendment) Bill, 2011 and
recommended to the Government for its enactment. The draft Bill was further examined by
the Government.
2. The Criminal Law (Amendment) Bill, 2012 seeks to amend the Indian Penal Code,
1860, the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 and the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, inter alia, so
as to—
(a) substitute sections 375, 376, 376A and 376B by replacing the existing sections
375, 376, 376A, 376B, 376C and 376D of the Indian Penal Code, and replacing the word
'rape' wherever it occurs by the words 'sexual assault', to make the offence of sexual
assault gender neutral and also widening the scope of the offence of sexual assault;
(b) include sections 326A and 326B in the Indian Penal Code to make acid attack
a specific offence;
(c) enhance the punishment under sections 354 and 509 of the Indian Penal
Code, making the offence more stringent;
(d) amend sections 154, 160 and 161 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 for
providing women and male person under the age of eighteen years or above the age of
sixty-five years more protections;
(e) amend the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 by way of inserting a new section 53A
wherein evidence of the character of the victim or of his or her previous sexual experience
shall not be relevant or questioned.
3. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; SUSHIL KUMAR SHINDE
The 19th October,  2012.

10
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE INDIAN PENAL CODE
(45 OF 1860)
*                        *                    *                      *                    *
354. Whoever assaults or uses criminal force to any woman, intending to outrage or knowing
it to be likely that  he will thereby outrage her modesty, shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
*                        *                     *                      *                    *
Sexual offences
375. A man is said to commit  “rape”  who, except in the case hereinafter excepted, has
sexual intercourse with a woman under circumstances falling under any of the six following
descriptions:—
First.—Against her will.
Secondly.—Without her consent.
Thirdly.—With her consent, when her consent has been obtained by putting
her or any person in  whom she is interested in fear of death or of hurt.
Fourthly.—With her consent, when the man knows that he is not her husband,
and that her consent is given because she believes that he is another man to whom she
is or believes herself to be lawfully married.
Fifthly.—With her consent, when,  at the time of giving such consent, by reason
of unsoundness of mind or intoxication or the administration by him personally or
through another of any stupefying or unwholesome substance, she is unable to un-
derstand the nature and consequences of that to whom she gives consent.
Sixthly.—With or without her consent, when she is under sixteen years of age.
Explanation .—Penetration is sufficient to constitute the sexual intercourse
necessary to the offence of rape.
Exception.—Sexual intercourse by a man with his own wife, the wife not being under
fifteen years of age, is not rape.
376. (1) Whoever, except in the cases provided for by sub-section (2), commits rape
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not be less
than seven years but which may be for life or for a term which may extend to ten years and
shall also be liable to fine unless the woman raped is his own wife and is not under twelve
years of age, in which case, he shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for
a term which may extend to two years or with fine or with both:
Provided that the court may, for adequate and special reasons to be mentioned in the
judgment, impose a sentence of imprisonment for a term of less than seven years.
(2) Whoever,—
(a) being a police officer commits rape—
(i) within the limits of the police station to which he is appointed; or
(ii) in the premises of any station house whether or not situated in the
police station to which he is appointed; or
Punishment
for rape.
Rape.
Assault or
criminal force
to Woman
with intent to
outrage her
modesty.

11
(iii) on a woman in his custody or in the custody of a police officer subor-
dinate to him; or
(b) being a public servant, takes advantage of his official position and commits
rape on a woman in his custody as such public servant or in the custody of a public
servant subordinate to him; or
(c) being on the  management or on the staff of a jail, remand home or other place
of custody established by or under any law for the time being in force or of a women’s
or children’s institution takes advantage of his official position and commits rape on
any inmate of such jail, remand home, place or institution; or
(d) being on the management or on the staff of a hospital, takes advantage of his
official position and commits rape on a woman in that hospital; or
(e) commits rape on a woman knowing her to be pregnant; or
(f) commits rape on a woman when she is under twelve years of age; or
(g) commits gang rape,
shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than ten
years but which may be for life and shall also be liable to fine:
Provided that the court may, for adequate and special reasons to be mentioned in the
judgment, impose a sentence of imprisonment of either description for a term of less than ten
years.
Explanation 1.—Where a woman is raped by one or more in a group of persons acting
in furtherance of their common intention, each of the persons shall be deemed to have
committed gang rape within the meaning of this sub-section.
Explanation 2.—“women’s or children’s institution” means an institution, whether
called an orphanage or a home for neglected women or children or a widows’ home or by any
other name, which is established and maintained for the reception and care of women or
children.
Explanation 3. —“hospital” means the precincts of the hospital and includes the
precincts of any institution for the reception and treatment of persons during convalescence
or of persons requiring medical attention or rehabilitation.
376A. Whoever has sexual intercourse with his own wife, who is living separately
from him under a decree of separation or under any custom or usage without her consent
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two
years and shall also be liable to fine.
376B. Whoever, being a public servant, takes advantage of his official position and
induces or seduces, any woman, who is in his custody as such public servant or in the
custody of a public servant subordinate to him, to have sexual intercourse with him, such
sexual intercourse not amounting to the offence of rape, shall be punished with imprison-
ment of either description for a term which may extend to five years and shall also be liable to
fine.
376C. Whoever, being the superintendent or manager of a jail, remand home or other
place of custody established by or under any law for the time being in force or of a women’s
or children’s institution takes advantage of his official position and induces or seduces any
female inmate of such jail, remand home, place or institution to have sexual intercourse with
him, such sexual intercourse not amounting to the offence of rape, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to five years and shall also be
liable to fine.
Explanation 1.—“superintendent” in relation to a jail, remand home or other place of
custody or a women’s or children’s institution includes a person holding any other office in
such jail, remand home, place or institution by virtue of which he can exercise any authority
or control over its inmates.
Intercourse by
a man with his
wife during
separation.
Intercourse
by public ser-
vant with
woman in his
custody.
Intercourse by
superintendent
of jail, remand
home, etc.

12
Explanation 2.—The expression “women’s or children’s institution” shall have the
same meaning as in Explanation 2 to sub-section (2) of section 376.
376D. Whoever, being on the management of a hospital or being on the staff of a
hospital takes advantage of his position and has sexual intercourse with any woman in that
hospital, such sexual intercourse not amounting to the offence of rape, shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to five years and shall
also be liable to fine.
Explanation .—The expression “hospital” shall have the same meaning as in
Explanation 3 to sub-section (2) of section 376.
* * * * *
509. Whoever, intending to insult the modesty of any woman, utters any word, makes
any sound or gesture, or exhibits any object, intending that such word or sound shall be
heard, or that such gesture or object shall be seen, by such woman, or intrudes upon the
privacy of such woman, shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may
extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.
* * * * *
————
E
XTRACTS FROM THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE, 1973
(2 OF 1974)
*                        *                    *                      *                    *
CHAPTER XII
INFORMATION TO THE POLICE AND THEIR POWERS TO INVESTIGA TE
154.  (1) Every information relating to the commission of a cognizable offence, if given
orally to an officer in charge of a police station, shall be reduced to writing by him or under
his direction, and be read over to the informant; and every such information, whether given
in writing or reduced to writing as aforeaid, shall be signed by the person giving it, and the
substance thereof shall be entered in a book to be kept by such officer in such form as the
State Government may prescribe in this behalf.
* * * * *
160.  (1) Any police officer, making an investigation under this Chapter may, by order
in writing, require the attendance before himself of any person being within the limits of his
own or any adjoining station who, from the information given or otherwise, appears to be
acquainted with the facts and circumstances of the case; and such person shall attend as so
required:
Provided that no male person under the age of fifteen years or woman shall be required
to attend at any place other than the place in which such male person or woman resides.
* * * * *
161. (1)* * * *  *
(3) The police officer may reduce into writing any statement made to him in the course
of an examination under this section; and if he does so, he shall make a separate and true
record of the statement of each such person whose statement he records.
* * * * *
273. Except as otherwise expressly provided, all evidence taken in the course of the
trial or other proceeding shall be taken in the presence of the accused, or, when his personal
attendance is dispensed with, in the presence of his pleader.
Explanation.—In this section, "accused" includes a person in relation to whom any
proceeding under Chapter VIII has been commenced under this Code.
* * * * *
Word, gesture
or act intended
to insult the
modesty of a
woman.
Information
in cognizable
cases.
Police
officer’s
power to
require
attendance of
witnesses.
Evidence to be
taken in
presence of
accused.
Examination
of witnesses by
police.
Intercourse by
any member of
the manage-
ment or staff
of a hospital
with any
woman in that
hospital.

13
327. (1) * * * * *
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the inquiry into and trial of
rape or an offence under section 376, section 376A, section 376B, section 376C or section
376D of the Indian Penal Code shall be conducted in camera:
Provided that the presiding judge may, if he thinks fit, or on an application made by
either of the parties, allow any particular person to have access to, or be or remain in, the
room or building used by the court.
* * * * *
Court to be
open.
45 of 1860.

14
THE FIRST SCHEDULE
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCES
* * * * *
I.—OFFENCES UNDER THE INDIAN PENAL CODE
Section           Offence      Punishment Cognizable Bailable or By what Court
or non- non-bailable triable
cognizable
12 3 4 5 6
*****
354 Assault or use of criminal Imprisonment Cognizable Bailable Any
force to a woman with for 2 years, or Magistrate.
intent to outrage her fine, or both.
modesty.
*****
376 Rape Imprisonment for life Cognizable Non- Court of
or imprisonment for Bailable Session.
ten years and fine.
Intercourse by a man with Imprisonment for two Non- Bailable Ditto.
his wife not being under years or fine or both. cognizable
twelve years of age.
376A Intercourse by a man with Imprisonment for two Ditto. Ditto. Ditto.
his wife during separation. years and fine.
376B Intercourse by public Imprisonment for Ditto. Ditto.
servant with woman in his five years and fine.
custody.
376C Intercourse by super- Ditto. Ditto. Ditto. Ditto.
intendent of jail, remand
home, etc.
376D Intercourse by manager, Ditto. Ditto. Ditto. Ditto.
etc., of a hospital with
any woman in that hospital.
*****
509 Uttering any word or Simple Cognizable Bailable. Any
making  any gesture imprisonment Magistrate.
intended to insult for 1 year, or
the modesty of a fine, or both.
woman, etc.
*****
Cognizable
(but no arrest
shall be made
without a
warrant or
without an
order of a
Magistrate).

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE  INDIAN EVIDENCE ACT, 1872
(1 OF 1872)
*****
114A . In a prosecution for rape under clause (a) or clause (b) or clause (c) or clause (d)
or clause (e) or clause (g) of sub-section (2) of section 376 of the Indian Penal Code, where
sexual intercourse by the accused is proved and the question is whether it was without the
consent of the woman alleged to have been raped and she states in her evidence before the
Court that she did not consent, the Court shall presume that she did not consent.
*****
146.  When a witness is cross-examined, he may, in addition to the questions herein-
before referred to, be asked any questions which tend—
(1) to test his veracity,
(2) to discover who he is and what is his position in life, or
(3) to shake his credit, by injuring his character, although the answer to such
questions might tend directly or indirectly to criminate him or might expose or tend
directly or indirectly to expose him to a penalty or forfeiture :
Provided that in a prosecution for rape or attempt to commit rape, it shall not be
permissible to put questions in the cross-examination of the prosecutrix as to her
general immoral character.
*****
Questions
lawful in
cross-
examina-
tion.
Presumption
as to absence
of consent in
certain pros-
ecutions for
rape.
45 of 1860.
15

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973
 and the Indian Evidence Act, 1872.
————
(Shri Sushil Kumar Shinde, Minister of  Home Affairs)
GMGIPMRND—3490LS(S3)—26-11-2012.