3801 1972. 
As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA ON 
' 7NOV,.. 
Bill No. I" cd 1188 
TIU; COAL MINES NATIONALISATION LAWS (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 1985 
• 
BILL 
jurthe,· to (trttf!nd the Coking Coal Mines (Nationalisa.tion) Act, 1972 an" 
the Coal Mines (Nationalisation) Act, 1973. 
Bli: it enacted by Parliament i~ the Thirty-seventh Year of the 
Pepuolic of India as follows:-
: 1. (1) This Act may be called the Coal Mines Nationalisation Laws Short 
(~endment) Act, 1986. title and 
5 (2) Save as otherwise expressly provided, the amendments to the 
OClking Coal Mines (Nationalisation) Act, 1972 shall be deemed to h~ve 
come into force on the 1st day of May, 1972 and the amendments to 
the Coal Mines (Nationalisation) Act, 1973 shall be deemed to have 
t"Ome into force on the 1st day of May, 1973, and the remaining provisions 
10 of this Act shall be deemed to have come, into force on the 7th day of 
October, 1986. 
2. (1) In section 4 of th.e C«;Iking Co~l Mines (Nati«;lnali~ation) Ad, 
IP~ (hereinafter referred to as the Coking Coal Act), sub-section (2) 
shall be omitted and shall be deemed to have been omitted with ef!eet . ,. . 
J.1 f~om t.be 1st day of June, 19"l2. 
I. 
(2) The omission of sub-section (2) of section ·4 of the Coking Coal 
Act by tlub-section (1) of this seetlon shall not dect the previous opera-
tion. of the provisions: of the said sub-section (2) or anything duly done 
or suffered thereunder. 
3. In IeCtion 6 of the Cokin! Coal _~ct,­
(a) in sub-section (1) ,-
(i) for the wor"! "as if ~ minin~ leale", the words "as it • 
fresh mining lease" shall be substituted: 
commence.. 
mel\t. 
A~ 
8Ie.u.ot 
se., •. 

Amend-
ment of 
section 
10, 
Amend-
mentor 
section 
11, 
Subetitu. 
tion of 
new sec-
tion for 
section 1'1. 
Liability 
of d1fteer 
or other 
emPloy" 
of a cok-
ingcoal 
mine or 
aoke o't'en 
plant for 
transfer 
to any 
other_ 
in, cea1. 
mID •• 
Coke 0\f8 
, ..... '" 
• 2 
(ii) "for the WO~I "being the entire period", the warch ".haU 
be the mutm\UD period" Ihall be sub.tituted; 
(b) in sub-section (Z), tb. worda II, on the same term. and condi-
tions on which til. 1 ... wu held on the appointed day," shall be 
omitted. 5 
4. Section 10 of the Coking Coal Act shall be renumbered as sub-
section (1) thereof, and after sub-section (1) as so renumbered, the 
following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-
"(2) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the 
amount specified in the fifth column of the First Schedule against 10 
any coking coal mine or group of coking coal mines specified in the 
second column of the said Schedule and required to be given by the 
Central Government to its owner under sub-section (1) shall be 
deemed to include and deemed always to have included, the amount 
required to be paid to such owner in respect of all coal in stock or ,~ 
other assets referred to in clause (j) of section 3 on the date imme-
diately before the appointed day and no further amount shall be 
payable to the owner in respect of such coal or other assets.", 
5. Section 11 of the Coking Coal Act shall be renumbered as sub-
section (1) thereof, and after sub-section (1) as so re-numbered. the gO 
following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-
"(2) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the 
amount specified in the fifth column of the Second Schedule against 
any coke oven plant specified in the second column of the said 
Sch~du]e and required to be given bv the Central Government to g5 
,ts owner under sub-section (1) shall be deemed to includ'!, and 
deemed always to have included, the amount required to be paid 
to such owner in respect of all coke in stock Or other assets re-
ferred to in clause (b) of section 3 on the date immediately bef('lre 
the appointed day and no further a.mount shall De payable Ie the 30 
OWner in respect of such coke Or other assets.". 
8, For section 17 of the Coking Coal Act, the fol1owing section shall 
be substituted, namely:- ' 
"17, Notwithstandin~ anvthtng eontained in the Industrial l)Is-
putes Act. 1947 or in any other law for the time being in force, the 35 It oC lM'r. 
services of any offteer or other emnlovee emnloved 'in a colCtnl!' coal 
m;ne or coke oven plant shall b .. Usble to be trRnsfeTTed to anv other 
rn1d,,~ coal mine or coke oven niant Rnd siich fT~"qfp.r qhRll not 
,."tttle such offtcer or other emnlovp", to anv C'omnensRtion un~er 
this Act or any other law for the time being in force and no su~h ~ 
claim shall be entertained by any eo~, tribun~ or otber _ytl\orIty.n, 

5 
10 
15 
sao 
35 
, 
7. In section 21 of the CokiDa Coal Act,-. 
(a) in sub-section (2), the words, figures and letters ", and simple 
interest at the rate of four per cent. per annum on such amount for 
the period commencing on the 1st day of April, 1973 and ending on 
the date of payment of such amount to the Commissioner" shall be 
inserted at the end; 
(b) in sub-section (5), the words, brackets and figure "and shall 
also be payable to the Commissioner in addition to the sum referred 
to in sub-section (1)" shall be inserted at the end. 
8. In section 22 of the Coking Coal Act,-
(a) for sub-section (4), thlt following sub-section shall be s~b. 
stituted, namely:- .. 
"(4) The liabilities of the coking coal mine or the coke oven 
plant (not being liabilities arising out of advances made by the 
Central Government or the Government company), which could 
not be discharged by the appointed day, may be discharged by 
the Central Government or the Government company up to the 
specified date out of the realisations effected before or after the 
appointed day or out of advances or borrowings made up to the 
specified date and every payment so made shall be included in 
the statement of accounts as on the date immediately before the 
appointed day indicating therein the period in relation to which 
the payments were made and the payments so made shall not be 
called ill question in any court: 
Provided that the liabilities in relation to the period prior to 
the appointed day, which have not been discharged on or before 
the specified date, shall be the liabilities of the owner of the 
coking coal mine or the coke oven plant, as the case may be."; 
(b) after sub-section (7), the follOWing sub-section and E:.c[Jlana~ 
tion shall be inserted, namely:-
• (8) The statement of accounts audited under sub-section 
(6) shall, unless the contrary is proved-, be conclusive proof in 
respect of every matter entered therein. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section, "statement 
of accounts" means a statement in the form of receipts and 
payments, and does not include any statement that may be 
prepared as a result of the closing and balancing of the books for 
the preparation of the profit and loss account and balance-sheet 
or any statement prepared in accordance with the normal 
commercial practice.'. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
21. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
22. 
t. For HCtion 25 of the Coldn, eo.I Aet, the following section shall Sublltitu. 
be substituted, RameI7:- tion ot 
new sec. 
tion for 
RCUOI\ 
25. 
'25. Any amount in excess of payments over receipts in the 
ltatemet of accounts prepared under section 22 shall be deemed to 
be aD amount· advanced by the Central Government or the Custo~ 
Recovery 
of exceu 
payment. 

l'menc:\-
..... t .... II,! 
.. nt of 
aecUon 
H. 
Amend-
ment of 
aecQen 3. 
dian, as the case may be, for the, n't19.nagement of a coking coal 'minI!! 
or a coke oven plant during the period in which the management of 
such mine or plant remained vested in the Central Government and 
the Central Governme!lt may make a claim to the Commissioner 
for such excess payment and such claim shall have priority 9:v~r the 5 
claims of all other unsc';ured creditors of the coking coal mine or 
coke oven plant. 
Exp.anation.-Iu th:::; section, "Custodian" means the Custodian 
appointed under the C,)king Coal Mines (Emergency Provisions) 
ACL, 1971.'. 10 M otlW11. 
10. In section 26 of the Coking Coal Act, after sub-section (2) and 
befote the EXplanation .. the following iub-section shall be inserted • 
namely:-
"(3) Where the amount specified in the fifth column of the First 
S~edule is relatdble to a group of coking coal mines, the Commis- 15 
sioner shall have power to apportion such amount among the owners 
of such grouP. and.in making such apportionment, the Commissioner 
shall have regard to the highest annual production in the coking coal 
mine during the three years immediately preceding the appointed 
day_". :zo 
11. (11 In section '3 of the Coal Mines (Nationallsation) Act, 1973 
(hereinafter referred to as the Coal Mines Act) ,-
2ft of ll'll. 
(a) sub-section (2) shall be omitted, and shall be deemed to 
have been omitted with effect from the 1st day of June, 1973; 
(b) in sub-sectL'l1 (4), the words, brackets and figures ", not- ~5 
Withstanding anything contained in SUb-section (2), or in the prOvi!50 
to sub-5eCtion (.1) of section 3 of the Coal Mines (Taking Over of 
Management) Act, 1973," .hellI be omitted; 
(c) after sub-sect1on (4), the following sub-section shall be 
1naer't~d, namely:-
"(5) If, aftel' ~ne apPointed day, the Central Government i. 
satilfted, whether from any information received by it or other-
Wlee, that there haa been any error, omission or misdescriptiOD 
~o 
is ftlaUOJl to the particulars of a coal mine included in the Sche-
~ 01' tGe IMIIIM aAd addNu of the owner of any such coal mine, 35 
it may, by notification, con-ect such error, omission or misdes- ~. 
crlption and on the issue of such notification, the relevant entrlet 
in the Schedule shall be, and shall be deemed always to have 
...., torrected ,aecordiDSly: 
Pnftiec;t Ulat DO, aueh correction in 'relation to the ownership 40 
of a eoal mine shall be made where such ().,.,nersbtpfs in dispute .. •. 
. . (a) The omission of sub-section (2) of section 3 of the Coal Mines Act 
..,. claw.. (4) 01 lu~ection (1) of this 8ection shal,1~ot affect the pre-
viwe operation of the proviaiol18 of the said sub:section (2) or anythin, 
duly done or .offered thereundep. 
12. In ,section 4 of the Coal Mines Act.-
(4) insub~seetioD (l) ,-
(i) for the words ','as If rt mIn,ine l~ase" the words "as if & 
'fresh iriiniiig lease" sJ5all h" ;llh~tnuted; , .'. I . 
4,~ 
15 of 1971 
.1\ 

14 CIi IM7. 
, ~ 
(it')fbr& ~. *tbW-ez\_'~' .. ''Ibt'a ¥the IBdi-
mum periOtf··~ be atibStittttea; 
(b) in sub-section (2). the words ", on the lame terms and cendi-
tions on which the leue was held, inunediataly Defore the appolD~d 
5 day," shall be owtted. 
13. Section 8 of the coal Mine' Aetshan be tenumbet'ed tis sub-section 
(1) thereof, and after sub-section (1) as so renumbered, .~~ following 
8ub1eclion shall be inserted. namely:-
"(2) For the removal of doubt. it la hereby ~Clafed that the 
amount $pecified in tIle fifth column 6f tlle Scliedu1eaiiiI'iit any coal 
mine or group of coal mines apecifted in the &eCoid" cotumn of the 
did Schedule and requiTed to be given by the ·c.ntrIl Ocnernmeni to 
its owner under sub~ection(l), shall be deemed 110 melude, and 
deemed always to have included, the amounts requirea to be paid to 
"uch owner in respe'rt of all coal in stock or other 'assets referred to 
in clause (h) of section. 2 'on the date finmed.iately before the appoint-
ed day and no further amount shall be payable to the owner in 
respect of tUeb coal or ottmr~a8lets.". 
14. For section 14 of the Coal Mines Act, the fonowing section shall 
.0 be .ubstituted, namely;-
"14. Notwithstanding anything contained tn the IndUstrial Dis-
pute. Act, IM7, or in any other law for the time being'in force, the 
services of any officer or other employee employed in a coal mine 
shall be liable to be transferred to any other coal mine and such 
tran!'lfer shall not entitle such officer or other employee to any com-
pensation under this Act or any other law for the time being in force 
and no such claim .hall be entertained by 8kJ court, tribunal or other 
authority!'. 
15. In section 18 of the Coal'Mines Aet __ 
(a) in sUb-Section (2), tlie 'Words figiires and leiters .. , and simple 
inte1"eStat the rate' 6f· tour per cent,· per annUin on such amount tor 
the periOd eoUiiIiencli1g On tb'~ 1st "etay of JUlY, 1'075 and ending on 
the cIIdIe of payment of l'bchamouflt to the ComIniuioner" ahall be 
inaerted at the end; 
(ll) in s11b.:sectf6h (5), tl1e'wo~, brac1i:ets and' figure "and shall 
alSo be PayaMe'to the C6ifunii~{Oiier m addition to the .um referred 
to in sUb-section (1) t, ahall be inserted at the end. 
It. In s~ction 19 Of the Coal'truies Act-" 
(a) for sub-aeetion (4), the tollowing .,,~ Ihall lJe'tltl'btti-
tuted, namely: - . 
• t (4) The liabiliiiel Of the cod m.m. (DOt lMfbtg lta'bllftfa. 
.~g out of advance. made by the Central Government or the 
GoverriiIlent eompany), which eould nat he ditc:harged by the 
apPotiited. day, may s. dilcharjed • tb.e C..I Government or 
Amenc!-
ment of 
lec:t1on 10 
3ubatlltu-
tien of 
neweec-
tion lor 
aecWm 
14. 
Lial;!Wty 
of oaleer 
or otDiiw 
employee 
of aeoal 
mine lor 
transfer 
to any 
, other 
Cloal 
arlU. 
~ 
~t~'t 
~ 
~i1. 

8u.bltitv.-
tio of .1;1 new_ 
tion for 
ACtion 
25. 
Becove17 
of exceas 
payments 
macleby 
c.tral 
Govern-
mentor 
CustodiIe 
, 
tho Go~ent·cQmpany up to the specified date out of the reaU-
lIations effected before or after the appointed duy or out of ad-
vances or bOl'rowings made up to the specliie;:J. l.ate and every 
payment so made shall be included. in the statement of accounts 
as on the date immediately ·before the appointed day indicatina 5 
therein the period in relation to which the payments were made 
and the paymenta so made shall not be called in question in any 
court:. 
Provided that the liabilities in relation to the period prior to 
the appointed day, which have not been discharged on or before 10 
the specified date, shall be the liabilities of the owner of the coal 
mine."j 
(b) after sub-section (7), the followine sub-section and Explana-
tion shall be inaerted, namely:-
'(8) The .tatement of accounts audited under sub-section (6) 15 
shall, unless the contrary is proved, be conclusive proof in resM 
pect of every matter entered therein. 
ExpZanation.-For the purposes of this section, "statement 
of accounts" means a statement in the form of receipts and pay~ 
ments, and does not include any statement that may be prepared 110 
as a result of the closing and balancini of the books for the p~ 
paration of the prClfit and loss account and balance-sheet Or any 
statement prepared in accordance with the normal commercial 
practice.' • 
17. For section 25 of the Coal Mines Ad, the following ~ection shan 8S 
be substituted, namely:-
'25. Any amount in excess of payments over receipts in the state-
ment of accounts prepared under section 19 shall be deemed to be 
an amount advanced by the Central Government or the Custodian, 
as the case may be, for the management of a coal mine during the So 
period in which the management of such coal mine remained vested 
in the Central Government and the Central Government may make 
a claim to the Commissioner for such excess payment and such claim 
shall have pnority over the claims of all other unsecured creditors 
of the coal mine, including those referred to in sub-section (2) of 35 
section 22-
ExpZanation.-In this section, "Custodian" means the Custodian 
appointed under the Coal Mines (Taking Over of Management) Act, 
1973.'. 11 of 19'11. 
18. In section 26 of the Coal Mines Act, after sub-section 
before the Explanation, the following sUb-section shall be 
(5) and 40 " 
inserted, 
namely:- .. . 
co (6) Where the amount specified in the fifth cqlumn of the 
Schedule" is relatable to a groUD of coal mines, the Commissioner 
shall have power to apportion such amount among the owners of 4' 
such group, and in makine such. apportionment, the Commissioner 

10 
15 
SlO 
35 
45 
7 
.. shall have regard t8 the htghelt annual production in the coal mine . 
during the three yean immediAtely pucedine the appoidtea day.". 
19. Notwithstanding any judgment, decree, order or· direction of VaKda. 
any court to the contrary- tiaD. 
(a) every amount paid to the owner of every coking coal mine 
or group of coking coal mines under section 10, or of every coke 
oven plant under section 11, of the Coking Coal Act, or to the owner 
of every (;QuI mine or group of coal mines under section 8 of the 
Coal Mines Act (hereafter in either caSe referred to as the owner). 
shall he deemed to include and be deemed always to have included, 
the amounts required to be paid to the owner in respect of the coal 
. in stock or other assets, coke in stock or other assets, referred to In 
clause (j), or clause (b) of section 3 of the Coking Coal Act or, as 
the case may be, coal in stock or other assets referred to in clause 
(h) of section 2 of the Coal Mines Act, on the date immediately be-
fore the apopinted day as if the provisions of section 10, or section 11 
of the Coking Coal Act or, as the case may be, section 8 of the Coal 
Mines Act, as amended by this Act, had been in force at all material 
times, and no such payment shall be called in question in any court 
on the ground that it had not included the value of such coal or coke 
or other assets; ,,, 
(b) every statement of accounts or supplementary statement of 
accounts prepared by the Central Government or the Government 
company under :-cction 22 of the Coking Coal Act or under section 19 
of the Coal Mines Act, shall be deemed to have been validly prepared 
as if the l,rovi;.ions of section 22 of the Coking Coal Act or, as the 
case may be, section 19 of the Coal Mines Act, as amended by this 
Act. h~d heen in force at aU material times, and no such sta~ 
ment of accounts or supplementary statement of accounts shall be 
callc.d in question in any court t)n the ground that it had not been 
prepared in accordance with the normal commercial practice or that 
any item has or has not been inc:1uded in such statement, 
and accordingly, no suit or other legal proceeding shall be maintained ef 
continued in any court,-
(i) for the recovery of any sum on the ground that the amount 
paid to the owner under section 10 or section 11 of the Coking Coal 
Act or under section 8 of the Coal Mines Act, does not include the 
amoun ts required to be paid in respect of all coal or coke in stoek er 
other assets referred to in clause (a); or 
(ii) for the recovery of any !.um as being the excess of realisa-
1ions over lbbilities on the ground that the statement of accounts 
IJr supplementary statement of accounts required to be prepared 
under section 22 of the Coking Cl)al Act or, as the case may be, 
section 19 of the Coal Mines Act, had not been prepared in accordance 
with the normal commercial practice or that any item has or has not 
been included in such statement. 
ExpZanation.-In this section,-
(a) "appointed day" meana,-
(i) in relation to the CpkiDg Coal .Act, the let day of Mlr. 
i972j and ' 

• 
(ii) _WMJ.~ w .. ~ ~"'.A~, ~ lit dp)" of ~.7t 
(b) "re~~ti9M" ~ "·UapW_~ h"", ~ ",m, meaninp as 
in ,ection 22 of the Cokine Coal Act or, u .~. <:~ .. may be, locti9" 
19 of the Coal Minea Act. 
fa. U) The C~l ¥i_ Nat4cma1i •• ijQP. x..WI (~nWnent) O"di. 
~, 1~, is ~rtI~Y ~. 
5 OrdiDuce 
7 of 1'16. 
(2) Notwithstanding .. u~h repeal, ~ything done or ~y action takeR 
und~r the Coking Coal Act or ~ Coal Min~ Act, as amended by the 10 
'~4 o.~~, ~ha.n be deeme(i t9 q,ave ~n d~ne or taken under· the 
CokiI\g Coal Act 9r, .. thJ c. ~ar bel ~ CQiJ }{1ne~ Act, I1J ameIJ~ed 
by tNt ~ 

STATEMENT OF OBJEcTS AND REAsoNS 
After the nationalisation ot coal mines in India under thtt Cokinl 
Coal Mines (Natlonalisation) Act, 11172. (Cokin, Coal Act) and the Cold 
Mines (Nationalisation) Act, 1973 (Coal Mines Act), certain Jud.icial 
llronouncements in regard to the interpretation of the provisions ot the 
said Acts necessItated a few amendments in the relevant provisioll& of 
those Acts. 1t was also found necessary to remove certain ambijUities 
and difficulties in implementing those provisions. The Coal Mines 
Nationalisation Laws (Amendment) Ord.inance, 1986 (7 of 1986) was 
thus promulgated by the President on the 7th October, 1986 to make 
certain amendments in the above two Acts. Some of the important 
amendments which the Ordinance proposed were as follows:-
ta) The definition of "mine" ill the Coking Coal Act and the l:oal 
Mines Act included all coal and coke belonemg to the owner of the 
mine whether in stock or in transit and all coal under prod·uction in 
a mine on a day immediately pnor to the date on which thecoa1 
mines were nationalised. Accordingly, the amounts specified in the 
Schedules to the two Acts included the value of the coke and cuaJ 
in stock lying at the mines at the time of nationalisation. Th~ 
Supreme Court, however, in a recent case, while agreeing with the 
contention that the coke and coal stocks lying at the mine vested 
in the Government as a result of nationalisation, took the view 
that the value of coke and coal stocks had to be taken into account 
for balancing the position of accounts as on the date immediately 
preceding the date of nationaiisation. This would have involved 
double payment of the aIDDunt in as much as the value of the cl)ke and 
coal stocks had already been included in the amounts mentioned jn 
the Schedules to the Acts against each coal mine. In order to make 
the intention clear, sections 10 and 22 of the Coking Coal Ak:t and 
sections 8 and 19 of the Coal Mines Act were amended, retrospectively' 
to remove any doubts in the matter and to clarify that the amounts 
specified in the Schedules to the relevant Acts shaU also 
be deemed to include the amounts required to be paid to the owner 
in respect of the stock of coke and coal or other assets referred to 
in the definition of "mine" in the relevant Acts. Necessary provi-
sion v~1idating the action taken under the two Acts wae also made. 
(b) With the commencement of the Coal Mines (Nationalisa-
tion) Amendment Act, 1976 on 29-4-1976, carrying on of coal 
mining operation or leasing for mining coal by any private party 
were ~rohibited. Thus, section 4 (2) of the Coking Coal Act and 
section ;-1 (2) of the Coal Mines Act became redundant and were 
omitted with effect from 29-4-1976, with a saving clause to protect 
action, if any, taken under the existing provisions. A provision for 
correc1.iun of an error, omission br mis-description was also .added 
to section 3 of the Coal Mines Act, on the lines ot a similar pro-
vision in the Coking Coal Act. 
9 

10 
(c) Section 25 of both the Acts was amended so as to clarity 
that any amount in excess of payment over receipts in the state-
ment of accounts prepared by the coal companies shall be deemed 
to be the amount advanced by the Central Government or the Cus-
todian. .' 
(d) Section 26 of b~.th the Acts was also amended to em-
pow~r th~ Commi~ioner of Paymentl$ to make apportionment of 
the amount ~~>ng tb.e vapous owners on t1:le basis of the highest 
anll1:la1 pr¢u.ctior;L in tbe r~levant coal mines during the last 3 
y~rs. i~~~i.a~elY px:eceding the appointed day. 
2. The Bill seeks to replace the above mentioned Ordinance. It also 
seeks to make certain further amendments of a clarificatory nature, 
which have been explained in the memorandum annexed to this Bill. 
NEW DELHI: VASANT SA THE. 
The 6th Nooember, 1986. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clauses 7 and 15 of the Bill, respectively, provide for tJle payment, 
by the Central Government, of simple interest at the rate of 4: per cent. 
per annum on the management period surplus amount, to the eX04~'" 
of the coal mines nationalised under the Coking Coal Act and the Coal 
Mines Act fcu- the period commencing ~mediately after the lpeclfted 
date viz., 1-4-1973 under section 22 (3) of the Coking Coal Act and 
1-7-1973 under se~tiori 19 of the Coal Mines A<!t to the date of payment of 
the said amount to the Commissioner. Expenditure on account of ~!lyment 
of intereSt under clauses 7 and 15 of the Bill, if enactid would Hkaiy to 
,_ ,I., • , ",'. • ~ 
be of the order of about rupees one crore. However, t;tte am punt is :not 
chargeable to the Consolidated Fund of India inasmuch as the Oovem'-
ment companies were managing the coal mines before nationalisation 
on behalf of the' Central Government and on nationalisatiOn, such cOa1 
mines vested in the Government companies who had to pay the manap. 
ment period surplus to the Commissioner of 'Payments immediately after 
the specified dates. As the ways and me,ans ~sition .9f the ~ow,mm~~~ 
cornpanies were not comfortable, the Government extended Nen-Plan sup-
port in the fo.rm of loan, a part of which was utilisecI for pa~~t of 
the management period surplus with simple int~t~st at the rate". ~ ~ ~r 
cent. to the Commissioner of Payments. Ali the Non-Plan loan is re-
payable to Government with intere.st, the question of outgo of funds 
from the Consolidated Fund of India does not arise. ' 
2. The Bill, if enacted and brought into op~r,~ion, would not involve 
any expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. . 
11 

MemorClndum. Ezplclin.in.g the Modific4tioft" contained in the Bill to replace 
t~ Coal Min.e, NCItioMtiIG.tion l"CIW8 (A'rMn.dm.~t) Ordin.cznce, 1988 .. 
The Coal Mine. Nationalisation Laws (Amendment) Bill, 1986 which 
aeeb to repeal and replace the Coal Mines Nationalisation Laws (Amend-
ment) Ordinance, 1986, proposes to make the following modifications, apart 
hmn modifications of consequential or drafting nature in the provisions 
contained in the said Ordinance, namely:-
(Vide clauses 2 and 11 of the Bill) 
(1) The amendments made to section 4 of the Coking Coal Act, and 
Section 3 of the Coal Mines Act are being made retrospective from 
1~19'72 and 1-6-1973 respectively instead of from 29-4-1976. Similarly, 
the amendments made by clauses 7 and 15 of the Bill are being made 
retrospective from 1-4-1973 and 1-7-1976 respectively, which are the 
specifted dates in the aforesaid Acts. 
(3) Clause 5 of the Bill proposes to insert a new sub-section in 
section 11 of the Coking Coal Act on the lines of sub-section (Z) of 
section 10 of that Act so as to avoid any possible litigation from the 
erstwhile owners of coke-oven Jllants on the ground that the value of 
coke had not been included in the amount of compensation paid to them. 
(3) Sections 21 (5) and 18 (5) of the Coking Coal Act and Coal Mines 
Act respectively are being amended to provide for the payment of 
interest on the amount of compensation aleo to the Commissioner (tnde 
clauses T and 15 of th4p BUl), 

64 of 1971. 
14 of 1947. 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS !-ROM THE COIONG COAL MINES (NATIONALlSA'l10N) ACT, 1972 
(38 or 1972) 
* • • • • 
4. (1) • • • * • 
(2) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that if, after the 
appointed day, any other coal mine is found., after an investigation made 
by the Coal Board, to contain coking coal, the provisions of the 
Coking Coal Mines (Emergency Provisions) Act, 1971, shall, until that 
mine is nationalised by an appropriate legislation, apply to such mine . 
• • • • • 
6. (1) Where the rights of an owner under any mining lease granted, 
or deemed to have been granted, in relation to a coking coal mine, by a 
State Government or any other person, vest in the Central Government 
under section 4, the Central Government shall, on and from the date of 
such vesting, be deemed to have become the lessee of -the State Govern-
ment or such other person, as the case may be, in relation to such coking 
coal mine as if a mining lease in relation to su~h coking coal mine had 
been granted to the Central Government under the Mineral Concession 
Rules. the period of such lease being the entire period for which such 
lease could have been granted by the State Government or such other 
person under those Rules and, thereupon, all the rights under such min-
ing lease. including surface, underground and other rights granted to the 
lessee shall be deemed to have been transferred to, and vest~d in, the 
Central Government. 
(~) On the expiry of the tenn of any lease. referred to in sub-section 
(1), such lease shall, if SO desired by the Central Government be renewed, 
on the same terms and conditions on which the lease was held on the 
appointed day, by the lessor for the maximum period for which such 
lease can be renewed under the Mineral Concession Rules . 
* • • • • • 
1'1. (1) Every person who is a workman within the meaning of the 
Industrial DisputeR Act, 1947, and has been, immediately before the ap-
pointed dav, in the employment of. a cokin~ coal mine or coke oven 
plant. shall become, on and from the appointed day. an employee of the 
Central Govemment. or, as the case may be: of the Government com-
pany in which the ri~ht, title and interest of such mine or plant have 
vested under this Act. and shall hold office or' service in the cokin~ eaal 
mine or coke oven plant. as the case may be. on the same terms and 
conditions and with the same riJthts to pension. In'atuitv and other 
matter!! as would have been admissible to him if the ri~hts in relation 
to such cokin~ coa1 mine or coke oven plant had not been transferred 
to. and vested in. the Central Government 01' Government company. 
as the case may be, and continue to de iO unless and until his employ-
13 
Acquisi· 
tion of 
riahts in 
coking coal 
mines. 
Central 
Govern-
ment to 
be the 
lessee of 
the State 
Govern-
ment. 
Employ-
ment of 
certain 
employees 
to COIl-
tinue. 

Payment 
by the 
Central 
Govern-
ment to 
the Com-
missions. 
State-
meat 01 
M:eOUDta 
mrela-
tioll to 
the period 
of manage-
mentby 
the Cen-
tralGov-
ernm8llt • 
.te. -
14 
ment in such coking coal mine or coke oven plant is duly terminated 
or until his remuneration, terms and conditions of employment are duly 
altered, by the Central Government or the Government company. 
(2) The Central Government or the Government company in which 
the right, title and interest in relation to a coking coal mine or coke 
oven plant have vested, may employ, on mutually acceptable terms and 
'conditions, any person who is not a workman within the meanlng of the 
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, and who has been, immediately before the 
appointed day, in the employment of a coking coal mine or coke oven 
plant, and on such employment the said person shall become an employee 
of the Central Government or the Government company, as the case 
may be. 
(3) Save as otherwise provided in SUb-sections (1) and (2), the ser-
vices of every person elll.llloyed by the owner or occupier of a coking 
ooal mine or coke oven plant before the appointed day shall stand 
terminated on and from the specifted date. \ 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in ~e Industrial Disputes 
Act, 1947, or in any other law for the time being in force. the transfer 
of the services of any officer or other employee f!'om a coking coal mine 
Ol' coke oven plant to any other coking coal mine Or coke oven p~8nt shall 
not entitle such officer or other employee to any compensation under 
this Act or any other law for the time being in force and no such claim 
shall be entertained by any court: tribunal Or other authority. 
(5) Where, under the terms of any contract of service or otherwise, 
any person whose se.rvice becomes terminated, or whose service hecomes 
transferred to the Central Government or a Government company by 
reason of the provisions of tms Act, is en\itled to any payment bv way 
of gratuity Or retirement benefit or for any leave not availed of, or any 
other benefits, such person may enforce his claim a!!ainst the owner of 
the coking coal mine or coke oven plant, as the caSe mav be, but not 
against the Central Government or the Government company . 
• • • • • • 
Zl. (1) • • • -. 
(2) In addition to the sum referred to in sub-section (1), the Central 
Government shall pay, in cash, to the Commissioner, such amount as may 
become due to the owner of a coking coal mine or coke oven plant in 
relation to the period during which the management of the coking coal 
mine or coke oven plant remained vested in the Central Government. 
• • • • • 
(5) Interest accruing on the amount standing to the creC3it of the 
llCccunt referred to in sub-sectlon (3) shall ensure to the benefit of -the 
owner of the coking coal mine or coke oven plant, as the case may be . 
• • • • • 
22. (1) • • • • • 
14 of 1947. 
14 of 1947. 

64 of 1971. 
.r 
15 of 19TJ. 
... 
IS of 1973. 
15 
(4) The liabilities of the coking coal mine or the coke oven plant 
(not being liabilities arising out of advances made by the Central Gov-
ernment or Government company), which could not be discharged by the 
appointed day, may be discharged by the Central Government or the 
Government company up to the specified date, and every payment made 
for the settlement with the owner shall be included in the statement of 
accounts as on the 30th day of April, 1972, indicating therein the period 
in relation to which the payments were made: 
Provided that the liabilities in relation to the period prior to the. 
appointed day, which have not been discharged on or before the specified 
date, shall be the liabilities of the owner of the coking coal mine or the 
coke oven plant, as the case may be . 
• • • • 
25. Every amount advanced by the Central Government or the Cus-
todian, as the case may be, for the management of a coking coal mine 
or coke oven plant shall be recovered from the income derived by such 
coking coal mine or coke oven plant in respect of the period during 
which the management of such mine or plant remained vested in the 
Central Government: 
Amount. 
advanced 
by the 
Central 
Govern-
mmt 
how to 
bere-
Provided that where such incorpe is insuffic,ient to meet in full the covered. 
total amount of the advances made by the Central Government or the 
Custodian for the management of the coking coal mine or coke oven 
plant, the Central Government may make a claim to the CommissiODer 
for the deficiency of the amount so advanced and the claim in respect of 
such deficiency shall have p.riority over the claims of all other unsecured 
creditors of the coking coal mine or coke oven plant. 
Explanation.-In this section, "Custodian" means the Custodian ap-
pointed under the Coking Coal Mines (Emergency Provisions) Act, 1971 • 
• • • • • 
EXTRAoCTS FROM THE COAL MINES (NATIONALISATION) ACT, 1973 
(26 OF 1973) 
• • • • • 
3. (1) • • • • • 
(2) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that if, after 
the appointed day, the existence of any other coal mine comes to the 
knowledge of the Central Gove.rnment, the pr,?visions of the Coal Mines 
(Taking Over of Management) Act, 1973, shall, until that mine is natio-
nalised by an appropriate legislation, apply to such mine. 
• • • • • 
(4) Where a mining lease stands terminated under sub-section (3), 
it shall be lawful for the Central Government' or a Government, com-
pany or corporation owned or controlled by the Central Government to 
obtain, notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), or in 
the proviso to sub-section (2) of section 3 of the Coal Mines (Taking 
Over of Management) Act, 1973, a prospecting licence or a mining lease 
in respect of the whole or part Of the land covered by the mining lease 
which stands so terminated. 
AcquisI_ 
tion of 
rights ot 
owners 
;n res-
pect of 
coal 
mines. 

Centrai 
Sov-
emment 
to be the 
lessee 
of the 
State 
Govern-
ment. 
Kmploy-
mentol 
certain 
employee. 
to con-
tinue. 
:.' ... ., .\ 
.- . 
.( (1) Where the rights of an owne.r under any mining iease grant-
ed, or deemed to have been granted, in relation to a coal mine, by • 
State Government or any other person, vest in the Central Government 
under section 3, the Central Government shall~ on and trom the date of 
such vesting, be deemed to have become the lessee of the State Gov-
ernment or such other person, as the case may be, in relation to such 
coal mine as if a mining lease in relation to such coal mine had been 
granted to the Central Government and the period of such lease shall 
be the entire period for which such lease could have been granted by 
the State Government or such other person under the Mineral Con-
cession Rules, and thereupon all the rights under such mining lease, 
including surface, underground and other rights granted to the lessee 
shall be deemed to have been transferred to, and vested in, the Central 
Government. 
(2) On the expiry of the term of any lease, referred to in sub-
section (1), such lease shall, if 10 desired by the Central Government, 
be renewed, on the same terms and conditions on which the lease was 
held, immediatel~ before t,he appointed day, by the lessor, fOI1 the 
maximum period for which such lease can be renewed under the Mine-
ral Concession Rules . 
• • • • • 
14. (1) Every person who is a workman within the meaning of the 
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, and has been, immediately before the 14 of 1947. 
appointed day, in the employment of a coal mine shall become, on and 
from the appointed day, an employee of the Central Government or, as 
the case may be, of the Governme~t company in which the right, title 
and interest of such mine have vested under this Act, and shall hold 
office or service in the coal mine with the same rights to pension, gra-
tuity and other matters as would have been admissible to him if the 
rights in relation to such coal mine had not been transferred to, and 
vested in, the Central Government or the Government company, as 
the case may be, and continue to do SO unless and until his employment 
in such coal mine is duly terminated or until his remuneration, terms 
and conditions of employment are duly altered by the Central Govern-
ment or the Government company. 
(2) The Central Government or the Government company in which 
the right, title and interest in relation to a coal mine have vested, may 
employ, on mutually acceptable tenns and conditions, any person who 
is not a workman within the meaning of the Industrial Disputes Act, 
1947, and who has been immediately before the appointed day, in the 
employment of a coal mine, and on such employment the said person 
shall become an employee of the Central Government or the Govem-
ment company, as the case may be. 
(3) Save as otherwise provided in sub-seations (1) and (2), the 
services of every person employed by the owner or occupier of a coal 
mine before the appointed day shall stand terminated on and from the 
specified date. 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Disputes 
Act, 1947, or in any other law for the time being in force, the transfer 
Of tke services of any officer or other employee of a coal mine to any 
other mine shall not entitl.e such officer or other employee to any oom-
pensation under this Act or any other law for the time being in force 
14.ot 1947. 

15 of 1973. 
1& of 19'13 
17 
and no such claim shall be entert~e(f by any court, tribunal or other 
authority. 
(5) Where, under the terms of any contract of service or otherwise, 
any person whose services become terminated or tNhose services be-
come transferred to the Central Government or a Government company 
by reason of the provisions of this Act is entitled to any payment by way 
of gratuity or retirement benefits or for .any leave Dot avafied of, or any 
other benefits, such person may enforce his claim against the owner of 
the coal mine but not against the Central Government or the Government 
company. 
• • • • • 
18. (1) • ... -* . • • 
(2) In addition to the sum referred to in sub-section (1), the Central 
Government shall pay, in cash, to the Commissioner, such amount as 
may become due to the owner of a coal mine in relation to the period 
during which the management of the coal mine remains vested in the 
Central Government. 
• • • • • 
(5) Interest accruing on the amounts standing to the credit of the 
deposit account referred to in sub-section (3) shall enure to the benefit 
of the owners of coal mines. 
19. (1) • 
.J:iP" ...• 
• • • • 
(4) The liabilities of the coal pine (not being liabilities arising OUl 
of advances made by the Central Government or the Government com-
pany), which could not be discna:rPd by the appointed day, may be 
disc~~~ge~.by ~e oC~tr~ oQov.~~en~oor. ~e G~ye~e~t. ~:mR~y ~p 
. to the specifi~ : 4a~, li;ndev~ry ''pa~~t ~~ ~adQ.~J l?e included' in the 
statement of accounts· as on the day immediately' before the appointed 
day, indicating therein the period in relation to which the payments 
were mad~: 
Provided that the liabilities in relation to the period p,rior to the 
appointed day. which have not been discharged on or before the speci1led 
date shall be the liabilities Of the owner of the coal mine . 
• • • • • 
25. Every amount advanced by the Central Government or the Custo-
dian, as the case may be, for the management of a coal mine during the 
period in which the manageIm!nt of such coal mine remained vested in 
the Central Government, shall be recovered from the income derived 
from the transactions which took place at any time after the commence-
ment of the Coal Mines (Taking Over Of Management) Act, 1973, but 
before the appointed day notwithstanding that such income was derlved 
after t~e appointed day: 
Provided that where such income is insutDcient to meet in full the 
total amount of the advance made by the Central Government or tb. 
Custodian far the management of the coal mine, the Central Govern-
ment may make a claim to the Commissioner for the deficiency and there-
upon the claim in respect of such deficiency shan have priority over 
the claims of all other unsecured creditors of the coal mine includtnJr 
those referred to in sub-section (2) of section 22. 
Explanatw'I\.-In this section, "Custodian" means the Custodian ap-
point~un4~_1h,;_~ Min~s (Taking Over of Management) Act. una. 
. ,or:" • o·v. • • • . ' 
Paymlllt 
by the 
Central 
Govern. 
ment 
to the 
Com-
mis.~ionor. 
state. 
mentof 
aceounte 
in respect 
ofth8 
period of 
manage-
mentb7 
u.e 
Central 
Govem-
ment, 
etc. 
Amounts 
adVBRced 
by the 
Central 
Govern. 
ment how 
to be 
recovered. 

LOKSABHA 
o 
A 
BILL 
.. 
further to amend the Coking Coal Mines (Nationalisation) Act, 15m and 
the Coal Mines (Nationalisation) Act, una 
" 
. (Aft "'GlMf sdthe~ 
Mimater of E~.) 