■I 6  n F  r.''9 a ©
Aa iMTRODVca) u r Lok S a v ia
BiU No. 130 of 1988 
TH E PLANTATIONS LABOUR (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1968
A
BILL
further to amend the Plantations Labour Act,  1951. ’
Bk it enacted by P arliam oit in the Ilurty-nintb Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:—
1. (i) This Act may be called the Plantations Labour (Amendment)
Act, 1968. I
j  (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Ck>vemment 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, and different dates 
may be appointed for different provisions of this Act and for different' 
States and any reference in any such provision to the commencement 
of this Act shall in relation to any State be construed as a reference to 
10 the coming into force of th at provision in that State.
2. In section 2 of the Plantations Labour Act, 1^51 (hereinafter 
referred to as the principal A ct),—
(a) in claxise (e),—
(i) after the words “affairs of the plantation”, the brackets 
and words * * (including a lessee pf such plantation)” shall be 
iD M rM ;
Sliort
tiUe
and
com­
mence­
ment.
Amend- 
m entof 
section a.


'Explanation .—^For the purposes of thi,s clause, “the 
person who has the ultim ate control over the affairs of the 
plantation” means in the case of a plantation owned or 5
controlled—
(i) by a firm or other association of individuals, any 
one of the individual partners or members thereof;
(jj) by a company, any of the directors thereof; 
and 10
(iii) by the Central Government or a State Gov­
ernm ent or any local authority, the person or persons 
appointed to manage the affairs of the plantation;’;
(b) in clause (ee), for the words “and includes, w here the
worker is a male, his parents dependent upon him”, the words “and 15
includes his or her parents dependent upon him  or her” shall be 
substituted;
(c) in clause (eee),  for the words “inspector of plantations”,
the words “a deputy chief inspector of plantations or an inspector 
of plantations” shall be substituted; jO
(d) after clause (h ), tlie following clause shall be inserted, 
namely: —
“ (ha) “trade union’ ' means a trade union registered under i 9 oflM 9.  
the Trade Unions Act, 1926;” ;
(e) in clause (k),—  25
(i) in the opening portion, for the w o ^  “th r o u ^  any
agency’’, the words “th r o u ^  any agency, including a contractor,” 
shall be substituted;
(it) for sub-clauses (ii) and (iii), the following sub-clauses 
shall be substituted, nam ely:— ^
“ (ii) any person employed mainly in a managerial or 
adm inistrative capacity;
(iii) any person who, being employe^ in  a  supentijMEsr 
capacity, draw s wages exceeding one thousand six hundred 
rupees per mensem or exncises either by the nature of the 35 
duties attached to the office or by reason of the p o w o i
vested in him fimctions mainly of a managerial nature; or’ ’;
(/) clause ( I ) shall be 'omitted.
3. In section 3B of the principal Act,—
Amtnd-
(o) to sub-section (5 ), the follow ing fwoviso shall be tM td,  ja  
n w n e ly : -
“Provided that where a change occurs in the ownership at the 
plantation such change shall be intim ated by the new owner;”;
(b) in sub-section ( 6), after the words ^he shall,**, the wards 
“after giving an o f ^ r tu n ity  of being heard to such parties as ha ^  
deems fit, including any trade union,” shall be iiMartad.
(ii) the following Explanation  shall be added at the end,
namely:—


4. In section 4 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1 ),—
(a) for the words “mspectors of plantations”, the words “deputy 
chief inspectors of plantations and inspectors of plantations” * a l l 
substituted;
5 (b) ttie foUowii^ proviso shall be inserted at the end, namely: _ _
“I*rovided that no person shall be appointed under this sub­
section or sub-section (lA)  or having been so appointed shall 
continue to hold olBce in case he is or becomes interested directly 
or indirectly in a plantation or in any process or business carried 
10 on therein.".
5. In section 7 of the principal Act. in sub-section ( 2), in clause (b), 
the words “and children” shall be omitted.
•• In f i ^ o n  10 of the principal A ct—
(c) for sub-section ( 1), the following sub-section shall be substi- 
15 tuted, nameily:—
“ (1) In every  plantation, there shall be—
20
25
30
35
40
AmuMl*
mentof 
section 4.
Amend­
ment of 
section?.
Amend­
ment of 
section 
10.
(i) established a garden hospital within two years and 
a group hospital w ithin three years of the registration of 
ttiat plantataon with sudi facilities;
(ii) provided and maintained, so as to be readily avail­
able. such other medical facilities,
as may be pwescribed by the State Government for the work­
ers and their families:
Provided that the employer of a plantation, existing at the 
Commencement of the Plantations Labour (Amendment) Act, 
1988 shall, within a period of two years of such commencement, 
establish a garden hospital and, within a per'.od of three years 
of such commencement, establish a group hospital.
E:j^lanatiofn.—In this sub-section.—
(«) “garden hbspital” means a hosjntal which deals 
Witii out-patients, in-patients not requiring any elaborate 
diagnosis and treatment, infectious cases and cases re­
lating to mid-wifery, cases of simple pre-natal and post-natal 
care, care of infants and children and periodical medical 
ejam ination of workers:
45
(b) “group hospital” means a hospital which deals with 
patients whose diagnosis and treatm ent are not normally 
dealt with in a garden hospital or whose diagnosis and 
treatm ent are referred by a garden hospital.”:
(b) in sub-section ( 2), for the words “chief inspector”, the words 
“State Govemnient” shall be substituted.
7. In  section 16C of the principal Act, for sub-section (3), ttie follow­
ing shall be substituted, namely: —
“ (3) Hb application for compensation under this section shall be 
« j t e r ^ « d  tmless it i." wade within two years of the collapse of the
Amend­
ment Of 
section 
16 C


Insertion 
• f  new 
■actions
16H, m
and 161.
A » e « r -
•n c e o f
parties.
Oon-
tracting.
Settle­
ment of 
compen­
sation.
house or w here death has resulted out of the collapse of the house, 
w ithin two years of the death; i
Provided th at the Commissioner may, if he is satisfied that the 
applicant was prevented by sufficient cause from m aking the appli* 
cation within the aforesaid period of tw o years, entertain such appli- 5 
cation w ithin a fu rth er period of six months.’’.
8. A fter section 16G of the principal Act, the following sections shall 
be inserted, nam ely:—
“16H. Any appearance, application o r act required to be made 
or done by any person before or to a Commissioner (other than an 10 
appearance of a party which is required for the purpose of his 
exam ination as a witness) may be m ade or done on behalf of such 
person by a lepal practitioner or a trade union or by an inspector or 
by any other officer specified by the State Governm ent in this behalf, 
authorised in w riting by such person, or, w ith the permission of the IS 
Commissioner, by any other person so authorised.
161. (I) W here an employer in the course of or for the purposes of 
his trade or business contracts w ith any other person for the execu­
tion by or under the contractor of the whole or any p art of any work 
w hich is ordinarily part of the trade or business of the employer, the 20 
employer shall be liable to pay to any w orker employed in the 
execution of the w ork any compensation which he would have been 
liable to pay if th at w orker had been immediately employed by 
him.
(2) W here the employer is liable to pay compensation under 25 
this section, he would he entitled to be indemnified by the contractor 
and all questions as to the r i ^ t  and the amoimt of any such indem« 
nity shall, in  default of the agreement, be settled by the Commis­
sioner.
(3) Nothing in this section shall be construed as preventing a 30 
w orker from recovering compensation from the contractor Instead
of the employer.
16J. (I) W here any lum p sum am ount has been settled to be paid 
as compensation by agreement, a memorandum therefor shall be 
prepared and registered by the employer w ith the Commissioner in 35 
such m anner as may be prescribed.
(2) If it appears to the Comm issimer that a memorandum ought 
not to be registered by reason of the inadequacy of the amotmt 
agreed to as compensation or by reason of the agreem oit having 
been obtained by fraud or other im proper means, he shall refuse to 49  
record the memorandum of the agreement arid shall pass such orders
as he thinks ju st in the circumstance.
(3) Any memorandum of agreement registered under sub­
section (I) shall be enforceaUe in between the parties to the agree­
m ent as if it is a liability of an employer decided by the Gommis- 4 5  
sioner under sub-section ( 1) of section 16E.”.


f. After Chapter IV, the following Chapter shall be iaaerted, in*«rti«n
n a m ely :- i
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
‘CHAPTER IVA ,
P rovisions a s to  s a fe h t 
18A. (I) In every plantation, effective arrangements shall be 
made by the employer to provide for the safety of workers in con­
nection w ith the use, handling, storage and transport of in i^ tid d es, 
chemicals and toxic substances.
(2) No woman or adolescent shall be employed in a plantation 
for using and handling hazardous chemicals.
Explanation .—^In  this sub-section, “hazardous chemicals” means 
such of the chemicals as the State Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, specify.
(3) The employer shall appoint persons possessing the prescribed 
qualifications to supervrise the use, handling, storage and transporta­
tion of insecticides, chemicals and toxic substances in his plantation.
(4) Every employer shall provide that every worker in a plan­
tation employed in handling, mixing, blending and applying insecti­
cides, chemicals and toxic substances, shall—
(a) on his first emplojrment be trained thoroughly in the 
hazards involved in different operations in which he is engaged, 
the various safety measures and safe work practices to be adopted’  
in emergencies arising from spillage of them and such other 
m atters as may be prescribed by the State Government;
(b) be subjected to refresher courses in this regard.
(5) Every employer shall maintain an accurate medical health 
record of every worker who is exposed to insecticides, chemicals 
and loxic substances which are used, handled, stored or transported 
in a plantation and every such worker shall h a v e . access to such 
record.
(6) Every worker who is exposed to insecticides, chemicals and 
toxic substances shall be medically examined periodically, in -  such 
m anner as may be prescribed, by the State G ovam nent.
(7) Every employer shall provide—
(o) washing, bathing and block room-facilities;
(b) protective clothing and equipment,
to every worker engaged in handling insecticides, chemicals and 
toxic substances in such manner as may be prescribed by the State 
Government.
(8) Every employer shall display in the plantation a list of 
permissible concentrations of insecticides, chemicals and toxic sub­
stances in the breathing zone of the workers engaged in the handling 
and application of such insecticides, chemicals and toxic substances.
Chapter
IVA.
Safety.


(9) £ v » y  employer s h a ll ochibit M ich p fn ^u tio iu ay  
may be prescribed by the State Govermnent indioating th* 
of insecticides, chemicals imd toxic substances.
Power to
make
nilw.
Amend­
ment of 
section 
19.
Amend- 
ment ot 
section 2
18B. ( 1) The S tate <Jovemment may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the purposes of this Chapter. $
(2) In particular and w ithout prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the follow­
ing m atters, nam ely:—
(a ) the qualifications of supervisor appointed im der sub­
section (3) of section 18A:
(b) the m atters to be specifisd under clause (a) of sub- 
secticni (4) of section ISA;
(c) the m anner of medical examination of workers utader sub­
section ( 6) of section 18A.
(d) th e m anner of providing the facilities, cloQiing and is 
equipm ent under sub-section (7) of section ISA:
(c) the exhibition of precautionary notices under sub­
section (9) of section ISA;
10. In section 19 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1)7 the words “or 
child” shall be omitted. ^
11. In section 22 of the principal Act,—
(a ) for the words “twelve hotu-s’’^  the words “ten and a h a lf 
hours” shall be substituted;
(b) the following proviso shall be inserted at the end, nam ely;—
“Provided that the chief inspector may, for reasons to b e  23 
^lecified in writing, increase the said time to  tw e lv e  h o u r s ’'.
Amend­
ment of 
section 
2 6.
12. A fter section 23 of the principal Act, Ih e  following section shall 
be inserted, namely: —
“24. No child shall be required or allowed to w ork in any 
plantation.”. 30
Insertion 
of new 
section
24.
Prohibi­
tion of 
employ­
ment of 
diildren.
Amend- section 29 of the principal Act, the words “or Child” shall be
ment of omitted. ' i*
section
25.
14. In section 26 of the principal Act,—
(a) in the opening portion, the words “ehild and no" shall be 
omitted;
(b) in clause (b). the words “child or” shall be omitted.


H  Im MBtioB ^  ol' the princqwl Act,—
(a) in sub-section (I),—
(i) for the words “young person” at both the places where 
they occur, the word “adolescent” shall be substituted;
(ii) for the words “such person’ ’  at both the places where 
they occur, the words “such adolescent’’  shall be substituted;
(iii) the words “either as a child or” shall be omitted;
(b) in sub-section (3), for the words 
“adolescent’’  shall be substituted.
30
35
40
AlQ^IUlr
Mmat.oi
aeetion
37.
“young person’ ’, the word
10 li» In lectioB 28 of the principal Act, for the words “young person”, 
the word “adolescent” shall be su b stitu te .
If* In sMtion 30 oi the principal Act, in sub-section ( 1), in clause (b) 
^  Mcti(»i 31 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2 ), for the words 
a- y«ung person", th e words “an adolescent** shall be substituted.
15 IS-, b  section 32A of the principal Act, for the words “such authori- 
ttoi" th e wmrds “trade union o t which su<^ worker is a m «nber and to 
such other authorities’’  shall be substituted.
!•. In sections 33 and 35 of the principal Act, for the words “three 
months, or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees’*  wherever 
20 they occxir, the words “six months, or w ith fine which may extend to 
ten thousand rupees” shall be substituted.
20. In section 34 of the principal Act, for the words “one m<mth, or 
w ith fine which may extend to fifty rupees”, the words “two months, or 
w ith fine which may extend to one thousand rupees” shall be substituted.
21, In section 36 of the principal Act, for the words “three months, or 
‘  w ith "fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or w ith both”, the 
fbllewiBg shall be substituted, namely: —
‘six months, or with fine which may e x t^ d  to ten thousand 
rupees, or w ith both and where the contravention is a continuing 
one, subject to the provisions of section 37A, w ith a further fine 
which may extend to one thousand rupees for every day during 
which the contravention continues after the conviction;
A s\e n d -
m entof
section
28.
Amend­
ment of 
sections 
30 and 
31.
Amend-
m oitol
section
32A.
Amend­
ment of 
sections 
S3 and
Amend­
ment of 
seetioa 
34.
Amend­
ment O ff' 
section
3«.
Provided that where the contravention of any of the provisions 
of this Act or of any rules made thereunder has resulted in an 
accident causing death or serious bodily injury, the fine shall not be 
less than twenty-five thousand rupees in the case of an accident 
causing death, and ten thousand rupees in the case of an accident 
causing serious bodily injury.
Explanation .—In this section and in section 37, “serious bodily 
injury” means an injury which involves, or in all probability wHl 
involve, the perm anent l<ws of the use of, or permanent injury to, 
lin ^  or ^ e  perm an«at loss of, or injxiry to the sight or hearing, 
or th* fracture < rf any limb, or the enforced absence of the injured 
pesvon from work for •  period exceeding twenty days.’.


Axnand-
mentef
SMtion
87.
Substitu­
tion of
22. Section 37 of the principal Act 
section ( 1) thereof and,—
shall be raiumbered aa *ub>
I  for 
w etion 
39.
Cogni- 
naee of 
cSeacts.
(a) in sub-section (I) as so renumbered,—
(i) for the words “six months, or w ith fine which may 
extend to one thousand rupees’ ’, the words “one year, or wittai ^ 
fine which shall not be less than ten thousand rupees but which 
may extend to one lakh rupees” shall be substituted;
(ii) the proviso shall be omitted;
(b) after sub-section ( 1) as so renumbered, the following sub­
sections shall be inserted, nam ely:— 10
“ (2) If any person who has been convicted of any offence 
punishable under this Act is again guilty of an offence involving 
a contravention of the same provision and which results into 
an accident causing death or serious bodily injury, he shall be 
punishable on a subsequent conviction w ith imprisonment 15 
which may extend to one year, or w ith fine which shall not be 
less than fifty thousand rupees in the case of an accident causing 
death, and tw enty thousand rupees in the case of an accident 
causing serious bodily injury, or w ith both.
(3) For the purposes of this section, no cognizance shall 20  
be taken of any conviction made m ore than two years before 
the commission of the offence which is being punished-”.
23. For section 39 of the principal Act, the following sections shall 
be substituted, nam ely:— I
“39. Any worker, an office bearer of a trade union of which such 25 
worker is a member, an inspector or any recognised voluntary 
organisation may file a complaint regarding the commission of an 
offence under this Act and no court inferior to th at of a Metropoli* 
tan M agistrate or Judicial M agistrate shall try  any offence punidiable
im der this Act.
Explanation .—^For the purposes of this section, “recognised 
volxmtary organisation” means an organisation as the State Gov­
ernm ent may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify.
30
Protee. 
tion to
•etinf 
under 
tUs Act.
Amend­
ment of 
swthm 
40.
39A. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding ahall lie 
against any person for anything which is in good faith done or 
intended to be done under this Act.”.
24. In section 40 of the principal Act, for the words “the alleged 
commission of the offence cam e to the knowledge of an inspector**, the 
words “the offence is alleged to have been committed” shall be substi­
tuted.
3S
40


2S. In section 43 of the principal Act,— An*end-
m entof
(o) in sub-gection ( 2), after clause {h) , the following clause shall 
be inserted, namely; —
“( h a ) tiie manner in which a memorandum relating to 
settlement of compensation shall be registered by the em­
ployer with the Commissioner;”;
(b) for sub-section (3 ), the following s u b ^ c tio n  shall be substi­
tuted, nam ely:—
“ (3) Every r'ole made by the State Government under this 
Act shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made, before the 
State Legislature.” .
9


Plantations Labour Act, 1951 provides for the w d fa ie  of plan­
tation labour and regulates the cohditions of w ork in jdantations. I t 
has been in operation since Ajwil, 1954 and is adm inistered by the State 
G o v e n ^ e n ts. The A ct was last amended in 196L .
meeting of Labour S ecm tyies of States, having plantation i n - ^ ^  
d u stry '^ e ld .^ n  September, 198^^12 need for further am endments toi/ 
make the Act more broad-based was considered. The C entral G!ovem> 
m ent had also received proposals from State Governments to amend the 
Act and the rules fram ed thereimder. The Tripartite Industrial Com­
m ittee on Plantations at its meeting held in Augtist, 1985, felt th at the 
Act should be amended to ensure provisions of welfare facilities as well 
as adequate safeguards against the toxic chemicals. A sub-committe* 
was constituted in August, 1985 to consider tiie required amendments.
T he r^ x jrt of this sub-committee was considered and approved, with 
certain modifications, by tiie Tripartite Industrial Committee in August, 
1986.
Plantations Labour Act, 1951, (does not contain ai^/provision 
sjaaiiWoHy dealing w ith s a fe ^  of w orkers. Similarly, there is no en­
abling provision covering occupational health problems arising from 
risk of injury to health during work in the plantations. One of the 
m ajor problems of safety and health resulting from technical progress 
in plantat’ons arises out of the risks a^ociated w ith the growing use of 
chemicals especially insecticides, fungicides and herbicides. The main 
hazard in this respect arises out of handling, transport, storage and use 
of th^^g|>em icals in p la n t^ ic ^ . The Act and the rules framed there- 
u n d er^ av e, a t  p paaw it i a o£^tyVi£ion| for safety precautions to be taken 
for the storage, utilisjjtion and handling of in s ^ c id e s  and pesticides 
in plantations. It i^Ttherefore, considered mscessary to amend the Act 
to provide specifically for safeguards to be adopted in the use and hand­
ling of such substances by the workers
provisions under section 17 < > f  the Plantations Labour Act,
1951 enjoin the State Government to make rules requiring th at in every 
plantation, the employer shall provide the workers with such number 
and tj'pe of umbrellas, blankets and rain coats or other like amenities 
for the prottiction of workers from rain or cold as may be specified in 
such rules. Tliis section has limited scope as it does not cover handling 
of insecticides and pesticides by workers in plantations and fo r making 
provision of protective clotliing for safeguarding health and safety of 
such workers. It is, therefore, essential that the Act should contain 
provisionR to protect workers from the use of hazardous chemicals be-^ 
sides giving them protection against weather conditiwis while working 
in plantations.
lo
^ i S T A T m ^KX-OF O aiK rT S  AND R E A S O N ^


w>«»^
5/ It has-been felt that to ensure better im p le m e n ^ o n  of welfare 
provisioas under the Act, specific targets shoxUd^TtuM a for provision 
of certain facilities and that penalties for non-compliance of pro­
visions should be made more stringent. It it»8—oloo 'baaiiT^^onsidered 
necessary that the Act should be suitably amended to make provisions 
relating to the liability of an employer in regard to the workmen em­
ployed by a contractor engaged for the execution of a work by such 
employer, modify the definit’ons of ‘family’  and employer’, prohibit em­
ployment of children in plantations and also to strengthen the inspecto­
rates to make implementation of the Act more effective//
6. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
1 1
BINDESHWARI DUBEY.
New  D klhi;
T h e 16th November,  1988;


Clause 9 of the Bill seeks to insert a new Chapter IVA contaniitig 
provisions dealing w ith safety of w orkers. Tliis clause seeks to insert 
a new section 18B which empowers the State Governm ent to m ake rules 
for ceuTjring out the provisions of the said Chapter. The m atters im res­
pect of which rules may be made, inter alia, relate to the qualifications 
of supervisors, training of workers, medical examination of workers and 
exhibition of precautionary notices.
2. Clause 25 of the BiU seeks to amend section 43 of the Act dealing 
w ith the general power to make rules. A new clause empowering the 
S tate Grovernnient to make rules regarding the m anner in which a 
memorandum relating to settlem ent of compensation shall be registered 
by the employer with the Commissioner has been inserted in sub-section
(2). Sub-section (3) has been substituted with a new sub-section pro- 
\id in g  for laying of the rules, so framed, before the State Legislature.
3. H ie m atters in respect of which rules may b e  made under the 
aforesaid provisions are m atters of procedure and adm inistrative detail. 
T h e delegation of legislative power is^ therefore, of a  normal d ia r a c t e r .
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATIOK
12


E xtracts  from  the  P lantations  L aboot  A ct, 1951  
(69 OF 1951)
• • * * *
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
♦ •  • ♦ ♦
(e) “employer’’, when used in relation to a plantation, means 
the person who has the ultimate control over the affairs of the 
plantation, and where the affairs of any plantation are entrusted to 
any other person (whether called a managing agent, manager, 
superintendent or by any other name) such other person shall be 
deemed to be the employer in relation to that plantation;
(e e ) “family”, when used in relation to a worker, means—
(i) his or her spouse, and
(ii) the legitimate and adopted children of the worker 
dependent upon him or her, who have not completed their 
eighteenth year.
and includes, where the worker is a msQe. his parents dependent 
upon him;
(ece) “inspector” means an inspector of plantations appointed 
under sub-section ( 1) of section 4 and includes an additional inspec­
tor of plantations appointed under sub-section (lA ) of that section;
*  *  *  I t :  *
.  (k ) “worker” means a person employed in a plantation for hir« 
or reward, w hether directly or through any agency, to do any work, 
skilled, unskilled, manusjl or clerical, but does not include—
(ii) any person employed in the plantation (including 
any member of the medical staff) whose monthly wagss exceed 
rupees seven hundred and fifty;
(iti) any person employed in the plantation prim arily in a 
managerial capacity, notwithstanding that his monthly wages 
dc not exceed rupees seven hundred and fifty: or
• •  ♦ * *
(I) “young person” means a person who is either a child or an 
adolescent.
ANNEXURE
D^ni
tions.
3B. (1) * * * * *
(5) Where, after the registration of a plantation under this aection. 
any change occurs in the ownership or management or in the extent of 
the area or other prescribed particulars in respect of such plantation, the 
particulars regarding such change shall be intimated by th^ employer to 
the registering officer w ithin thirty days of such change in such form 
as may be prescribed.
Re((is- 
tration of 
planta­
tions.


(6) Where as a result of any intimation received under suI>-section
(5), the registering pfdcer is satisfied that the plantation i n no longer 
required to be iregistei'ed under this section, he shall, by oi'der in writing, 
canod the i-egistration tliereof and shall, as soon as practicable, cause 
such order to be’  published in any one newspiaper in  the language of, and 
having circulation in. the area u-here the plantation is situated.
Chief  
inspector 
and ins­
pectors.
CHAPTER II
In sp ectin g  staff
4, (I) The State Government may, by notiiication in the Official 
Gazette, appoint for the State a duly qualified person to be the chief 
inspector of plantations an<J so m any duly qualified person to be 
inspectors of plantations subordinate to. the cliief inspector as it thinks 
flt.
Cettiftr-
inCBur-
geoRS.
7. (I) • * * * •
(2) The certifying surgeon shall carry out such duties as may be 
jK-escribed in connection with—
(b) the exercise of such n>edical supervision as may be prescribed 
w here adolescents and children are, or are to be, employed in any 
work in any plantation which is likely to cause injury to their 
health.
Medical
facilities.
It. (1) In evei-y plantation there shall be provided and maintained 
so as to be readily available such medical facilities for the workers and 
their families as may be prescribed by the State Govemmeht.
(2) If in any plantation medical facilities are not provided and 
maintained as required by sub-section (I) the chief inspector may 
cause to be provided and m aintained therein such medical facilities, and 
recover the cost t h o w f  from the defaulting employer.
Applica­
tion for 
compen­
sation.
1«C. (I) • • *  *  *
(3) No application for compensation under this section shall be 
M tertained unless it is made within six months of the collapse of the 
house:
Provided that the Commissioner may, if he is satisfied that the 
applicant was prevented by sufficient cause from making the application 
within the aforesaid period of six months, entertain such application 
wifhtn a fu rther period of six months-
Bxplmiation^In  this section, the expression “dependant” has the 
meaning assigned to it in clause <d) of section 2 of the Workmen’ s Com­
pensation Act, 1923.


CHAPTER V
H o UBS a n d UMlTATlOx^ OF BMPLOYMBNT
18. (1) Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act no adult 
worker shall be required or allowed to work on any plantation in excess 
of forty-eight hours a week and no adolescent or child for more than 
twenty-seven hours a week.
15
WeeWy
hours.
22. The period of work of an adult worker in a plantation shall ba so 
arranged that inclusive of his interval for rest under section 21 it shall 
not spread-over more than twelve lM>urs including the time spent in 
waiting for work on any day.
Spread-
over.
25. Except with the permission of the State Government, no woman or 
child w orker shall be employed in any plantation otherwise tiian between 
the hoiurs of 6 A .M . and 7 p .m .:
Provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed to apply to mid­
wives and nurses employed as such in any plantation,
28. No child and no adolescent shall be required or allov/ed to work in 
any plantation unless—
(b) such child or adolescent carries w ith him  while he is at work 
a token giving a reference tc such certifieate-
27. (3) A certifying surgeon shall, on the application of any young 
person or tiis parent or guardian accompanied by a document signed by 
the employer or any other person on his behalf that such person will be 
employed in the plantation if certified to be fit for work, or on the appli­
cation of the employer or any other person on his behalf w ith reference 
to any yoim^ person intendint? to work, examine such person and ascertain 
his fitness for work either as a child or as an adolescent.
Night 
work for 
women 
and
children.
Non­
adult 
vrotkias  
to carry 
tokens.
Certi­
ficate of 
fitness.
(3) Any fee payable for a certificate under ttiis section shall be paid 
by the employer and shall not be recoverable from the young peiw h. his 
parents or guardian.
28. An inspector may, if he tiunks necessary so to do, cause any young 
person employed in a plantation to be examined by a certifying surgeon.,
(1) Every w orker shall be allowed leave m th  wages for a number 
of days calculate’ d at the rate of—,
(b) if a young pereon, one day for every fifteen days of w ori per­
formed by him;
Power to
require
medical
examiua-
tion.
Annual
leave
with
wagss.


16
Wages
during
leave
pm od. (2) A  worker who has been allowed leave fox any period not less than 
four da>s in the case of an advilt and five days in the case of a young 
person under .-ection 30 shall, before his leave begins, be paid his wages 
for the period of the leave allowed.
31. ( J *  *  *  *  •  •
Notice of
accident.
CHAPTER VIA 
AcaOENTS
32A. W here in any plantation, an accident occurs which causes death 
or w hidi causes any bodily injury to a worker by reason, of which th* 
w orker injured is prevented from w orking for a period of fo rly -e i^ t 
hours or more immediately following the accident, or which b  of such a 
nature as m ay be prescribed in this behalf, the employer thereof shall 
send notice thereof to such authorities, in such form, and within such time, 
as may be prescribed.
Obitruc-
tion.
Use of 
fake 
certi­
ficate of 
fitness.
Contra­
vention 
ol provi­
sions re­
garding 
empioy- 
mentof 
labour.
CHAPTER VII
PEaiALTlES AND PROCEDURE
3S. (I) Whoever obstructs an inspector in the discharge of his duties 
under this Act or refuses or w-ilfully neglects to afford the inspector any 
reasonable fad lity  for making any inspection, examination or inquiry 
adlhorised by or im der this Act in relation to any plantation, shall be 
punishable w ith imprisoJiment for a term  which may extend to three 
months, or v/ith fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or w ith 
both.
(2) Whoever wilfully refuses to produce on the demand of an inspec- 
•  tor any re ^ ste r or other document kept in oursuance of this Act, or p re­
vents or attem pts to orevent or does anything which he has reason to 
believe is likely to prevent anv oe'^son from apnearin^ before or being 
examined bv an inspector acting in pursuance of his duties under this 
Act. shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend 
to three months, or with fine which may extend to five hundred irupees, 
or with both.
34. Whoever knowinglv uses or attem pts to use as a certificate of 
fitness granted to himself under section 27 a certificate granted to another 
person under that section, or having been p an ted  a certificate of fitness 
to himself, knowingly allow.« H to be used, or allows an attem pt to use it 
io be made by another person, shall be punishable w ith imprisonment 
which may extend to one month, or with fine which may extend to fifty 
rupees, or wnth both.
35. Whoever, except as otherwise permitted by or under this Act. 
contravenes any provision of this Act or of any rules made thereunder, 
prohibiting, restricting or regulating the employment of persons in  a 
plantation, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term  which may 
extend to three months, or w>*h fine which may extend to five h"ndred 
rupees, or uHth botv.


3tt. Whoever contravenes any of the provisions of thia Act or of any 
rules made thereunder for which no other penalty is elsewhere provided 
by or under this Act shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to five 
hundred rupees, or w ith both.
37. If any person who has been convicted of any offence punishable 
under this Act is again guilty of an offence involving a contravention of 
the same provision, he shall be punishable on a subsequent conviction 
w ith imprisonment which may extend to six months, or with fine v/hich 
may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both:
Provided that for the purposes of this section no cognizance shall be 
taken of any conviction made more than two years before the commission 
of the offence which is being punished.
17
O th er
(ifTences".
Enhanced 
penalty 
after pi 
vious 
convic­
tion.
39. No court shall take cognizance of any offence under this Act except 
on complaint made by, or w ith the previous sanction in wrriting of, the 
chief inspector and no court inferior to that of a presidency magistrate 
or a m agistrate of the second class shall try any offence punishable under 
this Act.
Cogni­
zance of
offences.
40. No court shall take cognisance cf an offence punishable under this 
Act, unless the complaint thereof has been made or is made w ithin three 
months from the date on which the alleged commission of the offence came 
to the knowledge of an inspector;
Provided that where the offence consists of disobeying a w ritten order 
made by an inspector, complaint thereof may be made within six months 
of the date on which the offence is alleged to have been committed.
Limita­
tion of 
prosecu­
tions.
43. U) *  * ♦ * ♦
(3) All rules made under this Act shall, if made by any Government, 
other than the Central Government, be subject to the previous approval 
-if the Central Government
General 
power to 
make 
rules.


LOK SABHA
A
BILL
further to amend the Plantations Labour Act, 1 9 6 1 .
(BlndeJihtcan Dubey. Minisier  of Labour)
