Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. 130 of  2017
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
THE AUTISM SPECTRUM DISORDERS (RECOGNITION AND
TREATMENT) BILL, 2017
By
SHRIMATI SUPRIYA SULE, M.P.
A
BILL
to recognise the rights of person suffering from autism spectrum disorders and making
the treatment accessible and affordable and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth year of the Republic of India  as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called Autism Spectrum Disorders (Recognition and Treatment)
Act, 2017.
(2) It shall extend to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:—
(a)  "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State and Union Territory
with Legislative Assembly, the State Government and the Administration of the Union
Territory, respectively, and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "ANM" refers to Auxiliary Nurse Midwife health worker at village level;
(c) "ASHA" refers to Accredited Social Health Activist employed under National
Rural Health Mission;
(d) "autisms spectrum disorders" refer to neuro-developmental disorders resulting
from the delay in the maturation of the central nervous system that significantly affects
a person's ability to communicate, understand relationships and relate to others, and is
frequently associated with unusual or stereotypical rituals or behaviours;
(e) "Committee" refers to the Autism Spectrum Disorders Monitoring Committee
constituted under section 4;
(f) "local authority" means the Municipal Corporation or Municipal Council or
Nagar Panchayat or Zila Parishad or any Urban Local Body;
(g) "mental health care professionals" refer to clinical psychologists, counselling
psychologists, psychotherapists, psychiatric social workers and nurses trained in
mental healthcare;
(h) "notification" means notification as published in the Official Gazette; and
(i) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. The Central Government shall ensure availability of affordable treatment to every
person suffering from autism spectrum disorders in such manner as may be prescribed.
4. (1) The appropriate Governments shall, by notification in the Official Gazette,
constitute a Committee to be known as the Autism Spectrum Disorders  Monitoring
Committee for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) The Committee shall consist of District Medical Officers, District Collectors and
an eminent doctor to be appointed by the appropriate Government in such manner as may be
prescribed.
(3) The head of the Committee shall be the eminent doctor who shall be appointed for
a period of four years, and shall be eligible for re-appointment upon the decision of the
simple majority of the members of the Committee present and voting.
5. The Committee shall assist the appropriate Government in effective implementation
and evaluation of the provisions of this Act.
6. The Committee shall prepare an annual report on the progress in the mental healthcare
services provided under this Act and submit it to the appropriate Government to decide the
criteria for evaluation of the mental healthcare service delivery.
Definitions.
Recognising
the right of
affordable
treatment of
persons
suffering
with autism
spectrum
disorders.
Constitution
of Autism
Spectrum
Disorders
Monitoring
Committee.
Monitoring and
evaluation of
implementation
of the
provisions of
the Act.
Annual Report.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

3
7. The appropriate Government shall appoint adequate mental healthcare
professionals in the public hospitals to maintain the doctor patient ratio of at least 1:40 for
patients suffering from autism spectrum disorders.
8. The Central Government shall provide the necessary infrastructure to the State
Governments for training of mental healthcare workers and nurses in mental healthcare.
9. The appropriate Government shall, with the assistance of the Committee, provide
for training of mental healthcare workers and nurses to facilitate the mental healthcare
service delivery at the public health centres.
10. The local authority shall appoint ASHA and ANM healthcare workers for
providing primary care to persons suffering from autism spectrum disorders and collection
of the data on neuro-developmental disorders.
11. The local authority shall conduct skill development programmes for healthcare
workers and sensitize them about the symptoms faced by persons suffering from autism
spectrum disorders.
12. The appropriate Government shall provide treatment of autism spectrum disorders
including counselling, therapeutic sessions and rehabilitative care including medicines
free of cost at the public health centres.
13. (1)  The local authority shall organise public awareness camps and free mental
health checkup camps in their local areas.
(2) While setting up the free mental health checkup camps under sub-section ( 1),
special attention shall be given to areas where people with less income and lower levels of
education reside.
14. The appropriate Government shall sensitise the communities about autism spectrum
disorders and their actions or behaviour when associating with persons with autism spectrum
disorders.
15. The Central Government shall provide adequate funds for medical research in the
field of autism spectrum disorders and other neuro-developmental disorders.
16. The appropriate Government shall collect the data on autism spectrum disorders
in such manner as may be prescribed.
17. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by
law in this behalf, provide requisite sums to the State Governments for carrying out the
purposes of this Act.
18. The provisions of this Act shall have effect not withstanding anything inconsistant
therewith contained in any other law for the time being inforce.
19.  The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any
other law for the time being in force dealing with subject matter of this Act.
Mental
healthcare
professionals.
Central
Government
to provide
necessary
infrastructure.
Training of
mental
healthcare
workers and
nurses.
Non-specialist
professionals
in mental
heathcare
delivery.
Skill
Development
programmes to
sensitize autism
spectrum
disorders.
Appropriate
Government to
provide free of
cost treatment
at public health
centres.
Public
Awareness and
free mental
health check
up camps.
Steps to deal
with the social
stigma.
Funds for
Medical
research in the
field of autism
spectrum
disorders.
Data on autism
spectrum
disorders.
Central
Government
to provide
necessary
funds.
Overriding
effect of the
Act.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35 Act not in
derogation of
other laws.

4
20. (1)  The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
(3) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before the State legislature.
Power to
make rules.
5
10

5
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASDs) refer to umbrella group of developmental disorders,
resulting from the delay in the maturation of the central nervous system. This developmental
disorder is associated with delay in the functions of central nervous system. Children inflicted
by this suffer from impaired reciprocal socio-communicative interaction. They also show a
tendency for repetition of restrictive repertoire of activities.
According to the report of World Health Organization (WHO) every 1 in 160 persons
worldwide is afflicted from ASDs. This makes the global disease burden of the developmental
disorders to be about 0.3 per cent. This high degree of prevalence is despite the fact that the
data on people troubled with ASDs is not comprehensive and excludes many. Thus the
actual number of the people with ASDs is much higher than that projected by WHO and
requires urgent attention by the Government.
National Mental Health Survey 2015-16 supported by the Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare, estimated the burden of mental and neurological disorders in India between
April 2015 and 2016 for adults (above 18 years of age) at 10.6 per cent. This means that at
given point, there are one hundred and fifty million Indians requiring intervention in their
mental health status. It estimates that in the adolescents of aged 13-17 the prevalence of
ASDs is at 1.6 per cent. The report also brings to the fore, the acute shortage of the mental
health care professionals in India-clinical pyschologists, counselling psychologists,
psychiatric social workers, nurses trained in mental health. It also brings to our notice the
divergence in the prevalence rates of mental disorders in rural and urban areas, and the
higher disease burden of people with less income and low levels of education.
There is need for investing in the research and development of the surveillance and
information systems to capture the data on ASDs. Better knowledge about the actual
prevalence of the developmental disorders will help ascertain the causes of the ASDs. Research
on the causes of ASDs is also equally crucial. With such research findings, the Government
can then undertake preventive steps in reducing the disease burden.
Research on the factors causing ASDs suggests that in majority of the cases, ASDs
manifest themselves in children below one year of age. The Government can mitigate the
incidence of ASDs through measures such as encouraging screening of pregnant women
and ensuring pregnant women get their vaccinations and maintain nutrition and hemoglobin
levels. The pediatic doctors, parents and the communities must be sensitised about the
symptoms of these developmental disorders, so that the children are diagnosed and treated
from early age.
These interventions help the children suffering from ASDs and also assit the families
and local communities in dealing sensitively with the people with developmental disorders.
At present, India does not have a comprehensive law on dealing with autism spectrum
disorders. The District Mental Health Programme, though being implemented since 1996
its coverage is varied across the States. As per the National Mental Health Report 2015-16,
only one-third of the surveyed States had coverage of more than fifty per cent. of the
population. In order to effectively address the above issues, this Bill is contemplated.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SUPRIYA  SULE
June 28, 2017.

6
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to provide for accessible and affordable treatment for person
suffering from autism spectrum disorders. Clause 4 provides for the constitution of Autism
Spectrum Disorders Monitoring Committee by the appropriate Government. Clause 7 provides
for the recruitment of mental health care professionals. Clause 8 provides for Central
Government to provide necessary infrastructure for the training of health care workers and
nurses. Clause 9 provides for training and facilitation of mental health care service delivery.
Clause 10 provides for appointment of accredited Health Activist (ASHA) and Auxiliary
Nurse Midwife (ANM) health care workers for providing primary care for persons suffering
from autism. Clause 11 provides for skill development and sensitising programmes of health
care workers. Clause 12 provides for free treatment including medicines for person suffering
from autism spectrum disorders at public health care centres. Clause 13 provides for organising
public awareness and free medical health check up camps. Clause 15 provides for funding by
the Central Government in medical research to ascertain the causes of autism spectrum
disorders and neuro-developmental disorders. Clause 16 provides for collection of data on
autism spectrum disorders. Clause 17 provides for the Central Government to provide funds
to the State Governments to carrying out the provisions of the Act. The Bill, therefore, if
enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that
a sum of rupees five thousand crore would be involved as recurring expenditure per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be involved.

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLA TION
Clause 20 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to make rules for carrying
out the provisions of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation
of legislative power is of a normal character.
7

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to recognise the rights of person suffering from autism spectrum disorders and making the
treatment accessible and affordable and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shrimati Supriya Sule, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—907LS(S3)—20.07.2017.