To BS DlTRODUcm IN LoK SAlIBA 
Bill No. 130 01 1987. 
THE CHANDIGARH (DELEGATION OF pOWERS) BILL, 1987 
BILL 
to pr01,ide fCYl' the delegation of powers vested in the AdministratCYl' of 
the Union territory of Chandigarh. 
BE it enac~ by Parliament in the Thirty-eighth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Chandigarh (Delegation of Powers) Short 
Act, 1987. title 
(2) It extends to the whole of the Union territory of Chandigarh. 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, "Administrator" 
means the administrator qf the Union territory of Chandigarh appoint-
ed by the President under article 239 of the Constitution. 
3. (1) Any power, authority or jurisdiction or any duty which the 
10 Administrator may exercise or discharge under any law in force in the 
Union territory of Chandigarh may be exercised or discharged also by 
such officer or other authority as may be specified in this behalf by the 
Central Government or the Administrator by notification in the Official 
Gazette. I 
and 
extent. 
De1lni-
tion. 
Delega-
tion of 
powers, 
etc., 
.etted In 
Adminis-
trator. 

Valida-
tion. 
2 
(2) The Administrator may transfer any appeal or application for 
revision or any other matter pending before him for dispasal to an 
officer or other authority competent under sub-section (1) to dispose of 
the same. 
(3) The Administrator may withdraw for disposal by himself any 5 
appeal or application for revision or any other matter pending before 
an officer or other authority competent under sub-section (1) to dispose 
of the same. • .. 
4. Notwithstanding any judgment, decree or order of any court or 
tribunal or other authority to the contrary, where any power, autho- 10 
rity or jurisdiction or any duty which the Administrator may exercise 
or discharge under any law in force in the Union territory of Chandi-
garh had been exercised or discharged by any officer or other authority 
before the commencement of this Act, such power, authority, j~is­
diction or duty shall be deemed to have been validly and effectively 15 
exercised or discharged by such officer or other authority as if the pro-
visions of sub-section (1) of section 3 were in force at all material times 
when such power, authority or jurisdiction was exercised or such duty 
was discharged and that officer or other authority had been specified 
as an officer or other authority by the Central Government or the 20 
Administrator in that behalf under the said sub-section, and accordingly, 
no suit or other proceeding shall be instituted, maintained or continued in 
any court or tribunal or before other authority on the ground that such 
officer or other authority was not competent to exercise such power, autho-
rity or jurisdiction or to discharge such duty. 25 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The statutory powers of the Central Government and the State Gov-
ernment under certain laws in their application to the Union territory 
of Chandigarh are with the Administrator of the Union territory of Chandi-
garh. Accordingly, the Administrator is required to exercise those sta-
tutory powers. Besides this, he is also required to discharge the func-
tions of a quasi-judicial authority under certain other statutes. 
2. At present, the Governor of Punjab is concurrently designated as 
the Administrator of the Union t(!rritory of Chandigarh. In his capacity 
as Administrator, he is required to exercise the said statutory powers and 
discharge the said quasi-judicial functions. As a result, several appeals 
and review cases are pending for disposal by the Administrator and 
it is not practiable for him to dispose of them expeditiously. It is, there-
fore, proposed to vest such powers of the Administrator in any officer or 
other authority as may be specified in this behalf by the Central Govern-
ment, or the A.dministrator by notification in the Official Gazette. 
3. It is reported that due to ex,rediency of the work the powers and 
functions of the State Government and Central Government which were 
normally to be exercised by the Administrator, have been exercised by 
,some. other. officers and authoritieS'Y· Accordingly, a need has arisen to valfruite ·sucli-'~~tions'. ( , :". :'1' ," ; .'.,' '- ..•. ,' ••• 
4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 
NEW DEI.m:; 
CHINTAMANI pANTGRAHI. 
The 4th December, 1987. 
3 

LOK SABHA 
BILL 
to provide for the delegation of powers vested in the Administrator of 
the Union territory of Chandigarh. 
(Shri Chintamani Panigrahi, 
MinUter of State in the 
Ministry of Home Affa.ir.) I . 