1
THE SCULPTORS AND ARTISTS OF RURAL AREAS
WELFARE BILL, 2016
By
SHRI SUNIL KUMAR SINGH, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the welfare of sculptors and artists in rural areas and
for matters connected therewith
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Sculptors and Artists of Rural Areas Welfare Act,
2016.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “artist” means any person who earns his livelihood by performing arts
including music, dance, drama, play, singing to entertain public or displaying of his
paintings or artistic skills to public in rural areas;
(b) “Board” means the National Sculptors and Artists of Rural Areas Welfare
Board constituted under section 4;
Short title,
extent  and
commencement.
Bill No. 130 of  2016
5
Definitions.
10
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(c) “Fund” means the National Sculptors and Artists of Rural Areas Welfare
Fund constituted under section 3;
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(e) "sculptor" means any person engaged in carving of statues or making of
decorative pieces or any other useful items from clay, cement, stone or any other
material in rural areas for earning his livelihood.
3.  (1) The Central Government shall constitute a Fund to be known as the National
Sculptors and Artists of Rural Areas Welfare Fund.
(2) The Central Government and State Governments shall contribute to the Fund in
such proportion, as may be prescribed.
4. (1) The Central Government shall constitute a Board to be known as the National
Sculptors and Artists of Rural Areas Welfare Board.
(2) The Board shall consist of following members, namely:—
(a) the Union Textile Minister who shall be its Chairperson, ex-officio;
(b) five members representing the Non-Governmental Organisations working
for the welfare of sculptors and artists in rural areas, to be appointed by the Central
Government; and
(c) five members representing the sculptors and artists in rural areas, to be
appointed by the Central Government.
(3) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service
of, members of the Board shall  be such, as may be prescribed by the Central Government.
5. (1) The Board shall administer the Fund for the welfare of sculptors and artists of
rural areas.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision, the Fund shall also
be used for,—
(a) payment of compensation to the next of kin of the sculptors and artists in
the event of death during work;
(b) payment of premium for life insurance;
(c) payment of old age pension;
(d) payment of disability allowance;
(e) provision of free health care facility to sculptors and artists and their family
members;
(f) housing facility at subsidised rate; and
(g) financial assistance to sculptors and artists for production and marketing of
their products and organization and advertisement of events.
6. The Board shall submit every year a report, in such form and manner, as may be
prescribed, of its activities to the Central Government.
7. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of  the session immediately following the session or  the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Constitution
of the
National
Sculptors and
Artists
Artisans of
Rural Areas
Welfare
Board.
Functions of
the Board.
.
Power to make
rules.
Annual
Report.
Constitution
of the
Sculptors and
Artists of
Rural Areas
Welfare Fund.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The sculptors and artists working in the rural areas are living in miserable condition.
The benefits of development have not reached them. In the age of globalisation and
information technology, it has become very difficult for these people to earn their livelihood.
Several generations of these sculptors and artists have spent their whole life to keep alive
these traditional arts and for providing other useful articles and entertainment to the
community. Despite public recognition, these people are not able to meet the both ends due
to meagre income.
In rural areas, the traditional folk arts are popular means of entertainment. But with the
invasion of television, it is increasingly becoming difficult for them to earn their livelihood.
Even today, these people are engaged in preserving our traditional art. Government should
come forward to provide assistance to these folk artists so that they can lead a dignified life.
In view of the miserable condition of these artists, it is the duty of the Government to
provide social security and other financial assistance to them by formulating and
implementing appropriate policies for their welfare.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; SUNIL KUMAR SINGH
April 13, 2016.

4
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for constitution of a Fund for the welfare of sculptors and
artists in the rural areas. Clause 4 provides for constitution of a Board to administer the
National Fund for the Welfare of Sculptors and Artists in the rural areas. The Bill, therefore,
if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India.  It is likely to
involve an annual recurring expenditure of rupees five hundred crore from the Consolidated
Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.

5
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the welfare of sculptors and artists in rural areas and
for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Sunil Kumar Singh, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—174LS(S3)—03-05-2016.