THE CINEMATOGRAPH (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 1958 

of 19S2, 
r 
further to amend the Cinematograph Act, 1952. ' 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Ninth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
, 1. This Act may be called the Cinematograph (Amendment>. Act, Short title. 
1958. 
5 2. In section 1 of the Cinematograph Act, 1952 (hereinafter refer- Amendment 
red to as the principal Act), in sub-section (2), for the words and of section I. 
letter "Part C States", the words "the Union territories" shall be 
substituted. 
3. In section 2 of the principal Act, after clause (d), the following Amendment 
10 clause shall be inserted, namely: _ of section 2. 
15 
lu 
'(dd) "film" means a cinematograph ,film;'. 
4. For sections 3, 4, 5 and 6 of the principal Act, the following Substitution 
sections shall be substituted namely'- of new sec-, • tions for 
sections 
3.4, sand 6. 
"3. (1) For the purpose' of sanetioning ft~msfor publicexhi- Board of 
bitlon, the Central Government may, by notiftcatlon in the Film Cen-
Official Gazette, constitute B Board to be called the Board of son. 
Fihn Censors which shall consist of a Chairman and not more 
than nine other members appointed by the Central Govern-
ment. 
(2) The Chairman of the BGard shall reeelve such salary 
and allowances as may be determined by the Central' GOivern· 
ment, and the other members shall receive such aU4)wances 
or fees for attendiag the meetings of the Boarcl.. may" be 
prescribed. 

Rumination 
of fihm. 
AdvilOry 
panell. 
2 
(3) The other terms and conditions of service of the mem-
bers of the Board shall be such as may be prescribed. 
4. (1) Any person desiring to exhibit any film shall in 
the prescribed manner make an application to the Board for a 
certiftcate in respect thereof, and the Board may, after examin- 5 
ing or having the film examined in the prescribed manner,-
(i) sanction the film for unrestricted public exhibition; 
or 
(ti) sanction the film for public exhibition restricted 
to adults; or 10 
(iii) direct the applicant to carry out such excisions or 
modiftcations in the ftlm as it thinks necessary before 
sanctioning the film for unrestricted public exhibition or 
for public exhibition restricted to adults. as the case may 
be; or 15 
(iv) refuse to sanction the film for public exhibition. 
(2) No action under clause (ii), clause (iii) or clause (tv) 
of sub-section (1) shall be taken by the Board except after 
giving an opportunity to the applicant for representing his 
views in the matter. lO 
5. (1) For the purpose of enabling the Board to effieiently 
dAaeharge its hmctions under this Ad, the Central Govemment 
may establish at such regional centres as it thinks fit. advisory 
panels each of which shall consist of such number of persons, 
beb,lg persons qualified in the opinion of the Central Govern- as 
mat to judge the elect of films on the public, as the Central 
Government may think fit to appoint thereto. 
(2) At each regional centre there shall be as many regional 
ofacers as the Central Government may think fit to appoint, 
aDel rules made in this behalf may provide for the association 30 
of regional officers in the examiDatlon of ft1ms. 
(3) The Board may consult in such manner as may be 
preseribed any advisory panel in respect of any film for Which 
an application for a certificate has been made. 
(4)' It shall be the duty of every such advisory panel 3.5 
< wh~~her acting as a body or in committees as may be provided 
in \be rules made' in' this behalf to examine the film and to 
mak~ ~ recom~endatio,ns to the ,Baa'rd as it thinks ftt. 

5 
10 
3 
(5) Th~ members- of the advisory panel $ball not be entitled 
to any 'lialary but shall receive such fees or allowanees as may 
be prescribed. 
5A. (l) If, after e; ·.lmining a film or having it examined in Certification 
the manner provided in this Act, the Board considers that the of film~. 
film is suitable for unrestricted public exhibition or that, although 
not suitable for such exhibition, it is suitable for public exhibition 
restricted to adults, it shall grant to the person applying for a 
certificate in respect of a film a "U" certificate in the former case 
and an "A" certificate in the latter case, and shall in either case 
cause the film to be so marked in the prescribed manner. 
(2) A certificate granted or an order refusing to grant a 
certificate in respect of any film shall be published in the Gazette 
of India. 
IS (3) Subject to the other provisions contained in this Act, a 
certificate granted by the Board under this section shall be valid 
throughout India for a period of ten yatrs. 
5B. (1) A film shall not be certified for public exhibition if, in Principks 
the opinion of the authority competent to grant the certificate f~r ~~1f~~g 
.20 the film or any part of it is against the interests of the security films. 
of the State, friendly relations with foreign States, Public order, 
decency or morality, or involves defamation or contempt of 
court or is likely to incite the commission of any offence. 
(2) Subject to the provisions contained in sub-section (l), 
25 the Central Government may issue such directions as it may 
think fit setting out the principles which shall guide the authority 
competent to grant certificates under this Act in sanctioning films 
for public exhibition. 
5C· Any person applying for a certificate in respect of a film Appcab. 
30 who is aggrieved by any order of the Board-
(a) refusing to grant a certificate; or 
(b) granting only an "A" certificate; or 
(c) directing the applicant to carry out any excisions or 
modifications; . 
35 may, within thirty days from the date of such order, appeal 
to the Central Government, and the Central Government may, 
after such inquiry into the matter as it considers necessary and 
after giving the appellant an opportunity for representing his 
views in the matter, make such order in relation thereto as it 
40 thinks fit. 

Revisional 
powers of 
the Central 
Government. 
4 
6. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Part, the 
Central Government may at My stage call for the reeord of. any 
proceeding in relation to any film which is pending before, or has 
been decided by, the Board, and after such inquiry into the matter 
as it considers necessary, make such order in relation thereto as 5 
it thinks fit, and the Board shell dispose of the matter in confor-
mity with such order: 
Provided that no such order shall be made prejudicially 
affecting any person applying for a certificate or to whom a 
certificate has been granted, as the case may be, except after 10 
giving him an opportunity for representing his views in the 
matter. 
(2) Without prejudice to the powers conferred on it under 
sub-section (I), the Central Government may, by notiftcat1on in 
the Official Gazette, direct that- IS 
(a) a film which has been granted Q certificate shall be 
deemed to be an uncertified film in the whole or any part of 
India; or . 
(b) a film which has been granted. a "U" certificate shall 
be deemed to be a film in respect of which an "A" certificate 20 
bas been granted; or 
(c) the exhibition of any film be suspended for such 
period as may be specified in the direction: 
Provided that no direction issued under clause (c) shall 
remain in force for more than two months from the date of :l.5 
the notification. 
(3) No action shall be taken under clause (a) or clause (b) 
of sub-section (2) except after giving an opportunity to the 
person concerned for representing his views in the matter. 
(4) During the period in which a fUm remains suspended 30 
under clause (c) of sub-section (2), the film shall be deemed to 
.be an uncertified film.". 
IUHrlion of 5. After section 7 of the principal Act, the following sections shall new sections . 7A, 78, etc be Inserted, namely:-
Power of 
seizure. "·7A. (1) Where a film in respect of which no certificate has 3S 
been granted under this Act is exhibited, or a ftlm certified as 
suitable for public exhibition restricred to adults is exhibited to 
any person who is not an adult or a film is exhibited in contra-
vention of any of the other provisions contained in this Act or of 
any order made by the Central Government or the Board in the 40 
exercise of any of the powers co~ferred on it, any poUce.,offtcer 

5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
6 
rooy, in pursuance of an order made in this behalf by the district 
magistrate or by any magistrate of the first class empowered in 
this behalf by the district magistrate, enter any place in which 
he has reason to believe that the film has been or is being or is 
likely to be exhibited, search it and seize the film. 
(2) All searches under this Act shall be carried out in aceord-
ance with the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, 
relating to searches. . • 
7B. The Central Government may, by general or special Delegation 
order, direct that any power, authority or jurisdiction exercisable of Bopowers 
by the Board under this Act shall, in relation to such matters and by ard. 
subject to such conditions, if any, as may be specified in the order, 
be exercisable also by the Chairman or any other member of the 
Board, and anything done or action taken by the Chainnan or 
other member specified in the order shall be deemed to be a· thing 
done or action taken by the Board. 
7C. Fol' the purpose of exercising any of the powers con- Power to 
ferred on it by this Act, the Central Government or the Board direct ex-
. fil t b h'b't d b f . b f hibition of may requIre any moe ex lIe e ore It or e ore any films for 
person specified by it in this behalf. examination. 
7D. No act or proceeding of the Board or of any advisory Vacancies, 
panel shall be deemed to be invalid by reason only -of a vaeancy i~~'~id~~: to 
in, or ~my defect in, the constitution of the Board or panel, as the proceeding. 
case may be. 
7E. All members of the Board and of 'any advisory panel Members of 
shall, when acting or purporting to act in pursuance of any of thed d~oard an a visory 
the provisions of this Act, be deemed to be public servants within panels to be 
the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code. ~~:tl~~ 9cr-
7F. No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Bar of .leaa 
Central Government, the Board, advisory panel or any officer or proceedings. 
member of the Central Government, Board or advisory panel, as 
the case may be, in respect of anything which is in good faith 
done or intended to be done under this Act.". 
6. For sub-section (3) of section 8 of the principal Act, the follow- AmendmcI\1 
35 ing sub-section shall be substitured, namely: _ of ~ec:tion 8. 
"(3) All rules made by the Central Government under this 
Part shall be laid for not less than thirty days before each House 
of Parliament as soon as may be after they are made, and shall 
be subject to such modifications as Parliament may make during 
the session in which they are so laid or the session immediately 
following.". 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
As a result of the experience gained in the working of the 
Cinematograph Act, 1952, for the last six years, it is considA!re<i 
necessary to make certain changes in its provisions for clarification, 
without making any, substantial cha.nge in the working of the 
present Act. . 
Section 3 of the Cinematograph Act, 1952, empowers the Central 
Government to constitute a Board of Film Censors consisting of 
such number of persons as may be prescribed for the purpose of 
examining and certifying films as suitable for public exhibition. 
The films are examined by the regional officers with the aid of the 
advisory panels consisting of non-officials. The composition of the 
Board, the constitution of the advisory panels and the procedure for 
examination of films by the regional officers with the aid of the 
advisory panels are at present laid down in the Rules. The Bill 
makes express provisions in this behalf in the principal Act. It also 
incorporates the principles for guidance in certifying films, based on 
the provisions of article 19 (2) of the Constitution. In addition, 
the Bill makes provision for certain matters of a procedural and 
routine character. 
N1tW DELHI.; 
The 8th December, 1958. B. V. KESKAR. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
The Bill seeks to include express provisions in the principal Act, 
respecting the composition of the Board of Film Censors and. the 
constitution of advisory panels to enable the Board to perfom 
its functions of sanctioning films for public exhibition. As at present 
the Chairman will continue to be a wholetime official and the 
members will be non-officials, working part-time in an honorary 
capacity. They will be paid travelling allowance only for attending 
meetings in connection with the work of the Board. The advisory 
panels have been constituted at present at Bombay, Calcutta and 
Madras under the Rules framed under the Act. Their member-
ship is also honorary, but conveyance allowance at the rate of 
Rs. 10/- per di'em is paid to them for attending film shows or meet-
ings convened by regional officers in connection with the examination 
of films. The annual expenditure on the salary of the Chairman, 
the travelling allowance of the members of the Board and convey-
ance allowance of the members of the advisory panels is estimated at 
Rs. 90,000/-. The expenditure on these items is already being 
incurred through appropriations made by Parliament, and no 
additional expenditure is anticipated . 
• 
1501 L.S.-·2 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the determination by th'e Central 
Government of the salary and allowances payable to the Chairman 
and the fees or allowances to the other members of the Board of 
Film Censors and to the members of the advisory panels. It also 
provides for determination of other terms and conditions of service 
of the members of the Board and the advisory panels. It empo~rs 
the Central Government to prescribe the manner in which applica-
tions shall be made to the Board for certification of films. The rule 
making power already conferrs by section 8 of the Act is sufficiently 
comprehensive to enable all such matters b'eing regulated by rules. 
All that the amending Bill seeks to do is to refer to these topics 
• in the body of the Act in appropriate places. The rul'e making 
i-"'lower is of a normal character. , 
• 
8 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE CINEMATOGRAPH AC'r, 1952 
(No. 37 OF 1952) 
An Act to make provision for the certification of cinematograph films 
for exhibition and for regulating exhibitions by means of cine-
matographs. 
BE it enacted by Parliament as follows:-
PART I 
PRELIMINARY 
1. 0) This Act may be called the Cinematograph Act, 1952. Short title, 
extent and 
(2) Parts I, II and IV extend to the whole of India except the commence-. ment. State of Jammu and Kashmlr and Part III extends to Part C States 
only. 
(3) This Act shall come into force on such date as the Central 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires- Definition •• 
(a) "adult" means a person who has completed his 
eighteenth year; 
(b) "board" means the Board of Film Censors constituted 
by the Central Government under section 3; 
(c) "cinematograph" includes any apparatus for the repre-
sentation of moving pictures or series of pictures; 
(d) "district magistrate", in relation to a presidency-town 
means the Commissioner of Police; 
(e) "place" includes a house, building. tent and any descrip-
tion of transport, whether by sea, land or air; 
(f) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this 
Act. 
PART II 
CERTIFICATION OF FILMS FOR PUBLIC EXHIBITION 
3. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Board ofrum 
Gazette, constitute a Board of Film Censors, consisting of such num- Censors. 
ber of persons as may be prescribed, for the purpose of examining 
9 

10 
and certifying films as suitable for unrestricted public exhibition or 
for public exhibition restricted to adults and prescribe the manner 
in which the Board shall exercise the powers conferred on it 
by this Act. 
Certification 4. (1) If the Board, after examination, considers that a film is 
of films. suitable for unrestricted public exhibition or that, although not 
suitable for such exhibition it is suitable for public exhibition res-
tricted to adults, it shan grant to the person applying for a certi-
ficate in respect of the film a "U" certificate in the former case and 
an "A" certificate in the latter case, and shall, in either case, 
cause the film to be so marked in the prescribed manner, and any 
such certificate shell, save as hereinafter provided, be valid through-
out India. 
Appeals. 
(2) If the Board is of opinion that a film is neither suitable for 
unrestricted public exhibition nor for public exhibition restricted 
to adults, it shall inform the person applying for the certificate of 
its decision. 
5. (1) Any person applying for a certificate, who is aggrieved by 
the decision of the Board-
(a) refusing to grant a certificate, or 
(b) granting only an "A" certificate, may, within thirty 
days from the date of such decision, appeal to the Central Gov-
ernment, and the Central Government may, after such inquiry 
into the matter as it considers necessary, pass such orders there-
on as it thinks fit. 
(2) If the Central Government rejects an appeal on the ground 
that a film is neither suitable for unrestricted public exhibition nor 
for public exhibition restricted to adults, it shall, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, direct that the film shall be deemtd to be an 
uncertified film in th{! whole of India. 
(3) For the purpose of disposing of any appeal under this sec-
tion, the Central Government may demand the exhibition of any 
film before any authority specified in this behalf and call for the 
report of such authority thereon. 
(4) No.thing in this section shall prevent the Central Gbvernment 
from calling at any time for the, record of any proceeding of the 
Board relating to the refusal to grant, or the grant of, any certificate 
and in which no appeal has been preferred and to make such order 
In the case as to the Central Government may seem fit. 

• II 
6. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Part, the Central Power of 
Government may, of its own motion by notification in the Oftlcial ~=~n?~~ 
Gazette direct that- modify 
, orders under 
(a) a certified film shaII be deemed to be an uncertified film tect~on 4 or sC'ctlCln 5. 
in the whole or any part of India; or 
(b) a film in respect of which a "U" certificate has been 
granted, shall be deemed to be a film in respect of which an 
"A" certificate has been granted; or 
(c) the exhibition of any film be suspended for such period 
as may be specified in the direction: 
Provided that no direction issued under clause (c) shall 
remain in force for more than two months from the date of the 
notification. 
6A. Any person who delivers any certified film to any distributor Information 
or exhibitor shall, in such manner as may be prescribed, notify to ~e~lts d~~be 
the distributor or exhibitor, a.s the case may be, the title, the g~ve~L. to . dlstrlL.utors 
length of the film, the number and the nature of the certIficate and cxhibi-
granted in respect thereof and the conditions, if any, subject to tors with . respect to 
which it has been so granted, and any other particulars respectmg certified 
the film which may be prescribed. films. 
7. (1) If any person-
(a) exhibits or permits to be exhibited in any place-
(i) any film other than a film which has been certified by 
the Board as suitable for unrestricted public exhibition or for 
Public exhibition restricted to adults and whi<!h, when exhi-
bited displays the prescribed mark of the Board and has 
not been altered or tampered with in any way since such 
mark was affixed thereto, 
(ii) any film, whil:!h has been certified by the Board as 
suitable for public exhibition restricted to adults, to any 
person who is not an adult, or 
(b) without lawful authority (the burden of proving 
which shall be on him), alters or tampers with in any way any 
film after it has been certified, or 
(c) fails to comply with the provision contained in section 
6A or with any order made by the Central Government or by 
the Board in the exercise of any of the powers or functions con-
ferred on it by this Act or the rules made thereunder, 
he shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to 
three months, or with· fine which m'~ extend to one thousand 
Penalties f rJI 
contraven-
tions of this 
Pari. 

• 12 
rupees, or with both, and in the case of a continuing offence with a 
further fine which may extend to one thousand rupees for each day 
during which the offence continues. 
(2) If any person is convicted of an offence punishable ~m~er 
this section committed by him in respect of any film, the conVlctmg 
court may further direct that the film shall be forfeited to the 
Government. 
(3) The exhibition of a film, in respect of which an "A" certifi-. 
cate has been granted, to children below the age of three years 
accompanying their parents or guardians shall not be deemed to be 
an offence within the meaning of this section. 
1'ower to 8. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the 
make rules. Official Gazette, make rules for the purpose of carrying into effect 
the provisions of this Part. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, rules made under this section may provide for-
(a) the number of persons who may constitute the ,Board 
and the manner in which the Board may exercise its powers, 
including the delegation of any of the powers of the Board to 
such person or persons as the Board may nominate in that 
behalf; 
(b) the procedure of the Board for examining and certifying 
films as suitable for public exhibition and all matters ancillary 
thereto and the fees that may be levied by the Board; 
(c) the appointment of officers subordinate to the Board 
and the regulation of the terms and conditioBS of service and 
the powers and duties of such officers; 
(d) the conditions (including conditions relating to thp. 
length of films in general or any class of films, in particular) 
subject to which any certificate may be granted, or the circums-
tances in which any certificate shall be refused; 
(e) the manner in which an appeal under this Part may be 
preferred; 
(f) any other matter which by this Act is to be prescribed. 
(3) Alll rules made by the Central Government under this Part 
shall be laid before Parliament as soon as may be after they are 
made. 
Power to 9. The Central Government may, by order in writing exempt, 
exempt. subject to such conditions and :restrictions, if any, as it may impose, 
the exhibition of any film or class of films from any of the provisioIUl 
of this Part or of any rules made thereunder. 
• • • • 

tOK SAnHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Cinematograph Act, 1952 
The President has, in pursuance of clause (3) of article 117 of 
the Constitution of India, recommended to Lok Sabha 
the consideration of the Bill. 
M. N.KAUL, 
Secretary. 
(Dr. B. V. Keskar, 
Minister of Information 
and Broadcastmg.) 