1
THE VOLUNTARY ORGANISATION (REGULATION) BILL, 2017
By
SHRI NISHIKANT  DUBEY, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for recognition and regulation of voluntary organisations and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the V oluntary Organisations (Regulation) Act, 2017.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. 131 of  2017
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK  SABHA

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means  in the case of  a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "Fund" means the V oluntary Organisations Assistance Fund established
under section 10;
(c) "National Board" means the National Board of V oluntary Organisations
established under section 3;
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(e) "V oluntary Organisation" means any organisation or institution or society,
whether incorporated or registered or not, which is engaged in any of the following
activities, namely:—
(i) promoting literacy and adult education;
(ii) involved in relief operations during natural calamities like floods,
earthquakes, storms, squalls and likewise;
(iii) involved in relief operations and providing assistance to victims in
cases of accidents;
(iv) involved in relief operations and providing assistance to victims during
strikes and other forms of disturbances;
(v) organizing free medical camps, distributing free medicines, promoting
in any way health awareness among general public or running free and charitable
dispensaries;
(vi) providing assistance to orphaned children and running children homes
for orphans;
(vii) running schools for orphaned and destitute children and providing
them with all necessary facilities;
(viii) running homes for destitute women and providing all facilities and
training in self-employment;
(ix) running homes for aged and old persons, wherein all necessary facilities
and support are provided;
(x) creating awareness among general public regarding pollution hazards
and teaching methods of pollution control;
(xi) creating awareness among general public regarding dangerous diseases
like AIDS and other contagious diseases;
(xii) creating awareness among general public about family planning;
(xiii) creating awareness among general public about ill effects of social
evils like dowry, domestic discords and negligence of dependant persons;
(xiv) creating awareness among general public about the need for religious,
caste and linguistic harmony and educating public about measures to be adopted
to achieve harmony;
(xv) spreading and taking all necessary steps to enable people to lead a
peaceful and healthy life and for improving general standard of life,
without any profit or commercial intention or motive.
Definitions.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette,  establish
a National Board to be known as the National Board of Voluntary Organisations for carrying
out the purposes of this Act.
(2) The headquarters of the National Board shall be at New Delhi.
(3) The National Board shall consist of—
(i) a Chairperson who shall have experience in social services for a period of
not less than ten years, to be appointed by the Central Government;
(ii) four other members who shall have experience in social services for a
period of not less than five years, to be nominated by Central Government in such
manner as may be prescribed.
(4) The Chairperson and other members of the Board shall hold office for a term of
five years.
(5) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of
service of the Chairperson and members of the Board, shall be such as may be prescribed.
4. ( 1) The Central Government shall establish a Regional Board of Voluntary
Organisations in the capital of every State/Union territory.
(2) The Regional Board shall consist of—
(i) a Chairperson who shall have experience in social services for a period of
not less than ten years, to be appointed by the Central Government;
(ii) two other members who shall have experience in social services for a period
of not less than five years, to be nominated by the Central Government on the basis of
recommendation of the State Government concerned;
(3) The Chairperson and other members of the Regional Board shall hold office for a
term of five years.
(4) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of
service of the Chairperson and members of the Regional Board, shall be such as may be
prescribed.
5. (1) The Central Government shall make available to the National Board and the
Regional Boards such number of officers and employees as may be necessary for the
efficient performance of their functions.
(2) The salaries and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service
of the officers and employees of the National Board and the Regional Boards shall be such
as may be prescribed.
6. Every voluntary organisation shall, within a period of three months from the date of
commencement of this Act, shall apply to the Regional Board for registration with such
particulars as may be prescribed.
7. Every Regional Board shall, within one month from the date of receipt of an
application from a voluntary organisation, declare whether the application for registration
has been accepted or rejected and in case the application has been rejected, the reasons
therefor.
8. Any voluntary organisation, whose application for registration has been rejected
may appeal to the National Board in such manner as maybe prescribed.
9. The National Board shall, after hearing the views of the Regional Board and the
voluntary organisation concerned, take a decision, which shall be binding on both the parties:
Provided that the National Board may before taking a decision, consult experts in the
relevant fields.
Establishment
of a National
Board of
Voluntary
Organisations.
Regional
Board of
V oluntary
Organisations.
Employees of
National Board
and Regional
Board.
Application for
registration.
Registration.
Appeal.
Decision of
National
Board.
5
10
1515
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
10. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette,
constitute a Voluntary Organisations Welfare Fund for carrying out the purposes of this
Act.
(2) The Central Government and the State Governments shall contribute to the Fund
in such ratio as may be prescribed.
11. (1) The Central Government shall administer the Fund in such manner as may be
prescribed.
(2) The Central Government shall, after due appropriation  made by Parliament by
law in this behalf make a grant to each Voluntary organisation every year or at such
intervals as it may deem necessary.
(3) While making a grant under sub-section (2), the Central Government shall
consult the National Board and the Member of Parliament representing the constituency in
which the head office of the organisation is situated:
Provided that the National Board may consult the Regional Board concerned in whose
jurisdiction the head office of the voluntary organisation is situated before recommending to
the Central Government for release of grant.
12. Every V oluntary Organisation, which is in receipt of grant from the Central
Government, shall send an annual report to the Regional Board about its activities during the
year and a statement of receipts and expenditure of the organisation.
13. Every Regional Board shall send the annual reports received from the voluntary
organisations under its jurisdiction to the National Board alongwith its comments on the
performance of the voluntary organisations.
14. The Central Government may, after due consultation with the National Board,
reduce the amount of grant or withhold the total amount of grant payable to a voluntary
organisation for such period as it may determine.
15. If, after an enquiry, it is found that any voluntary organisation does not utilise the
money for the purpose for which it was granted or involves itself in any activities other than
for which it was formed, the Regional Board may recommend to the National Board for taking
such action against the voluntary organisation as it may deem fit.
16. The National Board on receipt of a report from a Regional Board, shall take such
action against the V oluntary Organisation, as it may deem fit.
17. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses
agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under
that rule.
Constitution
of a Voluntary
Organisations
Welfare Fund.
Administration
of Fund.
Annual Report
of V oluntary
Organisation.
Regional
Boards to send
annual reports
to National
Board.
Withholding
of grants to
V oluntary
Organisation.
Regional
Board to
recommend
action against
V oluntary
Organisation.
National
Board to take
action.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
V oluntary Organisations play a significant role in the development of a nation. They
supplement the activities of the Government in times of crisis. In times of natural calamities,
voluntary organisations come to the rescue of affected persons even before the Government
agencies. They are doing a yeomen service to the society. These V oluntary Organisations
are engaging themselves in wide range of activities i.e. in providing education, health care,
running homes for orphaned children, old age homes, providing free food and medicines to
the needy people, etc. However, many of the V oluntary Organisations are lacking adequate
funds to undertake their activities. They mainly depend upon funds received through
contributions and donations which are not enough to meet their expenditure. Moreover,
there is no mechanism at present, for registration and regulation of the affairs of voluntary
organisations. They do not have any statutory recognition.
At present, Government provides grants to many V oluntary Organisations. But there
is no check on utilisation of money granted to them and their activities. As such, these
organisations utilise the money for the purposes other than for which it was granted. On the
other hand genuine V oluntary Organisations are deprived of any assistance from the
Government.
There is an urgent need to provide for registration and regulation of V oluntary
Organisations for their better involvement in welfare activities.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; NISHIKANT DUBEY
June 29, 2017.
5

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of a National Board of Voluntary
Organisations. Clause 4 provides for the setting up of Regional Boards in the capital of every
State and Union territory. Clause 5 makes provision for appointment of officers and staff of
the Boards. Clause 10 provides for the constitution of a Voluntary Organisations Welfare
Fund to which both Central and State Governments will contribute. Clause 11 provides for
making grants to voluntary organisations every year. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will
involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely to involve an annual
recurring expenditure of about rupees one thousand crore from the Consolidated Fund of
India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five crore is also likely to be involved.
6

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 17 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of details only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
7

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for recognition and regulation of voluntary organizations and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Nishikant Dubey, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—912LS(S3)—20.07.2017.