5
Short title and 
commencement.
Amendment of 
section 6.
As introduced in Lok Sabha
 
   Bill No. 131 of  2022
THE COMPENSATORY AFFORESTATION FUND 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022
By
Dr. Heena Vijaykumar Ga vit, M.P.
A
BILL
to amend the Compensatory Afforestation Fund Act, 2016.
 Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:—
 1. ( 1) This Act may be called the Compensatory Afforestation Fund (Amendment)  
Act, 2022.
  ( 2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
 2.  In section 6 of the Compensatory Afforestation Fund Act, 2016 (hereinafter referred 
to as the principal Act), after clause (h) the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
“(i)  State authority shall prioritise the native plants and flora over artificial 
afforestation for fulfilling purposes mentioned under clauses (a), (b), (c) and (d);10
38 of 2016

2
10
5
Amendment of 
section 16.
(j) State authority shall exhaust all but twenty per cent of the funds before the end 
of each financial year;
(k) State authority shall use the funds only for the purposes mentioned under this 
section and any use of fund for purposes other than the purposes mentioned under this 
section shall lead to legal action against the State Authority.”.
 3. In section 16 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1),—
  ( i) after clause (iii), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
“(iv) ensure that the State Authorities may not trample upon the rights conferred 
under the Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of 
Forest Rights Act, 2006)  (Act No. 2 of 2007) and the Panchayat (Extension to the 
Scheduled Areas) Act, 1996 (Act No. 40 of 1996 ); and 
(v) inspect and undertake social audits of works executed by State Authorities 
twice in every six months.”.

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
India faces the combined challenges of the COVID-19 and the climate change crisis. 
India continues to fight the pandemic and global climate change, as demonstrated by 
heroic efforts by public health officers and powerful climate commitments. Given these 
commitments, 2022 may be a critical year for implementation in India and around the world. 
India is rapidly developing, the alternative modes in terms of energy sources will have 
profound impact on the planet. Communities are already seeing the catastrophic impacts of 
global climate change from unprecedented flooding to record-breaking heatwaves across 
India. The 2021 Inter-governmental Panel on Global Climate Change (IPCC) report finds 
that if we don’t transform course, there will be dire climate change-induced consequences 
for the planet. India, a developing economy where an outsized portion of the infrastructure 
needed for the long term is yet to be built, is critical during this equation. 
With dangerously high pollution levels and continued respiratory threats from 
COVID-19, the necessity to guard public health in India is urgent. For reducing pollution, 
India recently announced plans to scale clean air programs to a national mission, “Clean Air 
for All”. Elevating India’s clean air programs to “mission-mode” is critical, as demonstrated 
in the past by the National Solar Mission and other missions. The new mission combined 
with the National Clean Air Program (NCAP) is active in 132 Indian cities with city-level 
Clean Air Plans (CAPs) aimed to scale back ambient particulate (PM) concentrations. 
Ambitious actions to implement pollution control strategies that stop pollution under the 
CAPs can help deliver transformative and lasting improvements for public health in India’s 
fight against dangerous pollution and global climate change.
Air conditioning used in India is additionally expected to rise dramatically within 
the next decade because the subcontinent continues to experience dangerously high 
temperatures. Expanding cooling strategies starting from cool roofs to improved air 
conditioners is significant in India. The India Cooling Action Plan (ICAP) aims to phase 
down super-pollutants hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs) and reduce cooling demand through the 
energy-efficient room and mobile air conditioners, and cold chain advancements, and reduce 
cooling demand through improved building energy efficiency and cool roofs. Weather may 
be a major health threat in India and in other parts of the planet because global climate 
change is fuelling more frequent, intense, and longer heatwaves. In response to the present 
mounting threat, cities and regions across India are taking concrete actions to create resilience 
and better prepare and protect communities. A combination of strategies, like the ICAP, Heat 
Action Plans, and cool roof programs are critical to beat the warmth and supply life-saving 
and sustainable cooling to over 1.3 billion people. Research shows that heat action plans can 
help avoid heat-related deaths and build resilience to extreme heat across India.
Moreover, the Compensatory Afforestation Fund Management and Planning Authority 
(CAMPA) 2016 tramples upon the rights of the tribals of the country. Not only does it go 
beyond the purview of the Forest Rights Act, 2006 and the Panchayat (Extension to the 
Scheduled Areas) Act, 1996 but also doesn’t provide enough transparency into the afforested 
lands. The tribals should have a say in their lands and in the type of flora that is afforested in 
the allotted areas. Therefore, it is necessary to amend the existing Act to accommodate the 
tribal society and as well as to stop the current discrimination against their rights. 

4
Moreover, the Compensatory Afforestation Fund Management and Planning Authority 
funds don’t help the tribals secure rehabilitation that is caused by the developmental projects 
that CAMPA funds cover. The Government needs to do much more than just cut down 
trees and evict its tribal population. It is paramount to come up with new laws to increase 
afforestation and work on the existing ones. The amendment seeks to strengthen CAMPA 
funds to be utilised well and for them to be exhausted to help the environment grow and 
not garner interest on the existing funds. It is  also a step to introduce more and more native 
flora, make aware the present and future generations and help sustain the native fauna. The 
funds should help empower the work it is meant to be and shouldn’t be used elsewhere like 
found in some States. If implemented, this Bill will help the country curb climate change 
and create safer living conditions in the longer run.
Hence this Bill.
     New Delhi;                                                              HEENA VIJAYKUMAR GA VIT  
5 July, 2022. 

ANNEXURE
Extract from the Compensatory Afforestation Fund Act, 2016
(38 OF 2016)
 *                             *           *            *                *
6. Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the monies available in a State Fund shall 
be disbursed and utilised in the following manner, namely:— 
 *                             *           *            *                *
(h) State Authority shall release monies to agencies identified for execution of 
activities in pre-determined installments as per the annual plan of operation finalised 
by steering committee of such State Authority and executive committee of the National 
Authority.
 *                             *           *            *                *
16. ( 1) The monitoring group shall—
(i) *             *             *             *                *
(iii) devise measures for transparency and accountability.
 *                             *           *            *                *
Disbursement 
and utilisation 
of State Fund.
Functions of 
monitoring 
group.
5

LOK SABHA
A
BILL
to amend the Compensatory Afforestation Fund Act, 2016.
(Dr. Heena Vijaykumar Gavit, M.P.)