BillKo. 181 01 1818. 
THE COLLECTION OF STATISTICS BILL, 1952 
(As INTRODUCED IN TUE HOUSE OF THE PEOPT,E) 
A 
BILI.J 
to facilitate the collection of RtatisticR of certain hinds relating to indultri6l, 
trade and commerce. 
B~ it enacted by Parliament as follows:-
1. Short title, utent &nd commencement.-(1) This Act may be 
called the Collection of Statistics Act, 1952. 
(.9) It ('xteuds to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir. 5 
(3) It shall cOllie iIlto fOl'ce on such elate as the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette", appoint. . 
2. De8nltlou.-In this Act. unless the context otherwise requires.-
(a) "approprinte Government" mcnus-
(i) the Central Government, in relation to the collection of 10 
statistics under II. directioll isslwrl by it undAr section 8, and 
(ii) the State Government, ill relation to the collt>etion of 
statistics under a direotion issued by it under that section; 
(h) "commercial concern" means II. public limited eompany.or a 
co~operative j:lociety or n firm or any other pprson or bod,. of persons 15 
Angaged in trade or commerce, Bud inclndeR-
(I) a concern engaged in hanking or insurance; 
(il) a financial corporRtion; 
(iii) a concern tmgaged in shipping II.nd navigation; 
(iv) a concern engaged in the business of brokers dealing in 20 
shRres, stocks and securities and commodities; 
(v) a concern engBged in the business of advertising con. 
sultants; 
(vi) Blight rBilw8Y; 
(vii) 8 concern engaged in ~oQd trans.,ort ser"ice i 21) 

(viii) a oonoenl engaged in air transport service; 
(ia:) a rubber, tea, coffee or llinchona plantation; 
(a:) II. concern engaged in the businesl:I of forwarding !!ld olear-
ing agents: 
<=) any other concern which, in the opinion of the Central 
Government, is a commeroial concern and is declared to be such 
by that Government by notification in the Official Gazette, but 
does not include 011 industrial concern: 
( c) "factory" melms 8 factory as defined in clause (m) of lection 
10 2 of the Factories Act, 1048 (LXDI of 194:8); 
80 
(d) "industrial concern" means a public limited company or a 
co-operative society or a firm or any other person or body of persons 
engaged in the manufacture, preservation or proceRsing of goods or 
in mining or in the generation or distribution of electricity or any 
other form of power; 
(e) "owner" in relation to a commercial or an indu.trial OO110enl, 
means the person who, or the authority which, hilS the ultimate 
control over the affairs of tlll~ concern, and where th~ Mid alairs are 
entrusted to n manager, managing director or mnnaging agent, such 
mauager, manngiug director or manl\ging agent shall be deemed to 
be the owner of the concern; 
(j) "prescribed" meaus prescribed by rules mode under thi. Act 
or in any form lnid down by such rules. 
3. OoI.1ection of ItatlltlCl.-The appropriate Government may, by noti-
fication in the Official Oazettl~. direct. that statistics shall be collected reo 
lating to any of the following matters, namely:-
(a) any matter relating to any industry or cl88s of indu.tries: 
(h) any matter relating to any commercial Or industrial concern 
or elMS of commercial or industrial concerns. IIDel in l,articular, RII~' 
matter reInting to fRctorip.~; 
(c) Rnv of the following mntters 80 far AS they relate to welfare 
of labour Ilnd conditions of labour, llnmely:-
(i) price of commodities; 
(;i) attendance; 
(iii) living conditiolls including housin8. water lupply and 
sanitation; 
(iv) indebtednesa; 
(v) rents of dwelling housel: 
(v~ wages and other earnings; 
(vii) provident and other funds p.·ovided for labour; 
(vi;;') benefits lind nnlt:'nities provided for la.bour; 
(iz) hours of work; ~ 
(a:) employment Bnd unemploymt'nt: ) 
(a:i) industrial Rnd labour disputes; 
and thereupon tbe provisions of this Act shall apply in re~~tioJ' t.<? ~bo~(t 
,tatittic, : ' . 

Provided 1Jba'-
(a) llothing cOlltu.ined in t.hill section shall be demned to authorise 
a tlta.to GovernlUent to illKUC IUIY dircctioll ullder this Act with respect 
to the collection of statistics relating to any matter fu.lliug under any 
of the entries specified in Lillt 1 in the tleventh tlchedule to the Consti· 6 
tutioQ; or 
(b) whore the Central (Jovct'mucnt, hilS issued any direotion 
unCler this secth:m fOl' the collection of statistics relating to any matter, 
no tltate Government shall, except with thc pl'evious approval of the 
Central Government, iSllue any similar direction for so long 88 the 10 
collection of statistics by the Central Government remains to be 
completed; or .. ' 
(0) where a tltate GoverllDlent hUt; hisucd a direction under this 
BPction for the collcction uf IItatistics relating to IIny matter, the 
Central Government shall not iSllue any similar direction for 80 long 16 
as the collection of statistics by the Stat.e Government remains to be 
comRleted, except ill cases where statistics have to be cl111ected with 
reference to two or more States, 
,. Appoilltment of .tatlltics authority.-'l'he appropriate Government 
may appoint un officer to be the statistics authority for the purpose of 20 
collecting ally statistics directed by it to be collected. 
6. Power of 8t&Uatica authority to call tor information or 1'8t1ll'lll.-
(1) The statisticli authority may Sllrve or cause to bo scrved on tho owner 
of an iudustrial or commercial COIICl'rJI or on I\ny other person a notice 
requiring him to furnish such information or rt't!lrns liS may be prescribed 26 
relating .to any matter iu respect uf which st8ti~tics are to be colleoted. 
(2) The form in which, aud the purson to whom, or the authorities to 
which, such information or retul'Ds should be furnished, the particulars 
which they should coutain and the;, intervals within which such information 
or returns should be furnished shall be such 8S may be prescribed, 30 
(3) The notioe referred to in sub-section (1) may be served by post. 
•. :atpt of ace. to recorda or docum8llta.-'rhe statistics authority 
or any person authorised by him in writing in this behalf shall, for the 
purposes of the collection of liny statistics under this Act, have acoess to 
,any relevant record or document in the possession of any person required 36 
to furnish any information or l'etUl'1l under this Act, and Dlay enter at any 
reasonable ~ime any premises where he believes Imoh record or document 
to be aud may ask any question necessary for obtaining any informatioD 
required to be furnished under this Aot, . 
'1. Be8trlctiCIIII on the publlcatlon of infOrmation and returna.-No 40 
information, lIO individual return and no part of au individual return with 
respect to any partic\1lar industrial or commercial C011cern, given for the 
purposes of this Act shall, without the previous consent ill writing of the 
owner for the time heing of tho iudustl'ial or COlUlJil'rcial conoern in relation 
to which the information or return was given or made or his authoriaed 46 
agent, be published in such mnnTler I1R would enable Rny particulars to be 
identified as referring to a particular concern. . 
(9) E~t(~ept for the pUrpOSt'B of 11 proBecut,iOl~ under this Act or under 
the Indian Penal Code (Act XIN of 1860), no person who is not engaged 

10 
16 
20 
30 
4 
in the collection of statistics under this Act shall be permitted to see Bny 
information or individual retunl referred ,to in Bub-section (1). 
8. PeiIlIlUeI.-lf BUY persoll-
(a) required to furnish ally iuformation or retunl-
(i) wilfully refuses or without lawful oX'JUS(1 negleots t,IJ 
furniSh such illtonnatioll or return Qi; may be rcquired undcr thil:\ 
Aot; or 
. (ii) wilfully furnishes or CI\USCS to be furnished allY informa-
tion or return which he knows to be false; or 
(ii.) refuscs to aUBwer or wilfully gives II. falsl~ answer to 
any quet;tion necessnr.Y for obtuinillg uny information required to 
be furnished under this Act; or 
(b) impedes the right of access to relevllnt. records or documents 
or the right of eutry conferred by section (i; 
he shall for each such offence be Illlnishnbh) with fine which InKy extend 
to five hundred rupees and in the case of 1\ eOlltinuing oflen(~e tu 11 furthcl' 
fine which may cxtcnq to two hlUUlred rupcfls for caeh day uftor thc 
first during which the oflence continues. 
ExpZanation.-In respect of false informatioll, return or answer the 
offence shl111 bc deemed to continue withill the meuning of t.his sectiou 
uutil tl'U6 informa.tion 01' II. true .retU!ll or IU1SWtll' has been given or mooe, 
9. Olances bJ compamea.-(l) If the person guilty of an offenoo UUUl'l' 
section t:I is a ('oml'any, evcry pcrsoll who ut the time the offence wus 
committed WIlS in charge of, or wus responsible to, the company for the 
conduct of the husiness of the company, 118 well liB the ('ompany, shall be 
deemed to be guilty of the oRence and shall be liable to be procceded 
against and punished aooordingly: 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render ally 
such person liable to Imy punishment provided in this Act, if he proves 
that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he exercised 
all due diligence to prevent tho commission of such ORenC(1. 
(2) Notwit,hstandiug anythiru; contLLiued in 8ub-section (1), wher~ all 
offence under this Act has b{~eu committed by a r:ompany and it· is proved 
that. the offence hus been committed with the consent or connivance of 01' 
is at~ributable to any neglect on the part of BUy director, manager, seore-
tary or other officer of the company, such director, manager, socretary or 
other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that oiIence a.nd shall 
be liable to be proceeded agaiust and punished accordingly. 
Ezplanation.-For the purposes of this sootion,-
(a) "company" means auy body corporate and inoludes a firm 
or other association of individual.; and 
(b) "director" in relation to a firm maBlls 11 partl~er in the finn, 
10. Peul. fOr Improper dllclOlUre of iDfonDattoa or Nt1ll'Dl.-lf ar~y 
penon engaged in connection with the col1ection of statistics WIder thiS 
Act wilfully c1iB~losell Rny information or the contents of I\ny return given 
01' ntade under this Act otherwise than in the execution of his duties under 
this Act or for the I'urposes of the prOl.l!'cution of an oflp-nee under this 
Act or under the Indian Penni Code (Act XLV of 1860), he shall be 

5 
~llnis'hable for sllah offence with imprisonmeut for a term which may 
extend to six months, or with fine which ma.y extend to one thousand 
rupees, or with both. 
11. OopilaDce Of oflencea.-No prosecutioll fot: 811 offonec uuder sec-
tion ~ shull be instituted except by or with the sallctioll of the statisLil'S 
authority and no prosecution for un offence Ullder RcdioH 10 shall be 
iu&tituted except by or with the COllsent of the a.ppropriate Oovernmeut, 
12. Power of Oenua! Government to give directiODl • ...o..'l'hc Central 
Government may give directious to a State Govcrnmcut us to the currying 
into executioll of this Act in the State. 
13. Protection of action taken in good !alth.-No suit or other lew,l 
proceeding shall lie against the appropl'ialie GovernnwlIL, tho lSt;atisties 
authority, or any other persoll acting under the uuthority of the nppro-
priate Governnlent or of the statisties authority ill respol·t of unything 
whi{'h is in good faith done or int,ended to be done ill pursuance of this 
Ad or of any rules or dire{,'tions il>sued thereunder. 
U. Power to make rulea.-(l) 'I'he appJ'opriute GoverlJrnellt JJIILY, Imh-
ject to the condition of previous }>UbUClltioll, by notification in the OfUcial 
Gazette, make rules for the purpose of currying out tho purposes of this 
.\('t. 
(2) Without prejudioe to the generality of the foregoing power, rules 
ma.y be made ulllll~I' this section for ull or llny of tho following Jrmtt-erl:;, 
Jlamely:-
(a) the form and manner in which the information Bnd rcturml 
10 
15 
20 
may be furnished, the particulars which t.hey should oontain, the 25 
interva.ls within which und the authority to which such inforUlution 
and rot urns may be furnished; , 
(b) the ma.nner in which the right of IlClleS8 to domlmonts and tho 
right of entry conferred by section 6 may be exercised; and 
(c) any other ma.tter which is to be or may be prescribed under 30 
1iliiBl Act. 
15. Bepeal.-The Industrial ..statistics Act, H142 (XIX of 1942), is 
hereby repealed 

e 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
It has been felt that at present Government have very limited legal 
powers to colled statistios for the various 8ubjllcts which l\rl~ the ".on-
(!orll of the Centre, partioularly in the indust,rilll und commeroial field. It 
is also considered that the existing arrangemeuts for gtltting trlllle statistics 
through the Customs authorities and statisti(,Yol data in rtll:lpeot of speoific 
oommodities Wlder the relevant Aots, are also not very comprehensive. 
Accordingly, Government have largely to depend on the voluntary co-
operation of the interests concerned in regard to the I'ollection of statisti(!ul 
data from industrial concerns a.nd busin('ss houst>s. 
2. Recently, in order to assess the extent to which foreign owned r~llIl 
controlled firms engaged Indians and foreign nationals, a notific'ation calling 
upon all undertakings to furnish the stlltisths wus issueU in all important 
English daily newspapers all over Indiu. The response to the notification 
has not however been very satisfactory. Though Gl",ernment clln exert 
pressure to make certain firms submit returns, it is expedient that Govern-
ment should be armed with powers to eompel all ('.oneern8 (including 
Managing Agency firms) engaged in (a) trude RIllI commerce with foreign 
countries, (b) inter-State trade and commerce, (c) trading firms or Corpora-
tions, incorporated. registered or otherwise pcnnittoo iu Iudill, inoluding 
banking, insurance and other financial Corporations, and (d) stock ex-
changes, to furnish such information. 
S. The Bill, while replacing the llldustrilll Statisties Act. 1942 (XIX 
of 1942), is designed to incorporate all its existing provisiolls Rnd to provide 
in addition for the collection of information and Ktatisties in respect of 
matters related to items 41, 42, 48 and 48 in List I in the Seventh Schedule 
to the Constitution. 
T. T. KRISHNAMACHARI, 
NEW DELHI; 
The 12th December, 1952, 

HOUSE OF THE PEOPLE 
.A. 
BILL 
to facilitate the collection of statistics of oertain, kinds relating 
to indl13tries, trade and commerce. . 
(SAri T. T. K ri8knamachari, 
Minister for Oommerce and IMUBtry.) 