AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No.  131 of 2021
THE ANDHRA PRADESH REORGANISA TION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2021
BY
DR. GADDAM  RANJITH REDDY,  M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2014.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-second Year of the Republic  of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation (Amendment)
Act, 2021.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
     5
Short  title and
commencement.

      5
        10
   15
2
2. In the Andhra Pradesh (Reorganisation) Act, 2014, in the Thirteenth
Schedule, under the heading ‘Infrastructure’:—
(a) for entry 2, the following entry shall be substituted:—
“2.  Steel Authority of India Limited (SAIL) shall establish, within a period
of three years from the coming into force of this Act, an integrated steel
plant in Khammam district of the successor State of Telangana;”
(b) for entry 10, the following entry shall be substituted:—
“10. The Indian Railways shall establish, within a period of three years
from the coming into force of this Act, a Rail Coach Factory in the
successor State of  Telangana;”
(c) after entry 12, the following entries shall be inserted, namely:—
“13. The Government of India shall take steps, within a period of two
years from the coming into force of this Act, to implement Information
Technology Investment Region approved in 2010;
14. The Government of India shall declare Kaleshwaram Lift Irrigation
Project in Telangana as National Project within six months of the date
of assent given by the President to this Act and complete the project
within a period of five years from such date.”.
6 of 2014.Amendment
of
Thirteenth
Schedule.

.
3
STA TEMENT  OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
After many decades of requests, appeals, struggle, dharnas, resolutions, the
Government of India had given the people of Telangana their rightful share- a separate
Telangana State in 2014.
There were extensive deliberations, discussions, interactions, consultations, etc.
by Government with various sections of people, public representatives, Non-
Governmental Organisations, civil society and other stakeholders in giving shape to
the Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2014. During the course of such deliberations,
many representations, appeals and requests from the people and public representatives
from Telangana have been received by the Government of India for incorporating the
same in the Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2014. Some such representations/
demands are:
(i) setting up of a steel plant in Khammam district of Telangana.
(ii) setting up of rail coach factory in Telangana.
(iii) including Information Technology Investment Region in the Andhra Pradesh
Reorganisation Act, 2014.
(iv) upgrading and conferring the status of National Project to Kaleshwaram
Project in the State of Telangana.
The Union Government, out of the above and many other demands, included
only two of the above demands i.e. steel plant at Khammam and rail coach factory, in
the parent Act. However, these two demands have also been considerably diluted by
giving itself enough escape route from implementing these two projects. One can
find the escape route if one reads framing and phrasing of related paragraphs
(No. 2 and 10) under Thirteenth Schedule. It is precisely the reason why even after
seven years of implementation of the Act, nothing has been done to ground these
projects. The other demands, such as implementing ITIR and Kaleshwaram Project
as national project, in spite of oral assurances, have not been included in the Act.
When there was demand by Chief Minister, State Ministers,
Members of Parliament, Members of Legislative Assembly and other public
representatives, again assurances were given that Government of India would do
justice. But, even after seven years, nothing has been done by the Government of
India to fulfill assurances given to the people of Telangana.
Hence, the Bill proposes to amend the relevant paras under Thirteenth Schedule
to the Act and give legal backing to assurances.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
NEW DELHI;                                                     GADDAM RANJITH REDDY
 July 7,  2021

4
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE  ANDHRA PRADESH REORGANISA TION  ACT, 2014
(6 of 2014)
THE THIRTEENTH SCHEDULE
(See  section 93)
*                            *                              *                                *                                *
Infrastructure
1. The Government of India shall develop a new major port at Duggirajupatnam
in the successor State of Andhra Pradesh to be completed in phases with Phase I by
end  2018;
2. SAIL shall examine, within six months from the appointed day, the feasibility
of establishing an integrated steel plant in Khammam district of the successor State
of Telangana;
*                            *                              *                                *                                *
10. The Indian Railways shall, within six months from the appointed day, examine
the feasibility of establishing a Rail Coach Factory in the successor State of Telangana
and improve rail connectivity in the State and take an expeditious decision thereon;
*                            *                              *                                *                              *
12. The Government of India shall examine the feasibility of Metro Rail facility
in Vishakhapatnam and Vijayawada-Guntur-Tenali Metropolitan Urban Development
Authority within period of one year from the appointed day and take an expeditious
decision thereon.
*                            *                              *                                *                              *

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 provides for the Central Government to establish a Rail Coach Factory
in the State of Telangana. It also provides that the Government shall take step to
implement Information Technology Investment Region approved in the year 2010. It
further provides that the Government shall declare Kaleshwaram Lift Irrigation Project
in Telangana as National Project within six months of assent by the President and
complete the project within five years. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India.  It is likely to involve a recurring
expenditure of about rupees five thousand crores per annum from the Consolidated
Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees fifty thousand crores is also likely
to be involved.

LOK  SABHA
——————
A
BILL
further to amend the Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2014
——————
(Dr. Gaddam Ranjith Reddy,  M.P .)