AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
THE INDIRA GANDHI NA TIONAL UNIVERSITY FOR WOMEN
BILL, 2013
——————
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
——————
CLAUSES
1. Short title and commencement
2. Definitions.
3. Establishment of University.
4. Objects of University.
5. Powers of University.
6. Jurisdiction.
7. University open to all classes, castes and creed.
8. Residence of students.
9. Power to establish and maintain schools.
10. Visitor.
11. Officers of University.
12. Chancellor.
13. Vice-Chancellor.
14. Pro-Vice-Chancellor.
15. Deans of Faculties.
16. Registrar.
17. Finance Officer.
18. Controller of examinations.
19. Librarian.
20. Other officers.
21. Authorities of University.
22. Court.
23. Executive Council.
24. Academic Council.
25. Board of Studies and Academic Boards.
26. Finance Committee.
27. Other authorities of University.
28. Power to make Statutes.
29. Statutes how to be made.
30. Power to make Ordinances.
31. Regulations.
32. Annual report.
33. Annual accounts.
Bill No. 131 of 2013
(i)

CLAUSES
34. Fund of University.
35. Returns and information.
36. Conditions of service of employees.
37. Procedure of appeal and arbitration in disciplinary cases against students.
38. Right to appeal.
39. Disputes as to constitution of authorities and bodies.
40. Constitution of Committees.
41. Filling of casual vacancies.
42. Proceedings of authorities or bodies not invalidated by vacancies.
43. Protection of action taken in good faith.
44. Mode of proof of  University record.
45. Power to remove difficulties.
46. Statutes, Ordinances and Regulations to be published in the Official Gazette and to
be laid before Parliament.
47. Transtional provisions.
THE SCHEDULE.
(ii)

THE INDIRA GANDHI NATIONAL UNIVERSITY FOR WOMEN BILL, 2013
A
BILL
to establish and incorporate a University in the State of Uttar Pradesh to  provide for
avenues of higher education and research facilities  to the women in India and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fourth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Indira Gandhi National University for Women Act, 2013.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.  In this Act, and in all Statutes made hereunder, unless the context otherwise
requires,—
(a)  "Academic Council" means the Academic Council of the University;
(b) "academic staff" means such categories of staff as are designated as
academic staff by the Ordinances;
(c) "Board of Studies" means the Board of Studies of the University;
(d) "Campus" means the unit established or constituted for making arrangements
for instruction, or research, or both,
Short title and
commencement.
Definitions.
Bill No. 131 of 2013
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(e) "Chancellor", "Vice-Chancellor", and "Pro-Vice-Chancellor" mean,
respectively, the Chancellor, Vice-Chancellor and Pro-Vice-Chancellor of the
University;
(f) "College" means a college maintained by the University.
(g) "Court" means the Court of the University;
(h)  "Dean" means Head of a Faculty of the University;
(i) "Department" means a Department of Studies and includes a Centre of
Studies;
(j) "distance education system" means the system of imparting education
through any means of communication, such as broadcasting, telecasting, webcasting,
correspondence courses, seminars, contact programmes or the combination of any
two or more such means;
(k) "employee" means any person appointed by the University and includes
teachers and other staff of the University;
(l) "Executive Council" means the Executive Council of the University;
(m) "Faculty" means a Faculty of the University;
(n) "Finance Committee" means Finance Committee of the University;
(o) "Hall" means a unit of residence or of corporate life for the students of the
University;
(p) "Institution" means an academic institution, not being a college, maintained
by, or admitted to the privileges of, the University;
(q) "Principal" means the Head of a College or an Institution maintained by the
University and includes, where there is no Principal, the persons for the time being
duly appointed to act as Principal, and in the absence of the Principal, or the acting
Principal, a Vice-Principal duly appointed as such;
(r) "Regulations" means the Regulations made by any authority of the University
under this Act for the time being in force;
(s) "Statutes" and "Ordinances" mean, respectively, the Statutes and the
Ordinances of the University, for the time being in force;
(t) "teachers of the University" means Professors,  Associate Professors,
Assistant Professors and such other persons as may be appointed for imparting
instruction or conducting research in the University;
(u) "University" means the Indira Gandhi National University for Women as
incorporated under this Act.
3.  (1) There shall be established, in the State of Uttar Pradesh a University by the
name of "Indira Gandhi National University for Women".
(2)The headquarters of the University shall be in the district of  Raebareli.
(3) The first Chancellor, the first Vice-Chancellor and the first members of the Court,
the Executive Council and the Academic Council, and all persons who may hereafter become
such officers or members, so long as they continue to hold such of fice or membership, are
hereby constituted a body corporate by the name of  "Indira Gandhi National University for Women".
(4) The University shall have perpetual succession and a common seal, and shall sue
and be sued by the said name.
4. The objects of the University shall be,—
(i) to provide avenues of higher education and research facilities to the women
of India and thus to provide the society with educated, competent and capable
women to meet the knowledge needs of the country;
Establishment
of University.
Objects of
University.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(ii) to create and disseminate  knowledge by providing instructional and research
facilities in such branches of learning as it may deem fit;
(iii) to make provisions for various courses offering educational programmes in
humanities, natural and physical sciences, social sciences, medical sciences,
engineering and technology and such other advanced disciplines  of education
including vocational education;
(iv) to take appropriate measures for promoting innovations in teaching-learning
process, inter-disciplinary studies and research;
(v)  to develop women imbued with the spirit of innovation and entrepreneurship
with social and environmental orientation for the development of the country;
(vi) to strive for the improvement of the social, educational and economic
conditions and welfare of women of the country through their intellectual, academic,
cultural  and overall personality development.
5.  (1) The University shall have the following powers, namely:—
(i)  to provide for instructions in such branches of learning like natural and
physical sciences, social sciences, humanities, engineering, technology and medicine
as the University may, from time to time, determine and to make provisions for research
and for the advancement and dissemination of knowledge for furtherance of the
objects of the University;
(ii)  to grant, subject to such conditions as the University may determine,
diplomas or certificates to, and confer degrees or other academic distinctions on the
basis of examinations, evaluation or any other method of testing, on persons, and to
withdraw any such diplomas, certificates, degrees or other academic distinctions for
good and sufficient cause in the manner prescribed by the Statutes;
(iii) to formulate women centric development models, publish reports and
monographs;
(iv) to organise conferences; seminars on issues relating to women and to
provide inputs to policy matters in different spheres;
(v) to organise and to undertake extra-mural studies, training and extension
services;
(vi) to confer honorary degrees or other distinctions in the manner prescribed
by the Statutes;
(vii) to provide facilities through the distance education system to women as it
may determine;
(viii) to institute Principalships, Professorships, Associate Professorships,
Assistant Professorships and other teaching or academic positions, required by the
University and to appoint persons to such Principalships, Professorships, Associate
Professorships, Assistant Professorships or other teaching or academic positions;
(ix) to recognise an institution of higher learning for such purposes as the
University may determine and to withdraw such recognition in the manner prescribed
by the Statutes;
(x) to appoint persons working in any other University or educational institution,
including those located outside the country, as teachers of the University for a
specified period;
(xi) to create administrative, ministerial and other posts and to make
appointments thereto;
(xii) to co-operate or collaborate or associate with any other University or
authority or Institution of higher learning, including those located outside the country,
in such manner and for such purposes as the University may determine;
Powers of
University.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
(xiii) to collaborate with any other college or university, research institution, industry
association, professional or any other organisation, in India or outside India to conceptualise,
design and develop specific programmes as part of education and research, training
programmes and exchange programmes for students, academic staff and others;
(xiv) to institute and award fellowships, scholarships, studentships, medals and prizes;
(xv) to establish and maintain Colleges, Institutions and Halls;
(xvi) to make provision for research and advisory services and for that purpose to
enter into such arrangements with other institutions, industrial or other organisations, as
the University may deem necessary;
(xvii) to organise and conduct refresher courses, workshops, seminars and other
programmes for teachers, evaluators and other academic staff;
(xviii) to appoint on contract or otherwise visiting Professors, Emeritus Professors,
Consultants, Scholars and such other persons who may contribute to the advancement of
the objects of the University;
(xix) to confer autonomous status on a College or an Institution or a Department, as
the case may be, in accordance with the Statutes;
(xx) to recognise, guide, supervise, and control Halls not maintained by the University
and other accommodation for students, and to withdraw any such recognition;
(xxi) to determine standards of admission to the University, which may include
examination, evaluation or any other method of testing;
(xxii) to demand and receive payment of fees and other charges;
(xxiii) to establish and maintain a health care centre for the benefit of the students
and employees;
(xxiv) to make arrangements for promoting the health and general welfare of  the
employees;
(xxv) to supervise the residences of the students of the University and to make
arrangements for promoting their health and general welfare;
(xxvi) to lay down conditions of service of all categories of employees, including their
code of conduct;
(xxvii) to regulate and enforce discipline among the students and the employees, and
to take such disciplinary measures in this regard as may be deemed by the University to be
necessary;
(xxviii) to receive benefactions, donations and gifts and to acquire, hold and manage,
and to dispose of, with the previous approval of the Central Government, any property,
movable or immovable, including trust and endowment properties for the purposes of the
University;
(xxix) to borrow, with the approval of the Central Government, on the security of the
property of the University, money for the purposes of the University;
(xxx) to do all such other acts and things as may be necessary, incidental or conducive
to the attainment of all or any of its objects.
(2) In exercising its powers referred to in sub-section (1), it shall be the endeavour of
the University to maintain an all-India character and high standards of teaching and research,
and the University shall, among other measures which may be necessary for the said
purpose and take, in particular, the following measures, namely:—
(i) admission of students and recruitment of  Faculty shall be made on all-India
basis;
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

5
(ii) admissions of students shall be made on merit, either through Entrance
Tests conducted  by the University or in combination with other Universities, or on
the basis of marks obtained in the qualifying examinations;
(iii) encourage inter-University mobility of Faculty;
(iv) introduce semester system, continuous evaluation and choice based credit
system  and  enter into agreements with other Universities and academic institutions
for credit transfer and joint degree programmes;
(v) introduce innovative courses and programmes of studies with provision for
periodic review and restructuring;
(vi) ensure active participation of students  in all academic activities of the
University, including evaluation of teachers.
(vii ) obtain mandatory accreditation  from National Assessment and
Accreditation Council or any other  statutory accrediting agency; and
(viii) introduce e-governance with an effective management information system.
6.  The jurisdiction of the University shall extend to the whole of India.
7.  The University shall be open to women of whatever caste, creed, race or class, and
it shall not be lawful for the University to adopt or impose any test whatsoever of religious
belief or profession in order to entitle her to be admitted as a student in the University or to
graduate thereat:
Provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent the University from
appointing any person as a teacher of the University or to hold any other office therein or
to enjoy or exercise any privilege thereof:
Provided further that nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent the University
from making special provisions for the employment or promotion of educational interests of
women physically challenged or of persons belonging to the weaker sections of the society
and, in particular, of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled tribes.
8. Every student of the University other than a student, who pursues a course of
study by distance education system, shall reside in a Hall or hostel or under such conditions
as may be prescribed by the Ordinances.
9. The University shall, subject to Statutes, have power to establish at least one
school as a model school for the schools of the region.
10.  (1) The President of India shall be the Visitor of the University.
(2) The Visitor may, from time to time, appoint one or more persons to review the work
and progress of the University, including Colleges and Institutions maintained by it, and to
submit a report thereon; and upon receipt of that report, the Visitor may, after obtaining the
views of the Executive Council thereon through the Vice-Chancellor, take such action and
issue such directions as he considers necessary in respect of any of the matters dealt with
in the report and the University shall be bound to comply with such directions.
(3) The Visitor shall have the right to cause an inspection to be made by such person
or persons as he may direct, of the University, its buildings, libraries, laboratories and
equipment, and of any College or Institution maintained by the University; and also of the
examinations, teaching and other work conducted or done by the University and to cause
an inquiry to be made in like manner in respect of any matter connected with the administration
or finances of the University, Colleges or Institutions.
(4) The Visitor shall, in every matter referred to in sub-section (3), give notice of his
intention to cause an inspection or inquiry to be made, to the University, if such inspection
or inquiry is to be made in respect of the University or any College or Institution maintained
by it.
Jurisdiction.
University
open to all
classes,
castes and
creed.
Residence of
students.
Power to
establish and
maintain
schools.
Visitor.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

6
(5) After considering the representations, if any, made by the University, the Visitor
may cause to be made such inspection or inquiry as is referred to in sub-section ( 3).
(6) Where any inspection or inquiry has been caused to be made by the Visitor, the
University shall be entitled to appoint a representative, who shall have the right to be
present and be heard at such inspection or inquiry.
(7) Upon receipt of such report of the inspection or inquiry, the Visitor may address
the appointing authority through the Vice-Chancellor to take appropriate action in accordance
with his advice, if any, regarding the action to be taken.
(8) The appointing authority shall take appropriate action within a period of two
months and in case, it is not able to act as per the advice of the Visitor, it shall report to the
Visitor, the reasons therefor along with supporting documents within a period of two months
and if the Visitor is not satisfied with the reasons then the decision of the Visitor shall be
final.
(9) The Visitor in respect of the matters not covered under sub-section ( 7) shall
address the Executive Council through the Vice-Chancellor along with this advice regarding
the action to be taken and the Vice-Chancellor shall take action accordingly.
(10) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this section, the Visitor may, by
order in writing, annul any proceeding of the University which is not in conformity with the
Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances:
Provided that before making any such order, he shall call upon the Registrar to show
cause why such an order should not be made, and, if any cause is shown within a reasonable
time, he shall consider the same.
(11) The Visitor shall have such other powers as may be prescribed by the Statutes.
11. The following shall be the officers of the University:—
(1) the Chancellor;
(2) the Vice-Chancellor;
(3) the Pro-Vice-Chancellor;
(4) the Deans of Faculties;
(5) the Registrar;
(6) the Finance Officer;
(7) the Controller of Examinations;
(8) the Librarian; and
(9) such other officers as may be declared by the Statutes to be officers of the
University.
12. (1) The Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor in such manner as may be
prescribed by the Statutes.
(2) The Chancellor shall, by virtue of his office, be the head of the University and
shall, if present, preside at the Convocations of the University held for conferring degrees
and meetings of the Court.
13.  (1) The Vice-Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor in such manner as may
be prescribed by the Statutes.
(2) The Vice-Chancellor shall be the principal executive and academic officer of the
University and shall exercise general supervision and control over the affairs of the University
and give effect to the decisions of all the authorities of the University.
Officers of
University.
Chancellor.
Vice-
Chancellor.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

7
(3) The Vice-Chancellor may, if he is of the opinion that immediate action is necessary
on any matter, exercise any power conferred on any authority of the University by or under
this Act and shall report to such authority at its next meeting the action taken by  him on
such matter:
Provided that if the authority concerned is of the opinion that such action ought not
to have been taken, it may refer the matter to the Visitor whose decision thereon shall be
final:
Provided further that any person  aggrieved by the action taken by the Vice-Chancellor
under this sub-section shall have the right to represent against such action to the Executive
Council within three months from the date on which decision on such action is communicated
to him and thereupon the Executive Council may confirm, modify or reverse the action taken
by the Vice-Chancellor.
(4) The Vice-Chancellor, if he is of the opinion that any decision of any authority of
the University is beyond the powers of the authority conferred by the provisions of this
Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances or that any decision taken is not in the interest of the
University, may ask the authority concerned to review its decision within sixty days of such
decision and if the authority refuses to review the decision either in whole or in part or no
decision is taken by it within the said period of sixty days, the matter shall be referred to the
Visitor whose decision thereon shall be final.
(5) The Vice-Chancellor shall exercise such other powers and perform such other
duties as may be prescribed by the Statutes or the Ordinances.
14.  The Pro-Vice-Chancellor shall be appointed in such manner and on such terms
and conditions of service, and shall exercise such powers and perform such duties, as may
be prescribed by the Statutes.
15. Every Dean of Faculty shall be appointed in such manner and shall exercise such
powers and perform such duties, as may be prescribed by the Statutes.
16.  ( 1) The Registrar shall be appointed in such manner and on such terms and
conditions of service as may be prescribed by the Statutes.
(2) The Registrar shall have the power to enter into agreements, sign documents and
authenticate records on behalf of the University and shall exercise such powers and perform
such duties as may be prescribed by the Statutes.
17. The Finance Officer shall be appointed in such manner and shall exercise such
powers and perform such duties, as may be prescribed by the Statutes.
18. The Controller of Examinations shall be appointed in such manner and shall
exercise such powers and perform such duties, as may be prescribed by the Statutes.
19. The Librarian shall be appointed in such manner and on such terms and conditions
of service, and shall exercise such powers and perform such duties, as may be prescribed by
the Statutes.
20. The manner of appointment and powers and duties of other officers of the University
shall be prescribed by the Statutes.
21. The following shall be the authorities of the University:—
(1) the Court;
(2) the Executive Council;
(3) the Academic Council;
(4) the Board of Studies and Academic Boards;
(5) the Finance Committee; and
(6) such other authorities as may be declared by the Statutes to be the authorities
of the University.
Pro-Vice-
Chancellor.
Deans of
Faculties.
Registrar.
Finance
Officer.
Controller of
Examinations.
Librarian.
Other
Officers.
Authorities of
University.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

8
22. (1) The constitution of the Court and the term of office of its members shall be
prescribed by the Statutes:
Provided that the Court shall have adequate number of members from amongst the
women:
Provided further that such number of members as may be prescribed by the Statutes
shall be elected from among the teachers, employees and students of the University.
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Court shall have the following powers
and functions, namely:—
(a) to review, from time to time, the broad policies and programmes of the
University and to suggest measures for the improvement and development of the
University;
(b) to consider and approve the annual report and the annual accounts of the
University and the audit report on such accounts;
(c) to advise the Visitor in respect of any matter which may be referred to it for
advice; and
(d) to perform such other functions as may be prescribed by the Statutes.
23.  (1) The Executive Council shall be the principal executive body of the University.
(2) The constitution of the Executive Council, the term of office of its members and its
powers and functions shall be prescribed by the Statutes:
Provided that the Executive Council shall have adequate number of members from
among the women:
Provided further that such number of members as may be prescribed by the Statutes
shall be from among the elected members of the Court.
24.  (1) The Academic Council shall be the principal academic body of the University
and shall, subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances, co-
ordinate and exercise general supervision over the academic policies of the University.
(2) The constitution of the Academic Council, the term of office of its members and its
powers and functions shall be prescribed by the Statutes:
Provided that the Academic Council shall have adequate number of members from
amongst the women:
Provided further that such number of members as may be prescribed by the Statutes
shall be from among the elected members of the Court who are teachers of the University.
25. The constitution, powers and functions of the Board of Studies and the Academic
Boards shall be prescribed by the Statutes:
Provided that the Boards of Studies and the Academic Boards shall have adequate
number of members from amongst the women.
26. The constitution, powers and functions of the Finance Committee shall be
prescribed by the Statutes:
Provided that the Finance Committee shall have adequate number of members from
amongst the women.
27. The constitution, powers and functions of other authorities, as may be declared
by the Statutes to be the authorities of the University, shall be prescribed by the Statutes.
28. Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes may provide for all or any of the
following matters, namely:—
(a) the constitution, powers and functions of authorities and other bodies of
the University, as may be constituted from time to time;
Court.
Executive
Council.
Academic
Council.
Board of
Studies and
Academic
Boards.
Finance
Committee.
Other
authorities of
University.
Power to
make
Statutes.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

9
(b) the appointment and continuance in office of the members of the said
authorities and bodies, the filling up of vacancies of members, and all other matters
relating to those authorities and other bodies for which it may be necessary or desirable
to provide;
(c) the appointment, powers and duties of the officers of the University and
their emoluments;
(d) the appointment of teachers, academic staff and other employees of the
University, their emoluments and conditions of service;
(e) the appointment of teachers, academic staff working in any other University
or organisation for a specific period for undertaking a joint project;
(f) the conditions of service of employees including   insurance, provident fund,
the manner of termination of service and disciplinary action;
(g) the principles governing the seniority of service of the employees of the
University;
(h) the procedure for arbitration in cases of dispute between employees or
students and the University;
(i) the procedure for appeal to the Executive Council by any employee or student
against the action of any officer or authority of the University;
(j) the conferment of autonomous status on a College or an Institution or a
Department;
(k) the conferment of honorary degrees;
(l) the withdrawal of degrees, diplomas, certificates and other academic
distinctions;
(m) the management of Colleges and Institutions established by the University;
(n) the delegation of powers vested in the authorities or officers of the University;
(o) the maintenance of discipline among the employees and students; and
(p) all other matters which by this Act are to be or may be provided for by the
Statutes.
29.  (1) The first Statutes are those set out in the Schedule.
(2) The Executive Council may, from time to time, make new or additional Statutes or
may amend or repeal the Statutes referred to in sub-section (1):
Provided that the Executive Council shall not make, amend or repeal any Statutes
affecting the status, powers or constitution of any authority of the University until such
authority has been given an opportunity of expressing an opinion in writing on the proposed
changes, and any opinion so expressed shall be considered by the Executive Council.
(3) Every new Statute or addition to the Statutes or any amendment or repeal of a
Statute shall require the assent of the Visitor who may assent thereto or withhold assent or
remit to the Executive Council for re-consideration.
(4)  A new Statute or a Statute amending or repealing an existing Statute shall have no
validity unless it has been assented to by the Visitor.
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing sub-sections, the Visitor
may make new or additional Statutes or amend or repeal the Statutes referred to in sub-
section (1), during the period of five years immediately after the commencement of this Act
and such statutes shall be laid before both Houses of Parliament.
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing sub-sections, the Visitor
may direct the University to make provisions in the Statutes in respect of any matter specified
Statutes how
to be made.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

10
by him and if the Executive Council is unable to implement such direction within sixty days
of its receipt, the Visitor may, after considering the reasons, if any, communicated by the
Executive Council for its inability to comply with such direction, make or amend the Statutes
suitably.
30. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the Statutes, the Ordinances may
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the admission of students to the University and their enrolment as such;
(b) the courses of study to be laid down for all degrees, diplomas and certificates
of the University;
(c) the medium of instruction and examination;
(d) the award of degrees, diplomas, certificates and other academic distinctions,
the qualifications for the same and the means to be taken relating to the granting and
obtaining of the same;
(e) the fees to be charged for courses of study in the University and for admission
to the examinations, degrees and diplomas of the University;
(f) the institution of fellowships, scholarships, studentships, medals and prizes;
(g) the conditions for award of fellowships, scholarships, studentships, medals
and prizes;
(h) the conduct of examinations, including the term of office and manner of
appointment and the duties of examining bodies, examiners and moderators;
(i) the conditions of residence of the students of the University;
(j) the setting up of a machinery for redressal of grievances of employees;
(k) the establishment and management  of  Faculties, Departments, Schools,
Colleges, other Institutions,  Centres of Studies, Boards of Studies, Special Centres,
Specialised Laboratories and other Committees;
(l) the manner of co-operation and collaboration with other Universities,
institutions and other non-profiteering agencies including learned bodies or
associations;
(m) the creation, composition and functions of any other body which is
considered necessary for improving the academic life of the University;
(n) all other matters which by this Act or the Statutes, are to be or may be,
provided for by the Ordinances.
(2) The first Ordinances shall be made by the Vice-Chancellor with the previous
approval of the Central Government and the Ordinances so made may be amended, repealed
or added to at any time by the Executive Council in the manner prescribed by the Statutes.
31. The authorities of the University may make Regulations, consistent with this Act,
the Statutes and the Ordinances for the conduct of their own business and that of the
Committees, if any, appointed by them and not provided for by this Act, the Statutes or the
Ordinances, in the manner prescribed by the Statutes.
32.  (1) The annual report of the University shall be prepared under the direction of
the Executive Council, which shall include, among other matters, the steps taken by the
University towards the fulfilment of its objects and shall be submitted to the Court on or
before such date as may be prescribed by the Central Government and the Court shall
consider the report in its annual meeting.
(2) The Court shall submit the annual report to the Visitor along with its comments, if
any.
Power to
make
Ordinances.
Regulations.
Annual
report.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

11
(3) A copy of the annual report, as prepared under sub-section ( 1), shall also be
submitted to the Central Government, and that Government which shall, as soon as may be
after it is submitted, cause the same to be laid before both Houses of Parliament.
33. (1) The annual accounts and balance sheet of the University shall be prepared
under the directions of the Executive Council and shall, once at least every year and at
intervals of not more than fifteen months, be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-
General of India or by such persons as he may authorise in this behalf.
(2) A copy of the annual accounts together with the audit report thereon shall be
submitted to the Court and the Visitor along with the observations of the Executive Council.
(3) Any observations made by the Visitor on the annual accounts shall be brought to
the notice of the Court and the observations of the Court, if any, shall, after being considered
by the Executive Council, be submitted to the Visitor.
(4) A copy of the annual accounts together with the audit report as submitted to the
Visitor, shall also be submitted to the Central Government, which shall,  as soon as may be,
cause the same to be laid before both Houses of Parliament.
(5) The audited annual accounts after having been laid before both Houses of
Parliament shall be published in the Official Gazette.
34.  (1) There shall be a University Fund which shall include—
(a) any contribution or grant made by the State Government;
(b) any contribution or grant made by the University Grants Commission or the
Central Government;
(c) any contribution made by Government, semi-Government or autonomous
bodies;
(d) any bequests, donations, endowments or other grants made by any private
individual or institution;
(e) income received by the University from fees and charges; and
(f) amounts received from any other source.
(2) The amount of the said Fund shall be kept in a Scheduled Bank as defined in the
Reserve  Bank of India Act, 1934, or in a corresponding new bank constituted under the
Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1980 or may be invested
in such securities authorised by the Indian Trusts Act, 1882, as may be decided by the
Executive Council.
 (3) The said Fund may be utilised for such purposes of the University and in such
manner as may be determined.
35. The University shall furnish to the Central Government such returns or other
information with respect to its property or activities as the Central Government may, from
time to time, require.
36.  (1) Every employee of the University shall be appointed under a written contract,
which shall be lodged with the University and a copy of which shall be furnished to the
employee concerned.
(2) Any dispute arising out of the contract between the University and any employee
shall, at the request of the employee, be referred to a Tribunal of Arbitration consisting of
one member appointed by the Executive Council, one member nominated by the employee
concerned and an umpire appointed by the Visitor.
(3) The decision of the Tribunal shall be final, and no suit shall lie in any civil court in
respect of the matters decided by the Tribunal:
Annual
accounts.
Fund of
University.
2 of 1934.
40 of 1980.
2  of 1882.
Returns and
information.
Conditions
of service of
employees.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

12
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall preclude the employee from availing
of the judicial remedies available under articles 32 and 226 of the Constitution.
(4) Every request made by the employee under sub-section (2), shall be deemed to be
a submission to arbitration upon the terms of this section within the meaning of the Arbitration
and Conciliation Act, 1996.
(5) The procedure for regulating the work of the Tribunal shall be prescribed by the
Statutes.
37. (1)  Any student or candidate for an examination whose name has been removed
from the rolls of the University by the orders or resolution of the Vice-Chancellor, Discipline
Committee or Examination Committee, as the case may be, and who has been debarred from
appearing at the examinations of the University for more than one year, may, within ten days
of the date of receipt of such orders or copy of such resolution by him, appeal to the
Executive Council and the Executive Council may confirm, modify or reverse the decision of
the Vice-Chancellor or the Committee, as the case may be.
(2) Any dispute arising out of any disciplinary action taken by the University against
a student shall, at the request of such student, be referred to a Tribunal of Arbitration and
the provisions of sub-sections (2), (3), (4) and (5) of section 36 shall, as far as may be, apply
to a reference made under this sub-section.
38. Every employee or student of the University or of a College or Institution
maintained by the University shall, notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, have a
right to appeal within such time as may be prescribed by the Statutes, to the Executive
Council against the decision of any officer or authority of the University or of the Principal
or the management of any College or an Institution, as the case may be, and thereupon the
Executive Council may confirm, modify or reverse the decision appealed against.
39.  If any question arises as to whether any person has been duly elected or appointed
as, or is entitled to be, a member of any authority or other body of the University, the matter
shall be referred to the Visitor whose decision thereon shall be final.
40.  Where any authority of the university is given power by this Act or the Statutes
to appoint Committees, such Committees shall, save as otherwise provided, consist of the
members of the authority concerned and of such other person, if any, as the authority in
each case may think fit.
41.  All casual vacancies among the members (other than ex officio members) of any
authority or other body of the University shall be filled, as soon as may be, by the person
or body who appoints, elects or co-opts the member whose place has become vacant and
the person appointed, elected or co-opted to a casual vacancy shall be a member of such
authority or body for the residue of the term for which the person whose place he fills would
have been a member.
42.  No act or proceedings of any authority or other body of the University shall be
invalid merely by reason of the existence of a vacancy or vacancies among its members.
43.  No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against any officer or other employee of
the University for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance
of any of the provisions of this Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances.
44.  Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 or in any
other law for the time being in force, a copy of any receipt, application, notice, order,
proceeding or resolution of any authority or other body of the University, or any other
document in possession of the University, or any entry in any register duly maintained by
the University, if certified by the Registrar, shall be received as prima facie evidence of such
receipt, application, notice, order, proceeding, resolution or document or the existence of
26 of
1996.
Procedure of
appeal and
arbitration in
disciplinary
cases against
students.
Right to
appeal.
Disputes as to
constitution
of authorities
and bodies.
Constitution
of
Committees.
Filling of
casual
vacancies.
Proceedings
of authorities
or bodies not
invalidated by
vacancies.
Protection of
action taken
in good faith.
Mode of proof
of University
record.
1 of 1872.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

13
entry in the register and shall be admitted as evidence of the matters and transactions
therein where the original thereof would, if produced, have been admissible in evidence.
45.  (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of three
years from the commencement of this Act.
 (2) Every order made under sub-section (1) shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is
made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if,
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the order or both Houses agree
that the order should not be made, the order shall thereafter have effect only in such
modified form or be of no effect as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under
that order.
46.  (1) Every Statute, Ordinance or Regulation made under this Act shall be published
in the Official Gazette.
(2) Every Statute, Ordinance or Regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon
as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the Statute,
Ordinance or Regulation or both Houses agree that the Statute, Ordinance or Regulation
should not be made, the Statute, Ordinance or Regulation shall thereafter have effect only
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that Statute, Ordinance or Regulation.
(3) The power to make Statutes, Ordinances or Regulations shall include the power to
give retrospective effect, from a date not earlier than the date of commencement of this Act,
to the Statutes, Ordinances or Regulations or any of them but no retrospective effect shall
be given to any Statute, Ordinance or Regulation so as to prejudicially affect the interests
of any person to whom such Statute, Ordinance or Regulation may be applicable.
47. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act and the Statutes,—
(a) the first Chancellor and first Vice-Chancellor shall be appointed by the
Visitor in such manner and on such conditions as may be deemed fit and each of the
said officer shall hold office for such term, not exceeding five years as may be specified
by the Visitor;
(b) the first Registrar and the first Finance Officer shall be appointed by the
Visitor and each of the said officers shall hold office for a term of three years;
(c) the first Court and the first Executive Council shall consist of not more than
thirty-one members and eleven members, respectively, who shall be nominated by the
Central Government and shall hold office for a term of three years;
(d) the first Academic Council shall consist of not more than twenty-one
members, who shall be nominated by the Central Government and they shall hold
office for a term of three years:
Provided that if any vacancy occurs in the above offices or authorities, the
same shall be filled by appointment or nomination, as the case may be in the manner
prescribed by the Statutes.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Statutes,
Ordinances
and
Regulations
to be
published in
the Official
Gazette and
to be laid
before
Parliament.
Transitional
provisions.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

THE SCHEDULE
(See section 29)
THE STATUTES OF THE UNIVERSITY
1. (1) The Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor from a panel of not less than
three persons recommended by the Executive Council from amongst persons of eminence
in the academic or public life of the country:
Provided that if the Visitor does not approve of any of the persons so recommended,
he may call for fresh recommendations from the Executive Council.
(2) The Chancellor shall hold office for a term of five years and shall not be eligible for
reappointment:
Provided that notwithstanding the expiry of his term of office, the Chancellor shall
continue to hold office until his successor enters upon his office.
2.  (1) The Vice-Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor from a panel of not less
than three persons who shall be recommended by a Committee as constituted under
clause (2):
Provided that if the Visitor does not approve of any of the persons included in the
panel, he may call for an extended fresh panel.
(2) The Committee referred to in clause (1) shall consist of five persons, out of whom
three shall be nominated by the Executive Council and two by the Visitor and one of the
nominees of the Visitor shall be the convener of the Committee:
Provided that none of the members of the Committee shall be an employee of the
University or a college or an institution maintained by the University or a member of any
authority of the University or connected with an institution associated with the University
or having any business interest in the University.
(3) The Vice-Chancellor shall be a whole-time salaried officer of the University.
(4) The Vice-Chancellor shall hold office for a term of five years from the date on
which he enters upon his office, or until he attains the age of seventy years, whichever is
earlier, and he shall be eligible for reappointment:
Provided that the Visitor may direct any Vice-Chancellor after his term has expired, to
continue in office for such period, not exceeding a total period of one year, as may be
specified by him.
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause ( 4), the Visitor may, at any time
after the Vice-Chancellor has entered upon his office, by order in writing, remove the Vice-
Chancellor from office on grounds of incapacity, misconduct or violation of statutory
provisions:
Provided that no such order shall be made by the Visitor unless the Vice-Chancellor
has been given a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the action proposed to
be taken against him:
Provided further that the Visitor may, at any time before making such order, place the
Vice-Chancellor under suspension, pending enquiry.
(6) The emoluments and other conditions of service of the Vice-Chancellor shall be as
follows:—
(i) the Vice-Chancellor shall be paid a monthly salary and allowances, other
than house rent allowance, at the rates fixed by the Central Government from time to
time and he shall be entitled, without payment of rent, to use a furnished residence
Chancellor.
Vice-
Chancellor.
14
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

15
throughout the term of office and no charge shall fall on the Vice-Chancellor in respect
of the maintenance of such residence;
(ii)  the Vice-Chancellor shall be entitled to such terminal benefits and allowances
as may be fixed by the Executive Council with the approval of the Visitor from time to
time:
Provided that where an employee of the University, or a College or an Institution
maintained by it, or of any other University or any Institution maintained by or
affiliated to such other University, is appointed as the Vice-Chancellor, he may be
allowed to continue to contribute to any provident fund of which he is a member and
the University shall contribute to the account of such person in that provident fund
at the same rate at which the person had been contributing immediately before his
appointment as the Vice-Chancellor:
Provided further that where such employee had been member of any pension
scheme, the University shall make the necessary contribution to such scheme;
(iii) the Vice-Chancellor shall be entitled to travelling allowance at such rates as
may be fixed by the Executive Council;
(iv) the Vice-Chancellor shall be entitled to leave on full pay at the rate of thirty
days in a calendar year and the leave shall be credited to his account in advance in
two half-yearly instalments of fifteen days each on the first day of January and July
every year:
Provided that if the Vice-Chancellor assumes or relinquishes charge of the
office of the Vice-Chancellor during the currency of a half year, the leave shall be
credited proportionately at the rate of two and-a-half days for each completed month
of service;
(v) in addition to the leave referred to in sub-clause ( iv), the Vice-Chancellor
shall also be entitled to half-pay leave at the rate of twenty days for each completed
year of service, and half-pay leave may also be availed of as commuted leave on full
pay on medical certificate:
Provided that when such commuted leave is availed of, twice the amount of
half-pay leave shall be debited against half-pay leave due.
(7) If the office of the Vice-Chancellor becomes vacant due to death, resignation or
otherwise, or if he is unable to perform his duties due to ill-health or any other cause, the
Pro-Vice-Chancellor shall perform the duties of the Vice-Chancellor:
Provided that if the Pro-Vice-Chancellor is not available, the seniormost Professor
shall perform the duties of the Vice-Chancellor until a new Vice-Chancellor assumes office
or until the existing Vice-Chancellor resumes the duties of his office, as the case may be.
3.  (1) The Vice-Chancellor shall be ex officio Chairman of the Executive Council, the
Academic Council and the Finance Committee and shall, in the absence of the Chancellor,
preside at the Convocations held for conferring degrees and at meetings of the Court.
(2) The Vice-Chancellor shall be entitled to be present at, and address, any meeting of
any authority or other body of the University, but shall not be entitled to vote thereat
unless he is a member of such authority or body.
(3) It shall be the duty of the Vice-Chancellor to see that this Act, the Statutes, the
Ordinances and the Regulations are duly observed, and he shall have all the powers
necessary to ensure such observance.
(4) The Vice-Chancellor shall exercise control over the affairs of the University and
shall give effect to the decisions of all the authorities of the University.
(5)The Vice-Chancellor shall have all the powers necessary for the proper maintenance
of discipline in the University and he may delegate any such powers to such person or
persons as he deems fit.
Powers and
duties of Vice-
Chancellor.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

16
(6) The Vice-Chancellor shall have the power to convene or cause to be convened the
meetings of the Executive Council, the Academic Council and the Finance Committee.
(7) The Vice Chancellor shall have powers to hear appeal against any order passed by
the Registrar and to confirm or to modify or to reverse the order.
4.  (1) Every Pro-Vice-Chancellor shall be appointed by the Executive Council on the
recommendation of the Vice-Chancellor:
Provided that where the recommendation of the Vice-Chancellor is not accepted by
the Executive Council, the matter shall be referred to the Visitor who may either appoint the
person recommended by the Vice-Chancellor or ask the Vice-Chancellor to recommend
another person to the Executive Council:
Provided further that the Executive Council may, on the recommendation of the Vice-
Chancellor, appoint a Professor to discharge the duties of a Pro-Vice-Chancellor in addition
to his own duties as a Professor.
(2) The term of office of a Pro-Vice-Chancellor shall be such as may be decided by the
Executive Council but it shall not in any case exceed five years or until the expiration of the
term of office of the Vice-Chancellor, whichever is earlier:
Provided that a Pro-Vice-Chancellor whose term of office has expired shall be eligible
for reappointment:
Provided further that, in any case, a Pro-Vice-Chancellor shall retire on attaining the
age of seventy years:
Provided also that a Pro-Vice-Chancellor shall, while discharging the duties of the
Vice-Chancellor under clause (7) of Statute 2, continue in office notwithstanding the expiration
of his term of office as Pro-Vice-Chancellor, until a new Vice-Chancellor or the existing Vice-
Chancellor, as the case may be, assumes office or his retirement whichever is earlier.
(3) The emoluments and other terms and conditions of service of a Pro-Vice-Chancellor
shall be such as may be prescribed by the Ordinances.
(4) A Pro-Vice-Chancellor shall assist the Vice-Chancellor in respect of such matters
as may be specified by the Vice-Chancellor in this behalf, from time to time, and shall also
exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be assigned or delegated to him by
the Vice-Chancellor.
5.  (1) Every Dean of a Faculty shall be appointed by the Vice-Chancellor from amongst
the Professors in the Faculty by rotation in the order of seniority for a period of three years:
Provided that in case there is either one or no Professor in a Faculty, the Dean shall be
appointed, for the time being, from amongst the Professor, if any, and the Associate Professors
in the Faculty by rotation in the order of seniority:
Provided further that a Dean on attaining the age of sixty-five years shall cease to
hold office as such:
(2) When the office of the Dean is vacant or when the Dean is, by reason of illness,
absence or any other cause, unable to perform duties of his office, the duties of the office
shall be performed by the seniormost Professor or Associate Professor, as the case may be,
in the Faculty.
(3) The Dean shall be the Head of the Faculty and shall be responsible for the conduct
and maintenance of the standards of teaching and research in the Faculty and shall have
such other functions as may be prescribed by the Ordinances.
(4) The Dean shall have the right to be present and to speak at any meeting of the
Boards of Studies or Committees of the Faculty, as the case may be, but shall not have the
right to vote thereat unless he is a member thereof.
Pro-Vice-
Chancellor.
Deans of
Faculties.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

17
6.  (1) The Registrar shall be appointed by the Executive Council on the recommendation
of a Selection Committee constituted for the purpose and shall be a whole-time salaried
officer of the University.
(2) He shall be appointed for a term of five years and shall be eligible for reappointment.
(3) The emoluments and other terms and conditions of service of the Registrar shall
be such as may be prescribed by the Ordinances:
Provided that the Registrar shall retire on attaining the age of sixty-two years.
(4) When the office of the Registrar is vacant or when the Registrar is, by reason of
illness, absence or any other cause, unable to perform the duties of his office, the duties of
the office shall be performed by such person as the Vice-Chancellor may appoint for the
purpose.
(5) (a) The Registrar shall have power to take disciplinary action against such of the
employees in respect of whom he is the appointing authority, and to suspend them pending
inquiry and, to impose upon them such penalty as he deem fit:
Provided that, till the provisions are made to provide for the procedure to be followed
for imposition of penalty, the procedure as provided in the Central Civil Services
(Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1965 is followed.
(b) An appeal shall lie to the Vice-Chancellor against any order of the Registrar.
(6) The Registrar shall be ex officio  Secretary of, the Executive Council and the
Academic Council, but shall not be deemed to be a member of any of these authorities and
he shall be ex officio Member-Secretary of the Court.
(7) It shall be the duty of the Registrar—
 (a) to be the custodian of the records, the common seal and such other property
of the University as the Executive Council shall commit to his charge;
(b) to issue all notices convening meetings of the Court, the Executive Council,
the Academic Council and of any Committee appointed by those authorities;
(c) to keep the minutes of all the meetings of the Court, the Executive Council,
the Academic Council and of any Committee appointed by those authorities;
(d) to conduct the official correspondence of the Court, the Executive Council
and the Academic Council;
 (e) to supply to the Visitor and the Chancellor copies of the agenda of the
meetings of the authorities of the University as soon as they are issued and the
minutes of such meetings;
(f) to represent the University in suits or proceedings by or against the
University, sign powers of attorney and verify pleadings or depute his representative
for the purpose; and
(g) to perform such other duties as may be specified in the Statutes, the
Ordinances or the Regulations or as may be required from time to time, by the Executive
Council or assigned to by the Vice-Chancellor.
7. ( 1) The Finance Officer shall be appointed by the Executive Council on the
recommendations of a Selection Committee constituted for the purpose and he shall be a
whole-time salaried officer of the University.
(2) The Finance Officer shall be appointed for a term of five years and shall be eligible
for reappointment.
(3) The emoluments and other terms and conditions of service of the Finance Officer
shall be such as may be prescribed by the Ordinances:
Registrar.
Finance
Officer.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

18
Provided that a Finance Officer shall retire on attaining the age of sixty-two years.
(4) When the office of the Finance Officer is vacant or when the Finance Officer is, by
reason of illness, absence or any other cause, unable to perform the duties of his office, the
duties of the office shall be performed by such person as the Vice-Chancellor may appoint
for the purpose.
(5) The Finance Officer shall be ex officio Secretary of the Finance Committee but
shall not be deemed to be a member of such Committee.
(6) The Finance Officer shall—
 (a) exercise general supervision over the funds of the University and shall
advise it as regards its financial policy; and
(b) perform such other financial functions as may be assigned to him by the
Executive Council or as may be prescribed by the Statutes or the Ordinances or the
Regulations.
(7) Subject to the control of the Executive Council, the Finance Officer shall—
 (a) hold and manage the property and investments of the University including
trust and endowed property;
(b) ensure that the limits fixed by the Executive Council for recurring and non-
recurring expenditure for a year are not exceeded and that all moneys are expended on
the purpose for which they are granted or allotted;
(c) be responsible for the preparation of annual accounts and the budget of the
University and for their presentation to the Executive Council;
(d) keep a constant watch on the state of the cash and bank balances and on the
state of investments;
(e) watch the progress of the collection of revenue and advise on the methods
of collection employed;
(f) ensure that the registers of buildings, land, furniture and equipment are
maintained up-to-date and that stock-checking are conducted, of equipment and
other consumable materials in all Offices, Centres, Specialised Laboratories, Colleges
and Institutions maintained by the university;
(g) bring to the notice of the Vice-Chancellor unauthorised expenditure and
other financial irregularities and suggest disciplinary action against persons at fault;
and
(h) call for from any Office, Centre, Laboratory, College or Institution maintained
by the University any information or returns that he may consider necessary for the
performance of his duties.
(8) Any receipt given by the Finance Officer or the person or person duly authorised
in this behalf by the Executive Council for any money payable to the University shall be
sufficient discharge for payment of such money.
8.  (1) The Controller of Examinations shall be appointed by the Executive Council on
the recommendations of a Selection Committee constituted for the purpose and he shall be
a whole-time salaried officer of the University.
(2) The Controller of Examinations shall be appointed for a term of five years and shall
be eligible for reappointment.
(3) The emoluments and other terms and conditions of service of the Controller of
Examinations shall be such as may be prescribed by the Executive Council from time to time:
Provided that the Controller of Examinations shall retire on attaining the age of sixty-
two years:
Controller of
Examinations.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

19
(4) When the office of the Controller of Examinations is vacant or when the Controller
of Examinations is, by reason of illness, absence or any other cause, unable to perform the
duties of his office, the duties of the office shall be performed by such person as the Vice-
Chancellor may appoint for the purpose.
(5) The Controller of Examinations shall arrange for and superintend the examinations
of the University in the manner prescribed by the Ordinances.
9.  ( 1) The Librarian shall be appointed by the Executive Council on the
recommendations of the Selection Committee constituted for the purpose and he shall be a
whole-time salaried officer of the University.
(2) The Librarian shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be
assigned to him by the Executive Council.
10.  (1) An annual meeting of the Court shall be held on a date to be fixed by the
Executive Council unless some other date has been fixed by the Court in respect of any year.
(2)  At an annual meeting of the Court, a report on the working of the University
during the previous year, together with a statement of the receipts and expenditure, the
balance-sheet as audited, and the financial estimates for the next year shall be presented.
(3) A copy of the statement of receipts and expenditure, the balance-sheet and the
financial estimates referred to in clause ( 2) shall be sent to every member of the Court at
least seven days before the date of the annual meeting.
 (4) Special meetings of the Court may be convened by the Executive Council or the
Vice-Chancellor.
(5) Eleven members of the Court shall form a quorum for a meeting of the Court.
11.  Five members of the Executive Council shall form a quorum for a meeting of the
Executive Council.
12.   (1) The Executive Council shall have the power of management and administration
of the revenues and property of the University and the conduct of all administrative affairs
of the University not otherwise provided for.
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances, the Executive
Council shall, in addition to all other powers vested in it, have the following powers,
namely:—
(i) to create teaching and other academic posts including  Chairs to determine
the number and emoluments of such posts and to define the duties and conditions of
service of Professors, Associate Professors, Assistant Professors and other academic
staff:
Provided that no action shall be taken by the Executive Council in respect of the
number and qualifications of teachers and other academic staff otherwise than after
consideration of the recommendations of the Academic Council;
(ii) to appoint such Professors, Associate Professors, Assistant Professors
and other academic staff including Chairs, as may be necessary, on the recommendation
of the Selection Committee constituted for the purpose and to fill-up temporary
vacancies therein;
 (iii) to promote interdisciplinary research by making joint appointments of
teaching staff in different Faculties, Departments and Centres;
(iv) to create administrative, ministerial and other posts and to define their
duties and conditions of their service and to make appointments to the posts for
which it is the appointing authority in the manner prescribed by the Ordinances;
Librarian.
Meetings of
Court.
Quorum for
meeting of
Executive
Council.
Powers and
functions of
Executive
Council.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

20
(v) to grant leave of absence to any officer of the University other than the
Chancellor and the Vice-Chancellor;
(vi) to regulate and enforce discipline among employees in accordance with the
Statutes and the Ordinances;
(vii) to manage and regulate the finances, accounts, investments, property,
business and all other administrative affairs of the University and for that purpose to
appoint such agents as it may think fit;
(viii) to fix limits on the total recurring and the total non-recurring expenditure
for a year on the recommendation of the Finance Committee;
(ix) to invest any money belonging to the University, including any unapplied
income, in such stocks, funds, shares or securities, from time to time, as it may think
fit or in the purchase of immovable property in India, with the like powers of varying
such investment from time to time;
(x) to transfer or accept transfers of any movable or immovable property on
behalf of the University;
(xi) to provide buildings, premises, furniture and apparatus and other means
needed for carrying on the work of the University;
(xii) to enter into, vary, carry out and cancel contracts on behalf of the University;
(xiii) to entertain, adjudicate upon, and if thought fit, to redress any grievances
of the employees and students of the University who may, for any reason, feel
aggrieved by the order of the Vice-Chancellor;
(xiv) to appoint examiners and moderators and, if necessary, to remove them,
and to fix their fees, emoluments and travelling and other allowances, after consulting
the Academic Council;
(xv) to select a common seal for the University and provide for the custody and
use of such seal;
(xvi) to institute fellowships, scholarships, studentships, medals and prizes;
and to receive donations from the members of the general public and institutions,
with due acknowledgment for establishing a Chair by contributing at least rupees one
crore, in the name of the donor or in memory of any person desired; for creating
foundations, not below rupees one crore in the name of the donor or in memory of any
person desired; and for bearing the cost of any building or complex to the tune of not
below rupees one crore in the name of the donor or in memory of any person desired;
(xvii) to provide for the appointment of Visiting Professors, Emeritus Professors,
Joint Faculty, Adjunct Faculty, Consultants and Scholars and determine the terms
and conditions of such appointments; and
(xviii) to exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may be
conferred or imposed on it by the Act or the Statutes.
13.  Seven members of the Academic Council shall form a quorum for a meeting of the
Academic Council.
14.  Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances, the
Academic Council shall, in addition to all other powers vested in it, have the following
powers, namely:—
(a) to consider matters of general academic interest either on its own initiative
or on a reference by a Faculty or the Executive Council or the Court and to take
appropriate action thereon;
Quorum for
meetings of
Academic
Council.
Powers and
functions of
Academic
Council.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

21
(b) to make arrangements through Ordinances for the instruction and examination
of persons other than those enrolled in the University;
(c) to exercise general supervision over the academic policies of the University
and to give directions regarding methods of admission and instruction, co-ordination
of teaching among the colleges and the institutions, evaluation of research and
improvement of academic standards;
(d) to bring about and promote inter-faculty co-ordination and to establish or
appoint such committees or boards as may be deemed necessary for the purpose;
(e) to recognise diplomas or degrees and other Universities and Institutions
and to determine their equivalence in relation to the diplomas and degrees of the
University;
(f) to fix, subject to any conditions accepted by the Executive Council, the time
mode and conditions of competition for fellowship, scholarships and other prizes,
and to award the same;
(g) to make recommendations to the Executive Council in regard to the
appointment of examiners and if necessary, their removal and fixation of their fees,
emoluments and travelling and other expenses;
(h) to make arrangements for the conduct of examinations and to fix dates for
holding them;
(i) to declare result of the various examinations, or to appoint committees or
officers to do so and to make recommendations regarding the conferment or grant of
degrees, honours, diplomas, titles and marks of honour;
(j) to award stipends, scholarships, medals and prizes and to make other awards
in accordance with the Regulations and such other conditions as may be attached to
the awards;
(k) to approve and publish syllabus or the prescribed courses of study and lists
of prescribed or recommended text books;
(l) to prepare such forms and registers as are, from time to time, prescribed by
Regulations; and
(m) to perform, in relation to academic matters, all such duties and acts as may
be necessary, for the fulfilment of the objects of this Act.
15.  (1) The University shall have such Faculties as may be specified in the Statutes.
(2) Every Faculty shall have a Faculty Board and the members of the first Faculty
Board shall be nominated by the Executive Council for a period of three years.
(3) The composition, powers and functions of a Faculty Board shall be prescribed by
the Ordinances.
(4) The conduct of the meetings of a Faculty Board and the quorum required for such
meetings shall be prescribed by the Ordinances.
(5) (a) Every Faculty shall consist of such Departments as may be assigned to it by
the Statutes:
Provided that the Executive Council may, on the recommendation of the Academic
Council, establish Centres of Studies to which may be assigned such teachers of the
University as the Executive Council may consider necessary.
(b) Each Department shall consist of the following members, namely:—
(i) Teachers of the Department;
(ii) Persons conducting research in the Department;
Faculties and
Departments.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

22
(iii) Dean of the Faculty;
(iv) Honorary Professors, if any, attached to the Department; and
(v) Such other persons as may be members of the Department in accordance
with the provisions of the Ordinances.
16.  (1) Each Department shall have a Board of Studies.
(2) The constitution of the Board of Studies and the term of office of its members shall
be prescribed by the Ordinances.
(3) Subject to the overall control and supervision of the Academic Council, the
functions of a Board of Studies shall be to approve subjects for research for various degrees
and other requirements of research degrees and to recommend to the concerned Faculty
Board in the manner prescribed by the Ordinances—
(a) courses of studies and appointment of examiners for courses, but excluding
research degrees;
(b) appointment of supervisors for research; and
(c) measures for the improvement of the standard of teaching and research:
Provided that the above functions of a Board of Studies shall, during the period
of three years immediately after the commencement of the Act, be performed by the
Department.
17.  (1) The Finance Committee shall consist of the following members, namely:—
(i) the Vice-Chancellor;
(ii) the Pro-Vice-Chancellor;
(iii) one person to be nominated by the Court;
(iv) three persons to be nominated by the Executive Council, out of whom at
least one shall be a member of the Executive Council; and
(v) three persons to be nominated by the Visitor.
(2) Five members of the Finance Committee shall form a quorum for a meeting of the
Finance Committee.
(3) All the members of the Finance Committee, other than ex officio members, shall
hold office for a term of three years.
(4) A member of the Finance Committee shall have the right to record a minute of
dissent if he does not agree with any decision of the Finance Committee.
(5) The Finance Committee shall meet at least thrice every year to examine the accounts
and to scrutinise proposals for expenditure.
(6) All proposals relating to creation of posts, and those items which have not been
included in the Budget, shall be examined by the Finance Committee before they are
considered by the Executive Council.
(7) The annual accounts and the financial estimates of the University prepared by the
Finance Officer shall be laid before the Finance Committee for consideration and comments
and thereafter submitted to the Executive Council for approval.
 (8) The Finance Committee shall recommend limits for the total recurring expenditure
and the total non-recurring expenditure for the year, based on the income and resources of
the University (which, in the case of productive works, may include the proceeds of loans).
18. (1) There shall be Selection Committees for making recommendations to the
Executive Council for appointment to the posts of Professor, Associate Professor, Assistant
Professor, Registrar, Finance Officer, Librarian and Principals of Colleges and Institutions
maintained by the University.
Board of
Studies.
Finance
Committee.
Selection
Committees
and
Appointments.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

23
(2) The Selection Committee for appointment to the posts specified in Column 1 of the
Table below shall consist of the Vice-Chancellor, a nominee of the Visitor and the persons
specified in the corresponding entry in column 2 of the said Table:
TABLE
12
Professor ( i) The Dean of the Faculty.
(ii) The Head of the Department, if he is a Professor.
(iii) Three persons not in the service of the University, nominated
by the Executive Council, out of a panel of names recommended by
the Academic Council for their special knowledge of, or interest in,
the subject with which the Professor will be concerned.
Associate Professor or ( i) The Head of the Department.
Assistant Professor ( ii) One Professor nominated by the Vice-Chancellor.
(iii) Two persons not in the service of the University, nominated by
the Executive Council, out of a panel of names recommended by the
Academic Council for their special knowledge of, or interest in, the
subject with which the Associate Professor or Assistant Professor
will be concerned.
Registrar or Finance ( i) Two members of the Executive Council nominated by it.
Officer ( ii) One person not in the service of the University nominated by
the Executive Council.
Librarian ( i) Two persons not in the service of the University who have
special knowledge of the subject of the Library Science or Library
Administration nominated by the Executive Council.
(ii) One person not in the service of the University nominated by
the Executive Council.
Three persons not in the service of the University of whom two
shall be nominated by the Executive Council and one by the
Academic Council for their special knowledge of, or interest in, a
subject in which instruction is being provided by the College or
Institution.
Note 1.— Where the appointment is being made for an inter-disciplinary project, the
head of the project shall be deemed to be the Head of the Department concerned.
Note 2.—The Professor to be nominated by the Vice-Chancellor shall be a Professor
concerned with the speciality for which the selection is being made and the Vice-Chancellor
shall consult the Head of the Department and the Dean of School before nominating the
Professor.
(3) The Vice-Chancellor, or on his authorisation the Pro-Vice-Chancellor, or the Dean
shall convene and preside over the meeting of the Selection Committee:
Provided that the meeting of the Selection Committee shall be fixed after prior
consultation with, and subject to the convenience of Visitor's nominee and the experts
nominated by the Executive Council:
Provided further that the proceedings of the Selection Committee shall not be valid
unless,—
(a) where the number of Visitor's nominee and the persons nominated by the
Executive Council is four in all, at least three of them attend the meeting; and
Principal of College or
Institution maintained
by the University
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

24
(b) where the number of Visitor's nominee and the persons nominated by the
Executive Council is three in all, at least two of them attend the meeting.
(4) The procedure to be followed by the Selection Committee shall be laid down in the
Ordinances.
(5) All the proceedings, right from occurrence of vacancy to selection of the applicants
by the Selection Committee shall be placed before the Executive Council by way of Agenda
Note circulated in advance along with the recommendations of the Selection Committee in
sealed cover for informed decision making by the Executive Council:
Provided that, if any complaint has been received on the same, it shall also be included
in the Agenda Note.
(6) On being satisfied with the selection process, the Executive Council may accept
the recommendations of the Selection Committee and shall appoint the person so selected
on such terms and conditions as it deems fit.
(7) If the Executive Council is unable to accept the recommendations made by the
Selection Committee, it shall record its reasons and submit the case to the Visitor for final
orders.
(8) Appointments to temporary posts shall be made in the manner indicated below:—
(i) If the temporary vacancy is for duration longer than one academic session,
it shall be filled on the advice of the Selection Committee in accordance with the
procedure indicated in the foregoing clauses;
(ii) If the temporary vacancy is for a period less than a year, an appointment to
such vacancy shall be made on the recommendation of a local Selection Committee
consisting of the Dean of the Faculty concerned, the Head of the Department and a
nominee of the Vice-Chancellor:
Provided that if the same person holds the offices of the Dean and the Head of
the Department, the Selection Committee may contain two nominees of the Vice-
Chancellor;
(iii) No temporarily appointed teacher shall, if he is not recommended by a
regular Selection Committee for appointment under the Statutes, be continued in
service on such temporary employment.
19. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in Statute 18, the Executive Council may
appoint a person of high academic distinction and professional attainments to accept a
post of Professor or Associate Professor or any other equivalent academic post in the
University on such terms and conditions as it deems fit.
Provided that the Executive Council may also create supernumerary posts for a specified
period for appointment of such persons:
Provided further that the number of supernumerary posts so created should not
exceed five per cent. of the total posts in the University.
(2) The Executive Council may appoint a teacher or any other academic staff working
in any other University or organisation for undertaking a joint project in accordance with
the manner laid down in the Ordinances.
20. ( 1) An authority of the University may appoint as many standing or special
Committees as it may deem fit, and may appoint to such Committees persons who are not
members of such authority.
(2)  A Committee appointed under clause (1) may deal with any subject delegated to
it subject to subsequent confirmation by the authority appointing it.
Special mode
of appoint-
ment.
Committees.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

25
21. (1) All the teachers and other academic staff of the University shall, in the absence
of any agreement to the contrary, be governed by the terms and conditions of service and
code of conduct as are specified in the Statutes, the Ordinances and the Regulations.
(2) The emoluments of members of the academic staff shall be such as may be
prescribed by the Ordinances.
(3) On appointment, every teacher and member of the academic staff of the University
shall sign a contract, the form of which shall be prescribed by the Ordinances.
(4) A copy of every contract referred to in clause ( 3) shall be deposited with the
Registrar.
22.  (1) All the employees of the University, other than the teachers and other academic
staff shall, in the absence of any contract to the contrary, be governed by the terms and
conditions of service and code of conduct as are specified in the Statutes, the Ordinances
and the Regulations and until such Statutes, Ordinances and Regulations are made, the
provisions of the Central Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1965
shall apply.
(2) The manner of appointment and emoluments of employees, other than the teachers
and other academic staff, shall be such as may be prescribed by the Ordinances.
23.  (1) Whenever, in accordance with the Statutes, any person is to hold an office or
be a member of an authority of the University by rotation according to seniority, such
seniority shall be determined according to the length of continuous service of such person
in his grade and a person in higher grade will be considered senior to a person in the lower
grade.
(2) It shall be the duty of the Registrar to prepare and maintain in respect of each class
of persons to whom the provisions of these Statutes apply, a complete and up-to-date
seniority list in accordance with the provisions of clause ( 1).
(3) If two or more persons have equal length of continuous service in a particular
grade or the relative seniority of any person or persons is otherwise in doubt, the Registrar
may, on his own motion and shall, at the request of any such person, submit the matter to
the Executive Council whose decision thereon shall be final.
24.  (1) Where there is an allegation of misconduct against a teacher, a member of the
academic staff or other employee of the University and the authority competent to appoint
(hereinafter referred to as the appointing authority) is of the view that continuance of such
teacher, member of the academic staff, or other employee is not in the public interest or
detrimental to the fair conduct of the regular departmental enquiry, he may, by order in
writing, place such teacher, member of the academic staff or other employee, under
suspension:
Provided that if the appointing authority of such teacher, member of the academic
staff or other employee is the Executive Council, the Vice-Chancellor may, after recording
the facts and circumstances warranting suspension of such teacher, member of the academic
staff or other employee, suspend him and report the matter to the Executive Council within
three months' failing which the order shall stand revoked:
Provided further that after considering the report of the Vice-Chancellor, the Executive
Council may confirm or revoke the order.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the terms of the contract of appointment
or of any other terms and conditions of service of the employees, the Executive Council in
respect of teachers and other academic staff, and the appointing authority in respect of
other employees, shall have the power to remove a teacher or a member of the academic
staff or other employee, as the case may be, on grounds of misconduct.
(3) Save as aforesaid, the Executive Council, or as the case may be, the appointing
authority, shall not be entitled to remove any teacher, member of the academic staff or other
Terms and
conditions of
service and
code of
conduct of
the teachers,
etc.
Terms and
conditions of
service and
code of
conduct of
other
employees.
Seniority list.
Disciplinary
action
against
employees of
the
University.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

26
employee except for a good cause and after giving three months' notice or on payment of
three months' salary in lieu thereof.
(4) No teacher, member of the academic staff or other employee shall be removed
under clause (2) or clause (3) unless he has been given a reasonable opportunity of showing
cause against the action proposed to be taken in regard to him.
(5) The removal of a teacher, member of the academic staff or other employee shall
take effect from the date on which the order of removal is made:
Provided that where the teacher, member of the academic staff or other employee is
under suspension at the time of his removal, such removal shall take effect from the date on
which he was placed under suspension.
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing provisions of this Statute,
a teacher, member of the academic staff or other employee may resign,—
(a) if he is a permanent employee, only after giving three months' notice in
writing to the Executive Council or the appointing authority, as the case may be, or by
paying three months' salary in lieu thereof;
(b) if he is not a permanent employee, only after giving one month's notice in
writing to the Executive Council or, as the case may be, the appointing authority or by
paying one month's salary in lieu thereof:
Provided that such resignation shall take effect only on the date on which the
resignation is accepted by the Executive Council or the appointing authority, as the
case may be.
25.  (1) The Executive Council may, on the recommendation of the Academic Council
and by a resolution passed by a majority of not less than two-thirds of the members present
and voting, make proposals to the Visitor for the conferment of honorary degrees:
Provided that in case of emergency, the Executive Council may, on its own motion,
make such proposals.
(2) The Executive Council may, by a resolution passed by a majority of not less than
two-thirds of the members present and voting, withdraw, with the previous sanction of the
Visitor, any honorary degree conferred by the University.
26. The Executive Council may, by a special resolution passed by a majority of not
less than two-thirds of the members present and voting, withdraw any degree or academic
distinction conferred on, or any certificate or diploma granted to, any person by the University
for good and sufficient cause:
Provided that no such resolution shall be passed until a notice in writing has been
given to that person calling upon him to show cause within such time as may be specified
in the notice why such a resolution should not be passed and until his objections, if any,
and any evidence he may produce in support of them, have been considered by the Executive
Council.
27.  (1) All powers relating to the maintenance of discipline and disciplinary action in
relation to the students of the University shall vest in the Vice-Chancellor.
(2) The Vice-Chancellor may delegate all or any of his powers referred to in clause (1),
as he deems proper, to a Pro-Vice-Chancellor and to such other officers as he may specify in
this behalf.
(3) Without prejudice to the generality of his powers relating to the maintenance of
discipline and taking such action, as may seem to him appropriate for the maintenance of
discipline, the Vice-Chancellor may, in exercise of such powers, by order, direct that any
student or students be expelled or rusticated, for a specified period, or be not admitted to a
course or courses of study in a College, Institution or Department or a Faculty of the
University for a stated period, or be punished with fine for an amount to be specified in the
Honorary
degrees.
Withdrawal of
degrees, etc.
Maintenance
of discipline
among
students of
University.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

27
order, or be debarred from taking an examination or examinations conducted by the University,
College, Institution or Department or a Faculty for one or more years, or that the results of
the student or students concerned in the examination or examinations in which he or they
have appeared be cancelled.
(4) The Principals of Colleges, Institutions, Deans of Faculties and Heads of teaching
Departments in the University shall have the authority to exercise all such disciplinary
powers over the students in their respective Colleges, Institutions, Faculties and teaching
Departments in the University, as may be necessary for the proper maintenance of discipline
in such Colleges, Institutions, Faculties and teaching Departments.
(5) Without prejudice to the powers of the Vice-Chancellor and the Principal and other
persons specified in clause ( 4), detailed rules of discipline and proper conduct shall be
made by the University. The Principals of Colleges, Institutions, Deans of Faculties and
Heads of teaching Departments in the University may also make such supplementary rules
as they deem necessary to the aforesaid purpose.
(6) At the time of admission, every student shall be required to sign a declaration to
the effect that he submits himself to the disciplinary jurisdiction of the Vice-Chancellor and
other authorities of the University.
28. Convocations of the University for the conferring of degrees shall be held in such
manner as may be prescribed by the Ordinances.
29. Where no provision is made for a President or Chairperson to preside over a
meeting of any authority of the University or any Committee of such authority or when the
President or Chairperson so provided for is absent, the members present shall elect one
from among themselves to preside at such meeting.
30.  Any member, other than an ex officio member of the Court, the Executive Council,
the Academic Council or any other authority of the University or any Committee of such
authority may resign by letter addressed to the Registrar and the resignation shall take
effect as soon as such letter is received by the Registrar.
31. (1) A person shall be disqualified for being chosen as, and for being, a member of
any of the authorities, or being appointed as, and for being, an officer of the University if—
(i) he is of unsound mind; or
(ii) he is an undercharged insolvent; or
(iii) he has been convicted by a court of law of an offence involving moral
turpitude and sentenced in respect thereof to imprisonment for not less than six
months.
(2) If any question arises as to whether a person is or had been subjected to any of the
disqualifications mentioned in clause ( 1), the question shall be referred to the Visitor and
his decision shall be final and no other proceedings shall lie in any civil court against such
decision.
32. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Statutes, a person who is not ordinarily
resident in India shall not be eligible to be an officer of the University or a member of any
authority of the University.
33. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Statutes, a person who holds any post in the
University or is a member of any authority or body of the University in his capacity as a member of a
particular authority or body or as the holder of a particular appointment shall hold such office or
membership only for so long as he continues to be a member of that particular authority or body or the
holder of that particular appointment, as the case may be.
34. (1) There shall be an Alumni Association for the University.
(2) The subscription for membership of the Alumni Association shall be prescribed by
the Ordinances.
Convocations.
Acting
Chairman of
meetings.
Resignation.
Disqualifications.
Residence
condition for
membership
and office.
Membership
of authorities
by virtue of
membership
of other
bodies.
Alumni
Association.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

28
(3) No member of the Alumni Association shall be entitled to vote or stand for elections
unless he has been a member of the Association for at least one year prior to the date of
election and is a degree holder of the University of at least five years standing:
Provided that the condition relating to the completion of one year's membership shall
not apply in the case of the first election.
35. (1) There shall be constituted in the University, a Student's Council for every
academic year, consisting of—
(i) twenty students to be nominated by the Academic Council on the basis of
merit in studies, sports and extra-curricular activities; and
(ii) twenty elected representatives of students in the manner prescribed by the
Ordinances.
(2) The Chairperson and other office bearers of the Council shall be elected by the
members of the Council in the manner prescribed by the Ordinances:
Provided that any student of the University shall have the right to bring up any
matter concerning the interest of the students before the Students' Council, if so permitted
by the Chairman, and he shall have the right to participate in the discussions at any meeting
when the matter is taken up for consideration.
(3) The functions of the Students' Council shall be to make suggestions to the
appropriate authorities of the University in regard to the programmes of studies, students'
welfare and other matters of interest to the students and such suggestions shall be made on
the basis of majority of the members present and voting.
(4) Twenty-one members shall form quorum of the meeting of the Council.
(5) The Students' Council shall meet at least twice in an academic year.
36. (1) The first Ordinances made under sub-section (2) of section 30 may be amended,
repealed or added to at any time by the Executive Council in the manner specified below.
(2) No Ordinance in respect of the matters enumerated in sub-section (1) of section 30
shall be made by the Executive Council unless a draft of such Ordinance has been proposed
by the Academic Council.
(3) The Executive Council shall not have power to amend any draft of any Ordinance
proposed by the Academic Council under clause (2), but may reject the proposal or return
the draft to the Academic Council for re-consideration, either in whole or in part, together
with any amendment which the Executive Council may suggest.
(4) Where the Executive Council has rejected or returned the draft of an Ordinance
proposed by the Academic Council, the Academic Council may consider the question
afresh and in case the original draft is reaffirmed by a majority of not less than two-thirds of
the members present and voting and more than half the total number of members of the
Academic Council, the draft may be sent back to the Executive Council which shall either
adopt it or refer it to the Visitor whose decision shall be final.
(5) Every Ordinance made by the Executive Council shall come into effect immediately.
(6) Every Ordinance made by the Executive Council shall be submitted to the Visitor
within two weeks from the date of its adoption.
(7) The Visitor shall have the power to direct the University to suspend the operation
of any such Ordinance and he shall, as soon as possible, inform the University about his
objection to the proposed Ordinance.
(8) The Visitor may, after receiving the comments of the University, either withdraw
the order suspending the Ordinance or disallow the Ordinance, and his decision shall be
final.
Students'
Council.
Ordinances
how to be
made.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

29
37.  (1) The authorities of the University may make Regulations consistent with the
Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances for the following matters, namely:—
(i) laying down the procedure to be observed at their meetings and the number
of members required to form a quorum;
(ii) providing for all matters which are required by the Act, the Statutes or the
Ordinances to be prescribed by Regulations;
(iii) providing for all other matters solely concerning such authorities or
committees appointed by them and not provided for by the Act, the Statutes or the
Ordinances.
(2) Every authority of the University shall make Regulations providing for the giving
of notice to the members of such authority of the dates of meetings and of the business to
be considered at meetings and for the keeping of a record of the proceedings of meetings.
(3) The Executive Council may direct the amendment in such manner as it may specify,
of any Regulation made under the Statutes or the annulment of any such Regulation.
38. Subject to the provisions of the Act and the Statutes, any officer or authority of
the University may delegate his or its powers to any other officer or authority or person
under his or its respective control and subject to the condition that overall responsibility
for the exercise of the powers so delegated shall continue to vest in the officer or authority
delegating such powers.
Regulations.
Delegation of
powers.
5
10
15

STATEMENT  OF OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Education is considered as prime driving force in elevating the status of women and
it is Government's commitment to ensure gender parity in all spheres of life. The making of
quality education, available to everyone is the most fundamental basis for advancing gender
equality and women's empowerment. Armed with such an education, and the self-confidence
that comes with it, there is no limit to what women can do-provided they have equal access
to job and career opportunities and the determination to make positive changes in the
country.
2. There are some State Universities and Institutions deemed to be Universities which
cater exclusively to women students, but there is no Central University exclusively for
women in the country. In the 12th Five Year Plan while the focus is on consolidation of the
existing institutions, there is provision for new Central Universities to address the social
gap. The University shall be established exclusively for women with an objective to provide
for necessary support and supplement the efforts of the Government in women's
empowerment by giving them increased access to higher education and research. The
proposed women's University will cut across social and religious categories and facilitate
girls from disadvantaged sections to enter into higher education.
3. Establishment of a Central University for women would have a multiplier effect on
availability of empowered women in all walks of life. As a model Central University for
women, it will create standards of excellence to be followed by others. Such a Central
University will help in the fight to overcome discrimination and change perceptions about
what women can and should do.
4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; M. M. PALLAM RAJU
The 2nd  August,  2013.
30

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to establish a new Central University as a body corporate to
be known as the Indira Gandhi National University for Women in the district of Raebareli,
Uttar Pradesh. After enactment of the Bill, the Vice Chancellor will be appointed, who will
prepare the Vision Document and the Draft Project Report under the guidance of the statutory
authorities of the University. The actual financial requirements of the University will be
worked out on the basis of the Draft Project Report. It is expected that the proposed
University would require about Rs. 500 crore during the 12thPlan period. The expenditure
would be met from the Consolidated Fund of India through the University Grants Commission
under the budgetary provisions of the Minsitry of Human Resource Development.
31

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 29 of the Bill provides that the first Statutes are those set out in the Schedule
to the Bill. It also empowers the Executive Council of the University to make new or additional
Statutes or to amend or repeal the Statutes of the university subject to the assent of the
Visitor.
2. Sub-Clause (5) of the aforesaid clause empowers the Visitor also to make new or
additional Statutes or amend or repeal the Statutes of the University during the period of
five years immediately after the commencement of the Act.
3. Sub-Clause (6) further empowers the Visitor to direct the University to make
provisions in the Statutes in respect of any matter specified by him and if the Executive
Council is unable to implement such direction within sixty days of its receipt, the Visitor
may, after considering the reasons, if any, communicated by the Executive Council for its
inability to comply with such direction, make or amend the Statutes suitably. The matters in
respect of which the Executive Council and the Visitor may make, amend or repeal Statutes
include the constitution, powers and functions of the authorities and other bodies of the
University, the appointment of officers and teachers of the university, the conditions of
service of employees of the University and other such matters.
4. Sub-Clause (2) of clause 30 of the Bill empowers the Vice-Chancellor to make the
first Ordinances of the University with the previous approval of the Central Government
and provides that the Ordinances so made may be amended, repealed or added to at any
time by the Executive Council in the manner prescribed by the Statutes. The matters in
respect of which Ordinances may be made, or as the case may be, amended, repealed or
added to, relate to admission of students, courses of study, medium of instruction and
examination, the manner of co-operation and collaboration with other Universities,
institutions and other agencies, the setting up of a machinery for redressal of grievances of
employees and other such matters.
5. Clause 31 of the Bill enables the authorities of the University to make Regulations,
consistent with this Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances for the conduct of their own
business and that of the Committees, if any, appointed by them and not provided for by this
Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances, in the manner prescribed by the Statutes.
6. Clause 45 empowers the Central Government, by order published in the Official
Gazette, to make provisions to remove certain difficulties, which may appear to be necessary
or expedient and such an order is not to be made after the expiry of a period of three years
from the commencement of the Act and such order shall be laid before each House of
Parliament.
7. Clause 46 provides that every Statute, Ordinance or Regulation made under the Act
shall be published in the Official Gazette and they shall be laid before each House of
Parliament.
8. The matters for which the Statutes, Ordinances or Regulations may be made pertain
to matters of procedure or detail and it is not possible to provide for them in the Bill. The
delegation of legislative powers is, therefore, of normal character.
32

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to establish and incorporate a University in the State of Uttar Pradesh to  provide for
avenues of higher education and research facilities  to the women in India and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri M.M. Pallam Raju, Minister of Human Resource Development)
GMGIPMRND—1937LS(S4)—13.08.2013.