Bill No. 131 of 2018
THE COMPULSORY PROTECTION OF WITNESSES AND VICTIMS
OF CRIMES BILL, 2018
By
SHRI NISHIKANT DUBEY, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory protection of witnesses and victims of crimes by the State who
are intimidated, harassed, physically attacked mostly by various means or of their
family members or their near and dear ones by the accused of crimes or by their
accomplices or friends or relatives or co-accused or sympathizers committed either
directly against the victims or against their family members or their near and dear
ones and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Compulsory Protection of Witnesses and Victims of
Crimes Act, 2018.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "concealing of the identity of witness" means any condition prohibiting
publication or revealing, in any manner whatsoever, directly or indirectly of the name,
address and other particulars relating to witness which may lead to the identification
of the witness of a crime;
(c) "family member" includes parents, spouse, siblings, children and grand-
children including legally adopted ones of the witness or victim of a crime;
(d) "in-camera proceedings" mean prodceedings wherein the public and press
are not allowed to witness the proceeding;
(e) "near and dear ones" include the relatives, in-laws, friends, etc.;
(f) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(g) "threat analysis report" means a detailed report prepared by designated
police officers of the District or the unit investigating the case reflecting the seriousness
and credibility of the threat perception to a witness or victim, as the case may be, or his
family members or near or dear ones containing specific details about the nature and
seriousness of threats faced by the witness or victim or his family members or near and
dear ones to their life, reputation or property;
(h) "victim" means a person who is harmed physically or robbed or cheated as a
result of a crime;
(i) "witness" means any person who possesses information or domcument about
any crime regarded by any Court of law as being material to any criminal proceedings
and who has made a statement or who has given or agreed to give evidence in relation
to such proceedings;
(j) "witness or victim protection application" means an application moved by the
witness or the victim, as the case may be, in the prescribed form before the competent
court of law for seeking witness or victim protection order;
(k) "witness or victim protection order" means an order passed by the competent
court of law detailing the steps to be taken by the local police for ensuring safety of
life, reputation or property of the victim or witness, and his family members, near and
dear ones and shall include interim order, if any, passed during the pendency or witness
of victim protection application.
3. (1) The appropriate Government shall provide compulsory protection to the witness
or the victim, as the case may be, who is intimidated, harassed, physically attacked by arms
or otherwise, or his kidnapping or of his near and dear ones by the accused of crime or by his
accomplices or friends or relatives or co-accused or sympathizer, committed either directly
against the witness or the victim or against their family members or near and dear ones
whenever a request is made to the appropriate Government by either the witness or victim, as
the case may be, or by their family member or near and dear one.
(2) The appropriate Government shall take the necessary measures for providing
protection to witness under this act.
(3) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions the measures shall
include,—
(a) procedure of availing protection from the State;
(b) concealment of the identity of the witness;
(c) avoidance of face to face contact between the witness or the victim, as the
case may be, and the accused;
Definitions.
Compulsory
protection of
witness or the
victim of
crime.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(d) compulsory in-camera proceedings so as to protect the identity of the witness;
(e) monitoring of the calls and mails of the witness or the victim, as the case
may be, and providing him with an unlisted number;
(f) installation of security devices like closed circuit television alarms, or any
other such devices at the place of residence or office of the witness or victim, as the case
may be.
(g) undertaking any other measure issued under the witness or victim protection
order to ensure safety of the witness or victim, as the case may be.
4. (1) During the course of investigation of an offence, the witness of the offence or
victim thereof may apply for protection order at the court in which the proceedings are being
heard in such manner as may be prescribed;
(2)The Court shall, upon receipt of an application under sub-section ( 1), call for the
threat analysis report and shall, upon receipt of the report, evaluate the threat to the life,
reputation or property of the witness or victim, as the case may be, or his family members or
near or dear ones or any other person, which it deemed fit, to ascertain whether there is
necessity to pass a witness or victim protection order or not.
(3)The threat analysis report shall be submitted within seventy-two hours of the
receipt of the application.
(4)During the course of hearing of the application, the identity of the witness shall not
be revealed to any other person.
(5)The National or State Legal Service Authority constituted under the Legal Services
Authorities Act, 1987 shall provide legal aid to the applicant free of cost.
5. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force the
National Legal Services Authority shall coordinate and frame policies for effective
implementation of the provisions of this Act and rules made thereunder.
6. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide requisite funds for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
7. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after expiry of two years from the date of
commencement of this Act.
(2)Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid
before each House of Parliament.
8. The provisions of this Act shall in addition to and not in derogation of any other law,
for the time being in force.
9.  (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made before
each House of the State Legislature while it is in session for a total period of thirty days
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions and if, before
Process of
availing
protection.
Power to
remove
difficulty.
National legal
Services
Authority to
coordinate
and frame
policies for
implementation
of the act.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Act to
supplement
other laws.
Power to
make rules.
39 of 1987.
  5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

4
the expiry of the session immediately following the session or successive sessions aforesaid
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of
no effect, as the case may be; so however, that any such modification or annulment shall be
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under the rule.

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
These days people who are witness to crimes do not come forward to depose before
the court of law because they fear for their lives, property or reputation and similar fear is felt
for their family members and near and dear ones. It is also true that the criminals in particular
the hardened ones and organized criminals first of all target the witnesses and victims, their
family members, near and dear ones with intimidation, harassment, attacks with arms, acid
etc., so that they do not come forward to give evidence in the court due to fear factor. The
victims of crimes are threatened to withdraw the case or face the consequences. In most of
rape cases and murders it is happening. Many a times the victim or witnesses have been
attacked and even murdered. Acid throwing on rape victims is very common. As such in the
absence of reliable evidence the criminals go scot free which becomes a morale booster for
them to become hardened criminals. Unfortunately of late orgainsed crime has grown and is
becoming stronger and more diverse.
It is also true  that in the course of investigation and prosecution of crime, in particular
the most serious and complex forms of organized crime and heinous crimes like murder, rape,
act of terrorism or voilence it is essential that the witnesses, the cornerstones for successful
investigation and prosecution must have trust in criminal justice system. They need to have
confidence to come forward to assist law enforcement and prosecutorial authorities. Similar
is the case of victims of crimes. In fact the witnesses as well as victims of crimes have to be
assured that they will receive State support and protection from intimidation and the harm
that criminal or criminal groups may seek to inflict upon them or upon the family members or
near or dear ones in an attempt to discourage or punish them. The apex court has also
emphasized on the need of legislative measures for the protection of victims and witnesses
which has to be implemented in letter and spirit.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; NISHIKANT DUBEY
July 2, 2018.
5

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Sub-clause (2) (f) of clause 3 of the Bill provides for installation of security devices like
Closed Circuit Television (CCTV) alarms etc. at the residence or office of the witness or the
victim of a crime. Sub clause (5) of clause 4 provides that the National or State Legal Services
Authority shall provide legal aid to the applicant free of cost. Clause 6 makes it mandatory for
the Central Government to provide requisite funds for carrying out the purposes of the Bill.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India.
It is likely to involve a recurring expenditure of rupees ten thousand crore per annum. No
non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.
6

7
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLA TION
Clause 9 of the Bill, gives power to the Central Government to make rules for
carrying out the purposes of the Bill. Since, the rules will relate to matters of details only,  the
delegation of legislative power is of normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the compulsory protection of witnesses and victims of crimes by the State who
are intimidated, harassed, physically attacked mostly by various means or of their
family members or their near and dear ones by the accused of crimes or by their
accomplices or friends or relatives or co-accused or sympathizers committed either
directly against the victims or against their family members or their near and dear ones
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Nishikant Dubey, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—603LS(S3)—24-07-2018.