1
THE CHILD DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMMES
COORDINATION AGENCY BILL, 2016
By
SHRI NISHIKANT DUBEY, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of the Child Development Programmes
Coordination Agency in order to ensure smooth functioning
of child development programmes and achievement of
targets for such programmes within a set time
frame and for matters connected therewith.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Child Development Programmes Coordination Agency
Act, 2016.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title,
extent  and
commencement.
Bill No. 131 of  2016
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “Agency” means the Child Development Programmes Coordination Agency
established under section 3;
(b) “Child Development Programmes” means the programmes being run by the
Union Ministry of Women and Child Development with an object of development of
children; and
(c) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under the Act.
3.  (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish
an Agency to be known as the Child Development Programmes Coordination Agency for
carrying out the purposes of this Act in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The headquarters of the Agency shall be at such place as may be prescribed.
(3) The Central Government shall appoint such number of officers and staff to the
Agency for the effective implementation of the provisions of this Act.
(4) The salary and allowance payable to and other terms and conditions of services of
officers and staff of the Agency shall be such as may be prescribed.
4. The Agency shall—
(a) coordinate with the agencies involved in implementation of child development
programmes in such manner as may be prescribed;
(b) conduct monthly review of child development programmes run by the Central
Government;
(c) hold meetings every three months in connection with the execution of
programme based on the review;
(d) submit half-yearly progress report and give recommendations to the Central
Government in such manner as may be prescribed; and
(e) undertake such other functions as may be assigned to it by the Central
Government, from time to time.
5. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
a fund to be known as the Child Development Programmes Coordination Fund for carrying
out the purposes of this Act.
(2) The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide requisite sums to the Fund for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
6. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
7. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Definitions.
Establishment
of a Child
Development
Programmes
Coordination
Agency.
Functions of
the Agency.
Power to make
rules.
Constitution
of a Child
Development
Programmes
Coordination
Fund.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
It is unfair to think of development of a nation without development of its children.
Actually, child development is the foundation of national development. The responsibility
of ensuring health  care, availability of good nutrition and quality education to children lies
not only with the parents but also with the Government. Presently, a number of programmes
on child development are being run by the Central Government amongst which the Integrated
Child Development Services (ICDS) Scheme is the primary one, which was started in the
year 1975. Subsequently, many small and big programmes were introduced. Despite all
these schemes, there seems to be a continuous deterioration in child development scenario
in the country, be it the state of health or nutrition or education. Owing to lack of coordination
in implementing these ongoing programmes, the state of child development in the country
continues to be at the lowest level despite spending hundreds of crores of rupees annually.
Therefore, the need to establish a coordination agency for ensuring smooth functioning of
child development programmes and achievement of targets of such programmes within the
set time-frame is inevitable.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; NISHIKANT DUBEY
April 11, 2016.

4
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of the Child Development
Programmes Coordination Agency. Clause 5 provides for the constitution of a Child
Development Programmes Coordination Fund. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure
of rupees one thousand crore per annum would be involved from Consolidated Fund of
India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be
incurred.

5
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relates to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK   SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of the Child Development Programmes
Coordination Agency in order to ensure smooth functioning
of child development programmes and achievement of
targets for such programmes within a set time-
frame and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Nishikant Dubey, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—173LS(S3)—03-05-2016.