AS INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA

17 DEC 1099

Bill_No. 131 of 1999.

THE POPULATION CONTROL AND FAMILY WELFARE BILL, 1999
By
Suri Susu. Kumar SHInbE, M.P.
A
BILL

to provide for measures for population control through compulsory sterilisation of certain
persons and providing incentives/disincentives for adopting small family norm.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fiftieth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. (7) This Act may be called the Population Control and Family Welfare Act, 1999.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
sf (3) It shall come into force at once.

(4) It shall be applicable to all Indian citizens, irrespective of their place of birth,
religion, faith, belief or worship.

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—

(® "Government" means the Central Government in respect of Union
10 territories, including the National Capital Territory of Delhi, and the respective State
Goverment in respect of a State; and

(ii) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.,

Short title,
extent,
commence-
ment and
acceptability.

Definitions.


of Small
Family-cum-
Child Welfare
Centre.

Time gap
between
children.

‘Compulsory
sterilisation.

Age for
marriage.

Population

family welfare
tobea

subject.

2

3. (J) There shall be established "Small Family-cum-Child Welfare Centre",
hereinafter called the "Centre" by the appropriate Government for every five thousand of
population in rural areas and for every twenty-five thousand in urban areas.

(2) The Centre shall guide the married persons in the use of preventive methods of
birth control and also provide them with suitable birth control devices free of charge.

(3) There shall be made adequate arrangements at every Centre for carrying out
birth control operations including post operation care of the persons who undergo operation
and supply of necessary medicines to them free of charge.

(4) There shall be made adequate arrangements at every Centre for providing
complete medical care to every child upto the age of five years free of any charge.

(5) The appropriate Government shall take suitable steps to mobilise the people in
rural areas to visit the Centres and avail of the facilities provided at the Centres.

4. Subject to the provisions of this Act, every married couple shall ensure, by use of
any of the recommended preventive methods of population control, adequate spacing
between children, which shall not be less than six years between the birth of their two
children.

5. (7) In the case of every married couple, having two or more living children, on the
date commencement of this Act, including those whose second child is born after the
commencement of this Act, either the husband or the wife, shall be required to undergo
compulsory sterilisation, within a period of one year from coming into force of this Act:

Provided that any attempt to avoid or avert such sterilisation shall be punished with
imprisonment for six months:

Provided further that no sterilisation of the husband or.wife, shall be required in case
the husband is above the age of sixty years or the wife is above the age of forty eight years.

(2) In case, however, an unmarried woman becomes a mother, immediate steps,
may be prescribed, shall be taken to determine the paternity of the child by various modes
of investigation, including a Deoxyribonucleic Acid test, so as to fix responsibility for
providing paternal care and bringing up the child, without loss of dignity to the child in
social life:

Provided that if the woman is below the marriage age as provided under Section 6,
the man responsible for fathering the child shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment
for not less than one year and a fine of rupees one lakh, and an amount necessary for
securing proper and human up bringing and also education to the child as may be determined
by the Court,

(3) Subject to the provisions of the Medical Termination or Pregnancy Act, 1971, it
shall not be illegal if pregnancy is terminated with a view to adopting small family norm.

6. (1) No marriage shall be solemnised between a male who is less than twenty-five
years of age, and a female who is less than twenty-one years of age.

(2) The provisions of the Child Marriage (Restraint) Act, 1929, shall be so amended
as to prohibit, marriage contemplated under sub-section (/), as "child marriage" and the
parties to such marriages shall be liable to be punished under that Act, as amended from
time to time.

7. (1) The appropriate Government shall introduce a compulsory subject, "Population
Control and Family Welfare" in all educational institutions, at the secondary level of
education,

(2) The subject mentioned in sub-section (/) shall be part of curriculum from class
nine onwards.


20

25

35

45

3

(3) It shall be incumbent on every student passing the Senior Secondary examination
to secure the minimum prescribed marks in that subject.

8. (7) Ifa man or a women elects to remain unmarried and gives a written undertaking.
to that effect, incentives as may be prescribed pertaining to education, health, housing,
financial security, transport and other means of sustenance shall be given to him or her.

(2) The names and other particulars of those electing to remain unmarried shall be
registered with a prescribed Authority, duly by the appropriate Government.

9. Any m couple having one living child and either of them, voluntarily
undergoes sterilisation, the appropriate Government shall provide them the following
facilities and benefits:—

(a) offer allotment of housing accommodation, including allotment of land
for housing, at specially subsidised rates, under various Government housing schemes,
allowing at least 20% rebate on usual cost, supported with concessional loan facilities;

(0) concessional travelling facilities within country,
(c) medical facilities for the child and his parents;

(d) a monthly pension of at least rupees two thousand and five hundred per
month per couple, in the event of death or disablement of the child, after they attain
the age of sixty years and they have no other source of income enough to secure a
reasonable standard of living, in accordance with the social status of the family:

Provided that the amount of the minimum pension payable under sub-section (d)
shall be linked with the cost of living index, to be reviewed after every five years.

10. (7) Any person who is serving in connection with affairs of the Union Government
or any undertaking under the control of the Union and who is unmarried or if married has
only one living child on the date of commencement of this Act shall give an undertaking
that he shall not procreate nor have more than two living children at any given time.

(2) Any person violating the provisions of sub-section (/) shall be subject to such
disciplinary action as the Union Government may by orders issued from time to time,
prescribe,

11. Any person who violates the provisions of section 4 of this Act, or otherwise
procreates a child in addition to two more living children, shall—

(a) ifhe or she is serving in connection with the affairs of the Union including

a public undertaking or enterprise under the union, be subject to stoppage of annual

increments for a period of three years and shall be debarred from any chances of

promotion during this period, besides any other further penalty as may be prescribed;

(0) if he or she is working in any private organisation, his employer shall
deduct 15% of his wages, and deposit the amount so deducted, in Government
treasury, every month for a period of three years from the date of default comes to

notice:

Provided that if any default is made and the amount as has been stated in sub-
section (b) is not being deducted in connivance between employee and employer, or
otherwise, both the employer and employee shall be liable to be prosecuted for ‘conspiracy’
under appropriate section of the Indian Penal Code;

(c) if he or she is engaged in agriculture or is otherwise self-employed or

‘engaged in business or profession, be subject to a fine of at least rupees fifty thousand

recoverable over a period of three years, besides any further penalty as may be

deemed necessary.

Incentives to
remain
‘unmarried.

Undertaking
by Govern-


Insertion of
new section 8A
in the
Representation
of the People
‘Act, 1951.
Disqualifi-
cation on
‘grounds of not
adopting small
family norm.

National
Population

Family Welfare
Fund.

Utilisation of
Fund.

Publicity.

Act to have
over-riding
effect.

Power to make
rules.

4

12. After section 8A of the Representation of the Act, 1951, the foll
section shall be inserted, namely:—

“8B. A person shall be disqualified, if he procreates more than | I
children:

Provided that no person shall be disqualified if he has two or more children
date of commencement of this Act, or has another child within one year from the
its commencement, where by the number of living children of that person adds up to
than two.”,

13. (1) The Central Government shall constitute a fund, called the N:
Population Control and Family Welfare Fund.

(2) The Central and State Governments shall contribute to the fund, in such ratio a
may be prescribed.

14. The fund constituted under section 13 shall be utilised for the following
namely:—

(0 giving national population control awards to States or Union t
which record the lowest population growth rate during a year;

ing national population control certificate to individuals
organisations, which have contributed substantially in creating awareness
awakening among the masses to the need for adoption of small family norms an

Propagating the use of scientific modes and techniques for achieving population
control, as may be prescribed;

(iii) giving awards to non-Government Organisations for promotion of
population control programmes and schemes.

15. (1) The apporipriate Government shall give effective and regular publicity to
the provisions of this Act and its objectives, involving the Press, electronic media,
educational institutions, hospitals, health centres and other Government and priv:
institutions, through appropriate incentives and otherwise, so as to convert population
control campaign into a mass campaign.

(2) The appropriate Government shall provide proper incentives to Panchayati Raj_
Institutions to push ahead the population contro! plans and Programmes. ६

16. The provisions of this Act shall apply notwithstanding any law, custom or usage —
having the force of law to the contrary, and such law, custom or usage to the extent of
contradiction, shall be void. _

17. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
tules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

On July 12, as we observe the World Population Day, year after year, the world |
attention is drawn to India's fast growing population, which threatens to put India on top
of the world. Though India had the distinction to launch an official "Family Planning
Programme" in 1951 itself, India's population continues to gallop unimpeded, and the
country accounts for the highest population density in the world. The population growth
has assumed such menacing proportions that unless stringent, nay deterrent, steps are
taken to curb it, the day is not far off, when India will out-strip even China, the most
populous country, being already on the threshold of 1000 million mark, starting with only
348 million at the time of independence in 1947.

So much so that the economic progress and development made over the eight
Five Year Plans and more, has been neutralised by one single malady that afflicts the
country, namely, population growth, and over 35% of India still lives below the poverty
line.

While poverty and ignorance is the main cause of population explosion, population
growth itself in turn is the root cause of poverty and ignorance, forming a vicious circle.
This vicious circle has got to be broken by strenuous and planned effort by educating the
masses of the advantages of having small family. Small family norms have to be promoted
and enforced, not only by providing incentives for adopting these norms, but also by
enforcing disincentives and even deterrents.

On a closer scrutiny it has been found that the total fertility rate can be brought
down by over 22%, if only unwanted pregnancies are eliminated. It can be further cut
down considerably if the legal marriageable age is raised under the Prevention of Child
Marriages Act, 1929 and the Act so amended is rigorously enforced. Since fertility rate
amongst women is the highest between 20 to 27 years of age, raising the marriage age to
21 years for females and to 25 years for males will considerably bring down the birth rate.

It has also been observed that adolescence of teenage girls very often ends up in
pregnancies, and one fourth of adolescent girls become mothers. This menace has to be
firmly dealt with.

An amendment to the Representation of the People Act, 1951, barring those not
adhering to small family norms from contesting for membership to Parliament and State
Legislatures. These measures will go a long way in curbing the population growth.

Hence this Bill.

New DELHr, SUSHIL KUMAR SHINDE
November 15, 1999.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM.

Clause 13 of the Bill provides for creation of the National Population |
Family Welfare Fund. The expenditure in respect of the administration of rest
provisions of the Bill shall be met out of the budgetary grants of the concerned
of the appropriate Government.

The Bill, if enacted, would involve a recurring expenditure of about rupees:
crore from the Consolidated Fund of India per annum.

A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five crore is also likely to be in


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 17 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. Since the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation
of legislative power is of a normal character.


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for measures for population control through compulsory sterilisation of
certain persons and providing incentives/disincentives for adopting small family norm.

(Shri Sushil Kumar Shinde, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—2407LS—08- 12-1999.