1
Bill No.  131  of  2012
THE FREE EDUCATIONAL AND HOSTEL FACILITIES TO
STUDENTS BELONGING TO THE SCHEDULED CASTES,
THE SCHEDULED TRIBES AND ECONOMICALLY
WEAKER CLASS BILL, 2012
By
DR. MAHENDRASINH P. CHAUHAN, M.P .
A
BILL
to provide for free educational and hostel facilities upto post graduation level for
the students belonging to the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and
economically weaker class and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-third Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Free Educational and Hostel Facilities to Students
Belonging to the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and Economically Weaker Class
Act, 2012.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
T
O BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) “economically weaker class student” means a student whose family income
from all sources is not more than rupees twenty thousand per annum;
(c) “educational institution” means any college or institution or university
imparting higher education including medical and technical education, recognized by
the Government or established under an Act of the Central Government or a
State Government; and
(d) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. Every educational institution shall provide free education to students belonging to
the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and economically weaker class for a period of
six years from the date of his enrollment in such institution or till the completion of the
course of study, whichever is earlier, in which that student is enrolled in such manner as
may be prescribed.
Explanation.—For the purpose of this section, free education includes,—
(a) all expenses incurred on admission and tuition fees;
(b) provision of books and stationery items free of cost; and
(c) scholarships, in such cases as may be prescribed.
4. The appropriate Government shall provide free hostel facilities to students
belonging to the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and economically weaker class,
in such manner and for such period, as may be prescribed.
5. The appropriate Government shall establish and maintain or cause to be established
or maintained adequate number of hostels, at such places and in such manner as may be
prescribed, within its territorial jurisdiction.
6. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force regulating any of the matters dealt with in this Act.
7. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previoulsy done under that rule.
Definitions.
Free
educational
facilities for
students
belonging to
certain
categories.
Free hostel
facilities.
Establishment
of adequate
number of
hostels.
Power to
make rules.
Act not in
derogation of
other laws.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
In our country even after more than sixty years of independence, most of the students
belonging to the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and economically weaker class
are not able to afford even their school education leave alone university level education.
The poorest among them are not able to go even to primary schools and remain illiterate and
thus continue to get exploited in the society. The Government provides free school education
to them but that is not enough. After completion of school education when they go to the
college or university, it is beyond their reach to pay either the tuition fee or the hostel
charges. Medical and Engineering students have to stay in hostels which are very expensive
and students belonging to these categories cannot afford cost of staying in the hostels.
This compels even the brightest students among them to opt out from higher education. In
some cases their tuition fee is exempted but that is not enough. Therefore, it is necessary
that students belonging to the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and economically
weaker class are provided free education and hostel facilities to enable them to pursue their
higher education. That is why late Shri Rajiv Gandhi in the election manifesto of the
Indian National Congress for the 1991 General Elections had promised—“Guarantee of
tuition fee and maintenance allowance to every SC/ST student admitted to any University
for a maximum period of six years”. After coming back to power, the Government had
included economically weaker class people in its welfare ambit. Thus, it will be appropriate
to enlarge the scope of that promise to the electorate. This can be achieved by providing
free educational and hostel facilities to students belonging to the Scheduled Castes, the
Scheduled Tribes and economically weaker class.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; MAHENDRASINH  P.  CHAUHAN
November 7, 2012

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for free educational facilities to the students belonging
to the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and economically weaker class. Clause 4
provides for free hostel facilities for students belonging to the Scheduled Castes, the
Scheduled Tribes and economically weaker class. Clause 5 provides for establishment of
adequate number of hostels. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India. A recurring expenditure of rupees one hundred crore is likely to
be involved per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees twenty crore is also likely to be involved.

5
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill.
As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of legislative power is
of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for free educational and hostel facilities upto post graduation level for the
students belonging to the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and
economically weaker class and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Dr . Mahendrasinh P . Chauhan, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—3449LS(S3)—30-11-2012.