As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA ON

Bill No. 131 of 1990
————
| MULTI-STATE CO-OPERATIVE SOCIETIES (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 1990
A
BILL

to amend the Multi-State Co-operative Societies Act, 1984.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-first Year of the Republic of
India as follows:—

1. (1) This Act may be called the Multi-State Co-operative Societies
(Amendment) Act, 1990.

__ (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government
9, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint,

2. In section 29 of the Multi-State Co-operative Societies Act, 1984
referred to as the principal Act), in sub-section (3), for the
“only through the Chairman”, the words “through any member of
board” shall be substituted.

1 6 AUG 1990

Short
title

and com-
mence-
ment,

Amend-
ment of


Insertion
of new
section
36A.

Holding of
office
ofa
member
of the
board
in the
national
o-opera-
tive
society,

inserted, namely: —

2

3. After section 36 of the principal Act, the following section shall be

“36A. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, no person
shall, at the same time, be elected, nominated or appointed as a
member of the board in more than two national co-operative socie- 9
ties:

Provided that any person holding, at the commencement of the
Multi-State Co-operative Societies (Amendment) Act, 1990, the office
of a member of the board in more than two national co-operative
societies shall, within three months from such commencement by |
notice in writing signed by him, intimate the names of any two
national co-operative societies in which he wishes to serve and
thereupon his office in the other national co-operative societies in.
which he does not wish to serve shall become vacant:

Provided further that in default of such intimation within the 15
period specified in the preceding proviso his office in each of such
national co-operative societies shall, at (४९ expiration of the period
aforesaid, become vacant.”.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Section 29 of the Multi-State Co-operative Societies Act, 1984,
inter alia, provides that the representation of the co-operative society or
a multi-State co-operative society in the general body or the board of
another multi-State co-operative society shall be through the chairman or
among co-operators who consider this provision as restrictive and un-
democratic. It is, accordingly, proposed to amend section 29 so as to
broad-base the representation of a member society in the general
body or the board of a multi-State co-operative society. Such representa-

tion shall now be through any member of the board or the Chief Execu-
tive.

2. Further, in order to stem the growth of vested interests in the
management of co-opera‘ives, a provision was made to provide that no
Person shall be eligible to hold, at the same time, the effice of a president
or chairman or vice-president or vice-chairman on the board of more than
one multi-State co-operative society (section 36). It is now felt neces-
sary that a similar restriction should also be put on persons holding
office of the members of the board in various national co-operative
Societies. Accordingly, it is proposed that no person shall be eligible to
be a member of the board in more than two national co-operative
societies listed in the Second Schedule to the Act.

3. The Bill seeks to athieve the above objects.

New Dewi; NITISH KUMAR.
The 1st August, 1990.


General
body, its
constitu-
tion,
powers

functions.

ANNEXURE

Extract FROM THE MuLtI-StaTe Co-operative Socieries Acr, 1984
(51 oF 1984)

* के * * *
CHAPTER IV

DIRECTION AND MANAGEMENT OF MULTI-STATE CO-OPERATIVE SOCIETIES

29, (1) * * * * *

(3) Where in any meeting of the general body or the board of a
multi-State co-operative society, a co-operative society or another multi-
State co-operative society is to be represented, such co-operative society
or other multi-State co-operative society shall be represented in such
meeting only through the Chairman or the Chief Fxecutive of such
co-operative society or other multi-State co-operative society, as the
case may be, and where ‘here is no board of such co-operative society
or other multi-State co-operative society, for whatever reasons, through
the administrator, by whatever name called, of such co-operative so~
ciety or other multi-State co-operative society.

* * * * *



LOK SABHA

a
BILL

to amend the Multi-State Co-operative Societies Act. 1924

(Shri Nitish Kumar,

i Minister of State én the
Department of Agriculture
and Co-operation in the
Ministry of Agriculture.)