AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

25 NOV 206

Bill No. 131 of 2005
THE ASIATIC SOCIETY OF MUMBAI BILL, 2005 j
| By
SHRI C.K. CHANDRAPPAN, M.P.
A”
BILL

to declare the institution known as the Asiatic Society of Mumbai having at present its
registered office in Mumbai to be an institution of national importance and to provide for
certain matters connected therewith |

BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty sixth year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (/) This Act may be called the Asiatic Society of Mumbai Act, 2005

(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint

___ 2, Whereas the late James Mackintosh founded the literary Society of Bombay which
is now known as the Asiatic Society of Mumbai and the objects of which are such as to make
the institution one of national importance, it is hereby declared that the said Asiatic Society
is an institution of national importance

Short title and

commencement.

Declaration of
Asiatic Society
of Mumbai as
an institution
of national
importance.


Definitions.

Grants, loans,
etc. by Central
Government to
Society.

Audit of
accounts of
Society.

Annual report.

Prior approval
of Central
Government
necessary for
certain action
by Society.

2
3. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “memorandum” means the memorandum of association of the society;
(8) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;

(c) “regulations” includes any rule or regulation (by whatever name called) which
the Society is competent to make in the exercise of the powers conferred on it by The
Bombay Public Trust Act, 1950 but shall not include any bye-laws or standing orders
made under the regulations for the conduct of its day-to-day administration;

(d) “Society” means the Asiatic Society of Mumbai being a society within the
meaning of the Bombay Public Trust Act, 1950 and having its registered office in
Mumbai.

4. For the purpose of enabling the Society to discharge efficiently its functions,
including in particular those relating to research, literary, library, scientific and
museological activities, collection of manuscripts, coins and art objects, and the
publication of periodicals, books and other literature, the Central Government may,
after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, pay to the Society in
each financial year such sums of money as that Government considers necessary by
way of grants, loans or otherwise.

5. (1) The Society shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records and prepare
an annual statement of accounts including the balance sheet in such form as may be approved
by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.

(2) The accounts of the Society shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-
General of India and any expenditure incurred by him in connection with such audit shall be
payable by the Society to the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.

(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and any person appointed by him
in connection with the audit of the accounts of the Society shall have the same rights, privileges
and authority in connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India
has in connection with the audit of the Government accounts, and, in particular, shall have
the right to demand the production of books, accounts, connected vouchers and other
documents and papers and to inspect the office of the Society.

(4) The accounts of the Society as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor-General

10

420

of India or any person appointed by him in this behalf together with the audit report thereof 30
shall be forwarded annually to the Central Government and that Government shall cause the

same to be laid before each House of Parliament.

6. The Society shall furnish to the Central Government, at such time each year as may
be directed, its annual report giving full account of its activities, policies and programmes
during the previous year and that Government shall cause the same to be laid before each
House of Parliament.

7. The Society shall not, except with the previous approval of the Central Government,

(a) alter, extend or abridge any of the purposes for which it has been established
or for which it is being used immediately before the commencement of this Act, or
amalgamate itself either wholly or partially with any other institution or society; or

(b) alter or. amend in any manner the memorandum or regulations; or

(c) sell or otherwise dispose of any property acquired by the Society with money
specifically provided for such acquisition by the Central Government:

Provided that no such approval shall be necessary in the case of any such movable
property or class of movable property as may be specified by the Central Government in this
behalf by general or special order; or

(d) be dissolved.

35°

५०

५


3

8. (1) For the purpose of advising it with respect to the planning and Planning

implementation of the developmental programmes of the Society and other matters
concerning the Society, the Central Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, establish a board to be called the Planning Board (Asiatic Society of Mumbai).

is (2) The Board shall consist of a Chairman and such other members as may be
appointed by the Central Government.

(3) Subject to any rules which the Central Government may make in this behalf, the
oard shall have the power to regulate its own procedure.

(4) The term of office of, the procedure to be followed in the discharge of their

\o functions by, the manner of filling casual vacancies among, the allowances, if any,

payable to, and other matters concerning, the members of the Board shall be such as
may be prescribed.

9, (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,

constitute as many Committees, as and when it considers it necessary, consisting of

}S such number of persons as it thinks fit to appoint thereto and assign to each such
Committee all or any of the following duties, namely:—

(a) the preparation and submission to the Central Government, as far as possible
before the commencement of each financial year, of statements showing programmes
of work agreed to be undertaken by the Society during that year for which the Central

Ao Government may provide funds as well as general financial estimates in respect of
such work;

(b) the settlement on board lines of the programmes of such work;

(2) A Committee constituted under sub-section (7) shall, in discharging its duties
with respect to any matter under this section, have due regard to the advice, if any, tendered
2¢  inrespect of such matter under section 8 by the Board to the Central Government.

(3) Where the Society does not agree to undertake any work sugge es by any
Committee referred to in sub-section (/), it shall give to the Central Government its reasons
for not so agreeing.

(4) The procedure to be followed by a Committee constituted under sub-
40 section (J) in the discharge of its functions, the allowances, if any, payable to the

members of such Committee and other matters relating to such Committee shall be

such as may be prescribed.

10. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
constitute a Committee consisting of such number of persons as it thinks fit to appoint
35 thereto for the purpose of—

(a) reviewing the work done by the Society and the progress made by it;
(b) inspecting its buildings, equipment and other assets;
(c) evaluating the work done by the Society;

(d) advising Government generally on any matter which in the opinion of the

Yo Central Government is of importance in connection with the work of the Society;

and the Committee shall submit its report thereon in such manner as the Central
Government may direct. 7

(2) The procedure to be followed by; the allowances, if any, payable to, the
members of the Committee and other mattes concerning the Committee shall be such
Ys" as may be prescribed.

(3) The Committee shall, subject to the provisions of sub-section (4) and of any
rules which the Central Government may make in this behalf, have power to regulate its own
procedure.

oard

Committees.

Review of work
done,
inspection of
assets, etc.



Society to
afford facilities
to Committees.

Power to issue
directions to
Society.

Power of
Central
Government to
assume
functions of
control.

4

(4) Notice shall be given in every case to the Society of the intention to cause a
review, inspection or evaluation to be made, and the Society shall be entitled to appoint a
representative who shall have the right to be present and be heard at such review, inspection
or evaluation.

(5) The Central Government may address the President of the Society with reference
to the result of such review, inspection or evaluation as disclosed in any report of the
Committee referred to in sub-section (/), and the President shall communicate to the Central
Government the action, if any, taken thereon.

(6) When the Central Government has, in pursuance of sub-section (5), addressed
the President of the Society in connection with any matter, and the President does not within
a reasonable time take action to the satisfaction of the Central Government in respect thereof,
the Central Government may, after considering any expianations furnished or representations
made on behalf of the Society, issue such directions as it considers necessary in respect of
any of the matters dealt with in the report.

11. The Society shail be bound to afford all necessary facilities to the Board constituted
under section 8 and to every committee constituted under section 9 or section 10 for the
purpose of enabling them to carry out their duties.

12. (1) The Central Government may, if it is satisfied that it is necessary so to do in the
public interest, issue, for reasons to be recorded and communicated to the Society, such
directions as it thinks fit to the Society, and such directions may include directions requiring
the Society—

(a) to amend the memorandum or to make or amend any regulation within such
period as may be specified in the directions;

(5) to give priorities to the work undertaken or to be undertaken by the Society
in such manner as the Central Government may think fit to specify in this behalf.

(2) Any directions issued under this section shall have effect, notwithstanding
anything contained in any law for the time being in force or in the memorandum or regulations
of the Society.

13. (1) If, in the opinion of the Central Government,—

(i) the society without just or reasonable cause has made default in giving effect
to any direction issued under sub-section (6) of section 10 or section 12; or

(ii) the Council of the Society has exceeded or abused the powers in relation to
the Society or any part thereof:

the Central Government may, by written order, direct the Society within a period to be
specified in the order to show cause to the satisfaction of the Central Government against the
making of any appointment referred to in sub-section (2).

(2) If, within the period fixed by any order issued under sub-section (/), cause is not
shown to the satisfaction of the Centrai Government, the Central Government may, by order
published in the Official Gazette and stating the reasons therefore, appoint one or more
persons to take over the management of the Society or of any of the activities of the Society
for such period not exceeding two years as may be specified in the order.

(3) During the period specified in the order issued under sub-section (2),—

(a) where the order provides for any person or persons taking over the
management of the Society-

(i) all persons holding office as members of the Council, including the
President, shall be deemed to have vacated their offices as such;

(ii) the person or persons appointed under sub-section (2) to take over the
management of the Society shall exercise all the powers and perform all the

jo

—r

८

Ao

25

२2०

357

Uo

Us



5

duties of the President or Council of the Society, whether at a meeting or
otherwise, in respect of the Society;

(b) where the order provides for any person or persons taking over the

management of any activities of the Society, the person or persons so appointed shall

Ss alone be entitled to exercise all the powers and perform all the duties of the President
or Council in relation to those activities. :

14. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in the memorandum or regulations or the Bombay Public Trust Act,
1950 or any other law for the time being in force.

1० 15. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make

rules to carry out the provisions of this Act.

(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power,
such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—

(i) matters with respect to the procedure to be followed by the Board under sub-
Ss section (3) of section 8;

(ii) the term of office of, the procedure to be followed in the discharge of their
functions by the manner of filling casual vacancies among, the allowances, if any,
payable to, and other matters concerning, the members of the Board under sub-
section (4) of section 8;

Ro (iii) the procedure to be followed by a committee in the discharge of its functions,
the allowances, if any, payable to the members of the Committee and other matters
relating to the Committee under sub-section (4) of section 9.

(iv) the procedure to be followed by, the allowances, if any, payable to, the
members of the Committee and other matters concerning the Committee under sub-
aS section (2) of section 10;

(v) any other matter which is required to be or in respect of which rules may be

made under this Act.

(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon

as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total

4,0 period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive

sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the

successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or

both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only

in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such

3¢ modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.

Act to have
overriding

effect.

Power to make
rules


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

With an astonishing collection of 300,000 books of which 30000 are considered rarest
of the rare and huge collection of bound volumes of periodicals of which one half is more
than 100 years old, and with collection of manuscripts of rare distinction, such as Dante’s
Divine Comedy 1350, The Shahnamah of Firdausi, Arnyaparva of Mahabharata, richly
illustrated belonging to 13th Century, the Asiatic Society of Bombay is one of the rich cultural
heritages of our country, which is now 200 years old.

The genesis of this institution, is traced to 1804, when the Literary Society of Bombay
was founded by a distinguished European called Sir James Mackintosh. In 1829, the Literary
Society was invited to become an integral part of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain,
then became the Bombay Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society. In 1831 it was given permission
to function from the North wing of Bombay Town Hall. The Societies’ Membership was
restricted only to Europeans upto 1840. Later membership was opened to Indians, and then
it became Asiatic Society of Bombay.

The Society today has been recognized by the Mumbai University for Ph.D. studies
and research on ancient and modern history as well as Sanskrit.

The Society has in its possession unique Sapora relics excavated from the Buddhist
Stupa in the suburbs of Mumbai. It has the invaluable collection of 11,830 coins, which
includes fifth century gold coins of. Kumara Gupta and rare gold mohar of Akbar, coins
issued by Shivaji, etc.

It is one of the most important institutions of research and studies in India; comparable
only to the Asiatic Society of Calcutta, which was established in 1784. In recognition of its
historic importance and its immense contributions ii all fields of Arts and Sciences since
1784, the Government of India recognized the Asiatic Society of Calcutta as an institution of
National importance by an Act of Parliament in 1984, during its bi-centenary celebrations.

It is high time the same type of recognition is bestowed on the Asiatic Society of
Bombay, which is now 200 years old and remains one of the rare institutions of excellence
in the country.

This Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.

New DELHI; C. K. CHANDRAPPAN
August 24, 2005 |



FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 4 of the Bill provides that the Central Government may make payments by way
of grants, loans or otherwise for the purpose of enabling the Asiatic Society of Mumbai to
discharge its functions efficiently Clause 8 of the Bill provides for the establishment of a
Planning Board. Clause 9 of the Bill provides for the constitution of Committee by the
Central Government whilst clause 10 of the Bill provides for the constitution of a Review
Committee.

The Bill if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is
likely to involve an annual recurring expenditure of rupees seven lakh fifty thousand only
from the Consolidated Fund of India.

No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 15 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules to Carry out the
provisions of the Bill. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause enumerates the matters with respect
to which rules may be made. These matters, inter alia, relate to the procedure to be followed
in the discharge of the functions by, the manner of filling casual vacancies among, the
allowances, if any, payable to, and other matters concerning, the Members of the Planning
Board, Committees, etc., under clauses 8, 9, and 10.

As these matters relate to procedure and administrative detail, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character. .

a.



‘LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to declare the institution known as the Asiatic Society of Mumbai having at present its
registered office in Mumbai to be an institution of national importance and to provide for
certain matters connected therewith

(Shri C. K. Chandrappan, M.P.)

MGIPMRND—3239LS(S$3)—12-11-2005.