Bill No. 131 of 2015
THE FLOOD AND DROUGHT CONTROL  BILL, 2015
By
SHRI  RAJESH RANJAN, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of a National Flood and Drought Control Board to
control flood and drought and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
WHEREAS entry 56 of List I-Union List of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution
provides for regulation and development of inter-State rivers and river valleys to the extent
to which such regulation and development under the control of the Union is declared by
Parliament by law to be expedient in the public interest;
A
ND WHEREAS a lot of havoc is caused by floods and drought every year in almost all
parts of the country;
AND WHEREAS it is expedient in the public interest to take effective measures to control
flood and drought.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Flood and Drought Control Act, 2015.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title
and
commence-
ment.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "Board" means the National Flood and Drought Control Board constituted
under section 3;  and
(b) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
a Board to be known as the National Flood and Drought Control Board to perform functions
assigned to it under this Act.
(2) The headquarter of the Board shall be at New Delhi and regional office at Madhepura
in the State of Bihar.
(3) The Board shall consist of,—
(a) a Chairperson; and
(b) a member representing each of the State Government and Union territory,
to be appointed, from amongst persons of eminence having special knowledge and
experience in the field of flood and drought control, by the Central Government.
(4) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service of
the Chairperson and other members of the Board shall be such as may be prescribed.
(5) The Central Government shall make available such officers and staff to the Board
as it may require for its efficient functioning.
4. The Board shall,—
(a) identify areas which are prone to floods and droughts;
(b) suggest measures for flood and drought control;
(c) make a time bound plan for inter-linking of rivers which are prone to floods
with the ones which are not so;
(d) suggest measures for the development of land in areas which are prone to
floods and drought;
(e) install flood forecasting system in areas which are prone to floods;
(f) suggest steps that shall be taken to evacuate the inhabitants from flood
affected areas to safer places;
(g) suggest measures to the State Governments for rehabilitation of inhabitants
of flood and drought affected areas; and
(h) suggest measures to the State Governments for rain water harvesting and
construction of dams.
5. The expenditure incurred on implementation of flood and drought control meansures
as suggested by the Board shall be borne by the Central Governments and the State
Governments in such ratio, as may be prescribed.
6. It shall be the duty of the Central Government to implement the recommendations of
the Board:
Provided that where it is felt that any recommendation cannot be implemented due to
any reason, the Central Government may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, inform the
Board accordingly.
Definitions.
Constitution
of the
National
Flood and
Drought
Control
Board.
Functions of
the Board.
Expenditure
incurred on
implementation
of the Act to
be borne by
the Central
and State
Governments.
Recommendations
of the Board to
be implemented
by the Central
Government.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40

3
7. (1) The Board shall prepare, in such form and at such time in each financial year, as
may be prescribed, its annual report, giving a true and full accounts of its activities during
the previous financial year and submit a copy thereof to the Central Government.
(2) The Central Government shall cause the annual report to be laid, as soon as may be
after receipt of the report under sub-section (1), before each House of Parliament.
8. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of  Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Power to
make rules.
Annual
Report.
5
15
10

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
India is the land of many great rivers. Floods occur in almost all river basins of the
country. The water resources of the country are not being fully utilized. Every year there are
floods in some parts of the country which cause immense loss of life and property. It has
been observed that at the same time, there is flood in one part of the country and the other
part is affected by drought. The national resources are damaged by floods and drought. The
problem, therefore, needs to be addressed urgently to mitigate the affects of floods and
droughts.
Therefore, it is expedient in public interest to evolve an integrated and scientific
approach to deal with the problem of frequent occurrence of floods and drought and to draw
out a national plan fixing priorities for implementation of strategies in the future.
The Bill seeks to provide for the constitution of a National Flood Control Board to
suggest measures to prevent flood and deal with the problem of drought in the country.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RAJESH RANJAN
April  8, 2014.
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for constitution of a National Flood and Drought Control
Board. Clause 4 provides inter alia for a time bound action plan for inter-linking of rivers and
installing of flood forecasting system. Clause 5 provides that the expenditure incurred on
implementation of the provisions of this Act shall be borne by the Central Government and
State Governments. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely to involve a recurring expenditure of about rupees
one hundred crore per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also  likely to be
incurred.
5

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGA TED  LEGISLATION
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to frame rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of detail only and as such the
delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.
6

GMGIPMRND—377LS(S3)—28-04-2015.
LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of a National  Flood and Drought Control Board to control
flood and drought and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Rajesh Ranjan, M.P.)