AS INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

15॥ 2b

Bill No. 131 of 2000.

THE UNORGANISED WORKERS INSURANCE BILL, 2000
By
‘Surx ANANDRAO ViTHOBA Apsut, M.P.
a
BILL
to provide for life insurance of unorganised workers

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. (J) This Act may be called the Unorganised Workers Insurance Act, 2000.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
5 2. जा this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context:—

(a) “dependant” means a person as defined in the Workmen's Compensation
11923, Act, 1923;

(b) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;

(c) “unorganised worker” means a worker who is engaged in any industry

10 which is not organised and includes a worker who is engaged in construction work,
hotel industry, small establishments, service sectors or who work as labourers on
contract basis or work as cleaners/drivers or such work as may be prescribed.

Short title and
extent,

Definitions.


Government
to frame
Insurance
Scheme.

Payment of
insurance
amount to the
dependants of
the organised
workers,

Power to make
rules.

a

3. (1) The Central Government shall frame an Insurance Scheme for unorganised
workers,

(2) The Government and the employer of unorganised workers shail contribute
Separately to the Insurance Scheme at the rate of ten percent. of the wages payable to
cach of the unorganised workers employed by the employer,

(3) The expenditure on the enforcement of the Insurance Scheme shall he borne
by the Central Government and the unorganised workers shall not be required to
contribute anything to the Insurance Scheme.

4. The Central Government shall pay rupees one thousand per month as insurance
amount to the dependant of an unorganised worker, who die while in Service, out of the
Fund of the Insurance Scheme,

5. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS.

‘The unorganised workers of the country are the worst sufferers securit
are meagerly paid by their employers. The amount they get is not even suf

subsistence, Naturally, they are unable to make provisions for their near and dear ones out
of their wages.

‘They suffer a slow death leaving their off springs at the mercy of this unkind world,
At the work-sites, where they are made to work, the working conditions are always dan-
gerous and often they die in accidents. Since, they do not belong to any organised sector,
they do not get any facilities and they are not represented at any level. As such their
grievances are neither heard nor resolved. They do not have any union/association to
represent their interest. Their nature of job is such that they cannot form unions,

Therefore, Government of a welfare State should protect their interests.

New हा मा; ANANDRAO VITHORA ADSUL
July 24, 2000.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 3(1) of the Bill Provides for the framing of an Insurance Scheme for the
unorganised workers. Clause 3(2) provides that the Government and employer of unor-
Eanised workers shall each contribute ten percent. of the wages payable to each of the
unorganised workers to the Insurance Scheme. Clause 3(3) provides that the expenditure
on the enforcement of the Insurance Scheme shall be borne by the Government. The Bill,
if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely to
involve a recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore per annum.

A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees two crore is also likely to be involved.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 5 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to frame rules for carrying
‘out the purposes of the Bill. Since the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the dele-
gation of legislative power is of a normal character,


LOK SABHA

A

BILL
to provide for life insurance of unorganised workers.

(Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—2068LS—0 1-08-2000.