,,; -, I 
.9 of 1176. 
10 
IS 
BiU No. 132 of l't77 
-piE INDIAN I~ON AND STEEL COMPANY (ACQUISITION 
OF Slil\RES) AME:NDMENT B,ILL, 1977 
A 
BILL 
to amend the lndiatn Iron and Steel Company (Acquisition of Shares) 
Act.. 1976. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-eighth Year of the Republic 
~~ Inpia as follows:-
-,-Il 
., 
Short 1. (1) This Act may be calIed the Indian Iron and Steel C~pany 
(Afq~sition of Shares) Amendment Act, 1977. 
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 13th day of 
O~tober. 1977. 
title and 
conunenee-
ment. 
~. ¥l. ~~ctiop 2 Qf the Indian Iron and Steel Company (Ac~uisition of Amend-
~~W:~~s) "c.t, 1976 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), for clause 1MBt· 
. ..... ' 
(h), the following clause shall be substituted, narnely:- . tiOQI. 
• (h) "shareholder" means,-
(i) a person who, imm~diately ~fpr~ the appointedd~y. "¥lis 
regis~red by the Company as the holder of any share' an:d in-
c~~des his l~gal representative; or 
(ii) a p~rsp~ w~o. q$re ~e ~~flo~qt~d qay. haqw.~ed)V'~h 
the Company a proper instrument of transfer of any share in the 
form prescribed under sf>ction 108 of the Companies Act, 1956, 
and executed in accordance with the provisions of that ~~tioni or 

",-ci-__ t of 
Het100 7. 
%ulrtioa 
of .. 
--. 
fA IDd 
m. 
PDwerof 
CoIDIIIH-
.tOIler to 
inquire 
into dis-
putes al 
to 
persons 
entitled 
to an1 
amount. 
.De):lOllt of 
amount in 
court. 
Repeal 
and 
laviD8. 
I" • '" 
,_ (iii) a person who claims under a proper instrument of 
transfer of any share in the form prescribed under section 108 
of the Companies Act, 1956, which was executed ltefore the 1 cd 1 .... 
appointed day and delivers such instrument to the Commissioner 
on or before such date as the Cantral Government may, by noti- S 
fication, specify in this behalf;. 
3. In section 7 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1) ,-
(i) in the opening paragraph, for the words "within thirty days 
from the specified date", the words, figures and letters "on or before 
the 30th day of November, lS77" shall be substituted and shall be 10 
deemed always to have been substituted; 
(ii) for the proviso, the following proviso shall be substituted 
and shall be deemed always to have been substituted, namely:-
"Provided that if the Commissioner is satisfied that the 
claimant was prevented by sufficient cause from preferring the IS 
claim before the said date, he may entertain the claim within a 
further period of thirty days from that date and not thereafter.". 
'" After section 7 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be 
j~ted, namely:-
",7 A. Where there is any dispute as to the person or persons who :ao 
are entitled to any amount payable under this Act (including any 
dispute as to who are the legal representatives of any deceased 
claimant to the amount). the Commissioner may. after makine such 
inquiry as he may deem fit, make the payment to such person as ap-
pears to him to be best entitled to receive the amount: ~s 
Provided that if the Commissioner is unable to determine as to 
who is the person entitled to the amount and considers that the 
matter could more appropriately be dealt with by the principal civil 
court of original jurisdiction within the local limits of whose jurisdic-
tion the registered office of the Company is situated, he may refer 30 
such dispute to the said court, whose decision thereon shall be final: 
Provided further that nothing contained herein shall affect the 
liability of any person, who may receive the whole or any part of the 
amount allowed under this Act, to pay the same to the penon 
lawfully entitled thereto. 35 
7B. Where any dispute has been referred under section 7A by the 
Commissioner to the civil court referred to therein, he shall deposit 
the amount in that court.". 
5. (1) The Indian Iron and Steel Company (Acquisition of Shares) 
Amendment Ordinance, 19'17, 1'8 hereby repealed. 40 15 of 117'7. 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken 
under the Ordinance so repealed shall be deemed to have been done or 
~.keJl unc;ier the corres~onding provisions of this Act. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Untier the Indian Iron and Steel Company (Acquisition of Shares) 
Act, 1976, with effect frum the 17th July, 1976, Government acquired 
the ~hares of the Indian Iron and Steel Company Limited, held by 
parties other than the State Governments and public sector institutions. 
in order to enable the Government to make the necessary additional 
investment in that Company to make it a viable unit. 
2. According to the definition of the term "shareholder" in the Act , 
the amount due in respect of shares was payable only to those persons 
who immediately before the appointed day (17th July, 1976) were regis-
. tered by the Indian Iron and Steel Company as the holders of any sh84oes. 
Representations had been received that on the basis of the existing defi-
nition, the amount would not be payable to persons who are holding the 
shares as on the appointed day on the basis of legal transactions., if they 
were not registered as the shareholders in the books of the Company as 
on that date. As the shares of the Company were listed on the Stock 
Exchanges, transfer of these shares from one party to another was taking 
place frequently and these transfers could not be registered in the Com-
pany's books before the appointed day, nor was it necessary that such 
transfer should be registered immediately after the transfer. In order to 
avoid hardship to genuine holders of the shares, it is proposed that the 
definition of the term "sharehCllder" should be suitably enlarged so as to 
include the following categories also:-
(i) persons who, immediately before the appointed day, were 
registered by the Company as the holder of ~y share and 
their legal representatives; 
(ii) persons who had acquired a share of the Company and had 
lodged the instrument of transfer with the Company before 
the appointed day; anrt 
(iii) any other person claiming in pursuance of a document duly 
executed before the appointed day, in the form prescribed for 
the purpose, under the Companies Act, 1956, and lodged with 
the Commissioner of Payments on or before such date as the 
Central Government, may, by notification, specify in this behalf. 
3. The other proposals connected with the above relate to empower-
ing of the Commissioner to inquire into disputes as to the persons entitled 
to any amount due (which would also enable the Commissioner to refer 
the matter in certain cases, where he is himself unable to decide that 
question, to the principal civil court of original jurisdiction within t~e 
local limits of whose jurisdiction the registered office of the Company ~ 
aituated) and the making of a provision for the deposit of the amount in 
3 

4 
court where the dispute has been referred to by the Commissioner to a 
civil court. Provision has also been mnde to safeguard the interests of a 
parson lawfully entitled to receive the amount by providing that the liabi· 
lity of any person who has received the same would still continue as 
against the person lawfully entitled to receiVe it. 
4. An Ordinance to give effect to the ab::>ve objects was promulgated 
by th~ ~ident on the 13th day of October, 1977. 
5. The Bill seeks to replace that Ordinance. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 8th November, 1977, BIJU PATNAIK. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF THt 
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. 8(97)/77-K.I./1948, dated the 11th November, 1977 
from Shri Biju Patnaik, Minister of Steel i:lnd Mines to the Secretary, Lok 
Sabha.] 
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the BI11 
for amendment of Indian Ir::>n and Steel Company (AcqUisition of Shares) 
Act, 1976, ,has recommended under article 117 (1) and (3) of the Constitu-
tion, the introduction in and consideration by Lcik Sabha of the Aaid :enI. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
,Acc,ordin~ to the definition of the term "Shareholder" ~n theIndiap" 
Ii'bn 'and Steel Corlipany (Acquisition of Shares) Act, 1976 lheamount' 
due in respect of shares was payable only to those persons whose shares 
w.ere acquired by Government dn'17-'7-1976 and who were registered on 
that date in the books of Indian Iron and Steel Company as, the holders 
of such shares. The amount would not, therefore, be payable to persons 
who were not registered as such even though they had Acquired ~the 
shares as on 17-7-1976, legally. The Bill seeks to provide for the amend-
ment Of the definition of the term "Shareholder" in the Act to provide 
that the· following categories of persons are also paid the amount, 
namely:-
(i) legal representatives of shareholders as defined iii the 
existing Act; 
(ii) a person who had acquired shares of the company aD.d bad 
lod~ed. the inst.wrnent of transfer with the company before 17-1-1~7~;, 
and ' , 
(iii) a person who claims under a proper instrument of transfer 
of imy share in the prescribed form and executed before l'V':7":li76 
and 1t*1ge\i with the 'Commissioner of Payments on or be~e meb' 
L datE! "as the Central Government may by notificatioh specify 'itt 'tfrls 
behalf. 
2. The amount at the rates stipulated in the Act, namely, at the 
rate of Rs. 4.70 for each equity share of the face value of Rs. 10 and at 
the rate of Rs. 32.75 for each preference share of the face value of Rs. 100 
would, therefore, be payable to all those persons who held the shares of 
lISCO in a lawful manner as on 17-7-1976 and whose shares were 
acquired. 
3. The total amount paid to the Commissioner of Payments for dis-
bursement to the shareholders whose shares were acqUired was deter-
mined with reference to the total number of shares acquired by Govern-
ment and not with reference to whether they were actually registered as 
shareholders in the Books of the company as on 17-7-1976. There would, 
therefore, be no further outgo of expenditure from the Consolidated Fund 
Of India as a result of the proposed amendment. 
4. However, but for the enlargement of the definition of the expression 
"shareholder" by the proposed amending legislation, the undisbursed 
amount lying with the Commissioner, would normally have gone back to 
the Government and, to this extent, this could technically be deemed to 
be a loss to the Government. 
, 

ClaImI to 
~ made 
... 
cea-le-
....... 
ANNEXURE 
b'l'llACTl FROI4 THE INDIAN IRON AND STEEL COMPANY (ACQUISITION OF 
SHARES) ACT, 1976 
(89 OF 1976) 
• • • • • 
I. In thil Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
• .. .. .. • 
(h) "shareholder" means a person. who, immediately before the 
appointed day, was registered by the Company as the holder of any 
.hare; 
.. • .. .. • 
7. (1) Every shareholder, having a claim in relation to any share ac-
quired by this Act, shall prefer such claim before the Commissioner with-
in thirty days from the specified date: 
Provided that if the Commissioner is satisfied that the claimant wal 
prevented by sufficient cause from preferring the claim within the period 
of thirty days, he may entertain the claim within a further period of 
thirty day. al'1d not thereafter. 
• .. .. .. .. 

Memorandum explaining the modijiocltions contained in the Bin to 
'replace the Indian ITOn and Steel Com~ (AcquiriticM at 8M,.e.) 
Amendment Ordinance, 1977 
Apart from changes of a formal drafting nature, refereDCfII in new 
sections 7A and 7B (vide clause 4 of the Bill to compensation have beea 
changed into references to amount payable under the Act to conform to 
the language of section 10 of the Act. 
1 

LOK SABRA 
A 
BILL 
r 
I r 
to amend the Indian Iron and Steel Company (Acquisition of Shares) 
Act, 1976. 
(Shri Bt;u. PCltMik, 
Minuter of Steel Clftd MtRel.) 