As Iyrropucep in Lox Saba

11 AUG 199%

Bill No. 132 of 1992
een nace

THE SPECIAL COURT (TRIAL OF OFFENCES RELATING
TO TRANSACTIONS IN SECURITIES) BILL, 1992

4 A हि 9
BILL

provide for the establishment of a Special Court jor the trial of offences
relating to transactions in securities and for matters connected therewith
or incidental thereto.
Bs it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-third Year of the Republic
of India as follows: —
4. (1) This Act may be “called the Special Court (Trial of Offences
"Relating to Transactions in Securities) Act, 1992. ;

5 (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 6th day of June, 1992.

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “Code” means the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973:

(0) “Custodian” means the Custodian appointed under sub-section
(4) of sectibn 3;
(c) “securities” includes—

(i) shares, scrips, stocks, bonds, debentures, debenture stock,
units of the Unit Trust of India or any other Mutual Fund or other
marketable securities of a like nature in or of any incorporated
company or other body corporate;

Short
title

and com
mence-
ment,

Defini-
tions.


Appiont-
ment
and fune-
tions of
Custodian,

‘Contracts
entered
into
fraudu-
ently
may be
cancel-
led.

Establish
ment of
Special
Court,

८1
(8) Government securities; and
(iii) rights or interests in securities;

1. (4) “Special Court” means the Special Court established under sub-
section (1) of section 5, q

3. (7) The Central Government may appoint one or more Custodians as it
may deem fit for the Purposes of this Act,

(2) The Custodian may, on being satisfied on information received that
any person has been involved in any offence relating to transactions in
securities after the Ist day of April, 1991 and on and before the 6th June
1992, notity the name of such person in the Official Gazette,

(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code and any other
for the time being in force on and from the date of notification under
section (2) any Property, movable or immovable.
person notified under that sub-section shal] stand
ihe issue of the notification,

. oF both, belonging to a
attached simultaneously ¥

(4) The Property attached under sub-section (3) shall be dealt with by
© Custodian in such manner as the Special Court may direct.

(5) The Custodian may take assistance of any person while ¢:
his powers or for discharging his duties under this section and section 4,

4. (1) If the Custodian is satisfied, after such inquiry as he may think fit,
that any contract or agreement entered into at any time after the Ist day of
April, 1991 and on and before the 6th June, 1992 in relati
३० any property of the person notified under sub-section, (2). of section
has been entered into fraudulently or to defeat the Provisions of
Act, he may cancel such contract or agreement and on such cancella=
tion such Property shall stand attached, under this Act:

Provided that no contract or
giving to the parties to the contract
being heard.

agreement shall be cancelled except after
OF agreement a reasonable opportunity. of

(2) Any person aggrieved by a notification issued under sub-section for
of section 3. or any cancellation made under sub-section (7) of section 4 or

any other order made by the Custodian in exercise of the powers. conferred

on him under sections 3 and 4 may file a Petition objecting to the same

Within thirty days of the commencement of this Act, before the Special Court
where such notification, i

id where such notification, cancellation or
order has been issued on or after that date, within thirty days of the
issuance of such notification, cancellation or order, as the case may be: and
the Special Court after hearing the parties, may make such order as it deers fit,

5. (7) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official *
Gazette, establish a Court to be called the Special Court

(2) The Special Court shail consist of a sitting Judge of the High Court
nominated by the Chief Justice of the High Court within the local Timits of

Whose jurisdiction the Special Court. is situated, with the conerrrence of the
Chief Justice of India,


3

6. The Special Court shall take cognizance of or try such cases as are Cosni:
before it or transferred to it as hereinafter provided. का
5 cases. by

a Special

" Court.

7. Notwithstandin; ing contai i i Juris-
jing anything contained in any: other law, any prosecutiod Gs tion of

in respect of any offence referred to in sub-section (2) of section 3 shall be Special
instituted only in the Special Court and any prosecution in=respect of such Court.
‘ofience pending in any court shall stand transferred to the Special Court.

8. The Special Court shall have jurisdiction to try any person concerned Sone

ein the olfence referred to in sub-section (2) of section 3 either as a principal, Special
conspirator or abettor and all other offences and accused persons as can be Cot
10 jointly tried therewith at one triel in accordance with the Code.

9, (7) The Special Court shall, in the tral of such cases, follow the 3४

procedure prescribed by the Code for the trial of warrant cases before 8 fae ae

magistrate. Special.
Court.

(2) Save as expressly provided in this Act, the provisions of the Code
5 shall, in so far as they are not inconsistent with the provisions of this
Act, apply to. the proceedings before the Special Court and for the
purposes of the said provisions of the Code, the Special Court shall be
deemed to be a Court of Session ‘and shall have all the powers of a Court
of Session, and the person conducting a prosecution before the Special Court
shall be deemed to be a Public Prosecutor.

(3) The Special Court may pass upon any person convicted by it any
sentence authorised by law for the punishment of the offence of which such
person is convicted.

(4) While dealmg with any ‘other matter brought before it, the Special
25 Court may adopt stich procedure as it may deem fit consistent with the principles
_ of natural justice,

10. (1) Notwithstanding anything in the Code, an appeal shall lie “from
any judgment, sentence or order, not being interlocutory order, cf the Speetal Appeal.
30 Court to the Supreme Court both on facts and on law,

(2) Except as aforesaid, no appeal or revision shall. lie to any court from
any judgment, sentence or order of the Special Court.

(3) Every appeal under this section shall be preferred within a period
of thirty days from the date of any judgment, sentence of order of the Special
35 Court:

Provided that the Supreme Court may entertain an appeal after the
expiry of the said period of thirty days if it is satisfied that the appellant had
sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal within the period of thirty days.

41, (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code and any other aa
“40 jaw for the time being in force, the Special Court may make such order as Wee

it may deem fit directing the Custostian for the disposal of the property imder
attachment. ‘“


Protec-
tion of
action
taken in
00d
faith,

Act

to have
over-
Tiding
effect.
Power

to make
tules,

Repeal
and

savings.

4

(2) The following liabilities shai] be paid or discharged in full, as
as may be, in the order as under:—

(व) all Tevenues, taxes, cesses and rates

notified by the Custodian under sub-section

Central Government or any State Government

(8) all amounts 6
fo any bank or financi

due from the Pers
(2) of section 3 to
or any local |
lue from the Person so notified by the Custodian
al institution or mutual fund; 3
(०) any other

lability as may be. specified by the Special Court
from time to time,
12. (1) No Suit, prosecution or other legal Proceeding shall lic against
the Central Government or the Custodian for

7 anything which is in good faith
done or intended to be done under this Act,

(2) No suit or other jegal Proceeding shall lie against the Central
Government or any of its officers or other employees for any damage caused
‘or likely to be caused by anything which is in good faith done or intended
to be done under this Act,

13. The provisions of this Act shall have
anything inconsistent therewith contai
in force or in any instrument having effect by virtue of ai
this Act, or in any decree or ord

effect notwithstanding

ny law, other than
ler of any court, tribunal or other authority,

14. (7) The Central Government may,

by notification in the Official
Gazette, make rules for carn

ying out the provisions of this Act,

(2) Every rule made bythe Central Government under this Act
Shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of
Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty
‘be comprised in one Session or ji
before the expiry of the session immediately

le should not be made, the tule
shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as 30
the cass may be: 50, however, that any such modification or annulment shall

be without prejudice to the validity of anything Previously done under that
rule.

15. (1) The Special Court (Trial of Offences Relating to Transactions a
in Securities) Ordinance, 1992 is hereby repealed. 35
(2) Notwithsianding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under
the said Ordinance, shal! be deemed to have been done or taken under the
corresponding provisions of this Act,


८८८ ८८ ८

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

In the course of the investigations by the Reserve Bank of India,
large scale irregularities and malpractices were noticed in transactions,
in both the Government and other securities, indulged in by some bro-
kers in collusion with the employees of various banks and financial
institutions. The said irregularities and malpractices led to the diver-
sion of funds from banks and financial institutions to the individual
accounts of certain brokers,

2. To deal with the situation and in particular to ensure the speedy
recovery of the huge amount involved, to punish the guilty and restore
confidence in and maintain the basic integrity and credibility of the
banks and financial institutions the Special Court (Trial of Offences Re-
lating to Transactions in Securities) Ordinance, 1992 was promulgated
on the 6th June, 1992, The Ordinance provides for the establishment of
a Special Court with a sitting Judge of a High Court for speedy trial of
offences relating to transactions in securities and disposal of properties
attached. It also provides for appointment of one or more Custodians
for attaching the property of the offenders with a view to prevent diver-
sion of such properties by the offenders.

3, The Bill seekg to replace the said Ordinance.

New DELHI; MANMOHAN SINGH.
The Tth July, 1992,


INANCIAL, “MEMORANDUM

°Sub-elause (1) of clause 3 of the Bill provides for the
one’ or ‘more Custodians, Sub-clause (5) of that clause Provides that
Custodian may take assistance ‘of any person for discharging his ‘duti
Sub-clause (1) of clause 5 of the Bill provides for the establisl
of a Special Court,



MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Sub-clause (1) of clause, 14 empowers the Central Government to
make such rules; if any, as it may deem necessary for the purposes of
legislation, ‘The rules, if any, which may be made under this provision
will relate to. matters: of detail: which it is not practicable to provide for
in the legislation itself,

2, In. the circumstances explained above, the delegation of legislative
power is of a normal character’


LOK SABHA

i K
BILL.
to provide for the establishment of 2

Special Court for the Trial of offences
relating to transactions in Securities and for matters connected therewith
or incidental thereto,

(Shri Manmohan Singh, Minister of Finance) ,