1
THE  SUPREME  COURT  OF  INDIA  (ESTABLISHMENT  OF  A  PERMANENT
BENCH  AT  AURANGABAD)  BILL, 2015
By
SHRI CHANDRAKANT KHAIRE, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of a permanent Bench of the Supreme Court  of India at
Aurangabad
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Supreme Court of India (Establishment of a Permanent
Bench at Aurangabad) Act, 2015.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No. 132 of  2015
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title  and
commence-
ment.
5

2
2. There shall be established a permanent Bench of the Supreme Court of India at
Aurangabad and such number of Judges of the Supreme Court of India, being not less than
eleven, as the Chief Justice of India may, from time to time, with the approval of the President,
nominate, shall sit at Aurangabad in order to exercise the jurisdiction and power for the
time being vested in the Supreme Court of India in respect of cases arising in the States of
Kerala, Tamil Nadu,  Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Odisha, Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh,
Jharkhand, Goa and Maharashtra and the Union territories of Puducherry, Dadra and
Nagar Haveli, Lakshadweep and Andaman and Nicobar Islands and such other territories
as may be notified by the Central Government, from time to time, with approval of the Chief
Justice of India.
Establishment
of a Permanent
Bench of
Supreme Court
of India at
Aurangabad. 5
10

3
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
India is the seventh largest country in the world in terms of area. It is the second most
populous country next to China. However, the seat of the Supreme Court of India is at Delhi
to decide cases arising in whole of the country. Article 130 of the Constitution provides that
the Supreme Court of India shall sit in Delhi or in such other place or places, as the Chief
Justice of India, may, with the approval of the President, from time to time, appoint. The
language of article 130 clearly indicates that the intention of the founding fathers of the
Constitution was to have more than one seat of the Supreme Court. But so far no thought has
been given to the idea of having another Bench of the apex court despite the fact that the
population of the country which was around 35 crore at the time of independence has now
swollen to over 120 crore and there is proportionate increase in the cases in the Supreme
Court. Litigant public has to travel thousands of kilometers to follow-up their cases in the
Supreme Court which is seated in Delhi. This not only adds to financial burden but also
result in wastage of a lot of time in travelling and staying in Delhi. The litigants in southern
and central part of the country find it inconvenient and expensive. Therefore, it is high time
that a Bench of the Supreme Court of India be established for the convenience of the public
at large for which Aurangabad is the most appropriate place.
Geographically, Aurangabad is the most ideal place for setting up the Bench of the
apex court as it is almost at the centre of the country. A Bench of the Supreme Court of India
at Aurangabad will provide a big relief to the litigant public of southern as well as the central
part of the country and will provide them convenient and affordable justice.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; CHANDRAKANT KHAIRE
April 7, 2015.
—–——
PRESIDENT’S  RECOMMENDATION  UNDER ARTICLES
117(1)  AND  117(3)  OF  THE  CONSTITUTION
—–——
[Copy of  letter No. K-15019/5/2015-US. 1 dated 1 July, 2015 from Shri D.V. Sadananda
Gowda, Minister of Law and Justice to the Secretary General, Lok Sabha]
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the Supreme Court
(Establishment of a Permanent Bench at Aurangabad) Bill, 2015 by Shri Chandrakant Khaire,
M.P., recommends the introduction of the Bill under article 117(1) and consideration under
article 117(3) of the Constitution, in Lok Sabha.

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides for the establishment of a permanent Bench of the Supreme
Court of India at Aurangabad. The Bill, therefore, if enacted and brought into operation,
would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is not possible to estimate,
at this stage, the exact amount of expenditure that will be involved.
However, a recurring expenditure of about rupees fifty crore is likely to be involved per
annum for the purpose of payment of allowances to the Judges of the Bench and payment of
salaries to the Court servants.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees fifty crore is likely to be involved for the
construction of building of the Court, etc. and appointment of staff members.

GMGIPMRND—378LS(S3)—17-07-2015.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of a permanent Bench of the Supreme Court of
India at Aurangabad
————
(Shri Chandrakant Khaire, M.P.)