Aඌ ංඇඍඋඈൽඎർൾൽ ංඇ Lඈ඄ Sൺൻඁൺ
Bill No. 132 of  2022
THE ENVIRONMENT (PROTECTION) 
AMENDMENT BILL, 2022
By
Sඁඋං  V . K. Sඋൾൾ඄ൺඇൽൺඇ,  M.P.
ൺ
BILL
further to amend the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986.
 B ൾ it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:–
 1. (1) This Act may be called the Environment (Protection) Amendment Act, 2022.
  ( 2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
Short title and 
commencement.

Amendment of 
section 2.
Amendment of 
section 3.
 2.  In section 2 of the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 (hereinafter referred to as the 
principal Act), existing clause (a) shall be renumbered as clause (aa) and before the clause 
(aa) so as renumbered, the following clause shall be inserted, namely:–
   “( a) “eco sensitive zone or buffer zone” means the area within the demarcated 
 boundary of protected forest, national park or wildlife sanctuary as the case may be.”.
 3.  In section 3 of the principal Act, after sub-section (2), the following proviso shall be 
inserted:–
   “Provided that the Central Government shall not declare any area beyond the 
 protected area of a National Park or a wildlife sanctuary as an Eco sensitive zone or a 
 Buffer zone.”.
   

STATEMENT  OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
 The Order dated June 3, 2022 of the Hon’ble Supreme Court, declaring all places within 
a kilometer around protected areas around national parks wildlife, and bird sanctuaries as 
eco-sensitive zones, has created dismay among the people who are living adjoining to 
protected forest areas from time immemorial. The said Order of the Hon’ble Supreme Court 
will make millions of people homeless, render many hectares of land devoid of human 
habitation, agricultural use and development as well as affect the livelihood of the people 
living there. 
 One km. area around a protected area is likely to have low-income housing colonies, 
historical monuments and livelihood use areas like river floodplains, etc. 
 The most likely impacted arising out of the said Order of the Hon’ble Supreme Court 
would be the State of Kerala as its 30 per cent area is forested and close to 48 per cent of the 
State’s geographical area formed part of the Western Ghats and it is one of the most densely 
populated States in the country and land for development and habitation is at a premium 
there. Many of the farms abutting forests had existed for atleast seven decades and the areas 
had been habitations for people from time immemorial. Therefore, the said order will have 
a bearing effect on the people especially of Kerala as abovesaid. 
 The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Environment (Protection)) Act, 1986, with a 
view to effect that:–
   (a) no area beyond the demarcated boundary of protected forest, that is national park 
 or wildlife sanctuary, shall be considered as Eco-Sensitive Zone or Buffer Zone; and
   (b) under no circumstances, area beyond the demarcated boundary of protected forest, 
 that is national park or wildlife sanctuary, shall be declared as Eco-Sensitive Zone or 
 Buffer Zone,
 as doing so, will make millions of people homeless, render many hectares of land 
devoid of human habitation, agricultural use and development.  
 Hence this Bill.
   
    Nൾඐ Dൾඅඁං;                         V .K. SREEKANDAN
5 July, 2022.

ANNEXURE 
Eඑඍඋൺർඍ ൿඋඈආ Tඁൾ Eඇඏංඋඈඇආൾඇඍ (Pඋඈඍൾർඍංඈඇ) Aർඍ, 1986
(29 of 1986)
    *   *  *  *  *  
 2.      *   *  *  *  * 
    ( a) “environment” includes water, air and land and the inter- relationship which 
  exists among and between water, air and land, and human beings, other living 
  creatures, plants, micro-organism and property;
    *   *  *  *  * 
 3. (2)  *   *  *  *  *
    ( xiv) such other matters as the Central Government deems necessary or expedient 
  for the purpose of securing the effective implementation of the provisions of this Act.
    *   *  *  *  *
 
Deﬁnitions.
Power of 
Central 
Government to 
take measures 
to protect 
and improve 
environment.

LOK  SABHA
ൺ
BILL
further to amend the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986.
(Shri V .K. Sreekandan,  M.P .)