to!< SA3HA 
cor'.,":{ I3Ef\O A 
to 
1. Page 3, line 2,-
f.cr.. U ga l.:mces H r.e3.9. II ba lances" 
2. Page 3. in the marginal heading to the ~ro;')osed 
new section 8D,-
f.Q.t. "section 4A:' read ;, secti on 8.i\" _._-_ ....... _ .......... 
3, Page 5, line 2 from bottomi~ 
NEW DELHI; 

N., 117 •. 
A.$ INTRODUCED IN ):,olt SABRA ON' 
But No. 132 of 1 .. 1 
THE ALCOCK ASHDOWN COMPANY LIMITED (ACQUIsmON or 
UNDERTAKINGS) AMENDMENT BILL, 1987 
A 
BILL 
.,.."her to amend thle Alcock Ashdown Company Limited (Acquisition of 
Uftdert41cing.) Act, 1973. 
B. it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-efghth Year at the 
Republic of India as follows:-
1. Thi. Act may be called . the Alcock Ashdown Company Limitied Short 
(Acquisition of Undertakings) Amendment Act, 1987. title. 
, z.. In section 2 of the Alcock Ashdown Company Limited (Acquisf- Amend-
Uon of Undertakings) Act, 1973 (hereinafter referred to as the principal ment Of 
Act> I after clause (c), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely: - 2.1eCtioJa 
(eca) ''notification'' means a notification published in the omcial 
Gazette; 
10 (eb) "undertakings of the company" means,-
I' 
(i) the indUstrial unit owned by the company and located 
at Bhavnagar in the State of Gujarat (hereinafter referred to 
u the Bhavnagar unit); and 
(ii) the industrial unit owned by the company located. at 
Bombay in the State of Maharashtra (hereinafter referred to u 
the Bombay unit) ;'. 
• 

2 
lnaer. 
tion of 
new 
aecti()OI 
SA, SB, 
ac, SO, 
8E and 
81', 
31. After section S of the principal Act, the following sections shall be 
inserted, namely:-
Vesting 
of the 
Bhav_ 
nagar 
unit 
in the 
StIte 
Govern· 
ment. 
vesting 
of Bom-
bay Unit 
in Govern-
ment 
COlm' 
pany. 
"SA. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 3 and ., 
the Central Government shall, direct, by notification that all assets, 
rights, powers, authorities and privileges and all property, movable S 
and immovable, cash balances, reserve funds. investments and all 
other rights and interests in, Or ari9ing out of, such property of the 
Bhavnagar unit which have vested in the Central Government under 
section 3, sha~l, instead of continuing to vest in the Central Govern-
ment, vest in the State Governmt!nt of Gujarat (hereinafter refer- 10 
red to as the State Government), either on the date of publication 
of the notification or on such later date as may be specified in the 
notification. 
(2) Where the assets, rights, powers. authorities and privileges 
and all property. movabl" ann immovable. cash balances, reserve IS 
fimda.~ investmants and a'l other rights and interests in, or arising 
out of. such property of the Bh!'lvna.~ar unit vest, under sub-section 
(1) in the State Governrrent, that Government shaH, on and from 
'>1, thc!i-dttte ef i8uchvef!Ung. be deemed ta have becOme ·tl1e, 'cJwUai'.~of 
such unit· and the ri{!ntg and liabiUtles· of' the Central Government 20 
in relation to that unit shall, on and from the date of such vesting, 
be deemed to have become the rights and liabilities of the State 
Government. 
BB. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained ill" sections' :rand 4, 
.." the c.ntral Government shAll· direct. bv n'Otiflmttion~ that aU:i8Sseb, 2S 
rj~hts, powers, authorities and privilege. and all propetty,movable 
. ,; and immovable, cash ,balances, reserve funds, investments,.ijnq. all 
other rights and inter¥ts in. or flrising 01lt of. such .proMrty 'oftbe 
Bombay unit which have vesterl in the Centr~l Government under 
section 3, shan, instead of continutn~ to vest in the Central Govern- 30 
.. '" m'eht,.' velt' in the Maza~on Dock Limited. a Goveminent : (tompanyi-
;'~I haYing' its; registerer) office'in the State Of Maharasbtr:l (heieinafter 
.. 'referred tol as the Government: companv), either on the- dati!t/of 
r'lblication of the notification or on such later date as may be 
.' specified ip the notification. 3S 
(2) Where the assets, rights, powers. authorities and privileges 
and all property, movabi~ and immovable, cash; baIan'''' rese~l 
funds, investments anrJ all other rights and interests in, or arising out 
f··I ·" 'Of, suchproperty.of the Bombay unit veSt, uridersub.section (1) in 
, . ·t1m'Gove-m~ent company; tHat compan~ shall, on and: 'frdlll the date 40 
of such vestmg, be deemed tb(;have become, tt.oWnerJ c*'such unit 
, . an~ the right.s and liabilities 0t. the ,Central. GQ\le~t in relation 
" .' t~. that unit. shall, on and from the date of such V'est~,.g,,~be deemed 
to have become the rights and liabUities J)l.~: ,gQvernm.entt 
company. '.., . 45 

14 of 1947. 
.S 
10 
15 
20 
':' ,. .:tc ,'-Cl) >Where:. '818ei's, rights, poWers, authorities az::td' privile-
-- ,i ges ~lmd' -allpropetty, mo.vable and immovable, cash galances, reeerve 
!.- ,funds, investments and other ,rights and interests in, or aIising out of, 
such property of the ,BbaV'nagar unit vest, under section 8A in the 
State Government, every person who has been, immediately before 
the 'date of such vesting, employed in that unit fhall become, on and 
-trom the date of such vesting, an employee of the State Gove.rnment, 
and shall hold office or service under ·that State Govemment with 
the same rights and privileges as to pension, gratuity and other mat-
ters as would have been admissible to him if there had been no such 
-vestin-g and shall continue to do so unless and until his employment 
under the State Government is duly terminated or until his remune-
ration and other conditions of service are duly altered by the State 
Government. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Dis· 
putes Act, 1947 or in any other law for the time being in force, the 
transfer of the services of any officer or other person employed 
in the Bhavnagar unit to the State Government, shall not entitle 
such officer or other employee to any compensation under this Act 
or under any other law for the time being in force and no such claim 
shall be entertained by any court. tribunal or other authority. 
(3) Where under the terms of any contract of service or other· 
wise, any person, whose services become transferred to the State 
Government by reason of the provisions of this Act, is entitled to 
2S any arrears of salary or wages or any payments for any Ieav:e not 
availed of or any other payment, not being payment by way of 
gratuity or pension, such person may enforce his claim against the 
Central Government, but not against the State Government. 
30 
35 
40 
45 
80. (1) Where a provident fund, superannuation fund, welfare 
fund or any other fund has been established for the benefit of the 
persons employed in the Bhavnagar unit, the monies relatable to the 
officers or other employees, whose services have become transferred 
by or under this Act to the State Government, shall, stand transferred 
to and vest in the State Government. 
(2) The monies which stand transferred under sub-section (1) 
to the State Govemment, shall be dealt with by that Government 
for the benefit of the officers and employees so transferred, in such 
manner as the State Government may decide from time to time. 
SE. All contracts, 'deeds, bonds, agreements and other instru· 
ments of whatever nature to which the Central Government is a 
party in relation to the Bhavnagar unit vested in the State Govern-
ment under section SA subsisting or having effect immediately before 
the date of vesting of the, said unit in the State Government, shall, 
as from that day, be of full force and effect against, Or in favour of 
the State Government and may be enforced fully and effectually, as 
if instead of the Central Government, the State Government had , 
'been a party thereto. 
End., .. ·'! 
meQto/ot,_ I 
certaia' :. 
emplo:" _. 
yees to 
conti-
nue 
when 
Bhav_ 
nagar 
unit 
vests 
under 
section 
SA. 
Transfer 
of 
Provident 
fund 
and 
other 
fund 
whon 
under-
takings 
vest 
under 
aection 
4A. 
Savilll 
of 
contracts, 
etc. 

4 
sF. 0) If any difBculty arises in giving effect to the provillona of 
Sections 8A, 8B, SC, 80 and 8E, the Central Government may. by 
order, published in the OfBcial Gazette, not inconsistent with the 
provisions of this Act, remove the difficulty: 
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of 5 
a period of two years from the coming into force of the A1c:ock 
Ashdown Company Limited (Acquisition of Undertakings) Amenc:J. 
ment Act, 1987. 
(2) Every order made under sub-section (1) shall be laid before 
each House of Parliament. ". 10 

STATEMENT OF OBjEctS AND REASONS 
The undertakings of the Alcock Ashdown Company ~ted comprised 
of two units one in Bombay and the other in Bhavnagar, Gujarat which 
were acquired by the Central Government through the Alcock Ashdown 
Company Limited (Acquisition of undertakings) Act, 1973. Immediately 
after the acquisition of the undertakings, the Central Government, in 
exerClse of poweri under section 8 of the Act entrusted. the manpment, 
and adminisu-ation of the two units viz; (1) Bombay unit and (2) 
Bhavnagar unit to (1) Mazagon Dock Limited, a Government of India 
undertaking under the Ministry of Defence and (2) IndUltr1e. Commia-
aioner, Government of Gujarat, respectively. Since then, the re8pec~ve 
managements of Mazagon Dock Limited and Government of Gujarat 
have been running the units. 
2. Prior to the acquisition of the undertakings of the company both 
\he Mazagon Dock Limited and the Governm~nt of Gujarat had expreued 
their keen interest in ultimately owning the respective units in public 
interest. While acquiring the undertakings of the company, the Central 
Government was also of the view that the ownership of the two unit. 
would in due courle be transferred to them who had been managinl 
t.b ... unita. 
3. While the Central Government was actively considering the trandlr 
of 'the two units, a question arose whether under the existing provisions 
of the Act, the units could be transferred. After examining the provi-
1i0o. of the Act, it however, appeared that in the abaence 01. speciftc 
provisions in the Act, the Central Government cannot traDlfer the 
right, tiUe and interest vested in it to any other Government or or,.-
nilation. 
4. The Bill .eeka to re-vest the property of the Bhavnagar and Bom-
bay unit. of the undertakings of the Alcock Ashdown Company Limited 
in the State Government of Gujarat and Mazagon Dock Limited respec-
tively. The Bill alIo seeks to safeguard the interests of the exilting em-
plOT'" of Bhavnalar unit by continuing their employment, provide 
for the transfer of Provident fund and other funds to the State Govern-
ment and for the lavinr of all contracts, deeds and bonds, to which the 
C:'Dtr~ Qovernment is a partr in relation to the laid unit •• 
:. V!:NOAt..A MO. 
r_ 10th Not)embl1', 108'7. 

'J r~~&Qf ,the ,BW.,aeeks .. to WfIl't, among other '~OIUJ, a new sec-
tion.SF,~ the Alcock Ashdown Company Limited (Acquisition of Under-
~) Ac~, -,1973' -which empowers the Central Government, by orde~, 
~.,remov.e',any,Qifticult.y whiCh m~y arise in giving etfectlo the proviSions 
~{~w.ti()nB sA to 8E'proposed to be inserted',by 'the sald clallSe.-Aify 
order which the Central Government may make under this section shoUld 
'il6t 'De"mco~t~t -wtthth-e l>to'OiSioJiS rlf the ~ct. 1'he propoSl!tl ll'e'W 
.eCtionl1sopto~~s 'that no SQdl order SliaU '-be tnac1t!att~r 'the"exp'ft1' 
t;t'twoye'a~'ftiorn: 'the 'dste dt C'Oln1ng'1n.tol~orC!e ·of'this':A.et. IEwry order 
1n1l&r muter utts '8eCUtlnts "alto 'teqUired 'to "be 1aid 'before 'the lHOlldl' lW 
!Parliament. ' 
2, The delegation of legislative power under this,new .aadiOD, inl. 
far as it provides for a time limit of two years within which this power 
'c'o-ald~ 'be -'eX'el'C1sM ' and "that' every order shall 'be '18ia -before' the' U-ouses 
cff'1'"namem;1s ot"a 'norma1characler. 
~~ .. .:. .... ' .; 
t-. 
,,\. , 
• 
"t,:' .... 
• .. ':,f 
~'~ '. "'" . " "" .. 
" 
. . -, ~ 
• 
~J .' _ '" .. ' 
. '''' :." .... 
. - . , ".~ 
. ,'.,,,. '" . ,. 
" 
. ... ' '" ~, 

A 
BnL 
furthe,r to amend the Alcock Ashdown Company Limited (Acquisition of 
Undertakings) Act, 1973. 
(Shri 1. Vengala Roo, Minister of I'l\dtc.mv.) 