10K SABHA 
CORRIGENDA 
to 
THE HOTOR VEHICLES (.AME.NIMENi) BILL, 1978 
(To be/As introduced in 10k Satila) 
1. Page 1, in the Title of the Bill' on the top,-
for "BIlL" read "BILL" 
2.. Page 1, against line 12, ... 
for the existing marginal citation 
3. Page 7, line 40,-
read ".--.. of 19.39." -
''clauase (a)" read - "clause (a)" 
4. Page 8, against clause 1-6,-
insert the· following marginal heading _ 
"Amendment of section 31 A. n 
5. Page 8, line 18,-
f.2£. "sub-setion" ~ "sub-section" 
6. Page 9, line 18,-
f2r.. "to issue a no objection certificate 
under section 2)A" 
read "under section ;;SA to issue a no objection 
- certificate" 
7 • Page 1 0, line 1 5, -
for - "55, 63 and 68, " read "55 and 63," -
8. Page 10, line 21,-
fa r "(Ie)" ,!:ead "( 1C) " 
9 • Page 10, line 32,-
fQ.!: "in section" read 
9A. Page 11, l~ne 32, .fQ1: "( IG)" 10~ Page 11, l~ne )e,-
"C IA) " read -- "( 1 A) " 
"in sections" 
~ "(1 G)" 

- 2 -
11 • Page 12, 1 ine s 25 and 26,-
for I1sub-section (IE), (ID), (IF) and (IG)" 
~ "rub-sections (1B), (1D), (1 F) and (1 G)" 
12. Pag~ 12, line 3),-
Q.mi ~ " fu;:· the r " 
13. Page 14, line 29,-
before ''pennit'' insert "a" fe>r "sections" 
1 ~A. Page 11+, in the marginarti"eading to. clause 430, ~ "sectio.n" 
1lf.. Page 19, i:1 the marginal heading to clarse 2,- ' 
b~f.')f.:: !lEi ghth" inser! "the" 
1 5 4 Page 20 ~ line 19,-
foT' "c8.I'rier" ~ad "carriers' " 
16. Page ?3; line :1 from bottom,-
fe£, -'Thie" read "This" 
17. Page 24, line 5 from hottom,-
fQ.!_ ' II supende d" ~ad "SU spended" 
18. Page 25, line 15,-
for ' "re suI t" . ~~ "re- bull t" 
19. Page 26, line 3 from bottom,-
befo~ "period" insert "a" 
20. PaGe' 26, line ~ from bottom,-
f2E. ''he'' read lithe" -
21. Page 27 7 line 10,-
for -- "C IC ) " re ad -- "(1C)" 
22. Page Z1, line 13,-
"Sheduled" read "Scheduled" -
23. Page 27 1 :line 23,-
fer '~seelu~tI'~ "seek" 
4. Page 30 , l;Ule 4,- . ~ , 

- 3 -
. 25. Page 32, line 6 from bottom,-
Af~ ''Chapter V" omit "or" 
26 • Page 32, 1 ine 2 from bo t tom, -
.!2!:. "vehile" re ad "vehicle" 
27. Page)6, line 6,-
'lperfe rene e " read. - "pre ference" 
28. page '31, line 21 from bot tom,-
.f2!:. "Gabette" read "Gazette" 
29. Page '31, line 17 from bot tom,-
for "0 bserue" ~Sf! "obscure" 
30. Page 42, line 3,-
~~ "DI SE.ASE.S " insert "I. It 
31. Page 42, line 10 from bottom,-
(1) .!Q.!: "NORE" read "NO TE" 
-
(11) for "following 11 ~ "followed" -
32. Page 43, line 23,-
for "moto s" read ''mo tor" - -
33. Correct line number s on 'P age s 5, 17 a.nd 18. 
Sravana 23, 1 00 (salta) 

2 Of 19. 
As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA ON 
Bill No. 13.Z 01 1878 
THE MOTOR VEHICLES (AMENDMENT) BIIL, 1978 
A 
BILL 
tu:rther to amend the Motor Vlehicles Act. 1939. 
BII it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-ninth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 
1978. 
S (2) It shall come into force. on such date as the Central Government 
DUty, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint and di1!erent dates 
mar be apl'Oint~d for dijl(!rent provisions of this Act; and any reference 
to the Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 1978, in any amendment made 
by any provison of ihis Act shall be construed as a reference to the corn-
Ia fBI into force of that provision. 
Short 
title 
a',ld 
com-
mence_ 
ment. 
" I. In section 2 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939 (hereinafter referred Amend-
to as the .principal Act) ,- ment of 
aect10n 
(0.) after clause (3), the following clause shall be inserted, 2. 
namely:-
'(4) "dealer" includes a person who is en,aged in the 
manufactqre of motor vehicles or in building bodies for attach-
ment to ehassis;' : ' 

Amend-
mentol 
.-etion'l. 
(b) for clause (9), the following clauses shall be substituted, 
namely:-
, (9) "heavy goods vehicle" means any goods vehicle 
the registered laden weight of which, or a trador the unladen 
weight of which, exceeds 11,000 kilograms; S 
(9A) "heavy passenger motor vehicle" means any pUblic ser-
vice vehicle or omnibus the registered laden weight of either of 
which, or a motor car the unladen weight of which, exceeds 
11,000 kilograms;'; 
(c) for clause (14), the following clauses shall be substituted, 10 
namely:-
• (14) "medium goods vehicle" means any goods vehi-
cle. other than a light motor vehicle, heavy goods vehicle or 
roadroller; 
(14A) "medium passenger motor vehicle" means any pub- IS 
lic service vehicle, other than- a motor cycle, invalid carriage, 
light motor vehicle or heavy passenger motor vehicle;'; 
(d) after clause (25), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:-
'(a5A) "'re-built vehicle" means a motor vehicle re-built 20 
'-. wit'han"eng;ne and a chassis both of which had not been regis-
tered under this Act as one vehicle;" 
3. In section 7 of the principal Act,-
(i) in sub-section (7), for clauses (a) 
clauses shall be substituted, namely:-
and (b), the following 
"(a) a person who passes the test in driving a heavy goods 
vehicle shall be. deemed also to have passed the test in 
driving any medium goods vehicle or lifht motOr vehicle; , 
2S 
(b) a person who pasees the ,test indrivipg a aeavy pasSlm-
ger motor vehicle shall be deemed also to have passed the test in 30 
driving any medium passenger motor vehicle or light motor 
vehicle; 
,(c) a person who passes the test in driving a medium goods 
vehicle or a medium passenger motor vehtcle shall be' 
deemed also to have passed the test in driVing any light mQtor 3S 
vehicle."'; 
(ii) after sub-section (7), the following sub-section shall be 
inserted, namely:-
"(7A) Notwithstan'diD8aDythillg contained in lub4ectlon 
(7), any person, who has a valid driving lieeriee granted. before 40 
the commencement of the Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 
197'3, authorilinl him to 4rive a heavy motor vehicle 'M, as the 
case may be, a medium motor vehicle. shall, for the period 
specifted in such licence, be permitted to drive-
(CI) any heavy &oods vehicle, beavy puaeager motor 45 
vehicle. medium eoods vehicle, JIledlum paaeDllr motor • $ 

s 
10 
3 
. vehicle, or light motor vehicle, where the liceiice is for driv-
ing any keavy motor vehicle; 
(b) any medium goods vehi.cle, medium passenger 
motor vehicle, or light motor vehicle, where the licence is 
for driving any .medium motor vehicle.". 
•. In section 8 of the prinCipal Act, in sUb-section (2), for clauses (d) 
tnd (e), the following clauses shall be substituted, namely:-
"(d) ~iu~ goods. vehicle, 
(e) medium passenger motor vehicle, 
(ei) heavy goods vehicle, 
(eii) heavy passenger motor vehicle,". 
5. In section 9 bf the principal Act, in sub~~tion (,J); in clause (a), 
for the words "to drive a transport vehiCle", the words "to drive as a 
paid emPloyee 'or to drive a transport vehicle" shall be- sUbstituted. 
Amend-
mentof 
section 8. 
Amend_ 
ment of 
section 9. 
15 6. In section 10 of the principal Act,- Amend-
mentol 
(a) after the words "issued Or renewed under this Act", the section 10. 
words, brackets and figures "after the commencement of the Motor 
Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 1978" shall be inserted; 
(b) for the words "three years", ilie words "five years" shall be 
20 substituted; 
(c) the following. proviso shall be inserted at the end, namely:-
; .' , 
,"Provided that a driving licence issued OJ' renewed to drive 
as a paid employee or to drive a transport vehicle shall be eftec-
tive without renewal for a period of three years only." 
25 7. In section 16 of the principal Act, after sub-section (1), the follow-
30 
35 
40 
ing sub-sections shall be insert~d, namely:-
.. (lA) Upon the issue of an order under sub-section (1), the 
holder of a driving licence, shall forthwith surreq.der his driving 
licence to the licensing aut~ority which issued th~'driving licence 
(hereafter in this, section referred to as the' issui~ authorj~y), or, 
as the case may be, to the licensiri.g authority by which the driving 
licence was last renewed (hereafter in this section referred to as the 
renewing authoritrl" ,an~. the, iSsujng authori~;' or, as· the, case may 
be. the renewing lluthori'ty shall endorse the fact of disqualification 
in .the driving lic~noe ,aDd keep it until the p8f~Qd 'o{,disqualifica-
,tion has ,e~pired ~r .~e disqualification has been removed: 
Ptovided that· where the driving iicence' authorises a person 
to di'Ne' Illore ·thjn orte clilss· or '~ription of motor vehicles and 
" the order, n'lade' uh~r subi-section (1), disqualifies him from driving 
ally speC1ftEM ~lass ordesctlpti&n of motor vehieles, the authority 
to wbieh tht! driVing licence was surt'endered ~haU endorse the 
') fa:(!'t of d1Sq~tl()n in 'th~ driving 'licence arid" return the 
same to the bolder. ' 
Amend. 
ment ot 
section 16. , 

Amend-
mentof 
section 21. 
Amend-
ment of 
NCtion 
24. 
.. 
(1B) Where an order of disciualification has been made under 
sub-section (1), the period of disqualification shall be reckoned 
from the date of surrender of the driving licence to the issuing 
authority or the renewing authority, as the case may be, under sub-
section (lA), or from the date on which the relevant endorsement S 
is made on the driving licence, whichever Is earlier: 
Provided that in a case where the driving licence is, on the date 
on which the said order is made, in the possession of the issuing 
authority or the renewing authority or a police offi.cer, the disquali-
fication shall take effect from the date of the aaid order.... 10 
S. In section 2.1 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), after clause 
(aa), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:-
.. (aaa) the minimum educational qualifications of per80tlS to 
whom licences to drive transport vehicles are issued after the com-
mencement of the Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 1978 and the IS 
time within which such qualifications are to be acquired by such 
persons;". 
9, In section 24 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (3), f::lr the words "one of the groups 01 
letters allotted to the State by the Sixth Schedule", the words 20 
"one of the groups of such of those letters as are allotted to the 
State by the Central Government from time to time by notiftcation 
in the Official Gazette" shall be substituted; 
(b) after sub-section (3) .. as so 'amended, the following sub-
sections shall be inserted, namely:- 25 
" (4) A certificate of registration issued under sub-section 
(2), whether before or after the commencement of the Motor 
Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 1m in respect of a motor vehicle, 
ether than a transport vehicle, shall, subject to the provisions 
contained in this Act, be valid only for a period of fifteen years 30 
from the date of issue of such certificate and shall be renewable. 
(5) An application by or on behalf of the owner of a motor 
vehicle, other than a transport vehicle, for the renewal 
of a certificate of registration shall be made within ~uch period 
as may be prescribed. in Form F as set forth in the First Sche- 35 
dule, shall contain the information required by that Form and 
shall be accompanied by the prescribed fee. 
(6) Where in the ease of a eertiftca.te of registration issued 
under this Act before the commeneemerit of the Motor Vehicles 
(Amendment) Act, 1918, in respect of a motor vehicle, other 40 
than a transport vehicle, the per"l)d of fifteen yeal'B referred to 
in Bub-section (4) has QPired at such "commencement, the 
holder of such ~rtiftcate, ,shall apply for -the renewal, of the 
said certificate in ,orm F IW, .~ forth in the 'lirat . Schedule 
to the registering _JlQAwrity wi~in six months fl'()m such 45 
commencement or within .uch. extended ,~, DOt exceeding 
six months as the authority may, on sumci~t ~use being 

5 
shown, allow, and such application shall contain the information 
required by that Form and shall be accompanied by the 
prescribed fee. 
(7) The registering authority may, on receipt of an appli-
s cation under sub-section (5) or sub-section (6)., renew the certi--
ficate of registration for the prescribed period .... 
10. In section 26 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the words 
"before proceeding to register a motor vehicle, require the person 
applying for registration of the vehicle", the words "before proceeding 
10 to register a motor vehicle or renew the certificate of registration in 
respect of a motor vehicle, other than a transport vehicle, require the 
person applying for registration of the vehicle or, as the case may be, 
for renewing the certificate of registration" shall be substituted. 
11. For section 27 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
15 substituted, namely:-
20 
25 
35 
"27. The registering authority may, by order. refuse to register 
any motor vehicle, or renew the certificate of registration in respect 
of a motor vehicle (other than a transport vehicle), if in either case 
the vehiCle is mechanically defective or fails to comply with the 
requirements of Chapter V or of the rules made thereunder, or if 
the applicant fails to fUl'IJ,ish particulars of any previous registration 
of the vehicle or furnishes inaccurate particulars in the application 
for registration of the vehicle or, a8 the case may be, for renewal 
of the certificate of registration thereof and the registering authOrity 
shall furnish the applicant whOSe vehicle is refused. registration, or 
whose application for renewal of the certificate of registration is 
refused, a copy of such order, together with the reasons for such 
refusal. ". 
12. In section 29 of the principal Act,-
«(I) to sub-section (1), the 'follOWing proviso shall be added, 
namely:"","," 
. , 
"Provided. that an application under this sub-section shall 
be accompanted-
(i) by a no objection certificate obtained under section 
29A. or ' 
(a) in a case where no such certificate has been 
obtained, by-
(Cl) a receipt obtained under sub-section (2) of 
section 29A; or 
(b) a postal -acknowledgment· received by the 
owner of the vehicle it he has sent an application in 
this behalf by registered post acknowledgment due to 
.tl1e ~gt8tering authority referred to in "section 29A. 
. ;~t.optherwith a declaration that he' ~as not re<;eived any com-
.munieatton . from such· atfthorlty retusing to grant such certi-
4-' . ftcate or" requirmg him to c,mply with any direction subject 
to which such certificate may be granted."; 
Amend-
ment ot 
section 
26. 
Substitu-
tion of 
new sec-
tion for 
section 27. 
Refusal 
of regis_ 
tration or 
renewal 
of the 
certificate 
of regis-
tration. 
Amend-
ment ot 
section 
29. 

ImertioD 
of new 
section 
29A. 
No 
objection 
certificate. 
Amend-
mentOf 
section 
30. 
6 
(b) in sub--section (2), for the words "in accordance with the 
Sixth Schedule", the words, 'braCkets and ftgures "as speCified in 
sub-settloR (3) of seetion 24" shan 'be substituted. 
13. After section 29 of the principal Act, the following section shall 
he inserted, namely: - 5 
"29A. (1) The owner of a motor vehicle when applying for the 
assignment of a new registration mark under sub-s~ction (1) of sec-
tion 29 to the registering authority within whose jurisdiction the 
vehIcle is, or the transferor of any motor vehicle when report-
in.g th~ transfer und~r sub-section (l)Qf' ~tion 31 to the regiiiter- 10 
ing authority within whose jurisdiction the transfer is to be effected, 
shall make an application in sucb XOI-in and iD. such manner as may 
be prescribed to the registering authority by which the vehicle was 
previously registered for the issue of a certificate (hereafter in this 
section referred to as the no objection certificate), to the 'effect that 15 
the registering authority has no objection for entering a new regis-
tration mark in the certificate of registration or, as the case may 
be, for entering the particulars of the transfer of ownership in the 
certificate of registration. 
(2) 'The registering authority shaU, oD receipt of an application 20 
under sub-section (1), issue a receipt in such form as may be 
prescribed. 
(3) On receipt of an application. under sub-section (1), the reo 
gistering authority may, after making sueh inquiry as it deems fit 
and. within thirty days of tiie receipt thereof, by order iti writing, 25 
communicate to the applicant that it has granted or refused to grant 
the Db objeCtion certificate: ' 
Provided that a regis~ring authority shall not refuse to grant 
the no objection certificate unless it has recorded in writing the 
reasons for doing sn and a COpy of the same has been communicated 30 
to the applicant. 
(4) Where within a period of thirty days referred to in sub-
section (3), the registering authority does not refuse to grant the 
no objection certificate or does Ilot communicate the ~al to the 
applicant, the registering authority shall be de,~med to have granted 3S" 
the no objection certificate . 
. (5) Before gr.anti~g or 're1~sing to grant the DO objection 
.:ertificate, the registermg authorIty shall obtain a report in writing 
from the police that Il() cue relating to the tha!ft of the motor 
vehicle concerned has been reported or is pending, verify whether 40 
all the amounts due to Government includiqg road tax in respect 
of that motor vehicle hav~ been paid' and take into account such 
other factors as the Central Government may by 'rules prescribe.". 
14. In section ~O iOf tilt! princt~~ Ad, af~ SUb-section (1), the 
following sutHlettlohs shan be In.set'ted, n'amely:-
, ' , 
"(J.o4.) 'If the oWner Of a motor vebfcle'!ails to thtimate his new 
add~ess to the concerned re~sttl!rb:~8 Wltlwrity wUhin the period ape_ 
cifi~ in sub-section (1.). the, t:e&istering authority may"Caving 1" .... 
gard to the circumstances .IlLtbe cas," req~ theownerw' pay, in 
• 1./ 
45 

7 
lieu of any action that may be taken a,ainst him under section 112, 
iuch amount not exceeding one hundred rupees as may be prescribed 
under sub~sect1on (lC): 
Provided that action under section 112 shall be initiated against 
5 the owner where he fa.ils to pay the said amount. 
(JB) .Where a person has paid the amount under lub-section 
(1,A), no action shall be taken against him under section 112. 
(lC) For the purposes of sub-section (1A), a State Government 
may prescribe ~erent amounts having regard t:l the period of 
10 dE!lay' tn intimating 'the change"in the place' of residenc~. or place of 
business, or both, as recorded in the certificate of registration.". , 
IS 
20 
15. In section 31 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1) ,for clause (a), the following clause 
shall be substituted, namely:-
"(a) the transferor shall-
(i) within fourteen days of the transfer, report the fact 
of transfer to the registering authority within whose jurisdic-
thn the transfer is to be effected and shall simultaneously 
send a copy of the said report to the transferee; 
(ii) within forty-five days of the transfer, forward to 
the registering authority referred to in sUb.;clause (i)-
(A) a no objection certificate obtained under section 
29A; or 
(B) in a case where no such certificate has been 
ob1;.aiDed,-,... . 
(I) a receipt obtained under sub-section (2) 
of section 29Aj or 
(If) a postal acknowledgment received by the 
transferor if he has sent an application in this be-
30 aaU by ,registered post· acknowledgment due to the 
regist«'ing authority referred to in aecticm 29A, 
to~etber with a declaration that he has not received any 
communication from such authority refusing to grant such 
certificate or requiring him to comply with any direction 
35 . ~. . I~t to whleh. such cert1t\c~te may be granted;"; 
", \ 
(b) after su,b-section (1), the follOWing sub-sections shall be 
inserted, namely:- . 
CI (lA) If the transferor or the transferee fails to report to 
the regi~tering autho~ity the fact Qf transfer within the period, 
40 sPeclfled in clauase (a) or clause (b) of sub-section (1), the 
registering authority may, having regard to the circumstances of 
Amend-
mentof 
sectionlL 

mentof 
aection 34. 
8 
the case, require the transferor or, as the case may be, the 
transferee, to pay. in lieu of any action that may be taken 
against the' transferor or the transferee under section 112, such 
amount not exceeding one hundred rupees as may be prescribed 
under sub-section (Ie): 5 
Provided that action under section 112 shall be initiated 
against the transferor or the transferee, where the transferor or, 
as the case may be, the transferee fails to pay the said amount. 
(1B) Where a person has paid the amount under sub-
section (IA), no action shall be taken against him under section 10 
112. 
(Ie) For the purposes of sub-section (IA), a State Govern-
ment may prescribe difterent amounts having regard to the 
period of delay on the- part of the transferor or the transferee 
in reporting the tact of transfer of ownership of the motor IS 
vehicle." . 
16. In section 31A of the principal Act,-
(4) in sub-setion (5), for the words "cancel the certificate 
and issue a duplicate thereof to the person aforesaid", the words 
"suspend the certificate and issue to the person aforesaid a duplicate lO 
of the certificate which shall be valid only for a period of three 
years" shall be substituted; 
(b) after sub-section (5), the following sub-sections shall be 
inserted, namely:-
.. (5A) The person to whom a duplicate certificate of regis- 2, 
tration has been issued under sub-section (5) may apply t:> the 
registering authority for the issue of a fresh certificate in place 
of the said duplicate certificate and the application shall be 
accompanied by the prescribed fee: 
Provided that no such application shall be made- 30 
(4) before the expiry of the period of three years from 
the date on which the person took poIIIeIslon of the vehicle 
trom the registered owner; or 
(b) where any dispute relating to the taking of such pos-
session is pending before any court or arbitrator, until such 35 
dispute has been finally settled ~ such court or arbitrator, 
whichever is later. 
(58) On receipt of the application under sub-section (SA), 
the registering authority may issue a fresh certificate of registra-
Uon which shall be valid for the remaining period for whlcD 4. 
the certificate suspended under sub-section (5) would have 
been in force.";' ' 
(c) in su~ectio~ (6), for the brackets &ad ftjute "(5) ", the 
brackets, figure and letter "(58)" shall be substituted. 
17. In section 34 of the principal Act,- 45 
(a) after sub-section (4), the following SUb-section shall be 
insertecL namely:- : 
.. (4A) If' a registerilig authority is satid~ tl:t&t the regis-
tration . cit ,a . motor vehk~e h~ ,keep Qptai.ned ' .on the· basis of 
, • ~ 1 

s 
10 
doCuments which were, or by representation of facts which wu, 
false in any material particular, the registering authority shall, 
after giving the owner an opportunity to make such represen-
tation as he may wish to make (by sending to the owner a 
notice by registered post acknowledgment due at his address 
entered in the certificate of registration), and for reasons to be 
recorded in writing, cancel the certificate of registration of the 
vehicle."; 
(b) after sub-section (1). the following sub-section sbaU be 
inserted, namely:-
'(8) In this section, "certificate of registration" includes 
a certificate of registration renewed under the provisions of this 
Act.'. 
18. In section 35 of the principal Act, in sub-section (I), for the 
IS words "to register a. motor vehicle", the words, brackets, figures and 
letter "to register a motor vehicle or to renew the certificate of registra-
tion in respect of a motor vehicle (other than a transport vehicle) or 
to issue a no objection certificate under section 29A" shall be substituted. 
20 
30 
3S 
40 
19. In section 41 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2) ,-
(i) nfter clause (b), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:-
"(ba) the period within which an application for renewal 
of a certificate of registration in respect of a motor vehicle, 
other than a transport vehicle, may be made and the period for 
which such certificate may be renewed;"; 
(ii) in clause (c), for the words "the issue", the words "the issue 
or renewal" shall be SUbstituted; 
(iii) after clause (d), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:-
"(del) the form in which and the manner in which an appli-
cation for no objection certificate may be made under 1Ub--
section (1) of section 29A and the form. Of receipt to be issued 
under sub-section (2) thereof;"; 
(iv) in clause (f), for the words "the issue", the words "the 
issue or renewal" shall be substituted; 
(v) after clause (h), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:- " • ,.~ 
.. (i) the amount or amounts under sub-section (Ie) of 
section 30 or sub-section (Ie) of section 31;"; 
(vi) after clause (1), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:-
"(Ia) the conditions governing the registration of re-buJ1t 
vehicles;". 
Amend-
ment of 
6iection 35. 
Amend. 
mental 
lection 41. 

Amend-
mentof 
section 44. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
47. 
., 
10 
• ~ ,2~ ~ ,s~~n 41 01. the princ~pal Act., in sub-~tion ,(~), for the 
,wo~ds '~i"'fU9!1 cx~rience",; wherever they occur, tlle wordJ "judicial 
~ieD.c" or expe.ri~ce as an appellate or a revisional au~ority undeI 
any lay.r relating to land rev~nue" shall be substituted. 
~l. In ~ection 47 of the principal Act,- 5 
<a) in sub-section (1), in the proviso, after the word5 "in force 
for the time being", the words "and an application for a stage 
carriage permit from a person who has a valid licence for driving 
transport vehicles" shall be inserted; 
(b) after sub-section (1) as so amended the following sUb-sec- 10 
tions shall be inserted. namely:-
• (lA) The Government of a State shall reserve in that State 
certain percentage of stage carriage permits for the Scheduled 
Castes and the Scheduled Tribes. 
ExpZanation.-In this section and in sections 55, 63 and 68, IS 
''Scheduled Castes" and "Scheduled Tribes" have the meanings 
respectively assigned to them in article 366 of the Constitution. 
(lB) The reservation of peI:mits under sub-section (lA) 
shall be in the same ratio as in the case of appointments made 
by direct recruitment to public services in the State. 
(IC) The Government of a State may having regard to the 
extent to which persons belonging to economically weaker 
sections of the community have been granted stage carriage 
permits in that State,-
20 
(a) reserve in that State such percentage of stage carri- 2S 
age permits, as may be prescribed, for persons belonging to 
economically weaker sections of the community; or 
(p) notWithstanding anything contained in the proviso 
to sub-section (1), give ,preference, in such manner as may be 
prescribed, to applications for stage carriage permits from 30 
such persoils. 
Explanation I.-In this sectbn and in section 55, 63 and 68, a per-
son shall be deemed to belong to economically weaker section of 
the -c:ommunity, if 'and only if, on the prescribed date, the limit of-
(a)' the annual income of such person together with the annual 35 
income, if any, of the members of his family; or 
(b) the extent of land (whether in one class or in different 
classes) held by such person -together with that, if ,any, held by the 
members of, his fami1y~ or 
(c) the annual income and the extent of land afo~~4, does 40 
or do, not exceed such as may be prescribed. 
'\': : 
EXplanation H.-For the putposesof Explanation I, "family", in 
relation to an individual, means the wife or husband, as the case may 
be, of such indivi4:ual ~d the minor children of such individual. 
(lD) The number of permits reserved under sub-section 4S 
.(l~~ an~ claus.~ (0) of sJlb-section (1C) shall not exceed fifty 
per cent. of the total number of stage carnag, permits granted 
during a calendar year. 

s 
10 
eot 19U. 
IS 
20 
30 
35 
45 
so 
u 
(1E) In giving effect, to the provisions of' sUQ-secUOD 
(IB) and c1ause(a) of sub-section (Ie), the Regt~nal Ttansport 
Authority or the State Transport Authority may, if' it considers 
necessary or expedient so to do, group the various routes wUhin 
its jurisdiction. ' , 
(IF) Where any stage carriage permit is 19'be granted 
from the quota reserved under sub-section (lB)Qr clause (a) 
of sub-section (1C) to any co-:>perativesociety registered or 
deemed to have been registered under any enactment in force for 
the time being or any firm to which the provisions of the Indian 
Partnership Act, 1932 apply, no permit shall be granted to such 
society or firm unless the members of the co-operative society 
or the partners of the firm belong to the Schedule4 Castes, the 
Scheduled Tribes or economically weaker sections of the COIll-
m,unity: 
Provided that where the members of such, co-operative 
SOCiety or the partners of such firm are partly fron;l the Sche-
duled Castes, partly from the Scheduled Tribes and partly from 
the economically weaker sections of the community, or from 
any two of these categories, any pennit under this sub-
section shall be granted to such society or firm only from the 
quota reserved for the category to which the largest number of 
members of the co-operative society, or, as the case may be, 
partners of the firm, belong: 
Provided further that where no reservation haS been made 
in the State for economically weaker sectiorls of the community 
under clause (a) of sub-section (Ie), no permit under this sub-
section shall be granted to a co-operative society or filml unless 
the members of such society or partners of such firm belong 
to the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes or partly to the 
Scheduled Castes and partly to the Scheduled Tribes and the 
permit to such society or firm shall be granted only from the 
quota reserved for the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes 
according as to whether the lar~er number of the members of 
the co-operative society. or partners of the firm, belong to the 
Scheduled Cast~' or the Scheduled Tribes. 
(1G) The circumstances under which, the mannet" in which, 
and the extent to which, reservation under SUb-seetton (lA) 
and clause (a) of sub-sectfon (IC) may' be carned forward 
shall be such as may be prescn"bed. 
(IH) Notwithstandin~ anything contl'tined in this section, an 
application for a stage carriage pennit from a State 'transport 
undertakin~ for operating in 'any inter-State" route shall be 
given preference over all other applications: 
Provided that the authority shall not grant a, ,permit under 
this sub-section unless it is satisfied that the State transport 
undertaking would be able to operate in the inter-State route 
without detriment to its respon~ibiHty for ptovidin'R efficient and 
adequate road transport servic('l in any notified area or notified 
route as is referred to in sub-section' (3Y of section 68D where 
tne ubdertaking operates the s"rvice. ". '! 

Amend-
ment of 
nction 
55. 
Amend-
mentof 
eection 88. 
A81end-
ment of 
section 
63. 
.. 
Ezplanation.-For the purposes of this sub-section, "lLter-
State route" means any route lying contiguously in two or more 
States.'. 
22. In section 55 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1), in the proviso, after the words "in force S 
for the time being", the words "and an application for a public 
carrier's permit from a person who has a valid licence for driving 
transport vehicles" shall be inserted; 
(b) after sub-section (l), the following SUb-sections shan be 
inserted, namely:- fO 
"(lA) The Government of a State shall reserve in that State 
certain percentage of public carriers' permits for the Scheduled 
Castes and the Scheduled Tribes. 
(IB) The Government of a State may, having regard to the 
extent to which persons belonging to economically weaker 15 
sections of the community have been granted public carriers 
permits in that State,-
(a) reserve in that State such percentage of public 
carriers permits, as may be prescribed, for persons belonging 
to economically weaker sections of the community; or 
(b) notwithstanding anything contained in the proviso to 
sub-section (1), give preference, in such manner as may be 
prescribed, to applications for public carriers' permits from 
such persons. 
20 
(1 C) The provisions of sub-section (IB), (ID) , (IF) and lS 
(IG) of section 47 shall apply to or in relation to the grant of 
public carriers permits under this section as they apply to or in 
relation to the grant of stage carriage permits under that 
section." . 
23. In section 58 of the principal Act, after sub-section (2), the follow- 30 
tng sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-
• ". 
"(2A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), 
an application for the renewal of a permit may be made by a State 
transpon undertaking in the case of a stage carriage permit or a 
public carrier's permit or a contract carriage permit, not less than 3S 
fifteen days before the date of expiry of the pennit.". 
M. In section 63 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1), after the second proviso, the followilll 
further proviso shall be inserted, namely:-
"Provided also that-
(a) where a motor vehicle covered by a permit granted 
40 
tn one State is to be used for the purposes of defence in any 
other State, such vehicle shall display a certificate, in such 
term, and issued by such authority, as the Central Govern-
ment may, by notification in the Offtcial Gazette, specify, 4~ 

13 
• to the effect that the vehicle shall be used for the period 
specified therein exclusively for the purposes of .defence; 
and 
(b) any such permit shall be valid in that other State 
notwithstanding that such pennit has not been counltersign-
ed by the State Transport Authority or the Regional Trans-
port Authority of that other State."; 
(b) in sub-section (7), the following proviso shall be inserted, 
namely:-
10 "Provided that preference shall be given to applications for 
IS 
20 
25 
30 
3S 
pennits from-
(i) the Ind:a Tourism Development Corporation; 
(ii) a State Tourism Development Corporation; 
(iii) a State Tourist Department; 
(iv) such operators of tourist cars, or such travel agents, 
as may be approved in this behalf by the Ministry of the 
Central Government dealing in tourism."; 
(e) after sub-section (11), the following sub-sections shall be in-
lerted, namely:-
" ,. 
.. (llA) The Government of a State shall reserve in that State 
certain percentage of national permits for the Scheduled Castes 
and the Scheduled Tribes. 
(lIB) The Government of a State may having regard to the 
extent to which persons belonging to economically weaker sec-
tions of the community have been granted national permits In 
that State,-
(a) reserve in that State such percentage of national 
permits, as may be prescribed, for persons belonging to 
economically weaker sections of the community; or 
('b) notwithstanding anything contained in clause (b) 
of sub-section (12), give preference, in such manner as may 
be prescribed, to applications for national permits from such 
persons. 
(11 C) The provisions of su:b-sections (1 B) , (lD) , (IF) 
and (lG) of section 47 shall apply to or in relation to the grant 
of national permits under this section as they apply to or in 
relation to the grant of stage carriage permits under that 
section!'. 
(d) in sub-section (12), in clause (b), foOr the word "or", the 
40 word "and" shall be substituted 
26. In section 64 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), the word 
"whole--time" shall be omitted. 
Amend-
mento, 
sectionK 

Amend_ 
mentol 
section. 
MA. 
Amend-
mentof 
section 68. 
Amend-
.. tal 
section 
68Y. 
Amend-
ment of 
8e';tion 72. 
Amend-
m':nt of 
sections 
75. 
Insertion 
of new 
flection 82A. 
Prohibi-
tion apinst 
travelling 
without 
pass or 
ticket. 
14 
• . 16. In section 6tA of the principal Act,-
(a) after the first proviso, the following proviso shall be inserted, 
namely:- . 
"Provided further that the State Transport Appellate Tri-
bunal may entertain the application dter the expiry of the said S 
period of thirty days, if it is satisfied that the applicant was pre-
vented by sufficient cause from making the application in time: "; 
lb) in the existing second proviso, for the word "further", the 
word "a!SO" shall be substituted. 
21. In section 68 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), after clause 10 
(e). the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:-
"(ci) the percentage of stage carriage permits, public carriers 
permits or national pennits to be reserved under section 47 or section 
55 or section 63 for economically weaker sections of the community; 
(cii) the manner in which preference shall be given in the grant IS 
of stage carriage permits, public carriers permits or national permits 
to economically weaker sections of the community where no reserva-
tion is made to such applicants; 
(ciii) the date and limits of annual income and the extent of 
land, for the purposes of Explanation I below sub-section (lC) of 20 
section 47; 
(civ) the circumstances under which, the manner in which, and 
the extent to which, reservation may be carried forward in respect 
of stage carriage permits, public 'Carriers permits or national 
permits;". 25 
28. In section 68F of the principal Act, after ~ub-section (1D), the fol-
lowing sub-section shaH be inserted, namely:-
" (1 E) Where a State transport undertaking applies for renewal 
of permit within the period specified in sub-section (2A) of section 
58, the State Transport Authority or, as the case may be, the Regional 30 
Transport Authority, shall, renew such permit, notWithstanding any-
thing to the contraI}' contained in Chapter IV.". 
29. In section 72 of thp. principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the words 
"heavy motor vehicles", the words "heavy goods vehicles or heavy passen-
ger motor vehicles" shaH be substituted. 3S 
30. In section 75 of the principal Act: in sub-section (4), for the words 
"Chief Presidency Magistrate" the words "Chief Metropolitan . Magis-
ifate" shall be substituted. 
31. After section 82 of the principal Act the following section shall be 
inserted, namely: - 40 
'82A. No person shall enter or remain in any stage carriage for 
the purposes of tAlVelling therein unless he has with him a proper 
pass or ticket: 
Provided that where arran~ents for the BIlpply of tickets are 
made in the stage carriage by which a person has to travel, a person 4S 
may enter sUch stage carriage but as soon as may be after his entry 
therein, hie shall make the payment of his fare ·to the conductor or 
,the driver who discharges the functions of a conductor IUld obtain 
from such conductor or driver, as the case may be, a ticket for his 
journey. 50 

Explanation.;-In this section.,-
(a) "pass" means a duty, privilege or cowrtesy pass entitling 
the person to whom it is given to travel in a stage carriage 
gratuitously and includes a pass issued on payment for travel in 
5 a stage carriage for the period specified therein; 
(b) "ticket" incluqes a siJ;agle ticket, a return ti~et or a 
season ticket.'. 
32. In section llOA of the principal Act, in sub-secttion (1), after clause 
(a), ~e following clause shall be insel1ted, namely:-
10 "(GIl) by the owner of the property; ort:. 
33. m section HOC of the principal Act, in sub-.ection (2), for the words 
and figures "section 195 8IDd Chapter ~V of the Code of Criminal Pro-
S of 1898. cedure, 1898", the words and figures "section 195 and Chapter XXVI of 
20t 1974. the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973" shall be SIlibstituted. 
I~ M. After section 112 of the principal Act, the following section shall 
. be inserted, namely:-
'112A. (1) Whoever travels in a stage carriage without having 
a proper pass or ticket with him or be;ng in or having alighted from 
a stage carriage fails or refuses to present for examination o,r to 
20 deliver up his pass or ticket immediately on requisition being made 
therefor, he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five 
hundred rupees. 
Explanation.-In this seot.ion "pass" and "ticket" have the mean-
ings respectively assigned to them in section B2A. 
2S (2) If the conductor of a stage carriage, or the driver of a. stage 
carriage where such driver discharges the tunctions of a conductor in 
such stage carriage, whose duty is-
(a) toO supply a ticket to a person travelling in a stage carriage 
on payment of fare by such person, either wilfully or neg-
30 ligently,-
35 
(i) fails or refuses to accept the fare when tef\d,ered, or 
(ii) fails or refuses to supply a ticket, or 
(iii) supplies an invalid ticket, or 
(i1:') supplies r. ticket of lesser value, or 
(b) to check any pass or ticket, either wilfully or negligently 
fails or refuses to do so, 
he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred 
rupees. 
40 (3) The offence under this section may be compounded if the 
person referred to in sub-section (1) or the condu~tor or the driver 
" referred to in sub-section (2), pays, on the spot on demand by such 
authOrity as the State Government may, by notiftcation in the 
Official Gazette, specify,-
(a) ten times the actual fare payable by such person or 
4S realisable by such conductor or driver; or 
Amend- . 
mentol 
sectioa 
BOA. 
Amend-
mentot 
,ec.tion 
l!OC. 
InsertiOn 
otnew 
section 
112a. 
PenaltYfOI 
trClulllng 
without 
pas£- or 
ticket and 
for dere_ 
liction ot 
duty on 
the part 
of COD-
duetor'. 

Inaertlon 
dnew 
section 
~ 
Imposition 
otmini-
mumftDe 
under 
certain 
circum-
stanc ... 
Amend. 
mentor 
section 
129A. 
Amend-
mentor 
section 132 
Amend-
mento! 
aeet10n 
13SA. 
lmen4-
ment of 
the First 
Schedule. 
(b) rupees five hundred, 
whichever is less. 
(4) Where a person has paid the amount under sub-section (!), 
no action shall be taken against him under section 112.". 
35. After section 124 of the principal Act, the following section shall s 
be inserted, namely:-
"124A. (1) Whoever having 'been convicted of an offence under 
this Act commibl an. offence on a second or subsequent occasion 
within three years of the comm;ssion of a previous similar offence. 
no court shall, except for reasons to be stated in writing, impose on 10 
him a fine of less than one40urth of the maximum amoun.t of the 
fine imposable for such offence. 
(2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall be construed. as restricting the 
power of the court from awarding such imprisonment as it consi-
ders necessary in the circumstances of the case not exceeding the IS 
maximum specified in this Act in respect of that offence.". 
3G. In section 129A of the principal Act, after the proviso, the follow-
ing proviso shall be inserted. namely:-
"Provided. further that where a motor vehicle has been seized 
and detained under this section for contravention of the provi- 20 
sions of section 22, such vehicle shall not be released to the owner 
unless and until he produces a valid certificate of registration under 
this Act in respect of that vehicle.". 
37. In section 132 of the principal Act, for the words "Presidency 
Magistrate", the words "Metropolitan Magistrate" shall be substituted 2S 
38. In section 133A of the principal Act, in sub-section (5) ,-
(a) for the words and figures "Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1898", the words and figures "Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973" 
shall be substituted; 
(b) for the word and figures "section 98", the word and figures 30 
"section 94" shall be substituted. 
39. In the First Schedule to the principal Act,-
(a) in Form A-
(i) in Section I, for items' (d) and (e), the following items 
shall be subs~ituted, namely: - 35 
". (d) medium goods vehicles, 
• (e) medium passenger motor vehicles, 
• (ei) heavy goods vehicles, 
• (eii) heavy passenger motor vehicles,"; 
(b) in Section TIl, for question (a), the following question shall 40 
be substituted, namely:-
.. (a) Do you suffer from attacks of loss of consciousness from 
any cause?"; 
5 of 1_ 
2 of 19'1'" 

5 
~. 
11 
(c) in Form AA, in the first paragraph, for items (d) and (.), 
the following items shall be substituted, namely:-
"(d) medium goods vehicles, 
(e) medium passenger motor vehicles, 
(ei) heavy goods vehicles, 
(eU) heavy passenger motor vehicles,"; 
(d) in Form B, in Section II, for question (a), ~ followiDI 
question shall be substituted, namely:-
"(0) Do you suffer from attacks C1f loss of consciousness 
10 from any cause?"; 
(e) in Form D, for items (d) and (e). the foUowiDa item. IbaD 
be substituted. namely:-
"(d) medium goods vehicles, 
(e) medium passenger motor vehicles, 
(ei) heavy goods vehicles, 
15 (eii) heavy passenger motor vehicles,"; 
20 
30 
as 
" 
(I) in Form E-
(i) in entry 1, the words uand address" shall be omitted: 
(ii) after entry lA. the following entries shall be inserted 
namely:-
"lAB. Permanent address of the person to be registered 
as registered owner ..... , .. , ............ , ................. ". 
lAC. Temporary address of the person to be registere~ 
as registered' owner ..................................... ; 
~,. (iii) after entry 2. the following entry shall be inserted, 
T namely:-
"2A. The motor vehicle is--
(a) a new vehicle; 
(b) a re-buiJt vehicl~:"; 
(iv) in entries 16 and 20, for the words "heavy motor 
vehicles", the words "heavy ~ds vehicles or heavy passl.-nger 
motor vehicles" shall be substituted; 
(g) after Form E, the following Form shall be inserted, name-
ly:-
"FORM F 
[See section 24(5) and (6)] 
Form Cf/ Application for renewal of certijicaie aJ r~cttion 
of a motor vehicle, other than a transpon vehioJjt 
I, Shrf/Shrimati/Kumari. ............. hereby apply for the 
.' renewal of the certific!1tp' of registration, which is attached, and 
particulars of which are liS f61l0ws: .' .r (a) Registered number ........... , ........... . 

(b) Date of issue 
(c) Registering authority by which the certiflca.te w. 
lIaued/last renewed. 
My present address is .......... ·· ..... · ....... · 
If this address is not entered on the licence, I do/do not wish 5 
that it should be so entered. 
The renewal of the certifkate has not been refused by au 
registering authority. 
1. Class of vehicle 
2. The motor vehicle is-
(a) a new vehic:le; 
(b) a re-built vehicle; 
3. Type of body 
4. Maker's name 
5. Year of manufacture 
6. Number of cylinders 
7. Cubic capacity 
8. Maker's classification 
I. Chassis number 
10. Engine number 
11 Seating capacity (including driver) 
12. Unladen weight 
Dated: Signature of Applica"t. 
NOTE.-The motor vehicle above described is-
10 
IS 
20 
(i) subject to a hire-purchase agree-ment with .............. 25 
(ii) subject to hypothecation in favour of ................. . 
(iii) not held under hire-purchase agreement or subject to 
any mortgage. 
(Sltrike out whatever is not applicable and, if the motor vehicle 
is subject to hire-purchase 8grPement or hypothecation, obtain 30 
the signature of the hire"purchllse company or the mortgagee, 
as the caSe may be.) 
Signature of owner. 
Signatlllre of Hire-purchase Company/Mortgagee."; 
(h) in Fonn G,-
. ~ 
(i) for the words "and addre!s", occurring in the third entry 
below the heading "Form of Certificate oj Registration", the words 
"and permanent and temporary nddresses" shall be substituted; 
(it) after entry 1, the following entry shall be inserted, 
namely:-
"1A. The motor vehicle is-
(a) a new vehicle; 
(b) a re-built vehicle;"; 
40 

5 
, ...... 
(iii)' in entries 14 and 18, for the words ''heavy motor 
vehicles", the words "heavy goods vehicles or heavy passenger 
motor vehicles" shall be substituted; 
(iv) after entry H~, the fon~wing shan be inserted, namely:-
'''This certificate is valid from ........................ . 
to ....................... . 
.". . . . . . . . . .. .. . .. .. .. .. . . .. .. .. .. . 
(v) before the Note t the following shall be inserted, 
namely:-
10 "'This certificate is hereby renewed up to 
::,,:' .~ 
Signa.ture of registering 
4uthority. 
the .......... day of .............. 19 
the ... , ...... day of ............ 19 
the ...... ' ... day of ........... 19 
the ....... ' .. day of ............ 19 . , " . ......................... .. 
IS 40. In the Second Scr~dule to the principal Ad: , in paragraph I, in 
item 1, for the word "Epi1ep~y", the words "Attacks of loss of conscious-
ness from any cause" shall be substituted. 
.20 
41. The Sixth Schedule to the principal, Act shall be omitted. 
42. In the Eighth Schedule to the principal Act,-
(4) for the words "heavy motor, vehicle", wherever they occur, 
the words "heavy goods vehicle or heavy passenger motor vehicle" 
shall be substituted; 
(b) for the words "medium motor vehicle", the words "medium 
goods vehicle or medium passenger motor vehicle" shall be substl-
25 tuted. 
Amend-
ment of 
the 
Second 
Schedule, 
Omissioa 
of the 
Sixth 
Schedule. 
Amend-
mentof 
E1ahth 
Schedule. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Motor Vehicles Act, 1939, was further amended in the beginning 
of 1976 to facilitate the implementation of the National Permit Scheme 
for -public carriers and in July 1977, to provide for more stringent punish-
ment fqr the offence of driving motor vehicles under the inBuence of 
drink or drug, for compulsory wearing of crash helmets by driversj and 
riders of two-wheeled vehicles and for specifying speed limits for such 
vehicles. 
2. With the rapid devclopmen,t of road transport during 'the past few 
years, a large number of suggestions for amendment of the Act has been 
receoived from State G~emments, TrRngport Development Council and 
its Standing Committee on Road Transport and persons or organisations 
interested in the road transport industry. The Bill seeks to give effect to 
the above-mentioned. recommendations and to remove certain difticu1:ties 
experienced in the administration of the Act. 
3. The main purpose of the BH1 is to provide for reservation for the 
Scheduled Castes aDd Scheduled Tribes ana ior reservation for, or giving 
preference tQ, persons belonging to economically weaker sections of the 
community, in granting stage carriage permits, public carrier permits and 
national permits and punish persons trsvelUng in stage carriages without 
tickets. Some of the other importar.t amendments are-
(a) obtaining of a 'no objection certiflcate' by the transferor or 
owner of a motqr vehicle from the Registering Authority before a 
frE:tlh regiqtration rlumber is assigned to the vehicle on its transfer 
from one State to another or on the transfer of ownership thereof; 
(b) to provide for a period of validity of the eertificate of regis-
tration in respect of a motor vehicle, other than a transport vehicle, 
as fifteen years; 
(c) grant of separate driving liccnces for driving buses and 
trucks; '/ 
(d) to increase the period of validity of driving licences, other 
than those of ~esaional chivers, from three years to five years; 
(e) to empower State Go,'ernmentl; to prescribe minimum edu-
cational qual.i.fi1zations of persorls to whom licences to drive transpol'!t 
vehicles are issued; 
(1) to empower the Central Government to allot, by notiflcation 
in the Official Gazette, groups of It'tters to each State Government 
for assignment to motor vehicles and omit the Sixth Schedule from 
the Act; 
(g) to provide fnr giving prt'ference to India Tourism Develop-
ment Corporation, State Tourism Development CorporatiOns, State 

2i 
'tourist Departments and such of the tourist car operators and travei 
agents as are approved by the Central Government, in granting all-
India permits for tourist vehicles; 
(h) to make it obligatory on courts.to impose fine of not less 
than one-fourth of the maximum arnllunt of fine provided for the rele-
vant offence under the Act for the second or subsequent offence com-
mitted within three years of the commission of a previous similar 
offence. 
4. The Bill is intended to give effect to these proposals. The provi-
.ions of the Bill are further explained in the notes on clauses. 
NEW DELHI; CHAND RAlII. 
The 18th July. IIno. 

Clause 2-Sub-clause (a) .-At present a State Government may make 
rules under clause (Jc) of sub-section (2) of section 41 of the Motor 
Vehicles Act, 1939 to exempt, from the provisions of the Act relating to 
registration, motor vehicles in the possession of dealers and specify the 
conditions subject to which such exemptions may be granted and the fees 
payahle therefor. This sub-clause seeks to defIne the expression "dealer" 
so as to include a person who is engaged in the manufacture of motor 
vehicles or in building bodies for attachment to chassis. 
Sub-clauses (b) and (c) .-Clause (9) of section 2 of the Act defines 
'the expression "heavy motol' vehicle" an::l clause (14) thereof "medium 
~tor vehicle". Since the technicalities to drive a truck and a bus are 
different, it is proposed to give separate licences for driving buses and 
trucks. Accordingly it is proposed to classify "heavy motor vehicles" into 
"heaYy goods vehicles" and "heavy paEsenger motor vehicles" and "medium 
motor vehicles" into "medium goods vehiCles" and "medium passenger 
motor vehicles". These sub-clauses give effect to this proposal. 
Sub-clause (d) .-At present 'the Act does not specify any condition 
subject to which re-built vehicles may be registered. It is considered 
necessary to vest in that behalf powers iII State Govemmt"nts to make 
rules to regulate the registration of such re-built vehicles. Accordingly 
this sub·1:lause seeks to define the expression COre-built vehicle". 
Clauses 3 and 4.-These clauses seek respectively to amend sections 7 
and 8 of the Act, consequent on ,the amendments proposed to section 2 (9) 
and (14). 
Clause S.-At present section 9 of the Act only empowers a State Gov-
ernment to make rules regarding specifications entitling the holder of a 
driving licence to drive transport vehicles. It is proposed. to empower the 
State Government to make similar rules to regulate the grant of licences 
to persons if theYj intend to drive private vehicles a9 paid employees. 
This clause seeks to make necessary provisions for this purpose. 
Clause 6.-This clause seeks to amend section 10 o'f the Act to increue 
the period of validity of driving licences issued hereafter to persqns, other 
than those working as paid drivers or d::ivers of transport vehicles, from 
thr~e years to five years. In the case of paid drivers and drivers of trans-
port vehicles, the driving licences will be valid only for three years as at 
present. 
Clouae 7.-This clause seeks to amend section 16 of the Act to require 
a pt'rson who is disqualified by a Regional Transport Authority to forth· 
with surrender the driving licence to the licensing authority, whether 
such authority issued or renewed such licence. The intention behind this 
amendment is to prevent the evasion of punishment in regard to holding 

23 
such licence. The licensing authority will keep with i't such licence until 
the disqualification expires or is removed. The period of dW:Iual!iftcation 
shall be reckoned from the date of surrender of the driving licence or 
from the date on which the relevant endorsement is made on the driving 
licence, whichever, is earlier. Where the driving licence is at the time of 
the said order in the possession of the licensing authority or a police officer, 
the disqualification shall take effect from 'the date of the said ('Mer. 
Clause 8.-This clause seeks to amend sub-section (2) of section 21 
of 'thE' Act to. enable a State Government to. specify by rules minimum 
educational qualifications for obtaining licences to drive transport vehicles 
and the period within which such quaJifkations are to be acquire:t by 
such persons. 
Clause 9-·Suh-cla1tse (a) .-According to section 24 of the Act,' the 
registering authority has to assign to a motor vehicle a regi!(~ration mark 
consisting of one of the groups of letters allotted to the State by the Sixth 
Schedule to the Act fo,JIowed by a number con.cristing of not more than 
four figures. To. avo.id the need for frequen't amendment of the Ao~ and 
to provide for additional gro.ups of letters to States and Union territories, 
this clause seeks to amend sub-section (3) of section 24 so as to. empower 
the Central Government to specify by ndtifi.{'ation in the Official Gazette 
the groups of letters to be assigned to the States and the Union terri-
tories and consequently o.mit the Sixth Schedule from the Act. 
Sub-clause (b) .-Under section 22 o.f the Act, a cettiflicate issued by a 
registering authority to. the effect that a motor vehicle has been duly 
registered in accordance with the provisions o.f Chapter III is permanent. 
This clause seeks to amend section 24 suitably to provide that the validity 
of a certificate of registratio.n in respect of a motor vehicle, othler than 
a transport vehicle, will be fifteen years and empower the Sta~e C"..ov-
ernments to make rules 'to provide for the period within which an appli-
cation may be made for renewing a certificate of registratio.n, the fee pay-
able in respect of such application and the period for which such registra-
tion may be renewed. 
Clauses 10 and 11.-CIause 10 seeks to amend sub-section (1) of sec-
tion 26 and clause 11 to substitute section 27 of the Act and are conse-
quential to the new proposal for renewing a certificate of registration 
in respect of a motor vehicle, other than a transport vehicle. A person 
applying for renewing the certificate of registration will have to pro-
duce the vehicle for inspection. The registering authority may refuse 
renewal of the certificate of registration under certain circumstances. 
Cla1LBe 12.-Under sub-section (1) of section 29 of the Act, an owner 
of a vehicle has to apply within the period specified therein for assignment 
of fresh registration mark when the vehicle is removed from one State to 
another. This clause seeks to amend this sub-section to require such per-
!lK)n to produce a no objection certificaie and this is consequential to the 
new section 29A proposed to be inserted by clause 13 . 
. Clau!e 13.-Thic clause seeks to insert new ~ion 29A in the Act to 
provide that before fresh registration number is' assigned to a motor 
vel-icle on its trans1'er from one State to ano.ther or when the ownershir 

24 
of the vehicle chang~s. 3 no objection certificate ·should be obtained by 
the ,transfaoor from the original registering authority. Provision has 
been made in the new section rega'l'djng th~ factors to be taken into $II'. 
count in granting the certifteate and the period within which :JUch CP.1'1:Ui-
cate is to be granted. 
Clause 14.-Under section 3f} of the Act, read with section 112 thereot, 
:pr~dinJPI may be initiated against an owner of a motor vehicle .if he fails 
to intJimate the registering Bllthorilty within the pel'iod specifled therein 
about the change of residence, or place of bu$iness, or both, as recorded 
in the certificate of registration. This clause seeks to amend section 30 to 
provide for composition of the offence by recovery of B sum not exceed· 
ing one hundred rupees hy the registering authority. A State Govern-
ment will be empowered to make rule~ for specifying different amQunts, 
linked with the period of delay in sending 1he intimation, for composition 
of the ot!enee. ' , 
Clntl~f! 15--Sub-c!aulIf! (a) .-This sub-clause ~eek'! to substitute clause 
(8) of sub-section (1) of section 31 of the Act for requirin!;! the tT'~msf("T'(1jr 
of a motor vehicle to ob4:Bin a no obiection certificate and is con~eqnentlal 
to the proposed new section 2gA to be inserted by clau .. c;e 13, 
Sub-clause (h) .-Under section :n of the A<rt, read with section 112 
'thereof, proceedings may be initiated against th€' tran!;feror or transi'er.ee 
failin~ to intim~4-e the re~9terin(1 authority within the nf'riorl !'tnP.<"ifi.~ri 
theretn a'botlt the chan~e of ownership of a motor vehicle. This sub-clause 
~e1t~ to amend section ~t tn provide for composftion of the nffpT'lce bv 
re~verV of Ii sum not exceedinlt Clnc hl1nrlred ru'P~ bv the relti!rterin,q 
autooritv. A State Government will be empowered to make rules fo,r 
flnecityinp; dift'erent amounts, linked with the period of delav in sendtng 
the intimation, for composition of the offence. 
Clau~e 16.-Section 3'A of the Act cont3in.~ snecial provisions reqard-
in'! m"tt'r vehicle!; subiect tn hire-purchase ~~ment. Under 9Ub-
sec~on (5) of section 31A, if the person with whl)m the re~jstered owner 
of a motor vehicle has entered into a hire-purt:ha!ge 8/ll'eement Rattsfles 
.the registerinv, authority that he has taken no~ses!"Jon ,.f the vp.~icle owing 
to the r\efRUlt of the resVstered owner unner the provisions of t.he Rv.ree-
ment and that the re~stel'erl nwner refuFe!' to nelivP.l' the cetptlflcate CYf 
recli,;tl"Jltion or has abseonded. the registering authority may, after tnvin" 
therecnstered owner an otmortunitv to make repreffentation in the matter. 
rRncel the certiflcate and iSJnlr. a dU'Dlicate thereof to the person whollC 
name h::lS been !;nP.cified in thp. certificRte of rel1istration IHI the ~on with 
whom the recdRt'en l'JW1let' has en~ fnt.n R hiT""'p'Jl"Chl\CIIe R~nt. 
,",b1 !l\th-sectinn is tn'Ol)nged ~ 'bel amende" tomak", the- inten~ft)n dear. 
Prmrision is 81so m~de fot' an,.,lvin~ 1m- thf! i~e of a fre"h cet'tfftt!~t~ 
within the nerlod ~neciflerl themn. Th .. fresh eet1;ifl('ate !'rO is..cruerl wnt 
be valid nnl-v fm- the period tot' which the snpended certlftc'lte would 
have been in force. 
Cfatlse 17 . ....:.This clause seek!': 1:0 nmend gecti(Vt 34 of the Act for 
pmpowering a retnsterin~ RUtl,,,rlty to cancel ~ "et'tif1catf' of retristration 
of a motor vehicle where it has reaS(m to believe that the rogiFtra,tion 
I 

25 
was obtRmed on the basis of documents which were, or by representation 
of facts which was, false in any material particular. 
Clawle 18.-'l'his clause seeks 'to amend sUlb-section (1) of section 35 of 
the Act to enahle a person to prefer an appeal if he is aggrieved by an 
order under sectien 27 refusing the renewal of a certifl!Cate of registration 
ill respect of a motor vehicle, other than a 'transport vehicle, (clause 11) 
or an order refusing to issue a no objection certificate under section 29A 
(clause 13). 
Claw;e 19.-Section 41 of the Act 'empowers a State Government to 
'make rules in respect of the provisions contained in Chapter HI relating 
to registration of motor vehicles. Consequential amendments are proposed 
to be made in sub-section (2) of this section to empower a State Govern-
ment to make rules in respect of the new provisions conta:ined in sections 
24, 29A, 30 and 31 and to provide the conditions governing the registration 
of result vehicles. 
Claase 2O.-Und€T section 44 of the Act, the Chairman of a State or 
Regional Transport Authority is required to have judicial experience. 
This clause seeks to amend this section to providQ that persons having 
experience as appellate or revisional authorit:v- under land re',renue laws 
will also he eligible for appointment as Chairman. 
Claure 21.-Section 47 of the Act prescribes the procedure to be fol-
lowed by Regional Transport Authority in consideritlg applications for 
'stage carriage permits. The proviso to sub-section (If). of this section 
Rives preference to an appJication for a stage carriage permit ~ a c0-
operative society. It is proposed to give preference also to an application 
Ifor a stage carriage permit from a person who has a valid licence for 
driving transport vehicles. It is also propolled to provide for reservation of 
certain percentage of permits for sta~e carriages in favour of persons 
belonging 'to the Scheduled Cagtes and the Scheduled Tribes in the same 
ratio as in the case of appointments made lbydirect recruitment by a State 
GO"ernment to public sef\l'ices in that State. ' It is considered necessary 
to promote the well-being of economically weaker sections of the com-
munitv and acoordingl~r it is proposed to empower a State Govemment 
unrier certain circumstancf'>S either to reSE'l've certain percentage of per-
mi'ts for stage carriages for persons 'belonging to economicaUy weaker sec-
tions of the community r)r to give preference to them in the prescribed 
manner. The number of permits reserved under this section. would not, 
however, exceed fifty per cent. of the total nllmb!?r of stage carriage 
permits ~anted in a calendar year. 
If a State transport undertaking applies for a ~tage carriage pemit 
operating in anv inter-State route, such applic8'tion will be given pre-
ference over all other applications provided the undertaking would be 
able to operate in the inter-State route without detriment 'to its res-
ponsibility for providing efficient and adequa'te road transport service in 
any notified area or notified route where the undertaking already ope-
rates the service. This clause seeks to amend section 47 to give effect 
to these proposals. 
Clau.se 22.-SectiQn 55 of the Act relates to applications for public 
carriers permits. This clause seeks to amend this section on the lines of 
the amendments proposed to section 47, by clause 21, to provide for re-
servation of public csrrieTl'l pennits for the Scheduled Castes and the 

2~ 
Scheduled, Tribes and 110 empower a State Gotvemment,uncler, .certain 
circumstances, either to reserve certuD percentage of ptlbllc clll'rlers 'per-
nUts for persons belonging to economically weaker sections of the com-
munity or to give preference to them. 
Clause Tit-Under section 58 of the Act, an application for renewal of 8i 
permit is required 'to be made not less than 120 days or 60 days, as the 
case may be, before the date of expiry of the permit This clause seeks to 
amend this secticn to provide that an application may be made by a state 
'transport undertaking not less than 15 days before the date of expiry of the 
permit. 
Clat:se 24--Sub-clause (a) .-Section 63 of the Act deals with validation 
of ~nnits for use outside region in which it is granted. This sub-clause 
~ks to amend sub-sectbn (1) of section 63 to provide for free move-
ment of a civilian vehicle- used for defence purposes without the need 
for counter-signature by the Regional Transport Authori'~y or State 
Transport Authori'ty of the region or State through which it 'has to move 
provided the vehicle carries a certificate in such form. and issued by such 
authority, as may be notified by the Central Government. The certificate 
should indicate the period for which the vehicle shall be used for purposes 
of defence and that during that period it shall be exclUSively used 'for 
said purposes. 
',Sub·c1ausc (b) .-Under su1>-section (7) of section 63, all-India permitS' 
are 'given to tourist whieies for the purposes of promoting tourism. ThD 
sub-clau8e seeks to amend this sub-sec'tion to provide for preference being 
given to applications for perm,its from the India Tourism Development 
Corporation, a State TouTism Development C~ion, a State Tourist 
Department and such operators of tourist cars, or 9Uch travel agents, as 
may be appro\rcd by the Central Government. 
Sun-clause (c) .-This sub-clause sreeks to amend section 63, on :tile 
lines of the amendments proposed to section -1-7, by clause 21, to provide 
for reservation of national permits for the Scheduled Castes and 'the 
Scheduled. Tribes and to empower a State Government, bIDder certain 
circumstanoes, either to reserve certain percentage offtatkmalpennLta-for 
persons belonging to .economically weaker sectiQns of theeommunity or to 
give preference to them. 
Clause 25.-Under sub-section (2) of section 64, lit State Government 
has to constitute a State Transport Appellate Tribunal which &hall 
consist of a whole-time judiCial officer not below the rank of a District 
Jugde. This clause seeks to amend this' sub--tlection to omft the word 
'4whole-time" 90 ~ to enable a State Government to apPOint to the Trf· 
bunal a judicial oflioer not below the rank of a Di~rict .1ud~e in additi011 
to his duties, where the work load does not justify the appointment 01.3. 
whole-1ime officer or to make arrangemen.~s during the absence of the 
permanent incumbent. 
Clause 26,-This clause seer.s to amend section 64A of the Act to 
empower a State Transport Appellate Tribunal to €'n'tertain applications 
furr-eviaion evt!l'1 after ihe .expiry of period of thirty days if it is satf-Sfiert 
'that ,the delay has occurred We to circulI}~ces beyond he applicant's 
control. , ' 

· . 27 
Clause 27 .-Section 68 of the Act empowers a State Government to 
make, rules in regard to the provisions contafued in Chapter IV relating 
tQ control of transport vehicles. This clause seeks to amend sub--section 
(2) of this seclt.ion to empower a State Government to make rules ,to 
6jetlfy peroentate' of stage carriage permits, pu,blic carriers permits or 
national' permits to be reserved fOr persons belonging to eeonomically 
weaker secti()ns of the community, the manner in which preference shall 
be given in the grant of such permits where no such percentage has 
been reserved for them, the date and limits of annual income and the 
extent of land for the purposes of Explanation I below suO-sectlon (IC) 
of section 47, ,and the circumstances under which, the mrumcr in which, 
and the extent to which, the aforesaid categories of permits reserved for 
tne Sheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and economlcally weaker 
sections of the community may be carried forward. 
Clause 28.-Section 68F of the Act relates to issue of permits to State 
transport undertakings. This clause seeks ta amend this sec tion to make 
it obligatory on a State Transport Authority or a Regional Transport 
Authority to renew the stage carriage permit if an application in this be-
half is made by State transport undertaking within a period of fifteen days 
referred to in section 58 as proposed to be amended' by clause 23. 
Clause 29.-This c1au~c seeks to amend section 72 of the Act, conse-
quent to the amendments proposed in section 2 (9) and (14) by clause 2. 
Clauses 30, 33, 37 and 38.-These clauses seeks respectively to amend 
sections 75, llOC, 132 and 133A of the Act consequent on the repeal of 
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 by the Code of Criminal Proce-
dure, 1973. 
Clauses 31 and 34.-There is no proviSion in the Act to deal with 
ticketless travel in stage carriages. As this problem has assumed size-
able proportions, clause 31 seeks 'to insert new section 82A in the Act to 
provide for the offence of travelling without ticket in the buses of State 
'transport undertakings as well as private buses. Clause 34 seeks to in-
sert new section 112A in the Act to provide for such offence being punish-
able with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees and for composi-
tion of the offence. It is also proposed to provide the same punishment 
for a condUctor of a stage carriage or a driver where he discharges 
the fUnctions of a conductor in such stage carriage, for the offence of not 
issuing the ticket for the corresponding value after accepting the fare 
from the passenger or for issuing tickets of lower denomination than the 
fare collected from the passenger. 
Clause 32.-Section 110A of the Ad does not indicate' the category at 
persons who can prefer daims for damages to property in an accident 
involving a motor vehicle. This clause seeks to amend this section to 
provide that in the case oC a damage to nny property the owner. of the 
property may flle an application before the Claims Tribunal for com-
pensation. 
Clause 35.-This clause seeks to insert new section 124A in the Act to 
make it obligatory on the court to impose a fine of not less than' one-
/fourth of the maximum :iJllount of fine provided for the relevant offence 
under the Act for .the second or subsequent affence committed within 
three years of the commission of the previous similar offence where 
punishment of imprisonment as well as fine is provided for an offence. 

28 
The court may, besides imPosing a miniri'lum fl:ri~, award such impriSort': 
ment as it considers necessary not exceeding the maximum specified in 
respect of 'that offence. 
Clause 36.-This clause seek.s to amend section 129A of the Act to 
provide that before a court or other authority releases the vehicle lJeized 
and detained for plying on road without a valid certificate of registration, 
necessary registration certificate shall be obtained by the owner from the 
competent authority. 
Clatt.!e8 39 to 42.-Clauses 39, 40 and 42 seek to carry out necessary 
consequential amendtneht:; in the First, Second and Eight~ Schedules to 
the Act and clause 41 seeks to omit the Sixth Schedule, consequent on the 
amendttlents proposed to SUb-section (3) of section 24, by clause 9. 

c. 
Clause 5.-Section 9 of the Act empowers a State Govemment to 
m~ke rules re"arding specifi.cations entitJil)g the holder of a driving 
li~nce to drive transport v~hicles. This ~tion is pro,llOSed to be 
a~~n4edto empower that Government to m:ake simi1~ ~l'es to t,'~g~ate.' 
the grant of licences to persons if they intend to drive vehicles ~ INUd 
employees. 
Clause B.-Section 21 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939 empowers the 
State Government to make rules in respect of the provisions relating to 
licensing of drivers of motor vehicles. It is proposed to add a clause 
in sub-section (2) of this section to empower the State Government to 
~pecify the minimum educational qualific&tions 'to be possessed by 
persons to whom licences to drive transport vehicles are issued and the 
time within which such qualifications are to be acquired by such persons. 
Clause 13.-This clause seeks to insert new section 29A in the Act to 
require a person to obtain a 'no objection certificate' when he applies fQI' 
assignment of fresh registration mark on removal of a motor vehicle from 
one State to another or intimating the transfer of ownership thereof. 
Under sub-section (5) of this new section, the registering authority has 
to take into account certain factors before granting or refUSing to grant 
the certificate. Such authority wi1l be required also to take into account 
such other factors as the Central Government may, by rules, prescribe 
in this behalf. 
Clause 19.-Section 41 of the Actt empowers a State Government to 
make rules in respect of the provisions contained in Chapter III relating 
to registration of motor vehicles. This clause seeks to amend sub-
section (2) of this section to specify the period within which an appli-
cation for renewal of a certificate of registration in respect of a motor 
vehicle (other than a transport vehicle) may be made and the period 
for which such certificates may be renewed, the renewal of a certificate 
of registration, the form in which and the manner in which an; appli-
c8ttion for no objection certificate may be made under section 29A and 
the form of receipt to be issued under sulHection (2) thereof, the fees 
1;0 be charged in respect of the renewal of cerlificate of registration, 
amounts payable by way of composition of offence, linked with the period 
of delay in sending an intimation under section 30 (IC) or section 31 (IC) 
and the conditions governing the regiStration of re-built vehicles. 
Clawe 27.-Section ea of the Act empowers a State Government to 
make rules in respect of the provisions contained in Chaptet' IV relating 
to control of transpo~t vehicles. This clause seeks to amend sub·St'.ction 
(2) of this section to empower a State Government to specify percen-
tage of stage carriage permits, public carriers permits or national per-
mits to be reserved for persons belonging to economically weaker sections 
of the community, the manner in which preference shall be given in the 
29 

30 
grant of such permits where no such percentale has been reserved tot 
them, the date and limits of annual income and the extent of land for 
the purposes of Explanation I below sub-section (Ie) of section 47, and 
circumstances under which, the manner in which, and the extent to 
which, the aforesaid categories of permits reserved for the Scheduled 
Castes, the Scheduled 'n'lbes and economically weaker sections of the 
community. may. be carried forw-ard 
The aforesaid-matterS inrespect of which rules may be made are matters 
of ' procedure and"administrative detail and it is not practicable to provide 
ftil' ~ in ,the BIn itself. The delegation of legislative power Is, tfle.lor 
fore, of a normal character. 

• 
ANNEXURE 
.... CTS noM THIl'MOTOR VIRICLES ACT, 1131 
(4 OF 193~) 
• • • • 
I. In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or Definition! 
tDIltut,-
• • • • • 
(9) "heavy motor vehicle" means a transport vehicle or omnibus 
the registered laden weight of which, or a motor car or tractor the 
unladen weight of which, exceeds 11,000 kilograms; 
• • • • • 
(14) "medium motor vehicle" means any motor vehicle other 
than a motor cycle, invalid carriage, light motor vehicle, heavy 
motor vehicle or road roller; 
• • • • • 
7. (1) • • • • • 
,(7) The test of competence to drive shall be carried out in a vehicle 
of the type to which the application r€fers, and, for the purpoaes of 
Put I of the test,-
(a) a person who passes the test in driving a heavy motor 
vehicle shall be deemed also to have passed the test in driving any 
medium motor vehicle or light motor vehicle; 
(b) a person who passes the test in driving a medium motor 
vehicle shall be deemed to have passed the test in driving any light 
motor vehicle. 
• • • • • 
8. (1) • • • • • 
(2) A driving licence shall specify whether the holder is entitled to 
drive as a paid employee and whether he is entitled to drive a transport 
·vehicle ·and shaUfurtber be expressed as ..titling 'the holder to drive 
a motor vehicle of one or more of the following eluleI!I, namely:-
• • 
l(d) medium moto.r vehiCle, 
(e) heavy motor vehicle, 
• 
• 
• 
31 
• • 
• • 
Grant Of 
drivinl 
licence. 
Form and 
contents 
of drivin, 
licence. 

Extentot 
validity 
otdrivinl 
licence. 
Currency 
Of 
driving 
licence. 
BgiJua-
tion,how 
lobe 
made. 
Produc-
tion of 
vehicle 
at time 
otregis-
tration. 
Refuaalof 
reeiltra-
tieD. 
t. (1) • • • • • 
(3) A State Government may, by rules made under section 21,-
(11) provide that a specification ',entitling the holder of a driving 
licence to drive a transport vehicle shall be made in the driving 
licence oA11 , by ~rundeithe authority of the ~«I'na1 Transport 
Authority constituted under Chapter IV, 
; , 
• • • • • 
. l~ .: . • ; '. ',11 ! 
10. A driving licencE' issued or renewed under this Act shall, su1;lit;et 
to the provisions contained in this Act as to the cancellation of driving 
licences and the disqualification of holders of driving licences for hold-
in~ or obtainin£ driving ,licences, be effective without renewal for a 
period of three years only, from the date of the issue of the liCence or, 
as'the case may be, from the date with effect from which the licence 
is renewed under section 11; and the driving licence shall be deemed 
to continue to be effective for a period of thirty days after the elate of 
its «;!xpil:y. , 
• • • • • 
• • • • • 
(3) The registering authority ,shall assign to the vehicle, for display 
thereon in the prescribed manner, a distinguishing mark (in this Act 
referred to as the registration mark) consisting of one of the groupe of 
letters allotted to the State by the Sixth Schedule followed by a num-
ber co,t:<ning not more than four figures. 
• • • • • 
~. (1) The registering a,u1.hority J;h;{l1 before proceerling to register a 
motor vehicle' require the, ~rson applying for registration of the vehicle 
to produce the vehicle either before itself or such authority as the State 
Government may by order apP')int in (\rder that the registering authority 
may satisfy itself th.at the particulaT~ contained in the .Ilpplication are 
tl'11(' and that the vehicle complies with the requirement of Chapter V 
and of the rules made thereundE:r. ' 
• • • • • 
" 27. The 'Ngtstering .,:i.dhority 'may refuse to' 'regbrter any motor 
vehicle if the vehicle iimeehanically defective or falls to comply' with 
the requirements of Chapter V or of the rules made thereunder, or if 
the applicant fails to furnish particulars of any prev.iQlJs registration of 
the vehicle or furnishes inaccurate particulars, in tI~e appli~tion for 
registration of such vehicle, and it shall furnIsh the applicant whose 
vehile is refused registration with the reasons ill~ writing for such refusal. . , , . • ... • • 

33 
21. (1) When a motor vehicle-
• • • • • 
{2) l'he regjstering authority, to which application is made under 
IUb-section (l), shall assign the vehicle a registration mark in aecord-
ance with -the Sixth Schedtllc to be carri~d thencefoirth on the vehicle 
and shall enter the mark upon the certificate of registration befof-e 
returning it to the applicant and shall, in communication with the 
registering authority by whom the vehicle was previously registered, 
arrange for the transfer of the registration of the vehicle from the 
records of that registering authority to its own records. 
• • • • • 
31. (1) Where the ownership of ally motor vehicle registered under 
this Chapter is transferred,-
(a) the transferor shall, within fourteen days of the transfer, re-
port the tran~er to the registering authority within whose jurisdic-
tion the transfer is eft'ected and shall simultaneously s€nd a copy of 
th€ said report to the transferee: 
• • • • • 
31A. (1) • • • • • 
(5) Where the person whose name has been specified in the certi-
ficate of registration as the person with whom the registered owner has 
entered into a hire-purchase agreement, satisfies the registering authority 
that he has taken possession of the vehicle owing to the default of 
the registered owner under the provisions of the agreement and that 
the registered owner refus~s to deliver the certificate of registration 
or has absconded, such authority may, after giving the registered owner 
an opportunity to make such representation as he may wish to make 
(by sending to him a notice by registered post acknowledgment due 
at his address entered in the certificate of registration) and notwith-
standing that the certificate of registration is not produced before it. 
cancel the certificate and issue a duplicate thereof to the person 
aforesaid. 
(6) The provisions of sub-sections (1) to (5) shall, so far as may be, 
apply to a motor vehicle which is subject to hypothecation as they 
apply to any motor vehicle which is hf'ld wlder a hire-p~\[chase agree-
ment. 
• • • • • 
35. (1) Any owner Of a motor vehicle aggrieved by an order of refusal 
under section 27 to register a motor vehicle or under sub-section (1) 
of section 38 to issue a certificate of fitness or by an order of suspension 
or cancellation made under section 33 or 34 or by an order of can~lla­
tion under SUb-section (3) of section 38 may, within thirty days of the 
date on which he has received notice of such order, appeal against the 
order to the prescribed authOrity. 
• • • • • 
41. (1) A StAte Government may makE' rules for the purpose of carry-
ing into effect the provisions of 'this Chapter. 
(2) Without prejudice b the penerality of the foregoing power, such 
rules may provide for-
• • • • • 
(e) the issue of certificate,; of re~stration and fJ~ness and dUDli-
('ates of such certifir.ates to replace th(' certificates lost. de~troyed or 
mutilated; 
• • • • 
Assign.. 
ment ot 
fresh 
registra-
tion 
mark on 
removal 
to another 
State. 
Transfer 
of owner-
ship. 
Special 
provisiona 
regardinl 
motor 
vehicles 
lubject 
to hire_ 
purchase 
agreement. 
Appeals. 
Power to 
make 
ruleL 
I 
I 
i f 
J 
I 
;, 
,j" 

'rnnSPort 
authO-
rttl •. 
Procedure 
of Bellon-
a! TraM-
port 
Authority 
In eon-
slderinl 
application 
for stqe 
carr1aee 
permit. 
34 
(j) the feesl to be charged fOtt the ~ssue or abteration of certifl.cates 
of registration, for making or cancelling an endorsement in rer.pect 
of an agreement of hire-purchase or hypothecation on a certif\cate of 
registration, for certificates of fitnes3, for registration marks, and -
lthe examination or inspection of motor vehicles, and the refund of 
• such fees; 
• • • • • 
oW. (1) • • • 
(2) A State Transport Authority or a Regional Transport Authority 
shall consist of a Chairman who has had judicial experience and, in 
the case of a State Transport Authority, such other officials and non-
officials, not being less than two, and, in the case of a Regional Trans-
port Authority, such other persons (whether officials or not), not being 
less than two, as the State Government may think fit to appoint; but 
no person who has any financial interest whether as proprietor, em-
ployee or otherwise in any transport -undertaking shall be appointed as 
or continue as a member of a State or Regional Transport Authority, 
and, if any person being a member of any such Authority acquires a 
anancial interest in any transport undertaking, he shall, within four 
weeks of so doing, give notice in writing to the State Government of 
the acq·..tisition of such interest and shall vacate office: 
, Provided that nothing in this section shall prevent any of the 
members of the State Transport Authority or the Regional Transport 
Authority, as the case may be, to preside over a meeting of such 
AuthOrity during the absence of the Chairman, notwithstanding that 
such member does not possess judicial experience: 
Provided further that the State Government may-
(i) where it considers necessary or expedient so to do, consti-
tute Regional Transport Authority for any region so as to consist 
of only one member who shall be an official with judicial experience; 
(ii) by rules made in this behalf, provide for the transaction 
of business in the absence of the Chairman or any other member 
and specify the nature of bUsiness which, the circumstances under 
which, and the manner in which, business could be so transacted: 
Provided also that nothing in this sub-section shall be construed al 
debarring an official (other than an official connected directly with the 
management or operation of a transport undertaking) from being 
appointed as or continuing as a member of any such Authority merely 
by reason of the fact that the Government employing the official hu, 
.)r acquires, any financial interest in a transport undertaking. 
• • • • • 
47. (1) A Regional Transport Authority shall, in considering an appli-
cation for a stage carriage permit, have regard to ,the following matters, 
namely:-
(a) the interest of the public generalJy; 
(b) 'the advantages to the publir of the service to be provided, 
including the saving of time likely .to be effected thereby and any 
convenience arising from journeys not being broken; 

3S 
(c) the adequacy of other passenger transport services operating 
or likely to operate in the near future, whether by road or other 
means, between the places to be served; 
(d) the benefit to any particular locality or localities likely tQ be 
afforded by the service; 
(e) the oPf'ration by the applicant of other transport services, 
including those jn respect of which applications from him ['lr pennits 
are pending; 
(I) the condition of the ro,ads included in the proposed route or 
area; 
and shall also take into consideraiion any representations made by Pel['-
aons already providing passenger transport facih1.ies by any means along 
or near the proposed route or area, or by any association representing per_ 
~sons interested in the provision of poad transport facilities recognised in 
this behalf by the State Government, or by any local authority or police 
authority within whose jnrisdiction any part of the proposed route or 
area lies: 
Provided that other conditions being equal, an application for a stage 
carriage permit from a co-QPerative society registered or deemed to have 
been registered under any enact.ment in force for the time being shall, 
as far as may be, be given preference over applications from individual 
owners. 
• * • 
55. (1) A Regional Transport Au'thority shall, in considering an ap-
plication for a public carrier's pennit, ha'lc regard to the following 
matters, namely:-
(a) the interestl'l of the public generally; 
(b) the advantages to the public of the service to be provided and 
the convenience afforded to the public by the provision at such ser-
vice and the saving of time likely to be effected thereby; 
(c) the adequacy of other goods services operating or likely to 
operate in the near future, whether by road or Qther means, between. 
the places to be served; 
(d) the operation by the applicant of other transpor'tservices, 
including those in respect of which applications from him for permits 
are pending; 
(e) the benefi,t to any pnr1;icular locality or localities likely t~ be 
afforded by the service; 
(f) the condition of the roads included in the propaRed area or 
route; 
(g) the nature of the goods to be carried wi'th special reference 
to any Qf a fragile or perishable nature; 
(h) the volume of traffic and the existence of mat"keting centres in 
the proposed area or along or near the proposed route; 
and shall al90 take into consideration Anv representations made by per-
sons already providing goOds transport facilities by any means, whether by 
road or otherwif'le, in the proposed area or along or near the proposed 
Procedure 
in con-
sidering 
applica-
tion for 
public 
carrier's 
permit. 

Validatioll 
of permits 
tor use 
outside 
region in 
which 
I'l'anted. 
JII,111. 
route, or by any local authority or police uuthority within whose juris-
diction any part of the proposed area or l'Oute lies: 
Provided that other conditions teing equal, an applic8!tion fqr a public 
carrier's permit trom p co-operative society registered or deemed to have 
been registered under any enactment in force for the time being shall, as 
far as may be, be given perference over applications from individual 
owners. 
• • 
63. (1) Except as may be otherwlse prescribed, a permi~ granted by 
the Regional Transpo.rt Authority of anyone region shall not be valid in 
My other region, unless the permit has been countersigned by ,~he 
Regional Transport Authority of that other region, and a permit granted 
in anyone State shall not be valid in any other State unless countersigned 
by the State Transport Authority of that other State or by the Regional 
Transport· Authority concerned: 
Provided that a private carrier's permit, granted by the Regional 
Transport Au1thority of anyone region 'with the approval of the State 
Tr~-port Authority, for any area in any other region or regions within 
the same State shall be valid in that area witoout the countersignature 
of the Regional Transport Authority of the other region or of each of the 
other regions concerned: 
ProVided further that where both the starting pQint and the terminal 
point of a route are situated within the same State, but part of such 
route lies in any other State and the length of such part does not exceed 
sixteen kilometres, the permit shall be valid in the other State in res-
pect of that part of the route which is in that other State notwith-
standing that such permit has not been countersigned by the State 
Transport Authority or the Regional Transport Authority of that other 
State. 
• '" • • 
(7) For the purposes of this section, the ex-pression "Governments in-
terested", "State Transport Authorities interested" or "Regional· Trans-
port Authorities interested", in relation to the Commission, means the 
Governments of such States, such Sta1e Transport Aulthorities 01' such 
Regional Transport Authorities, as the case may be, as are likely to be 
interested in, or affected by the functioning of 'the Commission under this 
section. 
'" • • '" • 
(12) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-seetion '(1) of section 
55, the appropriate authority shall. in considering an application 'for 1l 
national permit, also have regard to the following matters, namely:--
• • • • • 
(b) other conditions being equal, preference shall be given to 
applicants who are ex-army personnel; or who have valid licences for 
drtving transport vehicles. 
• , • • ¥ 
64. (1) • • • • • 
(2) The State Government shall constitute for the State a State 
Transport Appellate Tribunal which shall consist of a whole-time judI-
cial officer not below the rank of a District Judge: 
Provided that in relation to 8 Union territory the Tribunal may 
consist of the Administrator of that territory or any officer who; bll !. 
Judlcdal experience.· 
. ~ . . . 

37 
MA. The State Transport Appellate Tribunal may, either on its RevldoD.· 
own mcttion or on an application made to it, call for the record of any 
case in which an order has been made by a State Transport Authority 
or Regional Transport Authority and in which no appeal lies, and if 
it appears to the State Transport Appellate Tribunal that the order made 
by the State Transport Authority or Regional Transport Authority is im-
proper or illegal, the State Transport Appellate Tribunal may pass such 
order in relation to the case as it deems fit and every such order shall 
be final: 
Provided that the State Transport Appellate Tribunal shall not' 
entertain any application from a person aggrieved by an order of a 
State Transport Authority or Regional Transport Authority, unless the 
application is made within thirty days from the date of the order: 
Provided further that the State Transport Appellate Tribunal shall 
not pass an order under this section prejudicial to any person without 
giving him a reasonable opportunity of being heard . 
• • • • • 
68. (1) • • • • • 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, rules 
under this seCtion may be made with respect to all or any of the following 
matters, namely:-
• • • • • 
72. (1) The State Government may prescribe conditions for the 
issue of permits for heavy motor vehicles by the State or Regional 
Transport Authorities and may prohibit or restrict the use .of such 
vehicles in any area or route within the State. 
• • • • • 
75. (1) • • • • 
(4) A State Government may, by notification in the Official Gabette, 
empower any District Magistrate or Superintendent of Police (or, in 
the Presidency-towns, the Chief Presidency Magistrate or the Commis-
sioner of Police) to remove or cause to be removed any sign or advertise-
ment which is so placed in his opinion as to obscrue any traffic sign 
from view or any sign or advertisement which is in his opinion so 
similar in appearance to a traffic sign as, to be misleading . 
• • • • • 
UOA. (1) An application for compensation arising out of an accident 
of the nature specified in sub-section (1) of section 110 may be made-
(a): by the person who has sustained the injury; or 
• • • • • 
l1OC. (1) • • • • • 
(2) The Claims Tribunal shall have all the powers of a Civil Court 
for the purpose of taking evidence on oath and of enforcing the 
at~e-ndance of witnesses and of compelling the discovery and production 
of documents and material objects and for such other purposes as may 
be prescrilbed; and the Claims Tribunal shall be deemed to be a Civil 
Court for all the purposes of sect jon 195 and Chapter XXXV of the' 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1'898. 
• • • • • 
Power 
to make 
rules for 
the pur-
poses of 
this 
Chapter. 
Llmits 
ofweiiht 
and limita-
tions on 
use. 
Power 
to erect 
traflic 
signs. 
Applica-
tion for 
compen-
sation. 
Procedure 
and 
powet'lof 
ClaIm, 
Tribunals. 

PO\f'er 
to detain 
vehicles 
used with_ 
outcerti-
mate ot 
registra-
tionor 
permit. 
Jurisdic-
tionol 
Courts. 
Appoint.. 
mentor 
motor 
vehicles 
offtcer. 
121A. Any police offtce~' authorized in this behalf or other penoa 
authorized in this behalf by the State Government may, if he has reaSOD 
to believe that a motor vehicle has been or is being used in contraveD-
tion of the provisions of section 22 or without the permit required by 
sub-section (1) of section 42 or in contravention of any condition of 
such permit relating to the route on which or the area in which or 
the purpose for which the vehicle may be used, seize and detain the 
vehicle, and for this purpose take .or cause to be taken any steps he 
may consider proper for the temporary safe custody of the vehicle: 
Provided that where any such officer or person has reason to believe 
that a motor vehicle has been or is being used without the permit re-
quired by sub-section (1) of section 42, he may, instead of seizing the 
vehicle, seize the certificate of registration of the vehicle and shall issue 
an acknowledgment in respect thereof . 
• • • ... 
132. No Court inferior to that of a Presidency Magistrate or a Magis-
trate of the second class shall try any offence punishable under this 
Act or any rule made thereunder. 
• • • * • 
133A. (1) • • * • * 
(5) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 shall, 
so far as may be, apply to any search or seizure under this section as 
they apply to any search or seizure under the authority of any warrant 
issued under section 98 of that Code. 
Tln~ FIRST SCHEDULE 
FORMS 
FORM A 
[See section 7 (2) ] 
Form of applilcation fOT licence to drive a motor vehicle 
I 
Apptication 
I apply b a licence to enable me to drive *as a paid employee 
·public service vehicles, "'goods vehicles, the vehicles I wish to drive 
being of the following c1ass(es)·-
• • • • • 
• (d) medium motor vehicles, 
• (e) heavy motor vehicles, 
• • '" • • 
·Strike out whichever is not applicable. 
• '" • • • 

39 
m 
Declaration as to physical jitnsess oj applicant and knowledge of driving 
regulatiOlRB and traffic signs 
The applicant is required to answer "Yes" or "No" in the space 
provided opposite each question. 
(a) Do you suffer from epilepsy, or ,from 
sudden attacks of d~bility, giddiness or fainting? 
• • • • • 
I declare that 'to the best of my knowledge and belief the particulars 
given in Section II and the declaration made in Section III hereof are 
true. 
• - • 
FORM AA 
(See section SA) 
• • 
Form of applicaticm for the addition of a 1Veto cla:ss of vehicle to " 
driving liCence 
I, Shri/Shrimati/Kumari ........................ , hereby apply for 
the addition of the following class/classes of motor vehicle to the 
attached licence: 
- - • 
(d) medium motor vehicles, 
(C) heavy motor vehicles, 
• * * 
*1 enclose, 
(a) a medical certificate, 
• 
• 
(b) three copies of a recent photograph. 
• 
• 
-Required only where the applicant is not entitled to drive u a 
paid employee or to drive a transport vehicle and now wishes to do 10. 
Strike out if not applicable. 
Dated .................. 19 
Signature or thumb impression CYj applicaftt. 
* - * - • 
FORM B 
[See section 11 (2) ] 
Form of applicaticm jor the renewal of driving licence 
* * * • -II 
Declaration as to physical fitness of the applica.nt 
(The applicant is required to answer "yes" or "no" in the space 
provided opposite each question.) 
(a) Do you suffer from epilepsy, or from 
sudden attacks of disalbility, giddiness or fainting? 
• * - • • 
I declare that to the best of my knowledge and belief, the particularl 
liven in Section I and the declaration made in Section II hereof are 
true. 
• • • • • 

No ................ . 
FoRl.t!D 
[S~e section R (1)] 
Driving Licence 
(Name) ....................................... . 
11 .....•••• ' 
wife/son/daughter of ....................................... . 
or (permanent addresS') ................................... . 
................................................ . 
(temporary address) ....................................... . 
I Photograph I 
I if necessary. I 
I 
, 
---.--~ .. -.-
Sign.Gtu.re M thumb impresS1On. 
is licensed to drive, throughout India, vehicles of the following 
description·: -
" • " 
(d) medium motor vehicles, 
(e) heavy mot.or vehicles, 
" • • 
" " 
" • 
He/She is also authorised to drive as a paid employee" a transport 
vehicle. 
This licence is valid from to 
... [To be struck oUlt if inapplicable.] 
Dated ............... . 19 . 
Signature and designation of Licensing Atlthority. 
" " " ... " 
FORM E 
[See section 24 (1) ] 
Fcwm of AppUpatiOn for the Registration Of a MotM Vehic~ 
1. Full name, name of father and husband (in the case of a married 
wom:m), and address of person to be: registered as registered owner ..... . 
• • " ... " 
. !;:Additional part~iculars to be completed only in the case of troospori 
veIIl~les other than mottor cabs-
... " • • 

4' 
~ .. Muimum axle weight ,to be furnished in the ease of heavy motor vehicles only) - . 
(a) front axle ........................ kgms. 
(b) rear axle .......................... kgms. 
(c) any other ute .................... kgms . 
• • • • 
20. Maximum axle weight in ~t ()f eaCh axle (to be furnished in 
the case of heavy motot" vehicles only) ........... . 
Daf.ed ............... . lg Sign4ture of ..4.pplicont • 
• • • • • 
FORM G 
[See section 24(2)] 
Form of Certificate ~ Registration 
Registered number ............... . 
Brief des~ription of vehicle, 
(e.g .. For touritlg car, Chevrolet 22 seater bus, Albion lorry, 
trailer, etc.). 
Name, name of father, and husban.d (in the case of a married woman) 
and address of Registered Owner ................... . 
Signature of registering authority. 
Transferrectl to 
Signature of registering CWtllOTity. 
Transferreti to 
Signature of regi8term~ tmthority . 
• • • • • 
14. Registered axle weight (in the case of heavy motor vehiclea 
only)-
(a) front axle .. , ............. , .... , kgms. 
(b) rear axle ...................... kgms. 
• (c) any other axle ................ kgms. 
Additional particulars of alternative or additional trailer or trailers 
registered. with an articulated vehicle-
• • • • • 
18. Re~teted axle weight in respect of each axle (in the case of 
heavy motor vehicles only) ............ kgms. 
Date . ............... 19. . . . . . Signature of registe'rlng authority 
• • • • • 

42 -
THE SECOND SCHEDULa 
[See seci~ 7 (5) 1 
l)IS&lt!d 8 AND.M&A111LITIB15 AIISOLtmlLY blSQ1JALD'YIKG A PBIISOlI rc. 
OBTAINING A L~CENCE TO DRIVE A lI40'I'0B VIlHICLE 
1. Epilepsy . 
• • • 
THE SIXTH SCHEDULE 
[See sect:c.ns 24(3) and 29(2)] 
RIroISl'RATIOJf MARKs 
One ot the groups of letters specified in the second column followed 
by any other letter shall be used as the registration mark for a vehicle III 
the State ~fied in the first column. 
1 
Andhra Pradesh 
Assam 
Bihar 
Gujarat 
Haryana 
Jammu and Kashmir 
Kerala 
Madhya Pradesh 
Maharashtra 
Mysore 
Nagaland 
Orissa 
Punjab 
Rajasthan 
S'lkkim 
Tamil Nadu 
Uttar Pradesh 
West Bengal 
Chandigarh 
Delhi 
Goa, Daman and Diu 
Himachal Pradesh 
Manipur 
Pondicherry 
Tripura 
Andaman and Nicobar Islands 
Lakshadweep 
2 
._------ ------------
AP,AA, AD, AT 
AS, AM 
BR, BH, BP 
GJ, GT, GR 
HR, HY, HN 
JK, KM 
KL, KE 
MP, CP, MB 
MR, MH, MX, MW, MZ 
MY, ME 
NL 
OR, OS 
PN, PU, PB, PJ 
RJ,RS 
SK, SS 
TN, TM 
UP, US, UT, UR 
WB, WG, WM, WN 
CG, CH 
DL, DH, DE, DI 
GD 
Hl,HP 
MN 
PY,PD 
TR 
AN 
LD 
--- _.---_._--_._-- - .. ------_._-----
NOR! l.-Thefe letters shall be following by not more than four 
figures, and the letters 1\J)d figures shall be shown-
1. In the case of transpo:-t 
\~2hiclc;. 
2. In the case of temporary 
registration (section 25) 
3. In the case of registration 
marks allotted to dealers 
. ~tion 41.(2) (k)]. 
4. In other cases. 
In black on a white ground. 
In red on a yellow ground. , 
In white on a red groUACl. 
In wbfte.~ a black ground. 
J I • 

43 
NOT£ 2.-ln respect of the Maftarashtra State, the letter!! BM, BY may 
tontinue to be used in respect of vehicles which were registeI'\..~ before 
the lEt October, 1961. 
• • • • 
THE EIGHTH SCHEDULE 
(See section 71) 
LIMITS OF SPEED FOR MOTOR VEHlCLFS 
• 
Class of vehicle Maximum speed 
per hour in 
Kilome~rel 
-------- --.. - ._ ... _.- ... __ . 
(1) If all the wheels of the vehicle are fitted with 
pneumatic tyres and the vehicle is not drawing a 
trailer:-
(11) if the vehi<:le is a light motor vehicle 
(aa) if the v·, hide is a motor cycle 
N oTE.-Endeavour shall be made to enforce the 
speed limit spec;fied in this sub-item by inserting 
;.1 the motor cycle such device, like a g:lvernor or 
the like, which would ensure 'that the mOitor cycle 
cannot be ridden at a speed faster than the speed 
~pecified in this sub-item. 
(b) if the vehicle is a medium or heavy passen-
ger motos vehicle. 
(c) if tbe vehi::le is a medium or heavy goods 
motor vehicle 
(2) If the vehicle is an articulated vehicle (all +he 
wheeb of which are fitted with pneumatic tyres) which 
No Jiroi~. 
60 
6') 
is a heavy m :ltor vehicle 51 
(3) If the vehicle is drawing not ,more than one trailer 
(or in the case of artillery equipment, not more than two 
trailers) and all the wheels of tha.t vehicle and the trailer 
are fitted with pneumatic tyres-
(a) if the vehicle is a light motor vehicle and 
the trailer being two-wheeled has a laden weight not 
exceeding 800 kgms. 60 
(b) if the vehicle is a light motor vehicle and 
the trailer has more than two wheels or a laden 
weigh t exceeding 800 kgms. 50 
(c) if the vehicle is a medium motor vehicle 
(d) if the vehicle is a heavy motor vehicle 
(~) if the vehicle is a heavy motor vehicle used 
Dy the fire brigade. 
50 
40 
50 
(4) Any case not covered by entry (1), (2) or (3) 30 
• • • • • 
. ...... ----- ... . 
" 

LOK SABltA 
~ 
BILL 
further to amend the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939. 
(Shri Chand Ram, Minister of State ift rJ-vei of the Miftiltry 
of Shipping and Tnlmport.) 