As INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

f §
दि « Mi . - oe 5
जा . जे ४ > ‘ ‘
Cushy

Bill No. 132 of 2005
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2005
By
SHRI MOHAN SINGH, M.P.
A

BILL

further to amend the Constitution of India.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:— ;

1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2005. Short title.

2. In article 174 of the Constitution,’ in clause (/), for the words “six months”, the Amendment
5 words “three months” shall be substituted. of article 174.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

At present, as per the provisions of the Constitution, there can be a gap of six-months
between the last sitting of a session and the date appointed for its first sitting in the next
session of the State Legislature. However, it has been seen that the sessions of the State
Legislature are not being held regularly. Taking advantage of the long gap, the State
Governments are functioning arbitrarily thereby ignoring the basic principle of responsibility
to the State Legislature. As the sessions of the State Legislature are not being held regularly,
the issues concerning the States which should have been raised in the concerned State
Legislature are being raised in Parliament.

To ensure regularity in holding sessions and make the State Governments more
responsible to the Legislatures, it is suggested that the gap between two sessions of the
State Legislatures should not exceed three months.

The Bill, accordingly, seeks to amend the Constitution.

New DELHI; | MOHAN SINGH
November 7, 2005.



ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA.
* a * * eo % * ws
174. (1) The Governor shall from time to time summon the House or each House of the
Legislature of the State to meet at such time and place as he thinks fit, but six months shall

not intervene between its last sitting in one session and the date appointed for its first sitting
in the next session.

# | * / * कं क्र %

és

Sessions of
the State

Legislature,

prorogation
and dissolut-
ion.


LOK SABHA

A

BILL

,

further to amend the Constitution of India.

es

(Shri Mohan Singh, M.P.)

MGIPMRND-—3442LS(S1)—12-11-2005.