BUl No. 13210£ 19$8. @ 
THE DELHI PANCHAYAT RAJ 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, (958 
(As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABRA) 

Bill No. 13a or 1958 
THE DELHI PANCHAYAT RAJ (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 1958 
(As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABRA) 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Delhi Panchayat Raj Act, 1954. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Ninth year of the Republic of 
India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Delhi Panchayat Raj (Amendment) Short title. 
Act, 1958. 
5 2. In section 2 of the Delhi Panchayat Raj Act, 19M (hereinafter Amendment 
referred to as the principal Act) ,- ~~ Dc~~~ 
(i) in clause (11), for the word and figures "section 55", the 3 of 1955· 
word and figures "section 50" shall be substituted; 
(ii) in clause (12), for the words "prescribed by this Act or 
10 rules made thereunder", the words "prescribed by rules ma~e 
under this Act" shall be substituted; 
(iii) in clause (19), for the words "District Judge" in the 
two places where they occur, the words "Additional District 
Magistrate" shall be substituted. 
15 3. For sections 4, 5 and 6 of the principal Act, the following sec- Substitution 
tion shall be substituted namely:- of new sec-, tion for 
ICCtioIUI ... 
~ and 6. 
'4. All persons registered by virtue of the provisions of the Member-
Constitution and of the Representation of the People Act, 1950, gl~~noJabh8. 
as voters in so much of the electoral roll for any PC\I"liam~ntary 
%532 LS-I 

Amendment 
of scction 8. 
Omission of 
section 9. 
2 
constituency for the time being in force as relates to a Gaon 
Sabha Area shall be members of the Gaon Sabha of that Area. 
Explanation,-In this section, the expression "parliamentary 
constituency" has the meaning assigned to it under the Represen-
tation of the People Act, 1950,', , 43 
4. In section 8 of the principal Act, the words ", defect or omission 
in the enrolment" shall be omitted. 
5. Section 9 of the principal Act shall be omitted. 
Amendment of section 6, In section 16 of the principal Act, for the words "Gaon 
16. Panchayat's duties", the words "duties of the Gaon Panchayat" shall 10 
be substituted. 
?e~en~ '7. In section 18 of the principal Act, in clause (r), for the words 
o aectaOD I • ucivil justice", the word Ujustice" shall be substituted. 
Amendme~t 8, In section 30 of the principal Act, the words, brackets and figures 
~~. section "within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 15 
(Act XLV of 1860)" shall be omitted. 
~eD=~~Jn t. In section 41 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), for the 
41, words, "court fee in any suit or proceeding", the words ucourt fee or 
fine in any suit, criminal case or proceeding" shall be substituted, 
:renc::~ 10. In section 42 of the principal Act, for the words "as pres- 20 
42. cribed", the words "by such person and in such manner as may be 
prescribed" shall be substituted. 
AmrDdmenl 
oflection 
44. 
,11. In section 44 of the principal Act,-
(i) in sub-section (1), for the words and figures "group 8 or 
more contiguous Gaon Sabha Areas covering approximately a 25 
population of 5,000 persons into circles", the words Ugroup into a 
circle such number of contiguous Gaon Sabha Areas as the ChiE'f 
Commissioner or the prescribed authority may deem fit" shall be 
substituted and shall be deemed always to have been substi-
tuted: 30 
(ti) in sub-section (3), for the words "Every Gaon Sabha in 
each circle shall elect a number of adults of pr,scribed qualifica-
tions permanently residing within its jurisdiction", the word. 
"Every Gaon 5abha in e8t:h circle shall elect from amongst Its 

u of 1955. 
5 
10 
3 
members a number of persons of preseribed qualification" shall 
be substituted; 
(iii) in sub-section (4) ,-
(a) in clause (f), after the word "convicted", the words, 
brackets and figures "under the Untouchability (Offences) 
Act, 1955, or" shall be inserted; 
(b) the proviso shall be omitted . . 
12. In section 45 of the principal Act,- Amendment 
of section 
(i) the brackets and figure" (1)" at the commencement shall 45· 
be omitted; 
(ii) for the words "suits and proceedings", the words "suits. 
criminal cases and proceedings" shall be substituted. 
13. In S'ection 49 of the principal Act,-
(i) in sub-section (1) ,-
Amendment 
of section 
49. 
15 (a) for the words "A panch", the words "A member or 
panch of a Gaon Panchayat, Circle Panchayat or Panchayati 
Adalat" shall be substituted; 
(b) in clause (c), for the words "the Circle Panchayat", 
the words "the Gaon Panchayat or the Circle Panchayat" 
20 shall be substituted; 
(ii) for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be 
substituted, namely:-
"(2) A member or panch removed under sub-section (1) 
shaH not be entitled to re-election as a member or panch for 
25 a period of three years and shall cease to be a member of 
the Gaon Panchayat or Circle Panchayat as the case may 
be."; 
(iii) in sub-section (3), for the words "A panch" the words 
"A member or panch" shall be substituted. 
30 14. In sections 50, 51, 64, 65, 66, 68 and 77 of the principal Act, for Amf end,ment 
" 0 sections 
the words "smt or proceedmg" wherever they occur, the words 50, 51, 
"suit, criminal case or proceeding" shall be substituted. 6648 tdo 66. an 77. 
15. Section 53 of the principal Act shall be re-numbered as sub- Arnf endmcteint . 0 Ie on 
sectIon (1) thereof, and after sub-section (1) as so re-numbered, 53. 
35 the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-
"(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of 
5 of 1898. Criminal P.rocedure, 1898, every criminal case instituted under 
this Act shall be instituted before the Sarpanch of the Circle 
Panchayat of the circle in .which the offence is committed.". 

.. 
Insertion, of 16. After section 53 of the principal Act, the following sections new sections 
S3A to 53J. shall be inserted, namely:-
Offences 
triable 
by l'ancha~ 
vati Adalats. 
enatt es. 
"53A. (1) The following offences shall be triable by a 
Panchayati Adalat:-
(a) offences under sections 140, 160, 172, 174, 179, 269, S 
277, 279, 283, 285, 286, 289, 290, 294, 323, 334, 336, 341,352,356, 
357, 358, 374, 379, 403, 411 (where the value of the stolen or 
misappropriated- property in cases under sections 379, 403 
and 411 does not exceed fifty rupees), 426, 428, 430, 431, 447, 
448, 504, 506, 509 and 510 of the Indian Penal Code; 10 4S of 1860. 
(b) offences under sections 24 and 26 of the Cattle tres-
pass Act, 1871; 1 of 1871. 
(c) offences under sections 3, 4, 7 and 12 of the Delhi 
Public Gambling Act, 1955; 
(d) such other offence under any of the aforesaid enact- IS 
ments or any other enactment punishable with fine only, up 
to a limit of one hundred rupees as may, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, be declared by the Chief Commissioner 
to be triable by a Panchayati Adalat; 
(e) any offence under this Act or any rule made there- 20 
under; 
(f) abetment of any of the foregoing offences; 
(g) an attempt to commit any of the foregoing offences, 
when such att~mpt is an offence. 
(2) Any criminal case relating to an offence under section 25 
Delhi Act 
9 of 19S5. 
143, 145, 151, or 153 of the Indian Penal Code, pending before 4' of 1860. 
any court may be transferred ,for trial to the 
Panchayati Adalat, if in the opinion of such court the offence is 
not serious. 
(3) The Chief Commissioner may by ord'er published in 30 
the Official Gazette withdraw from a Panchayati Adalat the 
power to try all or any of the offences referred to in clauses (a) 
to (g) of sub-section (1). 
53B. (1) No Panch:1y~ ~i Adalat shall inflict a substantive 
sentence of imprisonment. 35 
(2) A Panchayati Adalat may impose a fine not exceeding' 
one hundred rupees but no imprisonment may be awarded in 
default 01. payment: 
. Provided that no nccused shall be tried for more than three 
offences in the same criminal case and the fine that may be ~ 

s 
5 
imposed on one accu~d in a criminal case shall not in 
aggregate exceeB one hundred rupees. 
the 
53C. No Panchayati Adalat shall try any criminal 
against a person where such person-
case CCrtai n 
p<:rsons not 
to be tried 
(a) has been previously convicted of an offence punish- ~rti Pancha-
able with imprisonment for a term of three years or more; Adalat&. 
(b) has been previously fined for theft by any 
Panchayati Adalat; 
(c) has been bound over to be of good behaviour under 
10 section 109 or 110 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898; 
30 
35 
(d) has been previously convicted under the 
Gambling Act, 1867 or the Delhi Public Gambling 
1955; or 
(e) is a public servant. 
Public 
Act. 
53D. A Panchayati Adalat may dismiss any complaint il Summa 
after examining the complainant and taking such evidenc€' as dismilss~ of .. . . .. comp ami. 
he may produ~. It IS satisfied that the complamt IS frIvolous. 
vexatious or untrue. 
53E. In imposing any fine, the Panchayati Adalat may order Compcnsa-
tiny portion or the whole of the fine recovered to be applied- tion to com-
o plamants. 
(a) in defraying the expenses properly incurred in the 
criminal case by the complainant, 
(b) in the payment to any person of compensation for 
any material loss or injury caused by the offence; or 
(c) in compensating any bona fide purchaser of stolen 
property for loss of the same where property is restored to 
the possession of the person entitled thereto. 
53F. (1) If in any crimim.l case before a Panchayati Adalat Compenia-
the accused is acquitted or discharged and the Panchayati tion to the 
Adalat is of the opinion that the accusation against him was accused. 
false and either frivolous or vexatious, the Panchayati Adalat 
may call upon the complainant forthwith to show cause why he 
should not pay compensation to the accused. 
(2) If after hearing the complainant, th'e Panchayati 
Adalat is satisfied that the accusation was false and either 
frivolous or vexatious, it may direct that compensation not 
exceeding twenty-five rupees be paid by the complainant to 
the accused. 

Enquiry in 
cases for-
warded by 
magistrates. 
Recovery of 
fines and 
compensa-
tion 
Contempt 
of Panchn-
yati Adalat. 
Conviction 
by the Pan-
chayati 
Adalat not a 
previous 
conviction. 
6 
53G. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1898, a magistrate may direct an enquiry s of 18911 
refurred to in section 202 of that Code to be made by a 
Panchayati Adalat in a criminal case in which the offence has 
been committed within the territorial limits of a Circle Pan- 5 
chayat. 
53H. Any fine imposed in a case or compensation ordered 
to be paid under section 53F by a Panchayati Adalat shall be 
recoverable in the manner provided in section 386 of the Code 
of Criminal Procedure, 1896, but if the Panchayati Adalat finds 10 5 of 1898. 
any difficulty in its recovery, it may request the magistrate 
within whose jurisdiction the Panchayati Adalat lies to recoV'er 
it as if the sentence of fine or the order directing payment of 
compensation had been passed by him. 
531. (1) If any person intentionally offers any insult to a IS 
Panchayati Adalat or any member thereof, while the Panchayati 
Adalat is sitting in any stage of judicial proceedings, in its or 
his view or presence or refuses to take oath duly administered 
or sign a statement made by the said person when legally 
required to do so, the Panchayati Adalat may at any time 20 
before rising on the same day take cognizance of the offence and 
sentence the offender to a fine not exceeding fiV'e rupees. 
(2) The fine imposed under sub-section (1) shall, for the 
purposes of section 53H, be deemed to be a fine imposed in 
a criminal case. 
53J. No conviction by the Panchayati Adalat shall be 
deemed to be a previous conviction for the purposes of 
section 75 of the Indian Penal Code, or section 562 or 565 of the 45 af 1860. 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1696, or section 3 of the Probation s of ISp8. 
of Offenders Act, 1958.". 30 aoofz9SS. 
Substitution 17. For section 56 of the principal Act, the following lect10n 
<!f new sec- -'-all be substituted namely'-non for .u " 
section 56. 
Extension of 
jurisdiction 
bY agree-
mentaf 
partiet. 
"56. Notwithstanding anything contained in section 55, 
parties may by written agreement refer any suit to a Circle 
Panchayat for decision by it. if the value of such suit does 3' 
not exceed the pecuniary limits of the appellate jurisdiction 
of the Senior Sub-Judge and thereupon the Circle Panchayat 
,hall dispose of such suit in accordance with rules made 
undler thil Act.". 

5 
10 
15 
20 
30 
7 
18. Section 62 of the principal Act shall be re-numbered as Amerdment 
sub-section (1) thereof, and after sub-section (1) as so re-numbered, °6f8ection 2. 
the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-
"(2) Where a criminal case is pending in any court against 
an accused in respect of any offence or where an accused has 
been tried for any otrence, no Panchayati Adalat shall take 
cognizance of any such offence or on the same facts, of any 
other offence of which the accused might have been charged 
or convicted.". 
19. In section 63 of the principal Act,- AmCDdm,ent ofaectioD 
(a) for the words "suit or proceeding" wherever they 
occur, the words "suit, criminal case or proceeding" shall be 
substituted; 
(b) for the words "plaintiff or", the words "plaintiff or the 
complainant or" shall be substituted; and 
(c) after the words "Senior Sub-Judge", the words "the 
Additional District Magistrate" shall be inserted. 
63. 
20. For sections 67, 69 and 70 of the principal Act, the following Substitution 
sections shall respectively be substituted, namely:- or new s~­nons .or 
sections 67, 
69 and 70. 
"67. (1) If the plaintiff, the complainant or the applicant Disposals of 
fails to appear. after having been ~nformed of the. ti~e and pla~e ~~it8the e~cb: 
fixed for hearmg, the Panchayatl Ada1at may dIsmIss the SUIt, Bence of the 
criminal case or proceeding or pass such order as it may deem fit. party d concerne . 
(2) The Panchayati Adalat may hear and decide the suit or 
proceeding in the absence of the defendant or opposite party if 
the summons have been served upon him or if he has been in-
formed of the time and place fixed for hearing. 
69. No legal practitioner shall appear, plead or act on behalf Legal pra-
of any party before a Panchayati Adalat: ctitioner not to appear 
before Pan-
Provided that a person who is arrested shall have the right chayati 
to consult and be defended by a legal practitioner of his choice. Adalal. 
70. (1) Subject to the provisions of section 69, any party to Appearance 
a suit or proceeding may appear before a Panchayati Adalat ~~ bF: 
either in person or by such agent duly authorised in writing by presentative. 
him as the Panchayati Adalat may admit as a tit ~rson to repre-
sent him. 
1532 LS-2 

Amendmenr 
of eection 
71. 
8 
(2) The parties to criminal cases shall appear personally 
before the Panchayati Adalat: 
Provided tha t-
(a) the Panchayati Adalat may in any case dispense 
with the personal attendance of the accused and permit 5 
him to appear by his agent duly authorised in writing; 
(b) the Panchayati Adalat may in its discretion at any 
stage of the proceeding direct the personal attendance 
of the accused. 
(3) No stamp-duty shall be required to be paid for any 10 
power of attorney filed under this section.". 
21. In section 71 of the principal Act,-
(a) for the words "civil or revenue dispute", the words 
"suit or proceeding" shall be substituted; 
(b) the following proviso shall be added at the end, name- IS 
ly:-
"Provided that-
(a) in the case of a suit, the value thereof does not 
exceed the pecuniary limits of the appellate jurisdiction 
of the Senior Sub-Judge; 
(b) in the case of a proceeding, the annual land re-
venue payable on the land involved in such proceeding 
does not'exceed two hundred rupees.". 
20 
Amendment 22. Section 72 of the principal Act shall be re-numbered as sub-
of section section (1) thereof, and-
o 72. 25 
(a) in sub-section (1) as so re-numbered, for the words "suit 
or proceeding" wherever they occur, the words "suit, criminal 
case or proceeding" shall be substituted and after the words and 
fisures "Code of Civil Procedure, 1908,", the words and figures 
"Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898," shall be inserted; 30 S of 18911. 
(b) after sub-section (1) as so re-numbered, the follOWing 
sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-
"(2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall entitle any party 
to compound any offence, which is not compoundable under 
the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, or to 3S 5 of 1898. 
compound an offence without the permission of the bench 
concerned, if it is compoundable with permission under the 
provisions of the said Code.". 

9 
23 In section 74 of the principal Act, for the words "suit or pro- Amf ~ent . 0 section 
ceeding" wherever they occur, the words "suit, criminal case or pro- 704. 
ceeding" shall be substituted and after the words "Senior Sub-
Judge", the words ", the Additional District Magistrate" shall be in-
S serted. 
Amendment Z4. In section 75 of the principal Act.- of Section 
(i) for the words "suit or proceeding" wherever they occur, 7'5· 
the words "suit, criminal case or proceeding" shall be substitut-
ed; and 
10 (ii) in sub-section (2), after the words "Senior Sub-Judge", 
the words ", Additional District Magistrate" shall be inserted. 
25. After section 75 of the principal Act, 
shall be inserted, namely:-
the following !':ection lnaertion of - new section 
7S· 
"75A. If at any time it appears to a Panchayati Adalat- Ji.:.f~~th! 
5 . Panchayati 
I (a) that it has no jurisdiction to try any case pendmg Adalat. 
before it, 
(b) that the offence involved is one for which it cannot 
award adequate punishment, or 
(c) that the case should otherwise be tried by a court; 
:w it shall submit the case to the Senior Sub-Judge, the Additional 
District Magistrate or the Collector, as the case may b~, for 
transfer to a court of competent jurisdiction and shall give 
information thereof to the parties concerned.". 
26. For section 76 of the principal Act, the following section shall ~~~s~~u~ew 
!5 be substituted, namely: - section for 
section 76. 
30 
35 
"76. The Senior Sub-Judge, Additional District Magistrate Revision. 
or Collector according as it is a suit, criminal case or proceeding 
may, either on his own motion or on the application of any party, 
call for the record of any case which has been decided by the 
Panchayati Adalat and if it appears to him that injustice or 
material irregularity has occurred, he may make such order in 
the case as he thinks fit.". 
27. For section 80 of the principal Act, the following section shall SubltitutiOft 
be substituted namely: _ of new !«de. , . for section 80' 
"80. A Panchayati Adalat after an application is made under Summons (0 
section 64 shall, unless it has been dismissed or otherwise dis- defendant .• 
ed f d h . . f or accuse .. 
poS 0 un er t e provIsIOns 0 this Act, cause summons in the per~on. 
prescribed form to be served in the prE'Scribed manner on the 

10 
defendant or the accused person or the opposite party, as the case 
may be, requiring him to attend and produce his evidence at such 
time and place as may be stated in the summons and shall at the 
same time direct the plaintiff or complainant or tht! applicant to 
attend and produce his evidence at such time and place.". 5 
~~:r~'tio~f 28. After section 83 of the principal Act, the following section 
83A. shall be inserted, namely:-
Suspension 
of powers. 
Amendment 
of 8Cdion 
88. 
"83A. The Chief Commissioner may, by order published in 
the Official Gazette, direct that any Panchayati Adalat shall not 
exercise all or any of the powers under this Act for such period 10 
as may be specified in the order and such Panchayati Adalat 
shall cease to exercise such powers for the period so specifted.". 
29. In section 88 of the pr'incipal Act, in clause (c) of sub-sec-
tion (2), after the words "Senior Sub-Judge", the words ", the Addi-
tional District Magistrate" shall be inserted and for the words "civil rs 
and revenue cases", the words "civil, criminal and revenue cases" 
shall be substituted. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Under the Delhi Panchayat Raj Act. 1954 (Delhi Act 3 of 1955), 
enacted by the Delhi Vidhan Sabha, the Gaon Panchayats have to be 
constituted under section 151 of the Delhi Land Reforms Act, 1954. 
But on account of some inconsistency between the provisions of these 
Ads relating to the membership of Gaon Sabhas which are the 
electoral bodies for Gaon Panchayats, the later could not be consti-
tuted. It is, therefore, proposed to remove the inconsistency by 
amending section 151 of the Delhi Land Reforms Act, 1954 (this is 
being done by another Bill) and making consequential changes in 
the corresponding provisions of the Delhi Panchayat Raj Act, 1954. 
At present the Panchayati Adalats have no jurisdiction in respect 
of criminal cases. It is proposed to invest these Adalats with crimi-
nal jurisdiction in respect of certain minor offences under the Indian 
Penal Code, the Cattle-trespass Act, 1871, etc. These Adalats will 
have power to impose fine up to a maximum limit of Rs. 100 but will 
have no power to pass any sentence of imprisonment. 
The present opportunity is availed of to propose certain amend-
ments mainly of a consequential or clarificatory nature. 
NEW DELHI; G. B. PANT. 
The 6th December, 1958. 
JJ 

Notes on clauses 
Ctauses 2, 7, 9, 12, 14, 15, 19, 22, 23, 24, 27 an.d 29,-Clau5e 16 of the 
Bill invests the Panchayati Adalats with criminal jurisdiction in res-
pect of certain minor offences. The amendments proposed in these 
clauses to sections 2, 18, 41, 45, 50, 51, 53, 63, 64, 65, 66, 68. 72, 74, 75, 
77, 80 and 88 are consequential upon the provisions of clause 16. 
Broadly speaking, the words "suit or proceeding" wherever they 
occur in the principal Act, have been substituted by the words "suit, 
criminal case or proceeding" and references to "Additional District 
Magistrate" and "Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898", have been made 
wherever necessary. Sub-section (2) has been added to section 72 
to allow the compounding of offences as permitted under the Code 
of Criminal Procedure, 1898. 
The expression "District Judge" appearing in section 2 (19) no-
where appears in the provisions that follow. Hence it is proposed to 
be deleted. The change proposed in section 2 (11) seeks to rectify an 
obvious mistake and the change proposed in section 2 (12) removes a 
drafting defect. 
Clauses 3, 4 and 5.-Section 4 has to be omitted because of the pro-
visions of the Delhi Municipal Corporation Act establishing a Corpo-
ration for the whole of Delhi. Sections 5 and 6 are redundant in view 
of the 'provisions of sections 16 and 20 of the Representation of the 
People Act, 1950, and have therefore been omitted. Section 9 also 
requires to be brought into line with section 151 of the Delhi Land 
Reforms Act, 1954, as proposed to be amended in the Delhi Land 
Reforms (Amendment) Bill, 1958. Sections 4, 5, 6 and 9 have accord-
ingly been replaced by new section 4 and a consequential amendment 
has been carried out in section 8. 
Clauses 6, 8 and lO.-These clauses contain verbal changes. 
Clause ll.-Section 44 provides for eight or more contiguous Gaon 
Sabha Areas covering approximately a population of 5,000 being 
grouped into a circle. This provision has given rise to difficulties in 
actual practice. Hence it is proposed to amend the section to provide 
for grouping of convenient number of contiguous Gaon Sabha Areas 
into a circle. As circles not conforming to the popUlation require-
ment as provided under this section have been formed, retrospective 
effect is proposed to be given to the amendment under this clause. 

13 
The amendment proposed in sub-section (3) of section 44 is con-
sequential upon the amendments proposed in clause 3. 
In sub-section (4) a! section 44 conviction under the Untouchabi-
lity (Offences) Act, 1955, has been added as a disqualification for 
election or continuance as a panch of the Circle Panchayat. It is not 
desirable to allow a servant of the Government or any local authority 
to become or remain a member of the Circle Panchayat. Hence the 
proviso has been omitted. 
Clause 13.-The scope of section 49 is limited to the removal of a 
panch of a Gaon Panchayat. The amendment proposed. in this clause 
seeks to cover a member or panch of a Gaon Panchayat, Circle 
Panchayat or Panchayati Adalat. 
Clauses 16 and 20.-New sections 53A to 53J inserted by clause 16 
seek to invest the Panchayati Adalats with criminal jurisdiction and 
provide for the procedure for the exercise of that jurisdiction includ-
ing certain other supplementary matters. Clause 20 seeks to substitute 
new sections for sections 67, 69 and 70 to make them applicable to 
criminal cases as well. 
Clauses 17 and 21.-Under sections 56 and 71, parties may by 
agreement bring any civil suit or proceeding of any value before the 
Panchayati Adalats. It is proposed to amend these sections to the 
effect that jurisdiction can be conferred on Panchayati Adalats by 
agreement of parties in respect of civil suits, only if their value does 
not exceed the pecuniary limits of the appellate jurisdiction of the 
Senior Sub-Judge, and in respect of revenue proceedings, only if the 
annual land revenue payable on the land involved in such proceed-
ings does not exceed Rs. 200. 
Clause lB.-It is proposed to add a new sub-section to section 62 
in order to prevent anyone being put twice on trial for the same 
offence. 
Clause 25.-New section 75A inserted by this clause provides for 
transfer of cases by the Panchayati Adalat to a court where the 
Adalat has no jurisdiction or the offence involved is of a serious 
nature or where it is otherwise considered expedient that the case 
should be tried by a court. 
Clause 26.-This clause seeks to extend the scope of section 76 to 
cover criminal cases as well by the substitution of a new section. 
Clause 2B.-Section B3A has been added to enable the Chief Com-
missioner to suspend for specified periods the powers of Panchayati 
Adalats. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Section 49 read with section 102 of the Delhi Panchayat Raj Act, 
1954, already invests the Chief Commissioner with the power to pre-
scribe the manner in which and the authority by which a panch may 
be removed under certain circumstances. By clause 13, the provisions 
of section 49 have been amplified to cover all members or panches of 
Gaon Panchayats, Circle Panchayats and Panchayati Adalats. The 
removal of these persons will continue to be regulated by rules. 
Consequent on the proposal to confer criminpl powers on Pan-
chayati Adalats, the provisions of the Act relating to the procedure in 
civil suits and revenue proceedings have been amended suitably to 
cover criminal cases also. The Chief Commissioner will therefore 
have power to frame rules in regard to certain procedural matters 
mentioned in these provisions, in respect of criminal cases, e.g., 
amendments to sections 50, 65, 77 and 72 made by clauses 14 and 22 
of the Bill. 
The delegation of power to make rules in the above cases relates 
to matters of procedure and is thus normal in character. 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE DELHI PANCHAYAT RAJ ACT, 1954 
.. 
(No.3 OF 1955) 
.. .. 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
.. 
• • • • 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
'. .. .. .. . 
(11) "Panchayati Adalat" means a Panchayati Adalat estab-
lished under section 55 and includes a bench, thereof; 
(12) "prescribed" means prescribed by this Act or rules made 
thereunder; 
• .. .. .. 
(19) "Senior Sub..Judge", "District Judge" and "Revenue 
Assistant" mean respectively the "Senior Sub-Judge", "District 
Judge" and "Revenue Assistant" of Delhi; 
• .. .. .. 
CHAPTER II 
GAON SABHA AND GAON SABHA AREA 
• .. .. .. 
Definitions. 
4. If the whole of a Gaon Sabha Area is included in a monicipality, Ec1ff~t of ifn. 
• USIOD ° cantonment or notified area the Gaon Sabha shall cease and its the Gaon • 
assets and liabilities shall be disposed of in the manner prescribed. ~abha !~rea 
If f h . . I ded d to murucl· a part 0 sue area IS so me u ,its juris iction shall be reduc- palities etc. 
ed by that part. 
5. No person shall be entitled to be or remain a member of the Disqualific:a. 
Gaon Sabha if he is of unsound m:'nd or if he is not an adult who don bof the 
for the time being ordinarily resides in the Gaon Sabha Area withw ~: ~t the 
in the meanin.g of section 151 of the Delhi Land Reforms Act, 1954. Gaon Sabha. 
6. A member of a Gaon Sabha shall continue to be its member Period hi of 
until his death or until he incurs any disqualification specified in :ren;beGac! 
section 5 or until the area in which he ordinarily resides within the Sabha. 
meaning of section 151 of the Delhi Land Reforms Act, 1954, iJ 
excluded from the jurisdiction of the Gaon Sabha under section 4 
or until the abandonment of his residence in the Gaon &bba Area: 
IS 

16 
~ded that a person who has ceased \0 be a member by rea-
lIOn of his disqualification under section 5, or abandonment of his 
residence in the Gaon Sabha Area shall, on the rem.)Val of the 
disqualification or the resumption of his reslaence, as the case may 
be. and on an application made by him to the Gaon Sabha in this 
behalf, be, after such enquiry as may be prescribed, re-enrolled as 
a member thereof . 
• • • • 
I?isquQifiea- 8. No disqualification, defect or omission in the enrolment of a 
Fe: ~ ~; member of a Gaon Sabha shall vitiate any act or proceeding of a 
poinunCDt Gaon Sabha if not less than two-third of the members at the time 
~~ nom!~~- the act is done or the proceeding taken were duly qualified mem-
to vitiate bers thereof. 
let or pro-
ceedina. 9. On the establishment of a Gaon Sabha every adult who ia 
Membcr- entered as a voter on the electoral rolls for a parliamentary consti-
~ S:~hL tuency, in force for the time being and pertaining to the Gaon 
Sabha Area, shall, as from the date of its establishment and sub-
ject to the provisions of sections 5 and 6, become a member of the 
Gaon Sabha. 
• • • 
CHAPl'ER III 
GAON PANCHAYAT 
• 
• • • • 
Patwan to 18. The Patwari shall be bound to assist the Pradhan or Up-
~~;!r:~ Pradhan of a Gaon Panchayat in the performance of the Gaon 
of Land Panehayat's duties relating to land management work under Chap-
~=ac- ter V of the Delhi Land Reforms Act, 1954, in respect of the village 
Work of of his halka situated in the juris~ction of the Gaon Panchayat, in 
~a;t. PIJl- the manner and to the extent prescribed under that Act. 
• • • • 
CHAPTER IV 
POWERS, DUTIES, FUNCTIONS AND ADMINISTRATION OF GAON PANCHAYATS 
Dutiea lind 18. In addition to the duties and functions imposed on a Gaon 
FUDctions. Psnchayat under the Delhi Land Reforms Act, 1954, or under any 
other enactment, it shall be the duty of every Gaon Panchayat, so 
far as its funds may allow, to make reasonable provision within 
ita jurisdiction for-
• • • • 
(r) the administration of civil justice to the extent per-
mitted in this Act and the election of the panches on the 
panel of the Circle Panchayat according to the provisions of 
this Act and rules made thereunder; 
• • • • 

17 
30. Every member or servant of a Circle Panchayat, Panchayatl MCDld bers an servants 
Adalat, a Gaon Panchayat or any committee constituted under to be Public 
this Act shall be deemed to be a public servant within the mean- Servlnts. 
ing of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (Act XLV of 
1860). 
• • • 
CHAPTER V 
ACQUISITION OF LAND, GAON SABRA AREA FUND AND PROPERTY 
• • • • 
41. (1) The expenses of the Panchayati Adalat shall be charged Bxpenael 
to the Gaon Sabha Area Fund of each unit in a circle in equal :foD =; 
proportion. by Panch_-
yati AdaJat. 
(2) All sums realised by way of court fee in any suit or pro-
ceeding disposed of by a Panchayati Adalat shall be handed over 
by the Chief Commissioner to the Gaon Sabhas situated within 
the jurisdiction of the Panchayati Adalat in equal proportion. 
42. The accounts of a Gaon Sabha shall be audited every year Audit. 
as prescribed . 
• • • • 
CHAPTER VI 
CIRCLE PANCHAYAT AND PANCHAYATI ADALAT 
44. (1) The Chief Commissioner or the prescribed authority shall, Circle Pan-
by' a notification in the official Gazette in this behalf, group 8 or ch.~t, S:d 
more contiguous Gaon Sabha Areas covering approximately a ~~b 
population of 5,000 persons into circles and establish for each such Slrploch. 
circle a Circle Panchayat . 
• • • • 
(3) Every Gaon Sabha in each circle shall elect a number of 
adults of prescribed qualifications permanently residing within 
its jurisdiction to act as panches of the Circle Panchayat of that 
circle. The number of adults so elected shall be such that from 
each village in the Gaon Sabha Area two such adults shall be 
elected where its population is 1,000 or less and three where its 
population is more than 1,000. The election shall be carried out in 
the manner prescribed. The panel so elected for each circle shall 
be called Circle Panchayat. 

18 
(4) No person shall be elected or remain panch of the Circle 
Panchayat if he is:-
(a) unable to read and write Hindi or Urdu; or 
(b) of unsound mind; or 
(c) suffering from leprosy; or 
(d) an undischarged insolvent; or 
, 
(e) a servant of the Government or any local authority; or 
(f) convicted of an offence involving moral turpitude or 
ordered to give security for good behaviour under section 110 
of the Code of Criminal Procedure. 1898: 
Provided that the disqualifications under clause (e) may be re-
moved by an order of the Chief Commissioner or the prescribed 
authority. 
• • • • 
PunCti<;m8 45. (1) In addition to providing panels of Panchayati Adalat for 
J!':chC;;;!~ the trial of suits and proceedings under section 50, the Chief Com-
missioner may utilise the services of the Circle Panchayat as are· 
presentative elected body of the constituent Gaon Babhas for the 
purposes of co-ordinating their common schemes of development 
projects and their general superintendence. Where the Chief Com. 
missioner decides to do so in one or more circles the following shall 
be the general functions of the Circle Panchayat:-
A. Obu,atory-
1. to take up the development projects of beneftts to all 
or more than one village in the circle, such as roads, seed 
stores, or irrigation projects. 
2. to undertake and perform the work of any superseded 
Gaon Babha during the period of supersession. 
3. to transact any business in which all or more than one 
of the constituent Gaon Sabha! are jointly interested. 
4. to take action under section 34. 
B. Discrettonary-
1. the Chief Commissioner may confer powers of general 
!luoerintendence and control on the Circle Pancbayat. over the 
eroiwtituent Gaon Sabhas and Gaon Puchayatl. 

19 
2. the Chief Commissioner may make rules regarding the 
diversion of a part or percentage of Gaon Sabha Area Funds 
of the constituent Gaon Sabhas towards the expenses involv-
ed in the performance of the aforesaid functions of the Circle 
Panchayat. 
• • • • 
•• (1) A panch may be removed at any time by the prescribed Removal. 
authority in the manner prescribed if he-
(a) incurs any disqualification under sub-section (4) of 
section 44, 
(b) refuses to act or becomes incapable of acting, or 
(c) without reasonable cause absents himself for more 
than two consecutive months from the sittings of the Circle 
Panchayat or the Panchayati Adalat. as the case may be, or 
(d) is in the opinion of the prescribed authority guilty 
of mis-conduct in the discharge of his duties, or 
(e) in the opinion of the prescribed authority undesirable 
in the public interest to continue in office. 
(2) A panch removed under sub-sect1on (1) shall not be en-
titled to re-election as a panch for a period of three years and shall 
eease to be a member of the Circle Panchayat. 
(3) A panch removed under sub-section (1) shall have a right 
to appeal to the Chief Commissioner. 
SO. (1) The Sarpanch shall, for the trial of every suit or proceed- Panchayati 
ing, form a bench of five panches from the panel of Circle Pan- ~~I·~n me: 
chayat to constitute a Panchayati Adalat for the purposes of the suit. or p~ 
trial of that suit or proceeding, in the manner prescribed. c:ecdilll· 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, the 
Chief Commissioner may prescribe the constitution of special 
benches for determining any dispute arising between any parties 
or Gaon Sabhas of different circles or for any other purpose. 
51. (1) If any panch appointed to a bench cODStituted under Absence of 
section 50 for the trial of a suit or proceeding is absent at any hearing, from Pa~e 
the remaining panches may, notwithstanding anything contained. in Bench. 
this Act, try the suit or proceeding, provided, however, that at leut 
three panchea, ~clud1n. ~ CbairlXW1, are p~t. 

Porum. 
20 
(2) No trial as aforesaid shall be invalid by reason merely that 
all the five panches forming the bench were not present at any hear-
ing or that the same panches were not present at all the hearings. 
'" '" '" '" 
53. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908, every suit instituted under this Act shall be insti-
tuted before the Sarpanch of the Circle ~nchayat of the circle in 
which the defendant or any of the defendants, where they are more 
than one, ordinarily resides or carries on business at the time of the 
institution of the suit irrespective of the place where the cause of 
action arose· 
'" '" '" '" 
&tent of 55. (1) The jurisdiction of a Circle Panchayat shall extend to any 
jurildiction. suit of the following description if its value does not exceed two 
hundred rupees:-
(a) a suit for money due on contract, other than a contract 
in respect of immowble property; 
(b) a suit for the recovery of movable property or for the 
value thereof; 
(c) a suit for compensation for wrongfully taking or injuring 
a movable property; or 
(d) a suit for damages caused by cattle trespass. 
(2) The Chief Commissioner or the prescribed IQuthority may, by 
notification in the official Gazette, direct that the jurisdiction of any 
Circle Panchayat shall extend to all such suits of such value not 
exceeding five hundred rupees as may be specified in the notification. 
&t~!on. 56. Parties to a suit may, by a written agreement, refer any suit 
d~unb:lc- . of the nature mentioned in section 71 to a Circle Panchayat for decision 
~~eJlt by i4; irrespective of the value of the suit and the Circle Panchayat 
parties. shall, subject to rules prescribed, determine and dispose of such suit 
under this Act. 
'" '" '" '" 
R".Jutiicata. 82. No Panchayati Adalat shall try any suit, proceeding or issue 
in respect of any matter which is pending for decision in or had been 
heard or decided by a court of competent jurisdiction in a former 
suit or proceeding between the same parties or between the parties 
under whom they or any of them claim. 

il 
63. Where a suit or proceeding is maintainable in more than one CODCUrrent 
Circle Panchayat, the plaintift or the applicant, as the case may be, jurisdiction' 
may bring the suit or proceeding in one of such Circle Panchayats. 
Any dispute regarding jurisdiction shall be decided by the Senior 
Sub-Judge or the Revenue Assistant, having jurisdiction, as the case 
may be. 
M. Any person who wishes to institute a suit or proceeding under Institution 
this Act before a Circle Panchayat may make an applic~tion orally ~~~~di::' 
or in writing to the Sarpanch of the Circle Panchayat or in case of 
his absence from the circle to the Naib-Sarpanch or when both are 
absent, to such other panch as the Sarpanch may have appointed 
in this behalf and shall at the same time pay the prescribed fee. The 
Court-fees Act, 1870, shall not apply to Panchayati Adalats except as 
may be prescribed. In every suit the plaintiff s~all state its value. 
65. (1) Where a suit or proceeding is instituted orally, the Sar- Substance 
panch, Naib-Sarpanch or panch receiving the application shall record ~1ca~~n a~~ 
without delay the prescribed particulars and the signature or thumb- ~e re,?orded 
impression of the applicant shall be taken thereon. In regIster. 
(2) The Sarpanch or in his absence the Naib-Sarpanch or panch 
mentioned in section 64, shall appoint a bench of the Panchayati 
Adalat under section 50 and refer the said application to that bench 
for disposal.and shell also fix a date for the first hearing of the 
application before the said bench and give notice of the said date to 
the applicant and to the members thereof. 
66. Every suit or proceeding instituted in accordance with the pro- Manner of 
visions of section 65 shall be brought before the bench of the procedl're. 
Panchayati Adalat on the date fixed and the bench shall, unless the 
Sarpanch or Naib-Sarpanch is a member of it, choose one of their 
members to be the chairman of that bench who shall conduct the 
proceedings, 
67. (1) 1£ the plaintiff or the applicant fails to appear after having D~spo~aJ of 
b 'nf d f th t' d 1 fi d f h . . SUitS In the een 1 orme 0 e Ime an pace xe or earmg, the Panchayati absence of 
Adalat may dismiss the suit or proceeding or pass such order as it the party 
ruay deem fit. concerned. 
(2) The Panchayati Adalat may hear and decide the suit or pro-
ceeding in the absence of the defendant, or opposite party, if the 
summons have been served upon him. 
68. (1) Except as provided in sub-section (2) or to correct a Panchayati 
clerical error, a Panchayati Adalat shall have no power to cancel, ~~:!isenot 
revise or elter any decree or order passed by it. ,or alter 
Its decialon. 

:u 
(2) A Panchayati Adalat may, for suftlcient reasons to be re-
corded, on application made within one month of the date of the 
deeree or order or know ledge thereof in case personal service of 
summons has not been affected, restore any suit or proceeding which 
has been dismissed in default or in which a decree or order has 
been passed ex-parte. 
No ~a1 69. No legal practitioner shall appear, plead or act on behalf of 
Practit oner any party in any suit or proceeding before a Panchayati AdalQt. to appear. 
Appearance 70. Subject to the provisions of section 69, any party to a suit or 
in person proceeding may appear before a Panchayati Adalat either in person 
~~~tati:e: or by such servant (not being a tout), partner, relation or friend 
authorised by it the Penchayati Adalat may admit as a fit person to 
represent it. 
Special 71. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or in any 
!uriadiction other law for the time being in force, it shall be lawful or a Panchayati 
m matten A..I_l- d'd . il di t ., 'th I al compromiIed. UCLIMt to eel e any ClV or revenue spu e ansmg me. oc area 
of the Circle Panchayat and not pending in any court in accordance 
with any settlement, compromise or oath agreed upon by the parties, 
Procedure 72. The Panchayati Adalat sball receive such evidence in suit or 
and P~er poceeding as the parties may adduce and may call for such further 
toascertam 'd "t' , b f th d t . t' f truth. eVl ence as m 1 s opIDlon may e necessary or e e ermma Ion 0 
the points in issue. It shall be the duty of the I\inchayati Adalat 
to ascertain the facts of every suit or proceeding before it by every 
lawful means in its power and thereafter to make such decree or 
order, with or without costs. as to it may seem just and legal. It 
may take local investigation in the villege to which the dispute 
relates, It shall follow the procedure prescribed by or under this 
Act. The Code of Civil Procedure. 1908, the Indian Evidence Act, 
1872, and the Indian Limitation Act, 1908, shall not apply to any suit 
or proceeding in a Panchayati AdWat except as provided in this Act 
or as may be prescribed. 
• • • • 
Transfer 14. (1) If in any suit or proceeding before a Panchayati Adalat 
applicatiOD. any party intimates at any stage before the announcement 
of the final decree or order that it intends to make an 
application under this section to the Senior Sub-Judge or 
the Collector, as the case may be, for the transfer of the 
suit or proceeding, the Panchay~ti Adalat shall upon its executing, 
if so required, IQ bond without surety of an amount not exceeding 
rupees ten that it will make such application within a reasonable 
time to be fixed by the Panchayati Adalat, which shall not be lese 
thaa 15 day&, adjaum tQe suit or proceeding for such a period as wtll 

'~3 
afford sufficient time for the application to be made and an order to 
be obtained thereon: 
Provided that nothing herein contained shall requfre the 
Panchayati J\.dalat to adjoum the suit or proceeding upon a second or 
subsequent intimation from the same party. .. .- _ .. 
',j. .1· 
(2)' 'If the appiicatio~ be not made within the time allo~ed, the 
amount of such bond shill be forfeited and may be recoverable by 
the Pancha)'\lti Adalat as if it were a fine imposed by itself . 
. , 
<.' 75".:(1): Any. court before whom a suit or proceeding triable by T~er of 
Pan:ch'ayati Adalat IS'rued 'shall transfer the s~t .o~proceectingto the ~~irll.or 
Circle Panchayat having jurisdiction. . : ;.. .., :. :.' 
1". 
(2) The Senior Sub-Judge or Collector may, for reasons to be 
recorded in writing, tNnsfer any suit or proceeding respectively 
from one Panchayati Adalat to another Panchayati Adalat of compe-
tent jurisdiction in the same circle or any other Circle Panchayat or 
to another court subordioote to him, 
76. A revision from any decree or order passed by a Panchayati RC\'isi(ln. 
Adalat shall lie in a suit to the Senior Sub-Judge and in a proceeding 
under the Delhi Land Revenue Act, 1954, to the Collector. 
77. A Panchayati Adalat may, if it considers the evidlence of, or Issue of 
the production of a document by, any person necessary in a suit or ~:m!l::'_ 
proceeding, issue and cause to be served in the prescribed manner a ea. 
summons on such person to compel his attendance or to produce or 
cause the production of such document, and such person shall be 
bound to comply with the direction contained in the summons . 
• • • • 
80. A Panchayati Adalat, after an application is made under section SummODs 
64, shall, unless it has been dismissed or otherwise disposed of under to defendsm. 
the provisions of this Act, cause summons in the prescribed form to 
be served in the prescribed manner on the defendant or on opposite 
party requiring him to attend and produce his evidence at such time 
and place as may be stated in the summons and shall at the same time 
direct the plaintiff or the applicant to attend and produce his evidence 
at such time and place . 
• • 

SupertelsioD 
of a Ga,'n 
Sabhl or I 
Gaon Pan-
chlYlt or 
Circle Pan-
chayat or I 
Panchllyati 
Adalat. 
• 
18. (1) 
• 
34 
CHAPTER VII 
EXTERNAL CONTROL 
• • 
• • 
• 
• 
(2) On the supersession of a Gaon Sabha or a Gaon Panchayat 
or a Circle Panchayat or a Panchayati Adalat under SUb-sectiOll (1) 
the following' ~onsequences shall ensue:-
• • • 
(c) the Senior Sub-Judge or the Collector, as the case may be, 
IIhall withdraw all civil end revenue easee pendin, before such 
Cir.cle Panchayat or Panchayati Adalat and. dispose of them tn 
accordance with law . 
• • • • 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
turther to amend the Delhi Panchayat Raj Act, 1954. 
(Shri GOfJind Ballabh Pant, 
Minister of Home Affairs.) 