BID No. 1D of 188Z 
... • b 
THE CENTRAL EXCISE ~ws (~DMENT AND VALIDATION) 
BILL, 1982 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the amendmem of ZmDs relating to Ce'J1tTGl ezc:iIe cmd to 
validate duties of &1:dae COZ~ under aveh ·lc&WB. 
BE it 8D8Ctecl by Parliament m the Thifty-Wrcl Year of tile Republic 
of lDcti& .. follow8:-
1. (11 This Act may be cal1ecl the Central BzcIM Laws (Amendmat SllDddtJe 
and Valldatlon) Act, 1982. ... 
5 (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the date 01' IIJIDCIeo 
1 of 1944. commencement of the Central Excises and Salt Act, 19M. meat. 
1 of 19(4. 
10 
16 of 1831. 
2. (1) In this section,-
(a) "Central Excises Act" means the Central Excises and Salt 
Act, 1944; 
(b) "Central law" means a Central Act other than the Cen-
tral Excises Act and in~u.des a declared. provision within the 
meaning of section 2 of the Provisional Collection of Taxes Act, 
1931; 
(c) "exemption", in relation to any duty of exCiSe, means 
exemption from the whole or any part of such duty; 
(d) "preamble", in relation to any notiftcatio..n or order, meIItI 
that part of the noti6cation or order which refers to the ~ la 
Provi. 
sions 
as to 
exemp· 
tion . 
from duty 
of excise 
or fixing 
rate of 
suchdufJ 
under 
certain 
Cefttral 
lawalDd 
vaIf4aUon. 

~ . '. 
bercise or in pursuance ot which such notification or order is iuued 
or Dlade. . 
(2) Every Central law providing for the levy aDd collection of any 
duty of excise which makes the provisions of the Central. Exclsea Act 
and the rules made thereunder applicable by reference to the levy and 5 
collection of the duty of excise under such Central law shall have, and 
shall be deeni~ always to have had, effect with respect to the matters 
dealt with in sub-section (3) in the manner provided in that sub-section 
and this Act shall be construed as one with such Central law. 
(3) Where any Central law pr..oviding for the levy and collection 10 
of any duty of excise makes the prOvisions of the Central Excises Act 
and the rules made thereunder applicable by reference to the levy and 
collection of the duty of excise under such Central law, then,-
(a) it shall be necessary for the pUrpose of granting, by any 
notification or order, any exemption from any duty of excise, or 15 
fixing, by any notification or order, any rate of, duty leviable under 
such Central law to expressly refer to the provisions of the said 
Central law in the preamble to such notification or order, or to 
state by express words in such notification or order that the 
exemption provided for, or the rate of duty fixed, by such notlft-
cation or order is an exemption from, or the rate of duty under, RO 
'stleh Oentril law; 
(b) no notification or 'OI"der issued or made under the Central 
Excises Act or the said rules' (whether issued or made before, on or 
after the 24th day 'of September, 1982 and whether or not in force 
on such date) granting any' exemption from any duty of excise or 15 
fixing any Irate of such duty shall have the effect of, or be "construed 
~s, providing 'for exemption from the duty of excise leviable, or, as 
the case may be, 'fudng the rate of duty, under the said CentralIaw, 
.. ~ , '" .' UnlesS 'Such' notiftcationor Ohier-
. . (i) ~press~y r,efer~ to. th~ provi~ons.o(the said CentralIaw 30 
.. 1rl the preamble; or' ',. : . . . '.' . 
(ti) by express words, provi4es for an exemption from the 
duty of eXcise leviable, or, as the caSe may be, fixes the rate of 
duty,under the said Central law; and 
(c) every notification or order of the nature refelU'ed to in 55 
clause (b) which expressly refers to the provisions of any Central 
law Or Central laws in the preamble, shall have the e1fect of, and 
be construed as, providing for exemption from the duty of eXCUe 
leviable, or, as the case may be, fixing a rate of duty, only under 
such Central law or Central laws, unless such notification or order 
also, by express words, provides for an exemption from the duty fO 
'Of·'8][Ciee leviable,or, as the case may be, fixes the tate of duty, 
under the Central Excises Act. 
.• ; :(4) 'Every notiftcatio~. or order gr&ntirig any exemption or fixing a _ 
rate of duty issUed or made under 'the Central gxcises Act or the rule& 45 
~de .. the~under at any time whatsoever before. the 24th day of Sep-
l~,~~';: 1982 shall have, and shall be deemed always to have had, effect 

lof 1881 
3 
for all purposes as if the foregoing provisions ot this section had been in 
force at all material times and accordingry, notwithstanding anything 
contained in any judgment, decree or order of any court, tribunal or 
other authority, any action or thing taken or done, or purporting to 
5 have been taken or dODe, under the Central Exci8ea Act o~ ~ said 
rules or any Central law in any, case by virtue of such notification .or 
order .shall be deemed to be, and to have always. been, for all putpOleS 
as'validly and effectively taken or done as if the. foregoing pro\1Siona ,9£ 
thls section had been in force at all material times, and, notwithstwl~ 
10 anything as aforesaid and Without prejudice to the genera1ity of the 
foregolng,-
15 
SlO 
35 
, 
(a) all duties of excise levied, 8.lJSE!sse,d or collected with feIP8C1: 
to any goods under the Central E~eises Ac~ or the said rules or MY 
. Central law shall be deemed to. be, and;shallj:,e de~ed al~ tq 
. have been, validly levied, assesse4 or collected as if. the, .. foregO~ 
provisions of this section had been in force at all material .times;, . 
(b) no suit or other proceeding shall be maintained or contimled 
in any eourt for the refund of, and no enforcement shall be made,py 
any' court of, any decree or order directing the refund, .of, any ~. 
duties of excise whic;h have· been collected· and which would,. have 
been .validly collected if the foregoing provisions of this section ha~ 
been in force at all material tbnes: 
(c) refunds shall be made of all such du~ies of excise which 
have been collected. but which woq1d not have been collected if the 
foregoing provisions of this section had been in force at all material 
times; and 
I 
(d) recoveries shall be made of all such duties of exc~ whi~ 
have not been collected or, as the case may be, which have been 
refunded but which would have been collected or, as the C8$e .. ~ 
~, would not have been refunded if the f-oregoing provisions ~f 
thjssection had been in force at all material times. 
(5) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that no act or 
omission on the part of any person shall be punish~ble as an oJf.~ce 
which wouid not have been so punishable if th~s Act had not come izlto 
force. 
3. (1) The Central Excise Laws 
<kdiDance, 1982, is hereby repealed. 
(AmenQInellt and VaUda~) 
(2) Notwlthstandillg sqch repeal, anything· done or any action -e.ken 
under the ~id Orditlan.ce SQaI1.' be deemed to have been 'dou.,e ~ takfm 
40 under the corresponding provisions of' this Act, .. 
. . 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Central exciae duty is levied under the Central Excises and Salt Act, 
~ (herematter referred to u the Central Excfles Act), and jl ccm-
monly referred to as the basic excise duty. In addition to this duty, 
other dUties of excise have also been impoaed on certain commocl1t1e1, 
meh U, additional exdle duty in lieu of ules tax levied on supr, 
tobacco and fabrics under the proyjafOJ1l of the Additional Duties of 
Ezclae (Goods of Special Importance) Act, 1967, additional exclle duty 
levied on specifted fibres. yams, fabrics, etc., tor the purpoae of 1Ub81-
cIiIlDI the produetion of controlled cloth under the provtlloDi of the 
AdcUtioDal Dati .. of ... ('l'attleI mel Textlle ArttcleI) Act, ma, 
..,.mal aclIe duty UDder the I'lDaDce ActII and CIIMI on varIoua ltala 
IUCh u fabris, biN, tea, ete., wbleb an levied and co1lectec1 .. duties 
of excIIe. 
2. The Delhi Hilb Court, in a judgment deUvered on the 8th of 
August, 1982 (CWP No. 1'1'13 of 19'19 etc. MIL Modi Rubber Ltd. '''. 
UDion of IDdta), hu held that in the abaenee of a spec1ftc reference to 
the uature of duty of exclae in a notUlcatton providing for exemption 
from duty of exeiIe on any goods, the exemption granted under the 
DOtUication would apply to all the duties of exclIe leviable on such goodI 
UDder dffterent enactments. Such an Intel ptetatton would have the 
effect of defeating the intention underlying the various nottflcations 
which have been issued over a long period of time as the practJee 
followed all along for decades bas been to invoke expressly the powers 
UDder Acts, other than the Central Excises Act, whenever the intention 
W8I to· grant exemption under such other Acts and to refer only to the 
Central Excises Act and the rules made thereunder whenever the 
bltention was to confine the exemption only to the duty under tbe 
Central Exctses Act. The effect of the judgment would be that a sub-
stant1al portion of special excise duty, additional excile duty tn. lieu of 
ales tax, ceases, etc., on various items could not have been conected. 
In addition, the special excise duty and other additional duties eone~ 
over the years in the past would also be open to question. A number 
of writ petitions were also being filed in the Delhi High Court foDowtDg 
the above judgment and the Court was granting stay of the eoUeetion 
of duties of exdIe in exeesB of the conceaional rates speclfted in the 
notf1lcaUons. Having regard to the huge revenue stakes involved, it 
became urgently necessary to spell out, by law, with retrospective 
effect, the intention as aforel8id clearly and to make the neeessary 
validating provisions. Accorc1fngly, the President promulgated the 
Central Excise Laws (Amendment and Valfdatfcm) Ordillance, 1982, on 
the 2'th September, 1982. 
3. The Bill seeks to replace the aforesaid Ordinance. 
I 

PRESIDENT'S RECOMMEN])ATION UNDER ARTICLES 117 AND 
274 OF THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
(Copy of letter No. 3491118Z-TRU, dated the 11th October, 1982 from 
Shri Pranab Mukherjee, Minister of Finance to the Secretary, Lok 
Sabha.) 
The Vice-President discharging the functions of the President having 
been informed of the subject matter of the Central Excise Laws 
(Amendment and Validation) Bill, 1982 recommends under article 
117(1) and article 274 of the Constitution of Indi'a, the introduction of 
the Bill in the Lok .Sabha. 

• 
Memorandum uplain.ing the modi;tlcations contained in the Bill to 
Teplace tJ?e Central Excile Law, (4m endmen.t and Validation) 
. Ordinance, 1982 
The various expressions which have been defined in section 2 of the 
Ordinance at dUferent places have been put together at one place in the 
beginning in sub-clause (1) of clause 2 of the But. De8.nitions of two 
more expreu1ons, namely, "exemption" and "preamble' have been added 
by way of abundant caution. . 
2. Secondly, it has been spelt out exp~ssly how the provisions made 
in the Bill are by way of amendment of the laws relating tQ Central 
excise [vide sub-clauses (2) and (3) (a) of clause 2 of the Bill]. In this 
connection, it may be mentioned that the long title to the Ordinance 
expressly mentions that the provisions of the Ordinance are by way of 
amendment of the laws relating to Central excise and sub-section (1) 
of section 2 of the Ordinance indicates by necessary implication how 
the provisions of the. Ordinance are by way of such amendment. This 
aspect of the matter has now been brought out explicitly. 
3. The Bill does not involve any other deviations except changes • 
necessary for converting the Ordinance into a Bill and changes of a 
drafting nature. 
6 

LOK SABRA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the amendment of laws relating to Central excise and 
to validate duties of excise collected under such laws. 
(Shri PTanah Mukher;~, 
11!idt"-c~ r.!' "';':';""re,) 