1
THE PREVENTION OF CRUELTY TO ANIMALS (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2019
By
DR. MANOJ RAJORIA,  M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (Amendment) Act,
2019.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 11 of the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960 (hereinafter referred
to as the principal Act), in sub-section (1), for the words “he shall be punishable, in the case
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 132 of  2019
Amendment
of section 11.
59 of 1960.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
of a first offence, with fine which shall not be less than ten rupees but which may extend to
fifty rupees, and in the case of a second or subsequent offence committed within three years
of the previous offence, with fine which shall not be less than twenty-five rupees but which
may extend to one hundred rupees or with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three
months, or with both.”, the words “he shall be punishable, in the case of a first offence, with
fine which shall not be less than three thousand rupees but which may extend to five
thousand rupees, and in the case of a second or subsequent offence committed within three
years of the previous offence, with fine which shall not be less than five thousand rupees but
which may extend upto ten thousand rupees or with imprisonment for a term which may
extend to six months, or with both.”shall be substituted.
3. For section 12 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
“12. If any person performs upon any cow or other milch animal the operation called
phooka or doom dev or any other operation (including injection of any substance or oxytocin)
to improve lacation which is injurious to the health of the animal or permits such operation
being performed upon any such animal in his possession or under his control, he shall be
punishable with fine which shall not be less than twenty thousand rupees but which may
extend to fifty thousand rupees, or with imprisonment for a term which may extend to four
years, or with both, and the animal on which the operation was performed shall be forfeited
to the Government.”.
4. In section 20 of the principal Act, for the words, “which may extend to two hundred
rupees”, the words “which shall not be less than ten thousand rupees but which may extend
to twenty thousand rupees” shall be substituted.
5. In section 26 of the principal Act, for the words “he shall be punishable on conviction
with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with imprisonment which may extend
to three months, or with both”, the words “he shall be punishable on conviction with fine
which shall not be less than twenty thousand rupees but which may extend to fifty thousand
rupees, or with imprisonment which may extend to six months, or with both” shall be
substituted.
6. For section 31 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
“31. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, any
offence punishable under this Act shall be a cognizable offence within the meaning of that
Code.”
7.  In section 38 of the principal Act, for sub-section ( 3), the following sub-section
shall be substituted, namely:—
“(3) If any person contravenes, or abets the contravention of, any rules made under
this section, he shall be punishable with fine which shall not be less than ten thousand
rupees but which may extend to fifty thousand rupees, or with imprisonment for a term which
may extend to six months, or with both.”.
Substitution of
new section for
section 12.
Penalty of
practising
phooka,
doom dev  or
use of
oxytocin.
Amendment of
section 20.
Amendment of
section 26.
Substitution of
new section for
section 31.
Cognizability of
offences.
Amendment
of section 38.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960 was enacted to prevent animal cruelty
and suffering. However, the purpose of the Act is not achieved due to the inadequate
penalties prescribed under it.
For decades, the Act has failed to deter animal abusers from committing acts of animal
cruelty, neglect and abuse. The penal provisions under the Act have not been revised since
enactment and in the present day, do not act as a deterrent to animal cruelty. The fine for
animal cruelty is a maximum of rupees fifty. While the PCA  Act was a strongly worded law for
1960 when it was drafted, it has not been able to protect animals for a long time due to this
negligible fine.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court in Animal Welfare Board of India Vs. A Nagaraja, case,
vide its order dated 7.5.2014 held—
Parliament is expected to make proper amendment of the Prevention of Cruelty to
Animals Act to provide an effective deterrent to achieve the object and purpose of the Act
and for violation of section 11, adequate penalties and punishments should be imposed.
Parliament, it is expected, would elevate rights of animals to that of constitutional
rights, as done by many of the countries around the world, so as to protect their dignity and
honour.
The then Hon’ble Minister of Food and Agriculture, Shri S.K. Patil, while moving the
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Bill on 12th December, 1960 in the Parliament stated as "At
the outset, I may say I do not claim that this is an ideal Bill. After 70 years, we are making
an attempt for the first time to put on the statute at least something that will ultimately lead
us on to the ideal Bill, after some years of experience.”.
Though the Animal Welfare Board of India has submitted a Draft Animal Welfare Bill,
2014 to the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change, the need of the hour is
evident. At the very least, we must amend the Act to enhance the penalties.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; MANOJ RAJORIA
June 18, 2019.

4
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE PREVENTION OF CRUELTY TO ANIMALS ACT, 1960
(59 OF 1960)
* ****
11. (1) If any person—
(a) beats, kicks, over-rides, over-drives, over-loads, tortures or otherwise treats any
animal so as to subject it to unnecessary pain or suffering or causes, or being the owner
permits, any animal to be so treated; or
* ****
(o) promotes or takes part in any shooting match or competition wherein animals are
released from captivity for the purpose of such shooting:
he shall be punishable in the case of a first offence, with fine which shall not be less
than ten rupees but which may extend to fifty rupees, and in the case of a second or subsequent
offence committed within three years of the previous offence, with fine which shall not be
less than twenty-five rupees but which may extend to one hundred rupees or with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, or with both.
* ****
12. If any person performs upon any cow or other milch animal the operation called
phooka or doom dev or any other operation (including injection of any substance) to improve
lactation which is injurious to the health of the animal or permits such operation being
performed upon any such animal in his possession or under his control, he shall be punishable
with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with imprisonment  for a term which
may extend to two years, or with both, and the animal on which the operation was performed
shall be forfeited to the Government.
* ****
20. If any person—
(a) contravenes any order made by the Committee under section 19; or
(b) commits a breach of any condition imposed by the Committee under that
section:
he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to two hundred rupees, and, when
the contravention or breach of condition has taken place in any institution, the person
incharge of the institution shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be punishable
accordingly.
* ****
26. If any person—
(a) not being registered under this Chapter, exhibits or trains any performing
animals; or
(b) being registered under the Act, exhibits or trains any performing animal with
respect to which, or in a manner with respect to which, he is not registered; or
Treating
animals
cruelty.
Penalty for
practising
phooka or
doom dev.
Penalties.
Offences.

5
(c) exhibits  or trains as a performing animal, any animal which is not to be used
for the purpose by reason of a notification issued under clause (ii) of section 22; or
(d) obstructs or wilfully delays any person or police officer referred to in section
25 in the exercise of powers under this Act as to entry and inspection; or
(e) conceals any animal with a view to avoiding such inspection; or
(f) being a person registered under the Act, on being duly required in pursuance
of this Act to produce his certificate under this Act, fails without reasonable excuse so
to do; or
(g) applies to be registered under this Act when not entitled to be so registered;
he shall be punishable on conviction with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or
with imprisonment which may extend to three months, or with both.
* ****
31. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code or Criminal procedure, 1898, an
offence punishable under clause (1), clause (n) or clause (o) of sub-section (1) of section 11
or under section 12 shall be a cognizable offence within the meaning of that code.
* ****
38.(1) ** * * *
(2) * * * * *
(3) If any person contravenes, or abets the contravention of, any rules made under this
section, he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one hundred rupees, or with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, or with both.
* ****
Cognizability
of offences.
Power to make
rules.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960.
————
(Dr.  Manoj Rajoria, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—989LS(S3)—04.07.2019.