As INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

Bill No. 132 of 2000

THE DEPOSIT INSURANCE AND CREDIT GUARANTEE
CORPORATION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000

By
Suet Kirt Somatva, MP.
A
BILL
further to amend the Deposit Insurance and Credit Guarantee Corporation Act, 1961,

Bz it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. This Act may be called the Deposit Insurance and Credit Guarantee Corporation Short title.
Act, 2000.

2. In section 2 of the Deposit Insurance and Credit Guarantee Corporation Act, Amendment of
47 of 1961. 1961 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in clause (g), the following proviso stion2.
shall be inserted, namely:—

“Provided that if any person has more than one account held jointly with one
or more depositors, each account shall be treated as a separate account for the purposes
10 of this Act.”.

3. In section 16 of the principal Act, in sub-section (/),— Amendment of
section 16.

Bof 1950. (i) for the second proviso, the following proviso shall be substituted, namely:—


“Provided further that where two or more depositors have more than one
account held jointly in their names, each account shall be treated as a separate
account for the purposes of this Act.”

(ii) in the third proviso, for the words “the aforesaid limit of one thousand and
five hundred rupees”, the words “the limit of one lakh rupees”, shall be substituted. 5


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

At present, deposits made in banks are insured upto rupees one lakh, Earlier the
limit was only Rs. 30,000/-. But after persuasion from all quarters, the limit was increased
to rupees one lakh in 1993.

As per the provision of the Act, persons having joint and different accounts are
treated as one entity and in the same capacity and right, Even the two separate accounts of
husband and wife (second signatory is spouse) are treated as combined account if the
name of the spouse is mentioned as second name in the account, As a result of this,
irrespective of accounts and money held by depositors jointly in their names, the insurance
cover is limited to Rs. one lakh only.

In certain joint accounts, the amount of deposit may be more than rupees one lakh.
But by virtue of this provision, the insurance cover has been limited, ‘This situation has
put several depositors at a loss. This is a glaring loophole in the Deposit Insurance and
Credit Guarantee Corporation Act, 1961, The Bill secks to plug the loophole,

New Deva; KIRIT SOMAIYA
July 17, 2000.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause ३ of the Bill provides that limit of insurance cover will be available for
different accounts held jointly by depositors by treating them as separate accounts, This
may involve additional expenditure in some cases. A Precise estimate cannot be made.

Itis likely that an annual recurring expenditure of rupees ten crore may be involved,
No Non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.


ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FKOM TRE Depostr INSURANCE AND CRebrt GuARANTEE Corporatton Act, 1961.
(Acr No. 47 oF 1961)

* * * + * *

2. * * * ¥ * Definitions

(8) “deposit” means the aggregate of the unpaid balance due 10 ६ depasitor
(other than a foreign Government, the Central Government, a State Government, a
Corresponding new bank, a Regional Rural Bank or a banking company or a co-
operative bank in respect of all his accounts, by whatever name called, with a
corresponding new bank or with a Regional Rural Bank or with a banking company
of a co-operative bank and includes credit balances in any cash credit accounts but
does not include,—

* * * * . *

16. (1) + * * * * Liability of
Corporation in

respect of

insured

Provided further that the total amount payable by the Corporation to any one deposits

depositor in respect of his deposit in that bank in the same capacity and in the same

right shall not exceed one thousand and five hundred rupees:

* * * * * *

Provided further that the Corporation may, from time to time, having regard
to its financial position and to the interests of the banking system of the country as
a whole, raise, with the previous approval of the Central Government, the aforesaid
limit of one thousand and five hundred rupees.

* * * * * *


LOK SABHA

A

BILL.
further to amend the Deposit Insurance and Credit Guarantee Corporation Act, 1961.

(Shri Kirit Somaiya, M.P)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—2087LS—01-08-2000,