As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA ON 
''',~f.' , ,.,:.l ., 
BiD <No; 1.32 of 1986 
THE CUSTOMS AND EXCISE REVENUES APPELLATE TRIBUNAL 
BILL, 1986 
• 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
Cl.AUSES 
1. Short title, extent and commencement. 
2. Definitions. 
CHAPTER II 
ESTABLISHMENT OF nIE ApPELLATE l'RmUN.AL AND BENCHES THEREOF 
3. Establishment of the Appellate Tribunal. 
4. Composition of the Appellate Tribunal and Benches thereof. 
5. Qualifications for appointment as President or Member. 
6. Appointment of President and Members. • 
7. Member to act as President or to discharge his functions in 
certain circumstances. 
8. Term of office. ... ... 
9. Resignation and removal. 
10. Salaries and allowances and other terms and conditiom of 
~ervice of Pl'esident and other Members. 
11. Provision as to the holdfug of offices by President and Members 
on ceasing to be such Presi.cient or Member. 
12. Financial and administrative powers of President·. 
13. Staff of the Appellate Tribunal. 
CHAPTER III 
JUIHSDICTION, POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF 'qIE ,ApPELLATE TRIBUNAL 
14. JurJsdiction, powers and authority of the Appellate Tribunal. 
15. Bar of jurisdiction of the Appellate Tribunal in certain cases. 
(i) 

(ii) 
.' . 
1 .. Power to punish for contempt. 
17. Distribution of business amonlst the Appellate Tribunal aDd itl 
Beadles. 
CHAPTER IV 
PIloCEDUftE 
18. Appeals to the Appellate Tribunal. 
19. Procedure and powers of the Appellate Tribunal. 
20. Deposit pending appeal, of duty demanded or penalty levied. 
21. Richt of applicant to take assistance of legal practitioner and 
Government to appoint representine otBcers. 
22,. Conditions as to making of interim orders. 
2'3. Power of President to transfer ca'Ses from one Bench to another .. 
24:. Procedure for deciding the case where the Members of a Bench 
difter in opinion. 
25. Orders of the Appellate Tribunal. 
CHAPTER V 
MISCELLANEOUS 
~6. Ex'closion of jurisdiction of courts, etc., except the SU'preme 
Court. 
27. Tra1\sfv of pending cases. 
28 PrO('~dings before the Appellate "rribunal to be judicial pro-
ceedin,. 
29. Members and staft' of the Appellate Tribunal to be public 
servalits. 
30. Pr~tion of action taken in .* faith. 
31. Act to have o'(l'erriciing effect. 
32. Power to make rules. 
33. Power to remove ditlicultte.s. 
34. Cd~quential amendments in the e!entra1 :8xcises Ad and the 
CustlJmlt Act. 

Bill No, 138 .1 1l1li 
THE CUSTOMS AND EXCISE REVENUES APPELLATE TRIBUNAL 
BILL, 1986 
A 
BILL 
\ 
to provide for the adjudication, by an appellate tribwai, of 8ispUteB taW& 
'fe8pect to the cUtermination of the nr.tes of duder C1f customB ad 
Central excise on goods an.cl to the valUAtion of goods for the pzl7'-
1'0_8 of CIB8~'"""t of sttch duties, in punucnce of fI.J'tiel.e CJ2SB oj 
the Constitution and for mdtters connected thertiru:ltth or iTl~lIl 
thereto. 
BII it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-seve1th Year o.t the 
Republic of India as follows:-
CHAPTER I 
PftlK.IMIN AllY 
5 1. (1) This Act may be called the Customs and EbCeise R~ AGrt 
Appellate Tribunal Act, 1986. tUIe, 
CIldQt .... 
10 
"(:) It extends to the whole of India. 
(3) It aball come into ~ on such date as the Central G~lIItl1.t 
may, by notification in the Oftkial Gazette. appoint. 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requircs,-
(a) uAppellata Tribunal" means the Culltoms _ ~ ~ 
Appellate Tribunal Cmlst!tUteti tmder seetion 3; 
r 
.-at. 

Establish· 
meat of 
the· ApPel. 
la1e'" 
lTriWDal . 
.... '~ ,', P"r:'. ~\'7'~ 
c.o1l1Plli-
tionotthe 
Appellate 
Tribunal 
aDd·liA-
cbe~·.re­
of. 
• .J_.~ 
(b) "appointed day" means the date with effect from which the 
Appe.l.1ate 'n-IDuna! is estab.lJsned, by' netlncation, under section 3; 
(c) "Bench" means a Bench of the Appellate Tribunal; 
(d) "Board" means the Central Hoard of Excise and. Customs Mot lt68. 
constlLuted. unuer the Central !ioarus 01 .rtevenue Act., IIj03; 5 
.(e) "Central Excises AcC' means the Central Excises and Salt 
Act, 11144; .. __ .. ___ • 
<f) "Central Excise Tariff Act" means the Central Excise Tariff 
A~l~;, 
1 of 1944. 
5 of 1986. 
.(g) "Customs Act"' mea11S the Customs Act, 1962; 10 S2ofl962. 
(h) 'Customs, 1:xclse and Gold lControl) Appeilate Tribunal" 
means th\: Customs, .I!IXC1Se and. Gold {L:ontrOl) a,lJp~llate 'l'nbunal 
constItuted. under sectIOn 12~ of the Customs Act; 
(i) "Customs 'fari11 Act' means the Customs Tariff Act, 197a. 51 of 1975. 
{]) "JUUIClal Member"' means a Membel' of the Appellate l'ribu- 15 
nal appointed as such under this Act, and includes the .President who 
poss~::,,"ses any or tne (!uallnca uons specltied in suo-section (2) of 
section 5; 
(k) "Member" means a Member (whether Judicial or Techni-
cal) of the Appellate Tribunal and includes the PreSident; 20 
(l) "notliication' means a no1.it1catlOn published in the Official 
Gazette; .• . _I 
, ,. -.1. '{in.} ';President" means the President of the Appellate Tribunal; 
.. : .... .. (n) "prescribed." means prescribed by rules; 
(0) "rules" means rules made under this Act; 
(p) "Supreme Court" means the Supreme Court of India; 
(q) "Technical Member" means a Member of the Appellate Tri-
bunal who is not a Judicial Member within the meaning of clause 
(;) ; 
. (r) words and expressions used in this Act but not defined 30 
',.~. ~d 'defined· in the Central Excises Act, Central Excise TarUf 
."ct, Customs. Act or Customs Tariff Act, or the rules made there-
under, shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them by' 
such Act or the rules made thereunder. 
CHAPTER II 
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE APPELLATE TRlBVNAL AND BENCHES THEREOF 
3. Th" Central GoVerDD.lent silalJ, by notification, esta~~~ Appel-
late Tribunal to be known as the Customs and Ex.cise ~Appel1at. 
. Tilbunal, to -exercise the jurisdictjon, powers and authority coalerred on 
such Appellate Tribunal by or under this Act. 
4. (1) The Appellate Tribunal Ihall consist' of a Presldellt aad sucb 
muaber· of .Jud.ieial and Teehnical Membel'l as the Ceatnl·Gtw..-ment 
may deem fit, anti subject to tho· 0"'-provisioDS of this· Act, ·the j1lJill.-
diction, powers and authority of the Appellate Tribunal may be ex.er-
35 
cised by BencheS thereof. . . . 45 
~'. \, . (!~ "A, :Ben:~h' shallCOnaist of one . Judicial Mehiber' and· oile Technical Member. .. " - .' ··.t.. . 

3 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the Preil. 
dent- :_ I#.~i 
(4) may, in addition to discharging the functions of the Judicial 
Member or the Technical Member of the Bench to which he is ap-
S pointed, discharge the functions of the Judicial Member or, as the 
case may be, the Technical Member, of any other Bench; 
(b) may transfer a Member from one Bench to another Bench; 
and 
, > J;.; ... '" • 
(c) may authorise the Judicial Member or the Technical Mem-
lU ber appointed to one Bench to discharge also the functions of the 
Judicial Member or the Technical Member, as the case may be, of 
another Bench. -' . 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing provisions 
of this section, it shall be competent for the President or any other Mem-
15 ber authorised by the, President in this behalf to function aa a Bench 
consisting of a single Member and exercise the jurisdiction. powers and 
authorit,:/ of the Appellate Tribunal in respect of such classes of cases 
or such matters pertaining to such classes of cases as the President may 
by general or special order specify: 
20 PrOVided that if at any stage of the hearing of any such case or matter 
it appears to the President or Member that the case or matter is of such 
a nature that it ought to be heard by a Bench consisting of two Members. 
the case or matter may be transferred by the President or, as the case 
may be, referred to him for transfer to, such Bench as the Preeident 
!Z5 may deem fit. , .... i 
(5) Subject to the other proviSions of this Act, the Benches of the 
Appellate Tribunal shall ordinarily sit at New Delhi aad at such other 
places as the President may deem fit. 
5. (1) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as the Presl-
30 dent unless he-
(a) is, or hal been, a Judge of a High Court; or 
(b) has, for at least two years, held the oftlce' of a Judicial 
Member or a Technical Member. 
(2) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a Judicial 
35 Member unless he-. i 
(4) is. or has been, or i8 qualified to be, a Judge of a HiSh 
Court; or i 
(b) has been a member of the Indian Legal Service and hu 
held a post in Grade I of that Service or any equivalent or higher 
post for at least five years. . 
(S) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a TechDical 
Member unless he has been a member of the Indian Customs and· Cen-
tral Excise Service, Group 'A', for a period of at least thirty years, and 
baa held during thll period the post of Collector of Customs or Central 
45 Excise or any equivalent or higher post for at least ten years. 
~ualJ4ca· 
tiODI for 
appoiDt· 
mIDt .. 
PreIidIat 
or .... 
Mr. 

Appoint-
IDeIIl of 
Ptelident 
aDd 
.--
lItn. 
Member 
fOactu 
Presldellt 
01' 10 eli&-
dwJo his 
fmJctioas 
fD certain 
circum-
ttances. 
TODD of 
omee. 
4-
6. (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), the President and 
every Member shall be appointed by the President of India. 
(2) Appointment of a person as the President Or a Member shall be 
made in consultation with a Selection Committee consisting of-
(4) a Chairman who shall be nominated by the Chief Justice 5 
of India; and 
(b) such other members as may be nominated by the Central 
Government. 
7. (1) In the event of the occurrence of any vacancy in the office of 
the President by reason of his death, resignation or otherwise, such one of 10 
the Members as the Central Government may, by notification, authorise 
in this behalf, shall act as the President until the date on which a new 
President, appointed in accordance with the provisions of this Act 
t.o fill such vacancy enters upon his office. 
(2) When the President is unable to discharge his functions owing to 15 
absence, illness or any other cause, such one of the Members as the Cen-
tral Government may, by notification, authOrise in this behalf, shall dis-
charge the functions of the President until the date on which the Presi-
dent resumes his duties. 
8. The President or other Member shall hold office as such for a 20 
tenn of three years from the date on which he enters upon his office or 
1:lntil he attains the age of sixty-five years, whichever is earlier . 
...... don 9. (1) rrhe President or other Member may, by notice in writing 
aad under his hand addressed to the President of India, resign his office: 
I'0I80\'&1. 
Provided that the President or other Member shall, unless he is 115 
permitted by the President of India to relinquish his office sooner, con-
tinue to hold oftice until the expiry of three months from the date of 
receipt of such notice or until a person duly appointed as his successor 
enters upon his office or until the expii-y of his term of oftlce, whichever 
is the earliest. go 
(2) The President or any other :Member aball not be removed from 
his oftice except by 8Q order made by the President of India on the ground. 
of proved misbehaviour or incapacity after an inquiry made by a Judge 
ot the Supreme Court in which such President or other Member had 
heeD. informed of the charges alaiDSt him and given a reasonable oppor- 35 
tuntty of being heard in respect of those charges. 

f ':." .~ 
5 
(3) The Central Government may, by rules, regulate the procedure 
for the investigation of misbehaviour or incapacity of the President or 
other Member referred to in sub-section (2). 
10. The salaries and allowances payable to, and the! otbe.l tenus aud 
5 conClltioDs of servic-,e (including pension, lI'atuity and other retirement 
bene8.ts) of, the President and otber Members shall be such as may be' 
prescribed by the Central Government: 
Provided that neither the salary and allowances nor the other terms 
ancJ conditions of service of the President or otbetr Member shall be varied 
10 to his disadvantage after his appointment. 
15 
11. On ceasing to hold oftice,-
(a) the President shall be ineligible for further employment 
either under the Government of India or under the Government of 
a State; 
(b) a Member (other than the President) shall, subject to the 
other provisions of this Act, be eligible for appointment es the Presi· 
dent, but not for any employment either under the Government of 
India or under the Government of a State; 
(c) the PresiGlent or other Member shall not appear, act or plead 
20 before the Appellate Tribunal or the customs, Excise and Gold 
(Control) Appellate TribunaL 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section, employment under the 
Government of India or under the Government of a State includes em-
ployment under any local or other authority within the territory of 
25 India or under the control of the Government of India or under any cor-
poration or society owned or controlled by the Government. 
12. The President shall exercise such financial and administrative 
)lowers over the Benches as may be vested in him under the rules: 
Provided that the President shall have authority to delegate such of 
30 his financial and administratJive powers as he may think flt to any 
Member Or officer of the Appellate Tribunal, subject to the condition 
that the Member or such officer shall, while exercising such delegated 
powers, continue to act under the direction, control and supervision of 
the President. 
35 13. (1) The Central Govel'nment shall determine the nature and 
categories of the officers and other employees required to a~ist the' Ap. 
)ellate Tribunal in the discharge of its functions and provide the Appel-
late Tribunal with ~uch officers and other employees as it Dlay think fit. 
(2) The officers and other employees of the Appellate Tribunal shall 
4° discharge their functions under the general superinfendence of the Presi-
dent. 
(3) The salarie .. and allowlUlces and conditions of sen'ice of the 
officers and other employees of the Appellate Tribunal shall he such as 
may he specified "by rules 
SalariII 
andalln'-
f:DCeIaDd 
otber 
terma aDd 
c::oadfdoaa 
ofterV1ce 
of PfeIi,. 
doDt aDcI 
other 
Memben. 
Pro1'llloa 
.. to die 
boIdfDI of 
oftlces '" Praldeul 
8IId M .... 
bert .. 
ceulngto 
be IUCh 
Predclelll 
or Menl-
ber. 
FinaDcial 
aJldaclmbt-
istrattv. 
J'OWI'I eI 
!lie PNIf-
dem. 
Staff 
of the 
AppoDate 
Tn'buaal. 

JIIriIdIo-
tJoD. po-.r. 
andautGo. 
rlt)' CJf u-. 
Appellate 
'niblmal. 
6 
CHAPTER III 
Jl7JWJDICTlON~ POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF THE ,ApPELLATE 'l'R!8vN,A.L 
I'. (1) Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, the Appellate 
Tribunal shall exercise, ~)n and from the appointed day. all the jurisdic-
tiOD, powers and authority exercisable in relation to an appeal against-
(a) a decision or order passed by the Collector of Central Excise 5 
as an adjudicating authority; 
(b) an order passed by the Collector (Appeals) under section 
35A or section 35E of the Central Excises Act; 
(c) a deelsion or order passed by the Collector of Customs as 
an adjudicating authority; 10 
(d) an order passed by the Collector (Appeals) under section 
128A or section 129D of the Customs Act, 
in which the determination of any question having a relation to-
(i) the rate of duty of excise for the time being in force, whether 
under the Central Excise Tariff Act or under any other Central Act 15 
poviding for the levy and collection of any duty of excise, in relation 
to any goods on or after tlie 28th day of February, 1986; or 
(ii) the rate of duty of customs for the time being in force, 
whether under the Customs Tariff 'Act or under any other Central 
Act providing for the levy and collection of any duty of customs; in 20 
relation to any goods on or after the 28th day of February, 1986; 
or 
(iii) the value of goods for purposes of assessment of any duty 
of excise in cases where the assessment is made on or after t.hp 28th 
day of February, 1986; or 25 
(iv) the value of goods for the purposes of assessmp.nt of any 
duty of customs in cases where the assessment is made on or afther 
the 28th day of February, 1986. 
is in issue or is one of the points in issue. 
Explanation.-FO'I' purposes of this sub-section, the determination of 30 
a rate of duty in relation to any goods or valuation of any goods for the 
purposes of assessment of duty includes the determination of a ques-
tiOn-
(4) whether any ~oods are excisable goods or whether the Tate 
of duty on any -gOOds is· nil; 35 -
(b) whether anv fi(oods fall under a particular beartint£ or sub-
heAding: of the Schedule to the Central Excise Tariff Act or the 
Additional Duties of Excise (Goods of Snecial Importance) Act. 1957 
or the Ad"'itional Dutips of Exeifle (Textiles and Textile Articles) Act, 
59 of 157. 
1978 or fall under the First sChedule or the Secon~ ~chedt1le to the 40 _ 40 of 1978. 

Cuatoma Tarift Act, as the case may be, or that any goods are or 
not covered by a particular notification or order issued by the Cen-
trial Government or the Board, granting total or parteal exemption 
from a duty of excise or customs, as the case may be; 
5. (c) whether the value of any goods fOr the purposes of assess-
ment of a duty of excise or customs shall be enhanced or reduced by 
the addition or reduction of the amounts in respect of such matters 
as are specifically provided in the Central Excises Act or the Customs 
Act. 
10 (2) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that nothing in 
sub-section (1) shall preclude the entertainment of an appeal in relation 
to any of the matters dealt with in sub.section (1) by the Customs, 
Excise and Gold (Control) Appellate Tribunal or the disposal thereof 
during the period commencing on and from the 28th day of February, 
15 1986 and ending with the appointed day and any order passed by the 
said Tribunal on such appeal during that period shall, for all purposes, 
have effect as an order of the Appellafe Tribunal constituted under this 
Act and all the provisions of this Act shall apply to such order. 
15. Notwithstanding anything contained in section 14, no appeal shall 
go lie to the Appellate Tribunal and the Appellate Tribunal shall not have 
jurisdiction to decide any appeal in respect of any decision or order 
referred to in section 14 if such decision or order relates only to,-
(a) . a case of loss of goods, where the loss occurs in transit from 
a factory to a warehouse Or to another factory, or from one warehouse 
fil5 to another, or during the course of processing of the goods in a 
warehouse or in storage, whether in a tactory or in a warehouse; 
(b) a rebate of duty of excise on goods exported to any country 
or territory outside India or on excisable materials used in the manu· 
facture of goods which are exported to any country or territory out-
30 lide India; 
(c) goods exported outside India (exeept to Nepal or Bhutan) 
without payment of duty; 
(d) any goods impOrted or exported u baggage or by post; 
(e) any goods loaded, or deemed to have been loaded in accor--
55 c:1ance with an import manifelt or import report, in a conveyance fot 
importation into India, but which are Dot unloaded at their place of 
destination in India, or so much of the qU8Dtity of such goock'al 
has not· been unloaded at any such destination if goods unloaded 
at such destination are short of the quantity required to be unloaded 
40 at that d .. t1Dation or any ,oods which have been lost or destroyed 
after hein, unloaded at any such destination; 
(f) payment of drawback as provided in Chapter X of the 
Customs Act and the rules mad. thereunder. 
Bar of 
juriadictioll 
oftbe 
Appell.te 
Tribunal 
in certaJa 
cases, 
18. The Appellate Tribunal shall have. and exercise, the same juris- Power to 
.. 5 diction, powers and authority 'in. respect of contempt of itself u a High puaiah for 
Court ~ and may exercise, and, for this purpose, the provisions of the CODtempt. 

Distribu-
tion of 
business 
amongst 
the Appel-
late 
Tribunal 
and its 
Benches. 
Appeals 
to the 
Appellate 
Tribunal. 
Contempt oi' Courts 'Act, 19'ti shalf" have' i1f~(£ subJect'tO" theo'moatB'ca-
tions that--
(a) the references therein to a High Court shall be construed as 
il1eluding a referenCe to the Appellate Tribunal; 
(b) the'refer~ees to the Advoeate-Otmeralin' seetion 15 of'the 5 
said Act shall be conStrued, in' relatibu to the ApPellate TribUrtal, 
. as a reference to the Attorney-General or the Solicitor-Genetat or 
the Additional Solicitor-General. 
11. (1) Where any Ben~hes of the AppeUa:te Tribunal are' coiistt:tuted~ 
the PreSident may, from'time to tbine, by otder, make provisions u totO 
the distribution of the business of the Awellaie TribUnal amongst the' 
Benches and specify the'matters w'hlch niay be dealt with by each 
Bench. I 
(2) If any qUestionai1ses as to 'whether any' niatter' fallS Within 'the' 
purview of the business allocated to a Bench of the Appellate Tribunal, 15 
the deCision of the ~esident thereon shall be tmat. 
CltAPTtR IV 
PRbcEIYuRI ' 
18. (1) Subject to the other prbvision's of this ACt; everY" ai)p~al' to 
the Appellate Tribunal under this Act shall be flied wit'hlri th'ree"monlhs go 
from the date on which the decision .a order sought to be appealed 
against is communicated to the person aggdeved by tlie decision or 
order or to the Collector of Central ,Excise or the Collector of CUstoms, 
as the case may be. 
700t 18'11 
(2) On receipt of notice that an appeal has been preferred' under 125 
this section, the party against whom the appeal has been preferred may, 
notwithstanding that he may Dot 'have' appealed 'againit 'sochotcIer' or any 
part thereof, file within forty-five days of the re~eipt of the notice a 
m'~ri(fum' . of: crOSS::ODje~drls )wHfted in' . sUch nilinn~r as Imay be 
speofied by rUles lrtadE' ill' th'rs:' ~ii'lf' agitinst any part of the' 6raer 30 
aPi1eiI~'~a~t 'and ~h"'ni~mOHmm/shall be' di~';of'by' the 
A~ellateTtifntntt1 as it it Wf!te an' app~l' preiJentet!' '\VttMb'the'dlne 
speclfte'd . in stib-s~ctfon: (l). 
(3) The Appellate Trfbtrttal'mllY aamtf ah app@lt'or"perititt"thcf1titbg 
of ,~ memo~andum of cross:~bJections after the exP~ of the relevant 35 
penod referred to in suh-section (1). or sub-section (2), if'it' is satisfied 
that there was sufficient' cause lo:r not presenting it within that period. 
(4')' Every li})pe*t to"ttle' :A~el18w-'Mlin:al shill 'l1E(in stleti fb'ml' , 
an! 'shim 'hi f wHIled In i'f1~IP ~f!tr "at rHay btf~\f br,.~ r\llei maS ¥ 

9 
~,~ b~' ~,:~" except.in .the c~seot an appeal preferred by 
,~ pr.roftl.~r Dr :. me.tUOfan~;'9f ,cro~-p~jei;:M~ns referr~d to ~n 
sub-ection (2) ,be-accompanied by. fee of two hull(tred rupees. 
19. (1) The App~llate Tribunal shall not be bound by the procedure 
'of 1908. 5 l~d down in tbe -Coste of C~yilProcedure, 1908, but shall be guided by 
the principles of natural justice and s"bject to the other provisiOns of 
this Act and of any rules made by the Central Government, the Appel-
la,te ~bunal shall h!lve power to regulate its own procedure, including 
,the fixing ,of plac,t;s and times of its heat:ing. , " _ r ,-. " • . • ~ • ' ,_'. 
10 (2) The Appellate Tribunal shall have, for the purposes of discharg-
,ing Its !u~tio~s un~ ~~is !\ct, the same powers as are vested in a 
$ of 1908. civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, while trying a suit, 
in respect of the f~llowing matt~rs, namely:-
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and 
J5 examin~g him on oath; 
(b) requiring the discovery, inspection and production of books 
of account apd other doculflents; 
(c) reviewing its decisions; 
(d) dismissing an appeal for default or deciding it ex parte; and 
ZOo Where in any appeal under this Act, the decision or order ~ppem­
ed against relates to any duty demanded in respect of goods which are 
not ,9D_der ~e e cp~trol. of, the, ~ntral exci~, authorities or the customs 
'1 ~utP.R:ri~'-,:a&:t~e,~a~~~y)e., ?r. ~ny,J~f1~lt',Je:vjed und.er the Central 
.Q5!~~,Ad,orAtPe·eu.~~ Act"the peli5Pll; daairOl.lS..of,4Ppealillg against 
. such decision or order shall" pending .the appeal, .. deposit with the proper 
oftlcer the duty demanded or the penalty levied: 
. PI;Qvided . that wbere in .. any :particular ca~e,.the r~ppellate T~ibunal 
is ,of opinion that· the, deposit of duty demanded or, penalty levied would 
30 cause undue hardship to such person, the Appellate Tribunal may dis-
,pense with such ciFposit s\lbje~t to suchcondit,ions as it maY' d~em fit to 
impose so as to ~~~d 'ij)e ,in.t~el$ts of re;venue, 
Procedure 
and powers 
of the 
Appellate 
Tribunal. 
Deposit, 
pending 
,3pPt'ul, of 
duty dc· 
maoocd or 
penalty 
Icvie(~· ... 

lliIht of 
applicant 
to take 
.. lataDce 
of Je.a1 
practitioner 
andGov-
ernment 
to appoint 
represent-
iDI officeR. 
COD-
ditions 
as to 
makin, 
of 
mterim 
OrdeIW. 
Power of 
President 
to transfer 
casH 
from one 
Bench 
to~ 
other. 
Procedure 
tor decld-
in, the 
c:ase 
w~ the 
Member. 
or. 
Bench 
cWrer in 
opinion. 
Orders 
of Ap-
pellate 
'l"rlbu~J. 
re 
21. (1) A person preferring an appeal to the Appellate Tribunal under 
this Act may either appear in person Or take the assistaDce of a legal 
practitioner of his choice to present hi, case before the AppeUaw 
Tribunal. 
(2) The Central Government may authorise one or mOl'e legal!S 
pactitionen or any of its olllcen to act as presenting offtcer and anr 
person so authorised by it may present its case with respect to an)' 
appeal before the Appellate Tribunal. 
22. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other provisions of 
this Act or in any other law for the time being in force, no interim order 10 
(whether by way of injunction or stay or in any other manner) shall 
be made on, or in any proceedings relating to, an appeal under this Act 
unless-
(a) copies of such appeal and of all documents in support of the 
plea for &uch interim order are furnished to the party against whom I!) 
such appeal is preferred; and 
(b) opportunity is given to such party to be heard in the matter: 
Provided that the Appellate Tribunal may dispense with the require--
ments of clauses (a) and (b) and make an interim order as an e"cap. 
tional measures if it is satisfied, for reasons to be recorded in writing, 20 
that it is necessary so to do for preventing any loss being caused to the 
appellant which cannot be adequately compensated in money but any 
such interim order shall, if it is not sooner vacated cease to have effect 
on the expiry of a period of fourteen days from the date on which it is 
made unless the said requlrements have been complied with before the 25 
expiry of that period and the Appellate Tribunal has continued the 
operation of the interim order. 
23. On the applil'ation of any of the parties and after notice to the 
parties, and after hearing such of them as he may desire to be heard, 
or on his own motion without such notice, the President may transfer any So 
case pending before one Bench, for disposal, to any other Bench, 
24. If the Members of a Bench differs in opinion on any point, they 
shall state the point or points on which they differ, and make a reference 
to the President who shall either 'hear the point or points himself or 
refer the case for hearing on such point or points by one or more of the 35 
other Members and such point or points shall be decided aceording to 
the opinion of the majority of the Members who have heard the cu.e~ 
including those who fint heard it. 
25, (1) The App~llate Tribunal may, after qiving the parties to the 
appeal, an opportunity of being heard, pass such orders thereon as it 40 
thinks fit, confirming, modUytng or annulling the deelsioD or order 
appealed against or may refer the case back to the authority which. 
passed such decision or orcieJ' with such directions as the Appellate 
Tribunal may think fit, ~or ~ fresh ~djudication or d~is~on, ~~ tbe case 
.~y be, after ~~g add!-tio~ evt~nce, !t nece~: . 45 

it 
(2) The Appellate TrlbUDal may, at any time within four years from 
the date of the order, with a view to rectifying any mistake apparent 
,from the record. ~ any order passed by it unC'.er sub-section (1) 
and shall make such amendments if the mistake is brought to its notice 
5 by the Collector of Central Excise or the Collector of Customs, as the 
case may be, or the other party to the appeal: 
Provided that an amendment which has the effect of enhancing the 
assessment or reducing a refund or otherwise increasing the liability of 
the other party shall not be made under this sub-section, unless the 
10 Appellate Tribunal has given notice to him of its intention to do so and 
has allowed him a reasonable opportunity of being heard. 
(3) The Appellate Tribunal shall send a copy of every order passed 
under this section to the Collector of Central Excise or the Collector of 
Customs, as the case IIlc1y be, and the other party to the appeal. 
15 CHAPTER V 
MISCELLANEOUS 
28. On and from the appointed day, no court (except the Supreme 
Court) or the Customs, Excise and Gold (Control) Appellate Tribunal 
shall have, or be entitled to exercise, any jUrisdiction, powers Or autho-
110 tity in relation to matters in respect of which appeals would lie to the 
Appellate Tribunal under section 14. 
27. (1) Every suit, appeal or other proceedings pending before any 
court or other authority or the Customs, Excise and Gold (Control) 
Appellate Tribunal. immediately before the appointed day, being a suit, 
125 appeal or other proceedings which would have been within the jUrisoic-
tion of the Appellate Trtbunal, if it had arisen after such 'day, shall stand 
transferred on that day to the Appellate Tribunal: 
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall apply to any appeal 
pending as aforesaid before a High Court. 
go (2) Where any suit, appeal or other proceeding stands transferred 
from any court, tribunal or other authority to the Appellate Tribunal 
under sub-section '(1) ,-
(4) the court or other authority or the Customs, Excise and Gold 
(Control) Appellate Tribunal shall, as sOon as inay be after such 
S5 transfer, forwarCl the records of such suit, appeal or other proceed-
ing to the App&Uate Tribunal; ed' 
(b) tile Appellate Tribunal may, on reeelpt of sueh records, 
proceed to deal with sueh suit, appeal or other proceeding, so far as 
may be. in tho flame manner as in the. case of an appeal under 
40 sectioD 19 from the stage which was reaehed before such transfer or 
from any earlier stag. or de novo as the Appellate Tribunal may 
deem At. 
(3) Any person, who imediately before the appointed day, is an 
advocate or authorised representative entitled to practice in any court 
45 or ather authoT'ity 01" the Customs, Exrjs" and GoM (Contol) Apnellate 
Trlbun9J. anti was authorfsed to annear or to act in anv prorep.dings 
transferre~ from the said 'court. other authority or Tribunal to the 
A~Uat~ Tribunal uQder this section shall have the right to appear or 
Ex-
clusion 
of juris-
diction ot 
courts 
elOCept 
the 
Supreme 
Court. 
Transfer 
ot pend. 
inC cases. 

Proceed-
ings 
before 
theAp-
pellate 
Tribunal 
to be 
judi-
cial 
pro-
ceeding. 
Members 
and 
staff 
of tho 
Ap-
pellate 
Tribu-nal 
to be 
public 
servants. 
Pro-
tection 
of 
action 
taken 
in t.OOd 
faith. 
Act to 
have 
OVel'-
riding 
effect. 
Power 
to make 
rules. 
to act. as· the ·cue may be, b,efore ~ -Appellate ~. ,m..rel .. tltn to 
the .a,id suit, app~al or ~herproeeeding. 
Z8 All proceedings before tbe Appe~ TJ'.ihu~ : Iib,.,l!, qe. ,..,.,.d 
to be judicial proceG.ngs ·witl1~n theUl,8aning of ~ctiOJjS 3.~t ~JB. and· 
228 of the Indian Penal Cocle. 5 
.29. The President and other ~mbersand .the Qm~rs ,~d ,.p~r 
employees of the Appellate Tribunal shall ,be deeJXled ,to be.·p\'~1tc 
servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code. 
30. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lit agalnst .the 
Central Gove-rnment or against the President or other Member, or any 10 
other person authorised by such President or other Member for any-
thing which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance 
of this Act or any rule or order made th.re~nder. 
31. The provisions of this Act shan have effect notwithst;a,ndipg 
anything inconsistent therewith. contained in. any other law for the time 15 
being in force or any instrument ha,vipg. ~ffect by virtue of any law 
other than this Act. 
32. (1) The Central Government -inay, by notification, make rules 
to carry out the provisions of this ~ct. 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such 20 
rules .D.1ay provide for all or. any of the following matters, namely:-
• 
(a) the salaries and allowances and oth.er Ite~ms8l1d:cw~t~PI 
of .servJ.c~ of Pr.esident,aJ)d other .l\f~I»P.ers.~11;lder.seotiqn.10; 
{b)·; the~~cial and, ~"'i •. tWe P"Y .... -WWch: tAe·~sident 
,m.y-,qer_ over:theJ~~s. u~ _~ 12;~5 
(e) the salaries and allOwanOU aAcI.;:coU:ltlonl. of;.wloe..of the 
e1ft~ . and otbar,.~oy.eea. of· ~.c~.:::'JJ1~"'M1a1c\lnder sub-
seetion (3) of -Beeiton 3.3; 
(d) the form in which every appeal to the Appellate Tribunal 
shall he filed. and the manner in which such appeal shalt be verifie(hso 
. under sub-section (4) of ·section 18; and 
(e) any other matter vvhich has. to be, or may be,' presr.ribed by 
rules under this Act. 
(3) Every rule made under'this Act by the CeBtral ,GOYftllIQtmt, ~ll 
l.'lI' laid. as soon as may be after it is made, bef-olle·each H~,of.~­
rnent, while it Is in session, for a total·period of thirty.days.·which.y S~ 
be.··~omppised'~ ODe ~n, or mtwo or;m",,·§~QMItive··' __ r:~~ 
45o! 1880. 
4liot 1800. 

19- ' 
if before the expiry of the session inUhetlta~lY" fOHoW'fnr the' 'session 
0; the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in malting any 
l"1oamclUon"ui'"tne'rtile or botli Houses agree that the rule should not 
be made, the rule shall thereafter haVe e«ect only in such modified 
5 form or be of, DO elfect, as 'the ease may' be; so, hbwever, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity 
of anything previously done under that rule. 
93. (1) If- ahy dift\~ulty" atises in giving effect to the prOVISIons of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by otder published in the Official 
10 Gazette, make such provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of 
this Act as appear to it to be DeteBsary or expedient fOr removing the 
difficult,.:. 
Provtd~' 'that n'O slieh order shall be made after the expiry of a 
pel1.od or three yeirs ffomthe appOinted day. 
15 (2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be 
after it is made, be laid before each House of Parliament. 
3i&: drl andfroni the appointed day, the, followingamendmellts (being 
amerldments of ,a consequential nature) s~all be made in the Central 
EXcls~s" Act and' the Custorrts' Act, namely:-
20 (a) in 'the Central ExciseS Act,-
!l5 
'5 
45 
(i)' for sub-section (2) of section 35B, the following sub-sec-
tlol1' shall' be slibstituted, namely:-
"(2) The' CoUector of Central Excise may, if he is of 
opinion that an order passed by-
(a) the Appellate Collector of Central Excise under 
section 35., as it stood immediately before the appointed 
day, or 
(b) the Collector (Appeals) under section 35A; is 
not legal or proper, direct any central Excise Officer 
authorised by him in this behalf (hereafter in this 
Chapter referred to as the authorised officer) to appeal 
on his behalf to the Appellate Tribunal or, as the case 
may be, the Customs and Excise Revenues Appellate 
Tribunal established under section 3 of the Customs and 
Excise Revenues Appellate Tribunal Act, 1986, against 
such order."; 
(ii) in section 35E,-
(A) after the words "Appellate Tribunal", wherever 
they occur, the words and figures "or, as the case may be. 
the Clmtoms and Excise Revenues Appellate Tribunal estab-
lished under section 3 of the Customs and Excise Revenues 
Appellate Tribunal Act, 1986" shall be inserted; 
(B) in 8ub·section (4), after the words, figures and 
letter "section 35B", the words and figyres "of, as the case 
may be, the provisions of the Customs and Excise Revenues 
Appellate Tribunal Act, 1986" Ihall be inaerted; 
Power 
to remove 
diffi. 
culties. 
Con. 
sequen-
tial 
amend-
menta in 
the 
Central 
Excises 
Act 
and 
the 
CustOlDJ 
Act. 

" 
(0) ill tU C""tOIDl ~ 
(i) for sub·section (2) of leCtion 129A, the foUowiua IU):,. 
section shall be sUbsUtuted, namely:-
"(2) The Collector of Cuatoma may. if he is of opinion 
that an order passed by- 5 
(a) the Appellate Collector of Customs under section 
128, as it stood immediately before the appointed day, or 
(b) the Collect~r (Appeala) under section 128A, jl 
on his behalf to the Appellate Tribunal or, as the case may 
"(2) The Collector of Customs may. if he of opinion 10 
be, the Customs and Excise Revenues Appellate' Tribu. 
nal established under section 3 of the Customs and 
Excise Revenues Appellate Tribunal Act, 1986, against 
such order ,"; 
(ii) in section 129D,- 15 
(A) after the words "Appellate Tribunal", wherever they 
occur, the words and figures "or, as the case may be. the 
Customs and Excise Revenues Appellafe Tribunal establish-
ed under section 3 of the Customs and Excise Revenues 
AppeUate Tribunal Act, 1986" shall be inserted; go 
(B) in sub-section (4), after the word, figures and letter 
"section 129", the words and figures "or, as the case may be, 
the provisions of the Customs and Excise Revenues Appellate 
Tribunal Act, 1986" shall be inserted. 

&TA'fEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASO.'~S 
-.. I 
Article 323B of the Constitutiun stipulates that the appropriate legis-
lature may, by law, provide It.t tne adjudication Or trial by tribunaJs ot 
any disputes, complamts, or oflentes with respect to all or any of the 
matters specified in clause (~) of that article with respect to which· such 
Legislature has power to make laws. One of the matters enumerated ill 
the laId. clause is the levy. as~eS8ment, collection and enforcement of any 
tax including any matter inCidental thereto. 
2. The Bill seeks to give effect to the aforesaid constitutional provi-
sion by the establishment of an Appellate Tribunal to provide for the 
adjudication of disputes with respect to the determination of the ratea of 
duties of customs and central excise on goods and to the valuation of 
goodi for the purposes of aBliesiment of iuch dutiei. The Bill alao provides 
for--- . 
<a> the jurisdiction, powt'J"a and authority which may ,be exer-
cised by the Appellate 'lribunal; 
<b) the procedure (iududmg provision as to limitation and rulei 
of evidence) to be followed by the Appellate Tribunal; 
(c) exclusion ot the jurisdictlOn of all courts, except that of the 
Supreme Court, relating to matters falling within the jurisdiction of 
the Appellate Tribunal; 
(d) the transfer to the Appellate Tribunal of any suit, appeal or 
other proceedings pendi!lg before any court, etc., immediately before 
the establishment of the Tribunal which would have been within the 
jurisdiction of the Tribunal if such suit, appeal or other proceedjnis 
had arisen after such establishment. 
3. The establishment of the Appellate Tribunal under the aforesaid 
provision ot the Constitution has become necessary as in recent years 
there had been an enormoulJ increase in litigation relating to custoJlLfi 
and excise cases. Many of these cases relate to disputes pertaining to 
the determination of the rate of duty and value of goods for purposes 
of levy of customs and excise duties, It is expected that the establiih-
ment of the Appellate Tribunal will reduce litigation and will also impart 
greater ('ertainty in the administration of the said duties. 
~ The Notes on clauses explain in defail the various proviSions of the 
Bill. 
5, The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 
NEW DELHI; VISHWANATH PRATAP SINGH. 
The 12th Novem~r. 1986. 
15 

Notes on Clauses 
Clause 2.-This clause defules certain expressions occurring 1n th~ 
Act. 
ClGUH3.-This clause provides for the establishment of the Appellate 
Tribunal. 
Cl.o.use 4.-This clause states what shall be' the organis3tion of the 
Appellate Tribunal, the composition of its Benches and the manner in 
which the Benches shall function. 
- Clause 5.-This clause prascribes the qualifications for appointment as 
President, Judicial Member or Technical Member of the Appellate 
'Tribunal. 
Clause 6.--":This clause prescribes the manner in which the President 
:md Members of the Appellate Tribunal shall be appointed. 
Clause 7.-This clause p~'ovides for the discharge of the President's 
functions in the contingency when the President is unable to discharge 
;!is. functions or the office of the President is vacant. 
Clause 8.-This clause fixes the tenure of the President or other Mem-
"1'5 of the Appellate Tribunal subject to a maximum age-limit. 
.-
Clause 9.-This clause details the procedure for resignation or re-
.noval of the President or oth2r Members of the Appellate Tribunal 
Clauge 10.-This clause provides for the framing of rules by the 
Central Government to regulate the salaries and allowances and other 
conditions oJ: service of President and other Members. 
Clause ·H.-This clause states the position as to further employmen* 
of the President and Membp.Ts on their ceasing to hold office as such. 
Clause 12.--This clause provides for the President to exercise financial 
and administ.rative powers and for delegation of such powers. 
Clause IS.-This clause provides that the Central Government shall 
provide tbe stat! for the functioning of the Appellate Tribunal. 
CIa •• 14.-This clause defines the jurisdiction, powers and authority 
of the Appellate Tribunal. 
Clause 15.-This clause provides for bar of the jurisdiction of the 
Appellate Tribunal' in certain cases .. 
Clause 16.-This clause vests the Appellate TribunaI- with powers to 
punish for contempt of itself as a High Court. 
16 C 

, " ~. 
I' 
Clause 17.-This clause provides for appropriate :JrOVISlons being 
made by the President for distribution of business amongst the Appellate 
Tribunal and its Benches. 
Clause 18.-This clause provide; for the procedure for preferring 
appeal to the Appellate Tribunal. 
Clause 19.-This clause provides that the Appellate Tribunal shall 
have the power to regulate its own procedure subject to the other pro-
visions of this Act or of any rules made by the Central Government. 
It also invests the Appellate Tribunal with powers of aaivi! court in 
respect of certain specified matters. 
Clause 20.-This clause provides for the amount demanded as duty or 
imposed as penalty in a dispute being deposited pending appeal; and 
also for deposit being dispensed within certain circumstances. 
Clause 21.- This clause provides for the aggrieved person taking the 
assistance of a legal practitioner and the Central Government present-
ing its case through one or more persons whether legal practitioners or 
not. . 
Clause 22.-This clause empowers the Appellate Tribunal to make 
interim order~ subject to certain conditions. 
Clause 23.-This clause defines the powers of the President to transfer 
cases pending hefore one Bench to any other Bench for disposal. 
Clause 24.-This clause prescribes the procedure to be followed for 
deciding a case where the Members of a Bench differ in opinion. 
Clause 25.-Thlf; clause indicates in what manner orders may be 
passed by the Appellate Tribunal on appeals. It also provides for recti-
fication of mistakes apparent in such orders. 
Clause 26.-This Clause provides for the exclusion' of the jurisdiction 
of all courts, etc., except the Supreme Court in relation to matters in 
respect of which appeals would lie to the Appellate Tribunal. 
Clause 27.-This clause provides for the transfer to the Appellate 
Tribunal of all matters llending in the courts and in the Customs. Excise 
and Gold (Control)' Appellate Tribunal which fall within the jurisillc-
tlon of the proposed Tribunal. However, appeals penMng in the High 
Court shan not be so transferred. 
'Clause 28.-This clause makes it clear that all 'Proct>edin~s be'fnre the 
Appellate Trft-unal shall be dep.med to be judicial proceedtn~. 
Clause 29.-This clause makes it clear that Member!! ann !!taft oJ the 
Appellate Tribunal shall be aeemed to be public servants. 

18 
UZau.re 30.-Thia clause provides for protection of the Central Gov-
ernment or the President or other Members of the Appellate Tribunal in 
respect of anything done in good faith in persuance of this Act . 
. -
ClAuse 31.-This clause is for giving overriding effect to the pro-
... wions of the legislation. 
ClAue 32.-This clause empowers the Central Government to make 
rules for various matters relating to procedure of the Appellate Tribunal, 
conditions of Rervice of President and other Members and similar other 
matters for the proper functioning of the Appellate Tribunal. 
Cla'U3e 33.-This clause empowers the Central Government to make 
suitable provtstODl for removing any difficulty in giving effect to the 
provisions of the legislation. 
Clause 34.-This clause provides for the consequential amendment. 
in th, Central Exci'l!les Act and the Customs Act. 

Z.'INANCIAL MEMORANDUM , 
The Customs and Excise Appellate Tribunal Bill, 1986, provides for 
the adjudication-by an Appellat:e Tribunal, of disputes with respect to the 
duties of customs and excise and the valuation of the goods for the pur. 
poses of assessment of such duties in persuance of article 323B of the Con-
stitution and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
2. Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of the Appellate 
Tribunal. According to clause 4 of the Bill, the Appellate Tribunal shall 
consist of a Presidt'nt and such number of Judicial and Technical Mem-
bers as may be considered !leCessary. A Bench shall consist of one 
Judicial Member and nne Technical Member. Clause 10 t>rovides that 
the salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions 
of service of, the President and other Members shan be such as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government. Clause 13 provides that the 
Central Government ~hall determine the nature a~d categories of the 
officers and other employees l'equired to assist the Appellate Tribunal 
tn the discharge of its functions an-d proyide the Appellate Tribunal with 
such officers and other employees 8S it may deem fit. Salaries and 
allowances and condition!! of servi(~e of the officers and other employees 
of the Tribunal shall be prescribed by the rules made bv the Central 
Government. TheRp. arr. the provisions in the Bill which will have 
ftnancial implications once It is E'n~ded. 
::I. The Anpellate TrIbunal will comprise six Members fnc1ut!in.f:! the 
President. The salary and allowf\l'lces of the President of the Tribunal 
would h(' those admissible to a ,Tudlte of the Supreme Court. Th~ Mem-
bers will be ltiven the sp.1nry and allpwanres of a .rud!!e of a Hf!1h Cnurt. 
AdeqlJate supportin/! st~ff ,,·ill 11~o have to be pro,rfded to the Tribunal 
for its efficient functioning. 
4. It will also be necessary to provide for an adequate number of 
Departmental Renresentatives tOJ!'ether with supporlin!!' r-;tllff so that the 
'Oepartment's cases are put forward properlv and effectively before the 
Appellate Tribunal. 
The details of the expenditure relatinJ!' to the Appellate T,.ibllnal and 
the Departmental Representatives are given below:-
------------------------_._---- -------
st. No. Post 
1 2 
'(a)' Appel14te TribuMl 
~ ...... ------.-.... -1 President - . 
2 Members . 
3 Registrar (2000-2250) 
No. Averal!e 
monthly 
expendi. 
ture 
Annual 
expendi. 
ture 
--.... -~.------.. --.. ----.-.---~. 
19 
1 
S 
1 
3 4 s 
-- 9,000 l,OR,oro 
- 8,000 • 4,80,000 ~ 
4,391 52,692 ' 

80 
2 
4 Asstt. Registrar (1500-2000) 
, Technical Officer (2000-3500) revised 
scale 
6 D.O.S. (Level II) 
7 U.D.Cs. 
8 L.D.C.s 
9 PS to President &. Memben 
3 
2 
3 
3 
6 
6 
6 
4 , 
3,759 90,216 
2,850 1,02,600 
1,925 69,300 
1,695 1,22,040 
1,270. 91,440 
2,850 2,05,200 
10 PA (Stenographers) 
11 Librarian . 
9 (6+3) 2,70,000 
12 Daftries/Record Keepers 
13 Peons/Sepoys 
14 TA/DA expenses-hiring of office accom-
modation/other expenses, etc. . 
TOTAL: 
or say 
(b) D.",lmmlal Representatives (DR) 
I 
3 
9 
1 Senior D.R. (2500-2750) 3 
2 D.R.s. (1500-2000) 3 
3 Tech. Officers (2000-3500) revised scale 3 
4 PAs/Stenographers 9 
5 U.D.C.s 3 
6 I.D.C.s 3 
7 Peons /Sepoys 6 
8 TA/DA Expenses Hiring of office 
accommodation and other expenses 
TOTAL: 
or say 
Gross recurring expenditure [Total or (a) and (b)] 
2,100 25,200 
Irl,057.5O 38,070 
875 ~94,SOO 
2,00,000 
19,49,258 
r 20,00,000 
'.5,3] 6.60 ·1,91,400 
'J 3,759 ~1.35,324 
r 2,850 tl,02,600 
~2,28,820 
1,695 61,020 
.1,270 '45,720 
875 ~ 63,000 
r 1,41,000 
9,68,884 
~ 10,00,000 
r .... r:·· .. 
30,00,000 
'S. Recurring expenditure will be of the order of RI. 30,00,OOO.NOIl"'1'ecuning ex-
penditure for jnitial setting up of the new Tribunal maybe ,of ' the order of Ri. S lakhs 

:MEMORANDUM REGAHDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 32 of the Bill empowers the Central Government, by notifica-
tion in the Official Gazette, to make rules to carry out the provisions of 
the proposed legislation. Sub-clause (2) of this clause enumeratcoll tne 
matters with respect to which rules may be made under this clause. 
These matters relate to, inter alia, to the salaries and allowanc and 
other terms and conditioIls of service of President and other Members, 
financial and administrative powers of the President, salaries and allow-
ances and other conditions of servIce of the staff of the Appellate Tri-
bunal and the manner of verification of certain documents to be filed in 
the Appellate Tribunal. 
2. As the matters with respect to which rules may be made under 
clause 32 pertain to matters of procedure or detail, the delegation of 
legislative powers is of a normal character. 
3. Clause 33 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to remove 
by order any difficulty which may arise in giving effect to the provision. 
of the proposed legislation. This is by way of abundant caution and for 
coveripg difficulties which it is not practicable to visualise. It has, how-
ever, betm provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of 
a period of three yearf; from the date of establishment of the Appellate 
Tribuna1. It has also been provided that a copy of every such order 
made shall be laid befo1"e each Housf: of Parliament . 
•• 

Appeals 
to the 
Ap-
pellate 
Tribunal. 
Powers of 
Boerd or 
Col1ector 
of Central 
Excise to 
PaslI ler-
Min orders. 
:A.NNEXURii 
, , 
EX'j,RACT FROM THE CENTRAL EXCISES AND SALT Acr, 1944 
(1 OF 1944) 
• • • • • 
358. (1) • • • • 
{2) The Collector of Central Excise may, if he is of opinion that an 
order passed by the Appellate Collector of Central Excise under section 
ilj, as It stl'on inunecilately before the appointed day, or the Collector 
(Appeals) under sectlOn 3~A, is not legal or proper, dIrect any Central 
.c;XClse Olficer authorised by him in this behalf (hereafter in tms Chapter 
referred to as the authonsed officer) to appeal on his behalf to the 
J\ppellat~ Tribunal against such order . 
• • • • • 
35E. (1) The Board may, of it$ own motion, call for and examine 
the ,j,'ecord of any proceeC1J.ng in WHich a Coilector of Central ~X':!lse 
as an a'CiJudicatmg authority nas passed any decIsion or order under 
tois Act tor the purpose of satlstymg itseil as to the legality or pro-
priety oi any such decision or orner and may, by order, C1J.rect such 
Collector to apply to the Appellate Tribunal lor the determmation 01 
such points arIsing out of the deC1Slon or order as may be spe..:llied by 
the Board in its order. 
(2) The Coliector of Central EXCIse may, of his own motion, ~al1 fOl' 
and examine the record of any proceeding in which an adjuthcating 
authol'1ty subordinate to him har. passed any decision or order under 
this Act for the purpose of satisfymg himself as to the legality or pro-
priety of any such decision or oraer and may, by order, direct ~ul..h 
authority to apply to the Collector {Appeals) 10r the determination of 
iUch points arising out of the decision or order as may be specified by 
the Collector of Central Excise in his order. 
,(3) No order shall be ,made under sub-section (1) or sub-section 
,(2) after the expiry of one year from the date of the decision or order 
of the adjudicating authority. 
(4) Where in pursuance of an order under sub-section (1) for sub-
section (2), the adjudicating authority or the authorised officer makes 
an application to the Appellate Tribunal or the Collector (Appeals) 
within a period of three months from the date of communicatlon of 
the order under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) to the adjudicating 
authority. such application shall be heard by the Appellate Tribunal 
or the Collector (Appeals), as the case may be, as if such application 
were an appeal made against the decision or order of the adjudicating 
authority and the provisioll8 of this Act regarding appeals, including 
the provisions of 8ub-section (4) of section 35B shall, so far as may be, 
apply to such application. 
• • • 
. . 
II 

• 
129A. (1) 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACT I"ROM THE CUSTOMS ACT, 1962 
(52 OF 1962) 
• • • 
... • ... ... 
• 
... 
(2) The Collector of Customs may, if he is of opinion that an order 
passed by the Appellate Collector of Customs under section 128, as it 
stood immediately before the appointed day. or the Collector (Appeals) 
under section 128A, is not legal or proper, direct the proper officer to 
appeal on his behalf to the Appellate Tribunal against such order . 
... ... ... ... ... 
129D. (1) The Board may, of its own motion, call for and examine 
the record of any proceedings in which a Collector of Customs as an 
adjudicating authorty has passed any decision or order under this 
Act for the purpose of satisf~ing itself as to the legality or propriety 
of any such decision or order and may, by order, direct such Collector 
to apply to the Appellate Tribunal for the determination of such points 
arising out of the decision or order as may be specified by the Board 
in its order. 
(2) The Collector of Customs may, of his own motion, call for and 
examine the record of any proceeding in which an adjudicating authority 
subordinate to him has passed any deCision or order under this Act 
for the purpose of satisfying himself as to the legality or propnety of 
any such decision or order and may, by order, direct such authority 
to apply to the Collector (Appeals) for the determination ot such 
points arising out of the decision or order as may be specified by the 
Collector of Customs in his order. 
(3) No order shall be made under sub-section (1) or sub-section 
(2) after the expiry of one year from the date of the decision or 
order of the adjudicating authority. 
(4) Where in pursuance of an order under sub-section (1) or sub-
section (2), the adjudicating authority or any officer of customs autho-
rised in thi5 behalf by the Collector of Customs, makes an applicati()n 
to the Appellate Tribunal or the Collector (Appeals) within a period 
of three months from the date C'f communicati.n of the order under 
sub-section (1)or sub-section, (2) to the adjudicating authority, such 
application shall be heard by the Appellate Tribunal or the Collector 
(Appeals) as the case may be, as if such application were an appeal 
made clgawt the decision or order of the adjudicating authority and 
the provisiOns of this Act reg~rding appeals, including the provisions 
of sub-section (4) of section 129A shall, so far as may be, apply to such 
application. 
• • • • • 
Appeals 
to the 
---late Tri-
bunal. 
Powers of 
Board or 
Collector 
of 
Customs to 
pass cer-
tain orders. 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the adjudication, by an appellate tribunal, of disputes 
with respect to the determination of the rates of duties of customs 
and Central excise on goods and to the valuation of goods fur the 
purposes of assessment of such duties, in pursuance of article 323B of 
the Constitution and for matters connected therewith or incidental 
thereto. 
(Shri Vishwana.th Pratap Singh, Minister of Finance.) 