Bill No. 188 011118 
THE COFFEE MARKET EXPANSION (AMENDMENr~ 
BIlL, 1912 
(As INTRODUCED IN THE HOUSE OF THE PEOPLE) 
.& 
BILL 
furtl,er to "mend the CoUee Market EZpG"Bion Act, 1942. 
B. it enacted by I)nrlinment 88 follows :-
1. Short Utle aDd colllmuu:eDl8llt.-i 1) This Act may be called the 
Coffee Market Expallsion (Amendment) Act, 1952. 
, (2) It shall come into force on such datess the Central Government 
mny, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. :; 
a .• ....,-_t of Joac Utl, ad peamlM, .Act'V1I of IH2.-In the 
Cuffee ~rarket Expansion At-t, 1942 (hereinafter referred to as the l>rincipsl 
Aet),-
(a) in the long title, for the words Rnd figures "to continue the 
provision made under Ordinance No. XIII of 1940 for Rssistance to 10 
the coffee industry by regulating the export and sale of coffee and by 
other means, ", the words "to provide for the development under 
CentTal control of the ooffee kldU8tTy" shall be .substituted; and 
(b) in tbepreamble, for the words "to continue the provision mudo 
under the Coffee Market Expansion Ordinance,Ut40, for Rssistance to Iii 
the cnffee industry by reguislling ·the export and ·sale of coffee aJld by 
other means,", the words "to 'proTide for 'he .aevelopment under 
()entl'al control of the caIee industry" shall be substit.uted. 
I. AmlDClment -of .. GUn I, .... of ''''-In Bub-section (1) of 
.eotion 1 of the principal Act, for the words "Coffee ~8r1(et l~xpl!D8ion io 
Act", the words "Coftee Aet" &ball be Su9&tituted. 
t. 11IbIUta'UOD -of IIIW ._ ...... nl la- *" va cd 190.-l!'or 
seotion 2 of tbe principa1 Aot, the fellc.nvilag -seemon .ehaU be substituted, 
DlUllely:-
"2. Dcdaration as to ezpedu,,,cy of llnio,. control.-It is bercby 2lJ 
rieclar~d that it is expedient in the pubHc interest that the Union 
should tak-e uncler its control tile coftee industry." 

10 
15 
20 
30 
~ 
&. Amendment of section 3, Act va of 1942.-In sedion 8 of the 
princ:pal Act. ill cilluse (rr), the word •. IndIan" "hall be omitted. 
8. Amendment of IeCUOD 4, Act VII of 1942.-111 section 4 of the 
prinoipal Aet,-
(i) in sllb-!lel'tioll (1), fm' tbe worcls ,. Indiun Coffee Board", the 
words "Coffee Board" shu)l be 6uLstituk'd ; . 
(ii) for sub-section (2), the following sub-sections shall be '8ubsti: 
tuted, namely:-
"(2) The Board shall consist of-
(i) a Chainnan to be appointed by the Central Govern-
ment; 
.'. 1ii) one person to represe:lt tbe Indian Council of Agri-
. "lIltural ~search to be nominat-ed by t~e Central Govern-. ment; . . ,. 
(ii.) two persons to 'represcllt t.bc Cent.rll~ Government to 
be nominated by that Government: 
Provided that when a person so nominated is an offioial 
it shall be lawful for him to depute in the prescribed circum-
stances another person to attend any meeting of the Board 
on his behalf; 
(iv) one person to represent Goor~ to be nominated by 
that Government; 
(v) one person t{) rcpI'el'pnt the Government of ;My80re to 
be nomino.ted by that OOV/'lhlment ; , 
(vi) onc person to r('pr(~sent t.he Government III JdadrM 
to be nominated by that Government; 
(vii) one person to rt·prcst·nt the Go· .. ernment of 
Travancore-Cochin to be nominsted by that Govamment ; 
(viii) four persons to represent coffee trade interests to 
be nominated by the Central Government; 
(~) four persons to represent the coffee growing industry 
in MY80re to be nomillated by the Government of Mysore ; 
(z) two persons to represent t.he coffee growing industry 
in Coorg to be nominn-ted by the Government of Coorg ; 
(z.) five persolls to represcqt the coffee growing industry 
in Madras to be nominated by the Oovenlment of M;adrlUl ; 
(zi.) three perBons to represent. labour to be nominated 
by the Central Government ; 
.. 
(xiiI) three perS01lS to represent the interests of the' 
oonSUlDerato be nominated by the Central Government. 
~.eA) The Central OovC!rnment sha.1l appoint from among the 
members of the Board a Vice-Chairman who shall exercise such 
of., the pow~ra Bnd' per1onn~ .uoh' of the, duties .0£ ~ Ch~irman 
, as may be prescribed or 88 may be delegated to him ~ by the 
ChaiJ'man," 
'1. AmIDdmlJlt of I8Ction 5,Mt VII of 190.-1n lection 5 of the 
principal Act .. the WOl'd "Indi~n" shall be, omitted . 
•• AmlDdmlllt of IICtlon '1, Act VII of 19U.-1n .ectiOD '1 of the 
P,incipal Aot, ,ub·,ection (1) ,hall be omitted. 

8 
9. Subltltutton of Dew Itctlonfor IHtiOD 8 In .Act VD of IM2.-For 
section 8 of the principal Act, the following seCltion shall btl substituted, 
namely:-
, "S. Secretary and Deputy Secretary. of· tile . Boa,d.-(l) The 
Central Government shall appoint an offiCE!\". to be called the Secretary 
of the Board to exercise such powers Rnd perform such duties under 
the direction of the Board os rnR.V be prescribed. . 
(.e) The Central Government may also app~int all officer to be 
cAlled the Deputy Secretary of the Board to exercise such poweMl and 
perform such dutieR of the S(·(·retary of the Board as may be delegated 10 
to him by the :8<l<'retn.ry with the nrevious Fonction of the Central 
novernment or as llllly be presrribed'. 
(.'1) The Secretary and the Deputy Secretary of the· Board shan 
be paid such salaries and allowances by the Board a. maybe fixed 
by the Central Government." .- lIS 
10. Omtas1oil of aectiOD 9, Act VD of 1H2.-Section 9 of the principal 
Act sheJl l:M omitted. 
11. Amendment of section 13"Act VII of 190.-ln se':ltion 18 of the 
principal Act,-
(€i) in sub·section (1), the words "for credit to the, general fund to 
of the Board" sholl be omitted; and 
(b) after sub·section (5). the following sub-section mall be insert-
ed, namely: - ' 
"(5A) The proceeds of the' duties of customs and excise paid 
to the Board shall first he credit-ed to the Consolidated Fund of 25 
India, and the Central Oovernmen~ may thereafter, from time 
to time, pay to the Bonrd from and out of such proceeds such 
sums of money os it may think fit to be credited to the general 
fund of the Board." 
11. AmendmeDt of section 14, Act VII of 1942.-ln section 14, of the 30 
principal Act, in sub-section (4), for the wOMs "Chief Coffee Marketing 
Officer", the words "::;c(~retar:v of the Board" shall be substituted. 
18. AmendmeDt of section 16, Aet VU of 1941.-1n sub-seeilion (1) of 
Acction 16 of the principa] Act. the words "after consultation with the 
IJoard II shall he omitted. sa 
14. AmeDdment of SectiOD 20. Act VII of 19t2.-To section 20 of the 
principal Act, the following furth{)r proviso sholl be inserted at the end, 
nnmely:-
"Provide'd further t.hnt tbtl Central Oovernment may, by noti· 
fication in the Official Gazette, declnre what shall be the permissible '0 
Qllot,l} of ('off(~(' for cxport durillg an:v ~'('"'!" and where sueh n declarn.tion 
has been made IlO coffee f'hn.D be l'x}lortcJ from Indill in excess. of the 
said quota." . 
115. Amendment of section 25. Act VII of IM2.-In section 25 of th~ 
)lrincipnl Aet, in !luh-section (4), the wordR "with the concurrence of the " 
Ohicf Coffee MarlICting OfUcer", shall be omittod. 

IS 
10 
1& 
20 
30 
35 
40 
45 
4 
1'. AmtIl __ ot IIOIa a, .. ...... lD section 82' of lIIte 
I"'incipnl Act, in 3IJb·,1ection (9), tbe woPd. "for promoting the •• Iud: 
increasing the consumption in India and elsewhcre of coffee produ(!ed in 
IllcUa. or" sbal~ be cmlitW. 
L7 .......... , of ___ a, £'" Y!!. of !ItI.-In section S2 of the 
principal Act, in Bub-tection (.e)1 after olaUle (a). the fallowing clause Ibnll 
be inlerted. namely:-
"(d) the promotion of the 181e and ihcrease in tbe oonsumptio~ 
in India and elsewhere of coftee produced in India." 
1 •• IDIIfIoIl· of 11ft' .... IM .... at m of lMl.-AftM section 89 
of the principal Act, the following 88Otion shall: be iMeried. namely;-
"OOA. Ofl~6" II" oontpGlli ... -(l) If the person cOJDlllitting any 
olenoe uwi81' this. AIlt. ia .. cOUlpIUll. every genIOn who at tbe time 
the offence was committed \\'a8 in oha. of. and W88 responsible to, 
the company for the conduct of the bU8iness of the oompany as "'all 
aa the oompany tlbaMl b& deemed. tID be gui:ity 06 ibe off .. _ ,ahall 
be liable to be proceeded again8t and punished accol!CiW&l,. 
Provided that.. nothing contained in thia Bub·section aball render 
any iuch person liuble to punishment provided in thi .. w it Ike 
proves that the offenoe WAS committed without his knowi8d8. .. 
tha~ he elte_led, all' due c.Uligwace to grev(:Ult the commission of luoh 
offence. 
(2) No~withatanding anything contained in lub'lection (1) wbere 
an offence under this Aot bas been COIIlIIriMed' by a compaD, and ,. 
is proved that the offence bas been committed with the OODI8Dt or 
conniwlDce of, or ia a1i.ribldable io any neglect on- the part of, any 
diNCtoll, managsl', seeretNlry or other officer of ~e company such 
director, manage!!, seere~1'Y gr other officer shall also be deemed to 
be guiliy. of that offeooe awl shall be liable- to be proceeded agaiBlt 
and punished, aooordin&lY. 
E2:planation.-For the purpoae. of this MOMon.-
(a) "company" means an, bod! cor.perMe and' inolude. Q 
finn or other allOCiation of indiVidual.; ana 
(b) "director" in relation to a fin'll meanl a plll'flner in· the 
firm. 
19. AmIDdbiftt 01 ....... _, .. YJI 01 19M.-1b. seeaon. 4& 01 t.be 
principal Act. for sub·section (.e), the following sub·8BOtion-shaUl be lIubati. 
tuted., namely:-< 
"(2) Without prajudioe to tbe gen81'aUty of the foregolnr poW., 
rules may.be made providing for .11 or any of tbe following m ..... 
namely:-
(i) the term of offtae of member. of' the Baud, tbe oircum· 
stances in which and the authority by whiob· members me, be 
removed and tbe filling of c8Iual vaoancies· in the Baud-; 
(ii) the procedure to be followed at.. meetings of the Board 
and at committees thereof for the "onduot of busin .... and. the 
number of membel'l whioh ah.U fonn· .. quorum at 8 meeting j 
(iii) the maintenance by the BoaN of record.. of hUsllJes':t 
transaoted by th(~ Board and- the submission of copif''' tbereof w 
the Central Government; 

.. 
(i11') tile holding of r. minimum number of meetiDp of the 
Hoard every year; 
(v) the powers of the Board, its Chairman and committee. 
thereof with respect to the incurring of expenditure; 
(vi) the conditions subject to which the Board may incur is 
Hp8Ddit.ure outside India;. 
(,,;i) the preparation of budget estimates of receipts and .... 
p8ncitwre of the Board and the authority by whioh the estimate.. 
8l'& to be sanotioned; 
(viii) the maintenance of the accounts of income and expen- 10 
diture of the Board and the audit of such accounts; 
(iz) the deposit of the funds of the Board in bunks and the 
investment of such funds; 
(z) the re-appropriation of the estimated savings from any 
budget head to any other budget head; US 
(:n) the oonditions subject to which the Board may borrow 
funds; 
(zii) the conditions subject to whioh and the manner in which 
oontracts may be entered ioto by or on behulf of the Board; 
(ziii) the delegation to the committee or Chairman or Vioe- 20 
Chairman or members or officers of the Board of any of the 
powers and duties of the Board under thilJ Aot; 
(ziv) the staff which may be employed by the Board and 
the pay and allowanoes and leave and other conditions of service 
of omoen and other employees of the Board: iii 
(zv> the travelling and other allowances of members of the 
Board and of committees thereof; 
(zvi) the pUDposes for which funds of the Board may be as-
pended; 
(nil) the maintenance of the registers and other records of 30 
the Board and its various committees; 
(zviii) the manner in whioh the internal sale quota of ooffee 
estates shall be determined; 
(ziz) the manner in whioh the Board shall exercise its powel'fl 
of buying and selling coffee in the Indian Market: 
(zz) the appointment by the Board of agents; 
(zzi) the conditions to be fulfilled by a curing establishment 
before a licence to operate as such can be issued: 
(zzii) the form of, and the particulars to be contained in, 
any returns or reports to be made to the Board under this Act; 
(zziii) the form of, manner of npplication for, fees payable 
for, procedurt- in granting and conditions governing, the lioences 
and permits to be issued by the Board ~ 
40 
(zziv) the oollection of any information or statistios in res-
peot of coffee or any product of ooffee; 4li 
(~zv) Rny other matter (other than nny matter speoified in 
section 15) which is to be or may be presoribed under tJliB Aot. 

8 
10. VlltdatioD of oertlla aotl IIl4 1Dd1llUll', la rtlpect ULereol • ....:A11 
acts of executive authority, proceedings and sentences which have been 
done, taken or passed with respeot to, or on acoount of, coffee during the 
period oommenoing on the :46th dllY of January, HI51l, Bnd ending with 
the date of cODlmencement of this Act, by tho Governmeut or by 
5 any ofiioer of the Government or by any other authority in the betief or 
purported belief that the acts, proceedings or sentences were being done, 
taken or passed under the principal Act shall be as valid and operative 
all if they had been done, taken or passed in acoordanoe with law, and 
10 no lIuit or other legal proceeding shall be maintained or continued against 
Any authority whatsoever on the ground that nll'Y such acts, proceedings 
OJ" sentt'uQes were Dot dono, tukclI or pllssod in 1I0COrdanfJe with hlw. 

/1, 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Coffee Market Expansior. Act, 1942, was passed to meet the titun-
tion which confronted the coffee industry on the outbreak of World Waf! 
II, whl3n most of our European markets for coffee were lost. This result-
ed in a surplus of corree in the country and It slump in prices. The 
situation today is entirely different. The internal consumption of coffee 
has increased considerably and it is of the utmost importance to step up 
our production in order to meet the increasing demand of the home 
market, keep prices at reasonable levels und to meet our export require-
ments. 'l'he problem now is therefore one of the development of the 
industry rather than of mark6ting. 
2. The Indian Coffee Board also needs to be reconstituted to eusure 
better co-ordination between the Board and the Central and State Gov-
ernments and a more equitable representation of all the interests concern-
ed by changing the present method of according individual representa-
tion, by llame, to various associations on the Board. The relation.hip 
between the Board and the Centre would also be strengthened if the 
Chairman and Vice-Chairman are appointed by the Central Government 
inatead of being elected from amons the members. 
8. The proposed Bill hal! btlen designed to achieve these objects. 
4. Opportunity has also been taken-
(/II) to substitute a new section for section 2 of the principal Act 
in order to bring its language in conformity with the langu8ge of 
Entry 52 of List I in the Seventh Schedule to the Con.titutionj and 
(b) to indemnify all authorities in respect of all action taken 
between the commencement of the Constitution and the commence-
ment of ~is Act, as a. doubt may be raised as to whether, in the 
absence of a declaration mude by Parliament by law" the declara-
tion contained in section 2 was effective during that period. 
T. T. KRISHNAMACHARI. 
NEW DELHI; 
Th.e 18th Docember, 1952. 

Q 
ANNEXURE 
EDaotCT8 FROX TUB COF.ME .MABKET EXPAN'8ION ACT, 19£2 (Vn 01' 1942). 
* * * * .. 
Long title and ",eambl. 
AD .Act to COIl'tbnIe \he prcwIIton made aD_ 0IdIDaBce WO. 1l1li 11 Il1O 
!or UllNnce to \he caa.. 1Dd1lltrJ 111 rep1atlq .. ~ ..... ·ar _ 'UUI b7 other me&u. 
W HEREAS it is expedient to cODtinue trIle provilion made aier 
the Coffee Market Expansion Ordmance, 1~ (ON.. No. XUI of 
!tNO), for 88sistance to the coffee industry by regulating *he eapor.t ad 
'I81e of colee and by other means; , 
• • • • • 
S.ction ~(1) 
1. ShOrt Utle lAd atat.-(l) This A.ct may be called the Colee Marlret 
Expansion Act, 1942. 
• • • • .. 
Section 2 
.t. Daclar&&ioD u to IKpIdl8llCJ or Oeatral Gonmmlll". _trot.-
It is hereby declared that it is expedient in the public interest that the 
Central Government should take under its control the development of 
fobe coffee indUitry. 
• • • • • 
Section 8 
S. DdDJUODI.-ln this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in 
the 8ubject or context,-
(a) .. the Board" means the Indian Coffee Board constituted 
under section 4 i 
• • • • .. 
8ect·ion 4(1) and (2) 
,. OoutltaUOIl of the B0Ir4.-(1) The Doard constituted by the 
uame of the J ndian Collee Market ExpanRion Board under section " of 
the Indian Coffee Market Expansion Ordinance, 1940 (Ord. XIII of 
1940), shall be tbe Indian Coffet! Board for the purposes of this Act. 
(2) The Board shall consist of-
(a) (i) one person representing the Indian Council of Agricul. 
tural Research, nominated by the Central Government; 
(ii) one person representing the Ministry of Industry And 
Supply of the Central Govel'nment, nominated by that Government; 
(iii) one person representing Coorg, nominated by the Central 
Government i 

9 
(iv) one person representing the Government of Madras, 
nominated by that Government; 
(v) three persons representing the Mysore State, nominated 
by the Government of that State; 
(vi) two persons representing the State of Travancore-Coohin 
nominated by the Government of that State; 
(b) four persons representing the cotlee trade interea., nomi .. 
nated by the Central Gyvernmenfl; 
(e) fourteen persons representing the coffee growing industry, 
namel.y:-
(i) three persons nominated by the Government of Mysore: 
(ii) three persons nominated by the United Planters' Asso-
ciation of Southern India; 
(iii) one person nominated by the Coorg Planters' Association; 
(iv) one person nominated by the Coorg Indian Planters' Asso-
ciation; 
(v) one person nomina.ted by the Mysore Planters' Association; 
(vi) one person nominated by the Mysore Indian Planters' 
Association; 
(vii) one person nominated by the Nilgiri Cum Nl1giri-
Wynaad Planters' Association; 
(viii) one person nominated by the Malabar-Wynaad Cotlee 
Growers' Association; 
(iz) one person nominated by the Shevaroy Planters' Asso-
ciation; 
(z) one person nominated by the Palni-Bodi-Sirumalai Cotlee 
Growers' Association; 
(d) three persons representing labour, one each to be nominated 
in consultation with labour organisations by the Governments of 
Madras and Mysore and one to be nominated ill consultation with 
labour organisations by the Chief Commissioner of Coorg. 
•• - • 1* • 
Section I) 
I. incorporation of til. Board.-The Board shall be a, body corporate 
by the Dame of the Indian Coffee Board, having perpetual succession 
and a commoD seal, with power to acquire and hold property, both mov-
able and immovable, and to contract, and shall by the said name lue 
and be sued. 
* * * • * 
Seeticm 7(1) 
7. Ohairman, committeel, ltal and &1'DtI.-(1) The Chairman oC 
the Board shall be elected by the Board from among the memben of 
the B081'd: 
Prodded that the Jlerson who il1o': at the coml1'iencement of' this Aot, 
the cha.il'man of the Indian Coffee Market Expansion Board constituted 
under the Coffee Market Expansion Ordinance, 1940 (Ord. No. XUI of 
1940), shall be the first chairman of the Board. . , . . . 

10 
B.otiofl. 8 
8. muel Ooile. Marke., Olleer ad Deputy Ohiel ooa.. JIarUtIq 
Olleer.-(l) The Central Government shall appoint an officer, to be called 
the Chief Cotlee Marketing Officer to exercise such powers lind perform 
such duties under the direction of the Board us may be presoribed by the 
Central Govemment. 
(2) '!'he Central Government Jllay appoint an officer, to be called th" 
Deputy Obief C0fiee Marketing Officer to eurcise such powers and perform 
such duties of the Chief Cofft'e l\1amfliDg Ollcer .. m.y be delegated to 
him by the Chief CotJee Marketillg Officer with the previous \'1I~llction of 
thE.' Central Government or al!! ma~' be prescribed by the Central Govern-
mt'nt. 
(3) 'rhe Chief Coffee Marketing Officer nnd the Ueputy Chief Coffee 
Marketing Officer may be either salaried or unsalaried: if salaried, they 
shall be paid by the Board such salaries as Jllay be fixed by the Central 
HovernmeDt. 
(4) The Board shall pay to Ihe Chief Coffee M-at'ket,illg Officer and the 
Deputy Chief Coffee Marketing Oillcel' sucb "lIowances os may be fixed 
by the CeDtr.). GoverDweui.. 
S.ctioll 9 
9. Power of Board to mike ."e-la ••. -The Board may, with the 
previolls salJction 01 thE' ('f'nt,mJ Govemment, make bye-Iawi! consistent 
with this Act and the rules made thereunder to provide for lill or 1U1J of 
the foll()wing matters, namely:-
(0) the procedure to b~ followed at meetings of the Board and 
at committees; 
(b) the powers exereisabJe and the dutiRS to be discharged b.v the 
nhairman of the BOllrd and the memherfl of the staff of tilt:' Board; 
~c) the travelling or otber allowallces which may be dfllwn by 
members of the Board; 
(d) the appointment, promotion and dismissal of members of the 
staff of the Board, the creation and abolition of such appointments, 
and the tenns of service of me-mbel'S of the stilt! of the BoRrel; 
(e) Ilny other matter in respect of which bye.laws mny be made 
under this Act or the rules made thereunder. 
• • • • • Section 13(1) 
18. Payme.t 01 proceedl of dutJea to the Board ADd maDill! of reallla· 
tloD. bJ t:be Boarcl.-(ll Thtl proceeds of the llut,Y of l'uatoms levied under 
section 11 and of the duty of excise levied under section 12 shall be paid 
to the Board for credit to the general fund of the Board. 
• • • • • Seotion 14(4) 
1'. BeP"'.tIoD of own.,. or ootI.. ettaw.-• • • • • 
(4) If any qU8ltion arises whether an owner of an estate is or is not 
req~ired to be registared under this section, the question shall be decided 
by the Chief Coffee Marketing Officer subject to revision by the CeQtrAl 
Goverument. . ' .. • S.ction 1~(1) 
• • 
18. WlDtloD of prlce. for lila of cotree.-(l) The Central Oovernment 
may, after consultation with the Board, by n~ificatfon in \be official 

11 
-Gazette. fix the price or prices at which coffee may be sold wholesale or 
retail in the Indian market. 
• • • • • 
Section ,95(4) 
15. Surpl118 0011 .. lad nrplu pool.-
• • • • • 
(4) 'fhe Board shall, with the concurrence of the Chief Coffee Marke,t-
ing Officer, from time to time, prepare tl differential scale for the valuation 
of coffee, and shall in uccordance with that scale classify the coffee in 
each consignment delivered for inclusion in th(\ surplus pool according to 
its kind and quality, Bnd shall make an assessment of its value based on 
its qU:lntity, kind and quality. 
• • • • • 
Section 31(2) 
81. o.Deral IUD4.--
• • • • • 
(2) The general fund shall be applied to meet the expenses of the Botlrd, 
the cost of such measures as it may consider advisable to undertake for 
promoting the sale And increR.sillg the consumption in India Bnd elsewhere 
of coffee produced in India. or for promoting agricultural and technological 
research in the interp.st of the coffee industry in India. 
• • • • • 
Section 48(9) 
.8. Power of the OeDtral GovernmeDt to make rulea.-
• • • • • 
(2) Without prejudice to the gt'nel'ality of the foregoing power, rules 
may be made providing for all or any of the following watters, lIamely:-
(a) the term of office of members of the Board, the circumstances 
in which Qnd the authority by which members may be l'emoved. lind 
the filling of casual vacaucies in the Board; 
(b) the conduct of business by the Board and the nnmbE'r of 
members which shall form a quorum at a meeting; 
(c.:) the maintenanoe by the Board of records of business transact-
ed by the Board, und the submission of copies thereof to the Central 
Government; 
(d) the preparation by the BOBrd of estimates of anllual receipts 
and expelld~ture; 
(e) the manner in which the internal sale quota of coffee estates 
shuU be determined; 
(I) the manner in which the Board shall exercise its powers 
of buying and selling coffee in the Indian market; 
(g) the appointment by the Board of agents; 
(Ii) the conditions to be fulfilled by a curing establishment before 
a \iCellce to operate as sllch can be issued; 
(i) the form of and the particulars to be contained in Bny returns 
or reports to be made to the Board under this Act; 
(i) the form of, manner of application for, fees payable for, 
procedure in granting and conditions governing the licences nnd 
permits to be issued by the Board; 
(k) any otlier matter except the matters referred to in section 15 
whioh is to be or mny be prescribed under this Act. 

HOUSE OF THE PEOPLE 
BILL 
further to amend the Coffee Market Expansion Act, ] 942. 
The President has, in pursuance of clause (3) of article 
117 of the CoD8titution of India, recommended to the HOU8e 
of the People the consideration of the Bill. 
(Skri T. T. K ri8knamac1uwi, 
Minister for Oommerce aM IndU8t1'II.) 
GIPD-l,AD-988 PS-18·12-112-1,300 