AS INTRODUCED IN Lok SAnHA

‘ 47 DEC 1999

Bill No. 132 of 1999

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1999
By
Surt ANANT GANGARAM GEETE, M.P.

A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fiftieth Year of the Republic of India as follows: —
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 1999.

2. In clause (2) of article 103 of the Constitution of India for the words "Election
Commission", the words "Electoral Council” shall be substituted.

5 3. After article 324 of the Constitution of India, the following article shall be inserted,
namely:-—

"324A. (1) There shall be set up an Electoral Council consisting of the
Chairman of the Council of States, the Speaker of the House of the People, the
Chief Justice of India, the Chief Election Commissioner and an eminent jurist to
10 be appointed by the President.

(2) The Chairman of the Council of States shall be the Chairman of the Electoral
Council.

(3) The Electoral Council shall formulate the electoral policy and have the power
review decisions taken by the Election Commission in the discharge of its functions.”.

Short title.

Amendment
of article 103.

Insertion of
new article
324A.
Electoral
‘Council.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS.

The role of the Election Commission as seen during General Elections to the 12th
and 13th Lok Sabha has become the subject matter of intense debate. The decisions of the
Election Commission have been both criticised or acclaimed by the political parties, groups
depending upon their political ideologies. The wisdom and equity shown by the Election
Commission by staggering election process of 13th Lok Sabha for more than five months
and deferring poll results for more than one month has also received adverse comment
across vide spectrum of media and general public. This is not a happy situation.

Article 324 of the Constitution vests in the Election Commission the power of
superintendence, direction and control of elections which is inherently an administrative
power. The Election Commission cannot encompass policy decisions which impinge on
the functions of the executive and legislature. Even the judicial intervention had to be
sought to resolve certain controversial decisions of the Commission. This has created an
unsavoury and anomalous situation.

The time has come to review the provisions of the Part XV of the Constitution. An
"Electoral Council” consisting of the Chairman Rajya Sabha, Speaker Lok Sabha, Chief
Justice of India, Chief Election Commissioner and an eminent jurist should be constituted
to review the decisions of the Election Commission. It will enhance transparency and
credibility to the role of the Election Commission.

The Bill seeks to achieve above objectives.

New DeELut; ANANT GANGARAM GEETE
November 11, 1999.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 3 of the Bill provides for setting up of an Electoral Council consisting of the
Chairman of the Council of States, the Speaker of the House of the People, the Chief
Justice of India, the Chief Election Commissioner and an eminent jurist to be appointed
by the President. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely to involve a recurring expenditure of about rupees
ten lakh per annum.

It is also likely to involve a non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five lakh.


ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

* * |

103. (1) * * * *
(2) Before giving any decision on any such question, the President shall ०
opinion of the Election Commission and shall act according to such opinion.
*

* * aly * < + *


A
BILL i
further to amend the Constitution of India

(Shri Anant Gangaram Geete, M.P)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—2531LS—8-12-1999,