LuK SABHA 
CURHIGENUA 
to 
TIiE EXPLJRT \ QUALI TV CUNTKUL MID INSP ECTILJi'~) ./lMENIlvl ENT 
B1 LL, .l'..d:~ 3 
L-IDe/AS iD!-E5?9}.l£~Q_tn Luk~.hA..7 
~r "p roceedings" ~ " prvce-eding" 
2. Page 3, line 1'-,-
onit "other" .. _. 
3. Page 4, line 10,-
for notl! 
- read 11 or" 
4. Page 5, line 14,-
afteE "con veyan c e" insu1... "or animal" 
5. Page u, line 18,-
i£.E "0 r" ~ "of" 
\J. Page.." line 31", 
!2..£ "notificaion" read "notification" 
7. P age \oj, lin e 3'1,-
.!££ "afer" ~ 11 after" 
8. Page 10, line. 18,-
fur 11 ned" ~d_ "need" 
-
"1. Page 10, line 10 from wttom,-
.w... ".i s sum ed 11 read "i ssued" -----.... . 
10. Pa9<-; 11, line () from bottom,-
for tJ commod i ties u £11 ~ "commodit ies or" 
--
11.. Page 13, line 5 frvrn tottom,· 
fur "auhority" ~sl .. "authority" 
~ .. -

22 of 1963. 
As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA ON 
) ~ nrc :993 ' 
Bill No. 133 of 1983 ... 
THE EXPORT (QUALITY CONTROL AND INSPECTION) 
AMENDMENT BILL, 1983 
A 
BILL 
to amend ·the Export (Quality Control and Inspection) Act, 1963. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-fourth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Export (Quality Control and Short 
Inspection) Amendment Act, 1983. title and 
5 (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government 
may. by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
%, In section 2 of the Export (Quality Control and Inspection) Act, 
1963 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), clause (a) shall be re-
lettered as clause (ar), and before clause (ac) as so re-Iettered, the 
10 foIlowing clauses shall be inserted, namely:-
'(a) "adjudicating a"Uthority" means the authority specified in, 
or under, section 10K; 
(ab) "Appellate authority" means the Appellate authority re-
ferred to in section 10M;'. 
corn-
mence_ 
ment. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 2. 
J 3. fa IedIoa 3 of the prindpal Ad, in sub-leCdon (1), in clause (f), for tile Amend-
S ward "'veo" the word ''fif(eea'' shall be subsdtufed meat of , , section 
3. 
• 

Amend-
ment of 
section 7. 
Inser-
tionot 
sections 
lOA to lOP. 
Power 
to enter 
and 
inspect. 
Power to 
search. 
Power to 
seize 
commo-
djtie~, 
et'C. 
-- c_r--· 
4. In section 7 of the principal Act,--
(0) after sub-section (3). the following sub-section shall be 
inserted, namely:-
.. (3A) Where- the agency has reason to believe that a certi-
ficate issued under sub-section (3) has been obtained fraudulent- 5 
, ly or by misrepresentation, or the commodity in rel~tion to 
which the certificate is issued has been ('hanged or has deterio-
rated in quality, the agency may, by order, amend, suspend or 
cancel the certificate in such manner and subject to such pro-
cedure as may be prescribed: 10 
Provided that before amending, suspending or cancelling 
any such ~rtificate the holder thereof shall be given a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard."; 
(b) in SUb-section (4). after the words "a certificate", the words, 
brackets, figure and letter ", or by the amqndment suspension or '5 
cancellation of a certificate under sub-section (3A) ," shall be inserted. 
5. After section 10 of the principal Act, the following sections shall 
be inserted, namely:-
.. -
'lOA .. 'I1Ie Diredor 01 Jlllpedioa .... Qu:alit~, Coldrol or any oftitel' 
of tile CellInI GoYera ................ by hi .. in "ritina 10 this b8d .!u 
(M ........ referred to 85 die ".....,rised 01icH") may eater at My reason-
.we .... .-y 1ft ..... ill -wlddl 
(a) ., ~ wIIIdI .. Iteen ~ after iR!lJM!dion by 
.Y .., .... red to III _lecfioI! (1) Of section 7; or 
(b) .., boob Of 8CCOUDt or odIer tIocutue" or ~ which. 25 
iD ........... wli be ...... for, or ~vant to, an~' proceedin. under 
tills Act, 
are suspected to have been 'kept or concealed. and inspect such com-
modity, 'hooks of Bffount, other documents or things ad may take 
such notes or extracts frem such hook." of account or other doeu- 3U 
ments as he may thin~ fit. 
(0) .. y mnuaodity "Weh ... been ('h8ftl!'e~ aftC1' in~JWdif\ll by 
.., IIgeIICy referred to in !illb-5edIon (1) of 'le(tion 7; or 
(b) .y boob of account or other _'Iments or thintrs "hich in :i5 
....... , wiD be ueful for, or ~Ievant to. an,. proceed. under 
tills Ad, 
are secnRd ill aay place, he IMy enter i.to and llieftfth midi ~ or pre-
mkH for IIKh COIDIIHMfity. hooks of account; odter documeats 61' thin,", 
lOC. (1) U tbel8dllorisN oRicer lJ,15 a .. \' reason to believe tlmt Inv 40 
CORlIllOdity is UbIe to confiscation under thk 1\ ct. be may ~ize !illch 
conanodity foIetber wida the packat!e, roverin~ or receptacle, if an,', In 
wItIdI .:II fOIHIOdity if! fOlllld and where suelt commodity is fmntd to 
have been _eel with any other ,ooM or ..... ~ri,.15. Ik- ma\' ~l'il~ !f(nclt 
connaodity toaether with ~ ~s or materink with "'hieh it i .. so mh:ed: 45 
Provided thqt where it i!'; not practicable to seize any such 
commodity, the authorised officer may serve on tnt» 'lwn':!r 
of the commodity an order that he sha11 not rc'T\Ov{' part with. or 

5 
10 
15 
30 
35 
45 
3 
otherwise deal with, the commodity except with the previous per-
mission of such authorised officer. 
(2~ W.here any commodity is seized under sub-section (1) and 
no notice 10 respect th~reof is given under section 10L within six 
months of the seizure of such commodity, it shall be returned to the 
person from whose possession it was seized: 
Pro\'ided that the aforesaid period of six months may, on suffi-
cient eause being shown, be extended by the Director of Inspection 
and Quality Control by a further period not exceeding six months. 
(3) The authorised officer may seize any docume~ts or things. 
which, in his opinion, will be useful for, or relevant to, any proceed-
ing under thi" .t\.ct. 
(4) The person from whose custody any documents are seized 
under sub-section (3) shall be entitled to make copIes thereof or 
take extracts therefrom in the presence oC the authorised officer. 
(5) If any person legally entitled to the documents or other 
things seized under sub-section (3) objects, for any reason, to the 
retention by the 8'Uthorised officer of the documents or things, he 
may make an application to the Central Government stating therein 
the reasons for such objection and requesting for the return of the 
documents or things. 
(6) On rf'ceipt of an application under sub-section (5), the 
Central Government may, after giving the applicant an opportunity 
of being heard, pass such order as it may think fit. 
(7) Where any document-
(a) is produced or furnished by any person or has been 
seized from 1he custody or control of any person under this Act 
or any other law for the time being in force; or 
(h) has been received from any place outside India (duly 
3uthentic<1ted by such a"'lt.hority or person and in such manner 
as may be prescribed) in the course of the investigation of allY 
offence alleged to have been committed by any person agatDlt 
this Act, 
and such documl'nt is tendered in evidence against the person by 
whom it is 'produced or from whom it was seized or against such 
person and any other person who is jointly tried, or proceeded 
against, with him, the court, or, as the case may be, the adjudicating 
authority shall, notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained 
in r.ny other law for the time being in force,-
(i) presume, unless the contrary is proved, that the signature 
and every other part of such document which purports to be in 
the handwriting of any particular person or which the court or 
t.he adjudicating authority may reasonably assume to have been 
signed by, or to be in the handwriting of, any particular person, 
is under that person's handwriting, and, in the case of a docu-
ment executed or attested, it was executed or attested by the 
person by whom it purports to have been so executed or attested; 
. (ii) admit the dpcument in evidence notwiths~anding. ~hat 
it is not duly stamped, if such document is otherwlse admiSSible 
in Qvidence. 

Power 
to stop 
and seize 
con-
veyan-
ces. 
SelU"Ch 
and 
seiz~ 
to be 
made in 
accord-
ance 
With 
the 
Code of 
Criminal 
Proce. 
dure, 
1973. 
Confts-
cation. 
4 
IOD. ADy .. tIIori8ecl ofticer may, if be 11M any reIIIOD to ... Pftt .. at 
.y conveyaace or anlmaI is being, or Is &boat to be, ... for tile en.-
portation of any . COIIlIDOdity whic:b is liable to coaftscadon UDder tills Ad 
and tbat by -=h tn.sportation my provisioa of this Act has beeD, is be-
iII& or 18 about to be, contravened, III .y tDe stop sudI c:onvey..:e 01' 5 
..imal or, in the CIR of _ aircraft, compel it to Imd, and 
(a) nlfDlllllle and sawda tile ~ or any part dIereof, 
(b) esamiae and se8l'Ch any goods or lD8teriais in tile CODfty8llCe 
or OD tile ..... 
(c) if it becomes nec:Ul!illlry to stop aDy COIIveyaace 01 ....... , lie 10 
_y DSe • 1a"'111 _for .stoppiIIa it -.I wbere IIUda .... bII, 
tile coDveyaace or ani ....... y be fired apoa, 
and wIIere he is atisfiecI that it is Mee • .,. 80 to do to preveat tile con-
trayeldioa of _y provision 01 this Act, lie may lei. sadI colmyuce or 
Explanation.-Any raference in this section to a conveyance 
shall, unless the context otherwise requires, be construed as including 
a reference to an aircraft, vehicle or vessel. 
lOE. The provision5 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, 2 of 1974. 
relating to searches and seizures shall, so far as may be, apply to ~o 
ev~ry search or seizure made under this Act. 
1 OF. Any commodity in respect of which-
(a) a certificate has been obtained from an agency referred 
to in sub-section (1) of section 7 fraudulently or bY' misrepresen-
~UOO,M ~5 
(b) any provision of this Act has been, is being, or is attemp-
ted to be, contravened, 
shall, togeth~r with any package, coveriBg or receptacle in which 
such commodity is found, be liable to confiscation and, where such 
commodity is so mixed with any other goods or materials that 30 
it cannot be readily separated, such other goods or materials 
~hall also be liable to confiscation: 
Provided that where it is established to the satisfaction of the 
adjudicating authority that any commodity, which is liable to 
confiscation under this Act, belongs to a person other than the person, 35 
who has, by any act or omission, rendered it liable to confiscation, and 
such act or omission was without the knowledge or connivance of 
the person to whom it belongs. such commodity shall not be ordered, 
to be confiscated; but such othqr action as is authorised by this Act 
may be taken against the person who has, by such act or orniasion, 40 
rendered such commodity liable t.o conftacation. 

5 
lOG. Any conveyance or animal which hrs been, is being, or is Confisca-
~ttempted to be, used for the transport of any commodity which is tion of 
lIable to confiscation under this Act, shall be liable to confiscation con-
~nl~s the own'ar of the conveyance or animal proves that it was, veyance. 
IS beIng, Or is about to be, so used without the knowledge or conni-5 
vance of the owner himself, his agent, if any, and the person in 
charge of the conveyance or animal and that each of them had 
tak~n all reasonable precautions against such use: 
Provided that in the case of a conv~yance or animal used for 
10 the transport of goods or passengers for hire, the o,Wner of the con-
veyance or animal shall be given an option to pay, in lieu of con-
fiscation of thl' conveyance or animal, aftne not exceeding the value 
of the commodity which has been, is being, or is attempted to be, 
transported by such conveyance~ 
15 10H. Whenever confiscation of any commodity is authorised by 
this Act, the offi~r adjudging it shall, without prejudice LO the pro-
visions of the proviso to section lOG, give to the owner of the .:om-
modity an optian to pay in lieu of confiscation such fine not exceed-
ing the value of the commodity. 
10-1. Any person,-
(a) who, in relation to any commodity, does or omi~ to do 
any act which act or omission would render such commodity 
liable to confiscation under this Act, or abets the doing or o~is­
sion of such an act; or 
(b) who acquires possession of or is in any way concerned 
in carrying, removing, deposi Hng, keeping, concealing, selling or 
purchasing, or in any manner dealing with, any commod;ty which 
he knows or has reason to believe is liable to confiscation under 
this Act, 
shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding five times the value of the 
commodity or five· thousand rupees, whichever is more, whether or 
not such commodity has been confiscated or is available for confis-
cation. 
lOJ No confiscation made or penalty imposed under the foregoing 
.. ' of thl'S Act shall prevent the infliction of any other provIsIons ., d h . h nt to which the person affected thereby IS liable un er t e pums me h . be' . 
provisions of this Act or under any other law for t e time mg In 
force. 
10K Any confiscation may . be adjudged or penalty dmQay Ii!; 
. this Act by the Director tOf IDspeetion an ua 
Imposed under h directs by a general or special order, by 
Control, or, where e SO , 
any oftleer subordinate to him. 
Option to 
Pay finc 
in lieu 
of con-
fiscation. 
Liability 
to penalty. 
Confisca-
tionor 
penalty-
not to 
interfere 
with 
other 
punish-
ments. 
Adjudica. 
tion. 

Giving 
ofop. 
portunity 
to the 
owner 
of goods, 
etc. 
Appeal 
Powers of 
revision. 
6 
lOL. No order of adjudication of confiscation Or. imposing a 
penalty shall be made unless the owner of the commodity, convey-
ance or animal or other person concerned, is given a notice in writ-
ing-· 
(a) infurming him of the grounds on which it is proposed 5 
to confiscate S'uch commodity, conveyance or animal or to im-
pose a penalty; 
(b) giving him a reasonable opportunity 8f making a 
representation in writing within such reasonable time as may 
be specified in the notice against the confisc~tion or imposition 10 
of penalty mentioned therein, and, if he so desires, of being 
heard in the matter. 
10M. (1) Aay penoa ..... ed It, uy dedliea or order IDIIde aader 
lids Act 1M)' ..... aD .. ,ellt-
e a) where the decisioD or order bas beeD madelty the Direc- J 5 
lor of IIIIrpedioII Mel QaIIIity CoIItrol, to tile Central ~en_eIIt; 
(b) wilen .. dedIIoa or ..... 11M ........ by 1liiy oIker 
_az. * .. tile ~ or IIIIrpedioII .. QaIity CoMroI, to .. 
Director of Inspection IIltiII Qaality Centrol • 
....... &I period of forty-1ft days froID tile dIIte oa whkII tile dec... or ~o 
.... Is 8eI"ft!d OB .m per!IOIl: 
Provided that the Appellate authority may, if it is satisfied 
that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from preferling 
the appeal within the aforesaid period of forty-five days, allow 
stich appeal to be preferred within a further period of forty-five 25 
days: 
Provided further that in the case of an appeal against an order 
imposing a penalty, no such appeal shall be enterfaihed unless the 
amount of the penalty has been deposited by the appellant: 
Provided also that where the Appellate authority is of the 30 
opinion that the deposit to be made will cause undue hardship to 
the appellant, it may, at irs discretion. dispense with such deposit 
either unconditionally or subject to such conditions as it may 
impose. 
(2) The Appellate authority may, after giving to the appellant 35 
a reasonable opportunity of being heard, if he so desires, and after 
makin~ such further inquiries, if any, as it may consider necessary, 
pass such orders as it thinks fit, confirming, modifying or reversing 
the decision or order appealed against, or may send back the case, 
with such directions as it may think fit for a fresh adjudication or 40 
decision, as the case may be, after taking additional eVidence, if 
necessary: 
Provided that an order enhancing or imposing a penalty or 
confiscating commodity of a greater value shall not be made 
under this section unless the appellant has had an opportunity of 45 
making a representation and, if he so desires, of being heard, in his 
defence. 
ION. The Central G.vem~ent may, on its own motion or 
otherwise, call for and examine the records of any proceeding in 
which an order of adjudication of confiscation or imposing any 50 
penalty has been made by any officer under this Act and against 
which no appeal has beep preferred, for the purpose of satisfying 

5 of 1908. 
2 of 1974. 
5 
10 
7 
itse~. as to the correctness, legality or propriety of such order or 
decIsIon and pass such orders thereon as it may think fit: 
.Provided that no decision or order shall be varied under this 
section so as to prejudicially affect any person unless such person-
(4) has, within a period of two years from the date of 
such dec.ision or order, received a notice to show cause why 
such deCIsion or order shall not be varied, and 
(b) has been given a reasonable opportunity of making 8 
representAtion and, if he so desires, of being heard in his 
defence. 
1()"(). (1) Every authority making any adjudication o.r hearing 
any appeal or exercising any powers of revision under this Act 
shall have all the powers of a civil court under the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908, while trying a suit, in respect of the following 
matters, namely:-
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of wit-
nesses; 
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any docu-
ment; 
SiO (c) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from 
3° 
35 
45 
50 
any court or office; 
(d) receiving evidence on affidavits; and 
(e) issuing commissions for the examination. of witnesses 
llr documents. 
(2) Every authority making any adjudication or hearing any 
appeal or exercising any powers of revision unde!' this Act shall be 
deem~d to be a Civil Court for the purposes of sections 345 and 
346 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973. 
(.1) Every authority making any adjudication Or hearing any 
appeal or exercising any powers of revision under this Act shall 
have the power to make such orders of an interim nature as it may 
think fit and may also. for sufficient cause. order the stay. of op~ra-
tion of any decision or order. 
lOP. (1) Where R penalty hac; baen impoSE'd hy tll£' adjudicating 
authority and-
(a) no appeal against the order imposing such penalty has 
been preferred to thp. AppellAte authority and the person entitled 
to file such appeal dies or is adjudicated an insolvent before the 
expiry of the period within which the appeal can be preferred; or 
(b) fin appeal has been preferred to the Appellate author~ty 
against the order imuosing su~h penalty but the appellant dIes 
or is adjudicated an in~olvent during the pendency of the appeal. 
then. it shall be lawful for the legal representativ~s of such person 
Or the Official Assignee or the Official Receiver, as the caSe lJ}ay be, 
to prefer nn appeal to the App!llate authority or, as t?e c~se may 
be, to continUe the appeal before the Appellate authorIty, In place 
h nd the provisions of section 10M shall. so far a~ may of sue !Jerson a 
be. apply or continue to apply to such appeal. 
(2) The powers of the Official Assignee o~ the ~fficial Receiver 
under sub-section (1) shall be exercised by hIm sub,ect to the pro-
Powcrsof 
adjudicat-
ing and 
other 
autho-
rities. 
Continu-
ance of 
proceed-
ings in 
the 
event of 
death or 
in~l­
veney. 

Amend-
_ ment of 
8Cction 
11. 
lilser-
lion Of 
new sec-
lions llA. 
lIB and 
lie. 
Penalty 
for con-
traV('n-
tion of 
order 
made by 
adjudicaL 
ing autho-
rity or 
Appel-
late 
autho-
rity. 
Offences 
by offi-
cers and 
emplo-
yees of 
agency, 
etc. 
Correc-
tion of 
clerical 
or arith_ 
metical 
mistakes. 
8 
visions of the Pres.idency-towns Insolvency Act, 1909, or' the Provin-
cial Insolvency Act, 1920, as the case may be.'. 
G. In sUb-section (1) of section 11 of the principal Act, in clause (ii), 
for the words "two years", the words "three years" shall be substituted. 
7. Aftp.r section 11 of the principal Act, the following sections shall 5 
be inserted, namely:-
"UA. If any person fails to pay the penalty imposed by the ad-
judicating or the appellate' ,authority or fails to comply with any 
direction or oreler 'made. ~r ~ to hav~ been made, Under this 
Act, he sh8H. on conviction, be punishable W'ithimpdSO'lUnent for 10 
a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both. 
lIB. (J) n any officer or employee of too Councilor of any 
agency referred to in sub-section (1) of section 7, or any surveyor, 
sampler or employee of any te~ng house, referred to in sub-eectlon 
(2) of that section enters into. or acquiesces in, any agreement to 15 
do. abstains from doing, permits, conceals or connives at, any act 
or thing wbereby any provision of this Act is or may be contravened, 
he shaU, on conviction, be punisbable with imprisonment for a ·term 
which may extend to two years. or with fine which may exteftd to 
five thousand rupees, or with both. SlO 
(Z) If Any officer searchtlS or authorises any other oftlcer of the 
Central Government to search any place without having reason to 
believe that any commod;ty. books of account or documents or 
things of the nature referred to in flection lOB are secreted in that 
place. he shall, on conviction, be punishable with imprisonment for 125 
a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may 
extend to one thousand rupees, or with both. 
(3) If any officer OT employee of the Council or of any agency 
referred to in sub-section (I) of section 7, or any surveyor, sampler 
or' employee of any testing house, referred to in sub-seetio'Tl (2) of 30 
that ~ection, except in the dischar~e in good faith of his dllty as such 
officer or employee or in complinnce with any requisition made 
unde:r any law for the time beinJl: in force. discloses any particulars 
learnt by him in his official capacity In respect of any 
commodity, he shall, on conviction. be punishable with imprisonment 35 
for' a' term which may extend to six months. or with flne whlch may 
exrend to one thousand rupees, or with both. 
lIC. Clerical or 8rit~tical mi!ltnkes in any decision o.r order. 
Or errors arising therein from any Accidental slip or omission may, 
'of 1108. 
50t 1820. 
at any time, be corrected by the authority by which the decision or 40 . 
order Wa.Il made either on its own motion or on the application of the 
D[Zgrieved person: 

5 
9 
Provided that where any correction pi oposed to be made under 
this section wil~ have the effect of prejudicially affecting any person, 
no S'UCh correctIon shall be made except after giving to that person 
a reasonable opportunity of making a representation in the matter 
and no such correction shall be made after the expiry of a period of 
two years from the date on which such decision or order was made.'~ 
8. After section 16 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
inserted, namely:-
20 
35 
'45 
"16A. (1) If the Central Government is satisfied that cirC"olm-
stances exilJt which render it necessary or expedient so to do in the, 
public interest, it may, by 'notification in, the Official Gazette, sus· 
pend or relax to a specified extent, the operation, of all Or any of 
the provisions of this Act in respect of such not.ified commodity or 
commodities generally or in respect of any area and for sucn period 
as may be specified in the notification. 
(2) Where the operation of any provision of this Act has, under 
sub-section (1), been suspended or relaxed, such suspension Or rela-
xation m~y, at any time, be removed by the Central Government 
by a like notification. 
(3) Every notification issued under this st-ction shall be laid,-
as soon as may be after it is issued, before each House of Parliament, 
while it is in session, for a total ~eriod of thirty days whicn may be 
comprised in one session or in two Or more successive 'Sessions, and 
if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session 
or the successive sessions aforesaid, both HO'Use's agree in making 
any modification in the notification or both Houses agree that the 
notification should not be issued, the notification shall thereafter 
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the 
ease may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment 
shall ,be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously 
done under that notificaion.". 
I. In section 17 of the principal Act,-
(4) in sub-section (2) ,-
(i) after clause (f), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:-
CI (I) the manner in which, and the proced~re subject 
to which anv certificate issued under sub-sedtlOn (3) of 
,section7 ~hall· be amended, suspended or cancelled;"; 
(ii) afer clause (g), the following clause shaH be inserted, 
namely:-
"(gg) the authority Of. person by which O.f by whom, 
d the manner. in which any document receIVed from a 
an the t~-ated·"· place outsi~ India shall be au n ~ " 
. th oros "in 'which it is so laid", 
(b) in sub-section (3), fOf. ethw ." shall be substituted. 
the words "immediately follo~ng e sesSIon 
Insertion 
of new 
section 
l6A, 
Suspen 
sian, 
etc., of 
operation 
of the 
provi-
sions of 
the Act. 
Amend· 
, mentol 
section 
17. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
,For the sound d~velopment of the export trade of India through quali-
ty control and i~spection, the Export· (Quality Control and Inspection) . 
Act, 1963 (22 of 1963) was enacted in 1963. The Act came into force from 
1st ,January, 1964 and it empowers the Centrd Government to notify 
commodities for the purposes of compulsory quality control and pre-
shipment inspection. Once a commodity was Dotifted, it cannot be • 
exported unless it is accompanied by a certificate of export worthiness, 
issued by an export inspectiolT agency established or recognised by the 
Government under the Act. 
2. Under section 3 of the Act, the Export Inspection Council was 
established on the 1st January. 1964 and its main function is to advise 
the Central Government regarding measures of enforcement of quality 
control and inspection of commodities intended for export. Five export 
inspection 'agencies have been established under the provisions of the 
Act and a few private inspection agencies have also been given recogni. 
tion under the provisions of the Act. . 
3. Of late, a ned has been felt for giving greater emphasis on 
measures of q'llality control and pre-shipment in~pection in the interests 
of proj~ctiRg the right image for -Indian goods in overseas markets. With 
a view to achieving this object, a review was made of the working of 
the provisions of the Act in the light of the eX1lerience gained in the 
working of the Act. This review has come to light certain inadequacies, 
deficiencies and lacunae in the Act and it is proposed to amend some of 
the provisions of the Act so as to enable the Export Inspection Council 
and the export inspection agencies to administer the compulsory quality 
control and pre-shipment inspection schemes more effectively. 
4. The Bill accordint;tly provides for the following changes In the 
Act, namely:-
(i) it is .proposed to enlarge the membership of 'the Export 
Inspection Council by four persons who will be nominated by the 
Central Gov~mment; 
(il) under the existing provisions. a certificate of export worthi-
ness once issued to a commodity by the export inspection 8Rency 
cannot be withdrawn even if there are reasons to believe that the 
certificate was issumed wrongly or fraudulently. It is proposed to 
empower the agencies to amend or suspend or cancel such' certifi-
cate in accordanC'e with the procedure to be prescribed by rules 
under the Act; . 
. (iii) the Act at present provides for proseautions only tQr 
fraudulent use of export wQrthv certificates or other violations of 
the Act. Experience has flhown '. that these steps did not have the 
de~ired effect in curbing the abuses of the quality control and pre-
shIpment inspection facilities. There is also no guarantee that the 
!o1ente'lce~ of imnrisonment 01' flne i."po~ed by courts wou.ld mc:rp up 
TO 

I J 
the ill-gotten gains accruing to persons m'susing the ·facilities. With 
a view to remove this lacuna in the Act, it is proposed to provide 
for the entry, inspt;ction and sea'rch of premises in which notified 
commodities which have been manipulated after examination by 
the export inspection ~gencies or documents or things in connection 
therewith are suspected to have been kept or concealed and to 
seize them. Provision for the confiscation of such commodities and 
imposition of penalties have also been proposed in the Bill; 
(iv) in order to have a check on the mis~ or abuse of powers 
by the officers of the Export Inspection Council or of the export 
inspection agencies, it is proposed to make a provision by which the 
delirrquent officers who have misused their authority would be liable 
to punishment under the Act; 
(v) under the existing provisions, commodities notified by the 
Central Government are. prohibited from export unless they are 
accompanied by certificates issued by export inspection agencies. 
There may be some special contingencies when it may be necessary 
for temporary .suspension or l'elaxation of the operation of all Jr any 
of the provisions of the Act in respect of certain commodities of 
areas. It is proposed to provide this power to the Central Govern-
ment. 
5. The Bill seeks to achieve the aforesaid objects. 
NEW DELHI; VISHWANATH PRATAP SINGH. 
The 2nd NC1,embe r ... 1983. 

FINANCIAL MEMORAlU>UM 
Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to amend clause (f) of ~ub-section (1) of 
section 3 of the Export (Quality Control and Inspection) Act, 1963 10 
as to increase the number of nominated members of the Export Inspec-
tion Council from eleven to fifteen. Under sub-section (3) of that seetion, 
the members of the Council are entitled to be paid such travelling and 
daily allowances as may be· prescribed by 'rules made under the Act. 
It is estimated that the expenditure that is likely to be incurred towards 
payment of travelling and daily allowances to the four new members 
will come to Rs. 24.,000 per annum. 
2. Clause 5 of the Bill proposes to insert new sections lOA to lOP in 
the Act. New sections lOA to IOC of the Act empower .the Director of. 
Inspection and Quality Control or any officer of the Central 'Govern-
ment authorised by him in this behalf, to enter and inspect and search 
any premises in which any commodities which have been changed 
after examination by an export inspection agency or the books of 
a~count Or' other documents or things in respect of any such commodity 
are suspected to have been kept or concealed and to seize such commodi-
ties, documents or things. The said officers have also been given power 
under the new section 10D to stop and seize conveyances which are used 
for the transportation of any commodities which are liable to con&cation 
under the Act. NeVI section 10K empowers certain oftkers to adjudge 
the confiscation or impose penalties under the Act. The power to hear 
appeals against orders made under the Act has been given to the 
Central Government tlnd the Director of In.'ipection and Quality Control 
under the new section 10M. The Bill, if enacted, would neeessitate the 
appointment of certain officers and staff for carrying out the above 
functions. The estimated administrative recurring expenditure for 
meeting the salaries and other expenses of the omCers and staff is likely 
t6 be" of the order of Rs. 87,000. A non-recurring expenditure of the 
order of Rs. 20,000 is also likely to be involved. 
3. The Bill does not involve any other expenditure either recurring 
or non-reCurring, 
12 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 8 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section 16A in the 
Export (Quality Cont,rol and Inspection) Act, 1963, which empowers 
the Central Government to suspend or relax to a specified extent 
by notification the operation of all or any of the provisions of the Act 
in respect of such notified commodity Or commodities generally or in 
respect of any area and for such period as may be specified in the noti-
fication. This power is required to meet certain special contingencies 
such as total strike in the export inspection agency when it may be neces-
sary for temporary suspension of the operation. of the Act. There may 
. be other circumstances and contingencies also which cannot be visualised. 
It is, however, made clear that the power can be exercised only when 
it is necessary or expedient in the public interest. As in the case of 
rules, provision is made for laying of such notifications before each House 
of Parliament and for their modification or annulment by Parliament. 
In the circamstances, the delegation of legislative power is of a normal 
character. 
2. SUlh-6ection (1) of section 17 of the Act empower~ the' Central 
Government to make rules to carry out the P'Urposes of the Act. Sub-
section (2) of the said section 17 enumerates the matters with respect' 
to which, rules may be made. Clause 9 of the Bill seeks to insert two 
new clauses (ff) .and (gg) in the said sub-section (2) to provide for the 
manner in which, and the procedure subject to which, any certificate 
issued under sub-6eotion (3) of section 7 of the Act shall be amend~, 
suspended or cancelled under the new 'Sub-section (3A) of that section 
and to specify the auhority or person by which or by whom, and the 
manner in which, any document received' tram a place outside India 
shall be authenticated. The mat~rs for which rules may be made under 
these two new clauses are matters of detail or procedure. The dele-
gation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character. 
. 15 
• 1.. .. 

Establish. 
ment of 
Export 
Inspec. 
tion 
Council 
Machirrery 
for quality 
control and 
inspection. 
Penalty. 
POWer 
to make 
ru-. 
• 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE EXPORT (QUALITY CONTROL AND INSPECTION) ACT, 1963 
(22 OF 1963) 
* • • • • 
3. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the OtBcial 
Gazette, establish, with effect from such date as may be specified in 
the notification, a CC1Uncil to be known as the Export Inspection Council, 
which shall consist of-
• • • • • 
(1) eleven o~her members nominated by the Central Govern· 
ment three of whom shall be persons representing the' agencies 
referred to in section 7. 
• • • • • 
7. (J) • • • • 
(4) Any person aggrieved by the refusal of any agency referred 
to in sUh-section (1) to issue a certificate may prefer an appeal within 
such time as may be prescribed to 'such authority as the Central 
Government may, by notlftcation in the Official Gazette, constitute for 
the purpose of hearing appeals. 
• • • • • 
11. (1) If any person contravenes any order under ~lause (d) of 
section 6, or fraudulently obtains a certificate under section 7, or· 
fraudulently affixes or applies any such mark or seal as is referred to 
In sub-section (1) of section 8, he' shall, on conviction, be punishable-
• • • • • • 
(ii) for the second or subsequent offence, with imprisonment 
for a term which may extend to two yearS mer also with fine which 
may extend to five thousand rupees and in the absence of .peelal 
and adequate reasons to be mentioned in the judgment of the court, 
such impris.Jnment shall not be less than three months. 
• • • • • 
17. (1) • • • • 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such rules may provide for-
• • • • • 
'(3) Ewry rule made by the Central Government under thi. section 
shall be laid 8'S soon as may be after tt Is made before each HOUle of 
Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thir.ty days which 
may be comprised in one session or tn two or' more successive sessions, 
and tf, before the expiry of the 'Session in which it is so laid or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree In making any modifi-
cation in ;the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be 
made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modifled form 
or be of no effect, as the case may be; so however that any such modi-
fication or annulment shall 00 without prejudice to the validity of any-
thing previously done under that rule . 
• 
... -. 
.. 
14 . , 
.40 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
• 
to amend the Export (Quality Control and Inspection) Act. 1963. 
!Shri ViBhwanath Pratla.p Singh, 
J. .. MiniateT of CommeTCe)~ 