5
As introduced in Lok Sabha
Bill No. 133 of 2022
THE PLACES OF WORSHIP (SPECIAL PROVISIONS) REPEAL 
BILL, 2022
By
Dr. Krishnapal Singh Yada v, M.P.
a
BILL
to repeal the Places of Worship (Special Provisions) Act, 1991.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third year of the Republic of India as 
follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Places of Worship (Special Provisions) Repeal Bill, 
2022.
2. The Places of Worship (Special Provisions) Act, 1991 is hereby repealed.
Short title.
Repeal.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
 The Places of Worship (Special Provisions) Act of 1991 was enacted to prohibit 
conversion of any place of worship and to provide for the maintenance of the religious 
character at any place of worship as it existed on 15th day of August, 1947. India is and has 
always been a civilizational state and to, not maintain that status would truly be a disrespect 
to our glorious past. Numerous places of worship in the past have been destroyed and 
desecrated in our country in the garb of invasions, battles, and warfare. The suppressed 
nature of our people and deeply-rooted colonialism didn’t allow us as a society to take any 
action against the cruelty bestowed upon us and our places of worship. Post-independence 
was truly the time to right the wrongs committed to these places of worship and our people 
in general. However, when the issues were raised, the Places of Worship Act, 1991 did not 
allow the people to fight for their places of worship that were destroyed and desecrated but 
also limited our history by limiting it to post-independence.
 India is a civilizational state that cannot be limited to its civic attributes only, which the 
Act largely tried to do with an exception to the Ramjanmbhoomi-Babri Masjid structure. 
That too took two decades to provide justice on the long-awaited judgment. Whereas the 
Government should have created an infrastructure to fast-track such issues of conflict on the 
ownership of places of worship. In doing so the Parliament ignored the Hindu belief upheld 
by the Supreme Court in the case, Mahant Ram Saroop Dashi vs. S.P . Sahi, AIR 1959 SC 
951, that “Even if the idol gets broken or is lost or stolen, another image may be consecrated 
and it cannot be said that the original object has ceased to exist”. Thus, even though the 
Hindu temples were destroyed decades ago, they have not ceased to exist.
 Considering recent events and the feelings of most of the citizens of the country in the 
cases of the Gyanvapi mosque in Varanasi and the demand to establish the Krishnajanmbhoomi 
Temple in Mathura, it becomes necessarily important to repeal the current law to make the 
process of reclaiming lost lands by legal means. Off late there’s also the Lakshman ka Tila-
TilaWali Masjid dispute in Lucknow that has attracted great interest from pressure groups as 
well. There is a total number of 600 to 3000 such disputed lands and places of worship that 
were converted, destroyed, or desecrated by different rulers across the country as contested 
by various pressure and interest groups. These, however, cannot be contested due to the 
current law. It is of absolute importance to realize that these places of worship constitute a 
paramount part of the identity of various people. People of various beliefs under the right to 
religion have the right to worship their Gods and have access to places of worship.
 It would thus be a violation of the fundamental rights of Hindus, Jains, Buddhists 
and Sikhs as it snubbes their voices against the acts of the past invaders. Therefore it not 
only violates the fundamental rights to practice and propagate religion but also the right to 
equality under Article14. It is, therefore, important to right the wrongs that were done in the 
past practiced by the former  rulers and colonial powers. 
 Moreover, while a lot of historians do defend the act by stating the time, space, and 
context argument but to justify these acts would not help solve the current problem at hand. 
The work of efficient Government is to carry out the will of the people and not to restrict 
them. Sections 2, 3 and 4 of the Act, bars any dispute regarding the nature of a place of 
worship after1947. Therefore, the Act takes away the powers of the court under article 32 
and 226 which it has no authority to do as opined in the case I.R. Coelho vs. State of Tamil 

Nadu, (1999) 7 SCC 580 and L. Chandra Kumar  vs. Union of India , (1994) 5 SCC 539. 
The powers under article 32 of the Supreme Court are provided by the Constitution with 
the intent of protecting the fundamental rights of the people. It’s power is expansive enough 
to issue any order for the protection for the enforcement of fundamental rights. For a law 
to not allow access to a fair attempt at fighting a case to reclaim these structures is surely 
unfair. Every attempt for the same could be simply struck down due to the present law and 
therefore, to repeal it, becomes of utmost importance.
 To repeal the Places of Worship (Special Provisions) Act of 1991 is to give the people of 
India a voice and a shot at rightfully reclaiming their lost lands taken away from them. Thus, 
the present repeal bill aims at giving the people a judicial chance to resolve existing disputes 
and therefore, seek communal harmony by closing the age-old chapters of destroyed places 
of worship and the debate following them.
 Hence this Bill.
New Delhi; KRISHNAPAL SINGH YADA V
July 5, 2022.

LOK SABHA
a
BILL
to repeal the Places of Worship (Special Provisions) Act, 1991.
(Dr. Krishnapal Singh Yadav, M.P.)