1
THE  ABOLITION OF BEGGING BILL, 2012
By
SHRI R. THAMARAISELV AN, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for abolition of begging and for matters connected therewith
or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-third Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Abolition of Begging Act, 2012.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
Short title,
and
commencement.
Bill No.  133  of  2012
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) “beggar” means a person who indulges in begging; and
(c) “begging” means—
(i) soliciting alms in a public place, including railways, bus-stops, road
sides and public transport, by involving compassion; and
(ii) entering into any private premises for the purpose of soliciting or
receiving alms.
3. Begging by any person in any manner is hereby abolished.
4. Whoever forces or encourages any person, including a child in his care, custody or
charge, for begging or whoever uses any person as an exhibit for the purpose of begging,
shall be punished with a fine of rupees five hundred.
5. (1) Any person found begging shall be arrested by the Police.
(2) Any person so arrested shall be sent to a Receiving Centre, to be established in
every district by the appropriate Government, wherein such person shall be provided with
facilities for his rehabilitation.
6. (1) The Central Government shall constitute a Fund to be known as the Beggars'
Welfare Fund for the welfare and rehabilitation of the beggars.
(2) The Fund shall be administered by, such agency, as the Central Government may
designate.
7. (1) The appropriate Government shall formulate such schemes, work out such
plans, including plans for provision of education, and create suitable infrastructure in
every district so as to enable beggars to take up suitable jobs for earning livelihood.
(2) The appropriate Government shall set up destitute homes for providing food,
shelter and protection to the old, infirm, helpless and destitute persons so as to discourage
them from indulging in begging.
8. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Definitions.
Abolition of
begging.
Punishment
for forced
begging.
Arrest of
persons found
begging.
Beggars'
Welfare Fund.
Formulation
of schemes
and plans for
beggars, etc.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Despite all efforts made and welfare measures taken by the Central Government and
the State Governments, the practice of begging continues unabated all over the country,
especially in the metropolitan cities and urban areas. There are also organized gangs who
exploit innocent children and force them into begging. Its not for the sustenance of these
boys and girls but for gathering alms for the gang leaders. These gangs have made kidnapping
children and forcing them into begging a business and thereby collect huge amount.
While the old and infirm beggars can be sent to destitute homes, the able-bodied
beggars should be given education and training so that they can get gainful employment.
Therefore, it is high time that a law for prevention of begging is brought forward.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; R. THAMARAISELV AN
November 6, 2012.

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 5 of the Bill provides for establishment of Receiving Centres in every district by
the appropriate Government. Clause 6 provides for setting up of Beggars' Welfare Fund.
Clause 7 provides for formulation of scheme and creating suitable infrastructure by
appropriate Government in every district so as to enable beggars to take up suitable jobs. It
further provides for setting up of destitute homes by the appropriate Government. The
Central Government would have to incur expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India
for establishment of Receiving Centres, destitute homes, formulating schemes, creating
suitable infrastructure in respect of Union territories and shall also have to contribute monies
into Beggars' Welfare Fund. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees  two hundred crore  will be
involved as a recurring expenditure per annum from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees one hundred crore  is also likely to
be involved.
4

5
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only,  the delegation of
legislative powers is of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for abolition of begging and for matters connected therewith
or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri R. Thamaraiselvan, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—3361LS(S3)—26.11.2012.