1
THE EDUCATION  BILL, 2015
By
SHRI SHIV AJI ADHALRAO PATIL, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for framing of a comprehensive education policy and for matters connected
therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Education Act, 2015.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government; and
(b) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
Short title
and
commencement.
Bill No.  133  of  2015
Definitions.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
a Committee for framing of a comprehensive education policy.
(2) The Committee shall consist of a Chairperson and four members to be appointed
by the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service
of the Chairperson and members of the Committee shall be such as may be prescribed.
4. The Committee shall, while framing education policy, take into account—
(i) number of schools required;
(ii) admission policy in schools;
(iii) curriculum and syllabus;
(iv) fees to be charged by schools;
(v) basic infrastructrure required in schools;
(vi) teacher-student ratio in the schools;
(vii) review the progress of the implementation of the education policy from
time to time; and
(viii) such other matters as may be notified by the Central Government in this
regard.
5. It shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to implement the education
policy formulated under this Act.
6. (1) The Committee shall prepare in such form and at such time, as may be prescribed,
for each financial year, an annual report giving a full account of its activities during the
previous financial year and forward of copy thereof  to the Central Government.
(2) The Central Government shall cause the report referred to in sub-section (1) to be
laid before each House of Parliament along with a memorandum explaining the action taken
or proposed to be taken on the recommendations relating to the Union and the reasons for
non-acceptance, if any, of any of such recommendations.
(3) Where any such report or any part thereof relates to any matter with which any
State Government is concerned, the Committee shall forward a copy of such report or part
thereof to the State Government concerned, which shall cause it to be laid before the
Legislature of the State along with a memorandum explaining the action taken or proposed
to be taken on the recommendations relating to the State and the reasons for non-acceptance,
if any, of any of such recommendations.
7. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the State Governments for effective implementation
of the provisions of this Act.
8. (1) The Central Government may by notification in the official Gazette make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of  Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Constitution
of a
Committee to
formulate a
comprehensive
education
policy.
Functions of
the
Committee.
Implementation
of education
policy by the
appropriate
Government.
Annual
Report.
Power to make
rules.
Central
Government
to provide
adequate
Funds.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Education Policy requires a complete revamp as it was drafted long ago. It should
cater to the current day requirements without compromising our culture, tradition, language
and aesthetic values. Therefore, it is proposed that an education policy be framed for
imparting education in the country keeping in view the course, admission policy, fee, basic
infrastructure and teacher-student ratio in the schools in the country.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SHIVAJI ADHALRAO PA TIL
April  8, 2015.

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the constitution of a Committee for framing a
comprehensive education policy. Clause 7 provides that the Central Government shall
provide adequate funds to the State Governments to carry out the purposes of the Act. The
Bill, therefore, if enacted will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. At
this stage, it is not possible to give an exact estimate of expenditure to be incurred. However,
it is estimated that annual recurring expenditure of about rupees ten thousand crore would
be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.

5
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to frame rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for framing of a comprehensive education policy and for matters
connected therewith.
————
(Shri Shivaji Adhalrao Patil, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—380LS(S3)—28-04-2015.