As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA ON 
. '-"~ \ '. ' ~I . . ' I 
Bill 'Mo, 153 ef 'f97o .. --
THE STATE OF mMA'CHAL PR.ADESH 13IL~, X970 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CI.AUSES 
1. Short title. 
'= Definitions. 
PART I 
PRELIMINARY 
PART II 
ESTABI.UiH.UEJft'OF' THE STA'J.1I: OF Huu.CHALPRADESH 
3. Establishment of State of Himachal Pradesh. 
4. AmeRdment of 'Ph-fit Seftedu1e to the Constitution. 
PART III 
REPRESENTATION IN THE LEGISLATURES 
The Council Of States 
5. Amendment of Fourth SChedule to the Constitution. 
6. Allocation ·of sitting members. 
7. Amendmentctf Bection 27A of Act 43 of 1950. 
The HoUl8e oftke People 
8. Allocation of seats in the existing House of the People 
9. Provision as to sitting members. 
The Legislative Assembly 
10. Provision as to Legislative Assembly as constituted on the appointed 
day. 
11. Duration of the Legislative Assembly. 
12. Speaker and Deputy Speaker. 
13. Rules of procedure. 
DeLimitation of constituencies 
14. Allocation of seats in the House of the People. 
15. Allocation of seats in the Legislative Assembly. 
16. Amendment of First and Second Schedules to Act 43 of 1950. 
17. Delimitation of constituencies. 
18. Power of Election Commission to maintain delimitation orders 
up-to-daie. 
19. Amendment of Scheduled Castes Orders. 
20. Amendment of Scheduled Tribes Orders. 
PART IV 
HIGH COURT 
21. High Court for Himachal Pradesh. , 
22. Judges of High Court. 
23. Jurisdiction of High Court. 
24. Special provision relating to Advocates afd Bar Council. 
25. Practice and procedure in High Court.. 

(ii) 
CLAUSES 
26. Custody of seal of High Court. 
27. Fonn of writs and other processes. 
28. Powers of Judges. 
29. Procedure as to appeals to Supreme C9urt. 
30. Transfer of proceedings from Hieh Court gf Delhi to Hiah 
Court of Himachal Pradesh. 
31. Riibt to appear or to act in proceedings transferred to High Court 
of Himachal Pradesh. 
32. Savings. 
PART V 
AurnORlSATION OF EXPENDrruRE AND DISTRIBUTION or REVi:NU&S . 
33. Authorisation of expenditure pending its sanction by. the 
Legislature. 
34. Reports relating to the accounts of the existing Union territory of 
Himachal Pradesh. 
35. Allowances and privileges of Governor of Himachal Pradesh. 
36. Distribution of revenues. 
PART VI 
AsS'ETS AND LIABILITIES 
37. Property, assets, rights, liabilities, obligations, etc. 
38. Special provision as to transfer of assets, rights, liabilities, etc., of 
Union in relation to transferred territories under Act 31 of 1966. 
PART VII 
PROVISIONS AS TO SERVICES 
39. Provision relating to All-India Services. 
40. Provision relating to certain Services. 
41. Provisions relating to other Services. 
42. Other provisions as to Services. 
43. Provisions as to continuance of officers in same posta. 
44. Advisory Committees. 
45. Power of Central Government to give directions. 
PART VIII 
LEGAL AND MISCELLANJlOt1S PROVISIONS 
46. Amendment of article 210 and article 239A. 
47. Amendment of Act 37 of 1956. 
48. Amendment of Act 20 of 1963. 
49. ContinuanCe of existing laws and their adaptation. 
50. Power to construe laws. 
51. Provisions as to continuance of courts, etc. 
52. Effect of provisions of Act inconsistent with other la WS. , 
53. Power to remove difficulties. 
54. Power to make rules. 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE. 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE. 
THE THIRD SCHEDULE. 
THE FOURTH SCHEDULE. 

As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA ON 
DIU No. 155 of In0 
THE STATE OF HIMACHAL PRADESH BILL, 1970 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the establishment of the State of Himachal Pradesh and f07 
matters connected therewith. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-first Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
PART I 
PRELIMINARY 
1. This Act may be called the State of Himachal Pradesh Act, 1970. 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "Administrator" means the administrator appointed by the 
President under article 239 of the Constitution; 
(b) "appointed day" means the day which the Central Govem-
10 ment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint; 
Short ti tie. 
DefinitiOn •• 

Batablish-
ment of 
State of 
Himacl1a1 
Pradesh. 
Amendment 
of Fint 
Schedule to 
the COnsti-
tution. 
Amendment 
of fourth 
Schedule 
to the 
constitution. 
2 
(c) "article" means an article of the Constitution; 
(d) "Election Commission" means the Election Commission 
appointed by the President under article 324; 
(e) "existing Union territory of Himachal Pradesh" means the 
Union territory of Himachal Pradesh as existing immediately before 5 
the appointed day; 
(f) "law" includes any enactment, ordinance, regulation, order, 
bye-law, rule, scheme, notification or other instrument having, imme-
diately before the appOinted day the force of law in the whole or 
any part of the existing Union territory of Him~chal Pradesh; 10 
(g) "sitting member", in relation to either House of Parliament 
or of the Legislative Assembly of the existing Union territory of 
Himachal Pradesh, means a person who, immediately before the 
appOinted day, is a member of that House or that Assembly; 
(h) "treasury" includes a sub-treasury. IS 
PART II 
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE STATE OF HIMACHAL P}tADESH 
3. On and from the appointed day, there shall be established a new 
State, to be known as the State of Himachal Pradesh, compriSing the terri-
torieE which immediately before that day were comprised in the existing 20 
Union territory of Himachal Pradesh. 
4. On and from the appointed day, in the First Schedule to the 
: ~9nstitution,-
(a) under the beading "I. TEH STATES", after entry 17. the 
following entry shall be inserted, namely: - . 25 
"lB. Himachal Pradesh. The territories which imme-
diately before the commencement 
of this Constitution were being 
administered as if they Were Chief 
Commissioners' Provinces under 30 
the names of Himachal Pradesh 
and BYaspur and the territories 
specified in sub-seetien ,( 1) of 
section 5 of the Punjab Reorgan- 35 
isation Act, 1966."; 
(b) under the heading "11 THIl UNION TERRITORIES", entry 
2 relating to Himachal Pradesh shall be omitted and entries 3 to 10 
sball be re-numbered as entries 2 to 9 respectively. 
PART 111 
REPRESENTATION IN THE LEGISLATURES 
The Council oj States 
5. On and from the appointed day, in the Fourth Schedule to the 
Constitution, in the Table,-
(a) entry 18 shall be re-numbered as entry 19 and before the 

5 
3 
entry as so re-numbered, the following entry shall be inserted, 
namely:-
"18. Himachal Pradesh ........ 3"; 
(b) entry 19 shall be omitted. 
6. (1) ?n and from the appointed day, the thTee sitting members of AllO?l~on 
the CouncIl of States representing the existmg Union territGry of Hima- Of 81ttilll 
chal Pradesh shall be deemed to have been duly elected under clause-(4) members. 
of article 80 to fill the three seats allotted to the S\ate of HiIDahal Pra" 
desh in that Council. 
10 (2) The term of office of such sitting members shall remain ua. 
15 
altered. 
7. On and from the appointed day, in section 27A of the Representa- Amcnd.mcllt 
tion of the People Act, 1950, in sub-section (4.), the words "Himachal ~~~O:32~ 
Pradesh" shall be omitted. 1950. 
The House of the P8<J7i)le 
8. (1) On and from the appointed day and until the dissolution of the Allocation 
existing House of the People, the a1locatioOn of seats to tbe State of ~ ':?t~:, 
Himachal Pradesh in the House of the People and the number of seats to ~ou;ccOC:Jc. 
be reserved for the Scheduled Castes of that State shall be sf~ and; one 
20 respectively; and the First Schedule to the Representation of the Pe0ple 
43 Of 1950 • Act, 19M, shall be deemed to be amended aceordtngly. 
(2) On and from the appointed day and until the ctissoluticm of .. 
existing House of the People, the six parliamentary eonstttuencles: of the 
existinl1 Union territory of Himachal Pradesh shall btt deemed to be the 
25 six parliamentary constituencies of the State of Himachal Pradesh and 
the Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies Order, 
1966. shall be com;trued accordingly. 
9. Every siWn~ member of the House of the People representing a PlOVi .. 
constituencv which. on the appointed dav, bv virtue of the provisions of =e:~ 
30 section 8. becomes a constituency of the State of Himachal Pradesh, 
shall be deemerl to have been elected under sub-clause (a) of clause (1) 
of article 81 to the House of the People by that constituency. 
The Legislative Assembly 
10. (1) On and from the appointed day, the total number of seats tn ~':Ja~ 
35 the Legislative Assembly of the State of Himachal Pradesh to be tilled me- z::.. 
by pe~ons chosen by direct election from Assemblv eonstituencies shall ~i~~ 
be sixty and the number of seats to be reserved. for the Scheduled ....... 
Castes and for the Scheduled Tribes of that St&te small be fourteen and poJaIad .... 
three respectively; and the Second Schedule to the Representation of the 
43 Of 1950. 40 People Act, 1950, shall be deemed to be amended accordingly. 
(2) On and from the appointed day, the sixty territorial cmtStituencies 
of the existing Union territory of Himaehal Pradesh shall be deemed to 
be the constituencies of the Legislative Assembly of the State of Hima-
chal Pradesh and the Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly Con&-
45 tituencies Order, 1966. shall be construed accordingly. 

DUrauonof 
Letialative 
A88embly. 
Spewrand 
Deputy 
Speaker. 
Rules Of 
prOcedure. 
AllOcatiOn 
of seats in 
the House 
of the 
PeOple. 
Allocation 
Of Beata in 
the Legis-
lative As-
sembly. 
Amendment 
Offiratmd 
aecODd acbedulea to 
Act 43 Of 
1950• 
4 
(3) Every sitting member of the Legislative Assembly of the existing 
Union territory of Himachal Pradesh representing a territorial consti-
tuency which, on the appointed day, by virtue of the provisions of sub-
section (2), becomes a constituency of the State of Himachal Pradesh, 
shall be deemed to have been elected under article 170 to the Legislative , 
Assembly of the State of Himachal Pradesh by that constituency. 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the 
time being in force, the Legislative Assembly of the State of Himachal 
Pradesh shall be deemed to be duly constituted on the appointed day. 
11. The period of five years referred to in clause (1) of article 172 10 
shall, in the case of the Legislative Asoembly of the State of Himachal. 
Pradesh, be deemed to have commenced on the day on which the dura-
tion of the existing Legislative Assembly of the Union territory of 
Himachal Pradesh commenced under section 5 of the Government of 
Union Territories Act, 1963. IS 20 Of 1963. 
12. The persons who immediately before the appointed day are the 
Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the Legislative Assembly of the 
Union territory of Himachal Pradesh shall be the Speaker and the 
Deputy Speaker, respectively, of the Legislative Assembly of the State 
of Himachal Pradesh on and from that day. 20 
l3. The rules of procedure and conduct of business of the Legislative 
.A!lsembly of the existing Union territory of Himachal Pradesh as in 
force immediately before the appointed day shall, until rules are made 
under clause (1) of article 208, be the rules of procedure and conduct of 
business of the Legislative Assembly of the State of Himachal Pradesh, 2S 
subject to such modifications and adaptations as may be made therein by 
the Speaker thereof. 
Delimitation of constituencies 
14. In the House of the People to be constituted after the appointed day, 
thpre shall be allotted four seats to the State of Himachal Pradesh of 30 
which one seat shall be reserved for the Scheduled Castes. 
15. The total number of seats in the Legislative Assembly of the State 
of Himachal Pradesh to be constituted at any time after the appointed 
day, to be filled by persons chosen by direct election from territorial 
constituencies, shall be sixty-eight of which sixteen seats shall be reserved 3S 
for the Scheduled Castes and three seats shall be reserved for the 
Scheduled Tribes. 
16. (1) In the Representation of the People Act, 1950,-
(a) in the First Schedule,-
(i) under the heading "I. STATES", after entry 17, the 40 
following entry shall be inserted, namely:-
"18. Himachal Pradesh .. .. .. 4 1 .. "; 
(ii) under the heading "n. UNION TERRITORIES", entry 
6 relating to Himachal Pradesh shall be omitted; 
(b) in the Second Schedule,- 45 
(i) under the heading "I. STATES", after entry 16, the fol-
lowing entry shall be inserted, namely:-
"17. Himachal Pradesh ...... 68 16 3"; 

~ 
(i~) under the heading "II. UNION TERRITORIES", entry 
2 relating to Himachal Pradesh shall be omitted. 
(2) The amendments made by clauses (a) and (b) of sub-section (1) 
s~alI have effect in relation to the House of the People and the Legisla-
S tlve Assembly of Himachal Pradesh to be constituted at any time after 
the appointed day. 
17. (1) The Election Commission shall, in the manner herein provided, Delimitation 
distribute, whether before or after tbe appointed day, the seats in the ~~=~­
HoUSe of the People allotted to the State of Himachal Pradesh under 
10 section 14 and the seats assigne'd to the Legislative Assembly of the State 
of Himachal Pradesh under section 15 to single-member territorial cons-
tituencies and delimti them on the basis of the latest census flgures, 
having regard to the provisions of the Constitution and to the following 
provisions, namely:-
15 (a) all constituencie6 shaU, as far as practicable, be geographical-
ly compact areas, and in delimiting them regard shalt be had to phy-
sical features, existing boundaries of administrative units, ilacilities 
of communication and public convenience; 
(b) every assembly constituency shall be so delimited as to fall 
20 wholly within one parliamentary constituency; 
(c) constituencies in which sents are reserved for the Scheduled 
Castes shall be distributed in different parts of the State and located, 
as far as practicable, in those areas where the proportion of their 
population to the total population is comparatively large; and 
25 (d) constituencies in which seats are reserved for the Scheduled 
Tribes shall, as far as practicable, be located in areas where the pro-
portion of their population to the total popUlation is the largest. 
Explanation.-In this section, "latest census figures" mean the census 
figures with respect to the existing Union territory of Himachal Pradesh 
30 or, as the case may be, of the State of Himachal Pradesh ascertainable 
from the latest census of which the finally published figures are available. 
(2) For the purpose of assisting it in the performance of its functions 
under sub-section (1), the Election Commission shall associate with itself 
as associate members,-
3.5 (a) the sitting members of the House of the People referred to 
in sectiOn 9; and 
(b) such six of the members of the Legislative Assembly of the 
existing Union territory of Himachal Pradesh or, as the case may be, 
of the State of Himachal Pradesh referred to in section 10 as the 
40 Speaker tbereof may nominate: 
Provided that none of the associate members shall have a right to vote 
or to sign any decision of the Election Commission. 
(3) If owing to death or resignation, the office of an associate member 
falls vacant, it !Phall be filled, if practicabJe, in accordan~e with tbe provi-
45 sions of sub-section (2). 

Power of 
Blection 
Conunis8ion 
to maintain 
delimitation 
orden up-
to-date. 
6 
(40) The ~_COlDllJia&ion shall-
(a): publish its proposals for the delimitation of constituencies; 
toether with the ilissenting proposals, if any, of any associate meni-
_ wllo desires publication thereof, in the Official Gazette and in 
.uch.ther lIlanner as the Commission may consider fit, together with 5 
a notice inviting objections and suggestions in relation to the pro-
posals and specifying a date on or after which the proposals will be 
further considered by it; 
(b) consider all objeetieas and eonestiens whieh may haTe been 
TeCeived 'by it 'hefore the date so specified; 10 
(c) .afterOODlideriDcall objectiolls aad suggestions which may 
,have ... recek>ed 1ty it before the date SO specified, determine by 
.- or more orders the delimitation of OODstitueneies and cause such 
order or orderS to be published in the Official Gazette; and upon such 
publication, the order or orders shall have the full force of law and 15 
shall not be called in question in any court. 
(5) As soon as may be after such publication, every such order relating 
to parliamentary constituencies shall be laid before the House of the 
!teeple,andMel')' such order relating to assembly constituencies shall be 
laid before the Legislative Assembly. 20 
•. (1-) The Election Commission may, from time to time, by notifica-
tion'in the Oftlcial Gazette,-
(~ correct any printing mistake in any order made under sec-
tion 17 or any error arising therein from inadvertent slip or omission; 
(b) where the boundaries or name of any territorial division 25 
mentioned in any such order are or is altered, make such amend-
ments as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for bringing such 
order up-to-date. 
(2) Every notification under this section relating to a parliamentary 
or an assembly constituency shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 30 
iuaad, iDeforethe House of the People or, as the case may be, the Legis-
Wt.e i\uembly. 
Amendment U. (1) On and f·rom the appointed day, the Constitution (Scheduled 
~~~duled Castes) Order, 1950, shall stand amended as directed in the First Schedule. 
Orden. 
(2') On and from the appointed day, the Constitution (Scheduled 3 
Castes) (Union Territories) Order, 1951, shall stand amended as directed 5 
in the Second Schedule. 
Amendment 20. (1) On and from the appointed day, the Constitution (Scheduled 
*,r~d1aIed Tribes) Order, 1950, shall stand amended as directed in the Third 
Orden. Schedule. 40 
(2) On and from the appointed day, the Constitution (Scheduled 
Tribes) (Union Territories') Order, 1951, shall stand amended as directed 
in the Fourth Schedule. 

as of 1961. 
7 
PART IV 
HIGH COtnn' 
21. (1) On and from the appointed day/there shall be a separate High Hi,h ~ 
HC?Uhrtcfor the State of Himachal PradeSh (hereinafter referred to as the ~ ~~-
S 19 ourt of Himachal Pradesh). deah. 
(2) The principal seat of the High Court of Himachal Pradesh shall 
be at Simla. 
22. (1) The President may. if he thinks tit, direct that such of the Jud 8 or 
Judges of the High Court of Delhi holding office immediately before the Hilt: Court. 
10 appointed day as may be determined by him, shall on that day cease to 
be Judges of the High Court of Delhi and become Judges of the High 
Court of Himachal Pradesh. 
(2) The persons who by virtue of sub-section (1) become Judges of 
the High Court of Himachal Pradesh shall, except in the case where any 
IS such person is appointed to be the Chief Justi~e of the High Court, rank 
in that Court according to the priOrity of their respective appointments 
as Judges of the High Court of Delhi. 
23. The High Court of Himachal Pradesh shall have, in respect of any JurisdictiOD 
part of the territories comprised in the State of Himachal Pradesh, all ~o:!h 
20 such jurisdiction, powers and authority as. under the law in force im-
mediately before the appointed day, are exercisable in respect of that 
part of the said territories by the High Court of Delhi. 
24. (1) Subject to any rule made or direction given by the High Court S~cia1 PrO-
of Himachal Pradesh in this behalf, any person who immediately before ~~slon torelat-
2S the appointed day is an advocate entitled to practise in the High Court of A~vocate. 
Delhi shall be entitled to practise as an advocate in the High Court of ~~!c:~f. 
Himachal Pradesh. 
(2) The right of audience in the High Court of Himachal Pradesh 'shall 
be re>gulated in accordance with the like principles as immediately before 
30 the appointed day are in force with respect to the right of audience in the 
r" High Court of Delhi. t .. }.., 
... 
35 
ill 
(3) On and from the appointed day, in the Advocates Act, 1981 (here-
after in this section referred to as the Advocates Act), in section 3,-
(a) in sub-section (1), for clause (d), the following clauses shall 
be substituted, namely:-
"(d) for the States of Pun,ab and Haryana and the Union 
territory of Chandlgarh, to be known as the Bar Council of Pun-
jab and Haryana; 
(dd) for the State of Himaehal Pradesh, to be known a. the 
:Bar Council of Himachal Pradesh;"; 
(b) in clause (b) of sub-section (2), after the words "Bar Coun-
cil of Orissa", the words ", the Bar Council of Himachal Pradesh" 
shall be insertf!d. 
3017 LS--2 

a 
(4) The provisions of S •• ..:C1on 17 of the Advocates Act shall have effect 
in respect of the roll of the Bar Council of Himachal Pradesh subject to 
the modifications that-
(a) for c1aus~ (a) of sub-section (1) of the said section 17, the 
following clause shall be substituted, namely: - S 
"(a) all persons who were entered as. advocates on the roll 
of the Bar Council of Punjab and Haryana immediately before 
the day appointed under clause (a) of section 2 of the State of 
Himachal Pradesh Act, 1970, and who within three months from 
that day express in such manner as the Bar Council of India may, 10 
by rules, prescribe an intention in writing to practise within the 
jurisdiction of the Bar Council of Himachal Pradesh;"; 
(b) in clause (a) of sub-section (3) of the said section 17, for the 
words and figures "with his date of enrolment under the Indian Bar 
Councils Act, 1926", the words "in accordance with his seniority on IS 
the roll of the Bar Council of Punjab and Haryana" shall be 
substituted. 
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Advocates Act as 
amended or modified by sub-sections (3) and (4) ,-
(a) in the case of the first Bar Council of Himachal Pradesh under 20 
that Act, the fifteen members .required to be elected under clause (b) 
of sub-section (2) of section 3 of that Act, as amended by sub-section 
(3), shall be nominated by the Chief Justice of the High Court of Hima-
chal Pradesh from amongst advocates who are entitled as of right to 
practise in the High Court of Himachal Pradesh and are ordinarily lS 
practising within the territories comprised in the State of Himachal 
Pradesh and the term of office of the members so nominated shall be 
one year from the date of the first meeting of the Council or until 
their successors are duly elected in accordance with the provisions of 
the said Act, whichever is earlier; 30 
(b) until the members of the first Bar Council of Himachal Pra-
desh required to be nomina.ted under clause (a) are duly nominated 
in accordanee with the provisions of that clause, the Bar COUllCil of 
Punjab and Haryana shall function as the Bar Council of Himachal 
?radesh and the provisions of the Advocates Act shall, So far as may 35 
be, apply accordingly; 
(c) the namf',; of persons entered on the roll of the Bar Council 
of Himachal Pradesh in accordance with the provisions of clause (a) 
of sub-section (1) of section 17 of the Advocates Act, as modified by 
sub-section (4), shaU, as from the date or dates on whicll the names 40 
are so entered, stand removed from the roll of the Bar Council of 
Punja.b and Haryana; 
(d) any proeeedings which may be pending or which may be 
instituted against any person before or by the Bar Council of Punjab 
Ind Haryana immediately before his name is removed under clause 4S 
(e) from the roll of that Bar Council may after such removal be con-
tinued or instituted before or by the Bar Council of Himachal 
Pradesh; 
(e) every person who immediately before his name stands remov-
ed from the roll of the Bar Council of Punjab and Haryana in 50 

accOl'Ciance with the provisions of clause (c) is a member of the Bar 
Council of Punjab and Hal'yana shall ct:ase to be a member of t.b,at 
Councll as from the date on WIDcn illS name stands so rempved from 
the roil of that Bar Council; 
5 U) the rules made or deemed to have been made by the Bar Coun-
cil of Punjab and Hal'yana and in lorce immectiately befol'e the date 
on which the first Bar Council of Himacilal Pradesh is duly constitutecl 
in accordance with the prOVisions of clause (a) shall, subject to such 
modifications and adaptabons as may be made therein by the Chair-
10 man of the Bar Council of Himachal Pradesh, be deemed to be rules 
made by the Bar Council of Himachal Pradesh and shall have etlect 
accordingly. 
(6) As soon as may be, after the first Bar Council of Himachal Pradesh 
is duly constituted in accordance with the proV.l.sions of clause (a) of 
15 sub-section (5), the assets and liabilities of the Bar. Council of Punjab and 
Baryana shall be apportioned between that Bar Council and the Bar 
Council of Himachal Pradesh in such manner and proportion as may be 
agreed upon by the two Bar Councils and in default of agreement with 
reference to any matter, the matter shall be referred to the Chairman of 
20 the Bar Council of India and his decision thereon shall be final. 
Explanation.-Expressions used in this section but not defined in this 
Act shall haVe the meanings assigned to them respectively in the Advo-
cates Act. 
25. Subject to the provisions of this Part, the law in force immediately Practice IIlCl 
25 before the appointed day with respect to practice and procedure in ~~dUR AD 
the High Court of Delhi shall, with the necessary modifications, apply in COUrt. 
relation to the High Court of Himachal Pradesh. 
26. The law in force immediately before the appOinted day with res- Cuatody Of 
pect to the custody of the seal of the High Court of Delhi shall, with the ~ of 
30 necessary modifications, apply with respect to the custody of the seal of Hish COUrt. 
the High Court of Himachal Pradesh. 
27. The law in forCe immediately before the appointed day with res- PO!m of 
peet to the form of writs and other processes used, issued or awarded by :t:: =-
the High Cpurt of Delhi shall, with the necessary modificatiOns, apply with OIl..!.. 
35 respect to the form of writs and other processes used, issued or awarded 
by the High Court of Himachal Pradesh. 
!S. The law in force immediately before the appointed day with res- Powen ot 
pect to the powers of the Chief Justice, single Judges and division courts JUd ••• 
of the High Court of Delhi and with respect to all matters ancillary to 
40 the exercise of those powers shall, with the necessary modifications, 
apply in relation to the High Court of Himachal Pradesh. 
%9. The law in force immediately before the appointed day relating PlOOedurc 
to appeals to the Supreme Court from the High Court of Delhi and the .. to 
Judges and division courts thereof, shall, with the necessary modifications, =0 
.5 apply in relation to the High Court of Himachal Pradesh. 00iIIt.· . 

Transfer or 
prOc:eediD .. 
from 
Hi,hCourt 
Of Delhi to 
High 
COurt Of 
H.im.ac:hal 
tt.radesh. 
10 
38. (1) Except as hereinafter provided, the High Court of Delhi shall, 
on and from the appointed day, have no jurisdiction in respect of the terri-
tories comprised in the State of Himachal Pradesh. 
(2) Such proceedings pending in the High Court of Delhi immediately 
before the appointed day as are certified, whether before or after that S 
day, by the Chief Justice of that High Court, having regard to the place 
of accrual of the cause of action and other circumstances, to be proceed-
ings which ought to be heard and decided by the High Court of Himachal 
Pradesh shall, as soon as may be after such certification, be transferred 
to the High Court of Himachal Pradesh. 10 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (1) and (2) of 
this section or in section 23, but save as hereinafter prGvided, the High 
Court of Delhi shall have, IUld the High Court of Himachal Pradesh shall 
not have, jurisdiction to entertain, hear or dispose of appeals, applications 
for leave to appeal to the Supreme Court, applications for review and 15 
other proceedings where any such proceedings seek any relief in respect 
of any order passed by the High Court of Delhi before the appointed 
day: 
Provided that if, after any such proceedings have been entertained by 
the High Court of Delhi, it appears to the Chief Justice of that High 20 
Court that they ought to be transferred to the High Court of Himachal 
Pradesh, he shall order that they shall be so transferred, and such pro-
ceedings shall thereupon be transferred accordingly. 
(4) Any order made by the High Court of Delhi-
(/I) before the appointed day, in any proceedings transferred to 2S 
the High Court of Himachal Pradesh by virtue of sub-section (2); or 
(b) in any proceedings with respect to which the High Court of 
Delhi retains jurisdiction by virtue of su-section (3), 
shall, for all purposes, have effect not only as an order of the High Court 
of Delhi, but also as an order made by the High C9urt of Himachal 30 
Pradesh. 
Expla114tion.-For the purpose. of this section-
(/I) proceedings shall be deemed. to be pencfutg in a court until 
that court has disposed of all issues between the parties including 
any issues with respect to the taxation of the costs 9£ the proceedings 3S 
and shall include appeals, applications for leave to appeal to the 
Supreme Court, applications for review, petitions for revision and 
petition for writs; 
(b) references to a High Court shall be construed as including 
references to a Judge or diviSion court thereof, aDd references to an 40 
order made by a court or a Judge shall be construed as including 
references to a sentence, judgment or decree passed or made by that 
court or Judge. 
Ri ht te 31. Any person who, immediately before the appointed day, is an advo-
ap~r Or to cate entitled to practise in the High Court of Delhi and was authorised 4S 
act in dln.r2'. to appear or to act in any proceedings transferred from that High Court 
rr:.~ilio to the High Court of Himachal Pradesh under section 30 shall have the 
~c:!i right to appear or to act, as the case may be, in the Hiih Court of 
Pradah. Himachal Pradesh in relation to those proceedinls. 

32 Nthin . hi P o : 0 g III t S art shall affect the application to the High Court Slvipl8. 
f HlI1lachal Pradesh of any provisions of the Constitution and this Part 
shall have effect subject to any provision that may be m~de on or after 
the appointed day with respect to that High Court by any Legislature or 
S other authority having power to make such provision. 
PART V 
AUTHORISATION OF EXPENDITURE AND DlS'I'RIBUTION OF REVENUES 
33. (1) The President may, at any time before the appointed day, Authorisa-
authorise by order such expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of the tion °dr. 
10 St te f Him ch ex pen ItUre a 0 a al Pradesh as he deems necessary for a period of not pending its 
more. than six months beginning with the appointed day, pending the ~~C~:i~! 
sanctIon of such expenditure by the Legislative Assembly of the State of latUre. 
Himachal Pradesh: 
Provided that the Governor of Himachal Pradesh may, after the 
IS appointed day, authorise by order such further expenditure as he deems 
necessary from the Consolidated Fund of the State of Himachal Pradesh 
for any period not extending beyond the said period of six months. 
(2) The President or, as the case may be, the Governor of Himachal 
Pradesh shall make separate orders under sub-section (1) in respect of 
20 periods falling in different financial years. 
34. (1) The reports of the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India RePOrts 
referred to in section 49 of the Government of Union Territories Act, ~h~at!~~~nts 
ao Of 1963. 1963, relating to the accounts of the existing Union territory of Himachal ?f the ~ist-
Pradesh in respect of any period prior to the appointed day, shall be sub- :~~i~~o~ 
~5 mitted to the Governor of Himachal Pradesh who shall cause them to be Hidac~1 
3 or 1962. 
58 or 1957· 
9 Of 1962. 
C. o .• ,. 
30 
35 
laid before the Legislative Assembly of the State. Pca es . 
(2) The Governor may, by order,-
(a) declare any expenditure incurred out of the Consolidated 
Fund of the existing Union territory of Himachal Pradesh on any 
service in respect of any period prior to the appointed day during 
the financial year 1970-71 or in respect of any earlier financial year in 
excess of the amount granted for that service and for that year as 
disclosed in the reports referred to in sub-section (1) to have been 
duly authorised, and 
(b) provide for any action to be taken on nny matter msine out 
of the said reports. 
35. The allowances and privileges of the Governor of Himachal Pra- AUOw~c:e' 
. . P Ii b I and prlvl-desh shall, until provlSlon in that behalf is made by ar ament y aw leges or 
under clause (3) of article 158, be such as the President may, by order, Wb:~~~ of 
40 determine. Pradesh. 
36. The President shall, by order, determine the erants-in-aid of the ~istrib~tion 
revenues of the State of Himachal Pradesh and the share of that State in f reve uea. 
the Union duties of excise, estate duty and. taxes on Income ud for that 
purpose amend thereby the relevut provisions of tbe Union Duties of 
Excise (Distribution) Act, 1962, the Additional Duties of Excise (Goods 
45 of Special Importance) Act, 1951, the Estate Duty (Distribution) Act, 
L962, aDd the Constitution (Distribution of Revenues) Order, 1969, in such 
mum.er as he thiDb fit. 

Property, 
asseta, 
rights, 
liabilities, 
obliptiona. 
etc:. 
PART VI 
AssE9s AND LIABILITIES 
3'1. (1) All such property and assets within the existing Union terri-
tory of Himachal Pradesh as are held immediately before the 
appointed day by the Union for purpose of governance of that Union terri- 5 
tory shall, on and from that day, pass to the State of Himachal Pradesh 
unless the purposes for which such property and assets are so held are 
Union purposes: 
Provided that the cash balances in the treasuries in the Union territory 
of Himachal Pradesh before the appointed day shall, as from that day, 10 
vest in the State of Himachal Pradesh. 
(2) All rights, liabilities and obligations (other than those relatable 
to, or in connection with, a Union purpose), whether arising out of any 
contract or otherwise, which are, immediately before the appointed day,-
(a) the rights, liabilities and obligations of the Central Govern- IS 
ment arising out of, or in connection with, the governance of the 
Union territory of Himachal Pradesh; or 
(b) the rights, liabilities and obligations of the Administrator of 
the existing Union territory of Himachal Pradesh in his capacity as 
such, or of the Government of that Union territory, 20 
shall, on and from the appointed day, be the rights, liabilities and obliga-
tions of the Government of the State of Himachal Pradesh. 
(3) The right to recover arrears of-
(a) any tax or duty being a tax or duty enumerated in the State 
List in the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution, or :as 
(b) any duty referred to in article 268, or 
(c) any tax under the Central Sales Tax Act, 1~t 
which have fallen due in the existing Union territory of Himachal Pra-
desh shall pass to the State of Himachal Pradesh. 
(4) The proviSions of this section shall not apply to or in relation (0,- 30 
(a) any benefit or burden of any assets, rights, liabilities or 
obligations of the Union under the Punjab Reorganisation Act, 1966 
attributable to the transferred territories as defined in the said Act; 
(b) any institution, undertaking or project the expenditure in 
relation to which is immediately before the appointed day met from 35 
out of the Consolidated Fund of India; 
(c) any property which has been placed by the Union at the 
disposal of the Administration of the existing Union territory of 
Himachal Pradesh subject to the condition that the ownership thereof 
will continue to vest in the Union. ' 
Ezpl4nation.-For the purposes of this section-
(a) "liability" includes liability in respect of any civil deposit, 
local fund deposit, charitable or other endowment, provident fund 
account, pension or actionable wrong; 
(b)UUnion purposes" mean the purposes of Govermntmt ..... 45 
latabl. to any of the matters mentioned in the UDion,LiIt 
31 Of 1966. 

13 
38. (1) In this section, the expressions "successor States" and "trans-
ferred territories" have the meanings respectively assigned to them in 
the Punjab Reorganisation Act, 1966. 
Special 
prOvision u 
to transfer 
of asscts, 
rilhts, lia-
(2) The Central Government may, by order, transfer to the State of ~~ ·H~onctc •• 
S Himachal Pradesh the benefit or burden of any assets, rights, liabilities in relation 
Or obligations of the Union under the Punjab Reorganisation Act, 1966, in rcr~~lS­
So far as such benefit or burden is, in the opinion of the Central Govern~ territories 
t tt 'b t bl h f 't . under Act men ,a rl u a e to t e trans erred tern ones. 31 Of 1966. 
(3) An ordtcr made under sub-section (2) may provide that the State 
10 of Himachal Pradesh shall be the suC'cesgor State in relation to the 
transferred territories for all or any of the purposes of the Punjab 
Reorganisation Act, 1966, or confer or impose on the State of Himachal 
Pradesh right" and obligations which correspond So far as may be to the 
rights and obligations conferred or imposed on the succesSOr States by or 
IS under that Act. 
(4) Without prejudice to the provisions of section 49, the Central 
Government may, for the purpose of giving effect to the prOvisions 
of this section. by order, direct that the provisions of Part VI, 
Part VII, Part VIII and Part IX and connected provisions of the Punjab 
20 Reorganisation Act, 1966, shall have effect subject to such exceptions and 
modifications as may be specified in the order. 
PART VII 
PROVISIONS AS TO SERVICES 
It. (1) In this section, the expression "State Cadre",- PrOvl tiisiOD re a n, to 
(a) in relation to the Indian Administrative Service, has the ~11 ~ndia 
meaning assigned to it in the Indian Administrative Service (Cadre) etVlccS. 
Rules, 1954; 
(b) in relation to the Indian Poliee Service, has the meaning 
assigned to it in the Indian PolicE' Service (Cadre) Rules, 1954; 
30 (e) in relation to the Indian Fore~t Service, has the meaning 
assigned to it in the Indian Forest Service (Cadre) Rules, 1966. 
(2) On and from the appointed day, there shall be constituted for the 
State of Himachal Pradesh a State Cadre of the Indian Administrative 
Service, a State Cadre of the Indian Police Service and a State cadre of 
3S the Indian Forest Service. 
(3) The initial strenl!'th and composition of each of the laid State 
cadres shall be such as the Central Government m1.Y, by order, determine 
before the appointed day. 
(4) Such of the members of each of thl'" said Services borne on the 
40 Union Territori~s cadre thereof immediately before the appointed day, 
RS the Central Government may, by order, specify. shall be allocated to 
the State cadre of Himachal Pradesh of the same Service with effect from 
such date or dates as may be specified in the order. 
(5) Nothinr, i.n this section shan be dE"E'med to affect the operation 
61 of 1951. 45 after the apl)ointed dav of the All-India Rt"rvicec; Act. 1.951, or the rules 
or rel!Ulations madE' thereunder in relation to the State cadrp!; of the 
said Services referred to in sub-section (2) or sub~section (-I) and in rela-
tion to the memb~ of those services borne on the State eadrea. 

PrOVision 
relati n, to 
certain 
Services. 
14 
40. (1) On and from the appointed day. there shall be constituted for 
the State of Himachal Pradesh the following Serviees. namely:-
(a) the Himachal Pradesh Administrative Service; and 
(b) the Himachal Pradesh Police Service. 
(2) The initial strength and composition of the cadres of the said , 
Services shall be such as the Administrator of the existing Union Terri-
tory of Himachal Pradesh may. with the approval of the Central Govern-
ment. by order. detennine before the appointed day. 
(.1) On and from the appointed day. the existing Delhi. Himachal Pra-
desh and Andaman and Nicobar Islands Civil Service (hereinafter referred 10 
to as the existing Civil Service) shall be known as the Delhi and Andaman 
and Nicobar Islands Civil Service and the Delhi. Himachal Pradesh and 
Andaman and Nicobar Islands Police Service (hereinafter referred to as 
the existing Police Service) shall be known as the Delhi and Andaman and 
Nicobar Islands Police Service. IS 
(4) Such members of the existing Civil Service as the Central Gov-
ernment may. by order. specify shall be allocated to the cadre of the 
Himachal Pradesh Administrative Service and such members of the 
existing Police Service as the Central Government may. by order. specify. 
shall be allocated to the cadre of the Himachal Pradesh Police Service 20 
and any such order may specify the date or dates from which the alloca-
tion made thereunder shall be effective. 
(5) All persons who are allocated under lub-leCtion (4) and who 
immedia,tely before the date on which they are allocated. are borne on a 
Select List for promotion to a State cadre of an AU-India Service. shall 2, 
bf' qeemed to have been included in the same order as in that lilt in the 
Select List for promotion to the State cadre of the same Service con-
stituted under sub-section (2) of seetion 39. 
(6) Subject to the foregoing provision, of thil seetion. the rules and 
regulations applicable to or in relation to the members of the existing 30 
Civil Service and the existing Police Service as in force immediately 
before the appointed day shall. so far as may be, apply respectively to 
and in relation to the members of the Himachal Pradesh AdministrativE: 
Service and the Himachal Pradesh PoliCe Service. until altered. repealed 
or amended by the competent authority. 35 
(7) Every member of the Central Health Service who immediately 
before the appointed day is holding any post in the existing Union terri· 
tory of Himachal Pradesh being a post included in the authorised strength 
of that Service, shall. until otherwise directed by the Central Government, 
be deemed to be on deputation. on and from the appointed day, to the 40 
Government of the State of Himachal Pradesh on thp same tenns and 
conditions of service as are applicable to him under the Central Health 
Service Rules, 1963. but without any deputation allowance: 
Provided that the period of such deputation shall in no ease extend 
beyond a period of three years from the appointed day. 4S 
ExplanatiDn.-In this sub-section, "Central Health Service" mean8 the 
Central Health Service constituted. under the Central Health . Service 
Rule!!. 19(18. 

11 
tl. (1) Every person who immediately before 'the appointed day is Prarision. 
lerving in connection with the affairs of the Union under the administra- ~~tinllO 
tive control of the Administrator of the Union territory of Himachal vie::. ser-
Pradesh shall. unless otherwise directed by an order of the Central Gov-
S emment. be deemed to have been allocated for service as from that 
day in connection with the affairs of the State of Himachal Pradesh: 
Provided that no directions shall be issued under this section after the 
expiry of a period. of one year from the appointed day: ) 
PrOvided further that nothing in this section shall affect the operation 
3rof 1966. 10 of section 82 of the Punjab Reorganisation Act. 1966. 
(2) The provisiQDS of this section shall not apply in rela.tion to persons 
to whom the provisions of sections 39 and 40 apply. 
42. (1) Nothing in this section or sections 40 and 41 shall be deemed ~ther pra-
to affect on or after the appointed day the operation of the provisions of :O18~::l:'. 
IS Chapter I of Part XIV of the Con'stitution in relation to detennination 
ot the conditions of service of persons serving in connection with the 
affairs of the Sta:te of Himachal Pradesh: 
Provided that the conditions of service applicable immediately before 
the appointed day in the caSe of any person referred to in section 40 or 
~o section 41 shall not be varied to his disadvantage except with the previous 
approval of the Central Government. 
(2) All services prior to the appointed day rendered by a person allo-
cated under section 40 or deemed to have been allocated under section 
41 in connection with the administration of the Union territory of Hima-
~S chal Pradesh, shall be deemed to have been rendered in connection with 
the affairs of the State of Himachal Pradesh for the purposes of the rules 
regulating his conditions of service. 
es. Every person who immediately before the appointed day is holding PrOVisions 
or discharging the duties of any post or otfice in connection with the ~~;:~~-
30 administration of the Union territory of Himachal Pradesh, shall conti- Officen in 
IlU.' to hold the same post or office in the State of Himachal Pradesh and same POStl • 
. shall be deemed, on and from that day. to have been duly appointed to 
the post or offtce by the Government of, or other appropriate authority 
til; the State' of HtmachalPradesh : 
35 'Provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed to· prevent a 
eompetent authority on or after the appointed day from passing in relation 
to, sueh }:lerson any order affecting his continuance in such post 01! office. 
'". 'The' Central Government may, by order, establish one or more AdvisOry 
Admory Committees for the P1JI'PCIse of ulisting it in regard to- Conunitteea. 
40 (a) the discharge of its functions under this Part; and 
(b) the ensuring of fair and equitable treatment to an persons 
aftected by the provisions of this Part and the proper consideration 
of any repreHntations made by such persons. 
fl. The Central Government may Sive such directions to the Govern- Power of 
., ment of the State of Himachal Pradesh as may appear to it to be ~~:a~ment 
neee_1l'1 for the purpoae of giving effect to the foregoing provisions of to iiv~ 
this 'Part and also'the proviiions of Part' IX of the Punjab Reorganisation direcuonl. 
Act. 19G6, and the State Govemment shall comply with such directions. 

Amen4meD.t 
of article 
alO and 
article 239A. 
18 
PARTVIU 
LEGAL AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
41. On and from the appointed day-
(4) in article 21, in clause (2), the following proviso ahall be 
inserted at the end, namely:- S 
'Provided that in relation to the Legislature of the State of 
Himachal Pradesh this clause shall have effect as if for the worda 
"fifteen years" occurring therein, the words Utwenty-ftve yean" 
were substituted.'; 
(b) in article 239A, in clause (1), the words "Himachal Pra- 10 
desh" shall be omitted. 
Amendment '7. On and from the appointed day, in clause (a) of section 15 of th, 
~~ 010:9,6. States Reorganisation Act, 1956,-
(i) for the word "Punjab", the words "Punjab, Himachal Pra-
desh" shall be substituted; X, 
(ii) for the words "Himachal Pradesh and Chandigarh", tho 
words "and Chandigarh" shall be substituted, 
Amendment 48. In the Government of Union Territories Act, 1963, in cla\18e (h) of 
~Act 30 of sub-section (1) of section 2 and in sub-section (2) of section 44, the 
17V3· 
words "Himachal Pradesh" shall be omitted. Zc, 
Power to 
c:OIl8trUel 
lawt. 
49. (1) All laws in force, immediately before the appointed day, in the 
existing Union tenitory of Himachal Pradesh shall continue to be in force 
in the State of Himachal Pradesh until altered, repealed or amended by 
a competent Legislature or other competent authority. 
(2) For the purpose of facilitating the application in relation to the 2, 
State of Himachal Pradesh of any law made before the appointed day, 
the appropriate GovC!rnment may, within two years from that day, . by 
order, make such adaptations and modifications of the law, whether by 
way of repeal or amendment, as may be necessary or ex-pedient, and 
thereupon every such law shall have effect suhject to the adaptations 3CJ 
and modifications so made until altered, repealed or amended by a com-
petent Legislature or other competent authority. ~ 
Explanaticm..-In this section. the expression "appropriate Govemment" .-:..; 
means, as respects anv law relatinJ!' to a matter enumerated in the Union 
List in the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution, th'" Central Govem- 35 
ment; and as respects any other law, the Government of the State of Hima-
chal Pradesh. 
SO. Notwithstanding that no provision or insufficient provision has 
been made under section 49 for the adaptation of a law made before the 
appointed day, any court, tribunal or authority required or empowered 40 
to enforce such law may, for the purpose of facilitatine: its application in 
relation to the State of Himachal Pradesh, construe the law in such 
manner not aftectin~ the substance as may be necessarv or p~r in 
reSlaM to the matter before the court, tribunal or authority, as the case 
may be. ' i 45 

1't 
Ii. An courts and tribunal8 and all authorities dischar,me lawful prOVision. 
functions throughout the existing Union territory of Himachal Pradesh as t~ c:onunuance or any part thereof immediately before the appointed day shall, unless of c:OUl1I, 
their continuance is inconsistent with the provisions of this Act or until etc:. 
5 other provision is made by a competent Legislature or other competent 
authority, continue to exercise their respective functions. 
12. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithltanding 
tbhlg inconsistent therewith contained in any other law. 
". (J) If any diftiCUlty arises in giving effect to the provisiona ot tbiJ Power to 
10 Act, the President may, by order, do anything not inconsistent with such ~~ 
provisiona which appears to him to be necessary or expedient tor the . 
purpose of removing the difficulty. 
(2) Every order made under this section.hall be laid before each 
HoUle of Parliament. 
15 M. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Ofllcial POWer to 
Gazette, make rules to give effect to the provisions ot this Act. ~ rwn_ 
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid as soon aa 
may be after it is made before eac~ House of Parliament while it 
is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised 
)0 in one session or in two successive sessions, and if, before the expiry 
ot the session in which it is so laid or the session immediately follow-
ing, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or 
both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall there-
after have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case 
25 may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be 
without prejudice to the validity ot anything previously done under thai. 
rule. 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
[See section 19(1)] 
go AMENDMENT OF THE CONSTITUTION' (ScHEDULED CASTES) Oaom,l950 
35 
(1) In paragraph 4, for the portion beginning with the words, flgurel 
and letter "and any reference in Parts IVA and X of the Schedule" and 
ending with the words and figures "the first day of November, 1966", the 
followini shall be substituted, namely:-
"any .reference in Parts IVA and X of the Schedule to a State or to a 
district or other territorial division thereof shall be construed u • 
reference to the State, district or other territorial division consUtuted 
as from the first day of November, 1966; and any reference in Part 
XIV to a State or to a district or other territorial division thereof 
shall be construed as a reference to the State, district or other terri-
torial division constituted 88 from the day appointed under clause 
(4) of ection 2 of the State of Himachal Pradesh Act, lInO". 

18 
(3) lnth. Schedule, after Part xm, the folio~.Part.lI1IaD. "tI1-
MI'ted, namely:- : 
''PART XIV.-Hima.chal Pra.duh 
1. Throughout the State except the territories specified in :sub-leeUaa 
(1) of section 5 of the Punjab Reorganisation Act, 1966 (310fl968):- S 
1. Ad-dharmi 
2. Badhi or Nagalu 
3. Bandhela 
4. Balmiki, Chura or Bhangi 
5. Bangali 
8. Banjara 
7. BalW 
8. &rad 
9. Barar 
10. Batwall 
11. Bawaria 
12. Bazigar 
13. Bhanjra 
14. Chamar, Machi, Ramdali, Ravidasi or Ramduia 
15. Chama! 
16.Chhlmbe (Dhobl) 
17. Chuhre 
18. Dagi 
19. Daole 
20. Darai or Daryai 
21. Daule 
22. Dhaki or Toori 
23. Dhaogri or Dhuai 
24. Doom or Doomna 
25. Dumne (Bhanjre) 
26. Hali 
27. Hem 
28. Jogl 
29. Julahe 
30. Kabirpanthi, Julaha or Keer 
31. Kamoh or DagoIi 
·32. Karoaclt 
33. Khatik 
34. Koli 
35. Lohar 
36. Mazhabi 
37. Meah 
•. Nat 
10 
40 

38. Cd 
40. Pui 
41. Phrera 
Go Rebar 
S O. Rebara 
44. SaDIi 
45. Sapela 
46. Sarde, Sarare or Slryare 
47. Sarehde 
10 .a. Sik:1Jgar 
49.S1p1 
~. Sfrk1band 
Gl. Teli 
52. Thath1ar or Thathera. 
15 2. In the territories specified in sub-section (1) of .ectiOD , of the 
Punjab Reorganisation Act, 1966 (31 of 1966):-
1. Ad Dharmi 
2. Bangall 
3. Barar, Burar or Berar 
20 4. Batwal 
5. Bauria or Bawaria 
e. Bazigar 
7. Balmiki, Chura or Bhangi 
8. ':Bhanjra 
25 9. Chamar, Jatia Chamar, Rehgar, Raigar, Ramdasi or Ravidaai 
10. Chmal 
11. Dagi 
12. Darain 
13. Dbanak 
30 14. Dhogri, Dhangri or Siggl. 
15. Dumna, Mahasha or Doom 
16. Gagr& 
17. GandhUa or Gandil Gondola 
18. Kabirpanthi or Julaha 
35 19. Khatik 
20. Kari or KoU ' 
21. Mar1ja or Mareeha 
22. Mazhabl 
23.Megb 
40 24. Nat 
25.Od 
28. Put 
2'1'. Perua 

29. Sanhat 
30. SanhaJ 
31. Sanaoi 
32. Sanai, Bhedkut er Manllh 
33. Sope1a 
34. Sarera 
35. S1kl1gar 
36. Sirkiband.". 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE 
[See secUon 19(2)] 
AuDn>MDT O. TIll: CONStitUTION (ScHJ:DUUD CABftI) 
(UNION TmuuroRml) ORDER, 1951 
to 
(1) In paragraph 4, for the words and figures "Parta n and V" in both 
the places where they occur, the word and figure "Pan V" Ihall be IU~ J, 
tituted. 
(~) In the Sc:hedule, Part II shall be omitted. 
THE THIRD SCHEDULE 
[See section 20(1)] 
AMENDMENT OF THE CONSTITUTION (Saalot1LED TBma) CaD., 1950 20 
(1) In paragraph 3 for the portion beginning with the words. figures 
and letter "and any reference in Parts IV and VIlA" and ending with the 
words, figures and letters "as from the 1st day of May, 1960", the followina 
shall be substituted, namely:-
"any reference in Parts IV and VIlA of the Schedule to a State 2S 
or to a district or other territorial division thereof shall be construed 
as a reference to the State, district or other territorial division 
constituted as from the 1st day of May, 1960; and any 
reference in Patt XllI to a State or to a district or other territorial 
division thereof shall be construed as a reference to the State, district 30 
or other territorial division constituted as :from the day appointed 
under clause (4) of section 2 of the State of Himachal Pradesh Act, 
1970". 
(2) In the Schedule, after Part Xll, the following Part shall be inserted, 
name1y:- " . .. 
"PART XIII.-Him.achBI Pra.desh 
1. Throughout the State except the teI1rltoriee specl1led in IIUb-Mo-
tion (1) of sectibn 5 of the Punjab Reorganisation Act, 1966 (31 of 1966):-
1. Gaddi 
2. Gujjar 
3S 

21 
3. Jad, Lambs, !Champa and Bhot or Bodh 
4. Kanaura or Kinnara 
5. Lahaula 
6. Pangwala. 
S 2. In Lahaul and Spiti district:-
10 
1. Gaddi 
2. Swangla 
3. Bhot or Bodh.". 
THE FOURTH SCHEDULE 
[See section 20 (2)] 
AMDDMENT OF THE CONSTITUTION (SCHEDt1LED '1'luns) (UmON 
TEruuTORIES) ORDER, 1951 
(1) For paragraph 3, the following paragraph shall be lubBtituted, 
51 namely:-
"3. Any reference in this Order to a Union territory shall be COIlIoo 
trued as a reference to the territory constituted as a Union terrttol'1 
u from the 1st day of November, 1956.". 
(2) In the Schedule, Part I shall be omittec:i. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
On 31st July. 1970, it was announced in the Lok Sabha that Government 
had decided to grant statehood to Himachal Pradesh and a 13Ul to give 
effect to that decision would be introduced in Parliament as early as 
possible. On the 3rd September, 1970, the House was informed ' that the 
necessary BUl in this behalf would be brought forward in the next session 
of Parliament. The State of Himachal Pradesh Bill, 1970, seeks to estab-
Ush a new State of Himachal Pradesh, comprising the territories of the 
existing Union ~erritory of Himachal Pradesh and makes the necessary 
supplemental, incidental and consequential prOvisions in relation to the 
establishment of the new State, including representation in Parliament 
and in the State Legislative Assembly. 
The notes on clauses explain in detail the various provisions of the Bill. 
NEW Jl)zuu; K. C. PANT. 
The lit Decembe1', 1970. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLES 117 AND 
274(a) OF'THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. 10128170-SR, dated the 4th December, 1970 trom 
Shri Kriahna Chandra Pant, Minister of State in the Ministry of Home 
Aftairs, and Minister of State, Departments of Electronics and Scienttfic 
and Industrial Research to the Secretary, Lok Sabha]. 
The President having been informed of the subject matter of the BilJ 
to provide for the establishment of the State of Himachal Pradesh and for 
matters connected therewith, recommends the introduction of the Bill in 
the Lok Sabha under articles 117(1) and 274(1) of the Constitution and 
the consideration of the Bill in the Lok Sabhs under article 117 (3) of the 
Constitution. 

ClaU1e8 3 and' 4 . ....etauae 3 -prbYtclee for the, ea*ablishment ot the· DeW 
Ita't* of Himaehal Pradelh·whs.t claute4 ..... Ileceaary cODSequenUal 
amendment. in the nm·; Sehedule to the Censtitutlon. 
CIGuns 5 -cmd ~ . ....trheae clauses deal with the fepreaentaUon of 
~.Chal Pradesh in the Couftetl 01'&8.. Ai preRDt there .. three 
.. _ in the sa1d Counotl for the UftiOft tenitory of -Hi .. chal Pradeab. 
It 11 proposed toa1lot the HmIIt number, of ..... to· die; aew State. The 
tht~ lI1~g meiJ1bers'trom Himachal ) Pradesh in the -Oouncll of States 
Wl11 be d_med·tohaw been dulyeleetett-a!ld wtn,repNHllt the new·State 
for their unexpired term. 
CiotIN 7.-Tbe~t"··Qf a CGBIequs-tial nature. 
C'l4user 8, Sand 14_These deal with representation ot Himachal Pra-
d1Nrbtn the HcnJIe,.ol,tliePeop1e; TIae· UAioD tel1dtOl"y ot Himachal Pra-
... UIte< other tJDtOb territorJies hIe-been. awen ~gbtage -in its represen-
tatsob 1ft· Lok Sabha rand hu..t· p&reseht..tx· members in that House. 'I'hia 
wefp"''' eumot· eobUDu. when Himeehal P.radesh becomee a State 
b4teause-the nnt StaI!e-baa to be t1le8*" at 'p8F wJtb other States. for 
purposes of reprl!llllitation in Lok Sabhe [viele article 81 (2) (a) ot the 
COllltltuUen]. 
'rhe lut Delimi.tation CQrn.mjMion had allotted Lok Sabha seats to 
the States.in the ratio of one seat tpr a population of 8'72 lakh, according 
to 1961-ceJ;18",. As the popuI_tton of l,Ifmachal Pradesh, according to the 
1961-cenaus, is 28 ·12 lakhs, FUJ!lachal Pradesh would, aeeordtng to the 
said ratio, be entitled to 3: 22 seats. Four seats are, therefore, proposed 
to be allotted to the new Sta.te in the House of the People. However . 
. there ,re.practical diftlculties iO re~u~ing the seats from 6 to 4 immediately 
pn Himachal Prad~ being made a State. Accordingly, as a transitfonal 
meQure, for the duration of the unexPired term of the present Lok Sabha, 
ft., js proposed to allot six seats for the new State in the House of the 
People [vi4e clauae 8J .and provide that the sl" sitting members in that 
:House from Himachal Pradesh .will reprel$ent the new State for the un-
expired term of the present LQk ~abhJ. In .the Lok Sabha to be consti-
tuted after the diuolution of the present House. Himachal Prade~h will 
hive only four seats [vide claus. 14J. 
C14me310 to 13 IlM·clcttft·1S.-Thesedeal with the Legislative Assemb-
ly of the new State. At present the Legislative Assembly of the Union 
territory' of Himachal Pradesh has sixty members elected from territorial 
constituencies and ·tbNe members nominated bv tfte Central Government. 
W],en Himachal' Pradesh becomes'a State. nominations would not be 
permissible except under article 338whichrelate5 to the representation 
BI. -~ndian COII\I1ltU\i4y. In claUBel 10 pd It provision has been 
~ ." 

made that the existing sixty elected members of the Legislative Assem-
bly of the Union territory shall be deemed to have been elected to the 
Legislative Assembly of the new State and that the term of the Assembly 
of the new State shall expire on the date on which the term 
of the existing Assemb'ly of the Union territory of Himachal Pradesh 
would expire. Clause 12 provides for the continuance of the existing 
Speaker and Deputy Speaker of the Legislative Assembly of the Union 
territory of Himachal Pradesh whilst clause 13 provides for the continu-
ance of the existing rules of procedure of that Assembly. 
Clause 15 provides that the total number of seats in the Legislative 
Assembly of the new State to be constituted after the dissolution of the 
existing Assembly shall be sixty-eight. Th~ strength of the new Assembly 
has been fixed at sixty-eight having regard to the fact that Himachal 
Pradesh will lose two seats in the Lok Sabha and also three nominated 
members of the Assembly and the need for adopting a multiple of the Lok 
Sabha seats. I 
Clause 16.-This provides far necessary consequential amendments in 
the Representation of the People Act, 1950. 
Clauses 17 and 18.-These clauses provide for delimitation of the par-
liamentary and assembly constituendes by the Election Commission 
according to the procedure generally followed by the Delimitation 'Com-
mission. It will be necessary to complete the delimitation in the shortest 
pOSSible time as the general elections are approaching. Hence,' the usual 
provision as to public hearing has DeEm dispensed with. 
" 
Clauses 19 and 20 and the Schedules.-These seek to make the neces-
sary consequential amendments in the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) 
Order, 1950, the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) ,(Union Territories) 
Order. 1951, the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950, and ,the 
Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) (Union Territories) .Order, 1951. 
Clauses 21 to 32.-At present the jurisdiction .of ,the Delhi High Court 
extends to the Union territory of Himachal Pradesh. The States of 
Punjab, Haryana and the Union territories of Chandigarh .and Himachal 
Pradesh have a common, Bar Council known as the, Punja.b and Haryana 
Bar Council. It is proposed to e~ta.b1ish a separate High. Court,fox: the 
new State and also provide for a separate. Bar Council for that State. 
Clause 21 provides for the. establishment of a separate Hi~h Court for 
Himachal Pradesh whj]~t claus€' 24 provipes for the' constitution of. ~ 
separate Bar Council for that State. The deta.iled provision~ contained 
in clausel; 21 to 32 follow brOlldlv the relevant provisions of the nrevioUs 
Reorgani<'ation Acts and cleal inter alia with the powers, functions and 
the procedure to be followed by the new High Court. -. - . 
Clctuses 3.~ 1:0 3G.-These clauses d~alWitn the authorisation nf exnendf~ 
tUl'e and 11tmihution of revf.nu~. As it wili' tAke some time for the new 
StAte tn p"~A"e its blln~et antl havp it apnl'OVM hv the ~tllt~ T,erti<:lah,"e. 
provision hilS hpf>n mAtle inclau!IIe 3~ 'tnat b-fnl'p' the nf>W ~+qte cnmes into' 
exist~nee.th~ Pl'psident mftv bv order atJthorfs~ exnendfture fmm' 'the 
Consolidated Fund of the State for a. neriod of ~ix months. Thereafter 
the power win be exerdS@d by the 'Governor. Provision lws been made 

25 
in. clause 35 to enable the President to determine the allowance. and 
privileges of the Governor of the new State. Clause 36 empower. the 
President to determine by order the arants-in-aid to the new State and 
ita ahare of Central taxea. 
Clause, 37 and 3B.-These clauses relate to transfer of property, assets 
rights, liabilities and obligations to the new State. Clause 37 providee 
that all properties and other assets in the Union territory of Himachal 
Pradesh which are at present held for purposes of governance of the Union 
territory and which are not properties or assets held for Union purposes 
shall vest in the new State along with the cash balances in the treasuries 
in the Union territory. Under the same clause, all rights, liabilities and 
other obligations arising out of, or in connection with, the governance of 
the Union territory excluding those relatable to Union purposes become 
the rights, liabilities and obligations of the new State. However, institu-
tions, undertakings. or projects financed at present out of the Consoli-
dated Fund of India and properties of the Central Government placed at 
the disposal of the Government of Himachal Pradesh will not be trans-
ferr.ed to the new State [vide clause 37 (4)]. It is not proposed to trans-
fer any debt liability to the new State on account of capital outlay mad~ 
by the Central Government on the properties which become vested in the 
new State under the provisions of clause 37. 
Clause 3B.-This clause makes special provisions as to transfer to the 
new State of assets, rights, liabilities. etc., of the Union in relation to the 
territories transferred to Himachal Pradesh under the Punjab Reorga-
nisation Act, 1966. Some of the assets and liabilities relatable to the 
area transferred to Himachal Pradesh under the said Act have already 
been transferred to Himachal Pradesh but there are other assets and 
liabilities of composite Punjab which are yet to be allocated and which 
are to be similarly transferred. 
Clau;ses 39 to 45.-These clauses make provisions as to services and 
follow broadly the corresponding provisions in the earlier Reorganisa-
tion Acts. 
Clause 39 makes provision for establiShing separate cadres of All-India 
Services for the new State and for allocating to these cadres officers of 
the corresponding existing Union territories cadres of the services. 
Clause 40 provides for allocation to the new State of officers of the Stat. 
level civil service and police service which are at present common to 
Delhi, Himachal Pradesh, and Andaman and Nicobar Islands. The clause 
also provides for deputation, for a period not exceeding three years, to 
the new State of officers of the Central Health Service who are at present 
holding posts in the Union territory of Himachal Pradesh. 
Clause 41 provides that persons who are at present serving in connec-
tion with the aftairs of the Union under the administrative control of the 
administration of Union territory of Himachal Pradesh shall, unless other-
wise directed by the Central Government, stand allocated to the new State. 
Clauses 42 and 43.-These are on the same lines as corresponding pro-
visions of the previous Reorganisation Acts. 
Clause 44.-This clause provides for the establishment of one or more 
advisory committees by the Central Government for the p~ of assist-

26 
ina it in reprd to the discharse of i~ tun~ons "'~tiN to proviltQ~. 
to. terv10es and for eDluMg a fair and eq\litable treatment to aU· ~ 
80 aftected. I 
ClaUit 4S.-This clause eQlpowers the Central GQvernment to give 
~ons to the new State for tb~ PwPC*: otli~ eff~ ~ the v~~U8 
provisions (including thole in Part IX of the Punjab Reorgllmaatian 
Act, 1966)· relating to lervicet. 
Clauses 46 to 48.-These cla.uses make consequential amendments in 
article 210 (relating to larigUa~e to"beuted' in' Ute '~lislature) of : the 
Constitution, sfiCtio'n 15 (nlatlng to 'Zt>rtal etnmcils) of 'tlte '!'tates' 'Be-
organisation Act, 1956 and tlie 'GOveI1U11!nt' of :Uhlbh Tenitorles Aet, 
1963. 
Clcuses 49 to 54.-These oliuses make the u,ual provilioJl8 rasardiaa 
the eeft.ti1\uanee of' exiltttlf laww, adapta\:leu: 'efi dlt)M ;1...,.( ual' their: ... 
te!'pretatioa by' :eouPts, ftc. Tlieee pttwt.tOD' feU.., "tIle~diIII 
provisi'Ons of the ppevi8u!JReor,lJllsatten A •. 

Clause 17> of the Bill seeks to empower the Election Commission of 
India to delimit or re-allocate the Assembly and Parliamentary Consti-
tuencies of the new State of Himachal Pradesh. For this purpose, non-
recurrine expenditure of about Rs. 10,000 will have to be incurred. 
This expenditure will be met from the Consolidated Fund of India. 
2. Clause 44 of the Bill seeks to empower the Central Government to 
establish one or more Advisory Committees for the purpose of UliltiAg 
it in regard to the discharge of its functions in relation to allocation of 
members of the services and the ensuring of fair and equitable treat-
ment to all persons a.1fected. Some expenditure, not exceeding RI. 5,000 
may have to be incurred out of the Consolidated Fund of India on 
acoount of uaveWn,g allowance ~ members of the Committee. 
3. According to Budget estimates of Himachal Pradesh for the CUlT8I1t 
~ the domestic revenue receipts of the Union tenitol"Y are Rs. 20.65 
crorea while the non-plan expenditure on revenue account (excluding the 
estimated ezpe.diture of RI. 3 crores on border roads) il RI. 37. M crores, 
leavms _ lAP of about Rs. 16.89 crore,. This gap is b~g met by grant-
in-aid iiven by the Central Government. As a State, Himachal Pradesh 
will be entitled to a ellare in the Central taxes which will be determined 
in pursuance of clause 36 of the Bill. This would augment the State's 
reveftUe to the ateat of ab&ut RI. 5.a4 arore. on the buis of current year's 
.tim_tes, leaving a Don"Plan reven,ue deftctt of RIIs. 11.65"01'88. In the 
put the FJDanee ColDlllillion had taken note of .uch deficits and recom-
memied suitable grants-in-aid \la'der article 275 (1) of the Constitution for 
variOUI State.. It tl, therefore, proposed to provide for such qlWltum of 
graftt.in..aid to the new State .. may be eonsidered neceARry until the 
reeommendatiens of the next Finance C9&nmiHion become available, by 
suitably amantiiagtBe provieion. of CoQliituticm. (Distribution of Reve-
nues) Order, 1969, in exercise of the powers sought to be taken under 
claule 31 -I the Bill. Tb ·grant.in-aid for border roads will conijnue to 
be IiYell' eD· tke aame pattern, ai ~. other Statei. At· pRJHn\ it iI 100 per 
ceat. of tit.· apenditur-e. 
4. The quantum of Central Plan assistance to Hbnachal Pradesh dUrin, 
the Fourth Plan period has already been settled. It is now being given 
in the form of grants-in-aid and loans. The same pattern of usistanee is 
,roped to be cont~ued for the rest of the plan period. The depar~U'e 
frDJll ~ present pattern of financial asSistance is not expected to result 
ill any aikliUonal el'penditure from the ConsOlidated Fund of India but 
aay future increase in the expenditure of Himachal Pradesh will have to 
be normally met by the Government of the new State by augmmtbl. Ita 
nvenue. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 24 of the Bill provides inter aZ'ia for the setting up of a Bar 
Council tor the new State and also for the necessary modifications or 
amendments to certain provisions of the Advocates Act. Under one of 
these modifications, namely, that provided in sub-clause (4) (a) of 
c1a.use 24, the Bar Council of India is being empowered to prescribe by 
rUles the manner in which the advocates intending to practise within the 
jurisdiction of the Bar Council of the new State may express their inten-
tion in that behalf. Sub-clause (5) (f) of clause 24 provides that the rules 
made or deemed to have been made by the Bar Council of Punjab and 
Haryana shall be deemed to be rules made by the Bar Council of the new 
State subject to such modifications and adaptations as may be made there-
in by the Chairman of the Bar Council of the new State. 
Clause 35 of the Bill enables the President to determine by order the 
allowance. and privileges of the Governor of the new State. 
Clause 36 of the Bill empowers the President to determine by order 
the grants-In-aid to the new State and its share of Central taxes and amend 
for that purpose the relevant provisions of the Union Duties of Excise 
(Distribution) Act, 1962, the Additional Duties of Excise (Goods of Special 
Importance) Act, 1957, the Estate Duty (Distribution) Act, 1962, and the 
Constitution (Distribution of Revenues) Order, 1969. 
Clause 38 of the Bill makes special provisions as to transfer to the new 
State ot assets, rights, liabilities, etc., of the Union in relation to the terri-
tories transferred to the existing Union territory ot Himachal Pradesh by 
the Punjab Reorganisation Act, 1966. Sub-clause (4) ot the clause provi-
des that for the purpose of giving effect to the provisions ot the clause the 
Central Government may, by order, direct that the relevant provisions of 
the Punjab Reorganisation Act, 1966, shall have effect subject to auch 
exceptions and modifications as may be speCified in the order. 
Clause 49 of the Bill provides tor the adaptation of existing laws to 
facilitate their application to the new State. The power to adapt is being 
conferred on the Central Government in the case of laws relating to 
matters enumerated in the Union List in the Seventh Schedule to the 
ConstItution and on the Government of the new State in the cue of all 
other law •. 
Clause 54 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules 
to give effect to the provisions of the Bill when enacted. The rules, if any, 
will be confined to matters of procedure and other mattera of minor detail 
relatfni to the enforcement of the vanoUl provisions included in the BID. 
The aforementioned provisions are modelled on identical or 
analogoUi proviaions in the States Reorganisation Acta palled by Parlia-
ment earUer. Besides, they are mainly of a consequential nature or per-
tain to matters of detail and proceciure. A3 such, the proposed deleea-
tion of lei1&lative powers is of a normal character . 
• 

Creation 
Of local 
lA,ulaturea 
or Council 
of Ministers 
or both fOr 
certain 
Union 
territories. 
ANNEXURE ..• 
EXTaACTS nOM THE CONSTITUTION or INDIA 
• • • • • 
PART VIII 
THE UNION TERRITORIES 
• • • • • 
ZSlA. (1) Parliament my by law create for any of the Union territori. 
of Himachal Pradesh, Manipur, Tripura, Goa, Damall and Diu, and Pondi-
cheny- . 
(4) a body, whether elected or partly nominated and partly elect-
ed, t.o function as a Legislature for the Union territory, or 
(b) a Council of Ministers, 
or both with such constitution, powers and functions, in each cue, .. may 
be specified in the law. 
• 
• 
Naru 
• 
• 
• 
• 
FIRST SCHEDULE 
[Articles 1 and 4] 
• 
• 
• 
II. THE UNION TERRITORIES 
• • • 
• 
• 
2. Himachal Pradesh The territories which inunedlately befbre 
the cOmmencement of this constitution 
were bein, administered a. if they were 
Chief Commissioners' PrOvinces under 
the names of Himachal Pradesh and 
Bilaspur and the territories specifted 
in Bub-section (I) of section 5 ot the 
Punjab ReOrganISation Act, 1966. 
• • • • • 
FOURTH SCHEDULE 
[Articles 4(1) and 80(2)] 
ALLOCATION OF SEATS IN THE COUNCn. OF STATES 
To each State or Union territory specified in the first column of the 
following table, there shall be allotted the number of seats specified in the 
second column thereof opposite to that State or that Union territory, as 
the case may be. 
TABLE 
• • • • • 
19. Himachal Pradesh 3 
• .. ' 
• • 
EXTRACTS FROM THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEoPLE ACT, 1950 
(43 OF 1950) 
• • • • • 
PART IVA 
MANNER OF I'ILLING SEATS IN THE COUNCIL OF STATES TO BJ: FILLICD IY 
REPRESENTATIVES OJ' UNION TERlUTORIES 
Z1A. (1)· • • • • • constitution • of electoral (4) The electoral college for each of the Union territorIes of Himac.hal co1le,eI fOr 
Pradesh, Manipur, Tripura and Pondicherry shall consist of the elected :,t;e ee!!lir;: 
members of the Legislative Assembly.constituted for that territory under the COanc·1 
the Government of Union Territories Act, 1963. ~ottel~~c, 
• • • • • UDioa tlrlitcne., , .......... -
•• 

THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
(See section 3) 
ALt.OCATION or SKAT! m 'till Houn OJ' THB Pzo~ 
N'amber Of ... i ft tilt Houle Number of leata In !be Hoac 
Naaw Of State. Union 
tcnitorJ Or area 
.. constituted on" the ISt .. lubaequeDdy c:onatitutl4 
November, 1966 
Tocal 
2 
• • • 
Reaerved fOr the 
Schedu-
led 
Calle' 
3 
• 
Reaerved fOrtbe Schedu. 
led 
Tribtl 
.. • 
Total 
, 
L~ 
Schedu. 
led 
C_ttI 
6 
• 
.1nJ:4 
&dil_ 
led 
Trib .. 
1 
• It. umON·'l'ltlUU'roRIES: 
• • • • • • • 
8. Himachal Pradesh 5 1 8 1 
• • • • • • • 
THE SECOND SCHlmULE 
(See section 7) 
Totel n1.l.mbet' C1f seats in the .Legi.latitle A"emblie, 
Name of lbe 
State/Union 
territory 
Number of searl in the 
L:gialative Allembly .. 
cOllltimed on the 1st 
November. 1956 
Number of .eats iD the 
Lesillatin Aaaembly 
.. subtcqUQlUy CODaSi-
toted 
I 
• 
~erved 
Totll for the 
Sch~Qled 
Cllltes 
, 3 
• • 
Reserved Totll 
for the 
Scheduled 
Tribet 
4 .5 
• • 
Relerved Reaerved 
for the for tb. 
Scheduled Schedu\ed 
Caate. Tribes 
6 7 
• • 
II. UNION TERRITORIES: 
• • • • 
14 
• • • • 
2 
• 
60 
• 
• • 
3 
• 
ErrDcns P'llOMTHB STA'l"M ~.un:sa.'1'ION Am, IBM 
(37 OF 1956) 
• • • • • • 
P.AR:r III 
ZoNES AND ZoNAL COUNCILS 
• • • • • 
15. A15 from the appointed day, th,re shall be a Zonal Council for each 
of the foHowtag.Jlve zones, namely:-
(4) the Northern Zone, oomprising the States 
Punjab, Rajasthan and Jammu and Kashmir and the 
toties of Delhi, Himachal Pradesh and Chaildtgarh; 
• • • • 
• 
• 
Ex'l'lVoCT TROM THB AINOCATr.S ACT, 1961 
(25 -oF 1961) 
• 
• 
• 
CHAPTER U 
BAR Cdtmcn.s 
• 
• 
• 
Eetablieb. of Haryana, ment Of 
Unio1'l. terri- ZOnal COUncila. 
• 
• 
• 
I. (l) There shall be a Bar Couneil-
. . . . . . ~~ 
(d) tor the States of Punjab and Haryan. and the Union t.n" 
10 

31. 
tories of Chandigarh and Himachal Pradesh to be nown as the Bar 
Council of Punjab and Haryana; 
• • • • • 
EXTRACTS 'FROM THE GOVERNMENT OF UNION TERRITORIES ACT, 1963 
(20 OF 1963) 
• • 
• • 
• 
PART I 
PRELIMINARY 
• 
• • 
• • 
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
• • • • • 
(h) "Union territory" means any of the Union territories of 
Himachal Pradesh, Manipur, Tripura, Goa, Daman and Diu, and 
Pondicherry . 
(2) Any reference in this Act to laws made by Parliament shall be 
costrued as inCluding a reference to Ordinances promulgated by 
the President under article 123 and a reference to Regulations 
made by the President under article 240 . 
* • • • • 
EXTRACT. FROM THE CONSTITUTION .(SCHEDULED CASTES) ORDER, 1950 
• • • • • 
4. Any reference in this Order, except in Parts IV, IVA, VIlA and X 
of the Schedule, to a State or to a district or other territorial division 
thereof, shall be construed as a reference to the State, district or other 
territorial division, constituted as from the first day of November, 1956; 
any reference in Parts IV and VIlA of the Schedule to a State or to a 
district or other· territorial division thereof shall be construed as a refer-
ence to the State, district or other territorial division constituted as 
from the first day of May, 1960; and any reference in Parts IV A and X of 
the Schedule to a State or to a district or other territorial division thereof 
shall be construed as a reference to the State, district or other territorial 
division constituted as from the first day of November, 1986. 
• * * • • 
EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION (SCHEDULED CASTES) (UNION TERRITORIES) 
ORDER, 1951 
• • • • • • 
4. Any reference in this Order, except in Parts II and V of the 
Schedule, to a Union territory shall be construed as a reference to the 
territ()ry constituted as a Union territory as from the 1st day of Novem-
ber, 1956; and any reference to a Union territory in Parts II and V of 
the Schedule shall be construed as a reference to that territory as existing 
on the 1st day of November, 1966. 
THE SCHEDULE 
• • • • • • 
PART II.-Himachal Pradesh 
1. Throughout the Union territory except the territories specified in 
sub-section (1) of section 5 of the Punjab Re-organisation Act, 1966:-
1. Ad-dharmi. 
2. Badhi or Nagalu. 
3. Bandhela. 
4. Balmiki, Chura or Bhangi. 
Dctlnitions 
and nter- i 
pretation. 

32 
5. Bangali. 
6. Banjara. 
7. Banai. 
8. Barad. 
9. Barar. ,; 
10. Batwal. 
11. Bawaria. 
12. Bazigar. 
13. Bhanjra. 
14. Chamar, Machi, Ramdasi, Ravidasi or Ramdasia. 
15. Chanal. 
16. Chhimbe (Dhabi). 
17. Chuhre. 
18. Dagi. 
19. Daale. 
20. Darai ar Daryai. 
21. Daule. 
22. Dhaki or Toori. 
23. Dhaogri ar Dhuai. 
24. Doom or Doomne. 
25. Dumne (Bhanjre). 
26. Hali. 
27. Heal. 
28.. JORi. 
29. Jlliahe. 
30. Kabirpanthi, Julaha or Keer. 
31. Komoh or Dagoli. 
32. Karoack. 
33. Khatik. 
34. Koli. 
35. Lohar. 
36. Mazhabl. 
37. M~gh. 
38. Nat. 
39.0d. 
40. Pasi. 
41. Phrera. 
42. Rehar. 
43. Rehara. 
44. Sansi. 
45. Sapela. 
46. Sarde, Sarare or Sirys.re. 
47. Sarehde. 
48. Slkligar. 

33 
49. Sipi. 
50. Sirkiband. 
51. Teli. 
52. Thathiar or Thathera. 
2. In the territoriee .apecifted In IUb-lection (1) of section 5 of the 
Punjab Re-organisation Act, 1966-:-
1. Ad Dharmi. 
2. Bangali. 
3. Barar, Burar or Berar. 
4. Batwal. 
5. Bauria or Bawaria. 
6. Bazigar. 
7. Balmiki, Chura or Bhangi. 
8. Bhanjra. 
9. Chamar, Jatia Chamar, Rehgar, Raigar, Ramdasi or Ravidasi. 
10. Chanal. 
11. Dagi. 
12. Darain. 
13. Dhanak. 
14. Dhogri,' Dhangri Or Siggi. 
15. Dumna, Mahasha or Doom. 
16. Gagra. 
17. Gandhila or Gandil Gondola. 
18. Kabirpanthi or Julaha. 
19. Khatik. 
20. Korl or Koli. 
21. Marija or Marecha. 
22. Mazhabi. 
23. Megh. 
24. Nat. 
25.0d. 
26. Pasi. 
27. Perna. 
28. Pherera. 
29. Sanhai. 
30. Sanhal. 
31. Sansoi. 
32. Sansi, Bhedkut or Manesh. 
33. Sapela. 
34. Sarera. 
35. Sikligar. 
36. Sirkiband. 
• • • • • 

S4 
EX'I'RAC1' FROM THE CONSTITUTION (SCHEDULED TRIBES) ORDEll, 1950 
• '" '" * * '" 
3. Any reference in this Order, except Parts IV and VII-A of the 
Schedule, to a State or to district or other territorial division thereof, 
shall be construed as a reference to the State, district or other territorial 
divisi'on, constituted as from the lstday'hf November, 1956; and any 
reference in Parts IV and VII-A of the Schedule to a State or to a district 
or other territorial division thereof shall be construed as a referrence to 
the State, district or 'Other territorial division, constituted as from the 1st 
day of May, 1960, 
oil 
* * * * '" 
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION (ScHEDULED TRIBES') (UNION TERRITORIES) 
ORDER, 1951 
* * * • • • 
3. Any reference in this Order, except in Part I of the Schedule, to a 
Union territory shall be construed as a reference to the territory con-
stituted as a Union territory as from the 1st day of November, 1956; and 
any reference to a Union territory in Part I of the Schedule shall be 
construed as a reference to that territory constituted as a Union territory 
as existing on the 1st day of November, 1966. 
THE SCHEDULE 
PART I.-Himachal Pradesh 
1. Throughout the Union territory except the territories specified in 
sub-section (1) of section 5 of the Punjab Reorganisation Aet, 1966:-
1. Gaddi. 
2. Gujjar. 
3. Jad, Lamba, Khampa and Bhot or Bodh. 
4. Kanaura or Kinnara. 
5. Lahaula. 
6. Pangwala. 
2. In Lahaul and Spiti district:-
1. Gaddi. 
2. Swangla. 
3. Bhot or Bodh. 
• • • • • • 

LOK SABHA 
., 
-~'.""'" ...... .... '''' ..... 
A 
BILL 
·0 provide for the establishment of the State of Himachal Pradesh and for matters 
connected therewith. 
(Shri Krishna Chandra Pant, 
Minister of Stale in the 
Ministry of Home Affairs, 
and Minister of State, 
Departments of Electronics 
and S denti fie and Industrial 
Research). 