43 of 1951

Bill No. 133 of 1999

‘THE REPRESENTATION OFTHE PEOPLE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1999
By
‘Sunt RAGHUVANSH PRASAD SINGH, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1951.
Be jtenacted by Parliament in the Fiftieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Representation of the People (Amendment) Act, 1999. Short title.

2. After section 26 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951, the following new _ Insertion of
sections shall be inserted namely:—
“26A. The Central Government shall make available to each district election
officer atleast four personnel of para-military forces and one patrolling party for
every polling station in every constituency under his jurisdiction.


2
Duties of para- 6B. The para-military personnel and patrolling party shall perform the fol-
military forces. lowing functions, namely:— 7
6) to assist the Presiding Officer in discharge of his duty;
(ii) to provide security cover to Presiding Officer, Polling Officer and
staff deputed on election duty;
(iii) to carry out patrolling in the constituency to ensure maintenance of
public order and prevent any such activity obstructing free, fair and peaceful
election process and to enable voters to exercise their franchise freely.”.



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

During elections to the Lok Sabha, State Assemblies, ithas been observed that Presid-
ing/Polling Officers are threatened, intimidated and booths are captured. Voters are kept
away at gun point and are not allowed to exercise their franchise. Moreover, people
belonging to weaker sections are stopped before they enter in the vicinity of polling station
to cast their votes. The Presiding/Polling Officers feel helpless in absence of adequate
police personnel at polling stations and are forced to record these arbitrary elections as
free and fair elections. The State police is also unable to provide security cover to staff
deputed on elections duty. Sometimes certain polling stations are arbitrarily declared as
sensitive or very sensitive stations.

It is, therefore, essential to depute para-military forces and patrolling party at each
polling station in adequate numbers to provide security cover to staff deputed for election
duty and to voters to exercise their franchise freely.

The elections will remain a farce unless evils of booth capturing, intimidation of Pre-
siding/Polling Officers and deprivation of weaker section from exercising their franchise
are curbed.

Hence this Bill.

New Delhi; RAGHUVANSH PRASAD SINGH
November 16, 1999


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 2 of the Bill makes provision for deploying of atleast four personnel of para-
military forces and one patrolling party for every polling station in every constituency of
the House of the People or the Legislative Assembly, to which elections are held. Since
the general elections can be conducted in many phases, the elections can be conducted
with the available personnel and no new appointments will be required. As 8 result, no
expenditure will be incurred from the Consolidated Fund of India either of a recurring or
of a non-recurring nature.


LOK SABHA

A
BILL
further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1951.

(Shri Raghuvansh Prasad Singh, M.P)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—2473LS—08-12-1999.