t.t DEC 1981 
Bill No. 133 of 1981 
, ,; 
THE COMMISSION OF SATI (PREVENTION.) ~,1987 
A 
BILL 
i.' 
to provide for the more effective prevention of the com,.,.,iuion of Bati 
and its g.lorification and for matters connected therewit" Of' incidental 
thereto. 
WHEREAS sati or the burning or burying alive of widows or women ia 
revolting to the feelings of human nature and is nowhere enjoined by 
any of the religions of India as an imperative duty;; , 
AND WHEREAS it is neceS'&ary to take more effective measures to prevent 
i the commission of sat~ and its glorification;' 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-eighth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
PART I 
PREl.IMINARY 
10 1. (1) This Act may be called the Commission of Sati (Prevention) 
Act. 1987. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir. 
(3) It shall come into force in a State on such date as the Central 
15 Government may, by notification in ttle 0fB~1 Q8lf;!tte. appoint. and 
different dates may be appointed for different S~tes. 
Short 
titlc • 
.. at 
&ad 
mcut. 

At1aqIt 
to commit 
MIl. 
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "Cvde" means the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973; 20f 1974. 
(b) "glorification", in relation to sati, whether committed. 
before or after the commencement of this Act. includes, among 
other things.-
(i) the observance 'of any ceremony or the taking out of 
a procession in connection with the commission of sati; or 
(ii) the supporting, justifying or propagating the practice 
of Ban in any manner; or 
5 
(iii) the arranging of any function to eulogise the person 10 
who has committed sati, or 
(iv) the creation of a trust, or the collection of funds, or 
the construction of a temple or other structure or the carrying 
on of any form of Vlorship or the performan<:e of any ceremony 
thereat, with a view to perpetuate the honour of, or to preserve 15 
the memory of, a person who has committed sati; 
(c) ",em" means the burning or burying alive of-
, I: 
(i)&I1y widow along with the body of her deceased husband 
. or «Dr, other' l'elati~ or with any article. object or thing asso-
ciated with the husband or such relative; or 
(ii) any woman along with the body of any of her relatives. 
irrespective of whether' such burning or bu..-ying is claimed to 
be voluntary on the part of the widow or the woman or other-
wise; 
20 
(d) "Special Court" means a Special Court constituted under 2S 
I section 9; 
(e) "temple" includea any building or othe.r structure, whether 
roofed or not, constructed or made to preserve the memory of a 
person committing lCIti or used or intended to be used for the carry-
ing on of any form of worship or for the observance of any ceremony 30 
connection with such commission. 
(2) Words and expressions used but not defined in this Act and 
definen in the Indian Penal Code or in the Code shall have the same 
meanings as are respectively assigned to them in the Indian Penal Code 
or the Code. 35 
. I PART II 
,T-- , PumSlD.o:NTS roR OFFENCES RELATING TO SAn 
3. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Penal Code, 
whoever attempts to commit 8ati and does any act towards such com-
mission shall be punishable with imprisonment 'for a term which may 40 
extend to one year or with AIle or with both: 
Provided· that. the S~al Court trying an offence under this section 
shall, before con'Victing any person. take into consideration the circum-
4,0(11160. 
4' of 1160. 

45 of 1160. 
3 . , 
stances leading to the commission of the offence, the act Committeed, 
the state of mind of the person charged of the offence at the time of the 
Commission of the act and all other relevant factors. 
4. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Penal Code Abetment 
5 'f " ' f ati 1 any person commIts satl, whoever abets the commisllion of such 8ati. 0' . 
either directly or indirectly, shall be punishable with death or imprison. 
ment for HIe and shall also be liable to fine. 
(2) If any person attempts to commit Bati, whoever abets such 
attempt, either directly or indirectly shall be punishable with imprison-
10 ment fOT life and shan also be liable to fine. 
15 
20 
25 
30 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section, any of the following 
acts or the like shall also be deemed to be an abetment, namely:-
(a) any inducement to a widow or woman to get her burnt or 
buried alive along with the body o'f her deceased husband or with 
any other relative or with any article, objector thing associated with 
the husband or such relative, irrespective of whether she is in a fit 
state of mind or is labouring under a state of intoxication or stupe_ 
faction or other cause impeding the exercise of her free will ; 
(b) making a widow or woman believ" that the commission 
o'f sati would result in !'lome spiritual benef . to her or her deceued 
husband or relative or the general well bt!ing of the family; 
(c) encouragin!! a widow or woman to remain fixed in her re-
solve to commit sati and thus instigating her to commit sati; 
(d) participatinr! in any proce!!sion in connection with the com-
mi!'lsion of sati or intpntionalJv aidin!! the widow or woman in her 
decic;ion tn cnmmit .~ati hv takinll' her aloner with th(> body of her 
deceas(''i husband or relative to the cremation or burial ~round: 
(e) be;n", nrp!'lpnt fit the place where sati is commtttad a~ an 
active narticinant to ~uch ~mmi!'l!lten er to anv'eeremenv connected 
with it: 
(f) preventln~ or obstructing the widow 'or W<lm8n from saving 
herself from bein~ burnt or buried alive; 
(q) obstructing. or interfering with. the police in the (fischarlle 
of its duties of taking any steps to prevent the commission of sati, 
35 5. Whoever does anv ad for the "lorifkatlon of sati shall be punish: 
able with Imprisonment 'Cor a term which shall not be leo;s than one veaI 
hut which mav extend to seVf"n ve8~ 8rtd with ftne which shall not be 
less than five thousand rupees but which may extend to thirty thousand . ' - .. - .p--~' 
rupees. 
40 PART III 
POWERS OF COLLECTOR OR DISTRICT MACISTRATE TO PREVENT OFFENCES 
RELATING TO SATI 
6. (1) Where the Collector Or the Di5trict Magistrate is of the 
opinion that sati or any abetment thereof is being. or is about to be 
4S committed. he may, by order, prohibit th~doing of any·act towards the 
commission of sati by any person in any area or areas specified in the 
crder. 
(2) The Collector or the District Ma~~strate may also, by order. 
J:-rohibit the glorification in any manner of s(ltiby {lny persou in apy 
50 area or areas specified in the order. 
Punish-
mcntfor 
,lcirUlcla. 
tioaof 
sali • 
Power 
to 
prohibit 
certain 
acts, 

Power 
to 
remon 
certain 
templel 
or 
other 
~. 
Trial of 
offeacea 
under 
thII , 
Act. 'I 
4 
I ' 
(3) Whoever ooat.ravellea any order made under sub-section (1) or 
sub-section (2) shalL if such contravention is not 'punishable under any 
other provision of this Act, be punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which shall not be leS'B than one year but which may extend to seven 
years and with fine which shall not be less than five thousand rupees 5 
but which may extend to thirty thousand rupees. 
7. (1) The State-Government may, if it is satisfied that in any 
temple or other structure which' has been in existence for not less than 
twenty years, any form of worship or the performance of any ceremony 
Is carried on with a view to perpetuate the honour of, or to preserve 10 
the memory of. any person committing san, by order, direct the removal 
of such temple or other structUTe. 
(2) The Collector or District. Ma~istrate may, if he is satisfied that 
in any temple or other structure, other than that referred to in Sub-
5f"ction (1), any form of worship or the performance of any ceremony 15 
is carried on with a view to perpetuate the honour of. or to preserve 
the memory of. any 1i)erson committing sati, by order. direct the removal 
"f such temple .or otller structure. 
3) Where any Ot'der under sub-section (I) or sub· section (2) is 
not ('omnlfed 'With. the StatP.· Govel'nment or the ColleC'tor shall cal1~e 20 
the temole or· other structure to be removed throll~h ::I noli(''' dYlcer 
not below the rank of a Sub ·Ynsnector at the co~t of the defaulter. 
8.(;1) Where the Collector or the District Magistrate has reason to 
believe that any funcis or property have been collected or acquired for 
the purptlse- of ,glorification of the commission of any sati or which may 
be found ~der circumstances which create suspicion of the commission 25 
of any o~ence ,~<let:. this Act, he may seize such funds OT property. 
(2) Every .. Collect«w or District Magistrate acting under sub·section 
(1) shall report the seizure to the Special Court. if any, constituted to 
try any oftIence·in relation to which suehfunds or property were collec-
ted or acquired and shall await the orders of such Special Court as to 30 
the disposal of the same. 
PART IV 
SPECIAL COURTS 
8. (1) Notwtthstanding .. anything contained in the Code. all offences 
under this' Act shall be triable only by a Special Court constituted under 3S 
this section. 
(2) The State Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
constitute one or more Special Courts for the trial of offences under 
this Act and every Special 'Court· shall exercise jurisdiction in respect 
of the whole or such 'part of the State as may be specified in thenotifi- 40 
cation. 
(3) A Sp~cial Court shall be presided over by a Judge to be appointed 
by the State Government with the concurrence of the Chief Justice of 
the High Court. 
45 
(4) A person shall not be qualified for appointm~Jit [I~ a Judge of a 
Special Court unless he is, immediately be"fore such appointment. a 
S~ssions Judge or an Additional Sessions Judge in any State. 

i I 
, 
10. (1) For every Special Court. the State Government shall appoillt 
a person to be a Special Public Prosecutor. 
(2) A person shall be eligible to be appointed as a Special Public 
Prosecutor under this section only if he had been in practice as an advo-
~ cate. fo~ not less than seven years or has held any post for a period of 
not . less th.an seven years under the State requiring special knowledge 
of law. I . 
(3) Every person appoin{Jed as a Special Public Prosecutor under this 
section shall be deemed to be a Public Prosecutor within the meaning of 
10 clause (u) of section 2 of the Code and the provisions of the Code shall 
. ;have ~ffect accordingly. 
11. (1) A Special Court may take cognizance of any offence, without 
the accused being committed to it for trial, upon receiving a complaint 
of facts which constitute such offence, or upon a police .report of such facts. 
15 (2) Subject to the ot~r provisions of this Act, a Special Court shall, 
for the purpose of the trial of any offence, have all the powers of a Court 
of Session and shall try such offence as if it were a Court of Session, so 
': : far as may be, in accordance with the procedure prescribed in the Code 
for trial before a Court of Session. 
20 .12. (1) When trying any offence under this Act, a Special Court may 
also try any other offence with which the accused may, under the Code, 
be charged at the same trial if the offence is connected with such other 
offence. 
'. (2) If in the course of any trial of any offence under this Ad it is found 
is that the accused person has committed any other offence under this Act 
or unde.!"· any other law, a Special Court may Cdnvict such person also of 
such other offence and pass any sentence authorised by this Act or such 
othe.r law for the punishment thereof . 
• ,(3). In every inquiry or trial, the proceedings shall be held as 
30 expeditiously as possible and, in particular, where the ~xamination of 
witnesses bas begun, the same shall be continued from day to day until 
all the witnesses in attendance havje been examined, and if any Special 
Court finds the adjournment of the same' beyond the following date to be 
necessary it shall record its reasons for doing so. ' . , 
35 13. Where a person has been convicted of an offence under this Act, 
the Special Court trying such offence may, if it is considered necessary 
so to do. declare that any funds or p.roperty seized under section 8 shall 
stand forfeited to the State. 
14. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code, an appeal 
40 shall lie as a matter of right from any judgment, sentence OT order, not 
being lln interlocutory order, of a Special Court to the High Court both 
on facts and on law. 
'. (2) Every (lppeal under this section shall 'be preferred within a period 
of thirtv days from the date of the judgment, sentence or order appealed , . 
45 t~orn: 
.<. Provided that the High Court may entertain an appeal after the expiry 
of the sDid period of thirty days if it is satisfied that the appellant had 
Special 
Public 
Prosecu-
tors. 
Procedure 
and 
powers 
of ~pecial 
Courts. 
Power 
of Special 
Court 
with 
respect 
to other 
offences. 
Forfeiture 
offunda 
01' 
property. 
Appeal. 

Protection 
of action 
taken 
under 
this 
Act. 
Burden 
of 
proof. 
Obligation 
of certain 
persons 
to report 
about the 
commis-
siooof 
offence 
under 
this 
Act. 
PerSOn 
convicted 
Of an 
offence 
under 
scdtion 
4 to be 
disquali-
fied from 
'j 
inheritina 
certain 
properties 
6 
sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal within the period of thirty 
days. 
PART V 
MISCELLANEOUS 
15. No suit, pros~ution or other legal proceeding shall lie against 5 
the State Government or any officer or authority of the State Govern· 
ment for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in 
pursuance of this Act or any rules or orders made under this Act. 
18. Where any person is /prosecuted of an offence undjer section 4. 
the burden of proofing that he had not committed the offence under the 10 
said section shall be on him. 
17. (1) All offiders of Government are hereby required and empowered 
to assist the police in the execution of the provisions of this Act or any 
rule or order made thereunder. 
(2) All village officers and such other officers as ;may be specified by 15 
the Collector or the District Magistrate in relation to any area and the 
inhabitants of such area shall, if they have reason to believe or have the 
knowledge that scti is about to be. or has been. cQmmitted in the area 
shaH forthwith report such fact to the nearest police station. 
(3) Whoever contravenes the provisions of sub-section (1) or sub· 20 
section (2) shall be punishable with imprisonment of either description 
for a term which may extend to two years and shall also be liable to fine. 
18. A person convict.ed of an offence under sub-section (1) of section 
4 in relation to the commission of sati shall be disqualifted from inheri-
ting th2 property of the person committing such sati or the property of 25 
any other person to which he would have been entitled to inherit on the 
person committing such sati. 
19. In the Representation of the People Act, 1951,- Amead. 
meat of 
('4) in section 8, in sub-section (2). after the proviso, the follow. Act 43 
ing proviso shall be inserted, namely: - 30 Of 1951. 
·'Provided further that a person convicted by a Special Court 
for the contravention of any of the provisions of the Commission 
of Sati (Prevention) Act, 1987 shall be disqualified from the date 
of such conviction and shall continue to be diaquaUfied fOr a 
f\lrther periop 9f five years since his relea~."; . 35 

7 
(b) in section 123, aftEn' clause (3A), the following claUSe shall 
be inserted, namely:- I 
'(3B) The propagation of the practice or the commission of 
san or its glorification by a candidate or his agent or any other 
S person with the consent of the candidate or his electiOll/ agent 
for the furtherance of the prospects of the election of that can-
didate or for prejudicially affecting the election of any candi-
date. 
Explanation.-Fo,r the purposes of this clause, "saW' and 
10 "glorifications in relation to sati" shall have the meanings res-
pectively assigned to them in the Commission of Sati (Preven-
tion) Act. 1987.'. 
20. The provisions of this Act or any rule Or order made thereunder 
shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith con-
15 tained in any enactment other than this Act or in any instrument having 
effect by virtue of any enactment other than this Act. 
21. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Oftlcial 
Gazette, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act. 
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as 
20 may be after it is made, before each House of Parli~ent, while it is 
in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in 
one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive 
• sessions aforesaid. both Houses agree in making any modification in 
2S the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, 
the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be 
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modifica-
tion or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of any-
thing previously done under that rule. 
30 ZZ. (1) All laws in force in any State immediately before the com-
mencement of this Act in that State which provide for the prevention 
or the glorification of sati shall, on such commencement, stand repealed. 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken 
under any law repealed under sub-section (1) shall be deemed to have 
35 been done or taken under the corr~sponding provisions of this Act, and, 
in particular, any case taken cognizance of by a Special Court under 
thP provisions of any law so repealed and pending before it 
immediately before the commencement of this Act in that Stat .. shall 
continue to be dealt with by that Special Court after such commence-
40 ment as if such Special Court had been constituted under section 9 of 
this Act. , ~ . , I r j ~. 'ii' 'V1 ..... 
Act to 
have over. 
ridina 
effect. 
Power to 
make 
rules. 
Repeal of 
existing 
laws. 

ST4Tl;MENT of OBJECTS AND REASoNS 
, 
The recent incident of the commisaion of sati in the village of Deorala 
in Rajasthan, its subsequent glorification and the various CJttempts made 
by the protagonists of this practrce to justify its 'continuance 
on religious grounds had aroused apprehension all over the coun-
try that this evil social practice, eradicated long back, will be revived. 
A general feeling had also grown in the country that the efforts put in 
by social reformers like Raja Ram Mohan Roy and others' in the last 
century would be nullified by; this single act· in Rajasthan. The com-
mission of sati in Deoraia was also followed by a number of congregations, 
ceremonies and festivals, and attempts were also made to collect funds 
for the construction of a temple at the site where sati was committed. 
The place had also attracted large nwnber of crowds and in spi.te of 
the various steps taken by the State Government of Rajasthan and the 
order of the ,High Court of Rajasthan to prohibit any ceremony being 
conducted, it was feared that a temple would be constructed at the site 
to perpetuate the memory of the widow who committed sati. These had 
evoked protests throughout the country and demands are being made by 
the women's organizations and from persons inside and outsid~ Parl41-
men~ for the enactment of a strong and deterrent Central law to prqvide 
for the more effective prev~ntion of the commission of sq,ti and its. ,glori-
fiCl;ltion so thatthis pralCtice or its glorification is not con~ued in States 
where there is no law for the prevention or glorification of ;o,ti. Although 
the offence of attempt to commit suicide as c~ntained in ~ectio~ 3Q9 of 
the Indian Penal Code had been held by various H'igh Courts to in~l~de 
the commission of sati punishable under the provlsIon, the sentence 
provided in that section was not deterrent enough to prevent the commis-
sion of such practice. Further, that section also did not provide for the 
glorification of sati subsequent to the commission of sati. There are at 
present only three laws in force in the States, including the ~fit.jasthan 
Sati (Prevention) Act, 1987. The other two enactments are the,B~ngal 
Sati Regulation, 1829 (Bengal Re.gul.ation XVII of 1829) and the T{lmil 
Nadu Sati Regulation, 1830 (Tamil Nadu Regulation 1 of 1830). 
2. It is, therefore, considered desirable to enact a Central law -w:hicp 
should be applicable to the whole of India other than the State afl ammu 
and Kashmir. The Bill, among other things, provides for the: folloWing 
matters, namely:-
0) the definition of 8'a'ti would include not only the. burning or 
burying alive of any widow along with the body of the deceased hus-
band but would also include such burning or burying of any woman 
with any other relative or with any article, object or thing associated 
with the husband or such relative irrespective of whether such burn-
ing or burying is claimed to be voluntary or otherwise; 
8 

• 
9 
(ii) a definition of glorification of Jati has been included which 
would include the observance of any ceremony, participating in any 
procession connected with the commission of sOiti or of any function 
to eulogise the person who had committed sati. The definition would 
also include the construction of any temple or the perfonnance of 
carrying on of any form of worship for the performance of ceremony 
thereat; 
(iii) the offence of attempt to commit sati will be punishable 
with the same punishment as is provided for the offence of attempt 
to commit suicide under section 309 of the Indiah Penal Code. This 
is because in most cases the widow or the woman is compelled to 
commit sati and invariably she will not be in ~ fit state of mind or 
will be labouring under a state of intoxication or stupefaction or 
other cause impeding the exercise of her free will; 
(iv) the abetment of sati will be punishable with death Or im-
prisonment for life and shan also be liable to fine while the abetment 
of any attempt to commit sati will be punishable with imprisonment 
for life and fine; 
(v) the glorification of sati is punishable with a minimum im-
prisonment of one year which may extend to seven years and with 
a minimum fine of five thousand rupees which may extend to thirty 
thousand rupees; 
(vi) the Collector or District Magistrate has been given the 
power to prohibit the doing of any act towards the commission of 
sati in any area if he is of the opinion that sati is likely to be com-
mltted in such area. The State Government or the Collector or 
District Magistrate has also been empowered to remove temples or 
other structures constructed for the glorification of sati and to seize 
properties aeq uired for such purpose; 
(vii) the offences under the proposed legislation will be triable 
only by a Special Court constituted under the provisions of the 
legislation; 
(viii) where any person is prosecuted of an offence of abetment 
of sati or the abetment of an attempt to commit sati, the burden of 
proving that he had not committed the offence shall be on him. A 
person who is convicted of an offence of abetment of sati will also 
be disqualified from inheriting the property of the persOn who 
commits sati; 
(ix) the Representation of the People Act, 1951 is being amende:! 
to provide for disqualification for standing for election to Parliament 
or to any State Legislature during the period of conviction and for 
a period of five years since his release, The propagation of commis-
sion of sati or its glorification by a candidate at such an election will 
also be deemed to be a corrupt practice under that Act, 
3. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 
NFW DELHI; 
The 9th December, 1987. P. V. NARASIMHA RAO. 

M)!;MORANDUM REGARDING bELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 21 of the Bill empowers the Central Government, by notifica-
tion in the Official Gazette, to make rules for carrying out the provisions 
of the proposed legislation. The rules that may be made by the Central 
Government under this provision may relate to matters of procedure or 
detail and as such the delegation of legislative power will be normal in 
character. 
It 

• 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACT FROM THE R!:PRBSENTATION OF THE PEOPLE ACT, 1951 
(43 OF 1951) 
• • * • 
II. (1) * * * •• Disquali-
fication on 
(2) A person coovict,ed by a court in India for any offence and con vic-
sentenced to imprisonment for not less than two years shall be disquali- lion for 
fied from the date of such conviction and shall continue to be disqualified certain 
for a further period of fiVe )1!ars since his release: offences. 
Provided that a person convicted by a court in India for the contra-
vention of any law providing for the prevention of hoarding or profiteer-
ing or of adulteration of food or drugs and sentenced to imprisonment for 
not less than six months shall be disqualified from the date Of such con-
viction and shall continue to be disqualified for a further period of five 
years since his release. 
• • * • • 
.1.1 

LOK SARRA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the more effective prevention of the commlSSlon of sati 
and it. 'gloriftcation and for matters connected therewith or inciden· 
tal thereto. 
(Shri P. V. Narasimha Roo, 
Minister of Human Resource 
Del,elopment. ) 