THE BANANA GROWERS (PROTECTION AND WELFARE )
BILL, 2010
By
SHRI A.T. NANA PATIL, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for protection and welfare of banana growers, payment of remunerative price
to them and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first Year of  the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Banana Growers (Protection and Welfare)  Act, 2010.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “Authority” means Banana Export and Processing Development Authority
established under section 8;
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
Bill No. 133 of 2010
Definitions.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
Procurement
of banana and
fixation of
remunerative
price.
Export of
surplus banana.
Compulsory
insurance.
(b) “banana grower” means any person who cultivates banana;
(c) “Fund” means the Banana Growers Protection Fund constituted under
section 6; and
(d) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3.  ( 1) It shall be the duty of the Central Government to procure the banana crop
produced in the country through such agency, as it may deem fit.
(2) The Central Government shall fix remunerative price of banana every year after
taking into consideration—
(i) the increase in the price of pesticides, fertilizers and other inputs;
(ii) total investment of the banana growers; and
(iii) such other factors as may be prescribed.
4. The Central Government shall take all necessary steps to export the surplus banana
produced during a year in the country.
5. The entire banana crop produced by the banana growers shall be compulsorily
insured free of cost by the Central Government against natural calamities, fall in the yield
of banana, fall in the prices of banana and such other eventualities as may be prescribed.
6. (1) The Central Government shall set up a Fund to be known as the Banana Growers
Protection Fund with a view to safeguard the interests of the banana growers.
(2) The Central Government and the State Governments shall contribute to the Fund
in  such ratio as may be prescribed.
7. The Banana Growers Protection Fund shall be used for the following purposes,
namely:—
(a) to provide financial assistance to banana growers—
(i) for purchasing fine quality seeds, pesticides and fertilizers; and
(ii) in case of low yields of bananas or loss of their crops due to rains,
storms, floods, hailstorms and drought;
(b) to provide compensation in the event of death or accident of banana growers
or labourers engaged in the production of bananas and other related work;
(c) to pay life insurance  premium on behalf of the banana growers;
(d) to provide free health facilities to banana growers and their families; and
(e) such other purposes as may be prescribed by the Central Government.
8. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification, establish an Authority to be
known as the Banana Export and Processing Development Authority for promoting the
export and processing of banana.
(2) The head office of the Authority shall be at Jalgaon in the State of Maharashtra.
(3) The Banana Export and Processing Development Authority shall consist of the
following:—
(i) a Chairperson, who shall be a person having knowledge and not less than
fifteen years of experience in the agricultural sector, to be appointed by the Central
Government;
(ii) two members, who shall be persons having not less than fifteen years
experience of research in banana processing industry, to be appointed by the Central
Government.
Banana
Growers
Protection
Fund.
Utilization of
the Fund.
Banana Export
and Processing
Development
Authority.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
(4) The Chairperson and the members of the Authority shall be appointed for a period
of three years or till they attain the age of sixty-five years, whichever is earlier.
(5) The salary and allowances payable to, and other  terms and conditions of the
service of Chairperson and the members of the Authority shall be such as may be prescribed
by the Central Government.
(6) The Central Government shall provide to the Authority such officers and staff as it
deems necessary for the efficient functioning of the Authority.
9. The Authority shall perform the following functions:—
(a) disseminate information among banana growers about reasonably priced
seeds, fertilizers and pesticides needed for growing bananas;
(b) recommend  to the Central Government the building of cold storages at
strategic places for the storage of bananas;
(c) provide financial assistance to banana growers for availing cold storage
facility;
(d) aid and encourage research in banana processing industry and set up research
institutes in this regard;
(e) recommend to the Central Government the measures for increasing banana
export and for revitalizing banana processing industry.
10. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear  it to be necessary or expedient for
removing  the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of two
years from the commencement of this Act.
11. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of the
provisions of any other law for the time being in force.
12. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days, which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Functions of
the Authority.
Power to
remove
difficulty.
Act not to be
in derogation
of other laws.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Banana is a commercial crop. It is cultivated in many States of the country. The banana
growers are facing problems as they are not getting remunerative price of their produce. To
grow their crop, they are forced to take loans. The banana growers are in distress as the
prices of banana crops are not increasing in proportion to those of seeds, fertilizers and
pesticides.
As banana is a highly perishable crop, the banana growers have to sell their produce
within a short period. They do not have the technology to preserve the bananas for a long
duration. In the absence of any cold storage facility, the banana growers are forced to sell off
their produce at a throw-away prices. The banana growers have to resort to distress sale as
there is no institutional mechanism on the part of the Government to ensure that banana
growers get remunerative price of their produce. As a result, the banana growers are getting
trapped in debt. By encouraging banana processing industry, avenues of employment
generation can be ensured along with the prosperity of the banana growers.
Government should provide remunerative price and also prompt relief to banana growers
in the event of natural calamities like storm, heavy rains, hailstorm and floods so that banana
growers can prosper. Setting up of a fund for banana growers and provision of insurance
scheme for them will certainly prove beneficial to them. Therefore, there is an urgent need to
enact a law which ensures Government assistance for the protection and welfare of the
banana growers in the country.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; A.T. NANA  PATIL
October 21, 2010.
4

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 5 of the Bill provides for compulsory insurance of banana crop. Clause 6
provides for the setting up of Banana Growers Protection Fund. Clause 8 provides for the
setting up of a Banana Export and Processing Development Authority. The Bill, therefore, if
enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely to
involve a recurring annual expenditure of rupees five hundred crore.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees fifty crore is also likely to be involved.
5

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 12 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
6

GMGIPMRND—4974LS(S3)—16-11-2010.
LOK  SABHARAJY A  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for protection and welfare of banana growers, payment of remunerative price to
them and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri A.T. Nana Patil, M.P.)