Bill NO."13~cl~$1I e 
- """, .. 
~ ",. < • " 
't~ 
-" ", 
."'" 
THE DELHI LAND REFORMS (AMEND-
MENT) BILL, 1958 
(As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA) 

Blll No. 133 of 1958 
THE DELHI LAND REFORMS (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 1958 
(Aa lNTRODUCBD IX LoK 8.uHA) 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Delhi Land Reforms Act, 1954-
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Ninth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. (I) This Act may be called the Delhi Land Reforms (Amend- Short title 
A 8 and ment) ct, 195 . commence-
S (2) Clause (b) of section 2, clauses (b) to (e) of section 3, sec- ment. 
Uons 4 to 9, 12 and 13 and sub-section (1) of section 19 shall be 
deemed to have come into force on the 20th dey of July, 1954, and 
the rest of this Act shall come into force at once. 
2. In section 1 of the Delhi Land Reforms Act, 1954 (hereinafter Amendment 
10 referred to as the principal Act), in sub-section (2),- ~elhTI~~ IS 
(a) in clause (a), the word "are" occurring before the word of 1954. 
"included" shall be omitted; 
(b) in clause (b), for the words "areas controlled, notified, 
held, occupied or owned by the Delhi Improvement Trwit, or", 
IS the word "areas" sooll be substituted. 
3. In section 3 of the principal Act,- Amendment 
of section 3. 
(a) for clauses (1) and (5), the following clauses shall be 
substituted, namely:-
• (1) "agricultural year" or "fasH year" means the year 
20 commencing on the 1st day of July end ending on the 30th 

Amendment 
ef aection 5. 
AJDlDdment 
of aocdon 7. 
(~) "Delhi town" means the areas which immediately 
before the establishment of the Municipal Corporation of 
Delhi were included in the limits of Delhi Municipality, 
Civil Station Notified Area, West Delhi Municipality and 
the Fort Notified Area; '; 5 
(b) after clause (12), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:-
'(l2A). "Khudkasht" means land (other than Sir) 
cultivated by a proprietor either by himself or by servant. 
or by hired labour,- 10 
(a) at the commencement of this Act, or 
(b) at any time during the period of five yean 
immediately before the commencement of this Act, 
whether or not it was so cultivated at such commence-
ment, provided that it has not, at any tim£' after having 15 
been so cvltiv.ioted, bee.n let out to a tenant;' ; 
(c) after clause (19), the following clause shall be inserted, 
DBmely:-
• (I~A). "Revenue Assistant" means an Assistan Collector 
of the first grade or class and includes any officer empower- ~ 
eel by the Chief Commissioner to perform all or any of the 
functions of a Revenue Assistant under this Act; '; 
(ci) in clause (24), the word "khudkasht," shall be omitted; 
(e) in clause (25), the words "Revenue Assistant" shell be 
omitted. 2S 
4. In section 5 of the principal Act, in clause (a) ,-
(a) the words "under his self-cultivation" shall be omitted; 
(b) after the words "Patta Dawami", the words "or Istam-
rari" shall be inserted. 
5. In section 7 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1). in clause (i) of the Explanation,-
(i) the words. letters and figures "recorded as such on 
1st July. 1950" shall be omitted; 
30 
(ii) for the words "except the uncultivated areas 
included in the holdings of such proprietor or proprieton", 3S 

10 
IS 
20 
a 
the following shall be substituted, namely:-
"except the uncultivated areas-
(a) included in the holdings of such proprietor or 
proprietors, or 
(b) used for purposes other than those mentioned 
in clause n3) of section 3, during the period commen-
cing on the 20th day of July, 1954. and ending with the 
27th day of October, 1956, or 
(c) tmnsferred to a bona fide purchaser for value 
during the period specified in sub-clause (b)"; 
(b) in sub-section (2), the words "consisting of all the 
adult residents of the village" and the words, letters and figures 
"as recorded on 1st July, 1950" shall be omitted; 
(c) in sub-section (3), for the words "not exceeding two, 
as the Chief Commissioner may determine, commencini from 
the fasli year next following the commencement of this Act", 
the following shall be substituted, namely:-
"not exceeding four, as the Chief Commissioner may 
determine, the first of which shall be paid-
(a) in any case where such calculation has been 
made before the date on which the Delhi Land Reforms 
(Amendment) Act, 1958, receives the assent of the Presi-
dent, on the first day of the fasli year next following 
such date; and 
(b) in any other case, on the first day of the fasU 
year next following the date of such calculation"; 
(d) after sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be 
inserted, namely:-
"(4) Where the amount of compensation is not paid by 
30 the due date specified in sub-section (3), such amount shall 
be paid with interest thereon at the rate of 2~ per cent. per 
annum from the said date until payment.". 
35 
6. In section 11 of the principal Act, for SUb-section (2), the Amendment 
follOWing sub-section shall be substituted, namely: - of scction II. 
"(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1), the Deputy Com-
missioner shall take into consideration the entries in the revenue 
records which shall be presumed to be correct unless the contrary 
ia proved.". 

Amendment 
of section 
IS· 
7. In section 15 of the principal Act,-
(a) for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be 
substituted, oomely:-
"(2) If the proprietor mortgagor deposits the amount 
and applies for redemption as provided in sub-section (1), he S 
shall be declared as Bhumidhar in respect of the mortgaged 
area which was under the personal cultivation of the mort-
iagee on the date of such application for redemption, and if 
any part of the mortgaged area was on the said date let out 
to a tenant, such tenant shall be declared as Bhumidhar in 10 
respect of the erea that was so let out to him." ; 
(b) in sub-section (3), the words "whether or not it was 
the Sir or Khudkasht of the mortgagor on the date of the 
mortgage" shall be omitted. 
I . f 8. After section 16 of the principal Act, the followini section shall IS nlertlon 0 
new section be inserted, namely:-
16A. 
Compensa-
tion payable 
by tenant 
declared 
Bhumidhar 
of redeemed 
land. 
Amendment 
oflection 18· 
·'16A. Where a tenant is declared as Bhumidhar in respect 
of any part of mortgaged area that has been redeemed under 
sub-section (1) of section 15, the compensation payable by such 
tenant to the mortgagor shall be determined and paid in the 20 
manner provided in clause (2) or clause (3) of section 16 accord-
ing as such tenant is declared a Bhumidhar under sub-section 
(2) or SUb-section (5) of section 15.". 
t. In section 18 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (2), after the words "Revenue Assistant", 2 
the words "and, shall on regaining possession have the same 5 
riihts as he would have had but for such eviction, decree or 
or order" shall be inserted; 
(b) efter sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be 
inserted, namely:-
.. (3) Nothing in this section shall affect the rights of a 
proprietor in any land held or occupied at the commence-
ment of this Act for purposes other than those mentioned in 
clause (13) of section 3." . 
30 

5 
10. In section 26 of the principal Act, for the words "except with Afment~me.?6t o sec Ion 10 • 
the written permission of the landholder of such land or the Gaon 
Panchayat, as the case may be", the following shall be substituted, 
n~mely:-
5 "except-
10 
IS 
(a) with the written permIssIon of the landlord of 
such land or the Gaon Panchayat, as the case may be, or 
(b) where such permission is not given within the pres-
cribed period, with the written permission of the Revenue 
Assistant granted in accordance with rules made under this 
Act in this behalf". 
11. In section 28 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words "written consent of 
the n~on Panchayat or the landholder", the words "written 
permission of the landholder, the Gaon Panchayat or the Revenue 
Assistent" shall be substituted; 
(b) in sub-section (2) for the word "consent", the word 
"permission" shall be substituted. 
Amendment 
of section 28. 
12. For section 33 of the principal Act, the following section shall Sfubstitution o new sec-
lObe substituted, namely:- tion for 
section 33. 
"33. No Bhumidhar shall have the right to transfer by sale Restrictions 
or gift or otherwise any land to any person, other than an insti- f~s b~ran.; 
tution established for a charitable purpose or a body notified by Bhumidhar 
the Chief Commissioner, where as a result of the transfer-
2, (a) such per!lon shall become entitled to land which 
tOllether with land, if anv. held bv him oersonally or together 
with the members of his family will, in the aggregate, 
exceed thirty standard acres, or 
(b) the transferor !lhall be left with an uneconomic 
30 holding of less than eight standard acres in the Union terri-
tory of Delhi: 
Provided that the Chief Commis!lioner may exempt from the 
operation of chl1lse (b) the tran!lfer of any land made before 
the 1st day of December, 1958, if the land covered by such trans-
35 fer does not exceed one acre in area and is used or intended to 
be used for purposes other than those mention'ed in clause (13) 
of section 3. 
Expla.nation,-For the purposes of thi!l section ft person's 
family shall, if the members are living jointly, consist of the 

• 
person himself, his minor children, his wife or her husband, 
as the case may be, and if the person himself is a minor, his 
father and mother.". 
~mendme.nt 13. Section 45 of the principal Act shall be re-numbered as sub-
4S. Iect\OD section (1) thereof, and after sub-section (1) as so re-numbered, the S 
following sub-section shall be inserted; namely:-
" (2) Nothing in sub-!'lection (1) shall apply to any transfer 
which has been exempted by the Chief Commissioner from the 
operation of clause (b) of section 33.". 
~en~=~n '14. In section 88 of the prinCipal Act, for the words "if the rent IO 
88. is paid in cash, its equivalent value", the words "four times the 
land revenue payable for the land held by the Asami, whichever is 
less" shall be substituted. 
Amendme.nt 15. In section 150 of the principal Act. for the proviso, the follow-
~~o. scctlon ing proviso shall be substituted, namely: _ IS 
"Provided that such areas shall not· include any area to 
which the Delhi Panchayat Raj Act, 1954, does not extend.". 
Substitution . of new sec- 16. For section 151 of the principal Act, the following section 
tion. for shall be substituted, namely:-sectlOn lSI. 
Membership "151. (1) All persons registered by virtue of the provisions 20 
of Gaon Sabha and of the Constitution and the Representation of the People Act, 
constitution 1950, as voters in so much of the electoral roll for any parlia-of Gaon 
Panchayat. mentary constituency for the time being in force as relates to 
a Gaon Sabha Area shall be the members of the Gaon Sabha 
for that area. 25 
Explanation.-In this sub-section, the expression "parlia-
mentary constituency" has the meaning assigned to it under 
the Representation of the People Act, 1950. 
(2) Every Gaon Sabha shall have an executive body to be 
known as the Gaon Panchayat. 30 
(3) A Gaon Panchayat shall consist of a Pradhan and such 
number of panches not less th"ln four and not more than ten, 
as the Chief Commissioner may fix from time to time in this 
behalf. 
(4) The Pradhan and the panches shall be elected by the 35 
members of the Gaon Sabha from among themselves. 
(5) The Chief Commissioner shall, by order in the Offtcial 
Gazdte, determine the number of seats, if any, reserved for 
Delhi Act 
3 of 1955 
43 of 19S0. 
43 of 1950 
women and the Scheduled Castes in each Gaon Panchayat: 't 

7 
Provided that the number of seats so reserved for the Sche-
duled Castes shall bear as nearly as may be the same proportion 
to the total number of seats in the Gaon Panchayat as the 
population of the Scheduled Castes in the area of the Gaon 
S Sabha bears to the total population of such area.". 
17. In section 153 of the principal Act. for clause (a), the follow- AmendJll~t 
ing clause shall be substituted, namely:- ~~3. RCCtlOD 
"(a) ceases to be a member of the Gaon Babhs; or". 
16. In section 187 of the principal Act. rfor the words "in which Ameudme~1t 
10 no appeal lies, or where an appeal lies but has not been preferred", ~~7. sectlOD 
the words "in which no appeal lies to him" shall be substituted. 
15 
20 
19 
30 
35 
45 
21 
So 
It. (1) In Schedule I to the principal Act,- Amendment 
of Sche-
. dule I. 
(a) for the figures and brackets "15 (2)" in column 2 against 
entry No.1, the figures and brackets "15 (1)" shall be substj. 
tuted; 
(b) for entries 2, 19 and 21. the following entries shall be 
respectively substituted, namely:-
1,(3)(3), AppUcatlo1l by lIIon,.- None 
(4) lUlil (,) 11M or mort,...,e 01' 
tenalltl to be declared 
Bhumidhlr, 
'7 
Suit Cor ejectment of a 
penon IlCeUpyinaland 
"ithout title and 
damqet. 
(I)' by I Bhuraidhar de- Three 
e1ared under Chap- )'OIrI 
ter III or the Act 
or by an Alami 
falUn. WIder IOctioll 
6 or the Act where 
auch unlawful 01:-
ClIipant wu In R-
aenion or the land 
before the itaue of 
the preocribed de-
claration rorlll; 
(ii) by a Gaon Sabha Throe 
"bere tbe uoIawfIU nara. OCCUpant "al III 
~P!m or :the IIUld before the con-
. . ,." , .. /til .... ; PC GIIOIl ·PUwrat. . 
(iir') By. BhllJllidhar. Three 
Aaami or Oaon )'OIrI. 
Sabha iIllUlY other 
CIN. 
Suit ror oj_t or 'I'bNe 
penon from landa of ye ..... 
public utilit" 
-do. -do- -do-
PI'OIIl the date or -do- -do- -do-IlIuo or the prel-
cribed decl .... tiOll 
rorm to the tallure holder or the I\Ibo 
tenure-holder COII-
cemed. 
Prom the date oC -do· -do- -do. 
conatltation or 
Oaon Panchayac 
undllr aectlOIl I, I. 
Prom the lit or Il&1y -do- -do- -do-roUowln. the dlte 
oC occupation. 
PrOlll the date or -do- -do- -do-coDltitution of o.on Panchayat 
UIIdI:r Medon 1,1. 
ChIef 
c:o..ua&.-
aIOIler." 

8 
(2) The amendments made in Schedule I to the principal Act 
by sub-section (1) shall not apply in relation to suits under entries 
19 and 21 of that Schedule instituted or disposed of before the date 
on which this sub-section comes into force. 
Cerlain 20. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the 5 
decrees aDd time being in force-
orders to be 
~~IJ. and (a) every decree or order passed by any court or other 
authority in respect of any land which came to be excluded . 
from the operation of the Delhi Land Reforms Act, 1954, as a :?re~;s~t 8 
result of the amendment made by clause (ii) of section 2 at the 10 Delhi Act 
Delhi Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1956, shall be null and 16 of 1956. 
void, if the same would not have been passed but for such 
amendment; 
(b) all suits and applications in respect of any such land for 
any relief, which cannot be granted but for such amendment, IS 
pending in any court or other authority on the date of the com-
mencement of this Act, shall be dismissed; and 
(c) every decree or order passed by any court or other 
authority refusing to grant any relief in respect of any such land 
on account of such amendment shall be null and void and the 20 
proceedings in which such decree or order was passed shall be 
revived and disposed of in accordance with the provisions at Delhi Act 
the Delhi Land Reforms Act, 1954, as amended by this Act. 8 of 19'4. 
(2) Where a decree or order is null and void under clause (a) of 
sub-section (1), the court or other authority which passed the decree 25 
or order shall, on the application of any party entitled to any beneftt 
by way of restitution or otherwise cause such restitution to be made 
as will, 80 far as may be, place the parties in the position which 
they would have occupied but for the decree or order. 
(3) No suit shall be instituted for the purpose of obtaining any 30 
lestitution or other relief which could be obtained by application 
under sub-section (2). 
(4) Nothing in this section shall aftect the interest. of a bono ~ 
purchaser for value in any land referred to in sub-lection (1) in reB-
pec:t of any we made on or after the 8th ~ of JUlUU'1, 1117. and], 
before the lit day of January, 1_ 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Delhi Land Reforms Act, 1954, as amended by the Delhi 
Vidhan Sabha in 1956, exempted from its purview areas controlled, 
notified, held, occupied or owned by the Delhi Improvement Trust, 
thereby depriving tenants in about 15 villages of their right to obtain 
Bhumidhari rights in land in their possession. This exemption is pr~ 
posed to be withdrawn as there is no immediate prospect of planned 
urban development being taken up in these areas. It has also been 
found that there is some inconsistency between the provisions of the 
Delhi Land Reforms Act, 1954 and the Delhi Panchayat Raj Act, 
1954, relating to the membership of Gaon Sabhas. It is proposed to 
remove this inconsistency. This opportunity is availed of to propose 
some other amendments mainly of a consequential and clarificatory 
nature. The reasons for each of the amendments proposed in the 
Bill are given in the notes on clauses. 
G. B. PANT. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 10th December, 1958. 
9 

}iote8 on clauaeB 
Clause I.-By this clause retrospective effect is being given to 
certain clauses of the Bill to secure effective implementation of the 
Act. 
ClatLSes 2 and 20.-Areas controlled, notified, held, occupied or 
owned by the Delhi Improvement Trust were excluded from the pur-
view of the Act by the Delhi Land Reforms (Amendment). Act, 1956, 
thereby depriving tenants in about 15 villages of the right to acquire 
bhumidhari rights in respect of land in their possession. It is pro-
posed to withdraw this exemption retrospectively. Provision is also 
being made in clause 20 of the Bill for making all decrees and orders 
passed by any court or authority on the basis of the exclusion null 
and void, and for (1) restitution of rights so as to place parties, as far 
as possible, in the same position as they occupied before such decree 
or order and (2) protection of rights of bona fide purchasers for 
value, acquired before 1st January, 1958, when the proposal to amend 
the Act was made known to the public. 
Clause 3.-The term "fasli year", though not defiried, is used in 
several places in the Act as a synonym of the term "agricultural 
year" which is defined in the Act. The position is clarified by this 
provision. 
. The revised definition of "Delhi town" is consequential upon the 
establishment of the Municipal Corporation of Delhi. 
It is proposed to define the term "khudkasht" as that term has 
not been defiried in the Act or in the Agra Tenancy Act, 1901, or 
the Punjab Tenancy Act, 1887, to which reference is made in clause 
(24) of section 3 of the Act. The term "Revenue Assistant" is also 
being defined for similar reasons. 
Clause 4.-After the definition of "khudkasht" the use of the quali-
fying words "under his self-cultivation" is unnecessary and it is 
proposed to delete the same. 
Whereas the type of tenure known as "Istamrari" is mentioned 
in section 11, it is not mentioned in section 5. It is proposed to cor-
rect this discrepancy retrospectively as otherwise there would be a 
conflict between sections 5 and 11, which 1VS" not intended. 
10 

II 
Clause 5.-Waste lands defined by Explanation (i) to sub-section 
(1) of section 7 as including cultivable and uncultivable area of the 
village recorded as such on 1.7.1950 except the uncultivated area in-
cluded in the holding of a proprietor, are to vest in the Gaon Sabhas 
on termination of the rights of proprietors thereto. The principal 
Act came into force on 20.7.1954. Between the period 1.7.1950 and 
20.7.1954, some waste lands had been, in good faith, brought under 
cultivation or built upon by proprietors. Besides, an ambiguity in 
the meaning of the term "waste land" was caused by the fact that 
according to prevailing practice all land was shown in the land 
records as being included in the holding of one or other pro-
prietor. This ambiguity was clarified by the Amending Act of 
1956 which defined the term "holding". Instances of waste 
land being put to non-agricultural use between the commencement 
of the principal Act (20.7.1954) and the passing of the Amendment 
Act of 1956 (27.10.1956) by proprietors or by transferees from pro-
prietors have also been noticed. In order to remove all hardship, it 
Is proposed to exclude such lands from the scope of the definition of 
"waste land". 
The words "consisting of all adult residents of the village" occur-
ring in sub-section (2) of section 7 are proposed to be omitted in 
view of the amendments made in section 151 by clause 16 of the Bill. 
Compensation payable to proprietors for termination of their 
rights in waste lands could not be calculated and paid within the 
prescribed period of two years, as a result of an order of the Punjab 
High Court staying the implementation of the Act. It is now pro-
posed that the compensation shall be payable in four instalments in-
stead of in two instalments as originally provided. As a conse-
quence of this amendment, it is proposed that interest shall be paid 
on the amount of compensation at 2' per cent. per annum. 
Clause 6.-This is a clarificatory amendment as sub-section (2) of 
section 11 does not expressly provide for a presumption of correct-
ness of revenue records. 
Clause 7.-This is also a clarificatory amendment. It seeks to pro-
vide that a proprietor mortgagor shall be declared Bhumidhar in 
respect of all the mortgaged lands which are under the self-cultiva-
tion of the mortgagee in possession on the date of redemption; that 
the tenant shall be declared to be Bhumidhar in respect of those 
mortgaged lands which are under his cultivation on the date of 
redemption. 
Clause a.-This is consequential upon the amendment proposed in. 
clause 7. 

12 
CUltue 9.-Section 18 of the Act enables a tenant evicted from 
land after 1st July, 1950, on any ground other than for arrears of 
rent in pursuance of a decree or order, to regain possession. It is 
now proposed to provide that on regaining possession, the tenant 
shall be entitled to bhumidhari rights in respect of such lands ex-
cept where, after the eviction of the tenant the land has been put to 
non-agricultural use. 
Clause 10.-By this amendment, it is provided that if permission 
is not given by the landholder or Gaon Panchayat to an Asami to 
make improvements on any land not included in his holding such 
permission may be given by the Revenue Assistant. 
Clause H.-The amendments proposed by this clause are conse-
quential. 
Clause 12.-Instances have come to notice of small areas of land 
having been transferred in contravention of provisions relating to 
transfers that would result in the transferor being left with an un-
economic holding, the transferees in most of these cases being poor 
persons. To avoid hardship in such cases, it is proposed to include 
a proviso which would enable the Chief Commissioner to exempt 
such transfers from the operation of clause (b) of section 33. 
Clause 13.-This amendment is consequential upon the amend-
ment proposed to be made in section 33. 
Clause l4.-By this provision it is proposed to limit the maximum 
rent payable by an Asami. 
Clause 15.-This modifies the proviso to section 150 (1) so as to 
accord with the position obtaining after the establishment of the 
Delhi Municipal Corporation. 
Clause 16.-The substitution proposed is intended to achieve uni-
formity between the provisions of the Delhi Land Reforms Act, 1954, 
and the Delhi Panchayat Raj Act, 1954, in respect of membership 
of Gaon Sabha. A further provision is added to enable reservation of 
seats for women and Scheduled Castes in each Gaon Panchayat. 
Clause 17.-This amendment is proposed to clarify that a person 
who ceases to be a member Qf the Gaon Sabha shall also cease to be 
a member of the Gaon Panchayat. 
Clause lB.-This amendment is proposed k> bring section 187 of 
the Act into line with section 'nti 01. tJae Code of Civil Proeed.ure. 
1808. 

13 
Clause 19.-No time-limit for declaration of bhumidhari rights is 
provided in ~oe Act. It is proposed to omit the reference to "six 
months" in column 4 against entry No.2. It is also proposed to in-
clude a reference to sub-section (2) of section 15 in column 2 against 
entry No.2 to cover cases of mortgagors, mortgagees and tenants 
entitled to be declared as bhumidhars under section 15. 
Persons eligible to obtain and who have in fact obtained bhumi-
dhari rights could not exercise the right to eject persons in occupa-
tion of land otherwise than in accordance with law, within the pres-
cribed period of 2 years as a result of an order of the Punjab High 
Court staying the implementation of the Act. Bhumidhari declara-
tions have been issued only after October~ 1956. The amendment 
now proposed seeks to enlarge the period OI limitation within which 
suits under soection 84 and section 87 may be brought. Prov1a1on hal 
been made to save suits instituted or disposed of before the com-
mencement of the Delhi Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1958. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Compensation payable to proprietors under section 7 of the Delhi 
Land Reforms Act, 1954, in respect of waste land vesting in Gaon 
Sabhas could not be calculated and paid within the period specified 
in that section as a result of an order of the Punjab High Court 
staying the implementation of the Act. Provision has been made in 
the BiU for payment of compensation in four instalments instead of 
in two instalments as originally provided and for payment of inter-
est on the amount of compensation at 21 per cent. Payment of inter-
est would involve an expenditure of about Rs. 25,574 out of the Con-
solidated Fund of India. 
14 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
By clause 10 of the Bill it is proposed to amend section 26 so as 
to empower the Chief Commissioner to prescribe the period within 
which a landholder or a Gaon Sabha should decide an Asami's appli-
cation for written permission to make improvements on land not in-
cluded in his holding. The Chief Commissioner is also empowered 
to make rules regarding the grant of written permission by the 
Revenue Assistant where permission is not granted within the pres-
cribed period by the landholder or Gaon Sabha. The delegation of 
power to make rules is for regulating procedural matters and is 
thus normal in character. 
15 

Short tilte 
extent and 
commence-
ment. 
Defmitions. 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE DELHI LAND REFORMS Ac'r, 1954 
(8 OF 1954) 
• • 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
• • 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Delhi Land Reforms Act, 1954. 
(2) It extends to the whole of the State, but shall not apply to-
(a) the areas which are or may before the first day of 
November, 1956, be are included in a Municipality or a Notified 
Area under the provisions of the Punjab Municipal Act, 1911, 
or a Cantonment under the provisions of the Cantonments Act, 
1924. 
(b) areas controlled, notified, held, occupied or owned by 
the Delhi Improvement Trust, or included in any estate owned 
by the Central Government or any local authority. and 
• • • • 
3. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(1) "agricultural year" means the year commencing on the 
first day of July and ending on the thirtieth day of June; 
• • • • 
(5) "Delhi town" means the areas included in the limits of 
the Delhi Municipality, Civil Station Notified Area, West Delhi 
Notified Area and the Fort Notified Area; 
• • • • 
(24) words and expressions, groV'e, grove-holder, rent, cess, 
sir, khudkasht, rent-free grantee, landholder, ex-proprietary 
tenant, occupancy tenant, non-occupancy tenant, sub-tenant, and 
crops or any other expressions, not defined in this Act and used 
in the Agra Tenancy Act, 1901, or the Punjab Tenancy Act, 1887, 
shall have the meaning assigned to them in the Agra Tenancy 
Act, 1901, or the Punjab Tenancy Act, 1887, according as the 
context refers to the Shahdara or the remaining circles; 
(25) words and expressions, land revenue, Revenue Assist-
ant and Tahsildar, not defined in this Act and used in the U.P. 
Land Revenue Act, 1901, or the Punjab Land Revenue Act, 1887, 
shall have the meaning. assigned to them in those Acts, as the 
case may be. 
• • • • 
J6 

CHAPTER II 
A-TENURES 
• • • • 
5. Every person belonging to any of the following classes shall Bhumidhar. 
be a Bhumidhar and shall have all the rights and be subject to all 
the liabilities conferred or imposed upon a Bhumidhar by or under 
this Act, namely:-
(a) a proprietor holding Sir or Khudkasht land under his 
self-cultivation, a proprietor's grove holder, an occupancy tenant 
under section 5 of the Punjab Tenancy Act, 1887, paying rent at 
revenue rates or a person holding land under Patta Dawami, 
with rights of transfer by sale, who are declared Bhumidhars on 
the commencement of this Act; 
• • • • 
ACQUISITION OF CERTAIN RIGHTS OF PROPRIETORS 
• • • 
7. (1) All rights of an individual proprietor or proprietors Rights of 
pertaining to waste lands, grazing or collection of forest produce proprietors 
• In waste from forest or fish from fisherIes, lands of common utility, such as lands, pas-
customary common pasture lands, cremation or burial grounds, ture1 dland8f . oranso abadi sites, pathways, pubbc wells, tanks and water channels, or common 
Khalihans, whether covered by an existing contract between such ~~il~~~t etc'in 
proprietor or proprietors and any other person or not, shall with Gaon Sabha 
effect from the commencement of this Act be terminated in accord- ~~~sati~~~ 
ance with the provision of sub-section (2) and the said contracts, if be paid for 
any, shall become void with effect from such commencement. them. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this sub-section-
(i) "waste lands" shall include cultivable and uncultivable 
waste area of the vil1age recorded as such on 1st July, 1950, 
including any land in the bed of a river, occupied or held by an 
Asami referred to in section 6 (a) (iii) of the Act, except the 
uncultivated areas included in the holdings of such proprietor or 
proprietors; 
(ii) "lands of common utility" shall include such lands as 
are recorded as such at the last settlement or have been or would 
have been customarily recorded as such on 1st July, 1950: 
17 

18 
Provided that where such land was as a result of consolidation of 
holdings made available for use for any purposes other than those 
referred to in this sub-section, land kept aside in exchange thereof, 
as a result of such consolidation, shall for the purposes of this Act 
be deemed to be land originally meant for purposes referred to in 
this sub-section. 
(2) On the commencement of this Act, the Deputy Commissioner 
shall pass an order in respect of the proprietor or proprietors of each 
village either singly or collectively divesting the individual prop-
rietor or proprietors of the rights mentioned in sub-section (1) and 
vesting those rights in the Gaon Sabha consisting of all the adult 
residents of the village or in any person or authority appointed by 
the Chief Commissioner under section 161 with effect from the com-
mencement of this Act and stating that a compensation equal in 
value to four times the amount of annual land revenue assessed at 
the last settlement for the cultivable and uncultivable waste area 
of the village as recorded on 1st July, 1950, shall be paid by the 
Government to the proprietor or proprietors concerned. If no such 
assessment of Land Revenue was made at the last settlement the 
rate of Land Revenue applied at the last settlement for similar areas 
in any other village in the same assessment circle shall be taken to 
be the rate of Land Revenue applicable to such areas shall be com-
puted at 75 per cent. of the Land Revenue assessed on the lowest 
class of soil in the village. 
(3) The amount of compensation shall be calculated separately 
fbr each village for the respective proprietor or proprietors in 
accordance with rules made under this Act and payments thereof 
shall be made in such number of annual instalments, not exceeding 
two, as the Chief Commissioner may determine, commencing from 
the fasli year next following the commencement of this Act. 
• • • • 
CHAPTER III 
A-DECLARATION OF BHUMIDHARI RIGHTS, COMPENSATION AND LAND 
REVENUE 
. 11. (1) Subject to the provisions of section 10, the Deputy Com-
DeclaratIOn Bh . dh h Id' th f 11 . of Bhumi- missioner shall declare as uml ars persons 0 mg e 0 owmg 
~hari rights lands namely:-
In favour of ,. 
proprietors 
and supe-
rior class of 
tenants, 
compensation 
and land 
revenue. 
• • • • 
(a) Khud Kasht laryd or a proprietor's grove in the tracts 
to which the Punjab Tenancy Act, 1887, was applicable or Sir 
land or Khud Kasht land or a proprietor's grove in the tracts 
to which the Agra Tenancy Act, 1901, was applicable; 

19 
(b) land held by occupancy tenants under section 5 of the 
Punjab Tenancy Act, 1887, with rights of transfer by sale; and 
(c) land held under Patta Dawami or Istamrari by tenants 
with rights of transfer by sale. 
(2) The basis for the purposes of this section shall be the records 
of the fasH year immediately preceding the commencement of this 
Act: 
Provided that where land held as Khud Kasht by a proprietor 
belonging to any of the categories of persons referred to in sub-
section (2) of section 10 has been before the commencement of this 
Act, let out to another person by or on behalf of such proprietor, 
the Revenue Assistant, on application made to him in this behalf 
by or on behalf of such proprietor within six months of the com-
mencement of this Act and after giving an opportunity to the tenant 
of being heard, shall declare such land to be the proprietor's Khud 
Kasht for the purposes of this section. 
• • • • 
B-GENERAL CONSEQUENCES OF THE TERMINATION OF INTERMEDIARIES 
RIGHTS 
15. (1) A mortgagee in possession of an estate or share therein Estate in 
shall cease to have any right in such estate or share, if the proprietor possession of 
t d Ot th t t th 'th' a mortgagee mor gagor epOSl S e mor gage money oge er Wl mterest with POS8e1-
thereon in Government Treasury and applies for redemption of the lion. 
mortgage in the proper court, within a period of nine months from 
the commencement of this Act. 
(2) The proprietor mortgagor shall forthwith produce the treasury 
challan and a copy of the plaint before the Revenue Assistant, who 
shall, after giving the interested. parti'es an opportunity of being 
heard, direct that so much of the mortgaged area, as, having been 
the Sir or Khud Kasht of the mortgagor on the date of the mortg: gc 
was under the personal cultivation of the mortgagee on the date of 
application for redemption by the proprietor mortgagor under sub-
section (1), be included in the proprietor mortgagor's Bhumidhari 
area. 
(3) Where the proprietor mortgagor fails to take action under 
sub-section (1) within the time specified therein, the mortgagee of 
the area mortgaged with possession, whether or not it was the Sir or 
Khud Kasht of the mortgagor on the date of the mortgage, shall be 
declared as the Bhumidhar of so much of the area mortgaged as is 
under the personal cultivation of the mortgagee. 
• • • • 

26 
Contract t 18. (1) Any contract or agreement made between a proprietor agreemen 
or evictkn to and any person on or after the 1st day of July, 1950, which has the 
;;!~i~ions of effect, directly or indirectly of defeating the provisions of this Act 
this Act to shall be and is hereby declared null and void. 
be void. 
(2) Notwithstanding any decree or order where a tenant of Sir 
or sub-tenant of tenants referred to in sub-section (1) of section 10 
or sub-tenant of tenants referred to in section 12 or a non-occupancy 
tenant referred to in clause (f) of sub-section (1) of section 13 was 
evicted ~rom land after 1st July, 1950, on any ground other than for 
arrears of rent, the tenant or the sub-tenant shall be entitled to 
regain possession thereof on his making an application in this behalf 
to the Revenue Assistant: 
Provided that the land is not in the possession of any other tenant 
in the fasli year immediately before the commencement of this Act. 
• • • 
Restrictions 26. No Bhumidhar or Asami shall make an improvement on, or 
:e~:~rove- detrimental to, any land which is not included in the holding, to be 
benefited thereby except with the written permission of the land-
holder of such land or the Gaon Panchayat, as the case may be . 
• * • • 
Right to 28. (1) An Asami who has made any improvement with the writ-
c~mpensa-... ten consent of the Gaon Panchayat or the landholder, as the case non lor 
improve- may be, shall be entitled to compensation-
men! made 
by an Asami. 
(a) when a decree or order for his ejectment is passed on 
any ground other than his making any transfer in contravention 
of the provisions of this Act or on the ground of his using the 
land for any purpose other than agriculture, horticulture or 
animal husbandry, which includes pisciculture and poultry 
farming; 
(b) when he has been wrongfully deprived of possession 
by the Gaon Panchayat or his landholder, as the case may be, 
and has not recovered possession of his holding; or 
(c) when he vacates the holding on the expiry of his lease 
or on becoming liable to ejectment on any ground mentioned 
in clause (a). 
(2) No compensation shall be payable to an Asami where the 
improvement was made without the written consent a8' aforesaid. 
i 
• • • • 

2t 
D-TRANSFERS (BHUMIDHARS AND ASAMIS) 
• • • • 
33. No Bhumidhar shall have the right to transfer by sale or gift Restrictions 
or otherwise any land to any person, other than an institution esta- ~:!.nsfe:~ebY 
blished for a charitable purpose or a body notified by the Chief a Hhumi-
Commissioner, where such person shall as a result of the transfer dhar. 
become entitled to land which together with land. if any, held by 
himself or together with the members of his family will, in the 
aggregate, exceed 30 standard acres. or where the transferor shall as 
a result of the transfer be left with an uneconomic holding of less 
than either standard acres in the State. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section a person's family 
shall, if the members are living jointly, consist of the person himself, 
his minor children, his wife or her husband, as the case may be, 
and if the person himself is a minor, his father and mother. 
• • • • 
45. Any transfer made by or on behalf of a Bhumidhar or Asami Transfer 
in contravention of the provisions of thi~ Chapter shall be void. made in Contraven-
• • • 
I-RENT (AsAMx) 
• tion of this 
Chapter to 
be void. 
88. An Asami shall be liable to pay such rent as may be agreed Rent 
upon between him and his landholder or the Gaon Sabha, as the payable ,by 
case may be, subject to the condition that it shaH not exceed one- an Asaml. 
nfth of the produce of the land or if the rent is paid in cash, its 
equivalent value . 
• • • • 
CHAPTER V 
GAON SABHA AND GAON PANCHAYAT 
150. (1) The Chief Commissioner may by notification in the Establish-
official Gazette divide the entire area of the State into Gaon Sabha !11cnt and 
h . . . . Incorpora-areas eac comprIsmg one or more contiguous revenue Villages for tion or Gaon 
the purposes of this Act and may be notification alter the boundar- GSabha S andb . f 'fied . Taon a ha les 0 any area so nob : Area. 
Provided that such area shall not include the whole or part of any 
" Notified Area established under section 241 of the Punjab Municipal 
Act, 1911, as extended to the State, or any Cantonment or Munici-
paUty or Town Area: 
• • • • 

22 
Constitution 151. A Gaon Panchayat consisting of a Pradhan and such number 
~~mbership of panches, not less than 4 and not more than 10, as the Chief Com-
of Ga(m missioner may fix from time to time in this behalf, shall be elected 
Panchayat. by and represent all Cldults, who for the time be!ng ordinarily reside 
in the area for which it is established, as the executive body of the 
Gaon Sabha. 
Explanation.- A person shall be deemed to be ordinarily resid-
ing in the area of a Gaon Sabha if he ordinarily lives therein or has 
his family dwelling house therein which he occasionally occupies 
or maintains therein a dwelling house ready for occupation which he 
occasionally occupies. 
• • • • 
~~~~~:lififor 153. No person shall be entitled to be or remain a member of the 
membership Gaon Panchayat, if he-
of the Gaon 
Panehuyst. (a) is of unsound mind; or 
• • • • 
CHAPTER VII 
MISCELLANEOUS 
Power of 187. The Chief Cmmissioner may call for thl' record of any suit 
C~ic.f Comt - or proceeding referred to in Schedule I decided by any subordinate mlRSloner q 
call for court in which no appeal lies, or where an appeal lies but has not 
case~. been preferred and if such subordinate court appe~rs-
(a) to have exercised a jurisdiction not vested in it in law, 
or 
(b) to have failed to exercise a jurisdiction so vested, or 
(c) to have acted in the exerci~ of jurisdiction illegally 
or with material irregularity, 
the Chief Commissioner may pass such order in the case as he thinks 
fit. 
• • • • 

Sl. 
Section 
)lo. 
of 
the Act 
I 
2 
1 
15(2) 
2 
IS(3),(4) ane! 
(5) • 
19 
84 
• 
21 
87 
• 
----
SCHEDULE 
I 
Seaion 
185 
Desaiption 
of 
mit 
application 
Period 
of 
Time 
from 
which 
period 
and 
other 
proceedings 
limitation 
begins 
Proper Court 
fees 
3 
" 
5 
6 
Application 
by 
m"lrtpgor 
de 
-
Nincmontm 
From 
the 
commencement 
tIC. 
FIfteen 
positing 
mortgage 
tboDey. 
this 
Act. 
IIQQII. 
Application 
by 
DlOrtJllBee 
OI' 
Six 
months 
From 
the 
date 
above 
period 
do. 
tenants 
to 
be 
dcclattd 
Bhu-
of 
nine 
months 
expires. 
. 
midhBI. 
* 
• 
• • 
• 
• 
• 
Suit 
for 
ejec:tme:nt 
of 
a pcison 
Two 
years 
From 
the 
commencement' 
of 
occupying 
JIIDd 
,ntlioUt 
title 
this 
Act 
01" 
from 
the 
lit 
of 
and 
dJllD8lCl. 
July, 
following 
the 
date 
of 
do. 
occupation 
. 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Suit for 
ejcc::tlDQlt 
of 
:n 
'I'brec 
years 
From 
the 
date 
of 
COIJUIlCDCC 
-
from 
lands 
of 
publk 
ity. 
ment 
of 
tbe 
Act. 
do. 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
~~----
--
~---
CoUJll 
of 
orisiDal ;....:.....a.: , ........ 
c-
tba 
7 
RcveQIIe Assistant 
do. • do. 
• do. 
.. 
Court 
of 
1st 
~ 
2nd 
appeal 
8 
8!r.!f 
.. 
siooI:r 
do. • dD. 
• dD. 
• 
9 • 
Chief 
Cammia-
Iioaer • 
~ w 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further. to amend the Delhi Land Reforms Act, 1954. 
The President has, in pursuance of clause (3) of ankle 117 of 
the Constitution of India, recommended to Lok Sabha the 
consideration of the Bill. 
M.N. KAUL, 
Secretary. 
(Shri GO'lJ1'"d Bal/abh Pant, 
Minister of Home Affairs.) 