BILL No. 133 OF 195~ 
THE CEN'l'RAL SILK BOARD (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1952 
(As INTftODUOIlD DI' TOJll HOUBH OF TUB P!:OPLB) 
A 
BILL 
further to amend tlllJ Central Silk Board Act, 1948. 
B" it enacted by Parliament as follows:-
1. Sbort title and commenc8m8llt.-(1) This Act may he called the 
Central Silk Board (Amendment) Aot, 1952. 
(9) It shall oome into foroe on suoh date 118 the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
I. Amendment of long title and p.'8&m.ble, Act LXI of 1"8.-10. 
the long titlo of. Rnd the preamble to, the Central Silk Board Aot, 1948· 
(hereinafter referred to as the prinoipal Act), the word "raw" shall be 
omit·ted. 
a. Subltitutlon of new section for section 2 in Act LXI of 19".-:For 
seotion 2 of the principal Aot, the following section shan be substituted, 
numely:-
"2. Declaration all to expediency of Union control.-It is hereby 
declared that it is expedient in the public interest that the Union 
should take under its oontrol the silk industry." 
,. AmfNlclmlnt of section j, Act LXI of 1948.-ln scctioll 4 of the 
principal Act, for sub-section (3), the following sub-seotion shall be' liub· 
atituted, namely:-
• (3) The Board shall consist of the following Iflembers, namely:-
(a) a Chairman to be appointed by the Central Government; 
(b) not more than three officials .to be nominated by the 
Central Government: 
Provided that it shall be IRwful for any such official to d~pute in 
the prescribEld circumstances another official to attend any meeting of 
the Board on his behalf; 
10 
15 
20 

JO 
16 
26 
~) six persons to be elected by Parliament, four from the 
House of the People Dud two from the Council of Sta.t.es; 
(d) four persons to be Ilominated by the Government of 
Mysorc, oue of whom shall represent the filature raw silk in-
dUltry and two shall represent the reat of the sericulture indu!!· 
try; 
(e) tlWo persons to be nominated by the Government of 
Madraa; 
(f) two persons to be nominated by the Government of West 
Bengal; 
(g) one person to be nominated by ellch of the Governments 
of Allam. Bihar, Bombay, Madhya Bhurat, Madhya Pradesh 
and Uttar Pradesh i 
(h) one persoll to be nominated by the Government of 
J UlID.IU and Xuhuur; 
(i) not more than three persons to be nominated by the 
Ceut.ral Gov.ernment to represent the producers of raw silk and 
areas other tlhan the States specified in pill uses (d) to (g) inclusive; 
(j) eight persollN to be nnmiullted hy the Central Government, 
of whom one shall represent the spun silk industry, one the 
sdk throwing and twiating industry, one the ailk weavins in-
dU8try.one labour; Bud two of them shall be experts in sencul-
tore.' 
I. AmtlDdma' of Metloll 7, Ac' LZ:I of IN8.-In section 7 of the 
prinoipal Act, the word. "in oonlultation with the Board" sha.ll be 
omitted 
.,·,U ...... t-Of .. eb 8.:£8t LZ!'or IM1.-In lIection 8 of the 
prinoipal Act,-
(i) in sub-section (1), the word "raw" 8haJJ be omitted; 
(u) in sub-section (2), after clause (Il), the following clause shlill 
be inserted, namely: - . 
"(j) oarrying out any other duties which may be vested il 
the Board under rules made WIder this Aot;"; 
(iii) in sub-section (3), in clause (0), the word "raw" Bhall bf! 
omitted, 
7.,Am-dmeDt of IICUoD ·10, . Act LXI of IH8.-In section 10 of the 
principal Act, after lub-ssction (6), the following sub-s8otioa shall be 
inserted, namely:-
"(7) The proceeds 'of the duties of excise paid to the Bo8.rd shall 
fil'Ri he credited· to the ConsolidRted Flmd of India and the Ct1ntrBI 
Govermnentmay. thereafter, from time to time, pay to the' B~ 
from and out of such proceeds Buch 8ums of money alit may thtnk 
fit ... 
8 • .tmeJUlmen\ of ,lIeuo&18, Apt LXI· of IM8.-l'or sub-section (B) of 
section 11} of the principal Act, the following Bub-section Bhall be Bub· 
stitutetl. nBJrll'ly:-
"(2) In [,artioular, .and without prejudice to the generality of the 
fOl'egoing power, rules made under this section may provide for all 

3 
or any of the following matters, namely:-
(i) t,be term of office of Illt~mberB of the. Board, the oitoum-
6taDC~" in which and the lIuthority by which membtlrs ma1"be 
r~JUoved lind the filling of cBKual vacancieg in the Board; 
(ii) the procedure to be followed at meetings of the B08l'd ... 1 
and at th(~ atunding committee for the conduct of busines. and 
the number of members which shall form a quorum at any meet-
ing; 
(in) the maiutenance by the Board of reoords of buainus 
transact,ed by the Board and the submission .of copies ·tJuuoeof I,JO 
to the Central Government; 
(iv) the holding of 6 minimum number of meetings every 
year; 
(v) the power of the Board, its Chairman and .tandin, 
committee with respect to the incurring of expenditure; Mil 
(vi) the conditiolls subject to which the Board may inour 
expenditure outside Indio.; 
(vii) the preparl.ltioll 0f budget estimates of receipts and ex-
peniliturt1 of the Board and the authority by whioh the estimates 
ure to he sanctioned; "10 
(viii) the maiutenl\l1P'8 of the Ilt'counts of income and 
expeuditure of the·BoorJ and the Ilildib of Buoll accounts; 
(i:r.) the deposit of thll funds of the Board in bank and the 
investment of sucb funds; 
(z) the re-nppropriation of f!stimated savings from one , ... as 
budget head to any other budget heRd; 
(xi) the conditions s\lbject to which the Board may borrow 
funda; 
(xii) the conditions subject to which aud the manner in which 
("'Ontracts IlIl1.y II(! enierpd .into by or on bE'half. of the: Board: 30 
(ziii) the delegation to tho stllnding Mmmittee or the 
Chairman or tho Vice-Chairman or members or oftloers of the 
Board of nny of the powerg and duties of the Board under··this 
Act; 
(xiv) thE' staff which may be .emplol'~dby the Board,and ~he 35 
pay alld allowance!;, leave Rnel other conditions of servica.4f 
officers Rud other employees of the Board: 
(xv) the travellinQ' and other allowances of members of the 
B081'd and of. the Rtnndmg committee; 
(xvi) the purposes for whioh funds of the Board may' be 
expended: 
(xvi.} the maintenance of the' regTsters Rna other reoords of 
.the Board IlJld of its standina committee: 
(xviii) the collection of any information or st~ti8tics in r.es-
pect of raw silk or bny produot of silk; .0 
(xix) the mRnner in which raw silk shall "be graded and 
marketed: 
(xx) any other matter. which is to be or may be prescribed." 

4 
9. Amendment oJ section 16, Act LXI of IM8.-Bection 14 of the 
principal Act shall be llumbered (IS sub·section (1) aud ufter that sub· 
seotion 88 so numbered, the following sub·scctions shull be inserted, 
namely:-
D • (S) H the person committing any offence specified in sub·section 
(I) is a <,,ompany, every person who, at the time the offence, was 
committed waR III t:bur~1l of, nud WWI l'cspousible to, the company 
for the conduct of the hUlliIwSR of the (10m pUll,\' 88 well 1\8 the compa.ny 
shaU be deemed to be guilt,)· of thu off;'nee and Rho.11 be liable to be 
10 proceeded against Bnd punished accordingly: 
Provided that nothing cOlltllined in this Rub-section shall render 
Any such person liBble to' Bny pUllishml'llt providnd ill this Act, if he 
proves that th" offence waR committed without hiR knowledge or thAt 
he exercised all due diligence to prevont t.he commission of such 
16 offence. 
(3) Notwithstn.nding a.nything contained in suh-scction (2), where 
an offence Ilnder sub· section (1) has been committed by a company 
and it is proved that tIle offenee haw bt-ll'n c'omillitted with the consent 
or connivRnce of. or iH Rttrihutllhll'1 t.o Bny negle(lt on the part of. any 
director, manngt'r. ge('retBry or ot,her officer of thE" <,-ompany. Buch 
director, manager, IJHCrptBry or of,her offiller shall RI80 be deemed to 
be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against 
and punished accordingly. 
Ezplanation.-For the purposes of this section.-
(a) "compBn~'" mC'ans any body corporate and includes B 
firm or other 1lr;8o(~iati()11 of illdh'idlln]s; nnd 
(b) "director" in relation to 1\ firm means a partnf~r in the 
firm.' 
10. Iuertlon of IUtW section 16A 111 Act LXI of IM8.-After section 15 
SO of the principal Act, the following Re(~tion shRIl be inserted, naRlely:-
"15A . • 1urilldiction 0/ rOllrtlt.---No court inferior to that of a presi-
dency magi~trntf'\ or " magistrBtE' of tit,· first C]BIIS sha]) try ~ny oRenoll 
punishBblf' under Rection 14." 
... 11. Omlalon of MOUon 1'1, Act LXI oJ UN8.-Section. 17 of tile 
3G prmcip"l Act shall be omitted. , 
12. Val1datlon of certain act. Ul4 IndemJl1ty 111 rNpect thereof.-All 
acts of executive allthority. procel'dingsllnd sentences which have been 
done, t,aken or pallllPd, with respect to, or on I\ccOlmt of, raw silk duriag 
the period commencing on the 26th dRY of ,Tf\nuRry, 19M. and ending 
40 with the datil of commenccm£'nt of t,his Act. by the Governmc'nt or by 
Rny ofIieer of the Govemmi:'l1t. 'or by nny other Bnt,hority in the belief or 
purported helief that the Bets. proceeding" or Rl'ntlmces were hfling done, 
tBkell or pBs~ed under the principBI Act AhRII be 6S valid Rnd opemtive IlS 
if they had_ hflp.n done. tBken or pa.AAed in accordance with law, and no 
~ suit or 'other IApn) proeeE'din~ shAll bA mninta.ined or continued Rffninat 
any Rtlthority who.taoevf'r on the ground that Blly such acts, proceedings 
U! or sentences w~r(l not done. taken or pR!lsed in RCcqrdnnce w~th law. 

IS 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Central Sill, Board eODRtituted uuder the Central Silk Board Act, 
1MS, requires to be re-coDstituted. The Minister for Comnlt'rce and Indus-
try iii at present the Chail'UlIUl of the Boord· and this is an anomalous 
position for him. Further, some changes are also essential in regard to 
the representation of vllrious iuterests including labour 011 the Board with 
1& view tlO increasing its efficiency. It is also necessary to increase the 
powers of control vested in the Hoard by authorising rules to be made in 
that behalf by the Central Goverumcllt. The amendments are designed 
to carry these into effect. 
2. Opportunity hRS also been taken-
(a) to extend the scope of the Act to cover the silk industry 
generally instead of raw sille 8S at present; 
(b) to substitute a new section for section 2 of the principal Act 
in order to bring its language in conformity with the language of 
Entil"y 52 of LiNt I in the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution; and 
(e) to indemnify oil Iluthorities in respect of actioD taken 
between the commencement of the Constitution and the commence-
ment of this Act. 8S 8 doubt may be raised as to whether, in the 
absence of 8 deolnrlltioll ma(1r~ by ParliAment by law, the declaration 
contained in section 2 W8~ eftective during that period. 
NEW DBLHI; 
The 1St" December, 1952. 
T. T. KRISHNAMACHARI. 

8 
ANNEXUBE 
ExTRAOTS FROM TIISCENTRAJ, SU,K BOARD At"J', Hl48 (I.XI or 194fJ) 
• • • • • 
Long title and preamble 
An Act to provide for tile development UDder Oentral COIlVol 01 tile raw .uk 
1Dd~1trJ &Del lor tIlat purpote to utabltlh a 0enV&1 BlUr Boa. 
WREREMI it is expedient to provide for the development Wlder Central 
eontrol of the raw silk industry and for that IlUrpose toestablh;h Ii Ceutrul 
Silk BOlud ; , 
• • • • • 
Bection. 2 
2.DIelIraUon &I to ezpedleaOJ of Oeat.ral Qovemme.t'. «mWl.--Tt 
is hereby declared that it is expedient in the publi(' interest that the Gentl'al 
ilovernment IIhould take undel' its ('outro) the development of the rllw .ilk 
industry, 
• • • 
Bection 4(8) 
t, OoDItitution of &he Board.-
• • • 
• • 
• • 
(8) The ;Board ·shaU consist of the following members, namely :-
(a) the Minister in Charge of Industry and Supply in the Central 
Government, who shall ez-o{ftcio be Chairman of the BOllJ'd; 
(b) not more than three officials to be nominated by the Central 
Govenlment ; 
(c) three persons e!~cted by the mf!mbers of the House of the 
l'eople from aDlQilg themNeh'es Rnd on8 person eled.ed by the melllb,~r8 
of the Couneil of Stl1tes from among themselvell ; 
(d) four pe1'8Ons to be nominated by the Government of Mysol'e 
of whom fine sholl be B reprcscntntivl! of the filature raw silk industry 
and two shall be representatives of the rest of the sericulture industry; 
(e) two persons to be nominated by th., Govermncnt of MIldra8, 
of whom at ~st one shllll hI! a lion-official ; 
(f) two persons to be nominated by the Government of West 
Benpl, of whom at least one shall be 0. non-official ; 
(g) on~ person to be nomina.ted by the Government of Jammu 
Bud Kashmir ; 
(It) one person to be nominated by each of tho Goverllm('nts of 
Assam Madbyll l)radesh, Uttar Pradesh, Bombay and BibllJ'; 
(i)' not ,~ore than three persons to be nomin&ted by the Central 
Oovenlment to represent (i) produeers of raw silk, and (ii) Rrens otlltlr 
than the Stutes specified in clauses (d) to (h); 
(j) five persons to he nominated by the Central Government·, of 
whom oue shall be a representative of the spun silk industry, one of 

the silk throwing and twisting iudustry, and nne of the' silk weaving 
industry, lind two shull be stlricultural tlxfJerts. 
• • • • • 
Seotion 7 
7 .. Becretary of the BO&ld.- The Central CiOVl'rllmellt HhalJ, in 
consultatiort with tbeBon.rd, appoint a Secretary to the "Board who shall, 
under the control und direction of the Board, . exercise such powers and 
perform such t!luties BII may be presClribed or as may be delegawd to him 
by the Board or the Chairman. 
Seotion 8(1) and (8) 
I. I'W1ctioDl of the Boarcl.-(l) It shall be the duty of the Board to 
promot.e the development of the rl,w silk industry by such lJItlBNure as it 
thinks fit. 
• • • • • 
(3) It shall also be the duty of the Board-. 
• • • • • 
(0) to prepare and funlish such other reportH relating to the r8W 
silk industry us muy be required by the Central Government from 
time to time 
• • • • • 
Scotio" 13(2) 
18. Power of OeDtrll Government to make rulel.-
• • • • • 
(2) In J>Rrticulul' Ilnd without projudice to the generality of the foregoinl{ 
power, such rules may provide for-
(a) the procedure to be followed at meetings of the Board or 
titullding Committee: 
(b) t.he delegation to the Standing Committee. to the Vice-
Cbuirman. or to members or officers of the Board, of any of the powers 
and duties of the Board under this Act: 
(0) the staff to be employed by tho Board; 
(d) the pay, allowances, leave Ilnd other conditions of service of 
oftioerc und st'rvan& of the Pon.rd; 
(e) the travelling and other allowances of the members of the 
Hoaret : 
(I) the eRtBblishment nnd maintenance of offices by the Board i 
(g) the term of office of member!! of the BOBrd, and the 
circumstances in which. Bnd the authority by which, they may be 
removed; _ 
(h) the quorum at mee~ings of the Board or Standing Committee; 
(i) the mnintenance by the Board or Standing Committee of 
records of its business and the submission of copies thereof to the 
Ventral Government; 

a 
(j) the purposes for which the funds of the Board may be 
expended; 
(k) the maintenance of the accouuts of the inoome and expendi-
ture of the Board and., the audit of such accounts; 
(l) the preparation of annual estimates of the income and 
e"penditure of the Board; 
(m) the deposit of the funds of the Board in banks and the 
investment of such funds; 
(,,) the registers und other records to be maintained by the Board 
or Standing Committee; 
(0) the manner in which raw silk shall be graded and marketed: 
(p) any other matter whioh is to be or may be prescribed under 
this Aot . 
• • • • • 
Seotion 17 
17. '1'empor&IJ PO'" of tht Oelltnl GovtrllDlenL-Until sUllh time, 
as the Board is constitut.erl under section 4, t,he Central Government may, 
notwithstanding anything eontnined in this Act, exercise Rny of the powers 
conferred, or diseharge any of the duties imposed, by this Aot upon thA 
Board. 

HOUSE OF THE PEOPLE 
• 
.. 
BtLL 
further to amend the Centra] Silk Board Act, 194~. 
The President hM, in pursuance of claulSe (3) of article 117 
of the Constitution of India, recommended to the HoUle of 
the People the OODside'ration of the Bill . 
• 
(8M' T. T. X,i,lInamacka,i, 
J!1 , ... , lor OommMu Gtld 1711luWg) 
• 