1
THE COMPULSORY HEALTH INSURANCE FOR SENIOR
CITIZENS, MENTALLY RETARDED CHILDREN AND
PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES BILL, 2017
By
SHRI OM PRAKASH YADAV, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the compulsory health insurance for the senior citizens, mentally retarded
children and persons with disability to be funded by the Government and for free
of cost treatment of insured persons by all hospitals including private hospitals
and clinics, etc. and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of  India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Compulsory Health Insurance for Senior Citizens,
Mentally Retarded Children and Persons with Disabilities Act, 2017.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No.  133  of 2017
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "beneficiary" means a disabled person, senior citizen or mentally retarded
child who has been given health insurance under this Act;
(c) "child" means a human being irrespective of gender who has not attained  the
age of twenty years;
(d) "disabled person" means a person suffering from not less than forty per cent
of any physical disability as certified by a competent medical authority and whose
monthly income from all sources is not more than twenty thousand rupees;
(e) "mentally retarded child" means a child with a condition of arrest or incomplete
development of mind which is specially characterised by subnormality of intelligence;
(f) "person with disability" shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in
clause (s) of section 2 of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016;
(g) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(h) "Scheme" means Health Insurance Scheme framed under section 3; and
(i) "senior citizen" means a  male, female or a  transgender who has completed
the age of sixty years.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, but within one year of the
commencement of this Act, by notification in the Official Gazette, formulate a Comprehensive
Health Insurance Scheme for the senior citizens, mentally retarded children and persons
with disability.
(2) The appropriate Government shall pay the premium of health insurance payable
by the senior citizens, mentally retarded children and persons with disability to the
insurer for providing healthcare services to the beneficiaries covered under the provisions
of this Act in such manner as may be prescribed.
4. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
every beneficiary covered under this Act, shall be entitled to healthcare facilities, free of
cost from all the hospitals including Government and privately owned hospitals, nursing
homes  and clinics, as may be specified by the appropriate Government, from time to time;
(2) The free healthcare facilities referred to in sub-section (1) shall include:—
(a) consultation with physicians and specialists;
(b) out patient and indoor treatment;
(c) diagnostic and laboratory services of all kinds;
(d) all kinds of surgeries;
(e) medicines;
(f) blood transfusing and such other facilities; and
(g) such other treatments and provisions as may be prescribed.
5. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
the public sector insurance companies shall enter into agreement with privately owned
hospitals make payments to such hospitals at such rates as may be agreed to upon by the
Public sector insurance companies and the hospitals for providing healthcare facilities free
of cost to the beneficiaries covered under this Act.
Definitions.
49 of 2016.
Comprehensive
Health
Insurance
Scheme for
the senior
citizens,
mentally
retarded
children and
disabled
persons.
Free Health
care facilities.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Public sector
insurance
companies to
make
payments to
hospitals.

3
(2) The public sector insurance companies which have entered into an agreement with
private hospitals under sub-section ( 1), may either themselves or through an agency
designated in that behalf inspect the hospitals from time to time to ensure that provisions of
this Act are effectively complied with and if, it is found that any private hospital does not
comply with the provisions of this Act, such hospital shall be blacklisted and shall also be
liable to pay such compensation, as may be prescribed.
6. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide in each financial year requisite funds to the Government of the States
and public sector insurance companies for the implementation of the provisions of this Act.
7. The provisions of this Act and rules made thereunder shall have effect,
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force.
8. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force dealing with the subject matter of this Act.
9.  (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Act to
supplement
other law.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20

4
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
There are millions of senior citizens, disabled persons and mentally retarded children
in our country who do not have access to adequate and good quality healthcare facilities.
Their number is continuously increasing. The general insurance companies do not insure
them. Senior citizens after completing the age of sixty five years are not insured for health
cover by the private sector insurance companies. Public sector insurance companies have
recently started insuring senior citizens irrespective of age but majority of senior citizens are
out of the ambit of health insurance whereas at this juncture of their lives they need the
health cover the most. Similarly mentally retarded children and disabled persons have to
depend on others for many things including the healthcare facilities. The families of disabled
persons and mentally retarded children are forced to bear huge costs beyond their means for
the healthcare.
Hence, it has become necessary for the Government to take sole responsibility to
provide health insurance and healthcare facilities to senior citizens, disabled persons and
mentally retarded children.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; OM PRAKASH YADA V
July 4, 2017.

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for formulation of a Comprehensive Health Insurance
Scheme for the senior citizen, mentally  retarded children and persons with disabilities.
Clause 4  provides for free healthcare facilities. Clause 7 makes it obligatory for the Central
Government to provide requisite funds for the purposes of this Bill. The Bill, therefore, if
enacted will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a
sum of rupees two lakh crore may involve as recurring expenditure per annum from the
Consolidated Fund of India.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.

6
MEMORANDUM   REGARDING   DELEGATED   LEGISLATION
Clause 10 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. As the  rules will relate to matter of details only,  the delegation
of legislative power is of a normal character.

GMGIPMRND—958LS(S3)—20-07-2017.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the compulsory health insurance for the senior citizens, mentally retarded
children and persons with disability to be funded by the Government and for free of
cost treatment of insured persons by all hospitals including private hospitals and
clinics, etc. and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Om Prakash Yadav, M.P.)