Ee Pe ३-8६ INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA

Bill No, 133 of 1992 -

THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT TRIBUNAL BILL, 1992

ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES

CHAPTER 1
‘PRELIMINARY
Causes
1, Short title and commencement,
2, Definitions.
CHAPTER II
ComPENsATION FoR DEATH oF, on INJURY TO A Person AND
Damace to PRopERTY AND ENVIRONMENT
3, Liability to pay compensation in certain cases on principle of
no fault.
4. Exemption from Liability.
5. Application for claim for compensation.
6. Procedure and powers of Tribunal
7, Conditions as to making of interim orders.

8. Reduction of amount of relief paid under any other law.

CHAPTER IIT

Esrapuis#Ment or Natronat. ENVIRONMENT "TRIBUNAL
AND BENCHES THEREOF
| 9, Establishment of National Environment Tribunal.

10. Composition for appointment as Chairman, Vice-Chairman or

11, Qualifications for appointment as Chairman, Vice-Chairman or

other Member,
12. Vice-Chairman to act as Chairman or to discharge his fune-
tions in certain circumstances,

18, Term of office.

14, Resignation and removal.

15, Salaries and allowances and other terms and conditions of service
of Chairman, Vice-Chairman and other Members..

16, Provision as to the holding of offices by Chairman, ete,, on ceas-
ing to be suc h Chairman, ete.

17. Financial and administrative powers of Chairman,

-७५/9७-४-१० ,


* 5 mc) हर

18. Staff of the Tribunal.
19. Distribution of business amongst the Benches,

CHAPTER IV

JuRtspIcrioN AND PROCEEDINGS OF THE TRIB}

20, Bar of Jurisdiction,
21, Power of Chairman to transfer cases from one
22. Decision to be taken by majority, है,
23. Deposit of amount payable for damage to em
24. Execution of award or order of Tribunal,

25, Appeals.

CHAPTER V
MISCELLANEOUS
26. Penalty for failure to comply with orders of
27. Offences by companies,
28, Proceedings before the Tribunal to be judicial
29. Members and staff of Tribunal to be public ;
30. Protection of action taken in good faith.
31. Act to have overriding effect,
32. Power to make rules,
THE SCHEDULE,


Bill No, 133 of 1992

neon. A

THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT TRIBUNAL BILL, 1992

A
BILL हे

to provide for strict liability for damages arising owt of any accident
occurring while handling any hazardous substamee and for the
establishment of a Nationa! Emvironment Tribunal for effective and
expeditious disposal of cases arising from such accident, with a view
to giving relief and compensation for damages to persons, property
and the environment and for matters connected therewith or inci-
dental thereto.

‘Wuerras decisions were taken at the United Nations Conference on
Environment and Development held at Rio de Janeiro in June, 1992, in
which India participated, calling upon the States to develop national
laws regarding liability and compensation for the victims of pollution

5 and other environmental damages; 1

Anp wuerras it is considered expedient to implement the decisions
of the aforesaid Conference so far as they relate to the protection of en-
vironment and payment of compensation for damage to persons, property
and the environment while handling hazardous substances,

| Be it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-third Year of the Republic

of India as follows: —

CHAPTER 1 i

‘PRELIMINARY
1, (1) This Act may be called the National Environment. Tribunal
15 Act, 1992.
(2) It shall come into force on such date or dates as the Central Gov-
ernment may, by notification, appoint, and different dates may be appoint-
ed for different States and any reference in any provision of this Act to

Short
title
and
com-
mence-
ment,


Defini-
‘tons

2 कै

the commencement of this Act shall be construed in relation to any State
or part thereof as a reference to the coming into force of that provisic
in that State or part thereof.

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—

(a) “accident” means an accident involving a fortuitous or sud-
den or unintended occurrence while handling any hazardous sub-
stance resulting in continuous or intermittent or repeated exposure
to death of, or injury to, any person or damage to any property ot
environment but does not include an accident by reason only of war:
or radio-activity;

(b) “Bench” means a Bench of the, Tribunal;

(०0 “Chairman” means the Chairman of the Tribunal;

(a) “environment” includes water, air and land and the intel
relationship which exists among and between water, air and lan
and human beings, other living creatures, plants, micro-organ!
and property;

(e) “handling”, in relation to any hazardous substance, means
the manufacture, processing, treatment, package, storage, tran:
tation by vehicle, use, collection, destruction, conversion, offering f
sale, transfer or the like of such hazardous substance;

(f) “hazardous substance” means any substance or preparation
which is defined as hazardous substance in the Environment (Pro- |
tection) Act, 1986, and exceeding such quantity as specified by the
Central Government under the Public Liability Insurance Act, 1991;

(g) “Judicial Member” means a Member of the Tribunal ap.
pointed as such under this Act, and includes the Chairman or

Vice-Chairman who possesses any of the qualifications specified i
sub-section (3) of section ll;

(0) “Member* means a Member (whether Judicial or Tec
cal) of the Tribunal, and includes the Chairman and a Vice
Chairman; :

(® “notification” means a notification published in the Offici
Gazette;

(Gj) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under
Act;

(0) “rules” means the rules made under this Act;

(0 “Technical Member” means a Member of the Tribunal whe
is not a Judicial Member within the meaning of clause (9);

(m) “Tribunal” means the National Environment Tribu
established under section 9;

(m) “Vice-Chairman” means the Vice-Chairman of the
bunal;.


ee 23

Explanation.—In the ease of the Tribunal having two or more
Vice-Chairmen, references to the Vice-Chairman in this Act shall
be construed as a reference to Gach of those Vice-Chairmen; and

(०) “owner” means a person who owns, or has control over
handling, any hazardous substance at the time of accident and
includes,— ri

(i) in the case, of a firm, any of its partners;
(ii) in the case of an association, any of its members; and

(iii) in the case of a company, any of its directors, mana-

10 gers, secretaries or other officers who is directly in charge. of,
and is reponsible to, the company for the conduct of the
business of the company. >

f CHAPTER II जन

(COMPENSATION FOR DEATH OF, OR INJURY TO, A PERSON AND
15 DAMAGE TO PROPERTY AND ENVIRONMENT

3. (1) Where death of, or injury to, any person (other than a work-
man) or damage to any property or environment has resulted from an
accident, the owner shall be liable to pay compensation for such death,
injury or damage under all or any of the heads specified in the Schedule.

20 (2) In any claim for compensation under sub-section (1), the claimant
shall not be required to p'ead and establish that the death, injury or
damage in respect of which the claim has heen made was due to any
wrongful act, neglect or default of any person.

Explanation—For the purposes of this section —

25 (i) “workman” has the meaning assigned to it in the Workmen’s

Compensation Act, 1923;

(ii) “injury” includes permanent toial or permanent partial dis-
‘ability or sickness resulting out of an accident.

(3) If the death, injury or damage caused by an accident cannot be

30 attributed to any individual activity but is the combined or resultant

effect of several such activities, apportions and processes, the Tribunal

may apportion the liability for ‘compensation amongst those responsible
for such activities, apportions and processes on an equitable basis,

4, The Central Government may, by notification, exempt from the
35 operation of this Act any owner, namely: —
(a) by the person who has sustained the injury;
(b) any State Government;

(०) any corporation owned or conirolled by the Central Govern-
ment or a State Government; or

40 (व) any local authority.

Liability
to pay
corhpen-
sation in
certain
cases on
principle
of no
fault.

Exemp-
tion from
liability.


Applica
tion for
claim
for com-

pensation.

श्र

5. (1) An application for claim for compensation may be made—

(a) by the person who has sustained the injury;

(b) by the owner of the property to which the damage has |
caused;

(०) where death has resulted from the accident, by all or any
of the legal representatives of the deceased; i

(4) by any agent duly authorised by such person or owner of
such property or all or any of the legal representatives of the deceas-
ed, as the case may be;

1 (०) by any representative body or organisation, functioning in
the field of environment and recognised in this behalf by the Central
Government, under all or any of the heads specified in the Schedule;
or |

(f) by the Central Government or a State Government or a
local authority under all or any of the heads specified in the
Schedule: z

Provided that where all the legal representatives of the deceased
have not joined in any such application for compensation, the applica-
tion shall be made on behalf of or for the benefit of all the legal repre-
sentatives of the deceased and the legal representatives who have not
80 joined shall be implealed as respondents to the application.

(2) Any claimant making an application under sub-section (1) may
also make an application before the Tribunal for such relief as is provided
in the Public Liability Insurance Act, 1991:

Provided that no such application shall be made if the relief has
been received by the claimant earlier or an application made by the
claimant to the Collector under the said Act is pending and has not been
withdrawn,

(3) The Tribunal shall have, and exercise, the same jurisdiction,
powers and authority in respect of the matters specified in the Public
Lixbility Insurance Act, 1991 as the Collector has and may exercise and,
for this purpose, the provisions of that Act shall have effect subject to
the modification that the references therein to the Collector shall be
construed as including a reference to the Tribunal.

(4) Every application under sub-section (1) shall be made to the
Tribunal and shall contain such particulars and shall be accompanied by
such documents and such fee, not exceeding one thousand rupees, as
may be prescribed:

Provided that no fee shall be payable by a person whose annual
income is below the prescribed limit or by a representative body or
organisation referred to in clause (e) of sub-section (1) or by the Cen-
tral Government, a State Government or a local authority.

(5) No application for compensation shall be entertained unless it is
made within five years of the occurrence of the accident,


5

6, (1) On receipt of an application under sub-seotion (1) of section 5,
the ‘Tribunal may, after such inquiry as it may deem fit, reject the
application summarily.

(2) Where the Tribunal does not reject the application under sub-
section (1), the Tribunal may, after giving notice’ of the application to
the owner and after giving the parties an opportunity of being heard,
hold an inquiry into the claim or each of the claims and may make an
award determining the amount of compensation which appears to be
just and specifying the person or persons to whom such amount of
compensation shall be paid.

oe

Ss

(3) The Tribunal shall not be bound by the procedure laid down by
the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, but shall be guided by the principles
of natural justice and, subject to the other provisions of this Aci and
of any rules, the Tribunal shall have power to regulate its own procedure
including the fixing of places and times of its inquiry.

a

(4) The Tribunal shall have, for the purpose of discharging its
functions under this Act, the same powers as are vested in a civil court
under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, while trying a suit, in respect
of the following matters, namely:—

(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and
examining him on oath;

(b) requiring the discovery and production of documents;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;

(a) subject to the provisions of sections 123 and 124 of the Indian
25 ‘Evidence Act, 1872, requisitioning any public record or document
or copy of such record or document from any office;

(०) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or
documents;

(f) reviewing its decisions;

30 (g) dismissing an application for default or deciding it ex-parte;

(h) setting aside any order of dismissal of any application for
default or any order passed by it ex-parte; and

(0) any other matter which is to be or may be prescribed,

7, Notwithstanding anything contained in any other provisions of this
35 Act or in any other law for the time being in force, no interim order
(whether by way of injunction or stay or in any other manner) shall be
made on, or in any proceedings relating to, an application unless—

(a) copies of such application and of all documents in support
of the plea for such interim order are furnished to the party against
40 whom such application is made or proposed to be made; and

(b) opportunity is given to such party to be heard in the matter:

Proce.
dure
and.
powers
of Tribu-
nal.

Condi.
tions

as to

making of

interim
orders.


Redue-
tion of
amount

relief
paid
under

other
Taw.

Establish-
ment of
National
Environ-
ment
‘Tribupal,

Composi-
tion of
Tribunal

and

Benches

thergof.

Provided that the Tribunal may dispense with the requirem
of clauses (०) and (b) and make an interim order as an exce
measure if it is satisfied, for reasons to be recorded in writing,
it is necessary so to do for preventing any loss or damage ७
caused to the applicant which cannot be adequately compensat
money but any such interim order shall, if it is not sooner vac
cease to have effect on the expiry of a period of fourteen days
the date on which it is made unless the said requirements have
complied with before the expiry of that period and the Trib
has continued the operation of the interim order.

8. Where in respect of death of, or injury to, any person or damag
to any property, the owner, liable to pay compensation under this A

is also liable to pay any amount as relief under the Public Lial
Insurance Act, 1991 or any other compensation under any other law,
amount of compensation payable under this Act shall be reduced by #
amount of relief and other cumpensation paid under any other law,

CHAPTER IIT =

Esras.isuMent or Nationa, ENvmoNMeNT TRIBUNAL AND BENCHES
‘THEREOF

9. The Central Government shall, by notification, establish a Tribunal,
to be known as the National Environment Tribunal, to exercise the jurisdic-
tion, powers and authority conferred on it by or under this Act.

10. (1) The Tribunal shall consist of a Chairman and such number
of Vice-Chairmen, Judicial Members and Technical Members as the
Central Government may deem fit and, subject to the other provisions 5,
of this Act, the jurisdiction, powers and authority of the Tribunal may
be exercised by Benches thereof.

(2) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, a Bench shall consist
of one Judicial Member and one Technical Member.

(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the 39
Chairman—

(०) may, in addition to discharging the functions of the Judicial
Member or the Technical Member of the Bench to which he is
appointed, discharge the functions of the Judicial Member or, as
the case may be, the Technical Member, of any other Bench; 35

(b) may transfer the Vice-Chairman or other Member from one
Bench to another Bench;

(c) may authorise the Vice-Chairman or the Judicial Member
or the Technical Member appointed to one Bench to discharge also
the functions of the Vice-Chairman or, as the case may be, the 40°
Judicial Member or the Technical Member of another Bench; and


?

(d) may, for the purpose of securing that any case or cases
which, having regard to the nature of the questions involved, re-
quires or require, in his opinion or under the rules made by the
‘Central Government in this belialf, to be decided by a Bench com-
posed of more than two members, issue such general or special
orders, as he may deem fit:

Provided that every Bench constituted in pursuance of ‘this
clause shall include at least one Judicial Member and one Techni-
cal Member.

(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing provisions

cf this section, it shall be competent for the Chairman or any other
Member authorised by the Chairman in this behalf to function as a
Bench consisting of a single Member and exercise the jurisdiction,
powers and authority, of the Tribunal in respect of such classes of cases

15 or such matters pertaining to such classes of cases as the Chairman

may, by general or special order. specify:

Provided that if at any stage of the hearing of any such case or

matter, it appears to the Chairman or such Member that the case or
matter is of such a nature that it ought to be heard by a Bench con-

20 sisting of two Members, the case or matter may be transferred by the

Chairman or, as the case may be, referred io him for transfer to such
Bench as the Chairman may deem fit.

(5) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, the Benches of the

‘Tribunal shall ordinarily sit { New Delhi (which shall be known as the principal

25 Bench) and at such other places as the Central Government may, by notification,
specif;

30

35

45

iy.

11, (1) A person shal} not be qualified for appointment as the Chair-

man unless he—

(०) is, or has been, a Judge of the Supreme Court or a High
Court; or

(b) has, for at least two years, held the office of Vice-Chairman.
(2) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as the Vice-

Chairman unless he—

(a) is, or has been, a Judge of a High Court; or

(b) has, for at least two years, held the post of a Secretary io
the Government of India or any other post under the Central or a
State Government carrying a scale of pay which is not less than
that of a Secretary to the Government of India; or

(c) (i) has, for at least five years, held the post of an Additional
Seeretary to the Government of India or any other post under the
Central or a State Government carrying a scale of pay which is not
Jess than that of an Additional Secretary to the Government of India;
and

(ii) has adequaie knowledge of, or experience in, legal, adminis-
trative, scientific or tethnical aspects of the problems relating to
environment; or r

(d) has, for at Jeast three years, held office as a Judicial Member
or a Technical Member.

Qualifi-
cations
for ap-
point-
ment as
Chair-
man,
Vice-
Chair-
man or
other
Mem-
ber.


Vice-
Chair-
man to
acts as
Chairman
or to
discharge
his func.
tions

in cer-
tain cir-
cumstan-
ces,

8

(3) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a Judicial
Member unless he—

(a) is, or has been, or is qualified to be, a Judge of a High Court;
or 8

(0) has been a member of the Indian Legal Service and has he'd —
a post in grade I of that Service for at least three years,

(4) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a Technical
Member unless he has adequate knowledge of, or experience in, or
capacity to deal with, administrative, scientific or technical aspects of

_ the problems relating to environment.

(5) Subject to the provisions of sub-sections (6) and (7), the Chair-
man, Vice-Chairman and every other Member of the Tribunal shall be
appointed by the President,

(6) No appointment of a person possessing the qualifications specified
in this section as the Chairman or the Vice-Chairman shall be made 15
except after consultation with the Chief Justice of India,

(7) No-appointment of a person as a Judicial Member or a Technical
Member shall. be made except on. the recommendation of a Selection
Committee appointed by the Central Government consisting of the
following, namely: — 20

(4), Chairman of the Tribunal; —Chairman of the Committee
ex officio;
(b) Secretary to the Govern- _—member ex officio;
ment of India in the Ministry of

Environment and Forests; 25

(c) Secretary to the Govern- —member ew officio,
ment of India in the Ministry of
Law, Justice and Company Affairs
(Department of Legal Aftairs) ;

(व) Director-General, Council —member ex officio, ae
of Scientific and Industrial Re-
search;

(e) an Environmentalist to be —member,
nominated by the Central Goy-
ernment,

35

42- (1) In the event of the occurrence of any vacancy in the office of
the Chairman by reason of his death, resignation or otherwise, the Vice-
Chairman or, as the case may be, such one of the Vice-Chairmen as the
Central Government may, by notification, authorise in this behalf, shall
act as the Chairman until the date on which a new Chairman, appointed 40

in accordance with the provisions of this Act to fill such vacancy, enters
upon his office. थे

(2) When the Chairman is unable to discharge his functions owing
to absence, illness of any other cause, the Vice-Chairman or, as the case _
may be, such one of the Vice-Chairmen, as the Central Government ma’ 9, 45
by notification, authorise in this behalf, shall discharge the ‘functions of
the Chairman until the date on which the Chairman resumes his duties,


9
13. The Chairman, Vice-Chairman and other Member shall hold office
ds such for a term of five years from the date on which he enters upon

his office, but shall be eligible for re-appointment for another term of
five years:

Provided that no Chairman, Vice-Chairman or other Member shall
hold office as such after he has attained,—

(a) in the case of the Chairman, the age of seventy years;

(b) in the case of the Vice-Chairman, the age of sixty-five years;
and

10 (०) in the case of any other Member, the age of sixty-two years.

14, (1) The Chairman, Vice-Chairman or other Member may, by
notice in writing under his hand addressed to the President, resign his
office:

Provided that the Chairman, Vice-Chairman or other Member shall,
15 unless he is permitted by the President to relinquish his office sooner,
continue to hold office until the expiry of three months from the date of
receipt of such notice or until a person Guly appointed as his successor
enters upon his office or until the expiry of his term of office, whichever

is the earliest.

20 (2) The Chairman, Vice-Chairman or any other Member shall not 9९
removed from his office except by an order made by the President on
the ground of proved misbehaviour or incapacity after an inquiry made,
by a Judge of the Supreme Court in which such Chairman, Vice-Chairman
or other Member had been informed of the charges against him and

25 given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in respect of those charges.

(3) The Central Government may, by rules, regulate the procedure
for the investigation of .misbeliaviour or incapacity of the Chairman,
Vice-Chairman or other Member referred to in sub-section (2).

15. The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and
conditions of service (including pension, gratuity and other retirement
benefits) of, the Chairman, Vice-Chairman and other Member shail be

such as may be prescribed:
Provided that neither the salary and allowances nor the other terms

and conditions of service of the Chairman, Vice-Chairman or other
35 Member shall be varied to his disadvantage after his appointment,

46. On ceasing to hold office—

(a) the Chairman of the Tribunal shall be ineligible for further
employment either under the Government of India or under the
Government of a State; ३

Term of
office.

Resigna-
tion and
removal.

Salaries
and
allow-
ances
and
other
terms
and
condi-
tions of
service
of Chair-
man,
Vice-
Chair-
man and
other
Members.

Provi-
sion as
to the
holding
of offices


cial and
adminis.
trative
powers
of

Chairman,

Staff of
the Tri-
bunal.

Distribu-
tion of

business
amongst

Benches.

10

(b) the Vice-Chairman of the Tribunal shall, subject to the |
provisions of this Act, be eligible for appointment as the Chairman
of the Tribunal, but not for any other employment either under the
Government of India or under the Government of a State;

(०) a Member (other than the Chairman or Vice-Chairman) of 5
the Tribunal shall, subject to the other provisions of this Act,
be eligible for appointment as the Chairman or Vice-Chairman
of the Tribunal or as the Chairman, Vice-Chairman or Member of
any other Tribunal, but not for any other employment either under _
the Government of India or under the Government of a State; y

(d) the Chairman, Vice-Chairman or other Member shall not
appear, act or plead before the Tribunal.

Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, employment under the
Government of India or under the Government of a State includes emp-
loyment under any local or other authority within the territory of India 15
‘or under the control of the Government of India or under any corporation
or society owned or controlled by the Government.

का, The Chairman shall exercise such financial and administrative
powers over the Benches as may be vested in him under the rules:

Provided that the Chairman shall have authority to delegate such of. 20
his financial and administrative powers as he may think fit to the Vice-
Chairman or any other officer of the Tribunal, subject to the condition,
that the Vice-Chairman or such officer shall, while exercising such dele-

gated powers, continue to act under the direction, control and supervision
1

of the Chairman, 25

18. (1) The Central Government shall determine the nature and
categories of the officers and other employees required to assist the
‘Tribunal in the discharge of its functions and provide the tribunal with
such officers and other employees as it may think fit,

(2) The officers and other employees of the tribunal shall discharge 39
their functions under the general superintendence of the Chairman.

‘

(3) The salaries and allowances and conditions of service of the
officers and other employee of the tribunal shall be such as may be
prescribed.

19. (1) Where any Benches of the Tribunal are constituted, the Cen- 35
tral Government may, from time to time, by notification, make provisions
as to the distribution of the business of the Tribunal amongst the Benches
and specify the matters which may be dealt with by each Bench.

(2) If any question arises as to whether any matter falls within the
purview of the business allocated to a Bench. the decision of the Chair- 40
man shall be final,

Explanation.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that
the expression “matters” inludes applications for interim relief,


il
CHAPTER IV

JURISDICTION AND PROCEEDINGS OF THE TRIBUNAL

क्‍ On and from the commencement of this Act, no court or other

authority except the Tribunal shall have, or be entitled to exercise, any
jurisdiction, powers or authority to entertain any application or action
for any claim for compensation which may be entertained or dealt with
by the Tribunal.

21. On the application of any of the parties and after notice to the
parties, and after hearing such of them as he may desire to be heard, or
on his own motion without such notice, the Chairman may transfer any
"case pending before one Bench, for disposal, to any other Bench,

22, If the Members of a Bench differ in opinion on any point, the
point shall be decided according to the opinion of the majority, if there
is a majority, but if the Members are equally divided, they shall state
5 the point or points on which they differ, and make a reference to the

Chairman who shall either hear the point or points himself or refer the
case for hearing on such point or points by one or more of the other
Members and such point or points shall be decided according to
the opinion of the majority of the Members who have heard the case
including those who first heard it,

23. (1) Where any amount of compensation is ordered to be paid under
any award by the Tribunal on the ground of any damage to environment,
that amount shall be remitted to the authority specified under sub-
section (3) of section 7A of the Public Liability Insurance Act, 1991 for
being credited to the Environmental Relief Fund established under that
section.

(2) The amount of compensation credited to the Environmental
Relief Fund under sub-section (1) may be utilised by such person or
authority. in such manner and for such purposes of environment as may
be prescribed.

24, (1) An award made by the Tribunal under this Act shall be
executable by the Tribunal as a decree of Civil Court, and for this pur-
pose, the Tribunal shall have all the powers of a Civil Court.

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the
Tribunal may transmit to the Collector having jurisdiction over the area
jn which the accident has occurred the copy of the order made by it
for payment of relief as provided in the Public Liability Insurance Act,
1991 and the Collector shall execute the order in the same manner as
if it were an order made by him under that Act,

(3) Where the owner against, whom the award or order is made by
{the Tribunal fails to make the payment or deposit the amount as directed
by the Tribunal within the period specified in the award or order, such,
amount shall be recoverable from the owner as arrears of land revenue
or of public demand,

Bar of
juris.
diction,

Power
of Chair-
man to
éransfer
cases
from one
Bench
to an-
other.
Decision
to be
taken
by ma-
jority.

Deposit no;
amount
payable
for 7
damage to
environ-
ment.

Execution
of award
or

order of
‘Tribunal,


Appeals,

Penalty
for failure
to comply
with
orders of
Tribunal,

Offences
by com-
panies,

12

25. (1) Save as provided in sub-section (2) and notwithstanding
thing contained in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 or-in- any other
jaw, an appeal shall lie against any award or other order, not being an
interlocutory order, of the tribunal to the Supreme Court on one or
more of the grounds specified in section 100 of that Code. Ey

(2) No appeal shall lie against an award or other order made by the
Tribunal with the consent of the parties,

(3) Every appeal under this secti
of ninety days from the date of (|
against: f

ion shall be preferred within a period
he award or otlier order appealed.

Provided that no appeal by the person who is required to pay any
emount in terms of such award shall be entertained by the Supreme
Court unless he has deposited with it the amount so awarded in the
manner directed by the Supreme Court: ~

Provided further that the Su
after the expiry of the said peri
the appellant was prevented b
appeal in time.

preme Court may entertain the appeal 15
iod of ninety days, if it is satisfied that
y sufficient cause from preferring the

हि

CHAPTER V
MiscELLANEous

26, Whoever fails to comply with any order made by the Tribunal,
he shall be punishable with imprisonment for.a term which may extend

to three years, or with fine which may extend to ten lakh rupees, or
with both कक

27, (1) Where any offence under this
5 conipany, every person who, at the time
was directly in’ charge of, and was responsib!
conduct of the business of the company, as
deemed to be guilty of the offence and sh:
against and punished accordingly:

Act has been committed by
the offence was committed,
1९ to, the company for the _
Well as the company, shall be _
all be liable to be proceeded

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (7), where an
offence under this Act has been committed by a com

lect on the part of, any director, manager,
such director,


13

| etary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offience
and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.

Explanation—For the purposes of this section, —

eee) “company” means any body corporate and includes a firm or
other association of individuals; and

(8) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm,

28, All proceedings before the Tribunal shall be deemed to be judicial Proceed-
proceedings within the meaning of sections 193, 219 and 228 of the Indian ings
Penal Code, ९ / a Ss

29. The Chairman, Vice-Chairman and other Members and the offi-
© cers and other employees of the ‘Tribunal shall be deemed to be public staf of
servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code. Tribunal

30, No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against
the Central Government or against the Chairman, Vice-Chairman oF taken
other Member of the Tribunal or any other person authorised by the in good
“Chairman, Vice-Chairman or other Member for anything which is in faith.
good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or any

rule or order made thereunder. an

31, Save as provided in the Public Liability Insurance Act, 1991, the Act to
provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything incon-
sistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force ng

or in any instrument having effect by virtue of any law other than effect,
this Act.

32. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules Power
for carrying out the purposes of this Act. ac

(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the
foregoing power, such rulés may provide for all or any of the following
matters, namely: —

(a) the particulars which an application shall contain, the docu-
ments and the fee which shall be accompanied with it and the limit
of annual income of a person So as to enable him to make applica-
tion without paying any fee, under sub-section (4) of section 5;

(b) any such matter in respect of which the Tribunal shall have
powers of a civil court, under clause (i) of sub-section (4) .of section
6; ‘

(०) the case or cases which, Having regard to the nature of the
questions involved, requires or require to pe decided by a Bench of
more than two members, under clause (d) of sub-section (3) of sec-
tion 10;


14

(d) procedure for the investigation of amisbehaviour or
city of the Chairman, Vice-Chairman or other Member of the Tri
under sub-section (3) of section 14;

(९) the salaries and allowances payable to, and the other term
and ‘conditions of service of, the Chairman, Vice-Chairman, ant
, other Members under section 15;

(7) financial and administrative Powers of the Chairman
the Benches under section any
|! (9) the salaries and allowances and conditions of service of

officers and other employees of the Tribunal under Sub-section (3) ०
section 18;

(h) the person or the authority by whom, the manner
which and the purposes of environment for which the amount
compensation credited to the Environmental Relief Fund shall
utilised under sub-section (2) of section 23; and

(6) any other matter which is vequired to be, or may be,
cribed.

(3) Every notification issued under section 4 and every rule ma
under other provisions of this Act shall be laid, as soon as may
after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in s
for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one si
or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of
session immediately following the session or the successive
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the n
tion or the rule or both Houses agree that the notification or the |
should not be made, the notification or the rule shal]
after hhave effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as
case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done
that notification or the rule.

“


THE SCHEDULE
[See section 3(1)]
HEADS UNDER WITCH COMPENSATION FOR DAMAGES MAY BE CLAIMED

(a) Death;

(by Permanent, temporary, total or partial disability or other injury
or sickness;

(c) Loss of wages due to total or partial disability or permanent or
temporary disability;

(d) Medical expenses incurred for treatment of injuries or sickness;
(e) Damages to private property;

(7) Expenses incurred by the Government or any loca] authority in
providing relief, aid and rehabilitation to the affected persons;

(g) Expenses incurred by Government for any administrative or
legal action or to cope with any harm or damage, including compensation
for environmental degradation and restoration of the quality of environ-
ment;

(hk) Loss to Government or local authority arising out of, or connec-
ted with, the activity causing any damage;

(i) Claims on account of any harm, damage or destruction to the
fauna including mileh and draught animals and aquatic fauna;

(j) Claims on account of any harm, damage or destruction to flora
including aquatic flora, crops. vegetables, trees and orchards;

(k) Claims including cost of restoration on account of any harm
or damage to environment including pollution of soil, air, water, land and
eco-systems;

(1) Loss and destruction of any property other than private property;

(m) Loss of business or employment or both;

(४) any other claim arising out of, or connected with, any activity
of handling of hazardous substance,

15


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The principle of strict civil liability in accident cases arising |
the activities involving hazardous substances has been highlighted. in a
case by the Supreme Court of India. An enterprise engaged in acti-
vities with potential threat to the health and safety of the persons resid-
ing in the surrounding areas of the factory owes an absolute duty to the
community to ensure that’ no harm is caused to anyone on account of
hazardous and inherently dangerous nature of such activities, Cases seek.
ing compensation for damages to human health, property and the  en-
vironment, patticularly contamination of sub-surface water, are increas-
ing. There is also an increasing trend in the number of industrial

disasters.

2, The United Nations Conference on Environment and Development
held at Rio de Janeiro in June, 1992, in which India participated, hag also
called upon the States to develop National laws tegarding lability and
compensation for the victims of pollution and other environmental
damage, !

3. It is deemed expedient to develop and codify the principle of strict
civil lability in respect of all such cases where damage is caused while
handling hazardous substances. Tt ig proposed to establish a National
Environmental Tribunal for effective and expeditious disposal of cases
arising from certain industrial accidents and disasters with a view to
providing effective and expeditious relief and compensation for damages
to human health, Property and the environment,

4. The Bill seeks to achieve the aforesaid objects,
New Deihi;
The 5th August, 1992, KAMAL NATH,

PRESIDENT’S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE il7 OF THE
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

[Copy of letter No. 8/6/91/PL(CPW), dated 6th August, 1992 from
Shri Kamal Nath, Minister of State of the Ministry of Environment and
Forests to the Secretary-General, Lok Sabha.]

The President, having been informed of the Proposed bill to provide for
effective and expeditious relief, restitution and compensation for damages
to human health, property and the environment to the Persons affected
by the accidents Securring while handling hazardous substance and for

consideration of the National Environment Tribunal Bill, 1999 by Lok
Sabha, !

16


17
Notes on clauses

Clause 3 provides for strict liability of owner for damages caused
| any person, property or the environment due to any accident occur-
ting while handling any hazardous substance. |

Clause 4 confers power on the Central Government to exempt from
the operation of the Act, the Central Government, any State Government,
as corporation owned or controlled by Government, or any local autho-
rity.

Clause 5 provides for making an application for claim for compen-
sation under this Act or for relief as provided in the Public Liability
Insurance Act, 1991. It also specifies five years as the limitation period.

Clause, 6 provides procedure and powers of the Tribunal which shail
be guided by the principles of natural justice and shall have certain
powers of a civil court.

Clause 7 empowers the Tribunal to make an interim order and
provides for its procedure.

Clause 8 provides for the amount of any relief or other compensation
received by any person under any other law to be reduced from the
compensation awarded under this Act.

Clause 9 provides for the establishment of a National Environment
‘Tribunal.

Clause 10 provides for the composition of the ‘Tribunal and its
Benches and also empowers the Chairman of the Tribunal to function as
member on any Bench, to transfer the Vice-Chairman or other Member
from on¢ Bench to another Bench, to authorise a member to discharge
functions on another Bench, and to form Benches, It also empowers the
Central Government to notify places other than Delhi where the Ben-

ches shall sit.

Clause 11 lays down qualifications for appointment of a person as
Chairman or Vice-Chairman or Member of the Tribunal. All appoint-
“ments shall be made by the President. ‘The Chairman and Vice-Chair-
man shall be appointed after consultation with the Chief Justice of India
and members shall be appointed on the recommendation of a Selection

“Commities as specified in sub-clause (7)-

Clause 12 provides for appointment of Vice-Chairman as Chairman
authorising

‘py the Government in the event of any vacancy and the
of Vice-Chairman in cases of absence of Chairman,

Clause 13 specifies five years as the term of appointment and 70
years, 65 years and 62 years as the age of retirement of Chairman, Vice-
Chairman and other Members, respectively.

Clause 14 provides for the resignation by. and removal of, Chair-
७ Vice-Chairman or other ‘Members of the Tribunal. Removal may
e place on the ground of proved misbehaviour or incapacity _ after
inquiry by a Judge of the Supreme Court.


Clause 15 empowers the Central Government to prescribe by 71
the salaries, allowances and other terms and conditions of service
Chairman, Vice-Chairman and other Members.

Clause 16 prohibits further employment under the Central or Sta!
Government for Chairman or Vice-Chairman or other Members, Th
cannot also appear, act or plead before the Tribunal.

Clause 17 provides for financial and administrative powers of th

Chairman of the Tribunal as may be prescribed in the rules, He ma
also delegate such powers. .

Clause 18 requires the Central Government to provide officers a
staff to the Tribunal. Their salaries, allowances and conditions of se
shall be prescribed in the rules.

Clause 19 empowers the Central Government to make provisions, by
notification, for distribution of business amongst Benches. In case of
doubt, decision of Chairman shall be final,

Clause 20 bars the jurisdiction of
where the Tribunal has powers to entertai:
claim.

courts and other authori!
in any application or action for

Clause 21 empowers Chairman to transfer cases from one Bench
to another Bench,
Clause 22 provides for decision

in a case by majority of hers
of the Bench,

Clause 23 provides for the d

leposit and utilisation of amount payal
for damage to the environment,

Clause 24 empowers the ‘Tribunal to execute its award as a d :
of civil court and also to transmit an order of interim relief to the
Collector for execution. Amount of award may also be recovered as
arrears of land revenue or of public demand,

Clause 25 provides for appeal to Supreme Court within 90 days on
a question of law and after deposit of the money awarded and prohi-
bits any appeal where award is given with the consent of parties,

Clause 26 provides for punishment if any person fails to comy
with any order of the Tribunal.

Clause 27 provides for liability of the directors, managers, ete,
@ company where an offence is committed by it,

Clause 28 provides that the proceedings before the Tribunal shall be
deemed to be judicial proceedings

Clause 29 provides that the Chairman, Vice-Chairman and Membe
vf the Tribunal shall be deemed to be public servants.

Clause 30 provides protection for anything which is in good
done or intended to be done under the Act or the rules.

Clause 31 provides that this Act shall have overriding effect.

Clause 32 confers power on the Central Government to make
to carry out the purposes of this Act,


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 9 of the Bill relates to the establishment of a National En-
| Tribunal. Under sub-clause (5) of clause 10, Benches of the
Tribunal may sit also at such places, other than Delhi, as the Central
Government may, by notification, specify. Expenditure on setting up of
one Bench is estimated at Rs. 15 lakhs approximately. Non-recurring ex-
penditure on four Benches. which the Government intends to set up for
the time being, is estimated at Rs, 18.2 lakhs and recurring annual expen-
diture at Rs. 42.6 lakhs.

19


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

_ > Clause 4 of the Bil seeks to empower the Central Government to: Df
by notification, from the operation of the Act the Central Government, any
State Governmeni, any corporation owned or controlled by any Go 1
sor any local authority,

2. Clause 32 empowers the Central Government to make rules
‘ding— |

(3) the particulars which an application shall contain, the docum
and the fee which shail be accompanied with it and the limit of annual
income cf a person so as to enable him to make application without f
ing any fee, under sub-section (4) of section 5;

(b) any stich other matter in respect of which the Tribunal shall fk
Ppowsts of a civil court, under clause (i) of sub-section (4) of section

(c) the cuse or cases which, having regard to the nature of
questions involved, requires or require to be decided ‘by a Bench of
than two members, under ciause (d) of sub-section (3) of section 10;

(d) procedure for the investigation of misbehaviour or incapacity of
the Chairman, Vice-Chairman or other Member of the Tribunal unde
sub-section (3) of section 14;

(०) the salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms
conditions of service of, the Chairman, Vice-Chairman and other M nt
bers under section 15; i

(i) financial and administrative powers of the Chairman over the
Benches under section 17:

(g) the salaries and allowances and conditions of service of the offic
and other employees of the Tribunal under sub-section (3) of section 1

(h) the person or the authority by whom, the manner in which end
the purposes of environment for which the amount of compensation ere
ed to the Environmental Relief Fund shall be utilised under 1
section (2) of section 23; and i

(i) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, pres
cribed, '

3. The matters with respect to which notification may be issued or
may be made under the aforesaid provisions are matters of procedure and detai
The delegation of legistative power contained in such provisions is, therefo
of a normal character,


A
BILL

to provide for strict liability for damages arising out of | accidi
occurring while handling any hazardous substance and for the estab-
lishment of a National Environment Tribunal for effective
expeditious disposal of cases arising from such accident, with a view
to giving relief and compensation for damages to persons, propel
and the environment and for matters connected therewith or
dental thereto.

(Shri Kamal Nath, Minister of State of the Minis
Environment and Forests.) i