5

10

As INTRODUCED IN Lok Sabina

35 ॥0६ cur

Bill No. 134 of 2000.

THE BACHELORS’ ALLOWANCE BILL, 2000
By
Sut CHANDRAKANT Knairr, M.P.
A
BILL
10 provide certain facilities and amenities to bachelors.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. (7) This Act may be called the Bachelors’ Allowance Act, 2000.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.

(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notifi-
cation in the Official Gazette, appoint.

2. For the purposes of this Act, the term ‘bachelor’ shall apply to any person who
is:—

(a) a citizen of India;

(b) not below the age of twenty one years and not above fifty years;

Short title, ex-
tent and com-
mencement.

Definition.


Bachelor to
swear before a
first class
Magistrate,

Amenities to be
provided.

Undertaking to
be given by a
bachelor.

Bachelor mar-
tying after
thirty five years
not to get facili-
ties.

Deprival of all
facilities and
punishment for
violation of un-
dertaking,

Power to make
rules.

2

(©) not married and has not undergone any kind of marriage or betrothal in any form
which is recognised as marriage either legally or socially and who does not undergo any
kind of marriage till the age of fifty years.

३. Any person mentioned in section 2 shall be considered for the grant of benefits
and facilities by the Government of India enumerated hereinafter provided he or she swears
before a first class Magistrate that he or she has not undergone any kind of marriage or
bethrothal which is recognised as a marriage either legally or socially in the country,

4. The following amenities shall be provided to a bachelor by the Government:—

(@) an allowance of rupees five hundred per month irrespective of the fact
whether the bachelor is an employee or not;

(0) a bachelor shall be given priority in the allotment of land sold by the
Government or other bodies for the construction of residential buildings and also
preference shall be given to him or her in the purchase of houses constructed by the
Government or other bodies:

(०) free medical facilities and also re-imbursement of the expenditure in-
curred for treatment in any hospital, nursing home, etc. which he or she has
chosen for treatment;

(४) if the bachelor is a Government employee, at least three additional
increments shall be given to him or her in addition to the pay and allowances in
the respective grades prevailing from time to time and Government accommo-
dation shall be given to him or her forthwith;

(e) if otherwise found, qualified a bachelor shall be considered on top priority
basis for going abroad for advancement of career;

(0 3 bachelor who has completed the age of fifty years and does not marry
even thereafter, shall be given free accommodation to live in the old age.

5. The amenities to be provided to a bachelor under section 4 shall be admissible
if he or she gives an undertaking that he or she shall not marry at least till the age of thirty.
five years,

6. Any bachelor marrying after the completion of thirty five years of age shall not be
entitled thereafter to the amenities enumerated in section 4.

7. (7) Any bachelor violating the undertaking shall be deprived of all facilities,

(2) Any person who violates the undertaking shall be punished with imprisonment
for a term of ten years and a fine of rupees fifty thousand.

8. (7) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.

(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon
as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a
total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more
Successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the
session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so,
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity
of anything previously done under that rule,

10

20

25

30

35

40


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

‘The population of India is rising in a geometrical ratio, The Government has made
several experiments in the form of compulsory family planning, etc. in the past to check
the growth of population at a rapid pace but there were adverse criticisms from several
sections in the country and the people also did not relish the measures, though many of
them tried these, As a result the growth of population could not be arrested,

Since the economic condition is becoming worse day by day and it is risky to have
more children, if the Government encourages the people of India to marry late by offering
several benefits in the form of cash or kind and also gives incentives to them not to marry,
keeping in view the economic pressure on the country, then there might be a check on the
growth of population as marrying late will mean less children. The measures enumerated
in the Bill are positive and hence it is expected that there will be favourable response from
the educated youth in the country who are either unemployed or living on a meagre
existence.

The Bill in other words seeks to put a check on population growth.

New Deuin; CHANDRAKANT KHAIRE
July 24, 2000.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 4 of the Bill provides for giving several amenities to the bachelors in cash
and otherwise. Hence, expenditure will be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India
which tentatively will be to the tune of rupees five hundred crore recurring per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees one hundred crore will also be involved.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 8 of the Bill delegates the power to the Central Government to frame rules
for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. Since the Bill covers only the board outlines and

covers only the important aspects on which legislation is necessary, the detailed rules
have not been mentioned in the Bill.

‘The delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to provide certain facilities and amenities to bachelors.

(Shri Chandrakant Khaire, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—2230LS' —03-08-2000.