1
THE EDUCATION LOAN BILL, 2012
By
SHRI R. THAMARAISELV AN, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for education loan to students and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-third Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Education Loan  Act, 2012.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "bank" means any nationalized or commercial bank and includes a private or
foreign bank;
(b)  "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(c) "student" means a person who is pursuing any course of study, including
any professional or vocational course in any college or institution or university.
Bill No. 134 of  2012
Short title and
extent.
Definitions.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
3. Within six months of the commencement of this Act, the Central Government shall
formulate a scheme for providing education loan at such rate of interest, as may be
prescribed, to students for following purposes, namely:—
(a) pursuing professional courses such as medical, engineering or vocational
course or education in any discipline in any college or an institution or a university;
and
(b) pursuing research in any recognized research institute or university.
4.  (1) An application for education loan shall be made by a student in the prescribed
format to any branch of a bank in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) An application made under sub-section (1) shall be disposed of within a period
of one month from the date of its receipt.
5. The Bank shall made payment directly to the head of the college or institution or
university where the student is studying or seeking admission.
6. No bank shall:—
(i) refuse an education loan to a student on any ground;
(ii) insist on any sort of guarantee, mortgage or surety for the purpose of
disbursement of loan;
(iii) charge interest more than the rate prescribed;
(iv) withhold degree/diploma certificates, mark sheets in original; and
(v) initiate recovery process of the loan before the completion of one year of
securing a job by a student who has taken an education loan.
7. If any bank violates the provisions of section 6, the director or other officer of the
bank responsible for the violation, unless he proves that such violation took place without
his knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent it shall be deemed to be guilty
of such violation and shall be punished with imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year
or a fine which shall be equal to the amount of loan sought by the student.
8. (1) The Central Government shall formulate a scheme for waiving off such loan, if
a student, even after five years of completing his course, fails to secure any employment.
(2) Subject to such rules as may be made, the waiving off loans shall be applicable
only to such bona fide students who do not get suitable employment after completing
their education.
9. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if,
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive
sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the
Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
Punishment.
Scheme for
education
loan to
students.
Application
for loan.
Payment to be
made directly
to the head of
the institution.
No bank shall
deny an
educational
loan.
Waiving off
loan.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
It is indeed a welcome step that educational loans are being given to students for
pursuing higher education. Poor students, who could not earlier afford the cost of professional
and higher education are also now in a position to pursue higher education because of
education loan. However, the policy of giving of educational loan is deficient on many
counts. It has no statutory backing or proper guidelines. Each bank has its own guidelines
and fixes its own criteria for disbursing loan. Many banks often refuse the same on some silly
and technical grounds. Guarantee and surety is always insisted upon before granting the
loan. The rate of interest on such loan also varies from bank to bank. Students are harassed
and have to run from pillar to post to get the loan disbursed. Students pursuing studies in
private institutes and seeking admission in management quota are not given loan. Therefore,
it is sought to ensure through the Bill that education loan should not be denied to any
student. Any person who violates the guidelines framed for education loan shall be punished
so that no bank dares to refuse loan to students.
Further, many students after completion of their course do not get jobs. Thus, they are
not in a position to repay the loan taken. In such cases, a policy or scheme for waiving off
loans should also be considered.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; R. THAMARAISELV AN
November 6, 2012.
3

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the framing of a scheme for providing educational
loans to students. Clause 8 provides for framing of a scheme for waiving off educational loan
if a student fails to secure any employment after completion of his course. The Bill, therefore,
if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that
a sum of rupees two hundred crore will be involved as a recurring expenditure per annum
from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.
4

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
5

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for education loan to students and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri R. Thamaraiselvan, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—3556LS(S3)—29.11.2012.