THE RIGHT TO WORK BILL, 2014
By
DR. BHOLA SINGH, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the right to work to every eligible citizen and for payment of allowance
till such time as appropriate work is provided to every citizen, constitution of
Right to Work Fund, creation of Right to Work Insurance Policy and
 for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Right to Work  Act, 2014.
   (2) It extends to the whole of India.
Short title and
extent.
Bill No. 134 of 2014
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "employment exchange" means an employment exchange set up by the
Government of a State or Union territory Administration;
(b) "Fund" means the "Right to Work Fund" constituted under sub-section (1)
of section 9;
(c) "Government" means the Central Government;
(d) "notification" means a notification published in the Official Gazette by the
Central Government; and
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. Subject to the provisions of sections 7 and 12, every citizen who has attained the
age of eighteen years and who, being unemployed, is registered at an employment exchange
shall have the right to appropriate work to be provided by the Government.
4. The work to be provided by the Government under section 3 shall be suited to the
age and qualification of the citizen concerned.
5. Till such time as work is provided to a citizen under section 3, there shall be paid
by the Government to such citizen such allowance, not being less than rupees two hundred
per week, as may be prescribed.
6. If a citizen secures any work or job subsequent to his registration with the employment
exchange, either on his own or otherwise, he shall inform the employment exchange
immediately and his name shall be removed by the employment exchange with effect from
the date of having secured the job or work.
7. The provisions of this Act shall not apply to any citizen,—
(a) who has an income, from one or more sources, not less than the amount of
allowance fixed under section 5;
(b) who is covered under any scheme of unemployment allowance prevalent in
a State or Union territory.
8. Where a citizen, being unemployed, is registered with an employment exchange, but
has an income of his own from any source, the amount of allowance to which he is entitled
under section 5 shall be reduced by the amount of his income.
9.  (1) The Government shall constitute a Fund to be called "Right to Work Fund" for
the payment of allowance under this Act.
(2) The Government shall, from time to time, make such grants to the Fund as may be
required for the purpose of this Act.
(3) There shall be credited to the Fund,—
(a) all grants made by the Government under sub-section (2);
(b) all voluntary donations made to the Fund;
(c) all contributions in respect of the Right to Work Insurance Policy under
section 10;
(d) all sums collected under section 11; and
(e) any interest or dividend or other return on any investment made out of the
Fund.
(4) All amounts due and payable under this Act and all expenditure relating to the
management and administration of the Fund shall be paid out of the Fund.
Definitions.
Right to work.
Nature of work
to be provided.
Grant of
allowance.
Removal of
name by
Employment
Exchange.
Act not to
apply to
certain
citizens.
Reduction of
allowance.
Constitution
of 'Right to
Work Fund'.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
10. The Government shall frame a Right to Work Insurance Policy to cover whole or
any part of such grants of allowances as may be payable under this Act.
11. Every citizen who receives work or allowance under this Act shall contribute to the
Fund for a prescribed period immediately after securing any work or job,  at such rate, as may
be prescribed.
12. The Government may, in its endeavour to provide work under this Act, categorise
citizens by notification on the basis of their qualification or such other basis, as may be
prescribed, and make citizens of such categories entitled to right to work under section 3:
Provided that the Government shall provide the right to work to all eligible citizens
within ten years from the commencement of this Act.
13. As soon as may be, after the close of a financial year, the Government shall cause
an annual report on the working and administration of the Fund and the implementation of
this Act during that year, to be prepared and laid before each House of Parliament, and every
such report shall be in such form and shall contain such matters as may be prescribed.
14. (1) The Government may, by notification, make rules for carrying out the purposes
of this Act.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers, such
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the rate of allowance referred to in section 5 and different rates may be
prescribed on the basis of qualification and skills;
(b) the necessary details relating to the Right to Work Insurance referred to in
section 10;
(c) the rate of contribution to the Fund under section 11;
(d) the basis of categorisation of citizens under section 12;
(e) the form and content of the annual report mentioned in section 13;
(f) the procedure to regulate all payments under this Act; and
(g) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.
(3) Every rule made under this Act by the Government and every notification issued
under section 12, shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made or issued, before each House
of Parliament, while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised
in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree
in making any modification in the rule or notification or both Houses agree that the rule or
notification should not be made or issued, the rule or notification shall thereafter have effect
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be, so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule or notification.
S 4
Right to Work
Insurance
Policy.
Contribution
to the Fund.
Categorising
of citizens
entitled to
right to work.
Annual report
by
Government.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Indian Constitution guarantees to every citizen the fundamental right to life. The
Supreme Court has observed that the right to life, in order to be meaningful, assumes the
availability of necessary means to a decent livelihood. On the other hand, the problem of
unemployment has assumed menacing proportions. Even the educated citizens are rendered
indigent. Lack of employment opportunity in the country is also leading to brain drain and
exodus of a large number of skilled and unskilled persons abroad.
It is time that concerted efforts are made by the State to assure work to citizens. The Bill
grants every citizen the legal right to work. Till such time as work is provided to a citizen, he
or she shall be entitled to an allowance.
The Bill also provides for the constitution of a 'Right to Work Fund' by the Government.
The Fund will receive grants made by the Government, contributions at prescribed rate and
for a specified period from citizens who secure work after registration, etc. There is also a
provision to promote Right to Work Insurance to raise finances.
The Bill is realistic, in so far as it provides for a gradual introduction of the right to
work. To begin with, the Government may categorise citizens on the basis of their qualification
or any other basis and make citizens of such categories entitled to the right to work, so,
however, that gradually all the citizens secure the right to work within a period of ten years
from the commencement of the Act.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; BHOLA SINGH
November 5, 2014.
4

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for right to work. Clause 5 seeks to provide allowance to
a citizen who has attained the age of eighteen years and who, being unemployed, is
registered at an Employment Exchange. Till such time as work is provided to such a citizen,
he or she shall be entitled to such allowance not being less than two hundred rupees per
week, as may be prescribed. Clause 9  provides for the Constitution of a 'Right to Work Fund'
for the grant of allowance under this Act. It is difficult to make an exact estimate of the
recurring expenditure that may be involved on this count. Nevertheless, the provisions of
the Bill may be expected to involve recurring expenditure of about rupees five hundred crore
per annum from the Consolidated Fund of India. The recurring expenditure is expected to
reduce substantially as employment situation improves, and as voluntary donations and
contributions from citizens who secure work and contributions from the Right to Work
Insurance are received.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.
5

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 14 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of detail only.
The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.
6

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the right to work to every eligible citizen and for payment of allowance till
such time as appropriate work is provided to every citizen, constitution of Right to
Work Fund, creation of Right to Work Insurance Policy and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto
————
(Dr. Bhola Singh, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—2713LS(S-4)—01-12-2014.