Short title,
extent and
commencement.
THE VICTIMS OF RIOTS AND COMMUNAL VIOLENCE
(EQUAL COMPENSATION) BILL, 2016
BY
SHRI RAMESH BIDHURI, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for equal compensation to victims of riots and communal violence by the
Central Government and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Victims of Riots and Communal Violence (Equal
Compensation) Act, 2016.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No. 134 2016
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "communal violences" means an unexpected and undesirable incident creating
internal disturbance within any part of the State which threatens the secular fabric,
unity, integrity or internal security of the country;
(c) "compensation" means financial assistance provided by the Central
Government to the victim or his dependent;
(d) "dependent" means the parents, spouse, children or siblings of a victim;
(e) "Fund" means the Victims of Riots and Communal Violence Compensation
Fund constituted under section 4;
(f) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(g) "qualified medical practitioner" means any person declared by the appropriate
Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, to be qualified medical practitioner
for the purpose of this Act.
(h) "riot" means an unexpected and undesirable incident resulting in injury or
death of a person belonging to a specific religious group during the extremists activities;
and
(i) "victim" means a person killed or injured during riots or communal violence.
3. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
the Central Government shall, after taking into consideration the loss or injury sustained,
pay equal amount of compensation to the victims or their dependant in such manner as may
be prescribed.
(2) Without generality of the foregoing provision, the payment of compensation shall
be as follows:—
(a) in case of death due to riots or communal violence, an ex-gratia payment to
the dependents of victims, which shall not be less than rupees twenty lakh;
(b) in case of permanent disability resulting from riots or communal violence, an
ex-gratia payment to every victim, which shall not be less than rupees ten lakh;
(c) in case of temporary disability resulting from riots or communal violence, an
ex-gratia payment to every victim, which shall not be less than rupees five lakh; and
(d) in case of ordinary injury resulting from riot or communal violence, ex-gratia
payment to every victim, which shall not be less than rupees one lakh.
(3) The nature and quantum of injury suffered by a victim shall be examined and
reported by a qualified medical practitioner in such manner as may be prescribed.
(4) The payment of compensation under sub-section (2) shall be disbursed in such
manner, as may be prescribed, to every victim or his dependent, as the case may be, within
two weeks from the date of receipt of report of the qualified medical practitioner.
4. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
a Fund to be known as the Victims of Riots and Communal Violence Compensation Fund for
carrying out the purpose of this Act.
(2) The Central Government and the State Governments shall contribute to the Fund
in such ratio as may be prescribed.
Definitions.
Equal
compensation
to victims of
riots and
communal
violence.
Constitution
of Victims of
Riots and
Communal
Violence
Compensa-
tion Fund.
5
10
15
20
30
35
40
25

3
(3) Such other sums as may be received by way of donations or contributions from
domestic and international institutions shall also be credited to the Fund.
(4) The Fund shall be administered by a Board to be known as the Victims of Riots and
Communal Violence Compensation Board, consisting of—
(i) the Prime Minister-Chairperson ex-officio;
(ii) the Chief Minister of every State and Lieutenant Governor or Chief
Administrator of Union territories; and
(iii) ten retired judges of High Courts to be appointed by the Central Government
in such manner as may be prescribed.
5. (1) The appropriate Government shall constitute a task force to implement the
provisions of this Act within their jurisdiction.
(2) The task force shall consist of ten members to be appointed by the appropriate
Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of
members of the task force shall be such as may be prescribed.
(4) The task force shall—
(i) visit the riots and communal violence site and collect information relating to
the victims;
(ii) submit the incident related information to the Victims of Riots and Communal
Violence Compensation Board;
(iii) ensure that the victims receive the compensation within time limit prescribed
under this Act; and
(iv) undertake any other work that may be assigned to it by the Victims of Riots
and Communal Violence Compensation Board.
6. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the State Governments for carrying out the purpose
of this Act.
7. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force.
8. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Constitution
of task force
by the
appropriate
Government.
Central
Government
to provide
adequate
Funds.
Act not in
derogation of
other laws.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

4
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Constitution provides right to equality to every citizen as a Fundamental Right.
Under articles 14 to 16, there is provision for equality and non-discrimination and for social
equality under articles 17 and 18 of the Constitution. The Right to Equality provides that all
the citizens of India should get equal protection under the law and should be treated equally
in similar situations. In case of riots and communal violence, financial assistance is provided
as compensation to affected persons. In most of the situations, these victims have to knock
the doors of court for equal compensation which is unfortunate. There is no clear policy
aimed at providing equal compensation to all victims affected by riots or communal violence.
Everything depends upon administrative decisions, which took long time and usually
results into no compensation to the victims or his/her dependents. Now, the time has come
to formulate a law providing payments of fixed amount as compensation to the next kin of
deceased and to the injured in riots and communal clashes.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RAMESH  BIDHURI
April 11, 2016

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for payment of compensation to victims of riots and
communal violence. Clause 4 provides for constitution of Victims of Riots and Communal
Violence Compensation Fund. Clause 5 provides that the appropriate Government shall
constitute task force for carrying out the purposes of this Act. Clause 6 provides that the
Central Government shall provide adequate funds to the state Governments for carry out the
provisions of this Act. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a   recurring expenditure of rupees one
thousand crore per annum will be involved out of Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.

6
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for equal compensation to victims of riots and communal violence by the
Central Government and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto
————
(Shri Ramesh Bidhuri, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—253LS(S3)—04-05-2016.