IDK 
SABHA 
THE 
COMPAJ,iJJ:ES 
(.AM&:NDMENT) 
BILL, 
19: 
7 
(To 
be/As 
introduced 
in 
Lok 
Sabha) 
1. 
Page 
If., 
line 
25,-
for 
n59A" 
read 
"58A" 
2. 
Page 
5, 
line 
18,-
for 
"provision 
n 
re 
SLd 
"provisions" 
NEW 
DELF..r· 
, 
November'21~972 Kartika 
30, 
1899\Sak-a1 

As IHTRODUCED IN LoK SAlIBA ION 
v. ", 
L 
Bill No. 13t C»f 1,,7 
THE COMPANIES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1977 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Companies Act, 1956. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-eighth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Companies (Amendment) Act, 1977. Short 
1 of 1956. Z. In the Companies Act, 1956 (hereinafter referred to as the principal 
5 Act), in section lOE, in sub-section (4!J), for the words and figures "Chap-
5 of 1898. ter XXXV of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898", the words and 
2 of 1974. figures "Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 197:i" shall 
be substituted. 
tlell"'. 
3. In section 58A of the principal Act, after sub-section (7), but be-
10 fore the Ezpl4ncLt:ion. the following sub-section shall be inserted, 
namely:-
IS 
.. (8) The Central Government may, if it considers it necessary 
for avoiding any hardship or for any other just and sufficient reason, 
by order, issued either prospectively or retrospectively from a date 
not earlier than the commencement of the Companies (Amend-
ment) Act, 1974, grant extension of time to II company or class of 
companies to comply with, or exempt any company or class of com-
panies from, all or any of the provisions of this section either gene-
rally or for any specified period subject to such conditions as may 
be specified in the order: 
title. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
lOE. 
Amead-
mentof 
section 
5~ . 

Amend-
ment of 
iection 
10SH. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
22(). 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
293. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
620. 
Insertion 
of new 
.ec:UoD 
63fA. 
Enforce-
ment of 
orders of 
Company 
Law 
Board. 
. 
~ 
Provided that no order under this sub-section shall be issued 
in relation to a class of companies except after consultation with the 
Reserve Bank of India.". 
4. In section lOSH of the principal Act, the words, figures, letters and 
brackets land, any re£erenee in sections lOBA, l08B and lOse to "same S 
management" shall be construed as a reference to "same management" 
as defined in clause (g) of section 2 of the Monopolies and Restrictive 
Trade Practices Act, 1969' shall be insertE'd at the end. S4 of 1969. 
5. In section 220 of the principal Act,-
(i) in sub-section (1), after the words "balance sheet and the 10 
profit and loss account were so laid", the words ", or where the annual 
general meeting of a company for any year has not been held, there 
shall be filed with the Registrar within thirty days from the latest 
day on or before which that meeting should have been held in 
accordance with the provisions of this Act," shall be inserted; IS 
(~i) in sub-section (2), after the words "does not adopt the 
balance sheet", the words ", or, if the annual general meeting of a 
company for any year has not been held," shall be inserted. 
6. In section 293 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), in clause (e), 
for the words "twenty-five thousand rupees", the words "fifty thousand 20 
r.upees" ,ball be substituted. 
7. In section fi20 of the princ~pa1 Act, for sub-section (2), the following 
SUb-section shall be substituted and shall be deemed to have been substi-
tuted with effect from the 1st day of February, 1975, namely:-
"(2) A copy of every notJ.fication proposed to be issued under 25 
sub-section (1), sha,llbe laid in dr,aft lx·fore each House of Parlia-
ment, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or mOJ:e B~cessive ses-
sions, and if, before the expiry of the session immedia~ly foUowi»,g 
the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses ~gree in 30 
disapproving the issue of the notification or both Houses agree in 
m~ ~y modi1lcation in the notification,the :notUi,ca~on shall not 
be issued or, as the ca,se may };Ie, shall be i~ued only in S1Jch modified 
form as may be agreed upon by both the Houses.". 
8. After section 634 of the principal Act, the following section shan 3S 
be inserted, namely:-
U834A. Any order made ,by ",tile "C'o~ny Law :BQQd ~er, ... 
tion 17, section 18, section 19, section 79, section 141 or ~ijon;ll.f6 
may be enf~rced by Utat Board ill the same manner as if it were a 
decree IJUlde by a Court in a suit pending therein, and it shall be 40 
lawful for that Board to send, in the case of its inabiHty to eacute 
such order, to 'the Court within the local limits of whose jurisdic-
tipn,-
(G) in tbf! case of an order ag$st a company, the registered " '", 
Qftl,ce of the QQD;l~ "is situ~~, or 4S 
(b) in ijae ,case of an ord.,r 4Pinst al)y otJJer I~' the 
person concemed voluntarily resid~s, or C4rri~ OD,"Q~~JIIS or 
personally works for gain.". 

5 
3 
t. In section 635 of the principal Act, after sub-section (3), the follow-
ing sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-
"(4) Where any order made by the Company Law Board under 
section 17, section ui, section 19, section 79 or section 186 is required 
to be enforced by a' Court, a certified copy of the order shall be pro-
duced to' the proper officer of the Court required to enforce the order 
and the provisions (If sub-sections (2) and (3) shall, as, far as may be, 
apply to every such order in the same manner and tu the same eX-
t.ent as thcyapply to an order made by a Court.". 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
131. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
In the Companies Act, 1956, section 58A rela~ing to acceptance of, 
deposits was inserted by the C'ompnniiest (Amendment) Act, 1974, which 
came into force on the 1st February, 1975. Prior to the coming into force 
of this section, acceptance of deposits !by companies was regulated by 
the dirqctions isSued by the Reserve Bank of India under Chapter IlIB 
ot the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1004. Clause (a) of sub-section (3) 
of section 58A provideos that every deposit accepted by a company at any 
tfime before 'the comm~encement of the said amendment Act of 1974, 
,shall, if it is not renewed by a company in accordance with the provi-
slons of that section, be repaid in accordance with the terms of such 
deposit. Clause (c') of that sub-se<-tion provides that any deposit re-
Ceived by a company in contravention of the aforesaid directions of the 
Reserve Bank shall be repaid in full on or ,before 1st April, 1975. Sub-
section (fit) of th2.t se<:tion provides for penalty for the contravention of 
the provisions of the section. A review of the cases of contraventions 
t;hows th.:!t som~timcs they are due to circumstances hl'yond th~ control 
of the compani/esl, namely, strikes, riots, power-cuts, recession, etc. Sulr. 
rection (7) of section 58A empowers the Central Government ~o give 
total exemption to a. rompany from the provisions of the section after 
consulting thE" ReServe Bank of India. There is, however, no power to 
(drant partial relaxation like extension of time in deserving CallIeS fol' 
the repayment of depoSits. A study group constituted by the Rese~ 
Bank of India under -the chainnanship of Shri James S. Raj reeom~ 
mended that section 59A of the Act may be suitely amended to grant 
eXtension of time to comply with or to exempt any company from the 
llmvisions of that section. It is proposed to accept this reconun~ .. 
t!inn and amend Section 58A suitably. 
In the State of Bombay v. Bandan Ram Bhandari [ArR (1961) 
S.C. 186], the queStion arose as to whether the company and its oftlcers 
are liable to be prosecuted under the 1913 Aot for not laying the balance-
s.neet and the profit and loss account before the company in annual 
~neral meetin~ where the annual general meetin~ of the company 
was not held. In that caRe, the Supreme Court took the view that a 
plEm;on ('harged with an offence could not rely on his own default as 'l 
defence to the charge. If he was responsible for not calling the annual 
general meeting, he could not be heard to say in his defence to the charae 
'that as the annual general meeting wac; not held, the balance-shee~ antf 
profit and 101'lS account could not be laid before the company in annnal 
general meeting. A diffe:rent vil:"W has. however. be£On taken on the 
noint bv Supreme COllrt in the case of St"te of Andhra Prndesh v. Andhra 
Pradesh Provincial Potteries Lid. [AIR (1973) S.C. 2429]. 
Persons in charge of the management of !lOme of -the comoanies Rome-
times omit to ('onvene the annual (leneral meetinl!' of the companv and by 
liIuch omi'!Sion keep the sharE"holde~ as well as the creiiitors of the com~ 
oany in thp dark aiboU'1; the Rffairs. of the ~oml)anv and ;t.-i financial C'lndi-
lion. Further, by such omission. they also eva~p the necessity 01 filing 
4 
.' • 

a 
the balance-Iheet and the protlt and loss account with the Registrar of 
Companies. When a document is filed with the Registrar of Companies, 
it is open to any shareholder or credItor to inspect such document and to 
obtain a copy thereo~. In the circumstances, it is absolutely essential that 
even where the annual general meeting of the company has not been held, 
the balance sheet and profit and loss account should be filed withl the 
Registrar of Companies to enable the shareholders and other persons to 
find out, from inspection of the said documents, the affairs of the com-
pany and its financial condition. The Bill seeks to amend section 220 to 
achieve the said object. 
Under section 293 ~f the Companies Act, 1956, a company IS empowered 
to make donations for charitable purposes up 'to five per cent. of its 
aV'QIrage net profits during the preceding three years or up to RsI. 25,000, 
wh,ichever is greater. The ceiling of Rs. 25,000 was fixed long ago and 
it is felt that in the present context, the said ceiling should be raised to 
&S. 50,000. The Bill seeks to amend section 293. 
Section 620 of the Companies Ad, 19156, empowel"3 the Central Govern-
(lle'nt to modify, by notification, any of the provision of the Act in its 
application to a particular Government company or to Government com-
pan~e~, in general. Every notification proposing to make such IIwdifi-
cation is required to be placed, in draft, before each House of Parliament 
for a period of not less than 30 days while it is in session. Since the said 
p~riod of 30 days cannot, sometimes, be completed in one session, it is 
necessary to amend the section to permit the period of 30 days to be co~ 
pleted in one socssion Of in two or more successive _sions. The Bfll 
seeks to amend secUon 620 to achieve the said object. 
Other amendments included in the Bill are of a consequential or 
formal nature. 
NEW DBLHI; SHANTI BHUSIIAN. 
The 14th November, 1977. , ~ 

Constitu-
tion of 
Board of 
Company 
Law Ad-
ministra-
tion. 
Comtruc-
tion of re-
ferences to 
"shares" 
or "share 
capital" in 
sections 
tOBA to 
108D, 
Three 
copies of 
balance-
sheet, etc., 
to be filed 
with Re-
gntrar, 
• 
'lOB, (1) 
ANN~URE 
EXTllAC'l'i FROM ~ll& COJ4PANlEa ACT, 19,56 
(1' OF 1956) 
• • • 
' .. 
• ... • '. 
(4D) Every Branch shall be deemed to be a civil court hr the ptir-
Wiles of section 195 and Chapter XXXV, '(If the Code of Criminal Pro-
cedure, 1898, and every proceeding before the, B~nch shall be deemed to 
be a judicial proceeding within the meaning of sections 193 and "228 01 
the Indian Penal Code and' for the· purpose of secti(m, 196 of that Cqde. 
... • • 
oil, • 
, ' 
108ft. R~erences in sectmns HtBA, 108B, lOBe aDd 1080 to sharea or, 
share 'capital, as the case maybe, shan be eanstrued atJ references to 
shares or share capital, resp~ctrn!ly, of a body~orporata owning any 
undertaking to which the provisions of Part A of Chapter III of the 
MontJpolies and Restrj~tive Trade Practices Act, 116'," apply. 
• • ... • 
220.(1), After the balance-sheet ,~d,the I>rofi~ and loss account have 
been laid before a company at an annual general meeting as aforesaid, 
there shall be filed with the Registrar within thirty days from the date 
on which the balance-sheet and the profit and loss account were so laid-
(a) three copies of. the balance-sheet and the profit and loSs"8o" 
count, signed by the managing director. maWAAlng' agen~; ;8eCremllies" 
and treasurers, manaqer or secretary of the company, or if there 
be none of these, by a director of the company, together with three 
copies of all documents which are rcq'_tired by this Act to be 
annexed or attached to such balanC'e-sheetor profit and loss account I 
Provided that in the case o~ a private company, copies of the 
balancMheet and copies of the profit and 1011 account shall be filed 
, with the Registrar separately: 
Provided further that,-
(i) in the case of a private company which is nota subsi-
diary of a public company, or 
Oi) in the case of a private company of which the entire 
paid-up share capital is held by one or more bodies corporate 
incorporated outside India, or 
(iii) in the case of a company which b~cnmes a public com-
pany by virtue of section 43A. if the Central Gnvemmfmt directs 
that it is not in the public intel'ec:t that any person other than 8 
6 
, 
5 of 1898. 
45 of 1860 • 
54 of 1969. 

"':,!l,,q .. ::; ~',' 
member of the company shall be entitled to inspect, or obtaid 
copies of, the profit and loss account of the company, 
no person other than a member of the company concerned shall be 
entitled to inspect, or obtain copies of~ the profit and loss account of 
that company under section 610. 
(2) if the annual general meeting of a company before which a 
balance-sheet is laid as aforesaid does not adopt the balance-sheet, a 
statement of that fact and of the reasons therefor shall be annexed to 
the balance-sheet and to the copies thereof required to be filed with the 
Registrar. 
.. • • • 
293. (1) The Board of directors of a public company, or of a private 
company which is a subsidiary of a public company, shall not, except 
with the consent of. such public company or subsidiary in general meet-
iDg,-
• • • • • 
(e) contribute, after the commencement of this Act, to charitable 
and other funds not directly relating to the business of the com-
pany or the welfare of its employees, any amounts the aggregate of 
which will, in any financial year, exceed twenty-five thousand rupees, 
or five per cent. of its average net profits as determined in accordance 
with the provisions of sections 349 and 350 during the three financial 
years immediately preceding, wlachever is greater. 
620. (1) • • • • 
(2) A copy of every notification proposed to be issued under sub-sec-
tion (1) shall be laid in draft before both Houses of Parliament for a 
period of not less than thirty days while they are in session and if within 
that period, either House disapproves of the issue of the notification or 
approves of such issue only with modifications, the notification shall not 
be issued or, as the case may require, shall be issued only with such 
modifications as may be agreed on by both the Houses. 
Restric-
tions on 
powel'lof 
Board. 
Power to 
modify 
Act in 
relation 
to Gov-
ernment 
companies 

A 
BII.J... 
further to amend the Companies Act, 1956. 
(Shri Sh4nti Bhushan, 
Mi.tler of Law, Justice and Coom.pony Affairs.) 