As inrropucep in Lox Sasua on

24 NOV 1906

Bill No. 134 of 1986
ena

THE BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS BILL, 1986
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES

CHAPTER [I

PRELIMINARY
Clauses

1. Short title, extent and commencement.
2. Definitions.
CHAPTER II
Tse Bureau or INDIAN STANDARDS
. Establishment and incorporation of Bureau of Indian Standard.

3
4. Constitution of Executive Committee.
5. Constitution of Committee.

6

. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of Bureau of
Executive Committee.

7. Director-General of the Bureau.

8. Committees.

9. Officers and employees of the Bureau.
: CHAPTER III

‘TRANSFER OF ASSETS, LIABILITIES, ETC., OF THE INDIAN STANDARDS
INSTITUTION TO THE BUREAU

10. Transfer of assets, liabilities and employees of Indian Standards
Institution.

CHAPTER IV
ह् PoWERs AND FUNCTIONS OF THE BUREAU
11. Functions of the Bureau.
12. Prohibition of improper use of Standard Mark.
13. Prohibition of use of certain names, etc.
14. Prohibition of registration in certain cases.
15. Compulsory use of Standard Mark for articles and processes to
certain scheduled industries.

@


we ES हि CHAPTER प्र
. Licence a
“CLAUSES | हे
16. Grant of licence,
के का, Appeal.
CHAPTER VI

FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT

18. Grants and loans by the Central Government.
19, Fund. वि j
20. Borrowing powers of the Bureau. i 4
21, Budget.
22. Annual report.
23. Accounts and audit.
24. Annual report and auditor’s report to be laid before Parlia

CHAPTER VII

‘MISCELLANEOUS
25. Power of Central Government to issue directions.
26. Inspecting officer.
27. Power to search and seizure. }
28, Delegation.
29. Power to obtain information.
30. Savings.
31. Certain matters to be kept confidential.

32, Members, officers and employees of the Bureau to be
servants.

33. Protection of action taken in good faith.
Penalty for improper use of Standard Mark, ete.

&

35. Cognizance of offences by courts.

36. Offences by companies.
37. Authentication of Orders and other instruments of the

38. Power to make rules.

. Power to make regulations.
gulations to be Jaid before Parliament.

Ey

40. Rules and 7९
41. Act-not to affect operation of certain Acts,
42. Power to remove difficulties.

43. Repeal and saving.



ही त 7 1 : ; ay Bill No, 134 of 1986

THE BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS BILL, 1986

A
BILL

| for the.establishment of a Bureau for. the harmonious
development of the activities of standardisation, marking and quality
+ certification of goods -and for matters connected. - therewith or
_ incidental: thereto, r

j है PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Bureau of Indian Standards Act,

(2) It extends to the whole of India.

(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government
y, by notification in-the Official Gazette, appoint.

(2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—

(a) “article” means (as respects standardisation and marking)
any substance, artificial or natural, or partly artificial or partly
natural, whether raw or partly or wholly processed or ” manufac-
tured; a2 के Mics

title,
extent and
commence-


under section 3

(c) “consumer” means a consumer of any article or process;

(d) “covering” includes any stopper, cask, bottle, vessel, box,
crate, cover, capsule, case, frame, wrapper or other container;

(e) “Executive Committee” means the Executive Committee
constituted under sub-section (1) of section 4;

(f) “Fund” means the fund constituted under section 18;

Bureau, in relation to any article or process indicative of the quality
and specification of such article or proess and includes—

(i) any standard recognised by the Bureau under clause (@)
of section 10; and

(ii) any standard established and published, or recognised,
by the Indian Standards Institution and which is in force imme-
diately before the date of establishment of the Bureau;

(h) “Indian Standards Institution” means the Indian Stand:

©.” institution’ set up under the Resolution of the Government of Ih
in the late Department of Industries and Supplies No. ISTD(4)/
dated the 3rd day of September, 1976, and registered under
Societies Registration Act, 1860;

6) “inspecting officer” means an inspecting officer appointed
under section 25;

0) “Tcence” means a licence granted under sectiori 16 to use th
Indian Standards Certification Mark in relation to any article
procéss which conforms to the Indian Standard and includes
Neence granted under the Indian Standards Institution ‘(Certi
tion Mark Act, 1952 and is in force immediately before the date

establishment of the Bureau
—

‘(k) “manufacturer” means the manufacturer of any article
process;

(0) “mark” includes a device, brand, heading, label, tick
pictorial representation. name, signature, word. letter or numeral
any combination thereof and also includes any Indian Stand:
Institution Certification Mark specified by the Indian Standai
751... Institution: हि

(m) “member” means a member of the Bureau;

smu ‘(n) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under
+7 Act;

= (०) “process” includes any practice, treatment and m
manufacture of any article; ig |


15

20

25

है 5°

40

करन - 2 ss 5
(p) “registering authority” means any authority competent
under ary law for the time being in force to register any company,
firm or other body of persons, or any trade mark or design, or to
grant a patent;

(q) “regulations” means regulations made by the Bureau under
this Act;

(r) “rules” means rules made by the Central Government under
this Act;

(s) “specifications” means a description of an article or process
as far as practicable by reference to its nature, quality, strength,
purity, composition, quantity, dimensions, weight, grade durability,
origin, age, material, mode of manufacture or other characteristics
to distinguish it from any other article or process;

(t) “Standard Mark” means the Bureau of Indian Standards
Certification Mark specified by the Bureau to rerresent a particular
Indian Standard;

(u) “trade mark” means a mark used or proposed to be used in
relation to goods for the purpose of indicating, or 80 as to indicate,
a connection in the course of trade between the goods and some
person having the right, either as proprietor or as registered user, to
use the mark, whether with or without any indication of the identi-
ty of that person; {

(९) an article is said to be marked with a Standard Mark if the
article itself is marked with a Standard Mark or any covering con-
taining, or label attached to, such article is so marked,

CHAPTER IT
Tre Bureau or INDIAN STANDARDS

3. (1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may,
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint in this behalf, there shall
be established for the purposes of this Act, a Bureau, to he called the
Bureau of Indian Standards.

(2) The Bureau shall be 3 body corporate by the name aforesaid,

having perpetual succession and a common seal, with power, subject to
35 the provisions of this Act, to acquire. hold and dinose of property, both
movable and immovable, and to contract and shall by the said name sue
and be sued. iin oi =

(3) The Bureau shall consist of the following members, namely: —

(a) the Minister in charge of the Ministry or Department of
the Central Government having administrative control of the Bureau
who shall be ex-Officio President of the Bureau; हे

(0) the Minister of State or a Devuty Minister, if any, in the
Ministry or Department of the Central Government having
administrative control of the Bureau who shall be ex-officio Vice-
President of the Bureau, and where there is no such Minister of State

‘or Deputy Minister, such person as may be nominated by the Cen-
tral Government to be the Vice-President of the Bureau;

Standard,


Constitu-
tion of
Executive

Committee.

४1५ 4
~ (c) the Secretary to the Government of India in charge of ४!

Ministry or Department of the Central Government having admi
trative control of the Bureau ex-officio;

(d) the Director-General of the Bureau ex-officio;

(e) such number of other persons, to represent the Govern-
ment, industry, scientific and research institutions and oth
interests, as may be prescribed, to be appointed by the Centra
Government.

(4) The term of office of the members referred to in clause (९) ८
sub-section (3) and the manner of filling vacancies among, and the

members, shall be such as may be prescribed.

(5) The Bureau may associate with itself, in such manner and for
such purposes as may be prescribed, any persons whose assistance 01
advice it may desire in complying with any of the provisions of this A
and a person so associated shall have the right to take part in the
cussions of the Bureau relevant to the purposes for which he has been
associated, but shall not have the right to vote.

4. (1) The Bureau may with the prior approval of the Central Gov-
ernment, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute an Executi'
Committee which shall consist of the following members, namely:—

(a) Director-General of the Bureau, who shall 56 its ex-o

Chairman; i )

(9) such number of members, as may be prescribed.

(2) The Executive Committee constituted under sub-section (1) shall 2
perform. exercise and discharge such of the functions, powers and
duties of the Bureau as may be prescribed or as may be delegated to if
by the Bureau. हे

5. (1) Subject to any regulations made in this behalf, the Bureau
may, from time to time and as and when it is considered necessary,
constitute the following Advisory Committees for the efficient discharge of
its functions, namely:— :

(a) Financial Committee;

(b) Certification Advisory Committee;

(०) Standards Advisory Committee;

(d) Laboratory Advisory Committee;

(e) Planning and Development Advisory Committees;

(f) such number of other committees as may be determined by
regulations.

(2) Each Advisory Committee shall consist of a Chairman and such
other members as may be determined by regulations, , a
(3) Without prejudice to the powers contained in sub-section (7,
the Bureau may constitute, as and when considered necessary, suc)


a 5 a ae

fiumber of technical committees of experts for the formulation of
standards in respect of articles or processes,

6. No act or proceedings of the Bureau, the Executive Committee
or any Committee constituted under section 6 shall be invalid merely
5 by reason of—

(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of the
Bureau or the Committee; or

(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a
member of the Bureau or Committee; or

10 (c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Bureau or the
Committee not affecting the merits of the case.

7. (1) The Central Government shall appoint a Director-General of
the Bureau,

(2) The terms and conditions of ‘service of the Director-General of
15 the Bureau shall be such as may be prescribed.

(3) Subject to the general superintendence and control of the
Bureau the Director-General of the Bureau shall be the Chief Executive
Authority of the Bureau.

(4) The Director-General of the Bureau shall exercise and discharge
2° such of the powers and duties of the Bureau as may be determined by
regulations.

8. (1) The Bureau may appoint such other officers and employees
as it considers necessary for the efficient discharge of its functions under
this Act.

25 (2) The terms and conditions of service of officers and employees
of the Bureau appointed under sub-section (1) shall be such as may
be determined by regulations.

CHAPTER III
TRANSFER OF ASSETS, LIABILITIES, ETC., OF THE INDIAN STANDARDS
go INSTITUTION 70 THE BUREAU

9. On and from the date of establishment of the Bureau,—

(a) any reference to the Indian Standards Institution in any
Jaw other than this Act or in any contract or other instrument
shall be deemed as a reference to the Bureau;

85 (b) all properties and assets, movable and immovable of, or
belonging to, the Indian Standards Institution shall vest in the
Bureau;

(c) all the rights and liabilities of the Indian Standards Insti-

tution shall be transferred to, and be the rights and liabilities of, the
40 Bureau;

(d) without prejudice to the provisions of clause (e), all debts,
obligations and liabilities incurred, all contracts entered into and all
matters and things engaged to be done by, with or for the Indian

Vacancies
etc, not to
invalidate
proceed-
ings of
Bureau
Com-
mittee,

Director
General
of the
Bureau.

Officers
and em--
ployees of
the

Bureau,

Transfer
of assets,
liabilities
and
employees
of Indiam
Standard
Institution.


Functions
of the
Bureau.

Standards Institution immediately before that date, for or’ in |
nection with the purposes of the said Instituiotn shall be deemed

to have been incurred, entered into, or engaged to be done by, with

or for, the Bureau;

(e) all sums of money due to the Indian Standards Institution 5
immediately before that date shall be deemed to be due to the —
Bureau,

(f) all suits and other legal proceedings instituted or which
could have been instituted by or against the Indian Standard Insti-
tution immediately before such commencement may be continued or
may be instituted by or against the Bureau; and 5

(g) every employee holding any office under the Indian Stan- —
dards Institution immediately before that date shall hold his office in
the Bureau by the same tenure and upon the same terms and con-
ditions of service as respects remuneration, leave, provident 1
fund, retirement of other terminal benefits as he would have held
such office if the Bureau had not been established and shall continue —
to do so as an employee of the Bureau or until the expiry of
a period of six months from that date if such employee opts not
to be the employee of the Bureau within such period.

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Disputes
Act, 1947 or in any other law for the time being in force, the absorption.
of any employee by the Bureau in its regular service under this section —
shall not entitle such employee to any compensation under that Act or —
other law and no such claim shall be entertained by any court, tribunal
or other authority. :

CHAPTER IV रू

PowERS AND FUNCTIONS OF THE BUREAU

10. (1) The Bureau may exercise such powers and perform such —
duties as may be assigned to it by or under this Act and, in particular,
such powers include the power to—

(a) establish, publish and promote in such manner as may bes :
prescribed the Indian standard, in relation to any article or process;

(b) recognise as an Indian standard, in such manner as may be
prescribed, any standard established by any other Institution in
India or elsewhere, in relation to any article or process; j

(c) specify a Standard Mark to be called the Bureau of Indian q
Standards Certification Mark which shall be of such design and ~
contain, such particulars as may be prescribed to represent a parti-
cular Indian standard;
(d) grant, recognise, suspend or cancel, in such manner a licence
. . for the use of the Standard Mark;
(e) levy such fees for the grant or renewal of any licence;
(f) make such inspection and take such samples of any material:

or substance as may be necessary to see whether any article or
© © preéess in relation to which the Standard Mark has been used con-


15

4s

7

forms to the Indian Standard or whether the Standard Mark has
been improperly used in relation to any article or process with or
without a licence;

(9) seek recognition of the Bureau and of the Indian standards
outside India on such terms and conditions as may be mutually
agreed upon by the Bureau with any corresponding institution or

organization in any country; '

(h) establish, maintain and recognise laboratories for the pur-
poses of standardisation and quality control and for such other
processes as may be prescribed;
purposes

(i) undertake research for the formation of Indian standards in
the interests of consumers and manufacturers;

(j) recognise any institution in India or outside which fs
engaged in the standardisation of any article or process, or the im-
provement of the quality of any article or process;

(k) provide services to manufacturers and consumers of articles
or processes on such terms and conditions as may be mutually
agreed upon; f

(l) appoint agents in India or outside India for inspection,
testing and such other purposes as may be prescribed;

(m) establish branches, offices or agencies in India or ouaside;

(७) inspect any article or process, at such times and at such
places as may be prescribed in relation to which the Standard Mark
is used or which is required to conform to the Indian standard by
this Act or under any other law irrespective of whether such article
or process is in India or is brought or intended to be brought into
India from a place outside India;

(0) co-ordinate activities of any manufacturer or association of
manufacturers or consumers engaged in the improvement of the
quality of any article or process or in the implementation of any
quality control activities;

(p) perform such other functions as may be prescribed.

(2) The Bureau shall perform its functions under this section in
accordance with, and subject to, such rules as may be made by the

35 Central Government.

11. (1) No person shall use, in relation to ny article or process, or
in the title of any patent, or in any trade mark or design the Standard
Mark er any colourable imitation thereof, except under a licence.

(2) No person shall, notwithstanding that he has been granted a

७0 licence, use in relation to any article or process the Standard Mark or

any colourable imitation thereof unless such article or process com-
forms to the Indian Standard.

छा.
tion of
improper
use of
Standard
Mark.


Probhhi-
thon of
use of

names,

tlon of

tion in
certain

sory
use of

mark for
articles
and pro-
cesses to.
certain

Bureau,— |

-being inforce, no registering authority shall—

-12: the registering authority may refer the question to the Central
_ernment whose decision therecn shall be final.

-it-may, by order published in the Official Gazette,—

: be subject to such conditions and on payment of such fees as may,

7 prescribed. 4

8

1%. No person shall, except in such cases and under such cond
as may be prescribed, use without the previous permission of

(a) any name which so nearly resembles the name of the Bi

as 19 deceive or likely to deceive the public or which contains 1
expression ‘Indian Standard” or any abbreviation thereof; or
हि (9) any mark or trade mark in relation to any article or छ
containing the expressions “Indian Standard” or “Indian Standi
Specification” or any abbreviation of such expressions. q

13. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law. for the ti m

(a) register any ¢ompany, firm or other body of persons
bears any name or mark; or

(b) register a trade mark or design which bears any name ¢
mark; or é .

(c) grant a patent, in respect of an invention, which bears a

title containing any name or mark, q

if the use of such name or mark is in contravention of section 11
section 12.

(2) If any question arises before a registering authority whether h
use of any name or mark is in contravention of section 11 or st

44: Ifthe Central Government, after consulting the Bureau, is of | 1९
opinion that it is necessary or expedient so to do, in the public interes

(a) notify any article or process, of any scheduled industry w
shall conform to the Indian Standard; and

(b) direct the use of the Indian Standard under a licence as
compulsory on such article or process. a
Explanation. —For the putposes of this section, the expression “
duled industry” shall have the meaning assigned to it in the indus
(Development and Regulation) Act, 1951.
CHAPTER V ae
LICENCE

15. (1) The Bureau may, by order, grant, renew, suspend of

a licence in such manner as may be determined by regulations. iP

(2) The grant or renewal of the licence under sub-section (1)

determined by regulations.

16. (1) Any person aggrieved by an order made under section 15
prefer an appeal to the Central Government within such period as may

(2) No appeal shall be admitted if it is-preferred after. the
of the period prescribed thereof:


9

Provided that an appeal may be admitted after the expiry of the
period prescribed therefor if the appellant satisfies the Central Govern-
ment that he had sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal within
the prescribed period.

5. (3) Every appeal made under this section shall be made in such form
and shall be accompanied by a copy of the order appealed against and
‘by such fees as may be prescribed.

(4) The procedure fcr disposing of an appeal shall be such as may be

prescribed:
10 Provided that before disposing of an appeal, the appellant shall be
given a reasonable opportunity of being heard. *
CHAPTER VI

FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT

17. The Central Government may, after due appropriation made by
15 Parliament by law in this behalf, make to the Bureau grants and loans
of such sums of money as that Government may consider necessary. +

18. (1) There shall be constituted a Fund to be called the Bureau of
Indian Standards Fund and there shall be credited thereto—

(०) any grants and loans made to the Bureau by the Central
20 Government under section 17;

val (6) all fees and charges received by the Bureau under this Act;

(c) all sums received by the Bureau from such other sources as
may be decided upon by the Central Government.

(2) The Fund shall be applied for meeting—

25 (a) salary, allowances and other remuneration of the members,
Director-General and officers and other employees of the Bureau;

(b) expenses of the Bureau in the discharge of its functions
under section 10;

(०) expenses on objects and for purposes authorised by this Act.

go 19. (1) The Bureau may, with the consent of the Central Government
or in accordance with the terms of any general or special authority given
to it by the Centrai Government, borrow money from any source ag it
may deem fit for discharging all or any of its functions under this Act.

(2) The Central Government may guarantee in such manner, as it

© 35 thinks fit, the repayment of the principal and the payment of interest

. there on with respect to the loans borrowed by the Bureau under sub-
section (1). = its.

20. The Bureau shall prepare, in such form and in such time in each

financial year as may be prescribed its budget for the next financial

“40. year, showing the estimated receipts and expenditure of the Bureau and
forward the same to the Central Government.

Grants
and loans
by the
Central

ment,
Fund,



tl

gad avait,

HEHE]

ne

direction,

ia

and Auditor-General of India at such intervals as may be specified

10

21. The Bureau shall prepare, in such form and at such time in each
financial year as may be prescribed its annual report, giving a full account —
of its activities during the previous financial year, and submit a copy
thereof to the Central Government. q

22. (1) The Bureau shall maintain proper accounts and other rele:
vant records and prepare an annual statement of accounts, in such form
as may be prescribed by the Central Government in consultation with
the Controller and Auditor-General of India,

(2) The accounts of the Bureau shall be audited by the Comptroller

him and any expenditure incurred in connection with such audit shall
be payable by the Bureau to the Comptroller and Auditor-General,

(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and any person —
appointed by him in connection with the audit of the accounts of the
Bureau shall have the same rights and privileges and the authority int
connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor-General ._
generally has in connection with the audit of Government accounts and,
in particular, shall have the right to demand the production of books,
accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to
inspect any of the offices of the Bureau.

(4) The accounts of the Bureau as certified by the Comptroller and
Auditor-General of India or any other person appointed by him in this
behalf together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded annually
to the Central Government and that Government shall cause the same to
be laid before each House of Parliament. 2

23. The Central Government shall cause the annual report, as soon ‘
as may be after it is received, before each House of Parliament.

CHAPTER VIL
MIscELLANEOUS

24, (1) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this Act, the ;
Bureau shall, in the exercise of hig powers or the performance of its
functions under this Act, be bound by such directions on questions of
policy as the Central Government may give in writing to it from time
to time: | |

Provided that the Bureau shall, as far as practicable, be given
opportunity to express its views before any direction is given under this
sub-section. a

(2) The decision of the Central Government whether a question
one of policy or not shall be trial.

25. (1) The Bureau may appoint as many inspecting officers as maj
be necessary for the purpose of inspecting whether any article or pro
in relation to which the Standard Mark has been used conforms to


IL

Indian Standard or whether the Standard Mark has been properly used
in relation to any article or process with or without licence, and for the
purpose of performing such other functions as may be assigned to them.

(2) Subject to any rules made under this Act, an inspecting officer
5 shall have power to—

(a) inspect any operation carried on in connection with any
article or process in relation to which the Standard Mark has been
used; and

(b) take samples of any article or of any material or substances
व used in any article or process, in relation to which the standard mark
has been used,

(3) Every inspecting officer shall be furnished by the Bureau with
a certificate of appointment as an inspecting officer and the certificate
shall, on demand, be produced by the inspecting officer.

35 26. (1) If the inspecting officer has reason to believe that any article
or process in relation to which the contravention of section 11 or section
12 has taken place are secreted in any place, premises or vehicles, he may
enter into and search such place, premises or vehicle for such article or
process, t

90 (2) Where, as a result of any search made under sub-section (3),
any article or process has been found in relation to which contravention
of section 11 or section 12 has taken place, he may seize such article and
other things which, in his opinion, will be useful for, or relevant to any
proceeding under this Act:

a5 Provided that where it is not practicable to seize any such article
or thing, the inspecting officer may serve on the owner an order that
he shall not remove, part with, or otherwise deal with, the article or
things except with the previous permission of the inspecting officer.

(8) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1978, relating
go to searches and seizures shall, so far as may be, apply to every search
or seizure made under this section.

217. The Bureau may, by general or special order in writing, delegate
to any member, member of the Executive Committee, officer of the Bureau
or any other person subject to such conditions, if any, as may be specified
in the order, such of its powers and functions under this Act (except
the powers under section 37) as it may deem necessary.

28, Every licensee shall supply the Bureau with such information, and
with such samples of any material or substance used in relation to any
article or process, as the Bureau may require.

4० 29. Nothing in this Act shall exempt any person from any suit or
other proceeding which might, apart from this Act, be brought against
him.

20. Any information obtained by an Inspecting Officer or the Bureau
from any statement made or information supplied or any evidence given
or from inspection made under the provisions of this Act shall be treated

5
“ as confidential:

Power to.

Delega-

Power to
obtain in-
formation,

Certain
matterg.

to be

kept confi-


Members,

employees

Cogni-

offences
by courts,

Offences
‘by com-
panies.

12

Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to the disclosure'of /
any information for the purpose of prosecution under this Act. a

31. All members, officers and other employees of the Bureau shall be
deemed, when acting or purporting to act in pursuance of any of the
provisions of this Act, to be public servants within the meaning of section’
21 of the Indian Penal Code.

32. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against ७
the Government or any officer of the Government or any member, officer
or employee of the Bureau for anything which is in good faith done or |
intended to be done under this Act or the rules or regulations made 7
thereunder. ‘eam

33. (1) Any member who contravenes the provisions of section 11, or
section 12 or section 14 shall be punishable with fine which may extend
to fifty thousand rupees. t

é

(2) Any court trying a contravention under sub-section (1) may 15
direct that any property in respect of which the contravention has taken
place shall be forfeited to this Bureau.

34, (1) No court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under
this Act, save on a complaint made by or under the authority of th
Government or Bureau or by any officer empowered in this behalf by the 20
Government or the Bureau, or the consumer of any article or process, ~

(2) No court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judi- 5
cial Magistrate of the first class specially empowered in this behalf shall
try any offence punishable under this Act. |

35. (2) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by 8३5.
company, every person who at the time the offence was committed was
incharge of, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct of ‘the
business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be —
guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against = and
punished accordingly: हट

Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any मु
such person liable to any punishment provided in this Act, if he proves
that. the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he had
exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence,

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where
an offence under this Act has been committed by a company and it is
proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or connit
vance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director,
manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director, mana~
ger, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that
offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accord-
ingly. ts wot tag


a3

“ | Explanation.—For the purposes of this section,—

(a) “company” means any body corporate and includes a firm
or other association of individuals; and

(0). “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.

5 °°’ 86. All orders and decision of, and all other instruments issued by,
the Bureau shall be authenticated by the signature of such officer or
7 officers as may be authorised by the Bureau in. this behalf.

. 87. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.

10, (2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following
matters, namely: — f

(a) the number of members of the Bureau and the interest such
members would represent under clause (e) of sub-section (3) of
1% section 3; |
(9) the term of office of the members of the Bureau, the manner
4 “for filling vacancies and the procedure to be followed in the discharge
of their functions by, the members; | ‘
oF (c) the manner of and the purposes for which the Bureau may
go * associate with itself in person for assistance and advice under sub-
section (5) of section 3; \
(d) the number of members of the Bureau who will be members
of the Executive Committee under clause (b) of sub-section (1) of
section 4; 1
25° (e) the terms and conditions of service of the Director General
of the Bureau; | ‘
(f) the design and the particulars to represent a particular
Indian standard under clanse (०): of sub-section, (1) of section 10;
(g) the purposes for which laboratories for the purposes of
3९ standardisation and quality control shall be established by the
Bureau;
(४) the purposes for which agents ‘may be appointed by the
Bureau in India or outside India;
: (i) the times and places at which any article or process may be
35 inspected under clause (n) of sub-section (1) of section 10;
(j) the additional functions that may be performed by the
Bureau under section 10;
(k) the cases in which, and the conditions subject to which,
exemption may be granted under section 12;
40 (1) the form in which, and the time at which, the Bureau shall
at. .- prepare its budget under section 20 and its annual report under
section 21; : ३५1६

Authenti-
cation of
orders an
other ins-
truments
of the +
Bureau.

Power to
make
rules.


14

(m) the manner in which the accounts of the Bureaw shall ;
_ maintained under section 22; is

(n) the conditions subject to which inspecting officer may exer
cise its powers under sub-section (2) of section 25;

(०) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed, or
in respect of which provision is to be, or may be, made by rules,

3

ower to 38. (1) The Executive Committee may, with the previous approval |
३५०३ ह of the Central Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
tone regulations consistent with this Act and the rules generally to carry ०७
the purposes of this Act. 10
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the
foregoing power, such regulations may provide for all or any of the fol-
lowing matters, namely: — :
(4) the members of the Advisory Committees constituted undet
section 5; Bi
(b) the powers and duties that may be exercised and discharged
by the Director-General of Bureau;

(c) the terms and conditions of service of officers and employees,
of the Bureau under sub-section (2) of section 8;

(d) the manner of grant, renewal, suspension or cancellation of |
licence under sub-section (1) of section 15;

(e) the conditions subject to which a licence may be granted or
renewed and the fees payable therefor under sub-section (2) of
section 15. f

Rule 39. Every rule and every reonlation made under this Act shall he ,
and regu- _ laid, as goon as may be after it is made hefore each House of Parliament,
lations to while it 18 in session, for a total nerind of thirty davs which may be com-
be laid prised in one session or in two or more snecessive sessions, and if, before
ie the expiry of the session immediately. following the session or the gsuc-
* cessive sessions aforesaid both Honses १९7९९ in making any modification 9,
in the rule or regulation or both Houses aeree that the rule or regulation
should not be made, the rule or reculation shall thereafter have effect —
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; no,

however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without pre
judice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule oF 9,
regulation. i 1 oe

‘Act not 40. Nothing in this Act shall affect the overation of the Agricultural
to affect Produce (Grading and Marking) Act, 1937 or the Drugs and Cosmatics —
operation —_ Avt, 1940, of any other law, for the time being in force, which deals with +
pf certain any standardisation or quality control of any article or process.

Power'to 41. (1) If any difficulty rises in giving effect to the provisions of

remove this Act, the Central Government may, by order, published in the Official
diffcul- Gazette, make such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of
See this Act as may appear to be necessary for removing the difficulty:

Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the
expiry of five vears from the commencement of this Act.


1s
(® Every Order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may
be after it is made, before each House of Parliament.

42. (1) The Indian Standards Institution (Certification Marks) Act, Repeal
1952, is hereby repealed. ang

5 (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, any thing done or any action taken aoe
or purported to have done or taken (including any rule, regulations, noti-
fication, scheme, specification, Indian Standard, Standard Mark, inspection
order or notice made, issued or adopted, or any appointment, or declara-
tion made or any licence, permission, authorisation or exemption granted

10 क any document or instrument executed or direction given or any pro-
ceedings taken or any pénalty or fine imposed) under the Act hereby
repealed shall, in so far as it is not inconsistent with the provisions of
this Act, be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding
provisions of this Act.

(3) The mention of particular matters in sub-section (2) shall not be
held to preiudice or affect the general application of section 6 of the
General Clauses Act, 1897 with regard to the effect of repeal.

व


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The Indian Standards Institution was registered as a society under
the Societies Registration Act, 1860 in January, 1947 to prepare and pro-
mote standards. The Indian Standards Institution (Certification Marks)
Act, 1952 covers the operation of the certification marks scheme, while
the formulation of standards and other related work is not.governed by
any legislation. q

2. When the Indian Standards Institution was established, the 170
trial development in the country was still in its infancy. During the la
39 years, there has been substantial progress in various sectors of the
Indian economy. The industrial and agricultural sectors have undergone —
structural and qualitative transformation under the Five Year Plans. In
this context, a new thrust has to be given to standardisation and quality _
control, A national strategy for according appropriate recognition and
importance of standards is to be evolved and integrated with the growth
and development of production and exports in various sectors of the
national economy. The public sector and private sectors including small
scale industries have to intensify efforts to produce more and more
standard and quality goods so as to help in inducing faster growth, in-
creasing exports and making available goods to the satisfaction of the
consumers.

3. The standards making organisations for formulating standards ha’ 8
has to be given due recognition and status to enable it to discharge its
functions effectively and efficiently in acceptance and promotion of Indian
standards not only in this country but even abroad. Apart from
representations of the industry, such an organisation should also have
adequate representation or users and consumer organisations, _ Central
and State Governments, research organisations and regulatory agencies,
For all these reasons, it is considered necessary to have the organisation
for standards as a statutory institution which will have adequate aut
nomy and flexibility in its operations and will also ensure that priority
is given to various aspects of its functions in line with national priorities.

4, To achieve these objectives, it is proposed to set up a Bureau ०
Indian Standards as a statutory institution.

5. The Bill provides that the Bureau of Indian Standards will be 8
body corporate and specifies its composition and the constitution of at
Executive Committee to carry on the day to day activities of the Bureau.

6


17

The proposed Bureau will take over the staff, assets and liabilities of the
Indian Standards Institution and perform all functions which are now
being performed by Indian Standards Institution. The Bill will pro-
vide access to the Bureau’s standards and certification Marks to suppliers
of like products originating in General Agreement on Trade and Tariff
(GATT) code countries. The Bill also makes provision for the making
of grants and the advancing of loans to the Bureau by the Central Gov-
ernment and the necessary provisions for the better administration of a
body corporate like constitution of Fund, accounts and audit etc. The
Bill provides for the repeal of the Indian Standards Institution (Certifi-
cation Marks) Act, 1952.

New Dent; प्र, K. 1, BHAGAT,
The 14th November, 1986.


Notes on Clauses

Clause 2 seeks to define certain words and expressions used in tl
Bill.

Clause 3 provides for the establishment and incorporation — of
Bureau of Indian standards and its constitution and terms and conditi
of services of the Members.

Clause 4 provides for the constitution of the Executive Committee of
the Bureau and the functions, powers and duties to be performed,
eised and discharged by the Executive Committee.

Clause 5 lays down the constitution of advisory committees such
Financial Committee, Certification Advisory Committee, etc. and ९०
tution of technical committees of experts by Bureau for efficient
charge of its functions.

Clause 6 lays down that any vacancy, defect or irregularity in
constitution, appointment, procedure of the Bureau or the Execut
Committee or any committee shal] not invalidate the proceedings of
Bureau or the Executive Committee. 4

Clause 7 provides for the annointment of the Director-General of
Bureau and his powers and duties, :

Clause 8 provides for the appointment of officers and employees ¢
the Bureau and the terms and conditions of their service.

Clause 9 provides for the transfer of assets and liabilities of
existing Indian Standards Institution to the Bureau. It further provi

for the transfer of employees of the Indian Standards Institution to
Bureau.

Clause 10 provides for the functions of the Bureau, mainly to es!
lish, publish and promote Indian Standards in relation to any article
process seek recognition of the Bureau and Indian Standards ou
India recognised as an Indian Standard, any standard established by any
institution in India or outside India, specified standard marks establish
maintained and recognised laboratories, appoint agents in India or ou
side, provide services to manufacturers and consumers consistent १
the object of this Act,

Clause 11 prohibits the improper use of standard marks except
a licence. ! |

Clause 12 prohibits use of certain names which so nearly resem|
the name of the Bureau.

Clause 13 prohibits registration of a company, firm, etc. which
the name or mark or register a trade mark or design which bears

name or mark if the use of such name or mark is in contravention -
clause 11 or clause 12, f

18


19

Clause 14 empowers the Central Government to notify any article,
process or any schedule industry which can be produced only under the
licence from the Bureau. }

Clause 15 deals with the grant, renewal, suspension, cancellation of
a licence. |

Clause 16 lays down a provision for appeal to the Central Government
against any order under clause 15 and procedure therefor.

Clause 17 provides for making of grants and loans by the Central

Government to the Bureau. |

Clause 18 provides for the constitution of the Bureau of Indian Stand-
ards Fund. It further provides that all the receipts of the Bureau
should be credited thereto and all its payment should be made therefrom.

Clause 19 empowers the Bureau to borrow with the consent of Cen-
tral Government money from any source as it may deem fit for discharge
of its functions under this Bill. The clause also lays down that the loans
borrowed by the authority may be guaranteed by the Central Govern-
ment for its repayment and payment of interest thereon.

Clauses 20, 21 and 23 make the usual provisions regarding preparation
of Budget, annual reports and laying the annual report before each
House of Parliament.

Clause 22 deals with the maintenance of proper accounts by the
Bureau and its audit by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.

Clause 24 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to issue
directions on question of policy to the Rureau in the discharge of its
functions and duties. Hi

Clause 25 of the Bill empowers the Bureau to appoint Inspecting
Officers for the purpose of inspection specified therein.

Clause 26 empowers the Inspecting Officer the entry into and search
of a place, premises or vehicle where article or process are secreted in
contravention of clause 11 or clause 12. It further empowers Inspecting
Officer to seize such article.

Clause 27 empowers the Bureau to delegate to the Director General
or any other member or any officer of the Rureau or any other person
such of its powers and functions under this Bill, except the powers
under section 37, as it may deem necessary. हि

Clause 28 provides for supply of information to the Bureau by the
license. 7

Clause 29 saves the suits or proceedings which might be brought
against any person under any other law.

Clause 30 provides that information obtained by Inspecting Officer
or the Bureau under the provisions of this Act shall be kent confivential
except for the purposes of prosecution of any person under this Act.

Clause 31 lavs down that all Members, Members of the Executive
Committee, Director General, officers and other employees of the Bureau.
when acting in pursuance of any provisions of this Act shall be deemed
publie servants 3 1


20°

Clause 32 seeks to give protection to the Central Government,
any officer of the Central Government or Members, Members of
Executive Committee, Officers or employees of the Bureau in respect
anything done or intended to be done in good faith in pursuance of this
Bill or Rules and Regulations made under this Act.

Clause 33 provides for penalty for contravention of the provisio1
clause 11, 12 or 14 and forfeiture of the property in respect of which su
contravention has taken place.

Clause 34 provides for cognizance of offences punishable under th
Bill and the courts therefor. |

Clause 35 fixes criminal liabilities on the Directors and the prineiy
officers of the companies and firms, etc, for the offences committed
such company. | |

Clause 36 confers upon the Central Government power to make i
rules which inter-alia include matters of procedure and administrativ
detail and it is haraly practicable to provide for them in the Bill itself.

६३4

Clause 37 provides that all orders and decisions of the Bureau shall.
be authenticated by the signature of such officer or officers as may be
authorised by the Bureau in this behalf.

Clause 38 empowers the Central Government to make rules for carry- ~
ing out purposes of this Act. + ‘

Clause 39 empowers the Bureau to make regulations for the purpo: f
of giving effect to the provisions of this Act. y

Clause 40 lays down that every rule and regulation made under this
Bill shall be laid before such House of Parliament पु

Clause 41 saves the operation of agricultural produce (grading 5
marking) Act, 1937 or the Drugs or Cosmetics Act or any other law for

_ the time being in force which deals with standards or quality control |
of any article or process 7 बा

Clause 42 seeks to empower the Central Government to remove any. :
difficulty which may arise in giving effect to the provisions of this Bill,
Clause 43 seeks to repeal the Indian Standard Institution (Certifica-
tion Mark) Act, 1952 and save the action takem or purported to have
baen done or taken thereunder. व


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 3 of the Bureau of Indian Standards Bill, 1986 provides for
‘the establishment of the Bureau of Indian Standards for harmonious
development in the activities of standardisation and quality certification
and to perform the functions specified in clause 10,

2. Clause 17 of the Bill provides for payment of grants and loans to
the Bureau of Indian Standards by the Central Government after due
appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, The grants
and loans to the Bureau will depend on the future requirements of the
Bureau in the context of its functions, On the basis of the proposals
before the Government, the recurring expenditure of the Bureau during
the year 1987-88 will be around Rs. 11.74 crores and total income from
non-Governmental sources shall be to the extent of Rs. 10.18 crores, To
bridge the gap between the income and expenditure, the grants and
loans from the Government of India under the said clause shall be to
the extent of Rs, 1.56 crores during the year 1987-88. The expenditure
that may have to be incurred by the Central Government in future
years from the Consolidated Fund of India on: this account cannot be
estimated at present. { |

3. Clause 19 (2) of the Bill provides for the guarantees “by the Central
Government on the ¥payment of the principal and. the payment of
interest, in respect of the loans borrowed by the Bureau under sub-
clause (1) of that clause. The ultimate liability arising out of such
guarantee cannot be esfimated at. this stage.

4, The Bill, if enacted and brought into operation, will not involve
any other recurring or non-recurring expenditure.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION —

Clause 37 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make
for carrying out tne purposes of the proposed legislaiion. The matver ४
respect to which rules may be made had been aetailed in sub-claus
The matters inter alia relate to provide the numper of Members
Bureau and the inierest such members would represent the term
office of the Members of the Bureau, the manner of tilling vacancies
the procedure to be followed in discaarge of their functions by the mi
bers the terms and conditions of the service of the Dire-tor-Gener
the Bureau, the design and the particulars to represent a particular
Standard, the purposes for which laboratory for the purposes of standar
isation and quality control shall be established, the purpose for wl
the agents may be appointed by the Bureau, the case in which and
ditions subject to the exemption may be granted from the provisio:
the use of certain names, provide for fee for grant of licence and
renewal, the period for the form of and the fees for an appeal and
cedure therefor but the time for preparation of Budget and ;
reports and the manner of maintenance of accounts.

Clause 38 of the Bill empowers the Bureau to make regulations
inconsistent with the proposed legislation and the rules made there
for enabling the authority to discharge its functions, the matter in
tion to which the authority may make regulation have been di
in sub-clause (2). The matters inter alia relate to the constitution
the advisory committees and the number of the members of such advii
committees. The terms and conditions of the service of the officers
employees of the Bureau, to provide for manner of grant, renewal, si
pension and cancellation of licences and the conditions for grant
renewal of licences and fees therefor. It has been provided in cla
that every rule and regulation made under this Bill shall be laid

each House of Parliament.
The matters in respect of which rules and regulations may be n

are essentially matters of detail or procedure. The delegation of
lative power is, therefore, of a normal character.


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for the establishment of a Bureau for the harmonious deve-
lopment of the activities of standardisation, marking and quality
certification of goods and for matters connected therewith or inci.
dental thereto. ;

(Shri H. K. L. Bhagat, Minister of Parliamentary Affairs
and Minister of Food and Civil Supplies)