AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 134 of 2024
THE SPECIAL FINANCIAL  ASSISTANCE FOR ANCIENT
MONUMENTS AND ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITES AND
REMAINS IN THE STATE OF RAJASTHAN BILL, 2024
By
SHRI DAMODAR AGRAWAL, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for special financial assistance to the State of Rajasthan to meet the
costs of repairs, renovations and preservation of ancient and historical
monuments and archaeological sites and remains including
excavation of new archaeological sites and remains
situated in the State of Rajasthan.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India
as follows:—
1.(1) This Act may be called the Special Financial Assistance for Ancient
Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains in the State of Rajasthan
Bill, 2024.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
5
Short title and
commencement.

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, “ancient monument”
means any structure, erection or monument, or any tumulus or place of interment
or any cave, rock-sculpture, inscription or monolith which is of historical,
archaeological or artistic interest and which has been in existence for not less than
one hundred years and includes:—
(i) remains of an ancient monument;
(ii) site of an ancient monument;
(iii) such portion of land adjoining the site of an ancient monument as may
be required for fencing or covering in or otherwise preserving such monument; and
(iv) the means of access to and convenient inspection of an ancient monument.
3. There shall be paid such sums of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of
India, every year, as Parliament may be due appropriation provide, as special
financial assistance to the State of Rajasthan to meet the costs of repairs,
renovations and preservation of ancient and historical monuments and
archaeological sites and remains including excavation of new archaeological sites
and remains situated in the State of Rajasthan, as may be undertaken by the State
with approval of the Central Government.
4. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of
any other law for the time being in force.
Special
financial
assistance to
the State of
Rajasthan.
Act not in
derogation of
any other law.
5
10
15
Definitions.
2

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The State of Rajasthan is one of the favourite destinations of tourists, both
domestic and foreign. Rajasthan is famous for its rich culture and tradition, fairs and
festivals worldwide. The different tourist destinations attract the tourists because of
various reasons including its ancient and historical monuments and archaeological
sites and remains.
At present, the Archaeological Survey of India is looking after the maintenance
and conservation of 161 monuments/sites. These monuments and archaeological
remains of diverse nature are located in the region since prehistoric times and are
scattered from Dholpur in the east to Jaisalmer in the west and Ganganagar in the
north and Banswara in the south of Rajasthan.
Taking care of the monuments is an important duty that devolves on the respective
State Government as well as the Central Government. It needs funds to engage people
who can look after monuments, ensure that the miscreants do not harm them, as also
to get the damaged portion repaired from expert designers and engineers. The Central
Government must provide adequate funds for each monument.
The proper upkeep and maintenance of ancient and historical monuments and
archaeological sites and remains in Rajasthan shall boost heritage tourism which will
in turn increase employment, revenue generation and local business in Rajasthan.
It is, therefore, necessary that the Central Government should provide special
financial assistance to the State of Rajasthan to meet the costs of repairs, renovations
and preservation of ancient and historical monuments and archaeological sites and
remains including excavation of new archaeological sites and remains situated in the
State of Rajasthan.
Hence this Bill.
NEW DELHI;               DAMODAR AGRAWAL
July 29, 2024
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
           Clause 3 of the Bill provides that there shall be paid such sums of money out of
the Consolidated Fund of India, every year, as Parliament may by due appropriation
provide, as a special financial assistance to the State of Rajasthan to meet the cost of
repairs, renovations and preservation of ancient and historical monuments and
archaeological sites and remains including excavation of new archaeological sites
and remains situated in the State of Rajasthan, as may be undertaken by the State
with the approval of the Government of India.
      The Bill, therefore, on enactment, will involve expenditure out of the
Consolidated Fund of India. As the sums of moneys which will be given to the State
of Rajasthan as special financial assistance by appropriation by law made by
Parliament will be known only after the plans to be implemented by the State
Government with the approval of Government of India are identified, it is not possible
at present to give the estimates of recurring expenditure, which would be involved
out of the Consolidated Fund of India at this stage.
         No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be incurred from the Consolidated
Fund of India.
4

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide special financial assistance to the State of Rajasthan to meet the
costs of repairs, renovations and preservation of ancient and historical
monuments and archaeological sites and remains including
excavation of new archaeological sites and remains
situated in the State of Rajasthan.
————
(Shri Damodar Agrawal, M.P .)