Aඌ Iඇඍඋඈൽඎർൾൽ ංඇ Lඈ඄ Sൺൻඁൺ
 
Bill No. 134 of  2022
THE VISUALLY IMPAIRED PERSONS (PROTECTION 
OF RIGHTS) BILL, 2022
By
Sඁඋං Jൺඇൺඋൽൺඇ Sංඇ඀ඁ ‘Sං඀උංඐൺඅ’, M.P.
ൺ
BILL
to provide rights to visually impaired persons, enabling them to avail employment, 
social and financial security, civil and other services, to live with human 
dignity, self respect as independent citizens and for matters 
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
 Bൾ it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:–
 1. (1) This Act may be called the Visually Impaired Persons (Protection of Rights) Act, 
2022.
  ( 2) It extends to the whole of India.
  ( 3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title, 
extent and 
commencement.
5

 2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:–
   ( a) “appropriate Government’’ means in the case of a State, the Government of that 
 State and in other cases, the Central Government; 
   ( b) ‘‘Board’’ means the Employment Advisory Board constituted under section 6; 
   ( c) ‘‘family’’ includes wife, husband and minor children; 
   ( d ) ‘‘prescribed’’ means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and 
   ( e) ‘‘visually impaired person’’ means a person with decreased ability to see to 
 a degree or with blindness which causes difficulties in normal activities such a driving, 
 reading, socializing and walking.
3. Notwithstanding anything contained in any Act for the time being in force, the 
Central Government shall as soon as may be, but within six months of the commencement 
of the Act, by notification in the official Gazette, frame a national policy for protection and 
welfare of the rights of the visually impaired persons.
4. It shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to provide employment to 
unemployed visually impaired persons in such manner as may be prescribed.
5. (1) Every unemployed, underemployed, aged visually impaired person shall be 
entitled to receive such monthly unemployment allowance as may be prescribed till 
such time he is gainfully employed. 
  ( 2) While fixing the rate of unemployment allowance, the Central Government 
shall take into account the age, educational qualifications, technical skills, visual 
difficulties and such other factors as it may deem necessary: 
    Provided that different rates of unemployment allowance may be prescribed 
  for different categories of visually impaired persons and for such persons living 
  in different States or parts of States.
 6. ( 1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, constitute an Employment Advisory Board for carrying out the 
purposes of this Act. 
  ( 2) The Board shall consist of the following persons, namely:— 
    ( a) a retired judge of the Supreme Court of India — Chairperson; 
    ( b) two representatives of the rank of the Secretary to the Government of India to 
  be appointed by the Central Government—Members; 
    ( c) one representative from Union Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment —
  Member Secretary; 
    ( d) two representatives from the National Association for the Blind having 
  experience in providing rehabilitation to the Blind, to the appointed by the Central 
  Government in such manner as may be prescribed — Members; 
Deﬁnitions.
Central 
Government to 
frame a national 
policy.
2
Appropriate Government to provide employment to visually impaired persons.
Grant of 
unemployment 
allowance.
Conﬆitution of 
Employment 
Advisory Board.

    ( e) one representative of the rank of Joint Secretary from NITI Aayog — Member; 
    ( f ) one woman representative having experience in the field of rehabilitation of 
  Blind Women and Children, to be appointed by the Central Government—Member; and 
    ( g) one representative from the National Institute for the Visually Handicapped 
  (NIVH) Dehradun to be appointed by the Central Government—Member. 
  ( 3) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of 
services of Chairperson, members, officers and staff of the Board shall be such as may 
be prescribed.
 7. The Board shall meet at such places and times and observe such rules of procedures 
in regard to transaction of business at its meetings including quorum as may be prescribed: 
   Provided that Board shall meet at least once in a month.
8. The powers and functions of the Board shall inter alia include to, — 
   ( a) advise the Central Government on policy matters pertaining to the visually 
 impaired persons; 
   ( b) review existing policies, rules, regulations and procedures with a view to 
 encompassing values, needs and aspirations of the visually impaired persons; 
   ( c) provide intensive individualized and personalized education and free vocational 
 training to all employable visually impaired youth; 
   ( d) setting up training centres along with hostel facilities by the appropriate 
 Government for the adult blind to provide Light Engineering/Fitter, Steno Training, 
 Recanting, Book Binding, Computer Training, Hand works, weaving etc.; 
   ( e) modernize all vocational training institutes and services for the visually impaired 
 persons in coordination with the appropriate Government; 
   ( f) co-ordinate with the appropriate Government to ensure professional rehabilitation 
 of the visually impaired persons by specialist qualified staff;
   ( g) co-ordinate with the appropriate Government to introduce modern management 
 techniques; 
   ( h) co-ordinate with the appropriate Government to substantially upgrade standards 
 of vocational training to the visually impaired persons; 
   ( i) co-ordinate with the appropriate Government to develop multiplicity of skills in 
 the visually impaired persons;
   ( j) co-ordinate with the appropriate Government to make training for the visually 
 impaired persons work/employment/job oriented; 
   ( k) co-ordinate with the appropriate Government to train, and continue to upgrade 
 staff members training; 
   ( l) co-ordinate with the appropriate Government to instill good work habits and 
Powers and 
functions of the 
Board.
3
Meeting of the 
Board.

 work tolerance among the visually impaired persons; 
   ( m) co-ordinate with the appropriate Government to ensure full capacity utilization;
   ( n) co-ordinate with the appropriate Government to use all normal community 
 resources fully; 
   ( o) co-ordinate with the appropriate Government to promote employment among 
 the visually impaired persons by all known channels, such as self-employment, rural 
 employment, industrial employment, co-operatives etc.; 
   ( p) co-ordinate with the appropriate Government to follow principles of selective 
 placement to match job demands with client’s abilities for the benefit of the visually 
 impaired persons; 
   ( q) co-ordinate with the appropriate Government to promote on-the-job training 
 programmes and multi-disciplinary assembly lines in large industrial plants; 
   ( r) co-ordinate with the appropriate Government to provide vocational guidance, 
 vocational assessment, evaluation and career-planning services to the visually impaired 
 persons; 
   ( s) involve high-level technicians, techno-crafts, trade unions, and employers’ 
 organizations; 
   ( t) conduct research with the help of international and national level research 
 laboratories and research and development departments of industries and eminent 
 scientists especially research in developing or adapting aids, appliances, equipment or techniques; 
   ( u) organize resource cells in all National and State level organizations which may 
 provide or supervise community-based services to the visually impaired persons; 
   ( v) set up clearing houses for dissemination of information and knowledge of latest 
 advancements in technology for the benefit of the visually impaired persons; 
   ( w) promote regional co-operation and spare experts for staff training for the benefit 
 of the visually impaired persons; 
   ( x) launch intensive mass-media publicity for raising public awareness towards 
 needs of the visually impaired persons; 
   ( y) create community awareness through the mass-media;
   ( z) recommend to the appropriate Government to accept full responsibility for 
 meeting all the special needs of the blind and visually-impaired persons; 
     ( aa) recommend to the appropriate Government to provide the special needs for 
   employment mobility and integration of the blind and visually-impaired persons;
     ( ab) recommend to the appropriate Government to set up exclusive commissions 
   or Directorate for the rehabilitation of the disabled, with specialist representation for 
   each of the major disabilities including visually impaired persons; 
     ( ac) recommend to the appropriate Government to grant tax-deductions and other 
   benefits to employers who employ the disabled, including the blind and visually 
4

impaired persons; 
     ( ad) recommend to the appropriate Government to give top priority to the 
   rehabilitation of the visually impaired persons with multiple visual impairment, 
   visually impaired women and children, visually impaired persons in rural areas, and 
   the elderly; and 
     ( ae) recommend to the appropriate Government to formulate comprehensive 
   social security schemes, subsidize blind people not able to earn a living wage, provide 
   pension schemes for the elderly and multiple handicapped and to comprehensively 
   cover the disabled in all social and pension schemes.
 9. (1) The Board shall prepare once every year, as may be prescribed, an annual report 
giving summary of its activities including schemes and recommendations to the appropriate 
Governments during the previous year and shall contain statement of the annual accounts of 
the Board. 
  ( 2) A copy of the report shall be forwarded to the Central Government and the Central 
Government shall lay the report before each House of the Parliament as soon as it is received.
 10. The Central Government shall after due appropriation made by the Parliament 
by law in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the State Governments for the purposes 
of this Act.
11. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent 
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force, but same as aforesaid the 
provisions of this Act, shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other law for the 
time being in force.
 12. (1) The Central Government in consultation with the State Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
  ( 2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon 
as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while  it is in session, for a total 
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive 
sessions, and if,  before the expiry of the  session immediately following  the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid,  both Houses  agree in making any modification in the rule  
or both the Houses  agree that the  rule  should not be made,  the rule shall thereafter have 
effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such  modification or annulment  shall be without  prejudice  to the validity  of anything  
previously  done under that rule.
 
Annual Report.
Central 
Government to 
provide funds.
Act to have 
overriding 
eﬀect.
Power to make 
rules.
5

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
 Blind people living in rural areas constitute 80% of the blind population in developing 
countries like India. They are scattered throughout millions of isolated and remote villages. 
For lack of an adequate and well organized delivery system of services, it is going to be 
extremely difficult to ensure that the fundamental human rights to the rural visually impaired 
and to ensure that they all definitely receive the relevant services according to their specific 
disabilities.
 Unemployment is one of the biggest problems in India. Lyndon B. Johnson said, “We 
must open the doors of opportunity, but we must also equip our people to walk through those 
doors.” We must aim at total rehabilitation of the visually impaired and equip them with a 
multiplicity of skills, so as to enable them to face the challenges ahead in the life. 
 Since nature has denied to the blind its most precious gift-vision-the State and the 
community should go all out to ensure that they are not further denied fundamental human 
rights and that they are enabled and assisted to get facilities like health care, education, 
employment, civic and other services like other citizens in order to live with human dignity 
and as self-respecting, independent citizens.
 It is estimated that the world’s blind population was in the order of 100 million in 
2020. The visually challenged form 18.6 per cent of India’s 26.8 million disabled population 
of whom 15.7 million are in the employable age of 15 to 59 years. Yet 60.4 per cent of 
India’s disabled people are either without work or are marginally employed according to 
2011 census. Therefore there is an urgent need to provide gainful employment to the visually 
impaired persons.
 Hence this Bill.
    Nൾඐ Dൾඅඁං;       JANARDAN SINGH ‘SIGRIWAL’
4 July, 2022.
6

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
 Clause 5 of the Bill provides for grant of unemployment allowance to visually impaired 
persons. Clause 6 of the Bill provides for constitution of the Employment Advisory Board. 
Clause 10 provides that the Central Government shall provide funds for the purpose of this 
Act. Therefore, the Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of 
India. However, it is not possible to estimate at this stage as to the exact amount which is 
likely to be incurred towards recurring and non-recurring expenditure for the purpose.
7

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
 Clause 12 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out 
the purposes of this Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of 
legislative power is of a normal character.
8

LOK  SABHA
ൺ
BILL
to provide rights to visually impaired persons, enabling them to avail employment, 
social and financial security, civil and other services, to live with human 
dignity, self respect as independent citizens and for matters 
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
(Shri Janardan Singh ‘Sigriwal’,  M.P .)