AI!. INTROOuCED IN Lox SABHA ON" 
Bill. No. 134 of 1190 
THE CANTONMENTS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1990 
A 
BILL 
fUTther to amend the Cantonments Act, 1924. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-first Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Cantonments (Amendment) Act, 1990. 
2. ID aedion 27 01. tbe Cantonments Act, 1924, in sub-seetion (1), for 
S the words "twenty-one yean", the words "eighteen years" shall be sub. 
stituted. 
Short 
title. 
Amend-
mentol 
section 
270fAct 
2 ot 1924. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Article 326 of the Constitution has been amended by the Constitution 
(Sixty-first Amendment) Act. 1988 with effect from 28th March, 1989 to 
reduce the voting age from 21 years to 18 years for the elections to the 
Hoose of the People and to the Legislative .Assembly of every State. Some 
o'f the Sta:e Governments have also adopted 18 years of age for elections 
to the local authorities. The present day youth are literate and enlighten-
ed. Lowering of the voting age in the Can~ent Act, 1924 would pro-
vide to the un-represented youth of the cantonment areas an oPP'Jrtunity 
to take active part in the political process. It is, ~erefore, proposed to 
reduce the voting age from 21 years to 18 ye"ars. 
2. The Bill seeks to achieve the above object. 
NEW DELHI; DR. RAJA RAMANNA. 
The 3rd August, 1990. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
There are no direct financial implications. The proposed amendment 
will bring a substantial number of youth. between the age of 18 to 21 
years, on the electoral rolls of the Cantonment Boards. Conseqmm.tly. 
the electoral rolls shall have to be revised'. It is not possible to precisely 
estimate the expenditure involved in the preparation of the revised 
electoral rolls. It is, however. estimated that the likely expenditure on 
the revision of electoral rolls may be between Rs. 2 lakhs to Rs. 2.5 lakhs 
for all the cantonments in the country. 
2. Besides the above. some additional expenditure will also have to be 
incurred on the actual conduct of elections, on account of increase in the 
number of ballot papers to be printed. increase in the administrative ex-
penditure in conducting the elections on account of increase in the 
number of polling booths. deployment of staff, etc. It is, however. not 
possible to precisely estimate the cost on this account. 
3. The Bill, when enacted, will not involve any other expenditure. 
whether recurring or non-recurring, apart from the above. 
3 

QualiI-
cation of 
elector.. 
ANNEXURE 
ExTRNCT FROM TtiE CANTONMENTS ACT, 1924 
(2 OF 1924) 
• • • • 
%1. (1) Every person who, on such date as may be fixed by the· 
Central Government in this behalf by notification in the Oftlcial Gazette 
(hereinafte.r in this section referred to as "the qualifying date"). is DOt 
less than twen'ty-one years of age and who has resided in the cantonment 
for a pel'iod of not leal than six months immediately preceding the quali-
fying date shall, if not otherwise disqualified, be entitled to be enrolled 
as an elector. 
ExpZanation.-When any place is declared a cantonment for the first 
time, or when any local area is first included in a cantonment, J"esidence 
in the place or area comprising the cantonment on the aforesaid date-
shall be deemed to be residence in the cantonment for the purposes of 
this sub-section. 
• • • • • 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BD..L 
'further to amend the Cantonments Act, 1924. 
(1)7". Ra;a RamAntl4. MinUte,. of State in the Miniatt't/ oj Defence) 