Bill No. 184 of 1952. 
THE RUBBER (PRODUC'l'luN AND MARKETING) AMENDMENT 
BILL, 1952 
(As INTRODUCED IN THB HOUSE OF THE PEOPLB) 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Rubber (Production anI! Marketing) Act, 1947. 
BE it enacted by Parlillment as f.911ows:-
1. Short title and commencement.-( 1) This Act may be (~a1led the 
Itubher (Pruduction and Ma.rketing) Amendment Act, 1952. 
(2) It shall come into forl'e 011 such date a.s the Central Govemment 
10 By , ,hy I,otification in the Official Gazette, a.ppoint. 5 
2. Amendment of long title and preamble, Act DIV of 196'1.-In the 
long title of, lind the preamble to, the Rubber (Produotion and Marketing) 
Act, 1947 (herl~illllfter referred to as the principal Act), the words "so far 
as regurds the production and marketing of rubber, and for regulating 
export ILnd import of rubber" shall be omitted. 10 
8. Amendment of section 1, Act JCaV of 194'1.-In sub-section (1) 
of seotion 1 of till' principal Act, the brackets and words "(Production and 
~r arketing)" shall Ill' omitted. 
,. SubBtltutton of new section for aecUon 2 ill .Act XXIV of lH'1.-For 
'scction 2 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, 16 
Ilrunely:--
"2. Declaration a8 to expediency of Union control.-It is hereby 
dec1aJ:Cd that it is expedient in the public int(>rest that the Union 
should take under its eontrol the rubber industry." 
5. Amendment of sectkm 8, Act XXIV oJ IN'1.-In section 8 of ~he 20 
principal Act, in clause (a), t.he word "Indian" shall be omitted. 
8. Amendment of I18Ctton f, Act XXIV 'of 196'1.-In section 4 of the 
~~nc:ipal Act,-
(a) in sub-sections (1) and (2). the word "Indian" shall be omitted; 
, 1 (Il) for sub-sections (3) rmd (4), the following sub-sections sha.ll 26 
be substituted, namely:-
"(.'1) 'l'he Board shall consist of-
l (a) n Chairman to be appointed by the Central Govern-
l mlmti 

(b) two members representing the Central Government to 
be nominated by thut Oovenlment: 
Provided that where 8 lIIember so nominated is an official, it shall be 
lawful for him to cleputfl in the prt~scribed circumstances nllother official 
6 to attend 11Il~' meetiug of the BOl\rd on his behnlf; ... 
IU 
20 
30 
(e) one member representing t.he Indian Council 01 Agri-
cultural Research to be nominated by the Central Government; 
(d) three members to be nominated by the Oovenmum~ 
of Madras, one of whom sha.ll ht! a person representing rubber 
producing interests; , 
(e) seven members to be nominl\ted by the Govern-
ment of '!'ravllncore-('ochin, four of whom shRIl be persons 
representing the rubber producing interest.s, one of such four 
being u person representing tlhe slOllller interests; 
(I) eight members to be nominated b)' the Central·Gov-
enlment, of whom two shall represent the ma.nufacturers and 
three labour; and 
(g) the Buhber Production Commissioner, ez-oJfrrio. 
(4) The Cent.ral Government shall appoint oue of tbemem-
Lers of the Board to be its Vice-Chainnon.·· 
7. Amllldment of seCUoD I, Act'XXIV of IH7.-In set,tion 6 of the 
principal Act,-
(a) for sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be sub-
stituted, namely:-
.. (1) 1'ht~ Cflntrlll Go\"emment shall appoint R Rubber Pro-
tiuctioll Commissioner to exetciRe such powers Rnd perform sllch 
dutit's RII may be prflRC'ribed."; 
(II) in sub-section (2), the words "in consultution with the Board" 
sholl be omitted. ' 
8. Amendmem of llcUoa 7, .lc\ UIV of lM1.-1n 8ection 7 of the 
prin('ip81 Act,-
(a) sub-section (1) shall be omitted; 
(b) in Bub-scction (.:?). the word "other" sholl be omitted. 
. -:US 9. AmeDdment 01 IIcUon 8, .Act XZIV'Of 1947.- In sectoion 8 of the 
40 
prjncipal Act.-
(a) in c;uh·sl'ction (1). ~he words "so fRr as regards the production 
.wd marketing of rubber" shall be omitted; 
(b) in Imh-section (9). a.fter clause (e), the following clause &ball 
Le inserted. namely: -' . 
"m C'lIrrying out any other duties which may be vested in the 
Board under rules made under this Act. ", 
10. AmeDdmIll\ of 18ctloD 11, .Ari lCaV of lN7.-In 8e<..otion 11 IIf 
the prindpal A'!t, in suh-section (I), the words "Rfter consulting the Board" 
thall be omitted. 

, 
~, 
.. 
3 
11. A,mendmeDt of IIcLioD 12, Act xXIv of 1"1.-111, section 12 of 
the principal Act.,-
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words "at slIch rate 88 the 'CentroJ 
Governrrtent may, on the! recoIDmendatioll of the Bourel," the words 
"8t such rate not exceeding one anna per pound of rubber so produced 
as the Ccntrul Government may" shull be suhstituted; and 
(b) nfter sub-sectioll (6), the following. sub-secHoll shull be in-
serted, namely:-
.. 
"(7) The proceeds of the duties of excise collected by the 
Board shall fil't'lt be credited to the Consolidated Fund of India, ,10 
and the Central Goverllmont may thereafter, from time to time, 
pay to the BOR1'd from and out of such proceeds such sums of 
money IlS it may think fit." 
11. AmMldmlllt of aectiOD 18. Act DIV of INT.-In suh-section (1) 
of seetiol' 1:) of the principRI Act, the words, brackets and figures "nfter 
oonsulting the I\ubbcr Price Advisory Committee constituted under sub-
section (1) of section 7" shall be omitted. 
18. AmendmeDt of HCtioD 25, Act XXIV of 1N1.- I-or IHlb·sp.ctioll (l?) 
of section 25 of the principal Act, the following sub-section shall be subRti-
tuted, namely:-
"(2) 1n particulur, und without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power; rules made under this section mllV provide for all or 
any of the following matters, namely: - . 
.. ~ .. 
IS 
20 
(i) the term of office of. memb~rs of the Board, the circum-
stances in which Ilnd the authority by which memberR may be 26 
removed and the filling of CIllHII\1 va'!lUlcies in the Board; 
rl (ii) the procedure to he followed at meetings (Jf the Board Bnd 
K"t. l~ommittees thereof for the ('olldud of bllsineR8. and the number 
of members which shall form a. quorum LIt any meQting; 
(iii) the mainteD4lnce by the Bonrd of records· of business 30 
transacted by the Hoard, amI the "submission of copies thereof to 
the Central Govemmeut; 
(iv) the holding of a minimum number of meetings of the 
Board every year; 
(v) thc powers of the Hoard, it.s Chairmull anll cOlllmittees :-16 
thereof with respect to the incurring of eX}leuditure anu the 
powers and duties of the Rubber Productioll Commissioner and 
the Secretary of the Board; 
(vi) the conditions subject to which the Board may.' incur 
expenditure outside India; 40 
(vii) the prepliration of budget estimates of receipts tlllti ex- ". 
pellditure of the Board· aud the authority by whi'.lh the estimtltes 
are to be sanctioned; 
(viii) the maintenance of the accounts of income and expendi-
ture of the Board and the audit of such a('counts; 45 
(iz) the deposit of the funds of the Board in batlks and the 
investment of slIch funds; 
. (:r) the re-appropriation of the estimuted savings from any 
budget head to any other budget head; 

10 
15 
to 
30 
• 
(:n) the conditions subject to which the Board may borrow 
funds: 
(:nl) the conditions 'subJect to which and the. maDner in 
which contracts may be entered into by or OD behalf of the 
Board;' 
(:nil) the deh·gation to committees or the Chairmlln or Vice-
Chairman or members 'or officers of the Board of any of the 
powers and duties of the Board undet" this Act: 
(:nv) the staff which may be employed by the Board aud 
the pay and allowances and leave and other conditioDs of s~rvice 
of officers and other employees of the Board; 
(zv) the travelling and other allowanoes of members of the 
Board and of committees thel'f'of; . 
(zv.) the pu!'poses for which the fuuds of the Board may be 
expended; 
(zvia) the maintenance of the registers /.lna other records of 
the Board and of ita various committeps; 
(niia) the collection of any information or statistics in 
respect of rubber or any product of rubber; 
(ziz) the form of application for registration under section 
10 or the oancellation of swC3h registration, the fee payable On 
such applications, the proct!dure to be followed in granting or 
cancelling registration and the registers to be kept by J the Board; 
(zz) the form of application for special licences under section 
14 or section 17, the fees for the grant or r.newal of such licences, 
and the forms of such licences; 
(zzi) the manner in which rubber shall be graded and 
marketed; 
<_i.) the fee payable on "ppeals under s"ction 2,.'1; 
(z:nia) any other mattel' which is to be or may be prescribed." 
U. AmIDdm.Dt of sectloD tI, Act ZXIV of IN'1.-8e(·tioll 26, of tho 
principal Aot shall be numbered as sub-section (1) thereof, and after t,hat 
sub-section as 80 numbered, the following sub-sections shall be inserted, 
namely:-
"(B) If the person committing any nffence under sub'section (1) 
is a company, every person who at the time. the offence WIlS com· 
mitted was in charge of. and was responsible to. the company for the 
conduct of the business of the company, 8S ~ell as thfl company. shall 
be deemed to be guilty of the.offellce and shall be liabll~ to be proceed. 
ed agaiDllt lAnd punished ..ooordingly: . 
.. 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub·seotion shall render 
any such person liable to any punishment provided in this Aot if he .. 
prov~s that the oRence was committed without his knowledge or thBt 
he exercised all due diligence t6 - prevent the commiBsion of suoh ~ . 
oIence. ':ft' C .- :' '.' :,' 
.(3) 'S=laudinK "' .. ""yilliog . containod ill ."" ..... ion (11. 
where a . und~r:·8'~b ... eetion (I) has been committed by a 
company a is pl'OVea that. the oRence bas been QOtDmitted with 

5 
the consertt or connivancc of, Or is attributubleto any neglect on the 
part of, auy direotor or manager, secretary or other officer of the 
company, such director, Il18nager, secretary or other officer shall aIso 
be deemed to be "uilty of that oifence and shall be liable to be pro-
ceeded against and punished accordingly. -. 6 
Ezplanation.-For the- purposes of 'this section.-
fa) "compony" mealls Rny body oorporat-e. and ino]udes .. 
firm or other association of individuals; and 
(b) "director" in relation to a firm means 0. Dartner in thp. 
firm." . 10 
• US. IDlertion of Dew 88ctlon 2'1'& in .,Ac.t XXIV of lNT.-After section 
27 of the principal Act, the following sectiou shall be inserted. namely:-
"27A. Juri,diclion 0/ court..-No court inferior to that of R 
presidency magistrate or a ma.gistrate of the firSt class shall try any 
offence punishable under this Act." US 
18. Omillton of 8letJon 29, Act lCIIV of 1NT .-Section 29 of the 
principal Act stall be omitted. 
IT. VaJ1datioD of certain acta II1d indemnity in relpeC~ Ulereof.-AJ) 
octe of executive authority, proceedings and senir4mces which have been done, 
taken or pBl;sed with respect to, or on account of, rubber, during the period 20 
commencing on the 26th day of .January, 1950, Rnd ending with the date 
of commencement of this Act, by the Government or by Bny officer of the 
Government or by any other authority in the b"lief or purported belief 
that the acts, pl'Oceedings or sentences were being done, taken or passed 
lUlder the principal Act shall be as valid and operative as if they had 26 
been done, taken Or passed in accordance with IBW, Bnd no suit or other 
legal proceetiing shall be maintained or continued against any authority 
whatsoe\'er on the gl'Ound that. ally such acts, proc"edings or sentences 
were not, done, taken or passed in accordance with law. 

8 
STATE!\1ENT O}' OBJECTS AND UEASONS 
Tho constitution. of tlle Indian Hubber Board requires to be radioally 
altered. In order to ensure proper co-ordination between the Board and 
the Centrlu Hovernment. it hli~ become necessary to effeot a ohange in the 
method of representation of the interests conoerned by vesting more 
powers in the UOVernUlellt in regard to nomiulltioll of members of the 
Itubber Board. Experience of other similar commodity Boards bas 
shown thut there are difficulties inuccol'ding individuaJ. representation, 
by name, to various associations WI the Board. The relationship between 
the Hoard aud the Central (Jovemmeut will be further strengthened if 
the ChuinnaD and the Vice-Chairman are appointed b~' the Central Govern-
ment instead of being elected from among the members. 
, 2. The Hubber Prioe Advisory Committee, constituted under section 7 
of the Act, has outlived its utility, as pri'ces of raw 'l'ubberare now fixed 
ou the recommendations of the Turiff Commission. It is therefore no 
Jonger necessary to have the Committee. 
3. India is deficit in rubber Itnd part of the cowltry's requir~nts are 
met by imports. As rubber i~ an important_ategio matenal, it is 
essential to attain self-sufficiency. With this end in view, the Central 
Oovernml:!nt have under consideration a development RchiWle for ·the 
industry, impieml'ntlltioll of which would requir'e larger funds than arc 
now at their disposal. The present cess on rubber is very small and it is 
proposed that the Centrnl Government should ha,'e powers to levy a larger 
cess, subject to- 8 maximum of one annll p~r poulld of rubber. 
4. The Bill gives effect to these proposals and inoidentally opportunit,V 
has '8180 been takelt-
(a) to 8ubst'itute a llew section for section 2 of the principal Act. 
in order to-bring its language in conformity with the language of Entry 
52 of List I in the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution; and 
(b) to indemnify all authorities in respect of all action taken 
between the commencement of the Constitution and ·the commence-
ment of this Act, a8 a doubt mlW he raised as to. whether, in the 
absellce of a declaration made hv Pllrlillment hv Is,,', the declaration 
eontained in section 2 was effective during that" period. 
NEw DELHI; 
The 13th December, 1952. 
T. T. KRlSHNAMACHARI. 

'1 
ANNEXURE 
BXTRACT; FROM THE !tUBBER (l:lRODUC1'JON AND MARKETINO) ·ACT, 1947 
(XXIV OF 1947). 
• • • • • 
Long title and preamble 
An Act to provide for the development under central control of the rubber 
bl4U1try 10 far .. lt,arda the productlon aud marketil1, ot rU.bber, aD4 
for re,ulattq ezport and Import of rubber. . 
WHEREAS it is expedient to pl'Ovide far the development under central 
control of the rubber industry so fllr UA regards the productioll tlnd Inarkl:'ting 
of rubber, and for regulnting export und import of rubber. 
• • • • • 
Section 1(1) 
1. Short title and eztent.-(I) This Act may be cnlled the Rubber 
\JJroduction and Marketin,) Act. 1947. 
• • • • • 
Section 2 
2. Declaration .. to ezpedlency ot Oen.tra1 Govenmumt' 8 ·contlol.-l t is 
hereby declared thut it is expeuient in the }JUblic interest that the Central 
Govenlmellt should take under itR coutrol the development of the rubber 
industry so far as regurds the production Bnd marketing of rubber. 
Section 3(a) 
8. DetlD1tlODl.-In this Act, unless thel'e is anything re}JUgnant in the 
subject or context,-
(R) "Board" means the Indian Rubber Board constituted under 
this Act; , 
• • • • • • 
Section 4(1), (2), (3) and (4) 
f. OoIUItltution of the BOard.-(l) As soon as may be ufter the 
commencement of this Act, the Central Government shall, by notifioation 
in the officilll Gnzette, constitute for the purpose!! of this Act 11 Board 
to be called tdle Inilinn ]lllhher Roard. 
(2) The Boa.rdshall be 11 body corporllte by the name of the India.n 
Rubber Board hnving perpetuul succession and a common seal, with 
power to acquire and hold property, both movable 8nd immovl~ble, Ilnd 
to contrllct, nnd shall by the snid nBmB sue und be sued. 
(8) 'fhe Board shall consist of-. 
(n) t.wo nUlmberR repreRenting the Central Government to be 
nomint\ted by thnt Government; 
(b) one member representing the Indian Council of Agricultural 
Research to be nominated by the Centrlll Oovenlment.; 

~ 
(c) one member to be nominated by ~he State Gov.ernment 
of Madras; 
(d) five members to be nominated by the Governrhent of the 
State of Travancore-Cochin, one of whom shall be a person repre-
senting rubber producing interests; 
• • • • • 
(f) three members to be nominated by the United Plan~rs' 
Association of Southern India, Coonoor: 
(g) three members to be nominated by the Rubber Growers' 
Association of India, Kottayam; 
(h) three members to be nominated by the Association of Planters 
of Travancore, Kottayam; 
(i) three membertl representing manufacturers, nominated respec-
tively by the Central Government, the Indian Rubber Industries 
Asaociation, Bombay, and the Association of Rubber Manufacturers in 
India, CRk~utta ; 
(j) one member to be nominated by the Central Government from 
among dealers; 
(jj) three persons representing labour, to be nominated by the 
Central Government; .. 
(k) the Rubber Production Commissioner, ez-officio. 
(4) The Board shall elect one of it,l membera to bILl its Chairman and 
another member to be its Vice-Chairman . 
• • • • • 
Section 6(1) and (2) 
6. becuUve Otllcen of the BOIId.-(I) The Central Government shall 
in consultation with the Board, appoint a Rubber Production Commissioner 
to exerc~ such powers and perform such duties under the direction of 
the Board 8S may be prescribed. 
(2) The Central Government shall, in consuitlltion with the Board, 
appoint a Secretary to the Board to exercise such powers and perform such 
duties under the direction of the Board as may be prescribed or as may 
be delegated to him by the Rubber Production Commissioner . 
• • • • • 
Section 7(1) and (g) 
7. Committee of the BOIId.-{I) The Board shall, for the purposes of 
section 18, constitute a Committee to be called the Rubber Price Advisory 
Committee consisting of-
(a) four persons to be elected by the Board, of whom two shall 
be members of the Board representing rubber producing interest!! and 
two shall be members representing manufacturers, and 
(b) three' members of the Board, one to be nominated by the 
Central Government and the other two by the Government of the State 
of Travlmcore-Cochin in this behalf, none of whom shall be a member 
representing rubber producing interests or manufacturers. 

9 
(2) 'l'.he Board may appoint. such other Committees ,!S may be necessary 
for the efficient performance of Us duties and funoijons under this Act. 
• • • • • 
Seotion 8(1) 
8. l'uDct1ou 01 ,\he Board..-(I) It shall be the duty of the Board to 
promote by such measures as it thinks fit the development of the rubber 
industry so far as regards the production and marketing of rubber. 
• • • • • 
Seotion 11(1) 
11. Power to prohibit or coav:01lm.portI aDd. uportI of rabber.-(I) The 
Central Government may, after collsulting the B08~, by order plib1ished 
in the offi<;iaJ Gazette, make provision for prohibiting, restricting or other-
wise controlling the import or export of rubber, either generully or in 
spe~~ classes of cases. 
• • • • • 
Section 19(1) 
12. Impoalt1oD of rubber <*1.-(1) With effect from suoh date 88 may 
be notified by the Central Government in this behalf, there shall be levied 
and collected as a OelS for the purposes of this Act 8 duty of excise 00 
all rubber produoed in India at suoh rate 8S the Central Government may 
ou the reoommendation of the Board, by the same or a like notification, 
from time to time fix. 
• • • • • 
Section 13(1) 
18. Power to Iz mUimWIL aDd. llliDlllium prleel tor Iale of J'1Ibber.-
(I) The Central Government may after consulting the Rubber PriCe Advisory 
Committee constituted under sub-section (I) of section 7, by order published 
in the official Gazette, fix the maximum price or the minimum price or 
the maximum and minimum prices to be charged, in the course of a business 
of any class specified in, the order, for rubber of any description 80 specified. 
• • • • • 
Section 95(9) 
25. Power of OeDtral Government to make r1l188.-
• • • • 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing po,,"er, rules 
made under this section may provide for all or any of the following matters, 
namely:-
(a) the procedure to be followed at meeting of the Board; 
(b) the election of the Chah'man and Vice-Chairman of the Board, 
the election of members of the Rubber I1rict! Advisorv COlllmittee, the 
appointment of other Committees and the delegation 'to Committees or 
the Ohairman or the Vice-Chairma.n or to members or officers of the 
Board, of anY of the powers and duties of the Board under this Act; 
(0) the staff that may be employed by the Board; 
(d) the pay, allowances, leave and other conditions of service of 
the Rubber Production Commiuioner, Secretary and other officers and 
servants of the Board; 

10 
(e) the tI~velliBg allowance of members of the Board and of Com-
mittees; . 
(f) the establishment and maintenance of officers by the Board; 
(g) the term of office of members of the Board apd the circum-
stances in which and the authority by which members of the Board 
or any Committee may be removed; 
(h) the quorum at meetings of the Board; 
(i) the maintenance by the Board of records of business trans-
acted and the submiasion of copiea thereof to the CeDtral Govern-
. ment; 
(j) the PU1'p0888 for which funds of the Board may be expended: 
(k) the maintenance of accounts of income and expenditure of 
the Board and the audit of such accounts; 
(1) the preparation of annual estimates of income aud expendi-
ture of the Board; . I 
(m) the deposit of funds of the Board iu banks aud the invest-
&Dent of such funds; 
(n) the regiiters, and other records to be maiIUained bytlle Board; 
(0) the form of application for registration under section 10 or the 
cancelfation of such registration, the fee payable on such applications, 
the procedure to be followed in granting or cancelling registration and 
the registers to be kept by ~e Board; 
• (p) the form of application for special Ucences under section 14 or 
section 17. the fees for the grant or renewal of such licences, and the 
forms of such licences; 
(q) the manner in which rubber shall be graded and marketed; 
(r) the fee payable on appeals under se~ion is; 
,(s) any other matter which is to be or may be prescribed under this 
Act. 
• • • • • 
860tio" S9 
•• '.I'em.por&r)' pow .. of the OIIlV&I. Govemmellt.-Until such time 
as the Board is constituted under section 4, the Central Government may, 
notwithstonding anything hereinbefore contalned,-
(a) exercise any of the powers oonferred by this Aot upon the 
Board; 
(b) exerc~ae any of the powers conferred by sub-section (1) of 
section 6, section 11 or .ection 18 on the. Central Government with· 
out consulting the Board, or aa the cue may be, the Bubber Prioe 
.Advisory Committee. 

., 
.~-
.. 
HOUSE OF THE PEOPLE 
A 
BILL 
furth. to amend the·Rubber (Produotion and Marketing) 
Act, 1947, 
The President hu, in pU1'8uance of clauses (1) and (3) of 
article 117 of the Constitution of India, reoommended to the 
House of the People the introduction a.nd consideration of the 
Bill. 
(SMi T. T. K ri81umacAari, 
M iniater lor OMMMrce and IndU81rg) 
.GIPD-LAD-t90 PS.-18·12·12-1.1IOO 