"". 
• ... : '~_'._ I.~· • ..... ,a 
THE ORISSA WEIGHTS AND MEASURES 
(DELHI REPEAL) BILL,,_ IQS8 
(As INTIODUC!D IN LoIC SABRA) 

·At;t 
. r 1943. 
IIID No. 1M ollfjl 
THE ORISSA WEIGHTS AND MEASURES (DELHI 
REPEAL) BILL, 1958 
(As INTftODUCED IN LOB: SABRA) 
A 
BILL 
to provide f01' the repeal of the Orissa Weights and Measures Act, 
1943, in its application to the Union territ01'Y of Delhi. # 
Bz it enacted by Parliament in the Ninth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Orissa Weiehts and Measures Short titl=. 
(Delhi Repeal) Act, 1958. 
5 z. In this Act,-
10 
(a) "Orissa Act" means the Orissa Weights and Measures 
Act, 1943, as extended to Delhi by notiftcation under section 7 
of the Delhi Laws Act, 1912; 
(b) "Rajasthan Act" means the Rajasthan Weights and 
Measures (Enforcement) Act, 1958, as extended to the Union 
territory of <Delhi by notification under section 2 of the Union 
Territories (Laws) Act, 1950. 
DefiDitions. 
3. On the date on which the Rajasthan Act or any provision con--=lor 
tained therein comes into force by virtue of a notification issued • Ad. 
IS under sub-section (3) of section 1 of that Act in the Union territory 
of Delhi or any part thereof in respect of any class of undertakings 
or any class of goods, the Orissa Act or any provision contained 
therein, which is applicable to those undertakings or goods in the 
said territory or part thereof, as the case may be, shall stand 
20 repealed: 

Provided that the repeal shall not affect-
(a) the previous operation of the Act so repealed or any-
thing duly done or suffered thereunder; or 
(b) any right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired, 
accrued or incurred under the Act so repealed; or S 
(c) any penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred in res-
pect of any offence committed against the Act so repealed; or 
(d) any investigation, legal proceeding or remedy in respect 
of any such right, privilege, obligation, liability, penalty, for-
feiture or punishment as aforesaid; 10 
and any such investigation, legal proceeding or remedy may be 
instituted, continued or enforced and any such penalty, forfeiture 
or punishment may be imposed, as if that Act had not been repealed. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Under the Orissa Weights and Measures Act, 1943, as extended 
to Delhi in 1949 by notification, the standard weights and measures 
in use are based on the "standard seer", "imperial gallon" and the 
"yard". The Standards of Weights and Measures Act, 1956 (89 of 
1956), passed by Parliament provides for the replacement of the 
"standard seer", "gallon" and "yard", and their multiples and sub-
multiples by corresponding metric units. The Central Act, in 80 
far as it relates to units of weight, has already been brought into 
force in the Union territory of Delhi with effect from 1st October, 
1958, by notification under section 1 (3) of that Act. At the same 
time, the continued use of previous standard weights and measures 
for a period of two years has been permitted by notification under 
section 14 of that Act. For the proper enforcement of the new 
standards of weights and measures several States have passed laws 
on the subject; one of such Acts is the Rajasth(ln Weights and 
Measures (Enforcement) Act, 1958. 
2. In these circumstances, the Orissa Weights and Measures Act, 
1943, has become both out-of-date and inadequate for the proper 
enforcement of weights end measures in Delhi. In the State of 
Orissa itself this Act has been repealed and replaced by fresh 
legislation. The object of the present Bill is to provide for the 
gradual repeal of the Orissa Weights and Measures Act, 1943, on the 
dates on which the Rajasthan Weights and Measures (Enforcement) 
Act, 1958, is made applicable to any area in respect of any class of 
undertakings or goods. 
SATISH CHANDRA. 
Nzw DELHI; 
Th. 28th November, 1958. 

LOKSABHA 
-
A 
BILL 
to provide for the repeal of the Orissa Weights and Mellimes 
Act, 1943, in its application to the Union territory of Delhi. 
(Shri Satish Chandra, 
Deputy Minister of 
Commerce ~and Industry.) 