54 of 1963. 
As IN'l'RODUCED IN LoK SABHA 
Bill No. 134 of 1870 . : 
THE CENTRAL BOARD OF DIRECT TAXES (VALIDA-
TION OF PROCEEDINGS) BILL, [970 
A 
BILL 
to provide fOT validation Of certain proceed.ings in relation to d.irect tazes 
and for matters connected therewith. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-first Year of the Republic 
of India 8S follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Central Board <1f Direct Taxes (Valida- Short 
tiOD of Proceedings) Act, 1970. title. 
S 2. Notwithstanding any judgment, decree or order of any court or any 
other authority, no approval, declaration, determination, recognition, direc-
tion, instruction, notification, order or rule, or other thing or action given, 
made, granted, issued, ckme or taken or purporting to have been given, 
made, granted, issued, done or taken by the Central Board of Direct Taxes, 
10 constituted under the Central Boards of Revenue Act, 1963, in the exer-
cise of the powers or the performance of the duties entrusted to it by the 
Central Government (j"f by or under any law (not being the Estate Duty 
Act, 1953) shall be deemed to be invalid or ever to have been invalid by 
reason only of the fact that such approval, declaration, determination. 
IS recognition, direction, instruction, natification, order, rule, thing or action 
was given, made, granted, issued, done or taken by any member of the 
said Board to whom the powers or duties in that behalf had not been 
validly entrusted in accordance with the provisions of the aforesaid 1963 
Act or the rules made thereunder; and accordingly-
20 (4) all acts, proceedings or things done or taken in pursuance 
of such approval, declaration, determination, recognition, direction, 
Valldla-
tion ot . 
certain 
proceed-
in,s. 

instruction, notification, order, rule, thing or action shall, for all pur-
poses, be deemed to be, and to have always been done or taken in 
accordance with law; and 
(b) no suit or other proceeding shall be instituted or continued 
against the Government or any person or authority whatsoever on , 
the ground that any such act, proceeding or thing was not done or 
taken in accordance with law. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Recently in the case of Shri R. Dalmia v. Union of India and others 
the High Court of Delhi held that the notices issued to the petitione~ 
under section 148 of the Income·tax Act, 1961, for the re-assessment of 
income which had escaped assessment, were null and void as the sanction 
of the Central Board of Direct Taxes to the issue of such notices, as re-
quired by section 151 of the Income-tax Act, was granted by a Member 
of the Board to whom this work had not been validly allocated with the 
previous approval of the Central Government as envisaged by rule 4 of 
the Central Board of Direct Taxes (Regulation <Yf Transaction of Busi-
ness) Rules, 1964. During the period from June, 1964, till about July, 
1969, distribution of work among the Chainnan and Members of the Cen-
tral Board of Direct Taxes had been made from time td time without 
making it clear on the face of the order that such distribution had been 
made with the prior approval of the Central Government. According to 
the decision <Yf the Delhi High Court, various actions taken by the Chah'· 
man and Members of the Board in pur~uance of those orders of distribu-
tion of work are liable to be regarded as invalid and without jurisdiction. 
2. Under the provisions of the Income-tax Act. and other enactments 
relating to direct taxes, the functions of the Board cover a very wide 
range and include the declaration of foreign associations to be companies 
for purposes of taxation, distribution of jurisdiction amongst Income-tax 
authorities, approval to the waiver or reduction of minimum penalty 1m-
posable in cases of voluntary disclo~ure of esCaped income or wealth, 
besides grant of approval to re-opening of aiJselSments for the assessment 
or re-assessment of escaped income. The eftect on revenue if these actions 
of the Chairman and Members of the Board are held to be invalid-due 
to the absence of the previous approval of the Central Government to 
the distribution of work amongst them-would be very considerable and 
it is not practicable even to hazard an estimate in this behalf. It is, there-
fore, necessary to validate all such actions, taken in the past in pursuance 
of schemes for distribution of work amongst the Chairman and Members 
obtaining from time to time. The Bill seeks to give effect to this object. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 8th December, 1970. Y. B. CHAVAN. 
3 

LOK SABRA 
f. 
lULL 
(: "', 
to provide for validation of cqWn prQCeed.iDgs in re Jarion to direct taxes and for 
~s ~f.4 t~ewit~. 
(Shri Y. B. Chavan, 
MiniBer of Finance). 