1
THE PREVENTION OF FOOD ADULTERATION (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2018
By
SHRI MULLAPPALLY RAMACHANDRAN, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called as the Prevention of Food Adulteration (Amendment)
Act, 2018.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 2 of the Prevention of Food Adulteration (Amendment) Act, 1954
(hereinafter referred to as the principal Act),—
(a) after clause (iii), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
"(iiia) 'consumables' means any article meant for human consumption as
food or drink and shall include raw and cooked fish, meats, vegetables, fruits,
Bill  No. 134 of  2018
Short title and
commencement.
Amendment of
section 2.
5
37 of 1954.
10
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
poultry and dairy products, bottled water, soft drinks, grains, pulses, cooking
oils, spices, dry fruits and sauces;
(iiib ) "contaminated"— an article of food shall be deemed to be
contaminated—
(a) if there is any addition or use of any contaminating substance in
any article of food or in the packing of such article of food;
(b) if harmful chemicals, preservatives, acids, paints, polish or wax
have been used in any article of food which are not permitted in the use of
such article of food; and
(c) if formalin, wax, ammonia or any dangerous chemical or
substance is used for the preservation of food.";
(b) for clause (v), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
'(v) "food"means any article used as food or drink for human consumption
other than drugs and includes any substance consumed by human beings as
food and shall include cooked and uncooked food, milk and milk products, dairy
produce, meats of all variety, fish of all variety, vegetables of all variety, fruits of
all variety, grains and pulses of all variety, packed drinks including drinking
water;' ; and
(c) after clause (vi), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
"(via) 'harmful chemicals' include formalin, ammonia and other chemicals
and insecticides, pesticides and preservatives, the presence of which in food
causes or is likely to cause harm to the consumer.".
3. In section 5 of the principal Act, after clause ( i), the following clause shall be
inserted, namely:—
"(ia) any contaminated food;".
4. After section 5 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:—
"5A. No person shall export from India any adulterated or contaminated food.".
5.  In section 7 of the principal Act, after clause ( i), the following clause shall be
inserted, namely:—
"(ïa) any contaminated food;".
6. In section 16 of the principal Act, the existing sub-section ( 1AA) shall be
renumbered as sub-section (1AB) and before the sub-section ( 1AB) so as renumbered, the
following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
"(1AA) Any person who, whether by himself or by any other person on his
behalf, export from India or manufactures for sale or stores, sells or distributes any
contaminated food shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be
less than six months but which may extend to two years and with fine which shall not
be less than rupees one lakh:
Provided that if the contaminated food, consumed by any person is likely to
cause his death or is likely to cause such harm on his body as would amount to
grievous hurt within the meaning of section 320 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860),
he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one
year but which may extend to term of life and with fine which shall not be less than
rupees two lakh;".
Amendment
of section 5.
Insertion of
new section
5A.
Prohibition of
export of
contaminated
food.
Amendment of
section 7.
Amendment of
section 16.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Pollution, contamination and adulteration in foods for human consumption is on the
rise, deeply affecting the health and lives of the persons at large. It is not only the
adulteration of foodstuffs that is dangerous to human health but more so it is the
contamination of food by use of extremely dangerous chemical substances that is more
harmful to health and is mostly fatal. Unfortunately in today's commercial life we find people
knowingly or unknowingly indulging in poisoning food by the use of substances like
formalin and ammonia to preserve fish and meats and also dangerous levels of insecticides
and pesticides and even artificial ripening agents and colours on fruits and vegetables. It is
pertinent to note that huge consignments of our traditional fruits like mangoes and large
wealth of fish are being rejected by foreign purchasers because of the presence of these
dangerous chemicals.
We cannot expose our country's reputation in the international market or our own
nation's consumers to the dangers of these substances. Experts opined that consumption of
these substances cause incurable and fatal diseases. If left unfettered, this will cause a
health emergency in the country. The use of such substances tantamount to homicide — not
of individuals — but of whole community. It is essential to bring stringent law to prohibit the
use of such substances or consumables and to inflict deterrent punishment for such use.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954 with
a view to prohibit export from India or manfucature for sale or store, sell or distribution of any
contaminated food and to provide for punishment thereto.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; MULLAPPALLY RAMACHANDRAN
June 29, 2017.
3

4
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE PREVENTION OF FOOD ADULTERATION ACT, 1954
[Act 37 of 1954]
* * * * *
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires—
(iii) "Committee" means the Central Committee for Food Standards constituted
under section 3;
* * * * *
(v) "food" means any article used as food or drink for human consumption other
than drugs and water and includes—
(a) any article which ordinarily enters into, or is used in the composition or
preparation of, human food,
(b) any flavouring matter or condiments, and
(c) any other article which the Central Government may having regard to
its use, nature, substance or quality declare by notification in the Official
Gazette, as food for the purposes of this Act;
(vi) "Food (Health) Authority" means the Director of Medical and Health
Services or the Chief Officer in-charge of Health administration in a State, by whatever
designation he is known, and includes any officer empowered by the Central
Government or the State Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, to exercise
the powers and perform the duties of the Food (Health) Authority under this Act with
respect to such local area as may be specified in the notification;]
* * * * *
5. No person shall import into India—
(i) any adulterated food;
(ii) any misbranded food;
(iii) any article of food for the import of which a licence is prescribed, except in
accordance with the conditions of the licence; and
(iv) any article of food in contravention of any other provision of this Act or of
any rule made thereunder.
* * * * *
7. No person shall himself or by any person on his behalf, manufacture for sale or
store, sell or distribute:—
(i) any adulterated food,
* * * * *
16. (1)  Subject to the provisions of sub-section (1A), if any person—
* * * * *
(1-A) If any person whether by himself or by any other person on his behalf,
imports into India or manufactures for sale or stores, sells or distributes,—
Definitions.
Prohibition of
import of
certain
articles of
food.
Prohibition of
manufacture,
sale, etc. of
certain articles
of food.
Penalties.

5
(i) any article of food which is adulterated within the meaning of any of the
sub-clauses (e) to (1) (both inclusive) of clause (ia) of section 2; or
(ii) any adulterant which is injurious to health; he shall, in addition to the
penalty to which he may be liable under the provisions of section 6, be
punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one year
but which may extend to six years and with fine which shall not be less than two
thousand rupees:
Provided that if such article of food or adulterant, when consumed by any
person is likely to cause his death or is likely to cause such harm on his body as
would amount to grievous hurt within the meaning of section 320 of the Indian
Penal Code (45 of 1860), he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term
which shall not be less than three years but which may extend to term of life and
with fine which shall not be less than five thousand rupees.
(1-AA) If any person is whose safe custody any article of food has been kept
under sub-section (4) of section 10, tampers or in any other manner interferes with
such article, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be
less than six months but which may extend to two years and with fine which shall not
be less than one thousand rupees.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954.
————
(Shri Mullappally Ramachandran, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—696LS(S3)—25-07-2018.