As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA ON

1

fw

Bill No. 134 of 1991

THE SPECIAL PROTECTION GROUP (AMENDMENT) BILL, . .199:

A
BILL ;
to amend the Spectal Protection Group Act, 1988.

Be it enacted’by Parliament in the Forty-second Year of the Republie
of India’as follows:— * 3 as

1. This Act may be called the Special Protection Group (Amend- Short
ment) Act, 1991. 5 title.

5: 2. In the Special Protection Group Act, 1988 (hereinafter referred to Amend.

34 of 1988.

५ as the principal Act), in the long title, for the words “members. of hisysment of
immediate family”, the words “the members of the immediate family (11%
of the Prime Minister, assassinated Prime Minister and’ assassinated हरे
Prime Minister” shall be substituted.

10. 3. In section 2 of the principal Act— लक
6) in clause (a), for the words “his immediate family”, the ४४४
words “the immediate family” shall be substituted; 2.
(ii) for clause (a) the following clause shall be _ substituted
namely: — !
15 “(e) “members of the immediate family” means wife, hus-

band, son, daughter and parents of the Prime Minister, assassi-
nated Prime Minister or assassinated ex-Prime Minister;”.

4. In section 4 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the words “his Amend-

immediate family”, the words “the immediate family” shali be substituted. ‘ment of
section’


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

gic assassination of Shri Rajiv Gandhi, Govern-
Ports that indicate that several extremist organisa-
ia, are conspiring to cause harm to the mem-
The threat perception emerging from
these reports confirms that the danger to the members of the immediate
family of the assassinated ex-Prime Minister is grave and serious.

3. With a view to ensuring proximate security for the members of
the immediate family of such assassinated Prime Minister and assassinat-
ed ex-Prime Minister who continue to be under serious threat, it is con-
sidered necessary that such security of the said members of immediate
family should be brought within the purview of the Special Protection
Group. Since the role of the Special Protection Group as at present
provided by law is to provide proximate security only to the Prime

4. (1) There shall be an armed force of the Union called the Special
meaning of the expression “members of the immediate family” used in
the Special Protection Group Act, 1988.

5. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects,

New Deut; 8. B. CHAVAN.
The 21st August, 1991.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

The Special Protection Group was raised for providing proximate
security to the Prime Minister and members of his immediate family.
‘The Bill proposes to extend the security cover of the Special Protection
Group to the members of the immediate family of the assassinated Prime
Minister antl assassinated ex-Prime Minister.

2. The expenditure that will be incurred for the additional person-
nel, equipment and facilities required for the above purpose is Rs. 4.5
crores per annum.



Defini-
tions

Consti.
tution of
the
Group.

ANNEXURE
Extracts From tHe 57828, Prorection Group Act, 1988
(34 or 1988)
* * * * .

An Act to provide for the constitution and regulation of an armed force
of the Union for providing proximate security to the Prime Minister
of India and the members of his immediate family and for matters
connected therewith. ‘

* * * * *

2, In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—

(a) “active duty” in relation to a member of the Group means
any duty as such member during the period when he is posted to
physically protect the Prime Minister of India and the members of
his immediate family, wherever he or they may be;

. * * * *
(०) “members of immediate family” means wife, husband,
children and parents;

* * * * *

4. (1) There shal! be an armed force of the Union called the Special
Protection Group for providing proximate security to the Prime Minister
and the members of his immediate family. |

* * * * *

nina


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to amend the Special Protection Group Act, 1988,

(Shri 8. B. Chavan, Minister of Home Agairs.)

tb