Bill No. 135 of 2017
THE PREVENTION OF DAMAGE TO PUBLIC PROPERTY
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017
By
SHRI MULLAPPALLY RAMACHANDRAN, M.P.
A
BILL
to amend the Prevention of Damage to Public Property Act, 1984
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Prevention of Damage to Public Property Act, 2017.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.  In section 2 of the Prevention of Damage to Public Property Act, 1984, in clause (b),
after sub-clause (vi), the following sub-clause shall be added, namely:—
"(vii) any religious or educational institution, firm or individual the premises of
which are visited by the public in the normal course of events or in connection with
day to day transactions.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this sub-clause,—
Short title
and
commencement.
Amendment
of section 2.
3 of 1984.
5
10
AS  INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(a) immovable property shall include —
(i) petrol pump stations, schools, colleges, Universities, libraries,
temples, churches, mosques, synagogues, gurudwaras, meditation halls;
(ii) hotels, restaurants, tea shops and buildings under Shops and
Commercial Establishments Act of the State Government concerned;
(iii) statutes of late political or religious leaders;
(iv) mobile towers;
(v) computer centres, internet cafes; and
(vi) medical clinics;
(b) movable property shall include—
(i) taxies, auto rickshaws and other means of public transport; and
(ii) dish antennae.".
5
10

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
At present the term "public property" as defined in the Prevention of Damage to Public
Property Act, 1984 includes any property, whether immovable or movable (including any
machinery) owned or possessed by or under the control of the Central Government, State
Government, local authority, Corporation or a company. However, still there are many places
where the public visit or interact at large in normal course of events like religious and
educational institutions which are not included in the definition of public property. The need
is to include such places under the definition of 'public property' under the parent Act.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; MULLAPPALLY  RAMACHANDRAN
June 29, 2017.
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE PREVENTION OF DAMAGES TO PUBLIC PROPERTY ACT, 1984
(3 OF 1984)
* * * * * *
2. (a)* * * * * *
(b) "public property" means any property, whether immovable or movable (including
any machinery) which is owned by, or in the possession of, or under the control of—
(i) the Central Government; or
(ii) any State Government; or
(iii) any local authority; or
(iv) any corporation established by, or under, a Central Provincial or State Act; or
(v) any company as defined in section 617 of the Companies Act, 1956
(1 of 1956); or
(vi) any institution, concern or undertaking which the Central Government may,
by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf :
Provided that the Central Government shall not specify, any institution, concern
or undertaking under this sub-clause unless such institution, concern or undertaking
is financed wholly or substantially by funds provided directly or indirectly by the
Central Government or by one or more State Governments, or partly by the Central
Government and partly by one or more State Governments.
* * * * * *
Definitions.
4

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to amend the Prevention of Damage to Public Property Act, 1984
————
(Shri Mullappally Ramachandran, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—993LS(S3)—20-07-2017.