As Inrropucep tn Lox SaBHA ON

2 0 AUG 1990

Bill No. 135 of 1990
em oe
THE TOBACCO BOARD (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1990
A
BILL

further to amend the Tobacco Board Act, 1975.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-first Year of the Republic
of India as follows: —

1. This Act may be called the Tobacey Board (Amendment) Act, Short
1990. title,

2. In section 4 of the Tobacco Board Act, 1975 (hereinafter referred Amend:
to as the principal Act), in clause (e) of sub-section (4),— Re of

(a) for the words “ten members", the words “fourteen mem- 4.
bers” shall be substituted, and

(0) in the proviso, for the word “six”, the word “ten” shall be
substituted

3. Section 5 of the principal Act shall be renumbered as sub-section Amend-
(1) thereof and, after sub-section (1) as so renumbered, the following ment of
| shal] be inserted, namely:—

“(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the
Central Government may terminate the services of the Chairman, at

vw

“


2

any time before the expiry of the term of his office, by |
notice of not less than three months in writing or three months’
selary and allowances in lieu thereof, and the Chairman shall
lave the right to relinquish his office, at any time before the expi
of the term of his office, by giving to the Central Government noti¢
of not less than three months in writing.”.

Amend 4, Iu section 8 of the principal Act—
nt OF

Soatton [0) in sub-section (2), for the words “virginia tobacco”,
8 Uicy eccur, the wort “tobacco” shall be substituted; and

(0) sub-section (3) shali be omitted,

inser 5. After section 15 of the principal Act, the following section shall
tion ut nserted, namely: —

new sec

tion 188

अक्षका<- “15A. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the
tion ०४ Oficial Gazette, make all or any of the provisions of this Chap!
the #०- upplicable to tobacco other than virginia tobacco from such date
Chupte के ते may Appoint under the seid notification and different dates may

a appointed for Giferent provisions of this Chapter and for differ
other Stes or different parts thereof.

prov

sions to (2) Where all or any of the provisions of Chapter वा. are made
tobacea applicable under sub-section (1) to tobacco other than virginia

rg in व Stale or part theseof, the other provisions of this Act

‘atte also apply in relation to such tobacco in that State or part thereof as
tobaced, they apply in reletion to virginia tobacco,”,

Amend 6. In section 20A of the principal Act, for the words “virginia
ment of lobaeco”, the word “tobacco” shall be substituted.

203



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

m of the

Development of tobacco industry is the primary funcio
Tobacco Board established under the Tobacco Board Act, 107%.
Chapter III of this Act, however, provides mainly for the regula
tion of production and disposal of virginia tobacco. It has been
seen that inadequate marketing conditions in respect of {he
tobacco other than virginia tobacco are resulting in unfair and unre-
munerative prices of the produce to its growers. As the bulk of tobacco
exported was virginia tobacco until recently, the Tobacco Board con-
fined its activities to virginia tobacco. Of late, there has also been an
increase in the export of tobacco other than virginia tobacco. It is,
therefore, considered to be expedient and necessary that the Tobacco
Board should also regulate the production and marketing of tobacco
other than virginia tobacco. The provisions of Chapier IIL of the
Tobacco Board Act, 1975, are, therefore, intended to be made applicable
also to tobacco other than virginia tobacco in a phased manner.

2. In order to keep the representation of growers on the Tobacco
| in proportion to the increase in *he Board's activities, it is pro-
posed to increase their representation from six to ten members, The
provision regarding the term of office of the Chairman of the Tobacco
Board is also sought to be suitably amended by incorporating a new
clause for terminating his services and also for enabling him to 1: {
quish his office.

3. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.

New DELHI; ARUN NEHRII

The 3rd August, 1990.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

2. Clause 4 of the Bill seek

8 to enable the Tobacco Board to tala:
measures for the development

of tobacco other than virginia tobaeco.

3. Clause 5 of the Bill intends to make ¢
of the Tobaceo Board Act, 1975 also applic:
virginia tobacco in phased manner.
shall also regulate the production and का;
virginia tobacco.

‘he provisions of Chapter Tt
able to tohacco other
As a result, the Tobaceo Boi

4. It is estimateg that as a result of the expended activities of

Tobacco Board, non-recurring expenditure of Rs. 395 lakhs and recurri
expenditure of Rs. 84 lakhs would be incurred durin,
1990-91. The estimated expe:
is likely to be Rs. 20 crores,


ANNEXURE

Exrracts From THE Topacco Boar Act, 1975

(4 or 1975)
* * * * *
CHAPTER II
THe Tobacco Boarp
* * * * *
4. (1)
(4) The Board shall consist of the following members, namely:—
* * * * *

(e) not more than ten members to be appointed by the Central
Government from amongst growers of tobacco, dealers and exporters
(including packers) of tobacco and tobacco products, manufacturers
of tobacco products and from amongst persons who in the opinion of
the Central Government, are experts in tobacco marketing or
agricultural economics:

Provided that the number of members appointed under ‘his
clause from amongst the growers of tobacco shall not exceed six.

* * * * *

5, The Chairman shall be entitled to such salary and allowances
and such conditions of service in respect of leave, pension, provident
fund and other matters as may, from time to time, be fixed by the Cen-
tral Government,

* * * * के

aq) * « é न *

(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-
section (1), the measures referred to therein ™may provide for—

(@) regulating the production and curing of virginia tobacco
having regard to the following factors, namely: —
(i) the demand for virginia tobacco in India and abroad;
(ii) the suitability of land for growing virginia tobacco;
(iti) the differences in soil characteristics and. agro-climatic
factors in different regions of the country where virginia tobacco

is grown and the effect thereof on the quality and quantity of
virginia tobacco produced in those regions;

(iv) the marketability of different types of virginia tobacco;
(०) the need for rotation of erops; and

(vi) the nature of the holdings of the growers of virginia
tobacco whether owned or leased;

(b) keeping a constant watch on the virginia tobacco market,
both in India and abroad, and ensuring that the growers get a fair
and remunera‘ive price for the same and that there are no wide
fluatuations in the prices of the commodity;

5

Establish-
ment

and
constitu-
tion of

Board,

Salary
and
allowan-
ces and
other
condi-
tions of
service

of
Chairman.

Functions
of the
Board.


Power of
Central
Govern-
ment to
authorise
purchase
of vir-
ginia
tobacco

(c) maintenance and improvement of existing markets, and
development of new markets outside India for Indian virginia
tobacco and its products and devising of marketing strategy in con-
sonance with demand for the commodity outside India, including
group marketing under limited brand names;

(cc) establishment by the Board of auction platforms, with the
previous approval of the Central Government, for the sale of virginia
tobacco by registered growers or curers, and functioning of ‘he
Board as an auctioneer at auction platforms established by or regis-
tered with it subject to such conditions as may be specified by *he
Central Government;

(d) recommending to Central Government the minimuin prices
which may be fixed for purposes of export of virginia tobacco with
a view *o avoiding unhealthy competition amongst the exporters;

(e) regulating in other respects virginia tobacco marketing
in India and export of virginia tobacco having due vegard to the inte-
rests of growers, manufacturers and dealers and the nation;

(f) propagating information useful to the growers, dealers and
exporters (including packers) of virginia tobacco and manufacturers
of virginia tobacco products and others concerned with virginia
tobacco and products thereof;

(g) purchasing virginia tobacco from growers when the same
is considered necessary or expedient for protecting the interests of
the growers and disposal of the same in India or abroad as and when
considered appropriate;

(h) promoting the grading of tobacco at the level of growers;

(6) sponsoring, assisting, co-ordinating or encouraging scientific,
technological and economic research for the promotion of tobacco

industry; }

(j) such other matters 88 may be prescribed,

(3) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-
section (1) and subject to priority being given to matters specified in
sub-section (2), the measures referred to in sub-section (1) may also
provide in relation to tobacco, other than virginia tobacco, for all or any
of the matters specified in clauses (९) to (g) of sub-section (2) and for
this purpose any reference in those clauses to virginia tobacco shall be
construed as including a reference to tobacco other than virginia tobacco.

* * * * *

20A. Without prejudice to the provisions of clause (g) of sub-
section (2) of section 8 and, notwithstanding anything contained in
any other provision of this Act, if the Central Government is satisfied
that it is necessary or expedient so to do, it may, by order in writing
and subject to such conditions and limitations as may be specified in
the order, authorise any body or other agency to purchase virginia tobac-
co from the growers and dispose of the same in India or abroad.

* * * * *


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

further to amend the Tobacco Board Act, 1975.

(Shri Arun Nehru, Minister of Commerce and Tourism.)