‘As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

“25 ane 2Em

is)

Bill No, 135 of 2000

THE CITIZENS (IDENTITY CARD) BILL, 2000
By
‘Suri CHANDRAKANT Kuaire, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for issue of multi-purpose identity cards to the citizens of India.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as
follows: —

1. (J) This Act may be called the Citizens (Identity Card) Act, 2000.

(2) It shall come into force on such date as may be appointed by the Central
5 Government for the purpose.

2. In this Act unless the context otherwise requires,—

(a) “citizen” means a citizen of India as defined under the Citizenship Act,
S7 of 1955, 1955; and

(b) “Prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.

10 3. (J) It shall be duty of the Central Government to issue identity card to
every citizen of the country within a period of six months from the date of
commencement of this Act.

1

Short title and
commence:
ment,

Definitions

Issue of
identity cards
toall citizens,


Provision for
change in
identity cards

Duty of
citizens.to give
details of birth’
death in the
family.
Provision for
surrendering
of identity
cards,
Disincentive
for not holding
idewtity wand

Power to make
rules,

2

(2) The identity card issued under sub-section (7) shall contain the foilowing
information, namely:—

(a) full name in capital letters with latest photograph of the citizen;

(b) date of birth;

(c) permanent address;

(d) temporary address, if any;

(e) business or occupation;

(f) educational qualification;

(g) blood group;

(h) identification marks like mole, ete;

(i) total income;

(0) whether income tax payee or not; and

(k) remarks column.
(3) The identity card to be issued shall be prepared in the manner to be prescribed

under the rules,

(4) The identity card issued under sub-section (/) shall be conclusive proof for the

Purposes of determining the age and residence of the citizen.

4. (/) I there is any change in the particulars of the identity card, a citizen may,
in writing bring it to the notice of the authorities set up for the purpose by the
appropriate Government in this behalf.

(2) On receipt of an application under sub-section (1), the authorities shall issue a
duplicate card or replace the existing particulars with now particulars on the basis of
application from the citizen

5. Itshall be the duty of every citizen to bring it to the notice of authorities set up for
the purpose about birth or death in the family,

6. if a citizen is leaving the country for a period exceeding one year or intends to
settle abroud permanently, he shall surrender the identity card to the authorities concerned

7. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
a citizen who does not hold an identity card shall not be entitled to the benefit of any
scheme of the Central Government, the State Government or a corporation or an undertaking
of cither the Central or the State Government.

8. (7) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules for the purpose of carrying into effect the provisions of this Act.

(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power,
the rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—

(a) the manner in which publicity shall be given to the provisions of the
Act so as (० enabie the people to get their identity cards prepared;

{b) the size and shape of the identity card, the photograph to be affixed to the
same and of the letters to be used therein;

(2) the authority or the authorities empowered to issue the identity card; and

(d) the authority or authorities empowered to make entries in the remarks
column and the nature of remarks to be made.

1S

20

25

30

35

40


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Although India is a vast country with almost 100 crore population, the need to
provide indentity cards to each and every citizen, despite tremendous task and labour
involved in it, cannot be side-lined.

In the interest of security and integrity of the country, requirement of holding of
identity card is absolutely essential. Besides, the identity card will also give to the citizens
additional sense of belonging.

Moreover, identification of people by Government for various schemes would be
easier. The identity cards can be used for several purposes. This will not only put a check
on the illegal migrants into India but also provide a correct figure of our population. This
will enable Government to formulate schemes accordingly. Since, it is provided that a
citizen shall be deprived of certain facilities if he does not possess an identity card,
everybody will be encouraged or rather motivated to possess one.

Hence this Bill.

New Dewan, CHANDRAKANT KHAIRE
July 24, 2000.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 3(1) of the Bill provides for issuing of identity card to every citizen of the
country. Clause 4 provides for setting up of authorities for issue of identity cards or duplicate
cards as the case may be. Clause 8(2) (a) provides for giving publicity to the provisions of
the Act so as to enable the people to get their identity cards issued, The major expenditure
will be involved in getting the cards printed. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely to involve a recurring
expenditure of about rupees twenty crore per annum on account of appointment of staff
who will issue the identity cards.

A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one thousand crore is likely to be
involved.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 8(1) of the Bill empowers the Government to make rules for carrying out the
purposes of the Bill and the rules with relate to matters of detail only. The delegation of
legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

10 provide for issue of multi-purpose identity cards to the citizens of India,

(Shri Chandrakant Khaire, M.P)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—2231LS—03.08 2000.