.. 
'1 of 1M2. 
As INTJIODUcm IN Lox SABRA ON 
2 9 JU' .. (985 
DOl No. 135 of 1J8S 
THE COF)'EE (AJvn:NDMENT) BILL, 1985 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the COffee Act, 1942. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-sixth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act Clay be called the Coffee (Amendment) Act, 1985. 
(2) It shall come into lorce on such date as the Central Government 
5 may, by notification in the Oftlcial Gazette, specify. 
2. In the Coffee Act, 1942 (hereinafter referred to 88 the principal 
Act), in section 11, for the words "eleven rupees and eighty naye paise", 
the words "fifty rupees" shall be substlt1,1ted. 
3. In section 12, of the principal Act, for the warda "eleven rupees 
Ie and eighty naye paise", the words "fifty rupees" shall be substituted. 
Short 
title and 
com-
mence-
ment. 
Amend-
mentof. 
section 11. 
Amend-
JQentof 
section 12. 

2 
Amend- 4. In section 13 of the principal Act, for sub-section (3), the following-
ment of . sub-section shall be substituted, namely:-
section 13. 
AmeDd-
ment of 
8ection 
fa. 
"(3) The provisions of the Customs Act, 1962, and the rules and 
regulations made thereunder, shall, as far as may be, apply in 52 of 1962. 
relation to,- 5 
(a) the refund of the duty of customs where coffee is ex-
ported and subsequently imported into India; and 
(b) the export, without payment of the duty of customs, of 
coffee which is subsequently to be imported into India.u • 
S. In section 48 of the principal Act, for sub-section (3), the follow- 10 
ing sub-section shall be substituted, namely:-
"(3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon 
as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while 
it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be CI')J11-
prised in one session or in t~o or more successive sessions, and if, 15 
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session 
or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making 
any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule 
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such 
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, how~ver, 20 
that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice 
to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.". 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The present rate of the duty of customs and the duty of excise on. 
coffee has reached the ceiling of Rs. 11.80 per quintal each fixed under 
section 11 and section 12 of the Coffee Act, 1942. These rates have been in 
vogue since 16-12-1977. The proceeds of the duties of customs and ex-
cise levied under the Act form part of the Consolidated Fund of India 
and after being reduced by the cost of collection and after appropriation 
by law by Parliament are paid to the Coftee Board for being utilised for 
the purposes of the Act. The' elCplenditure by the Board during the re-
cent years has increased considerably due to increase in the plan and 
non-plan activities of the Board. The Board has taken up a number of 
new schemes relating to man-power development, pulping and hulling 
units, warehousing/storage, etc., besides continuing the existing deve-
lopment activities and research and extension programmes. The pro-
ceeds of the two duties would not be su.tlicient and, therefore, the Cen~ 
tral Government had to resort to grants-in-aid to meet the expenditure 
of the Board during the financial year 1985-86. It is thus necessary to 
strengthen. the financial position of the Board. It is, therefore, pro-
posed to amend section 11 and 12 of the Act to provide for a higher ceil-
iDg of levy of duty of customs and duty of excise at a rate not exceeding 
Rs. 50 per quintal for each. The actual op,erative rates of the two duties 
will, however, be fixed at such levels as may be su1U.cient to generate 
fundi to meet substantial part of the ·budget expenditure of the Board 
in future. 
2. The Customs Act, 1962 and the rules and regulations made there-
under contain elaborate provisions regarding the refund of,ud exemp-
tion from the pre-payment of, the duty of customs with regard to export 
of goods in general. In the interest of uniformity and administrative 
convenience, it is proposed to make these provisions applicable also for 
purposes of refund of, and exemption from, the pre-payment of the duty 
of customs under the Coffee Act, 1942, with regard to export of coffee by 
substituting for sub-section (3) of section 13 of the Act a new sub-section. 
3. Opportunity is being availed of to substitute for the provision re-
lating to laying of rules contained in sub-section (3) of section 48 a new 
provision on the lines recommended by the Committees on Subordinate 
Legislation. 
4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 
NEW DEI.m; VISHWANATH PRATAP SINGH. 
The 17£1£ July. 1985. 
3 

Duty of 
customs. 
Duty of 
excise. 
Payment of 
proceeds of 
duties to 
the Board 
and 
manner 
.f realisa-
tion by 
the 
Board. 
- Power of 
tbeCen-
tral G0-
vernment 
to makt" 
rules. 
• 
ANNEXURE 
ExTRACTS FROM THE COFFEE ACT, 1942 
(7 OF 1~) 
• • • • 
11. A duty of customs shall be levied on all coffee produced in India 
and exported from India at such rate not exceeding eleven rupees and 
eighty naye paise per quintal as may be fixed by the Central Govern-
ment by notification in the Official Gazette. 
12. A duty of excise shall be levied at such rate not exceeding eleven 
rupees and eighty aye paise per quintal as may be fixed by the Central 
Government by notification in the Official Gazette on all coffee whieh 
a registered estate is permitted by the internal sale quota allotted to it 
to sell in the Indian market, whether such coffee is actually sold or not, 
and on all coffee released for sale in India by the Board from the surplus 
pool. 
13. (J). • • 
(3) The Central Board of Revenue may make rules 
such conditions, as maybe specified in the rules,for-
• • 
prOviding, on 
(a) the refund of the duty of customs where coffee is exported 
by land and subsequently imported into India, and 
(b) the export by land, without payment of the duty of customs, 
of coffee which is subsequently to be imported into India . 
• • • • 
48. (1) • • • • 
. (3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act 
shall be laid as soon' as may be after it is made, before each House of 
Parliament while. it is in session for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two successive sessions, and if, 
be10re the expiry of the session in which it is so laid Or tbe session imme-
diately following, both Houses agree in making any modification in the 
rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule 
shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, 
as the case may be; so however that any such modification or annul-
ment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously 
done under that rule . 
• • • • • 
4 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BU..L 
further to amend the Coftee Act, 1942 
(Shri Vishwanath Pratap Singh, 
MiniSter of Commerce.) 