Bill No. 135 of  2018
Short title  and
commencement.
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2018
By
SHRI NISHIKANT DUBEY, M.P .
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of  India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment)  Act, 2018.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. After article 121 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted,
namely:—
“ ‘‘121A. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the rules and standing
orders regulating the procedure of the Houses of Parliament, if any Minister in the
Council of Ministers during the proceedings in either House of the Parliament, gives
any assurance, the Minister concerned shall, within fifteen working days, issue an
Insertion of
new article
121A.
5
10
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
executive order to give effect to the assurance given, wherever required, after taking
necessary approval from the appropriate authorities in such manner as Parliament
may, by law determine.
(2) If the implementation of the assurance given in either House of Parliament
warrants a law under the provisions of the Constitution, the Minister concerned shall,
within thirty working days, introduce a Bill to that effect in the relevant House of
Parliament as per the provisions of the Constitution if the Parliament is in session or
cause to send the proposal for promulgation of an Ordinance under article 123 of the
Constitution in such manner as Parliament may by law determine:
Provided that if no executive order is issued nor any Bill is introduced in either
House of Parliament nor any Ordinance is promulgated on the assurance given in the
Parliament either due to resignation or removal of Council of Ministers or due to
dissolution of the House of People the Council of Ministers subsequently appointed
under article 74 of Constitution shall take required steps under this clause or
clause (1) within the prescribed period to be counted from the next day of subscribing
oath as Council of the Ministers:
Provided further that if an executive order is not issued under clause (1) due to
operation of election model code of conduct, the executive order shall be issued
within the period prescribed under clause (1) from the day on which the election model
code of conduct ceases to operate.’’
3. After article 211 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted,
namely:—
‘‘211A. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the rules and standing orders
regulating the procedure of the Legislature of a State, if any Minister in the Council of
Ministers during the proceedings in the State Legislative Assembly or Legislature
Council, gives any assurance, the Minister concerned shall, within fifteen working
days, issue an executive order to give effect to the assurance given, wherever required,
after taking necessary approval from the appropriate authorities in such manner as the
Legislature of the State may by law determine.
(2) If the implementation of the assurance given in the State Legislative Assembly
or Legislature Council warrants a law under the provision of the Constitution, the
Minister concerned shall, within thirty working days, introduce a Bill to that effect in
the State Legislative Assembly or Legislature Council as per the provisions of the
Constitution if the State Legislature is in Session or cause to send the proposal for
promulgation of an Ordinance under article 213 of the Constitution in such manner as
the Legislature of the State may by law determine:
Provided that if no executive order is issued nor any Bill is introduced in the
State Legislative Assembly or Legislature Council nor any Ordinance is promulgated
on the assurance given in the State Legislature either due to resignation or removal of
Council of Ministers or due to dissolution of the State Assembly or due to imposition
of  President's rule, the Council of Ministers subsequently appointed under article 163
of Constitution shall take required steps under this clause or clause ( 1) within the
prescribed period to be counted from the next day of subscribing oath as Council of
the Ministers:
Provided further that if an executive order is not issued under clause (1) due to
operation of election model code of conduct, the executive order shall be issued
within the period prescribed under clause (1) from the day on which the election model
code of conduct ceases to operate.’’
Insertion of
new article
211A.
Procedure in
respect of
assurances in
Legislature of
a State.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS  AND REASONS
The Parliament is supreme legislative body in our country and is vested with power to
make laws and rules in the interest of public. Further, the Parliament is also vested with power
to amend even the Constitution duly following the envisaged procedure. As such, both the
Houses of Parliament debate, discuss and deliberate on various issues of public importance
and make laws and rules from time to time. During these discussions or debates, the Council
of Ministers, including the Prime Minister, usually make certain promises and give certain
assurances to the House, when the members express certain doubts on the proposed
legislations. It is the bounden duty of the Council of Ministers, i.e., the Government to fulfil
these promises and assurances to ensure the dignity of Parliament in the eyes of common
people. If the Government fails to implement the promises or assurances given in the supreme
legislative body of the country, the people will lose faith in the parliamentary system, which
is detrimental to the interest of a democratic system. Particularly, the people for whose
benefit the assurances are given but not fulfilled feel betrayed by their own Government and
dissatisfaction grow in their mind which can become a threat to sovereignty of the country.
Over a period of time, the political parties winning the public mandate and forming the
Government are ignoring the promises made or assurances given by their predecessor
Governments thinking that those promises or assurances were not given by their own party
without considering the fact that those assurances were given in the supreme legislative
body of the country and not fulfilling them will tamper the image of parliamentary system of
democracy.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to provide the constitutional guarantee to the assurances
given or promises made by the Council of Ministers including the Prime Minister in either
House of Parliament either during the debate or discussion on any issue or while answering
any question or responding to any notice or motion or in response to any matter raised by
any Member under the prescribed rules, by issuing an executive order to give effect to the
promises made or assurances given, so that the successor Governments cannot escape from
implementing it.
Similarly, the Bill also seeks to provide the Constitutional guarantee to the assurances
given or promises made by the Council of Ministers including the Chief Minister in the State
Legislatures.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; NISHIKANT  DUBEY
July 02, 2018.
3

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Nishikant Dubey, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—700LS(S3)—25-07-2018.