1
THE FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO UNEMPLOYED
POST-GRADUATES BILL, 2016
By
SHRI RAMESH BIDHURI, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for financial assistance to unemployed post-graduates and for matters
connected herewith.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Financial Assistance to Unemployed Post-Graduates
Act, 2016.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. 135 of  2016
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "post-graduate" means any citizen who holds a master's degree or equivalent
qualification from any recognised university or institution and includes citizens who
hold qualifications higher than that of post-graduate degree or its equivalent; and
(b) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. The Central Government shall endeavour to provide to every post-graduate an
employment according to his qualification.
4. (1) Every unemployed post-graduate, till he is gainfully employed, shall, be entitled
to financial assistance at such rate, as the Central Government may deem appropriate.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),  no financial assistance
shall be provided to an unemployed post-graduate if—
(a) he is receiving any fellowship or scholarship under any scheme of the
Central Government or a State Government; or
(b) he is registered under any higher research course.
(3) The Central Government shall, while fixing the rate of financial assistance, take
into account the age, educational qualification, technical skills, physical disabilities and
such other factors, as it may deem necessary:
Provided that different rates of financial assistance may be prescribed for post-
graduates on the basis of subjects in which they hold post-graduate degrees and the State
or part of the State of their residence.
5. The Central Government shall ensure provision of special employment oriented
skill and apprenticeship trainings, based on industrial requirements, to the post-graduates
in such manner as may be prescribed.
6. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days,
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if,
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses
agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under
that rule.
Definitions.
Power to make
rules.
Central
Government
to endeavour
to provide
employment
to post-
graduates.
Grant of
financial
assistance to
unemployed
post-graduate.
Central
Government
to provide
special skill
and
apprenticeship
training.
30
20
25
5
10
15

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The problem of employment has been growing amongst the post-graduate citizens in
our country. They are living in stressful condition with pressure of their parents, society
and uncertain future after having completed higher education in our country. Their capacity
and energy are not being utilized for nation building. Due to desperation to get employed,
they are choosing the path of crime and violence. Some even commit suicide. Lack of
opportunities for employment is also a leading factor in migration of a large section of
capable youth abroad. The problem of not getting any financial assistance after the
completion of post-graduation is also leading the youth towards lack of interest in Research
and Development sector in various streams of higher education thereby hampering national
research output and innovation capacity. It is high time that necessary efforts be made by
the Government to assure employment for citizens of the country and to provide financial
assistance to those who are having post-graduate degrees but have not been able to secure
employment. It is also high time that the efforts be made by the Government to provide
necessary skill training to the post-graduate according to the industrial and institutional
requirements.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RAMESH BIDHURI
April 11, 2016

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for financial assistance to unemployed post-graduates.
Clause 5 provides for special skill and apprenticeship training for the post-graduates. The
Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is
estimated that a recurring expenditure of about rupees fifty crore per annum would be
involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.

5
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 6 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the provisions of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for financial assistance to unemployed post-graduates and for matters
connected herewith
————
(Shri Ramesh Bidhuri, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—254LS(S3)—04-05-2016.