1
Amendment
of section 56.
THE JUVENILE JUSTICE (CARE AND PROTECTION OF CHILDREN)
BILL,  2019
By
SHRI BHANU PRA TAP SINGH VERMA, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Childern) Act, 2015.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children)
Act, 2019.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 56 of the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015
(hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in sub-section (2), the words ", irrespective of
their religion," shall be omitted.
3. In section 58 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section (1), the words "irrespective of their religion," shall be omitted;
and
Bill  No.  135 of  2019
5
10
Short title and
commencement.
Amendment
of section 58.
2 of 2016.
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
5
10
15
20
25
(b) after sub-section (1), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
Provided that where the identity of the orphan or abandoned or surrendered
child is known, he shall be adopted by prospective adoptive parents belonging to
similar religious or spiritual (Scheduled Tribe) ethnic group matching with the identity
of such child.".
4. In section 59 of the principal Act, for sub-section ( 3), the following sub-sections
shall be substituted, namely:—
"(3) A foreigner, who is a prospective adoptive parent living abroad, if interested
to adopt an orphan or abandoned or surrendered child from India, irrespective of his
religion, may apply for the same to an authorised foreign adoption agency or Central
Authority or a concerned Government department in their country of habitual residence,
as the case may be, in the manner as provided in the adoption regulations framed by
the Authority.
(3A) A non-resident Indian or overseas citizen of India, or person of Indian
origin, who are prospective adoptive parents living abroad, if interested to adopt an
orphan or abandoned or surrendered child from India, may apply for the same to an
authorised foreign adoption agency, or Central Authority or a concerned Government
department in their country of habitual residence, as the case may be, in the manner as
provided in the adoption regulations framed by the Authority:
Provided that where the identity of the orphan or abandoned or surrendered
child is known, he shall be adopted by prospective adoptive parents belonging to
similar religious or spiritual (Scheduled Tribe) ethnic group matching with the identity
of such child.".
5. In section 69 of the principal Act, in sub-section (5), for the words "regional offices",
the words "provincial Steering Committee for each State or province, as the case may be"
shall be substituted.
Amendment
of section 69.
Amendment
of section 59.

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
India is a signatory to the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child (1992)
and the Hague Convention (1993) on inter-country adoption of child. In consonance with
the commitment towards these conventions, the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of
Children) Act was enacted in the year 2000 which was consolidated and amended in the year
2015. Para (1) of Article 14 of Resolution 44/25 of the United Nations General Assembly dated
20 November, 1989 clearly expects the State parties to respect the "right of the child to
freedom of thought, conscience and religion". The Government of India did not give due
respect to the said resolution and without carrying out a thorough study of article 25 of the
Constitution of India, enacted the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act in
the year 2015 and made a mistake by way of insertion of provisions related to inter-country
adoption. To address the discrepancies in the Act of 2000, the amendment Act of 2015
[Act No. 2 of 2016] was enacted. However, the discrepancies could not be removed. Therefore,
the amendment of the present Act of 2015 has become necessary for adoption of Hindu
children.
As per sections 2(1), 2(42) and 2(60) of the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of
Children) Act, 2015, abandoned or orphan or surrendered child may be categorised into
following two categories of child whose:—
(1) identity is not known to the Committee; and
(2) identity is known to the Committee including sections of society, religion and
spiritual ethnic group to whom the child belongs to.
The present Bill is intended for the welfare of the children coming under second
category where the identity of the child is known to the Committee. The words "irrespective
of their religion" as mentioned in sections 56(2), 58(1), 59(3) of Chapter VIII of the Act implies
that the children whose identity is known are still being adopted by the prospective parents
belonging to different religion. Such provisions cannot be justified as it leads to forced
conversions.
Though the best interests of the child are mentioned in the Juvenile Justice (Care and
Protection of Children) Act, 2015 and are also defined in section 2(9), there are still many
ways to serve further. The present Act seems to be more inclined to give the Hindu Children
to followers of other religions for adoption. Though at present no major movement is being
noticed at social level, in coming days it may possibly lead to agitation by followers of Hindu
religion. The Hon'ble Supreme Court also does not support such type and inappropriate
attempts and in 1977 had clearly stated that "......... if a thing disturbs the current of the life of
the community and does not merely effect an individual. It would amount to disturbance....".
It is an indisputable that the number of followers of Hinduism is greater than that of
other prominent religions like Christianity and Islam. Out of which the Hindus are considerably
poor and the followers of Christianity and Islam used to get substantial foreign financial
assistance. Therefore, the children of the followers of Christianity and Islam religions are
available for adoption in meager numbers and the number of children born in Hindu families
is comparatively higher under the present Act. There is a provision in the Act which clarifies
the religious and socio-economic background of children available for adoption. If the
Government of India reveals its related records such as Form 43 Rule 69 (H) 3 of the Juvenile
Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Model Rules, 2016 pertaining to Case History of the
Child for Child Care Institutions; Schedule II of the Adoptive Regulation, 2017 pertaining to
Child Study Report and Schedule VII pertaining to Home Study Report of Resident Indian
Parent/ Overseas Citizen of India/Foreigner Living in India, the actual position may be placed
before the House.
3

4
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children)
Act, 2015 with a view to:—
(a) ensure that injustice is not meted out to the abandoned Hindu children; and
(b) provide that the orphan or abandoned or surrendered child whose identity is
known to the Committee be adopted by prospective adoptive parents belonging to
similar religious or spiritual (Scheduled Tribe) ethnic group matching with the identity
of such child.
(c) establish Provincial Steering Committee for each State or Province, as the
case may be.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; BHANU PRATA P SINGH VERMA
June 19, 2019.

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE JUVENILE JUSTICE (CARE AND PROTECTION CHILDREN)
ACT,  2015
(2 OF 2016)
56. (1) Adoption shall be resorted to for ensuring right to family for the orphan,
abandoned and surrendered children, as per the provisions of this Act, the rules made
thereunder and the adoption regulations framed by the Authority.
(2) Adoption of a child from a relative by another relative, irrespective of  their religion,
can be made as per the provisions of this Act and the adoption  regulations framed by the
Authority.
(3) Nothing in this Act shall apply to the adoption of children made under the provisions
of the Hindu Adoption and Maintenance Act, 1956.
(4) All inter-country adoptions shall be done only as per the provisions of this Act and
the adoption regulations framed by the Authority.
(5) Any person, who takes or sends a child to a foreign country or takes part in any
arrangement for transferring the care and custody of a child to another person in a foreign
country without a valid order from the Court, shall be punishable as per the provisions of
section 80.
* * * * *
58. (1) Indian prospective adoptive parents living in India, irrespective of their religion,
if interested to adopt an orphan or abandoned or surrendered child, may apply for the same
to a Specialised Adoption Agency, in the manner as provided in the adoption regulations
framed by the Authority.
(2) The Specialised Adoption Agency shall prepare the home study report of the
prospective adoptive parents and upon finding them eligible, will refer a child declared
legally free for adoption to them along with the child study report and medical report of the
child, in the manner as provided in the adoption regulations framed by the Authority.
(3) On the receipt of the acceptance of the child from the prospective adoptive parents
along with the child study report and medical report of the child signed by such parents, the
Specialised Adoption Agency shall give the child in pre-adoption foster care and file an
application in the court for obtaining the adoption order, in the manner as provided in the
adoption regulations framed by the Authority.
(4) On the receipt of a certified copy of the court order, the Specialised Adoption
Agency shall send immediately the same to the prospective adoptive parents.
(5) The progress and wellbeing of the child in the adoptive family shall be followed up
and ascertained in the manner as provided in the adoption regulations framed by the Authority.
* * * * *
59. (1) If an orphan or abandoned or surrendered child could not be placed with an
Indian or non-resident Indian prospective adoptive parent despite the joint effort of the
Specialised Adoption Agency and State Agency within sixty days from the date the child has
been declared legally free for adoption, such child shall be free for inter-country adoption:
Provided that children with physical and mental disability, siblings and children above
five years of age may be given preference over other children for such inter-country adoption,
in accordance with the adoption regulations, as may be framed by the Authority.
Adoption.
Procedure for
adoption by
Indian
prospective
adoptive
parents living
in India.
Procedure for
inter-country
adoption of
an orphan or
abandoned or
surrendered
child.
5

6
(2) An eligible non-resident Indian or overseas citizen of India or persons of Indian
origin shall be given priority in inter-country adoption of Indian children.
(3) A non-resident Indian or overseas citizen of India, or person of Indian origin or a
foreigner, who are prospective adoptive parents living abroad, irrespective of their religion,
if interested to adopt an orphan or abandoned or surrendered child from India, may apply for
the same to an authorised foreign adoption agency, or Central Authority or a concerned
Government department in their country of habitual residence, as the case may be, in the
manner as provided in the adoption regulations framed by the Authority.
(4) The authorised foreign adoption agency, or Central Authority, or a concerned
Government department, as the case may be, shall prepare the home study report of such
prospective adoptive parents and upon finding them eligible, will sponsor their application
to Authority for adoption of a child from India, in the manner as provided in the adoption
regulations framed by the Authority.
(5) On the receipt of the application of such prospective adoptive parents, the Authority
shall examine and if it finds the applicants suitable, then, it will refer the application to one of
the Specialised Adoption Agencies, where children legally free for adoption are available.
(6) The Specialised Adoption Agency will match a child with such prospective adoptive
parents and send the child study report and medical report of the child to such parents, who
in turn may accept the child and return the child study and medical report duly signed by
them to the said agency.
(7) On receipt of the acceptance of the child from the prospective adoptive parents, the
Specialised Adoption Agency shall file an application in the court for obtaining the adoption
order, in the manner as provided in the adoption regulations framed by the Authority.
(8) On the receipt of a certified copy of the court order, the specialised adoption
agency shall send immediately the same to Authority, State Agency and to the prospective
adoptive parents, and obtain a passport for the child.
(9) The Authority shall intimate about the adoption to the immigration authorities of
India and the receiving country of the child.
(10) The prospective adoptive parents shall receive the child in person from the
specialised adoption agency as soon as the passport and visa are issued to the child.
(11) The authorised foreign adoption agency, or Central Authority, or the concerned
Government department, as the case may be, shall ensure the submission of progress reports
about the child in the adoptive family and will be responsible for making alternative
arrangement in the case of any disruption, in consultation with Authority and concerned
Indian diplomatic mission, in the manner as provided in the adoption regulations framed by
the Authority.
(12) A foreigner or a person of Indian origin or an overseas citizen of India, who has
habitual residence in India, if interested to adopt a child from India, may apply to Authority
for the same along with a no objection certificate from the diplomatic mission of his country
in India, for further necessary actions as provided in the adoption regulations framed by the
Authority.
* * * * *
69. (1) The Authority shall have a Steering Committee with following members:
(a) Secretary, Ministry of Women and Child Development, Government of India,
who shall be the Chairperson—ex officio;
(b) Joint Secretary, Ministry of Women and Child Development, Government of
India, dealing with Authority—ex officio;
Steering
Committee of
Authority.

7
(c) Joint Secretary, Ministry of Women and Child Development, Government of
India, dealing with Finance—ex officio;
(d) one State Adoption Resource Agency and two Specialised Adoption
Agencies;
(e) one adoptive parent and one adoptee;
(f) one advocate or a professor having at least ten years of experience in family
law;
(g) Member-Secretary, who shall also be Chief Executive Officer of the
organisation.
(2) Criteria for the selection or nomination of the Members mentioned at (d) to (f), their
tenure as well as the terms and conditions of their appointment shall be such as may be
prescribed.
(3) The Steering Committee shall have the following functions, namely:
(a) to oversee the functioning of Authority and review its working from time to
time so that it operates in most effective manner;
(b) to approve the annual budget, annual accounts and audit reports as well as
the action plan and annual report of Authority;
(c) to adopt the recruitment rules, service rules, financial rules of Authority as
well as the other regulations for the exercise of the administrative and programmatic
powers within the organisation, with the prior approval of the Central Government;
(d) any other function that may be vested with it by the Central Government from
time to time.
(4) The Steering Committee shall meet once in a month in the manner as may be
prescribed.
(5) The Authority shall function from its headquarter and through its regional offices
as may be set up as per its functional necessity.
* * * * *

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children)
Act, 2015.
————
(Shri Bhanu Pratap Singh Verma, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—992LS(S3)—-04-07-2019.