BID -.0. HI 1111 ... 
THE HIGH COURT .1UDG~S (CONDITIONS OF SilRVICE) 
- BILL, 1952 
(As INTIlODUOBn IN TBB HousB Or TBB PBOPLB) 
A 
BILL 
to t,gulate clJrtuin conditiOfl' 01 IBrvic8 of th8 Judge, 01 High Court. in 
Port A 8,,,t8'. 
BB i\ enac6ed by Parliament as follows:-
CHAPTER 1 
PIiBLDmfABY 
1. 8IIo1't Ut.le;--This Act may be called the High Court Juclgea (C0il4i-
tiona of ·8emee) A_, 1051. I 
I. DdDttIou.-(l) In this Act, unless the context 'Otherwise 
requirea,-
(G) "acting Chief Juatice" means a Jutlge appointed. uneler ~ 
228 of the Constitution to perform the duties of the Chief Juatill8; 
(b) "acting Judge" means a person who was appointed tG -ao' 10 
.. a Judge under lub-seotion (9) of section _ of. theGoV8rnb!Dt t1 
India Ac~, 19M; 
(0) "actual service" include&-
(I) time apent by a Judge on duty &I a Judge or in the per-
fonnanoe of luch other fQI1ctibns as he may, at the requel~ of 11 
the President of I'Ddia, undertake to diB!8harge; 
(ii) vacationa, excluding any ~ime during which the Judge 
ia absent on leave; 
(iii) joining time on transfer from .. High Oovt to the 
Supreme Cour, or from one High Court to another or from t.IM JO 
Supreme OOll" to • High Court; 
, 

I 
10 
t 
(ill) time spent by a Judge on duty as a Judge of a former 
Indian High Court; 
(11) time spent by a Judge to attend the aitting8 of the 
Supreme Court 88 an ad hoo Judge under article 127 of the 
Consti~ution; and 
(vi) vacations (excluding any time during .which the Judge 
waa absent on leave) taken by a Judge as a .Judge of a former 
Indian High Court; 
(eI) "additional Judge" means a person who wu appointed 88 an 
additional Judge under Bub-section (3) of section 222 of the Govern-
ment of India Act, 1985; 
(e) "former Indian High Court" means the IHigh Court at 
Lahore, the Chief Court of Sind or the Judicial Commi88ioner'8 Court 
of North West Frontier Province; 
(J) "High Court" means a High Court in any Part A State; 
(g) "Judge" means & Judge of a High Court and includes the 
Chief Justice and acting Chief Justice of a High Court; 
(h) "service for pension" includes 
(i) actual senice ~ 
20 (ii) one month or the amount actually takeh, whichever is 
lNa, of each period of leave on full allowances; 
(iii) joining time on return from leave out of India j 
(i) "prescn'bed" means prescribed by rules made under thi. Act. 
(2) In the calculation of service for the purposes of this Act, preTious 
• service for any period or periods aa acting Judge or additional Judge or as 
a Judge of 8 former Indian High Court shall be reckoned 8& service as 
a Judge but, save as otherwise expressly provided, previous service as an 
acting Chief Justice shall not be reckoned as service aaChief Justice. 
(3) Any period of leave taken by 8 Judge before the commencement 
SO of this Act under the rules then applicable to him as an acting Judge, 
additional Judge or a Judge shall, for the purposes of this Act, be treated 
.. if it were leave taken by him under this Ad. 
(4) Any period of leave taken by a Judge while serving a8 a Judge 
of a former Indian High Court before his appointment to a High Court 
315 in 8 Part A State sh,Il for the purpose. of this Aot be treated .. if it were 
leave taken by him under thi. Act. 
OHAPTER 11 
LBAVB 
8. K1Dd8 of leave aclmlMlble to a 111411.-(1) Subject to the provisions 
40 of thi. Act, leave granted to 8 Judge may be at his option either-
(a) leave on full allowances; or 
(b) lea'ge on half alluwances; or 
(0) leave partly on full allowanoes and partly on half allowances. 

3 
(9) For the purposes of this Chapter, any period of leave on' full allow-
ances 'ihall be reckoned as double that period of leave on half allowancea. 
,. Leave &CCOaDt Ihow1Dg the amount of 18&ve due.-{l) A leave 
account shall be kept for each Judge showing therein the amount of leave K 
due to him in terms of leave on half allowances. U 
(9) In the leave aocount of a Judge-
Cal there shall be credited to him-
(11 one-fourth of the time spent by him on actual service; and 
eii) where the Judge, by reason of his having been detained 
for the performanoe of duties not connected with the High'Court, 10 
cannot enjoy nny vacation which he would otherwise have been 
entitled to enjoy had he not been so detained, 88 compensation 
for the vacation not enjoyed, a period equal to double the period, 
by which the vacation enjoyed by him in any year falls short lK 
of one month: and U 
(b) there shall be debited to him all leave with allowances taken 
by him. 
B. £aNpte amount of leave which ma), be granted.-The aggregate 
amount of leave which may be granted to a Judge during the whole 
period of his servioe as such shall not exceed in terms of leave on half 10 
allowances three years together with the aggregate of the periods, if any, 
credited to his leave account under sub-section (9)(a)(il) of section 4 as 
compensation for vacation not enjoyed. 
(2) ThE. aggregate amount of leave on full allowanoee whioh may be 
granted to a Judge during the whole period of his servioe as such shall 1& 
not exceed one-twenty-fourth of the period spent by him on actual serviC?e 
together with one-half of the aggregate periods, if any, credited to his 
leave acoount under sub-seotion (9)(a)(ii) of section 4 as oompensation 
for vacation not enjoyed. 
(3) The maximum period of leave which may be granted at one time 30 
shall be, in the case of leave on full allowanoes, five months and in the 
oase of leave with allowances of any kind, sixteen months. 
8. GrIIlt of leave DOt due.-Subje'3t to th(l maximum limit specified 
in sub-section (1) of section 5. leave on half allowances may be granted •• 
to a Judge in excess of the amount at his credit- -
(i) on medico.l oertificate: oJ' 
(ii) otherwise than on medical certifioate, for not more than six 
months and not more than once during the whole period of his 
servioe as a Judge:; 
Provided that no such leave shall be granted if the Judge is not (!) 
expected to return to duty at the end of such leave and earn the leave 
granted. 
'1. Special dla&bWty leave.-The rules for the time being in force with 
respeot to the grant of special disability leave in relation to an officer 
of the Central Civil Services, Class I who has entered servioe on or after .-
the 16th July, 1981 Rnd who may be disabled by injury oaused in, or in 
oonsequenoe of, the due performance of his official duties or in conse. 
quence of his official position, shall apply in relation to .. Judge. 

~ .. 
4: 
'., ~rcIIur1 Je.~-Extr80rdinary leave not eJEceedins eix months 
jj) 4ur:ation ~y ~e pnted f.(. a J.udge not more than 0000 during flbe 
whole period of his servioe 68 a Judg~ in exoess of any leave permissible 
unc1~ the begoing provisions of this Chapter, but no salary or allowanoes 
abtB _ f8fable 4lJriag. or in reapeot of, suoh leave. 
e. Lean aUowancee.-(l) The monthly rate of leave allowa.ncell pa.y-
able to & Judge while on leave on full allowanoes shall be for the first 
month of such leave a rate equal to the monthly rate of his salary, and 
thereafter two thousand two hundred and twenty rupeElS. 
10 (S) The mont~y tate of leave allowances payable to a Judge whUe on 
I.... on baH aJl~ances shall be one thousand one hundred and ten 
~;,I Npeea. 
J,Q. ~ far JDIIdaI Ume.-There shall be payable to a Judge 
. in: ~ of j~ time on his return from l.ave out of India an allow-
16 ~ at tab. rate of one 'bouaand one hundred and ten rupees a month 
.: in lieu of salary. 
» .. _*"1 ..... wtt.ll " ..... -A Judge may be permitted to 
oombine vacation on full salary with leave, if,-
(4) whel8 the vacation consists of one confJinuous period, the 
20 le, .. ,. i. taken either at the commencement or at the end of tbe 
,. . vacation but not at both ~ . 
(lI) where the vaoation is divided -into two .separate periods, the, 
leave is flaken for the interval, or part. of the interval, b~ween the 
two periods of that vacation. or for the intervAl. or part of the interval. 
25 between: the aeoond period of thM vacation and the commencement 
of the next enauing vaoaflion: 
. Provided that no slJQh permiuion to combioe vacation with leave shall 
be granted if it becomes neoeaBliry to appoint an acting Chief Justice 
during the period of vacation or if the Judge is not expected to return 
3(; to duty at the end of suob leave. 
U~ ac..a?lIBCII ttl GnfItaJiDI 1M .. or noaU.OD.-If a Judge over· 
stays his leaYe or an)' vacation, whether combined wit.h leave or not, 
he shall receive no salary for the period of his absence in excels of leave 
IfINlted to him or beyond the end of. the vacation. .. ~e 0818 may be: 
H Provided thnt if such absence is due to circumstances beyond hiB 
control the period thereof may be treated 88 leave and may be debited 
to his leave acoount. 
. 11; .A1ItIIoIttJ ~. to Jl'Illt -leave" e~.-The anthori., oompe-
tent flo gran, or refu.ae leaye to a Judge or rev-oke or cu~ _Y.8 gnmted 
40 to a Judge shall be ~e Governor of the State in which e. ~ 
~., of tht Big" Couri Ie altu.". afW COIIIOltatloD wiiil .. CIIW 
of tb, ltigb COUl't. 
ClUPTER III 
PnSIOJftIJ 
4tI ~. ~QI1OQ J8,.* to ........ -8ubjeet tc> the proviliona of t.hi. Aot, 
eveq ,Tu,cJge ~~. on bil ~~eD$. be paW a peNioo ill ~ ,.. 
Mae Boale and ~ilkg lD. P.wt I qt .. l"IrIt lJoheCIur.:. . . .. . . 

5 
ProTided tha.t no suoh pension sbaJI be payable to a Judge um8BB-
(a) he has completed not less than twelve years of service for 
pension; or 
(b) he has atte.ined the age of sixty years; or 
(0) his retirement is medicaJIy oertified to be necessitated by ill- 5 
health. 
E%pianation.-In this section 'Judge' means a Judge who is n~ a 
member of the Indie.n Civil Service or has not held sny other pensi.9llable 
oivil post under the Union or a State e.nd inoludes a Judge who being a 
member of the Indian Civil Servioe or having held any other pensionable 10 
civil post under the Union or a State has elected to receive the pension 
payable under Part I of the First Schedule. 
U5. Special provt.ion for pension in reapect of .Judges who are memben 
oIl1rV1ce.-Every Judge-
(a) who is 110 member of the Indian Civil Service shall, on his 15 
retirement. be paid a pension in aocorde.nce with the scale snd pro-
visions in Part II of the First Schedule; 
(b) who is not a member of the Inaian Civil Service but has held 
any other pensionable civil pos~ under the Union or & State, shaJI, 
on his retirement, be paid a pension in aooordance with the scale aad 20 
provisions in Part III of the First Sohedule: 
Provided that every such Judge shall elect to receive the pension 
payable tc him either urrder Part I of the First Schedule or, as the case 
may be, Part II or Part III of the First Schedule, snd the pension payable 
to him shall be calculated accordingly. 25 
16. Power of Prealdent to add to the eemce for peDIloa..-The 
President of India may for special reasons direct that any period not 
exceeding three months shall be added to the service for pension of a 
Judge: 
Provided that the period so added shall be disregarded in calculating 30 
sny additional pension under Part I or Part II or Part III of the First 
Schedule. . 
17. I:nraordinary peulODl.-The rules for the time bein~ in force with 
respect. to the gT"n!lf. of extraordinary pensions and gratuitIes in relation 
to an officer of the Central Civil Services, Class I who ho.s entered service 35 
on or after the 1st April, 1987 snd who may suffer injury or die 88 a 
reault of violence, shall apply in rolation to Q Judge, subject however, 
to the modi.ftcation th&t references in those rules to tables' of ipJury 
sratuJtiee and pensions, and of family gratuities snd pensionB, shall be 
construed 811 referen0811 to th~ tl8blell in the Second Schedule. 40 
18. OonversloD of sterllng peD8lon into mpeea.-Pensions expreB8ed 
in sterling only shall, if paid in India, be convert.ed into rupees at such 
rate of l!J:oh&nge lioii the Centr&l Government may, from time to time, speoify 
in this behalf: 
Pro"f'ided ~&fI nothing in thill section IIhall aJreot any specUla privilege 41 
in r •• peo$ of tha conTeraion of IIterling pellliolll which WBI oonlerred by 
an,. rule. prSTioully in force in respect of persons who, on ihe lBt February 
19rJ), were tllembers of the Inaian Ci-ril Serviae. ' 

10 
8 
19. OommlltaUon of penllou. The Civil Pensions (Commutation) 
Rules for the time being in force shall, with necessary modifications, 
apply to Judges. 
SO. Proriden,\ 1'uDcl.-Every Judge shall be entitled to subscribe to the 
General Provident Fund (Central Services): 
Provided that a J~dge who is a member of the Indian Oivil Service or 
has held any other pensionable civil post under the Union or a State shall 
continue to subscribe to the Provident Fund to which he was subscribing 
before bis appointment as a Judge: 
Provided further that a. Judge who was uppointed before the com-
mencement of this Act may continue to subscribe to the Provident Fund 
to which he was subscribing immE'diately before suoh commencement. 
11 • .&lI&barlq competen\ to graD\ peDIIon.-Bave 88 may be otherwise 
expresaly provided in the relevant rules relating to the grant of extra-
16 ordinary pensions and gratuities, the authority oompetent to grant pension 
to a Judge under the provisions of this A~t shall be the President of India. 
CHAPTER IV 
MISCBLLAlfBOUS 
-II. 'l'raY8llbla aIloWUlOll to a I ..... -Every Judge shall reCeive Buch 
rellsonable ollownllCES to re_imbune him for expenses incurred in travelling 
on duty within the territory of India. and shall be afforded such reasonahle 
facilities in connection with travelling as may, from time to time, be 
pftlscribed. 
II. I'IcWUea tor medical trea\m.eDt and other COIlditiou of .. mOl.-(l) 
25 Every Judge and the members of his family shall be entitled to such 
facilities for medical treatment and for accommodation in hospitals a8 may, 
from time to time, be prescribed. 
(9) The conditions of service of a. Judge for which no express provision 
has been made in this Act shall be such as may be determined by rules 
30 made under this Act. 
(3) This section shall be deemed to have come into force on the 26th 
January, 1950 and any rule made under this section may he made so 88 to 
be retrospective to any date not earlier thun the commencement of this 
section. 
36 M. Power to make 1'11181.-(1) Tbe Central Government moy, by noti-
fication in the Ofti~ia) Gazette, make rules to carry out the purposes of 
this Act. 
(9) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of th!' fore-
going power, such rules may provide tor all or any of the following watters, 
40 namely:-
(a) lea.ve of absence of a Judge; 
(b) pension payable to a Judge; 
(c) travelling allowances to a Judge; 
(el) facilities for medical treatment and other conditions of aer-
46 . vice of a Judge; 
(6) a.ny other m8tter which has to be, or may be, prescribed. 

, 
., 
(3) All rules made under the provisions of this Act shall be laid, 81 
soon 88 may be, before each House of Parliament. 
U. Sa'ViDp.-Nothing contained in this Act shall have eftec.t BO.88 to 
give to a Judge who is serving as such at the oommencement of this Aot 
less favourable terms in respect of his allowances or his rights in respect & 
of leave of absence (including leave allowances) or pension than those to 
whioh he would be entitled if this Act had not been passed. 
FIRST SCHEDULE 
(B86 seotions 14 and 15) 
PENSIONS OF JUDGFS 
PART I 
1. The provisions of this Part apply to a Judge who is not a member 
of the Indian Civil Service or has not held any other pensionable civil post 
under the Union or a State and also apply to a Judge who, being a member 
of the Indian Civil Service or having held any other pensionable civil post 
under the Union or a State, has elected to receive the pension payable 
under this Part. 
10 
15 
2. Subject to the other provisions of this Part, the pension payable to 
a Judge. to whom this Part applies and who has completed not less than 
seven years of service for pension shall be the basic pension specified 20 
in paragraph 8 increased by the lidditional pension, if any, to which he 
is entitled under paragraph 5. 
8. The basic pension to which such B Judge shall be entitled shall b~ 
(a) for the first seven completed years of service for pension, 
Rs. 5,000 per annum; and 2& 
(b) for each subsequent completed year of service for pension, a 
further sum of Re. 1,000 per annum: 
Provided tha.t the basic pension shall in no case exceed ,Re. 10,000 per 
IIjDnum. 
4. For the purpose of oalculating additional pensions, service as a 30 
Judge shall be classifiEd as follows:,-
Grade I. Service as Chief Justice in any High Court; 
Grade II. Service as any other Judge in any High Court. 
5. For eo.ch completed year of service for pension in either of tho 
grades mentioned in p8l'agraph 4. the Judge who is eligible for a basic 35 
pension under this Part shall be entitled to the additional pension speoi-
fied in relation to that grade in the second column of the table annexed 
hereto:1 
Provid'ed that the aggregate amount of his basic and additional pension 
shall not exoeed the amount specified in the third column of the said ~ 
table in relation to the higher grade in whioh he has rendered servioe for 
not less than one completed year. 

Or"" I 
ar.-U 
8 
TAIIUI 
AddldOQal peaalOD 
P.aDDlUD 
BL 
.760 
'10 
ulmum 1IIInP~ pia. 
IioDper_ 
Be. 
10;0G0 
11;010 
6. A. J ucige who hae rendered senice for pen.ion in both th. gradM 
may claim ~fI any period of samoa 01 1018 than a completed yfJfIZ rea-
dared by him in the higher gNcie. or any portion of any such period, ahall 
10 be treated for the purposes of paragraph 6 .. eervioe rendered by him in 
the lower grade. 
7. For the Purpoles of tI:da Put, aemce .. an acting Chief J u~oe of 
a High Cowt or .. an ad hoc Judge of the Supreme COW'l, aball be treated 
&8 though it were service rendered .. Chief J uatice ofa High Coun. 
11 8. NotbwifihataDding anybhing contained in the foregoing provisions of 
this PM, flhe pension payable to a Judge who has completed .welTe 
yean at aemoe for peDlion, including not less than six years of service 88 
Ohief .'Justioe of one or more of the High Coul'tl, shall be Re. 20,000 per 
&DDUJD.. 
10 9. Where a Judge to whom this Part a.pplie8 retiree or haa retired at 
~ time alter the 26th J anua.ry, 1960 witholn being eligible tor a peDtlion 
under any other proviaion of this Part, then, notwithltandillg anything 
oonwned in the fOl'egoing provisions, a. penaion of &. 6,000 per annum 
shaUbe pa.yable to IUcla a Judge. 
• PD~n 
30 
The pro-.isions of this Part apply to a Judge who i. a member of the 
Indian Civil Senioe and who hal not elected to receive the pGDllon pay· 
able under Pan I. 
2. The penaion payable to suob a Judge ahaIl be-
(a) \he pension to which he il entitled under the ordinal'] rules 
of ~ Indian Civil Se"ice if he had not been appointed .. Ju<lge, his 
aenioe as , Judge being treated as service therein for the purpoH of 
calculating that pension; and 
(b) the adclliioDal pen8ion, if any, to which he is entitled ~der 
paragraph S. 
8. If IUcli a Judge has completed not lell than Be't'en years of semee 
for pension in a High Court, he .hall be entitled to an Additional penlion 
in accordrmoe wi~ file following BOale:-
\ 
For levan oompleW yeara of 881'Yioe for penaion 
For eight oomp1eMd 1881"1 of aemce for pension 
For nine completed years of service for peDBion 
For ten oompleMd yean of service for pension 
Per annum . 
.. 
405· For ele~_ oompleiled y8&1'l of semce for penaion 
100 
110 
140 
160 
180 
~ For twelve or more oompleted years of s8l'Tioe for peoaion 

9 
PABTID 
The provisions of this Part apply to a Judge who has held Rny civil 
pensionabl\l post under the Union or a State (but is not a member of the 
Indian Civil Service) and who has not elected to reaeive the pension 
payable under Part 1. . 5 
2. The pension payable to such a Judge shall be-
(a) the pension to which he is entitled under the ordinary rules 
of his service if he had not been appointed a Judge, his service as &. 
Judge being treated 88 servioa therein for the purpose of calculating 
that pension; and 10 
(b) a special additional pension of Re. 500 per annum in respect 
of each completed year of service for pension but in no case exceedinff 
Re. 2.500 per annum. 
OfBoer 
I. Ohief Justioe 
2. Any other Judge 
Oftloer 
1. Chief Justice 
J. Any other Jlldgtt 
OfBoer 
J. Ohler Justioe 
2. Any other Judp 
SECOND SCHEDULE 
(8'6 section 17) 
INJ'UBT GBATCITIBS AND PENSIon 
Gratuity 
RI. 
20,000 
18,300 
.Annual Peaalon 
Re. 
3.400 
4,'700 
Lower IIOale 
RI. 
4,'700 
4,000 
FAMILY GRATUITIBS AND PaNSION8 
A. Widow 
Gratuity 
RI, 
13,000 
18,500 
B. Ohildren 
Annual Pension 
Annual Pension 
RI. 
11,000 
4,000 
If motherle88 If not motherle88 
Us. 
11110 
50 
RI. 
320 
320 
U5 
30 

10 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Under clause (2) of Article 221 of the Constitution, every Judge of .. 
High Court is entitled to "such allowances and to such rights in. reapeoi 
of leave of absence and pension as may from time to time be determined 
by or under law made by Parliament", provided thafl neither the allowancet 
of a Judge nor his rights in respect of leave of absence or pension shall 
be varied to his disadvantage after his appointment. 
2. This Bill seeks to determine the rights in respect of leave al absence 
and pension and t'ertain other subsidiary conditions of J udgea of High 
Courts in Part A Sta_. 
S. No substantial change is propoeed in the leave term. hitherto ad-
missible to these High Court Judges, nor in their pensionary righta, 
except to the extent indicated below:-
(4) Under Part I of the Third Schedule to the Government of 
India (High Court Judges) Order, 1987, the service of a Judge for 
purposes of additional and muimum pension is clauified into five 
diBerent grades, under wnich non-Service Judges are entitled to draw 
additional pensions ranging from §O to £76 and maximum pensions 
ranging from '1,000 to £1,800. These different rates of pension 
were in consequenoe of the different rates of salary prescribed in 
the order. Under the Constitution, however, one uniform rate of 
salary haa been laid down for Chief J ustioes and another uniform 
rate of salary for other J udgea of HIgh Courts in Part A States. 
Accordingly, in paragraphs 4 and 6 of Part I of the Firat Sohedule to 
this Bill, provision is made for one common scale of pensions far 
Chief Justices and another common scale for other Judges. 
Separate provision has been made, on the same terms as pro-
vided in the Government of India (High Court Judges) Order, 1987, 
for the penaions of I.C.S. and other Se"ioe Judges. 
(b) IDtherto, no pension has been admissible to a non-Service 
Judge of a High Court, unless, on attaining the age of 60 years. he 
completed not· less than 7 years qualifying service for pension. Pr0-
vision has been made in paragraph 9 of Part I of the First Schedule 
to thia BiU for .. minimum pension of Be. 6,000 per annum even If the 
service put in b~ a Judge is less than seven yean. This is considered 
necessary, mainly because of Artiole 220 of the Constitutioa barring 
practice after retirement, .. provision which adversely affects the 
recruitment of desirable candidates who would not be able to p'ut in 
the minimum seven years on attaining the age of 60 to qualify for 
pension. 
(c) Special provision has also been made to govern certain other 
subsidiary conditions of lemce, luch as medical attendance facilities 
which are enjoyed by all Government servants and whioh, up to the 
commencement of the Constitution, were admissible also to High 
Court Judges under paragraph 26 of the Government at India (High 
Court Judgea) Order, 1987. 
K. N. KATJU. 
Nsw DBLHIj 
'1'h6 18th December, 1962. 

HOUSE OF THE PEOPLE • 
BlLL 
to regulate certain conditions of service of the Judges of 
High COlll'UJ in Part A States. 
The President has, in pursuanoe of olause (3) of 
article 117 of the Constitution of India, recommended 
to the HOUMe of the People the oonsideration of the Bill. 
(Shri Kailas Nath Katju, 
Minister for Home Affair,) 
GIPD-LAD-999 PS-19.12.i12-1,1I00. 