1
THE CONSTITUTION (ONE HUNDRED AND SIXTEENTH
AMENDMENT) BILL, 2011
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-second Year of the Republic of  India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the  Constitution (One Hundred and sixteenth  Amendment)
Act, 2011.
(2) It shall come into force on such  date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. After Part XIV A of the Constitution, the following Part shall be inserted, namely:—
"PART XIV B
LOKPAL   AND  LOKAYUKTA
"323C. (1)  There shall be a Lokpal for the Union.
(2) The powers of superintendence and direction relating to holding a preliminary
inquiry, causing an investigation to be made and prosecution of offences in respect of
complaints made to the Lokpal under any law for the prevention of corruption made
by Parliament shall vest in the Lokpal.
Short title and
commencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No.  135 of   2011
Insertion of
new Part
XIVB.
Lokpal for
Union.
5
10

2
(3) The Lokpal shall be an autonomous and independent body with a Chairperson and
such number of Members as Parliament may by law determine.
(4) Subject to the provisions of any law made by Parliament, the appointment of the
Chairperson and Members of the Lokpal shall be made by the President.
(5) The conditions of service and tenure of the Chairperson and Members of the
Lokpal shall be such as may be determined by Parliament by law.
(6) Every person appointed to be Chairperson or Member of the Lokpal shall, before he
enters upon his office, make and subscribe before the President or some person appointed in
that behalf by him an oath or affirmation according to the form set out for the purpose in the
Third Schedule.
(7) The Chairperson and Members of Lokpal shall not be eligible for further office
either under the Government of India or the Government of any State or any other office as
Parliament may by law determine.
323D. (1) There shall be a Lokayukta for every State.
(2) The powers of superintendence and direction relating to holding a preliminary
inquiry, causing an investigation to be made and prosecution of offences in respect of
complaints made to the Lokayukta under any law for the prevention of corruption made by
Parliament or the State Legislature, as the case may be, shall vest in the Lokayukta.
(3) The Lokayukta shall be an autonmous and independent body with a Chairperson
and such number of Members as Parliament or,  as the case may be, the State Legislature may
by law determine.
(4) Subject to the provisions of any law made by Parliament or the State Legislature,
the appointment of the Chairperson and Members of the Lokayukta shall be made by the
Governor.
(5) The conditions of service and tenure of the Chairperson and Members of the
Lokayukta shall be such as may be determined by Parliament by law or, as the case may be,
the State Legislature.
(6) Every person appointed to be Chairperson or Member of the Lokayukta shall,
before he enters upon his office, make and subscribe before the Governor or some person
appointed in that behalf by him an oath or affirmation according to the form set out for the
purpose in the third Schedule.
(7) The Chairperson and Members of Lokayukta shall not be eligible for further office
either under the Government of India or the Government of any State or any other office as
Parliament or the State Legislature may by law determine.".
3. In the Third Schedule to the Constitution, after Part VIII, the following Part shall be
inserted, namely:—
"IX
Form of oath or affirmation to be made by the Chairperson or other Member of
Lokpal or Lokayukta:—
I, AB., having been appointed as the Chairperson (or Member) of Lokpal or
 Lokayukta, do swear in the 
name of God that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the
solemnly affirm
Constitution of India as by law established, that I will uphold the sovereignty and
integrity of India, that I will duly and faithfully and to the best of my ability, knowledge
and judgment perform the duties of my office without  fear  or favour, affection or
ill-will and that I will uphold the Constitution and the laws.".
Lokayukta
for state.
Amendment
of Third
Schedule.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Government introduced a Bill, namely, 'Lokpal Bill 2011' in the Lok Sabha on 4th August
2011. This Bill was referred to the Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Personnel, Public Grievances, law and Justice on  the 8th August, 2011 for examination and
report and this was followed by discussions in both the houses of Parliament on
27th August 2011. A sense of the House was communicated to the Standing Committee on
the basis of discussions  in  the Houses. The Department Related Parliamentary Standing
Committee after extensive discussion with all the concerned Stakeholders suggested major
amendments as regards the scope and content of the Bill introduced in August 2011. It also
recommended that Lokpal at the centre and Lokayukta at the level of  the States be conferred
constitutional status in its 48th Report of  9th December 2011. Upon consideration of the
recommendations of the Standing Committee, it is proposed to establish the institution of
Lokpal at  the Centre and Lokayuktas at the State level with constitutional status and, for this
purposes to carry out necessary amendments to the Constitution by inserting a new Part,
namely "PART XIV B titled "LOK PAL & LOKAYUKTA"
2. The Constitution  (one hundred  and sixteenth Amendment) Bill 2011. seeks to
provide, inter alia, for:
(a) insertion of Articles 323 C and 323 D in the proposed Part XIVB of the
Constitution.
(b) setting up the institution of Lokpal for the Union with powers of
superintendence and direction relating to holding a preliminary inquiry causing
investigation to be made and prosectuion of offences in respect of  complaints made to
them under any law for the prevention of corruption made by the Parliament as an
autonomous and independent body.
(c) Appointment of chairperson and such number of members, their conditions
of service and tenure, as Parliament may by law determine.
(d) Similar dispensation for the institution of Lokayuktas at the level of the
States.
3. The Bill seeks to achieve the aforesaid objectives.
N
EW DELHI; V .  NARA Y ANASAMY.
The 21st December, 2011.
3

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of  India.
————
(Shri V. Narayanasamy, Minister of State in the Ministry of Personnel, Public
Grievances and Pensions)
GMGIPMRND—3451LS(S3)—21-12-2011.