EE —  —=— << —-——_-

As INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

0 DEC ANS

Bill No. 135 of 2005.

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2005
By
~ Suri K.S. Rao, M.P

A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as

follows :— |
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2005.

2. After article 262 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely:—

“262A. (7) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, all inter-State rivers
shall be under the exclusive jurisdiction of the Government of India and no State shall

have any control on any inter-State river.
(2) It shall be duty of the Government of India to link all inter-State rivers
in the country at the earliest.

Short title.

Insertion of
new article
262A.

Inter-linking
of inter-State

-_Tivers.


2 : a

(3) The Government of India shali constitute an Expert Committee con- _
sisting of five members who are experts in the fields of Water Resources,
Irrigation, Electricity, Rural Development and Agriculture for making —
recommendations regarding equitable distribution of inter-State river waters —
among the States till the time all the inter-State rivers in country are linked. : ै

(4) The salary, allowances, terms of appointment and conditions of ser- | ५४
vice of the members of the Expert Committee shall be such as may be prescribed —

by Parliament by law.

। (5) The Government of India shall make available necessary officers and —

staff for the functioning of the Expert Committee. a

Explanation.—For the purpose of this article, “inter-State river” includes any —

river which originates in one State and flows into another State or States and also —
includes a tributary. : | ee


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Most of the major rivers in India are inter-State in character, having basins in two or
more States. Every State tries to utilize as much water as it can. Often disputes arise amongst
States with regard to the utilisation of water particularly for irrigation. These water related
disputes are emerging as one of the most important issues so far as inter-State relations are
concerned having a bearing on the integrity of the nation. A number of such disputes are
pending for disposal in various tribunals as well as in the Supreme Court. Since water is a
very emotive issue and the need of States for water is also acute, the litigation is affecting the
farming sector as well

In our country many States are water surplus and every year vast quantity of water
goes waste when the same could have been used for irrigation and other requirements of
States which are water deficit. To avoid such a situation the linking ofall rivers is imperative.
It can be done only when all inter-State rivers are brought under the exclusive jurisdiction of
the Central Government. Till such time all major rivers are inter-linked and a national water
grid is formed, the river water can be allocated amongst the States on the basis of recommen-
dations of an Expert Committee to be appointed by the Central Government.

The Bill seeks to achieve the above objective.

NEW DELHI; K.S. RAO
November 7, 2005,


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 2 of the Bill provides for inter-linking of all major rivers in the country. It further.
provides for constitution of an Expert Committee for equitable distribution of water of inter-

State rivers amongst the States. It is difficult to estimate the expenditure to be involved.

However, it is estimated that an annual expenditure of rupees ten thousand crore is likely to -
be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India

A non-recurring expenditure of about two lakh crore is also likely to be involved for
inter-linking of inter-State rivers



LOK SABHA

A
BILL

further to amend the Constitution of India.

(Shri K.S. Rao, M.P)

MGIPMRND—3473LS(S5)—17.11.2005