1
Bill No. 135 of  2012
THE PROMOTION OF SMALL FAMILY BILL, 2012
By
DR. (SMT.) BOTCHA JHANSI LAKSHMI, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for measures to promote small family norm and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-third Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Promotion of Small Family Act, 2012.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires “Government” means either the
State Government or the Central Government, as the case may be.
3. No person shall procreate more than two living children after a period of one year
from the date of commencement of this Act.
TO BE INTRODUCED IN  LOK SABHA
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
Definition.
No person to
procreate
more than
two living
children.
5

2
4. A person who procreates more than two living children shall—
(a) not be given any employment in any services under the Government and if
he is already in Government service, he shall not be eligible for benefits such as
annual increment, health care facility, leave travel concession facility or any other
facility which the Government provides to its employees from time to time;
(b) not be entitled to have facilities of drawing ration from Public Distribution
System; and
(c) not be entitled to avail benefit in any welfare scheme of the Government.
5. Any person violating the provisions of this Act shall be punished with rigorous
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one year and with fine which shall not
be less than rupees one lakh.
6. Any person who voluntarily decides not to procreate more than one child shall be—
(i) provided a monthly allowance of rupees two thousand in case he is not a
Government servant and rupees five hundred in case he is a Government servant;
(ii) provided with a suitable accommodation at subsidised rates;
(iii) given loans at reducd interest rates; and
(iv) given ration items at subsidised rates.
7. It shall be the responsibility of the Government to take care of the persons who
remain childless after they complete the age of sixty with respect to their boarding, lodging
and medical needs if they have no source of income.
8. In case any person, who has been given benefits under section 6, procreates more
than two children, the benefits given to him shall be immediately withdrawn and the amount
equivalent of the benefits given in the past shall be recovered from him.
9. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide adequate fund for carrying out the purposes of this Act from time to
time.
10. The provisions of this Act and rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force.
11. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any
other law, for the time being in force.
12. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Power to
make rules.
Penalties for
violation.
Punishment.
Incentives for
opting single
child norm.
Government
to look after
those who
remain
childless.
Penalties for
those
procreating
after getting
benefits under
section 6.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Act to have
over-ridding
effect.
Act not in
derogation of
any other law.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The population explosion in the country is posing a serious threat and it is a great
hindrance in the development of the country. The per-capita income in the country is
among the lowest in the world despite the huge increase in GNP/GDP. We are not able to
exploit the benefit of the latest technologies in various fields due to rise in population.
Population explosion results in lack of food, water and other facilities including medical
facilities for the general public. Our neighboring country China has become very successful
in controlling the population by adopting stringent measures, which proves the fact beyond
doubt that without penal measures the population in the country cannot be controlled.
This Bill aims to achieve the above objective.
N
EW DELHI; BOTCHA  JHANSI  LAKSHMI
November 7, 2012.

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 6 of the Bill provides for giving benefits to those persons who opt for single
child norm. Clause 7 provides that the Government shall be responsible for looking after the
couples, who choose to remain childless. Clause 9 provides for payment of adequate funds
to the States for carrying out the purposes of the Act. The expenditure relating to States
shall be borne out of the Consolidated Funds of the respective States. However, the
expenditure in respect of Union territories shall be borne out of the Consolidated Fund of
India. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, is likely to involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees five hundred crore will be involved as
recurring expenditure per annum from the Consolidated Fund of India.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.

5
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 12 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide  for measures to promote small family norm and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
————
[Dr. (Smt.) Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi, M.P.]
GMGIPMRND—3450LS(S3)—30-11-2012.