1
THE SPECIAL FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO THE STATE OF KERALA
BILL, 2015
By
SHRI M.K. RAGHA V AN, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for special financial assistance to the State of Kerala for the purpose of
development of education, especially for girl child, power, transportation
and agriculture.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Special Financial Assistance to the State of Kerala
Act, 2015.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title
and
commencement.
Bill No. 135 of  2015
5
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. There shall be paid such sums of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of India,
every year, as Parliament may by due appropriation provide, as special financial assistance
to the State of Kerala to meet the costs of such schemes of development, as may be undertaken
by the State with the approval of the Union Government for the purpose of development of
education, especially for girl child, power, transportation and agriculture in the State.
3. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force.
Special
financial
assistance to
the State of
Kerala.
Act not in
derogation of
any other law.
5

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The State of Kerala is reeling under severe financial crisis. Substantial money is required
for development of education, infrastructure and agriculture in the State. The allocation of
funds recommended by the 14th Finance Commission is not sufficient to meet the demands
of the State. If development takes place in the State, the Central Government can earn
considerable revenue.
Therefore, a special financial assistance to the State of Kerala is urgently required for
its all round development including development of education, especially for girl child,
power sector, transportation and agriculture in the State.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; M.K. RAGHA VAN
April   8,  2015.
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides that there shall be paid such sums of moneys out of the
Consolidated Fund of India, every year, as Parliament may by due appropriation provide, as
special financial assistance to the State of Kerala to meet the costs of such schemes of
development, as may be undertaken by the State with the approval of the Union Government.
The Bill, therefore, on enactment, will involve expenditure out of the Consolidated
Fund of India for providing special financial assistance to the State of Kerala. As the sums of
money which will be given to the State of Kerala as special financial assistance by
appropriation by law made by Parliament will be known only after the welfare schemes to be
implemented by the State Government with the approval of Union Government are identified,
it is not possible to give the estimates of recurring expenditure, which would be involved out
of the Consolidated Fund of India at this stage.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be incurred from the Consolidated Fund of
India.
4

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for special financial assistance to the State of Kerala for the purpose of
development of education, especially for girl child, power, transportation
and agriculture.
————
(Shri M.K. Raghavan, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—374LS(S3)—30-04-2015.