1
THE SPECIAL FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO THE NATIONAL
CAPITAL  REGION BILL, 2016
By
SHRI RAJENDRA AGRAWAL,  M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for special financial assistance to the National Capital Region for the
purpose of harmonised and balanced development of growth-oriented
infrastructure in all areas of National Capital Region.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Special Financial Assistance to the National Capital
Region Act, 2016.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No. 136 of  2016
Short title
and
commencement.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "National Capital Region" shall have the same meaning as assigned to it
under clause (f) of section 2 of the National Capital Region Planning Board Act, 1985;
and
(b) "Regional Plan—2021" means the Regional Plan notified by the National
Capital Region Planning Board on 17th September, 2005 for the development of the
National Capital Region under the National Capital Region Planning Board Act, 1985.
3. There shall be paid such sums of money out of the Consolidated Fund of India, every
year, as Parliament may by due appropriation by law provide, as special financial assistance
to the Government of the National Capital Territory of Delhi and the Governments of the
States of Haryana, Uttar Pradesh and Rajasthan to meet the costs of such development
works as may be undertaken by the Government of the National Capital Territory of Delhi
and the Governments of the States of Haryana, Uttar Pradesh and Rajasthan with the approval
of Union Government for the purpose of—
(i) implementation of Regional Plan—2021;
(ii) improving the growth-supportive and environment-friendly infrastructure
for balanced development of National Capital Region;
(iii) improving connectivity of National Capital Territory of Delhi with other
districts of the National Capital Region by implementing new infrastructure projects
and improving the existing roads and rail infrastructure;
(iv) improving public utilities like housing, power, water, sanitation, education
and health care in the National Capital Region; and
(v) equitable relocation of resources and economic activities and equitable
development of all sub-regions within the National Capital Region.
4. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force.
Special
financial
assistance to
National
Capital
Region.
Definitions.
Act not to be
in derogation
of any other
law.
5
10
15
20
25
2 of 1985.
2 of 1985.

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
As per 2011 census, 460.69 lakh people live in 168 towns (Comprising 22 Class-I and 13
Class-II cities and 7206 rural settlements) falling in the National Capital Region (NCR), which
has an area of 34, 144 sq. km., NCR region is the most urbanized region in India with
62.6 per cent. urbanisation as per 2011 census. The rapid growth of urban population through
migration has put heavy pressure on public utilities like water, power, housing, sanitation,
transport, health, education, etc. in the National Capital Region. Due to unplanned expansion
and constructions and encroachments in the NCR, some of the areas are susceptible to
disaster.
Delhi is the largest contributor to GDP of NCR. Delhi is the main centre for providing
services. Sub-regions of the States of Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh are dominated by
agriculture and region of the State of Haryana is a mixture of industry and service sector.
In a study by National Capital Region Planning Board (NCRPB) titled 'Economic Profile
of NCR—2015' it has been found that share of sub-region of the State of Uttar Pradesh in
GDP of NCR has been declining consistently. According to 2011 census, out of total of
6,226,491 rural workers in NCR, sub-region of the State of Uttar Pradesh has the maximum
number of rural worker (2,513,152) and the National Capital Territory of Delhi has the lowest
number of rural workers (130227). Thus, according to existing local socio-economic conditions
of the sub-regions, there is an immediate need for providing common infrastructure
i.e. power, highways, railways, over-bridges, etc. for balanced development of the NCR.
National Capital Region is an integrated growth zone and it is necessary to modernise the
non-farm activities and promote agro-based industries by building rural infrastructure in
order to enhance per capita incomes and raise the living standards in a balanced manner.
As per recommendation made under the Master Plan for Delhi—1962, a statutory body
for NCR, that is, the National Capital Region Planning Board (NCRPB) was set up in 1985 by
the law of Parliament. After thirty-one years of setting up of NCRPB, there is huge gap
between its target and achievements even for establishing basic infrastructure facilities to
increase connectivity between the parts of Western Uttar Pradesh and NCT of Delhi. The
existing current transportation network i.e. roads and railways has long way to go for
accomplishing the mission envisioned during formation of board.
The NCR regional plan—2021, which was notified in September 2005, estimates total
required investment of rupees 193752 crore for development of quality infrastructure in
power, water, sewage and sanitation by 2021. This estimated investment amount excludes
the investments for land development for residential/commercial/industrial/institutional
projects.
It is, therefore, necessary that the Central Government should immediately provide
special financial assistance to harness the overall development impulse of National Capital
Region in order to make the entire region a region of global excellence as envisioned in NCR
Regional Plan—2021.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RAJENDRA  AGRAW AL
April 12, 2016.
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides that there shall be paid such sums of moneys out of the
Consolidated Fund of India, every year, as Parliament may by due appropriation by law
provide, as special assistance to the National Capital Region to meet the costs of such
schemes and projects for development, as may be undertaken by States Governments of
Uttar Pradesh, Haryana and Rajasthan and National Capital Territory of Delhi with the approval
of the Government of India.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure out of the Consolidated Fund of
India. As the sums of money which will be given to National Capital Region as special
financial assistance by appropriation by law made by Parliament will be known only after the
developmental works which are to be implemented by the concerned Governments with the
approval of the Central Government are identified, it is not possible at present to give the
estimate of recurring expenditure which would be involved out of the Consolidated Fund of
India.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be incurred from the Consolidated Fund of
India.
4

LOK  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
to provide for special financial assistance to the National Capital Region for the
purpose of harmonised and balanced development of growth-oriented
infrastructure in all areas of National Capital Region.
—————
(Shri Rajendra Agrawal, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—252LS(S3)—04.05.2016.