AS INTRODUCED IN Lox Sanita

95 ons?

Bill No. 136 of 2000
__—_——

THE COMPULSORY HOME-GUARD TRAINING BILL, 2000
By
‘Suet CHanprakanr Kuaire, M.P.

A

BILL
to make home-guard training compulsory for all able-bodied persons,

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1, (7) This Act may be called the Compulsory Home-Guard ‘Training Act, 2000,

(2) It extends to the whole of India.

(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.

2. Home-guard training for a period of not less than two years shall be
compulsory for all able-bodied persons who have attained the age of eighteen years
and not crossed the age of twenty-five years:

Provided that persons enrolled in the Territorial Army, the Border Security Force,
the Central Reserve Police Force, the Central Industrial Security Force, the Indo-Tibetan
Border Police or any other para-military force, shall be exempted from the provisions of
this section.

Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment,

Compulsory
home-guard
\waining for all
able-bodied
persons.


Scheme to
establish
Institutions,
Utilisation of
services of
{rained persons
during natural
calamities, etc.

Scholarship
and other
incentives to
those persons
whose service
have been
utilised,

2

3. The Central Government shall formulate a scheme to establish mecessary
institutions to give effect to the provisions of section 2,

4. (4) The Central Government may utilise the services of Persons who have been
given home-guard training during natural calamities, accidents or mishaps or on such
other occasions as the Central Government may deem fit.

(2) Every person whose services have been utilised under sub-section (1) shall be
given a certificate by the Central Government.

5, Every person who has been given a certificate shall be entitled to the following
incentives, namely:—

(i) scholarships for higher education;
(ii) preference in employment;
(iii) preference in allotment of plots/house sites;

(iy) preference in any other scheme launched by Central ora State Government;
and

(९) loans at concessional rates for self-employment from banks and financial
institutions.

10

1s


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 2 of the Bill provides for home-guard training to all able-bodied youth.
Clause 3 provides for seting up of necessary institutions. Clause 5 provides for scholarships
and other incentives to youth whose services have been utilised,

‘The Bill, therefore, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. {t
is likely to involve a recurring expenditure of about rupees five thousand crore per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees three thousand crore is also likely to be involved.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 3 of the Bill provides for formulating a scheme for imparting compulsory
home-guard training to all able-bodied persons. The scheme has to be administered by the
Government of India. The delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.


LOK SABHA

A
BILL
to make home-guard training compulsory for all able-bodied persons.

(Shri Chandrakant Khaire, M.P_)
MGIP(PLU)MRND—2232L S—03-08-2000.