5 
10 
15 
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABRA ON 
BiD No. 138 of 1985 . 
THE INDIAN RAILWAYS (AMENDMENT) -BILL, 1985 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the IndiAn Railways Act, 1890. 
B. it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-sixth Year of the Republic 
ef lalUa as follows:-
I. This Act may be called the Indian Railways (Amendment) Act, Sherr 
191G. title. 
• 40:. 
Z. In section 100B of the Indian Railways Act, 1890,-
(i) for the words "five hundred rupees", the words 
thousand rupees" shall be substituted; 
"two 
Amend_ 
mentot 
section 
110B ot 
Act 9 
(ii) the following proviso shall be inserted at the end, 
ly:-
name- ot 1890. 
"Provided that in the absence of special and adequate 
reasons to the contrary to be mentioned in the judgment ot the 
court, where a railway servant or any other person without 
authority in this behalf, causes to be obstructed any train by 
tampering with, disconnecting or otherwise interfering in any 
other manner with its hose-pi~, he shall be punishable with im-
prisonment for a term which shall not be less than six months 
and with fine wh!ch shall not be less than five hundred rupees." • 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
{goG . 
Section ~Lof the Indian Railways Act, 1890, which provides for 
punishment for persons obstructing or causing to be obstructed or at-
tempting to obstruct running of trains, etc., h,s not been adequate to 
deal with the problem of obstructions to trains, particulady by dis-
-connection of hose-pipes. It is, therefore, proposed to enhance the 
maximrun amount of fine which may be imposed under the ~ection 
from five hundred rupees to two thousand rupees. It is also propose·:! 
to provide for a minimum punishment of imprisonment for a term 
which shall not be less than six months and fine which shall not be less 
than five hundred rupees in ca~es of obstruction of the running of 
trains by disconnecting hose-pipes. 
2. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 19th July, 1985. 
• 
• • 
BANSI LAL. 

ANNEXURE 
'EXTRACT fROM THE INDIAN RAILWAYS ACT, 1890 
(9 OF 1890) 
• • • • • 
l00B. If a railway servant, when on duty or otherwise, or any other 
person obstructs or causes to be obstructed or attempts to obstruet any 
train, rail-car or other rolling-stock upon a railway, by squatting, ptcJtet-
. ing, keeping without authority any rolling-stock on the railway or tam-
pering with signal gear or otherwise, he shall be punishable with im-
prisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine 
which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both. 
• • • • • 
Obstruct.·~ 
runmo,ot 
train, etc. 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Indian Raih"GtlI Act, 1890. 
(Shri Bansi LA!, 
Minister of Railways) 