1
THE CONTEMPT OF COURTS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015
By
DR. SANJAY JAISWAL, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Contempt of Courts Act, 1971.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Contempt of Courts (Amendment) Act, 2015.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 1 of the Contempt of Courts Act, 1971 (hereinafter referred to as the
principal Act), after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
“(3) It shall apply to the Supreme Court of India and the High Courts in exercise
of their powers under article 129 and 215, respectively, of the Constitution of India.”.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 136 of 2015
70 of 1971. Amendment
of section 1.
5
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
3. In the principal Act, in section 2, in clause (c), sub-clause (i) shall be omitted.
4. In the principal Act, for section 13, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
“13. Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force,—
(a) no court shall adjudge a person guilty under this Act for a contempt of
court unless it is satisfied that the contempt is of such a nature that it
substantially interferes, or tends substantially to interfere with the due course
of justice;
(b) the court may permit, in any proceeding for contempt of court,
justification by truth as a valid defence if it is satisfied that the request for
invoking the said defence is bona fide:
Provided that no person shall be held guilty of a contempt of court for
making or publishing any statement relating to a judge or a court, which is true
or which he, in good faith, believes to be true.
Explanation.— Nothing will be believed in good faith unless it is believed
with due care and caution.”.
Amendment
of section 2.
Substitution
of new
section for
section 13.
Contempts
not punishable
in certain
cases.
5
10
15

3
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The present Bill is an attempt to bring the contempt law in conformity with
constitutional liberty and the public interest in disclosure of truth. The Bill gives shape to
most of the recommendations made by the Standing Committee on Personnel, Public
Grievances, Law and Justice in its Twelfth Report presented to the Parliament in
August 2005 pertaining to the Contempt of Courts (Amendment) Bill, 2004. A fresh modern
and democratic approach is required in India to do away with the old anachronistic view
related to contempt law.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SANJAY JAISWAL
April  1,  2015.

4
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONTEMPT OF COURTS ACT, 1971
(70 OF 1971)
* * * * * * *
1. (1) This Act may be called the Contempt of Courts Act, 1971.
(2) It extends to the whole of India:
Provided that it shall not apply to the State of Jammu and Kashmir except to the extent
to which the provisions of this Act relate to contempt of the Supreme Court.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) * * * * * * *
(b)* * * * * * *
(c) “criminal contempt” means the publication (whether by words, spoken or
written, or by signs, or by visible representations, or otherwise) of any matter or the
doing of any other act whatsoever which—
(i) scandalises or tends to scandalise, or lowers or tends to lower the
authority of, any court.
* * * * * * *
13. Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force,—
(a) no court shall impose a sentence under this Act for a contempt of court
unless it is satisfied that the contempt is of such a nature that it substantially interferes,
or tends substantially to interfere with the due course of justice;
(b) the court may permit, in any proceeding for contempt of court, justification
by truth as a valid defence if it is satisfied that it is in public interest and the request
for invoking the said defence is bona fide.
* * * * * * *
Short title
and extent.
Definitions.
Contempts
not punishable
in certain
cases.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Contempt of Courts Act, 1971.
————
(Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—381LS(S3)—30-04-2015.