1
Short title and
commencement.
THE ANCIENT MONUMENTS PRESERV ATION (AMENDMENT)
BILL,  2018
By
SHRI MULLAPPALLY RAMACHANDRAN,  M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Ancient Monuments Preservation Act, 1904.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of  India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Ancient Monuments Preservation (Amendment)
Act,  2018.
 (2)  It shall come  into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. After section 20C of the Ancient Monuments Preservation Act, 1904, the following
sections shall be inserted, namely:—
“20D. Notwithstanding anything in this Act, no ancient monument held, owned
or acquired by the Central Government or a State Government shall be transferred by
way of lease, sale or otherwise by that Government.
Bill  No. 136 of  2018
Insertion of
new sections
20D and 20E.
Prohibition
of transfer of
ancient
monuments
by the
Governments.
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
Government to
be solely
responsible for
maintenance of
ancient
monuments.
20E. The Central Government or a State Government, as the case may be, in
whose possession an ancient monument is, shall be solely responsible for the
maintenance, upkeep, improvement of profitability and development as tourist place
of such ancient monuments.”.

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The ancient monuments being part of our rich heritage and wealth of nation have to be
preserved to uphold the nation’s great traditions and history. The Ancient Monuments
Preservation Act, 1904 provides for the acquisition and maintenance of such properties that
come under the description of ancient monuments. However, the Central and State
Governments are, of late, transferring by way of sale, lease or otherwise, properties which are
ancient monuments and heritage sites of our country. Such transfers need to be prevented.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Ancient Monuments Preservation Act, 1904
with a view to:—
(a) prohibit transfer of ancient monuments by the Central or State Government by way
of lease, sale or otherwise; and
(b) make the Central Government and the State Governments to be solely responsible
for the maintenance of ancient monuments.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; MULLAPPALLY RAMACHANDRAN
July 4, 2018.
3

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Ancient Monuments Preservation Act, 1904
————
(Shri Mullappally Ramachandran,  M.P .)
MGIPMRND—602LS(S3)—25-07-2018.