     AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No.  136  of  2021
THE POPULATION (CONTROL AND MANAGEMENT)
BILL, 2021
 By
SHRI BHOLA SINGH, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for a comprehensive policy towards stabilizing the population of the
country by providing voluntary and safe access to methods of contraception,
establishment of a Population Planning Agency, promotion of schemes that
incentivises the small family norm, creating awareness on family planning
and providing access of education to empower every girl child and for
all matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-second Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.(1) This Act may be called the Population (Control and Management) Act,
2021.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “ Agency” means the National Population Planning Agency constituted
under section 3;
(b) “ appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
Short title,
extent
and
commencement.    5
Definitions.
10

(c) “ hospital” means any private or public healthcare institution that provides
general, critical care or specialized healthcare;
(d) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(e) “small family” means a family having one or two living children.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, within one year of the coming into force of
this Act constitute an Agency to be known as the National Population Planning Agency
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) The Agency shall consist of:—
(a) Secretary, Union Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation—
ex-officio, Chairperson;
(b) Secretary, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare — ex-officio, Secretary;
(c) Chairperson, National Commission for Women — ex-officio member;
(d) Secretary, Ministry of Women and Child Development — ex-officio
member;
(e) Secretary, Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment — ex-officio,
member;
(f) Secretary, Ministry of Education — member; and
(g) two persons, with experience of at least ten years in the social sector,
one of whom shall be a woman.
(3) The Central Government shall appoint such number of officers and staff
as it considers necessary for the functioning of the Agency.
(4) The salary and allowances payable to and terms and conditions of services
of the members, officers and staff of the agency shall be such as may be prescribed.
4. The Agency shall—
(a) conduct nation-wise surveys at an interval of every five years to assess
the growth in population and analyse the trends;
(b) formulate and implement the national population control strategy and
monitor its implementation throughout the country;
(c) establish recreational centres at panchayat level to host traditional art
forms to disseminate messages regarding family planning;
(d) formulate schemes to provide for free education up to college level for
the first child and to the second child only if gap between the two is greater
than three years;
(e) formulate schemes to provide weightage in Government jobs for the
single child;
(f) ensure dissemination of proper information regarding safe family planning
methods such as contraception and spacing between births;
(g) include in school curriculum a proper syllabus on the importance of
population stabilization;
(h) undertake, promote and publish studies relating to the Indian population;
(i) conduct awareness campaigns relating to medical procedures regarding
birth control; and
(j) undertake such other activities as may be prescribed by the
Central Government.
2
Functions of
the Agency.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Constitution
of a National
Population
Planning
Agency.

3
Meetings of
the Agency.
5
10
5. The Agency shall meet at such times and places and shall observe such rules
of procedure in regard to transaction of business at its meetings as may be prescribed.
6. (1) The appropriate Government shall establish Family Planning Quality
Assurances Committees at the State and District level.
(2) The Committee shall,—
(a) ensure quality care in family planning services through accreditation
of every hospital or clinic providing such services;
(b) conduct regular inspections to ensure that services are disseminated
in accordance with standards established by the committee; and
(c) establish a citizen’s grievance redressal mechanism to assess into
faulty disservice at any clinic or hospital.
7. Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force,
every person, who adopts the small family norm, shall be entitled to—
(a) two additional increment as incentive if the person is employed with
the Central or the State Government;
(b) free healthcare at all the public healthcare institutions for the entire
family;
(c) subsidised education for the children at public schools; and
(d) receive such other benefits as may be prescribed by the Central
              Government from time to time.
8. The appropriate Government shall ensure that married couples have access
to quality and affordable contraceptive devices, medicines and healthcare pertaining
to family planning and matters incidental and consequential thereto.
9. The appropriate Government shall —
(a) ensure that measures are taken to secure the right to education of
good quality for women and girls, on an equal basis with men and boys, and
that they complete a full course of primary education; and
(b) review efforts to improve and expand the education of girls and women
at all levels, including at the secondary and higher levels, as well as vocational
education and technical training, in order to, achieve gender equality,
empowerment of women and poverty eradication.
10. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament
by law in this behalf, from time to time, provide requisite funds for carrying out the
purposes of this Act.
11. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the
Central Government, in consultation with the State Governments, may make such
order or give such direction, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as
appears to it to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of
three years from the commencement of this Act.
12. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as
soon as may be after it is made, before  each  House of  Parliament, while it is in
session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session
or in two or more successive  sessions, and  if, before the expiry of the  session
immediately following  the session or  the successive sessions aforesaid, both
Establishment
of Family
Planning
Quality
Assurance
Committees at
State and
District level.
Access ofsafe andvoluntaryfamilyplanningmeasures.
CentralGovernmentto provide
funds.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Power to
make rules.
Incentive-
based
population
control
measures.
Access toqualityeducation tothe girl child.
20
25
30
35
15
40
45

5
4
Houses agree in  making  any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree
that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything
previously done under that rule.
(3) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as
soon as may be after it is made, before the State Legislature.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
India is the second most populous country in the world despite the fact that it
was the first country to enact a national population control policy. Conversely, India’s
population has grown steadily since independence. Studies suggest that the country
could surpass China’s population by the year 2030, thereby, becoming the most
populous country in the world.
A high human population can impact natural resources and social infrastructure,
which in turn places pressure on a country’s sustainability. Indian population accounts
for 20 per cent. of the total world population, however, the Indian land area is only
2.5 per cent. of the total area of the world. In a developing country such as India
where a large section of the population still lives in abject poverty with little to no
resources, the need for stabilization of the population growth becomes crucial.
A stabilized population ensures that every citizen can get access to the right amount
of resources to live a life of dignity.
Adopting a rights-based approach, there is need to provide for voluntary and
safe access to family planning services. The increase in access to family planning
facilities will empower women. Additionally, access to these services allows spacing
of pregnancy which can reduce pregnancy related health risks in women. It would
also ensure that the infant is healthier thereby reducing infant mortality rate in the
country. Therefore, a comprehensive policy for population stabilization can help in
moving towards a healthier population.
Hence this Bill.
  NEW DELHI;                                          BHOLA SINGH
July 20, 2021.
5

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for constitution of a National Population Planning
Agency. It also provides for appointment of persons with experience in social sector
as members, officers and staff to the Agency. Clause 6 provides for establishment of
Family Planning Quality Assurance Committees at the State and District level by the
appropriate Governments. Clause 7 provides for certain incentives for adopting of
small family norm. Clause 8  provides for access to quality and affordable contraceptive
devices, medicines and healthcare pertaining to family planning. Clause 9 provides
for access to quality education to the girl child. Clause 10 provides that the Central
Government shall provide requisite funds carrying out the purposes of the Act. The
Bill, therefore, if enacted would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of
India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about rupees two thousand crore
per annum would be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees two hundred crore is also likely to
be involved.
6

7
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 12 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to make rules for
carrying out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only,
the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
to provide for a comprehensive policy towards stabilizing the population of the
country by providing voluntary and safe access to methods of contraception,
establishment of a Population Planning Agency, promotion of schemes that
incentivizes the small family norm, creating awareness on family planning
and providing access of education to empower every girl child and for
all matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Bhola Singh, M.P .)