As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

Bill No. 136 of 2005

THE PROVISION OF INFRASTRUCTURAL FACILITIES IN ALL
EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS BILL, 2005

By

Suri K.S. Rao, M.P.
A
| BILL
to provide for infrastructural facilities an all educational institutions in the country
- and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—

1. (1) This Act may be called the Provision of Infrastructural Facilities in All Educational Short title,
। extent and

Institutions Act, 2005.
commencement.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force at once.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— Definitions.

(i) ‘appropriate Government’ means a State Government or the Union Territory
administration, as the case may be;


Appropriate
Government to “
conduct survey
of all
institutions.

Central
Government to
provide funds
to appropriate
Governments.

Educational
Institutions
Upgradation
Fund.

2

(ii) ‘educational institution’ includes any educational institution, whether run by
appropriate Government or any organisation receiving aid out of the consolidated —
funds of the appropriate State Government and includes any institution whether
imparting primary, secondary, higher or technical education but does not include any
institution which is privately managed.

(iii) ‘infrastructural facilities' means and includes,—

(A) in respect of educational institutions imparting primary and middle
level education:— '

(a) permanent structure;
(6) necessary furniture and black board;
(c) drinking water; |
(a) play ground; and
(e) toilet facilities.
(B) in respect of higher secondary and dechnical institutions:— —
(a) permanent structure;
(6) necessary furniture;
(c) drinking water and toilet facilities;
(d) play ground;
(८) library;
(f) at least one computer for every 10 students;
(g) fully equipped laboratories;
(8) hostel facilities with boarding; and
(1) canteen facility

Provided that keeping in view the geographical location or other factors
the appropriate Government may request for more infrastructural facilities in
schools imparting primary and middle level education.

3. (/) The appropriate Government shall conduct a survey of all educational institutions
within its jurisdiction and prepare a list of educational institutions not having the requisite
infrastructural facilities

(2) The appropriate Government shall, as soon as possible but not later than six months
from the date of commencement of this Act, send the list of educational institutions within
its jurisdiction not having the requisite infrastructural facilities to the Central Government.

4, (1) The Central Government shall, on receipt of the list from the appropriate
Government under section 3, provide the appropriate Government the funds for
providing infrastructural facilities in the educational institutions.

(2) While releasing the funds, the Central Government may ask for such
information as it deems necessary from the appropriate Government and release the
subsequent instalments on receipt of utilisation certificate of the funds released earlier
from the appropriate Government

5. (7) The Central Government shall constitute a Fund to be known as Educational
Institutions Upgradation Fund to which the Central Government may contribute such
sums as may be authorised by Parliament by law and such other sums as may be received
by way of donation, contribution or assistance by the Central Government or
appropriate Government shall also be credited to the Fund.



3

(2) All expenditure in connection with the implementation of the provisions of
this Act shall be met out of the Fund.

Power to make

6. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
rules.

carrying out the purposes of this Act.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Lakhs of schools and educational institutions, whether run by Government or receiving
funds from the Government are ina very bad shape. They do not even have basic infrastructural
facilities like permanent structure, furniture, drinking water, etc. Schools imparting higher
education or technical education do not have library and computer facilities. State
Governments are not in a position to bear the expenditure.

Therefore, it is proposed that the-Central Government shall bear the expenditure on
upgradation and provision of basic facilities in all educational institutions. When primary
education has been made a fundamental right, no purpose will be served if schools do not
have adequate facilities. | |

The Bill seeks to achieve the above objective.

New DELHI K.S. RAO
November 7, 2005,



FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 4 of the Bill seeks to provide that the Central Government shall provide funds
for infrastructural facilities in all educational institutions in the country. Clause.5 provides.
for setting up of Educational Institutions Upgradation Fund. Therefore, the Bill, if enacted
will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely that an annual
recurring expenditure of about rupees five thousand crore may be incurred.

A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees fifty thousand crore is also likely to be
involved. |


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 6 of the Bill empowers the Government to make rules for carrying out the
purposes of this Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

जन



~ LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for infrastructural facilities in all educational institutions in the country
and for matters connected therewith. ल्‍

(Shri K.S. Rao, M.P.)

MGIPMRND—3481LS(S3)—17-11-2005.