1
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
THE FAMILIES OF FARMERS (FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE AND
REHABILITA TION) BILL, 2017
By
SHRIMATI SUPRIYA SULE, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for financial assistance to the widows and other dependant family members
of farmers who have committed suicide in order to enable such families to earn
sustainable livelihood and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Y ear of the Republic of  India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Families of Farmers (Financial Assistance and
Rehabilitation) Act, 2017.
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
Bill No.  136  of  2017
5

2
Definitions.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State or a Union Territory
with Legislative Assembly, the Government of that State or the Administration of that
Union, respectively, and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "bereaved families" means the widow and children of the deceased farmers
who have committed suicide since the year 2000;
(c) "children" means the sons and daughters below the age of 18 years of the
deceased farmers who have committed suicide since the year 2000;
(d) "local authority" means the Municipal Corporation or the Municipal Council
or the Nagar Panchayat or the Zilla Parishad or any Urban Local Body;
(e) "notification" means a notification as published in the Official Gazette;
(f) "prescribed" means as prescribed by the rules made under this Act; and
(g) "widow" means a legally married woman of the deceased farmer who has
committed suicide since the year 2000.
3. The appropriate Government shall waive off the outsanding debt of the farmers who
have committed suicide since the year 2000.
4. ( 1) The Central Government shall provide financial assistance to the State
Government, subject to the extent of agrarian distress in the State concerned.
(2) The Central Government shall, in consultation with the State Governments
concerned, prescribe the criteria for agricultural distress in a State.
(3) The funds shall be allocated amongst the States based on the criteria for agricultural
distress as prescribed under sub-section (2).
5.  The appropriate Government shall provide compensation to the bereaved families
in addition to waiving off the debt of the farmers as prescribed under section 3.
6. (1) The appropriate Government shall conduct skill development programmes for
widows to help them develop sustainable means of livelihood alternate to agriculture.
(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1), the appropriate Government shall conduct
skill augmenting workshops either for handicrafts or for the revival of the skill endemic to
the area.
7. (1) The appropriate Government shall provide alternate means of livelihood to the
widows for setting up of small scale industries and handicrafts so as to enable them to cater
to the livelihood needs of their children.
(2) The appropriate Government shall, after widows have acquired necessary skills
from the skill augmentation workshops conducted by the Government under sub-section
(2) of section 6, provide interest free loan to the widows as the initial investment needed for
setting up of small scale industry, dairy farms or poultry farms as an alternate means of
livelihood to agriculture:
Provided that in case of widows with less than two hectares of the farm land, interest
free loans for the initial investment shall be provided by the appropriate Government to set
up small scale industry.
Loan waiver
to farmers.
Financial
Assistance to
State
Governments.
Compensation
to bereaved
families.
Skill
Development
programmes
for widows.
Alternate
means of
livelihood to
the widows
and provision
of interest
free loan as
initial
investment.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
8. The appropriate Government shall provide the necessary equipments and inputs
for the first sowing season to the bereaved families opting for farming as means of livelihood.
9. The appropriate Government shall open schools in the drought affected areas,
especially in rural India, to make the schools and education more accessible to children of
those areas.
10. The appropriate Government shall provide funds to improve access to affordable
and reliable public health care services to the bereaved families.
11. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide the requisite funds to the State Governments, from time to time, for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
12. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
13. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force applicable to the widows covered under this Act.
14. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification on annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
(3) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before the State Legislature.
Appropriate
government
to provide
equipment
and inputs to
the bereaved
families.
Schools for
children in
the drought
affected
areas.
Health of the
bereaved
families.
Central
Government
to provide
necessary
funds.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Act not in
derogation of
other laws.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
In the last decade, the number of farmers committing suicide has increased drastically
necessitating the Nation Crime Records Bureau (NCRB) to release separate data on suicides
of farmers. In 2014, the farmers' suicides in India stood at 5,650. The main reason behind the
farmers' suicides is their indebtedness. As per the NCRB statistics, bankruptcy and
indebtedness is the main factor contributing to about 20.6% of the total farmers' suicides.
The Government policies at the present involve giving a onetime monetary compensation to
the families of the farmers who commit suicide. Given the indebtedness behind the farmers'
suicides, this compensation will not help the bereaved families in sustaining livelihood.
Thus it is of importance that the Government provides for a comprehensive rehabilitation
programme for the widows and their children.
The small and marginal farmers with less than two hectares of land area are among the
most affected classes of farmers. With their small land holdings making it economically
unviable for introduction of farm technologies, they face greater probability of going bankrupt.
The NCRB data depict the suicide rate of small and marginal farmers to be at 72.4%.
The Central Government must provide financial assistance to the States, so that they
are able to conduct rehabilitation programmes for the bereaved families. This must be in
addition to the welfare policies adopted by the various State Governments towards the
widows. While providing the financial assistance to the States, the State-wise variation in
the agrarian distress must be taken into consideration. For instance, Maharashtra accounts
for nearly 50% of the total farmers' suicides with the figure standing at 2,658 of total number
of suicides by cultivators. The State Governments must also allocate the funds based on the
degree of agrarian crisis. The regions of Marathwada and Vidarbha are the most affected
and hence the State Government must allocate more funds in these regions.
In India, at present the governments at most provide a onetime monetary compensation
to the widows. There is no comprehensive policy to ensure sustainable means of livelihood
to widows.
The focus of the Governments must be on providing sustainable livelihood to the
widows and their families. This can be done through skill development programmes for
widows, helping them in setting up of small scale units etc. The Government can also help
the families diversify their income through investments in dairy and poultry farms.
To ensure that the education of the children in these distressed areas is uninterrupted,
new Government schools must be opened and the study conditions of the existing schools
in the rural areas must be improved.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SUPRIYA  SULE
June 28, 2017.
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to provides for the waiver of loans of the farmers who have
committed suicide since the year 2000. Clause 4 provides for the financial assistance to the
States to the extent of agrarian distress in the State concerned. Clause 5 provides for financial
compensation to the bereaved families. Clause 6 provides for conducting skill development
programmes for widows. Clause 7 provides interest free loans for initial investment for
setting up of small scale units to bereaved families with less than two hectares of farm land.
Clause 18 provides for farm equipment and inputs required for the first sowing season.
Clause 9 provides for the institution of schools in the drought affected areas. Clause 10
provides for the affordable and reliable public health care services to the bereaved families.
Clause 11 provides for the Central Government to allocate requisite funds to the States. The
Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is
estimated that a recurring expenditure of about rupees five thousand crore per annum would
be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees fifty crore is also likely to be involved.
5

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 14 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
6

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for financial assistance to the widows and other dependant family members of
farmers who have committed suicide in order to enable such families to earn sustainable
livelihood and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shrimati Supriya Sule, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—957LS(S3)—20-07-2017.