1
THE EUTHANASIA (REGULATION) BILL, 2019
By
SHRI BHARTRUHARI MAHTAB, M.P.
A
BILL
to regulate termination of life of persons who are in a permanent vegetative state or
terminally ill and facing unbearable suffering and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Euthanasia (Regulation) Act, 2019.
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "active euthanasia" means termination of life of a person who is terminally ill
and facing unbearable suffering by administration of lethal drugs;
(b) "Board" means the Evaluation and Review Board constituted under
section 3;
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
Definitions.
Bill No. 136 of  2019
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(c) "Committee" means the Committee constituted by the Chief Medical Officer
of a Government Hospital under section 8;
(d) "passive euthanasia" means termination of life of a person who is in a
permanent vegetative state for not less than six months by withdrawal of life support
system;
(e) "physician" means a medical practitioner registered with the Medical Council
of India; and
(f) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
a Board to be known as the Evaluation and Review Board.
(2) The Board shall consist of—
(a) Director General of Health Services in the Union Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare, who shall be ex-officio Chairperson of the Board;
(b) two eminent physicians;
(c) a jurist of repute; and
(d) an eminent person having experience
in ethics or social work, to be appointed by the Central Government in such manner, as
may be prescribed, as members of the Board.
4.  (1) The Board shall have such officers and employees as may be necessary for the
efficient discharge of its functions.
(2) The term and other conditions of service of officers and employees of the Board
shall be such as may be prescribed.
5. The Board shall examine applications of active euthanasia and passive euthanasia
made under sections 7 and 8, respectively and give its opinion thereon:
Provided that in examining an application of euthanasia in respect of a child below the
age of eighteen years, the Board shall associate a paediatrician if neither of the physician in
the Board is a paediatrician:
Provided further that in respect of an application of active euthanasia, the opinion of
the Board shall be given within three weeks of the receipt of such application.
6. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Penal Code, 1860 or any other
law for the time being in force,—
(a) a physician shall not be deemed to have committed any offence for
performing an act of termination of life through active euthanasia or passive euthanasia
in accordance with the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder;
(b) no person applying for termination of life through active euthanasia or
passive euthanasia either for himself or for a person in respect of whom he is so
authorised under this Act shall be deemed to have committed any offence.
7. An application for termination of life through active euthanasia shall be made to the
Board by that person himself or where that person, by reason of his illness, lack of mental
faculties or age or such other reasons, as may be prescribed, is unable to express his
consent, by his parents or spouse or children or siblings or legal guardian.
8. (1) An application for termination of life through passive euthanasia shall be made
to the Chief Medical Officer of a Government hospital by the parents or spouse or children
or siblings or legal guardian of that person.
Constitution
of Evaluation
and Review
Board.
Officers and
employees of
the Board.
Examination
of application
of active and
passive
euthanasia.
Euthanasia
not to be an
offence.
Application
of active
euthanasia.
Application of
passive
euthanasia.
45 of 1860
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
(2) On receipt of an application under sub-section (1), the Chief Medical Officer shall
constitute a Committee consisting of three physicians for examining the person in respect of
whom an application has been made and giving its opinion thereon.
(3) Notwithstanding anything in sub-section ( 2), where the application made under
sub-section (1) is in respect of a person, whose any organ is to be transplanted to another
person, or a girl child, the Chief Medical Officer shall forward that application to the Board.
9.  If the Board or the Committee, after examining the person in respect of whom an
application has been made is of the opinion that the life of that person requires to be
terminated by active euthanasia or passive euthanasia, as the case may be, it shall issue a
certificate to that effect containing therein the reasons for such opinion.
10.  No person shall be administered active euthanasia or passive euthanasia under
this Act unless he makes an application in a Court of Session and such Court permits the
application of euthanasia.
11. (1) On receipt of an application of euthanasia under section 10, the Court shall
appoint a team of lawyers to investigate and enquire as to whether the patient, actually and
without any extraneous influence of any kind, desires to terminate his life through euthanasia
and make a report thereon.
(2) If the Court is satisfied with the report, it shall grant permission for euthanasia in
the prescribed form under its seal and signature.
12. (1) On production of permission from the Court of Session, the Civil Surgeon or
Chief Medical Officer of a Government hospital shall fix a date for euthanasia.
(2) On the date so fixed, steps shall be taken to put the life of the patient to a gentle and
painless end in the presence of the members of the family of the patient and a representative
of the Court of Session.
13. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing that difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two years from
the date of commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid
before each House of Parliament.
14. The Provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force or in any instrument having
effect by virtue of any law other than this Act.
15. (1) The Central Government may, by  notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Issuance of
certificate of
euthanasia.
Permission for
euthanasia by
the Court of
Session.
Investigation
of application
of euthanasia
by the Court.
Euthanasia of
the patient.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to
make rules.
45
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
There  are divergent views world over whether a person has a right to end his life or
not.  The demands for such right are more vociferous in the case of individuals in permanent
vegetative state and those with terminal illness and facing unbearable sufferings due to
such illness.
The issues involved in the questions arising out of euthanasia are both ethical and
legal. While there are different views on ethical questions among people of different
persuasions, there is hardly any semblance of convergence on the legal aspects as well.
A few countries have allowed euthanasia in some form or the other, but most of them have
outlawed it. Indian law too does not permit euthanasia in any form. However, in Aruna
Shanbaug's cases, Hon'ble Supreme Court laid down certain guidelines for passive euthanasia
in exceptional cases. The Court left it to the Parliament to frame a comprehensive law on the
subject.
The present Bill seeks to regulate euthanasia by making the following provisions—
(i) defining 'active euthanasia' and 'passive euthanasia';
(ii) allowing active euthanasia for terminally ill individuals who are facing acute
suffering due to such illness;
(iii) allowing passive euthanasia for individuals in permanent vegetative state;
(iv) providing for constitution of an Evaluation and Review Board to examine
patients requiring active or passive euthanasia;
(v) providing for constitution of a Committee of three physicians to decide
whether a patient actually requires passive euthanasia; and
(vi) providing that application of euthanasia involving a child shall be decided
by the Evaluation and Review Board in consultation with a paediatrician to prevent
misuse of law in such case.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; BHAR TRUHARI  MAHTAB
June 17, 2019.
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for constitution of an Evaluation and Review Board.
Clause 4 provides for appointment of officers and employees of the Board. The Bill, therefore,
if enacted, would involve expenditure out of the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated
that a recurring expenditure of four crore per annum will be involved.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees ten crore is also likely to be involved.
5

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 15 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
6

MGIPMRND—916LS(S3)—04.07.2019.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to regulate termination of life of persons who are in a permanent vegetative state or
terminally ill and facing unbearable suffering and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab, M.P .)