As intropuceD In Lok Saba’.

24 NOV 1992

No. 136 of 1992
es
THE CINE-WORKERS WELFARE CESS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1992

A
BILL
to amend the Cine-workers Welfare Cess Act, 1981.

Br it enacted by Parliament in the Ferty-third Year of the Republic
| of India es follows:—  -

1. This Act may be callgd the Cine-workers Welfare Cess (Amend-
ment) Act, 1992.

2. In section 3 of the Cine-workers Welfare Cess Act, 1981, for sub-
section (1), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely: —

10

“ (1) There shall be levied and collected as a cess, for the pur-
poses of the Cine-workers Welfare Fund Act, 1981, a duty of excise
at such rate, not being less than one thousand rupees and not ex-
ceeding twenty thousand rupees on every feature film, as the
Central Government may. by notification in the Official Gazette,
specify from time to time.”.

Short
title,

Amend-
ment of
section

3 of Act
30 of 1981.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The Cine-workers Welfare Fund has been formed under the Cine
workers Welfare Fund Act, 1981, The said Fund is applied by the Cen-
tral Government to meet the expenditure incurred in connection with the
measures and facilities to promote the welfare of the cine-workers, For
the purposes of the said Fund, a cess, as duty of excise, of one thousand
Tupees on every feature film is leviable under the Cine-workers Welfare
Cess Act, 1981.

2. The existing rate of cess generates an amount of about eight lakh
Tupees per year for the purposes of the said Fund. This amount is not
sufficient to provide welfare facilities. With a view to augmenting the
resources for the purposes of the said Fund, it is proposed to enhance
the rate of cess from existing one thousand rupees toa maximum of
twenty thousand rupees on every feature film. The exact rate of cess
will, however, be specified by the Central Government keeping in view
the proposed welfare measures.

3. The Bill seeks to achieve the above object.

New Dewar; PABAN SINGH GHATOWAR.
The 29th July, 1992.



MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to substitute sub-section (1) of section 3 of
the Cine-workers Welfare Cess Act, 1981. Under the new sub-section.
(1), the Central Government is being empowered to specify, by notifica-
tion in the Official Gazette, the rate of cess which shall not be less than
one thousand rupees and not more than twenty thousand rupees on every
feature film. The said rate will be specified by the Central Government
keeping in view the welfare measures proposed to be undertaken by it
for the Cine-workers.

2, The aforesaid delegation of legislative power is of a normal
' i

character. |


Levy

collec~
tion of
cesson
feature

ANNEXURE
Exrracr rrom Tae CINE-Workers WELFARE Czss Act, 1981
(30 oF 1981)
* * * a के
3. (7) With éffect from stich date ay the Central Government |
by Hotification in the Official ‘Gazette, appoint, there shali be levied and

Act, 1981, a duty of excise at the rate of one thousand rupees on every
feature film, =

» * * कर *



es LOK SABHA” 02223

i :
BILL
to amend the Cine-workers Welfare Cess Act, 1981.

| Shri Paban Singh Ghatowar, Deputy Minister
in the Ministry of Labour)