A s INTRODUCED IN LOK S a BHA ON
2 0  AUG 1990
Bill No. 136 of 1990
THE TOBACCO CESS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1990
A
BILL
fu rth er to amend the Tobacco Cess Act,  1975,
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-first Year of the Republic 
of India as follows: —
1. This Act may be called the Tobacco Cess (Amendment) Act, 1990.
2. In the long title to the Tobacco Cess Act, 1975 (hereinafter refer­
red to as the principal Act), for the words “Virginia tobacco”, the word 
“tobacco” shall be substituted.
3. In the principal Act, in section 3, for the words “Virginia tobacco”, 
wherever they occur, the word “tobacco” shall be substituted.
Short
title.
Amend­
ment of 
long 
title.
Amend­
ment of 
section 
3.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
This Bill is being introduced along with the Tobacco Board (Amend­
ment) Bill, 1990 for the purpose of regulating the production and market­
ing of other varieties of tobacco along with Virginia tobacco. As a con­
sequence, the duty of excise which is being levied by way of a cess on 
Virginia tobacco will have to be levied on other varieties of tobacco also. 
For that purpose, it is proposed to amend section 3 of the Tobacco Cess 
Act, 1975 accordingly.
2. The Bill seeks to achieve the above object.
N ew  D elhi;
The  3rd August, 1990. ARTJN NEHRU.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to levy and collect, by way of 
duty of excise on tobacco other than Virginia tobacco also, 
relating to the collection of the said cess would involve some 
ture. It is estimated that expenditure on collection of cess 
around Rs. 34,000. j
a cess, a 
The steps 
expendi- 
would be
3


ANNEXURE
Duties of 
excise on 
Virginia 
tobacco.
Extracts from  the  T obacco  C ess A ct, 1975 
(26 of 1975)
*****
An Act to provide for the levy and collection, by way of cess, of a duty 
of excise on Virginia tobacco and a duty of customs on tobacco, for 
the development of tobacco industry and for matters connected 
therewith.
*  >  *  *  *  *
* * * * *
3. (1) There shall be levied and collected, by way of a cess for the 
purposes of the Tobacco Board Act, 1975, a duty of excise at the rate of 4 of 19 75 . 
one paisa per kilogram on Virginia tobacco which is produced in India 
and sold at an auction platform.
(2) The duty of excise levied under sub-section (i) shall be in addi­
tion to any cess or duty leviable on Virginia tobacco under any other law 
for the time being in force.
(3) The duty of excise payable under sub-section (1) in respect of 
any Virginia tobacco sold at an auction platform shall be payable by the 
seller thereof to the person or authority prescribed in respect of such 
platform.
(4) The person or authority prescribed in respect of an auction plat­
form shall collect the duty of excise payable on Virginia tobacco sold at 
such platform and pay the amount so collected to the Central Govern­
ment in such manner and within such time as may be prescribed.
(5) If any duty of excise payable under this section, or if any amount 
collected under this section by way of such duty, has not been paid to 
the Central Government within the period prescribed under sub-sec­
tion (4), the Central Government may recover such duty or amount in 
the same manner as an arrear of land revenue.
* * * * *
4


LOK SABHA
A
BILL
further to amend the Tobacco Cess Act, 1975.
(S hri Arun Nehru, M inister of Commerce and Tourism)
