As InTRobUCED IN Lok SaBia

7§ ANG 208

Bill No. 137 of 2000

THE PARTICIPATION OF WORKERS IN MANAGEMENT BILL, 2000

By
Suet ANANDRao Virnopa Apsut, M.P.

A
BILL.

17 provide for participation of workers in management of every enterprise and for

matters connected therewith.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as

follows:—

2000.

1. (1) This Act may be called the Participation of workers in Management Act,

(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force at once.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:-—

(a) “association of employees” means and includes association of employees
functioning in an enterprise where there is no recognised trade union or a trade
union cannot be formed;

Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment

Definitions,


Trade union
in every
enterprise.

Only one trade
union shall be
recognised.

Two
representatives
shall represent
the employees
in the enterprise
which is
managed by
Board of
Directors.

Participation of
representatives
of trade union
in every
meeting shall
be compulsory.

Association of
representative
of employees

in management,

Rights and
privileges of
representatives
of union,

Mecting with
representatives
of trade union
for better
‘management.

2
(0) “enterprise” means and includes, —

(#) any enterprise or a company wholly owned or controlled or whose
affairs are managed by the Central Government or a State Government:

(id) any joint sector undertaking where fifty-one percent. of shares are
held by the Central Government or a State Government;

(iii) any statutory authority or autonomous body set up under any law
made by the Parliament or the legislature of a State; and

(iv) any public limited company or a company registered under
Companies Act, 1956 or Societies Registration Act, 1860.

(c)"prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;

(d) “representative of trade union” means and includes representative of a
recognised trade union as per the provisions of Trade Union Act, 1926.

3. (1) There shall be a trade union in every enterprise.

(2) The representatives of trade union shall be elected from amongst the
employees of that enterprise,

4. In every enterprise only one association of employees or trade union shall be
treated as a recognised trade union for the purposes of this Act,

5. In every enterprise, which is managed by a Board of Directors, a minimum of two
representatives of trade union or association of employees shall represent the employees.

6. In every meeting of the Board of Directors, participation of representatives of
trade union or association of employees shall be compulsory and no meeting shall be
treated as valid in which there is no participation of representatives of trade union or
association of employees, as the case may be:

Provided that the Managing Director or the Chairman of the Board of Directors
of an enterprise may call a meeting of the Board in extra-vrdinary circumstances
without the participation of representatives of trade union or. association of employees,
as the case may be:

Provided further that the Chairman or Managing Director shall forward the
reasons for calling such a meeting to the Central Government.

7. Where the affairs of an enterprise are managed by the head of the enterprise, it
shall be obligatory for the head of the enterprise to associate the representative of the
trade union or association of employees in every meeting of the enterprise.

8. In every enterprise, representatives of trade union or association of employees as
the case may be shall have the same rights and privileges as are enjoyed by the other
Directors of Board or persons in charge of the management of the enterprise, as the case
may be.

9. The Management of every enterprise shall hold a meeting not less than one in a
month with representatives of trade unions to hear their views for better management of
the affairs of the enterprise.

21 of I
10

16 of 19

1s

20

25

30

35


3

10. Any decision affecting the interest of employees of an enterprise shall be taken
only after hearing the views of representatives of trade union or association of employees,
as the case may be.

11. This Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything contrary contained in any
other law for the time being in force.

12. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.

Decision to
be taken in
consultation
with,
representatives,

‘Act to have
overriding
effect.

Power to make
rules.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS,

In the recent years, there has been a spurt of trade union activities resulting in loss
of man days and loss to enterprises. This has resulted in slowing the economic progress,
If any deep consideration is given to the background, we can easily conclude that the
opinion of the representatives of employees is not taken into consideration in the

The Bill seeks to provide for compulsory participation of workers in management
of every enterprise.

New एस; ANANDRAO VITHOBA ADSUL.
July 25, 2000.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 12 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of this Bill. As the matters will be of administrative detail only, the
delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.


LOK SABHA,

A
BILL

10 provide for participation of workers in management of every enterprise and for
matters connected therewith.

(Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul, M.P)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—2223L S—03.08-2000.