As INTRODUCBD IN LOK SARRA cJ\..\... 1 0 . r . , ~ 
BIU No. 137 .f It'lH 
THE INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS BILL, 1971 
CLAUSFB 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
1. Short title, extent and commencement. 
2. Definitions. 
CHAPTER II 
AUTHORITI&<; UNDER THE ACT 
3. Labour Commissioners. 
4. Conciliation Offtcers. 
5. Registrar of Trade Unions. 
6. Powers of superviskn of the Chief Labour Commissioner and 
State Labour Commissioner. 
7. ATbitrator. 
8. Courts of Inquiry. .' 
9. Labour Courts. ... 
10. Industrial Tribunals. 
11. National Industrial Relations Commissions. 
12. Filling of vacancies. 
13. Terms and conditions of service of PresWing OfRcers of Labour 
Court, etc. 
14. Finality of orders appointing Pres~4ingQfticers of Lf.bour Courts. 
Tribunals and National Commissions and Chairman and 
members of Courts of Inquiry. 
15. Labour Court, etc., to be deemed to be a civil court. 
16. Conciliation Oftlcers, etc .. to be deemed to be publtc 9M'Vants. 
OHAPTER III 
TRADE UNtONS 
17. Definition of "employee" ann "empoyler" for the purpnsE"f! 0' 
this Chapter. 
] 8. Formation of trade unions. 
19. Applic8.tion for registi"ation. 
20. Prohibition of registration of craft or category-wise trade union. 
21. Power 1'0 call for further particulars and to require aJter.tion of 
name. 
22. Constitution of executive and proviJ;ions to be containeod, in th~ 
rules of a trade union, 
• 

CLAUSES 
23. Registration of trade union. 
2'~ Certifica.te qf registration. 
ell) 
, ' 
'25. he~ 'r';iiS"triUonof trade unions registered under Act 16 of 19:1('i. 
26. Cancellation of registration. 
27. Appeal against non-registration and cancellation of registration 
28. Re-registration of a trade union. 
.. 29. Registered office. 
30. Membership fee and its mode of collection. 
31. Incorporation of registered trade unions. 
32. Certain Acts not to apply to registered trade unions. 
33. Di'squalifications for being office-bearer of trade unions. 
34. Proportion of office-bearers to be connected with the industry. 
35. Declaration of assets by office-bearers. 
36. Change of name. 
37. Amalgamation of trade unions. 
38. Notice of change of name or amalgamation. 
39. Effects of change of name and amalgamation. 
40. Dissolution. 
41. Returns. 
42. Speclal provisions in regard to trade union of employers. 
43. AdjudicaUon of trade union disputes. 
44. Objects on which general funds may be spent. 
45. Constitution of a separate fund for political purposes. 
46. Right to inspect books of trade unions. 
47. Trade union of employers may enter into settlement with ne!!o-
tiating agent. 
48. Enforceability of agreements. 
49. Immunity from ciVil suit in certain cases. 
50. Discrimination against members of registered trade union of em. 
ployees prohibited. • 
51. Office-bearers or members of registered trade unions not liable for 
criminal conspiracy in certain cases. 
CHAPTER IV 
NEG(YJ'IATING AcEN't 
52. Sole and chief negotiating agents. associate union and local 
,!nion. 
53. Qualifications for takin, part in the determinatio~ of support 
ot a trade union of employees or for voting in electiqn to choose 
negotiating committee. 

(iii) 
CLAUSES 
54. Application for certification of registered trade union IS 'MJO-
tiattng agent. . 
55. Parttculars which an application for certiflCation as negotiating 
agent or local union shall contain. 
56. Bar against application by registered trade union of employees 
for certification as negotiating agent, associate union or local 
union in certain cases. 
57. Reference of application to Tribunal for certification of nego-
tiating agent or loeal union. 
58. Manner of detennining support for registered trade union of 
employees for certifying negotiating agent, associate union or 
local union. 
59. Procedure for enquiry by Tribunal. 
60. Ce~ification of registered trade union of employees as negotiat-
ing agent, associate union or local union. 
61. Negotiating committee. 
62. Entering particulars of certification in register and communi-
cation of certification of negotiating agent, associate union or 
local union. 
63. Copies of certificate to be forwarded to employers concerned. 
64. Term for which certification of negotiating agent shall be valid 
and cancellation of certification. 
65. Entry in register of cancellation of certification. 
66. Employer bound to recognise negotiating agent, associate union 
and local union. 
67. Rights of negotiating agent. 
68. Rights of associate unions. 
69. Rights of local union. 
70. Rights of other registered trade unions of employees. 
71. Protection of conditions of service of office-bearers of registered 
trade union of employees certified as negotiating agent, asso-
ciate union or local union and chairman and members of nego-
tiating committee. 
CHAPTER V 
STANDING ORDERS 
72. Application of Chapter. 
73. Making of Standing Orders. 
74. Interpretation, etc., of Standing Orders. 
75. Time limit for completion of di&eiplinary proceedi'ngs and lia-
bility to pay subsistence allowance. 
76. Laying of Standin'g Order before the Houses of Parliament. 
CHAPTER VI 
PROCEDURE FOR CHANGE IN TERMS OF EMPLOYMENT AND CONDmoNS OF LABOUR 
AND REGULATION OF CONDITIONS OF EMPLOYMl!:NT BY Go'vl!:ImMI:NT 
77. Notice of change of terms of employment and conditions of 
labour. 

(iv) 
CI.M1. 
. .... 
78. Terms of employment, el.c., to remain UIloAlUlpci wader certaiD 
circumataaces. 
79. Regulation of conditions of employment by Government. 
CHAPTER vn 
LAY-OF)', Rli:TUNC:HMENT AND Coosuu 
88. DIIDi*- of CCIIltiDUOUI .. vice. 
81. Rights of employee laid-off tor compeDAtion and duty of 
employer ,to maintain muster rolls of employees notwithstand· 
inC lay-01f. 
82. Prohibition of lay~1f in certain circumstancea. 
83. Conditions precedent for re~ncbmeni of employees. 
84. Procedure for retrenohment. 
• 85. Re.employment -of retrenched 'employee. 
86. Computation of the lay-off and retrenchment compensation. 
87. Compensation to employees in case of transfer of industrial 
estalillshment or undertaking. 
88. Conditions precedent to closure ot any industrial establishment 
Or undertaking. 
89. Special provision as to restarting of industrial establishment or 
undertaking closed down before commencement of the Act. 
CHAPTER VIII 
STRIKES AND l..ocK-ouTS 
90. Prohibition of strikes and lock-outs. 
91. Power to prohibit continuance of strike or lock-out. 
92. Illegal strikes and lock-outs. 
93. Consequences of' illegal strike or loet-out. 
94. Strike or locS.out 'not to terminate -relationship between em-
ployer and emplOyee. 
95. ProhibitiOn of ftnattCial aid to illegal strikes and lock-outs· 
CHAPTER IX 
96. Parties to an industr;al dispute-interpretation of the expres-
sion in certain cases. 
97. Bipartite negotiations. 
98. CoDCiliation of dilpute. 
99. Conciliation officer may assist in bipartite negotiations. 
100. Arbitration of disputes. 
101. Ref~rence of industrial dispute for adjudication when agreed to 
by parties. 
'. r, 
102. Beierence of aay matter to a Court of·Inquiry for investigation. 
103. Procedure for settlement of individual disputes. 
104. Reference of industrial dispute for adjudication. 

(y) 
CLAUSES 
105. Applicability of proviaioni to industrial disputes raised by local 
unions. 
106. Settlement ot industrial dispute between employees and em-
ployees and employers and employers. 
CHAPrER X 
UNnD .Pu.crIcB 
107. Prohibition of unfair practice. 
108. Procedure on complaints relating to unfair practices. 
109. Persons on whom the order under sub-sections (6) and (8) of 
section 108 shall be binding. 
CHAPTER Xl 
PROCEDURE, I'OWII:BS AND DUrIBS OF AUTHORlTll'B 
110. Adjudicating. author~ties to determine their procedure subject 
to the provisions of the Act and the rules. 
111. Power to summon witnesses, to inspect premises, etc. 
112. Power of Labour Court, etc., to proceed in absence of parties 
to dispute. 
113. Appointment of assessors to assist Court of Inquiry, etc. 
114. Power to grant interim reliefs. 
115. Power to transfer proceedings. . 
116. Power of Labour Court to give proper relief in case or discharge 
or dismissal of employees. 
117. Form of report of Court of Inquiry and its publication. 
118. Pronouncement of award by arbitrator, Labour Court, etc. 
119. Time limit for submission of report,making of award, etc. 
120. Date on which award becomes enforceable. 
121. Persons on whom awards are binding. 
122. Period of operation of award. 
123. Review of award by Labour Court, Tribunal or National Com-
mission and correction of mistakes. 
124. Award of costs. 
125. Execution of settlement or· award by Labour Court, etc. 
128. Procedure for recovery of II10ney due under aettlemeat or 
award, etc. 
127. Employ~e entitled to wages, etc., though award for reinstate-
ment is not CGmpolied with. 
128. Commencement and conelusion of proeeedlngs, etc. 
129. No demand in regard to same matter to be raised so long as 
settlement or award is in foree. 

CLAUSES 
(vi) 
CHAPTER XII 
PJ!:NAL'lDS 
130. Penalty for failure to submit statement, making false statement, 
etc. 
131. Supplying false information regarding tr.ade union. 
132. Penalty for failure to recognise negotiating agentt, etc. 
133. Penalty lor disclosure of confiden1.ial information. 
134. Penalties for breach of Standing Orders. 
13r.. Penalty for lay-otf, retrenchment, etc., in contravention of pro-
visions of the Act. 
136. Penalty for closure of industrial establishment or undertaking 
in contravention of provisions of section 88. 
137. Penalty for illegal strikes and lock-outs. 
138. Penalty for instigation, etc., 
139. Penalty for giving financial aid to illegal strike or lock-out. 
140. Penalty for breach of settlement or award, etc. 
141. Penalty for committing unfair practice. 
142. Penalty for wrongful withholding of information. 
143. Penalty for removal, etc., of notice affixed or displayed in 
pursuance of this Act. 
144. Penalty for other oft'ences. 
145. Cognizance of offences and courts which may take cognizance 
of offence. 
CHAPTER XIII 
Exu4nIONS AND MODlFlCATlONS 
146. Act not to apply to certain industries. 
147. Exemption from certain prcvisJons. 
148. Power of Government to exempt. 
149. Modification of provisions of Chapters IV, IX and XII in their 
application to certain industrial establishments or undertakings. 
CHAPTER XlV 
MIscELLANEOUS 
150. Offence by trade union, company, etc. 
151. Power to remove difficulties in the interpretation of settlement 
or award 
152. Certain matters to be kept confidential. 
153. Publication, affixation and defacement of notice. 
154. Power to re=lujre production of books, etc. 
155. Protection of action taken under the Act and protection of 
persons. 

t,.vii) 
CLAUSES 
156. Representation of parties. 
157. Power to amend Schedules. 
153. Delegation of powers. 
159. Power to make rules. 
160. Laying of rules bef~e State Legislature and Houses of Parlia-
ment. 
161. Repeal and saving. 
162. Provision regarding pending proceedings for adjudication of 
in dustri!l] disputes to which this Act does not apply. 
163. Transitional provirion. 
164. Repeal of State laws and savings. 
165. Overriding effect of the Act. 
166. Power to remove difficulties. 
167. Amendment of Act 11 of 1976. 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE.-EssEN'l'IAL SmtVICES. 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE.-MA'rI'ERS WITHIN THE JURISDICTION 
OF LABOUR COURTS. 
THE THIRD SCHEDULE.-·MATTF.RS wrnnN THE JURISDICTION 
OF' INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNALS. 
THE FOURTH SCHEDULE.-UNFAlft PRACTICES. 

Bill No. 137 of 1978 
tHE INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS 'BILL, 197~ 
" , 
A 
BIIlli 
to c:omolidate a7)d,amend the law ~lating to therffg~tration of trade 
u.nions of e~es a7ld emplQuerB,~he Tights and liabilities of 
registered trade u.nions and settlement of trade union disputes, the 
cwditiont of empw.,rnent C1/ emplO1lees, and, t.he, ,iflovestigationand 
lI8~'InC1at,of 4.tes between employees emplqyl1,d . itt indu.strial 
, .. t.bUB~nts or undertQkings an4 their e"t-pJ.o1/erB.. and. for matters 
connected therewith or inctdental thereto,' with a view to promoting 
Iwalthy industrial relations leading to accelerated economic develop-
tIIIeRt~ """ aociGL jJuJtice. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the'Twenty-ninth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
Ii. I 
~,I 
Pu'LIMlNARY 
S II.: (1) 1'I'bis. Att may be called the: Industrial Relatioiu; Act, 1978. 
(2) It extends to ~he whole of Inqia. ,; 
,4.1) ,It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government 
may, by notification, appoint aM different dates may be appointed for 
Short 
title, 
extent 
and com.. 
mence_ 
Jnent 

Deftni-
tiona. 
dlfterent provisions of this Act and for different States and any referene~ 
in any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall, in relation 
to any state, means the date on whicr that provision comes into force 
in such State: 
Provided that where any provision of this Act has not been brought 5 
into force in any State before the expiry of a period of three years from 
the date on which this Act receives th,! assent of the President, such pro-
vision shall come into force in such State on the date on which the 
aforesaid period of three years expires. 
. ~ 
Z. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(1) "appropriate Government" means,-
(i) in relation to, or in relaUon to any industrial .dispute 
concerning,-
(a) any establishment wherein any industry is carried 
10 
on by or under the authority of the Central Government or IS 
a railway administration or any undertaking of such estab-
lishment; 
(b) any establishment wherein is carried on, such con-
trolled industry as may be specified in this behalf by the 
Central Government, by notification, or any undertaking of 20 
such establishment; 
(c) any banking company, insurance company or 
other financial institutdon (not being a financial instLtution 
carrying on the business of conducting chit funds only), 
having branches or oftices in more than one State; 2S 
(d) any body corporate operating any social security 
echeme or service in more than one State; 
(e) any corporation which is owned by, or is UDder the 
control of, the Central Government aDd which carries on the 
business of purchase, procurement, storage, supply or matri- 30 
button of food grains; 
(J) any mine or oilfield, ir eluding BIly pipeliDe for 
carrying oil or other mineral; 
(g) any establishment of, or wherein is carried on, the 
business of carriage of pasSengers or goods by air 01' any 3S 
undertaking of such establisbment; 
".L ~ (h) any, major port as deftDed in the Indian Ports Act, 
1908 or the Board of Trustees of such port constituted under 15 of 1908 
... section 3 of the Major Port Trusts Act, 1963, any dock, or any 38 of 1963 
Dock Labour Board established under section 5A of the Dock 40 
Workers (Regulation of Employment) Act, 18M; 8 of UNa. 

-' 3 
15 of 1948. 
34 of 1948. S 
(i) the Industrial Finance Corporation of India estab-
lished. under section 3 of the Industrial Finance Corporation 
Act, 194.8, the Employees' State Insur~ Corporation estab-
lished under section 3 of the Employees' State Insurance 
Act, 1948, the Board of Trustees constituted under section SA 
of the Coal Mines Provident Fund and MiscellaneoUs Provi-
sions Act, 1948, the Central Board of Trustees and the State 
Board of Trustees constituted under section SA and section 
!;B, respectively, of the Employees Provident Funds and 
Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952, the "Indian Airlines" and 
"Air-India International" Corpprations established under 
section 3 of the Air Corporations Act, 1953, the Life Insurance 
Corporation CJf India established under section 3 of the Life 
Insurance Corporation Act, 1956, the Deposit Insurance Cor-
poration established under section 3 of the Deposit Insurance 
Corporation Act. 1961, the Agricultural Refinance Corpora-
tion established under section 3 of the Agricultural Refinance 
Corporation Act, 1963, the Unit Trust of India established 
under section 3 of the Unit Trust of India Act, 1963, the 
Food Corporation of India established under section 6, or 
a Board of Management established for two or more conti-
guous States under section 16, of the Food Corporations Act, 
1964, the International Airports Authority of India constituted 
under section 3 of the International Airports Authority Act, 
1971, the General Insurance Corporation of India formed 
under section 9 of the General Insurance Business (Nation-
alisation) Act, 1972, a Regional Rural Bank established un-
der section 3 of the Regional Rural Banks Act, 1976, the Ex-
port Credit and Guarantee Corporation Limited and the 
Industrial Reconstruction Corporation of India Limited; or 
46 of 1948. 
19 of 1952. IO 
27 of 19'53. 
31 of 1956. 
IS 
47 of' 1961 
10'of 1963. 
52 of 1963. 
20 
37 of 1964. 
43 of 1971. 2S 
57 of 1972. 
31 of 1976. 
2 of 1924. 
30 
U> a Cantonment Board constituted under section 10 of 
.the Cantonments Act, 19M, 
the. Central Government; and 
(ii) in relation to, or in relation to any industrial dispute 
3S concerning, any other industrial establishment or unaertaking, 
the State Government: 
Provided that wh ere there is any dispute Or doubt as to 
whether the Cen11ral Government or the State Government Is the 
appropriate Government in relation to, or in relation to any indus-
40 trial dispute concerning, any industrial establishment or under-
taking, the Central Government, eith~r on a reference made to 
it by the parties to the dispute or by the State Government con-
cerned or on its own motion, may. if it is of the opinion that the 
dispute or doubt-
4S (i) relates to an industrial establishment wherein one 
or more of the industries referred to in sub-clauses (i) Ca) 
to (iI) (g) (botl). inclusive) and any other industry or indus-
tries are carried on; or 

4 
(ii) . fs whether any indUstry carried on in any establisb-
ment is' catri~ti' on by, or under the authority of, the Central 
Govern~ent; 
~ after Jiving ~ parti~ concerned a l'eaBonable opportunity 
• i of being heard, declare, by notification,. whether the Central S 
Government or ~ State Government is the appropriate Govern-
I,' ment in relation to, or in relation to any indus~l dispute con-
~eming,:that industrilil establishment or, ~y, undertaking of 
that .industrial establishment and such ~claraUon shall be final; 
.,i" (2) 'ia~~itrator~' means an arbitrator or bo~y of arbitrators 10 
ehose~ by the p~rties to a dispute under sub-sectidn (1) of section 
,f,?A"8J?p.?il1~d'!~Yi.th~C,en~~al G?;~e~ent \1ll,der sub~ection (2) of 
tlJ1it sectioq and inCludes the umpll'e of a body of arbttratnrs; 
, ' . ~ : 
""';:1 (3) ':8Noci~te union" ~eans a registered trade union of emplo-
r certified as an associate union under sub-section (2) of section IS 
, .. 
""(4) i'average pay" means the average of the wages (including 
.P~~~ fate ea.rlrlngs) payable to an employee--
, (a) ,in~~. case ,of a monthly ~aid employee ~d piece rated 
emplbyee, tit the three cotnplete calendar months; 20 
(b) itt th~ ~ by a VI'eeldy pHd empM~, in the four com-
plete weeks; . 
(c) rin the case of a dan;"' paid employee, iii the twelve full' 
working days, 
pr~'n~ the date with reference to which the average, pay becomes 25 
PtByable if the employee had wotked for three complete calendar 
months or four complete weeks or twelve full working days, as the 
case may be, and where such average cannot be calculated as afore-
said, the average of the wages payable to the employee during th~ 
, pleriod' he actllaUy worked; . 30 
, . 
(5) "award" means an interim or ftnlll deterinfnatton of a'y 
individual dispute. industrial dispute or trade union dispute or any 
,q\l~tion rela~1ng thereto by any arbitrator, Labour Court, Tribunal 
Or Na~ional Commtssion; 
(6) "bank,i.n~ company" means a banking company as defined in " 
section 5 of the Banking Regulation Act, 194'9, and include8 the 
~~rve Bank of lrUJia consti.t~~d under sect19n 3 of ~h~ Reserve 
,~k of India Act" 1934, the State Bank of lndta constituted under 
Section 3 of the State Bank of India Act, 1955) IJ,ny subsldi~ bank as 
defined in clause (k) of section 2 of the State 13ank of india (Subsi- 40 
~~ .. Banks) Act, 1959, the Iqdustrial .Development Bank of India 
establlahed under section 3 of the Industrial Development Bank of 
In~a ~ct, 1964 and . a colTesponding new bank oonstituted under 
section 3 of the Banldng Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of 
Undertakings) Act, 1970; 4S 
10 of 1941. 
2 f1f 1934. 
23 of 1955. 
38 of 1959. 
18 of 1964. 
5 of 1970. 

5 
10 
IS 
45 of 1950. 
46 of 1950. 20 
62 of 1957. 
23 of 1957. 
25 
47 of 1968. 
DO of 1968. 
30 
('1) "closur~" metms' the pe'l'Manflnt (!tosing' c:tbwft of ~;tace 
bf ernploymeft t Or 'Pan thereof: ' " " 
1 'I' 
.. 
'.' 
(8) "controlled industry" means any industry the control of 
w.\lkll by tha:Union is declared.b.y ~31IGentralAc~ ~ be "tUent in 
the public interest; I '!"" 
, ; i(p~ ,~~~~pl~yeEi" exceP,t (6;' tlie putpo~ o,nbii~pt~IM:,meanl 
,any person, (including an apprentf.ce) employed in .y ~, 
; fof hire o~ r~ward, to do any manJJS1; unsldI1edl, skfllecf, ~1ituca1, 
oPer~iio~~i, clerical or supervis<?ry' work or. w~~ ,'is, '~~~~y,~ to 
do any work relating to promotlon of sales or any Woi'~i #e~ting 
to any profession or any kind of entertain'ment or recreation, 
whether the terms of employment be express or implied, and 
~r the· purpose of atly praceeding' _der tN, MaI'iIl ti'-tion to 
an individual dispute or industrial dispute (and for no other pur-
. pose), includes.aDy. such pe11I&n who haa been di8lntssed, dis-
chareea or retrenebed in connectiOD with or a8 a eonMClJlence of 
that dispute, or whose dismiasal" dischar&e or Fetleae1:aent hu 
led to that dispute, but doee ,not iMl-wie any 8uell· JII!I'IfOII--
(a) who js subject to the Air Force Act, 1950 .. ar tlie Army 
i(ci, 1~ or ~e;Navf A~' 19&'1: 01'1 .' i ~ 
" '.' .; 
(b) who is employed in the police service or is an oftlcer or 
other' employee or' a prison, or is an officer or m~ber o~, the 
Railway Protection Force constituted tinder seetfo!i 30t the 
Railway Protection Force Act, 1957, or the Border Security Force 
'ebnstituted under section 4 'Of tlie' Border Seeurl~ ~ Act, 
< ' 1968, or the Central Industrial Seturttt "01'1!11 MftItf~ Uftder 
section 3 of the Central Industrial SI!fOl!l~ "bl1!8~t .. l"; or 
(~) who, 'hfhg emp~ in a .sUpervtlrM1 apael\t, drawl 
wages e~eeding one thousaftttrupees per meri.mr, (it , 
I, 
44 of 1958. ' tI 
(d) who is' employect or e1l~Rt!d as a Nmtat\·IfI' .... fn 
clause (42) of section 3' of the ~h.nt 8IIdflIpblg' Aet~ ,1_ or 
.. 
,I 
(e) who is employed mainly in a managerial or administra-
tive capacity. 
, .. ,! 
Explam1:iOft.~For the purposes of thiscla~~, a person' !~~ri be 
3S deemed to be employed in a managerial or administrative cat';8":'fty, 
i:n ~l".tipn to any industrial estllblishDlent "" '~~ It( he has 
beel) !empowered to employ, promote, demot.. ortel'm-.., the 
services of any employee tn such industrial establishment or UDder-

1aldai or to change the wages of any such employee or to suspend 
or dismiss or impose any other punishment OD any such em~oyee, or 
is entitled to take part in policy making process of such industrial 
establishment or undertaking; 
,,, I" ,. 
:' I : '.' (10) *employees of a local unit" means the employees employed 5 
in any local unit; 
(11) "emploJe81 of a negotiating unit" means the employees 
/'1 t emp~oyed, in an, ,~dustrial ,establishment or undertaking ~r two or 
mole industrial establishments or undertakings or any urut, branch 
or oftlce or two or more units, branclies or oftlces of the same tndul- 10 
'~ial .t8blishment or undertaking, as the case may be, constituting a 
~t1ating unit; - I 
, . ,i t(12) ''employer'' , except for the J¥1rposes of Chapter III, means-
(a) in relation to any industrial establishment or undertaking 
managed by, or on behalf of, a department of the Central or a 15 
State Government, the authority prescribed in that behalf by 
the Government concerned and where no authority is pres-
cribed the head of the'department; 
(b) in relation to any industrial establishment or undertak-
ing managed by, or on behalf of, a local authonty the chief 20 
executiVe officer of that local authority; 
, . 
",. i (13) ~~essential service" means any industry, or part of an indus-
,\ ': t,ry. specified in .the First Schedule; 
'I 
I· • (14~ "executive", in relation to a trade union, means the body . 
. . ~ "by "".tever name eaRed, to which the management of the affairs of 25 
,'., _de, \JIliOD is entrua~; ~ 
(15) '~indi~ual dispute" means any dispute or difference bet-
ween an employer and !lilY of his employees in relation to, or arising 
from, the transfer or promotion of, or the refusal or failure to pro-
mote, such employee or the termination of his employment or any 0 
lImylhment (including dixharge or dismil88l) imposed on such em- 3 
; ployee Iud ilHiudat any dilipUte' 'or difference as to the money due 
to such employee from the employer or as to the amount at which 
a benefit, which is capable of being computed in terms of money, is 
to be computed. , , 
Ezplanation.-A dispute of the nature referred to in this clause 
,hall not Cease to be an individual dispute merely because any other 
" ~~pl~~e~ or employees are interested in that dispute; 
, '0' i fl6) -tndustrbil dispute" means any dispute or difference between 
; emplGYers and emplorees, or between employers and employers, or 
11'-:. 
35 

9 of 1948. 
t 
fJetWeeb employees and employees. wbldi Itt ~otmeeted With the 
employment or non-employment or the terms of employment or con· 
ditiODI of labour, of any person, but does not 1nclude an individual 
dlspute or. trade union dispute; , 
,Ill, , 
5 (17) "industry" means any sy,tematic .-ctbrtty, ~ on by 
co-operation between an employer and his employees (whether luch 
employees are employed by such employer directly or by or through 
any agency. including a contractor) for the producMon,' supply or 
distribution of goods or aervices with a view to satisfy hDlan wanta 
10 or wishes (not beiag wants or wiabes which are merel,,~iritual or 
15 
religious in nature), whether or ~., .• 1 j". ) 
(a) any capital has been invested for the~.e of carry· 
ing on such aCtivity; or ' '''; " 
, I 
(b) such activity is carried on with a motive to make any 
gain or PIl'oftt; . 
• ,I.! ' 
and includes any activity of the Doek Labour BoaI:d co~tituted 
under section 5A of the Dock Workers (Regulaijon of. ~Qwnent) 
Act. IlM8. but does not include-
(i) any domestic service; or 
20 (ii) save for the purposes of Chapter III. any agricultural 
operation, except where such agricultural operation is carried 
on in an integrated manner with any other industry. such other 
30 
3S 
industry being the predominant one: " , 
Provided that--
(a) any activity, being a profession practised by .ny indivi-
dual or body of individuals; or .,! 
(b) any activity carried on by a club or eo--operativ8;lOciety 
or any other like body Of individuals, 'I' 
shall not be deemed to be an industry unless not ,less ~ ten per· 
SCIlla are employed, by the individual or ~y 'of indi~d~ls. as 
the case may be, practising the profession, Or' by the club or co-
operative society or such other like body of iriaividu~JS, inj,laUon 
to sueh profession or actiVity. 
Ezpl4na.t1on I.-Any activity of the Government relatable to 
the primary functiODS of tbe' GovernmetJt'lihall not '~ 4e£Imed to 
be an industry. 
Explanation 2.-Wbere several such activities are c~ied on tn 
an, establisbqlent or undertaking and only oM' or some of such 
activities is or are an industry or industries or OQ.ly lQffie of th. 

, .... t~t4p,g rWi.tIh tbeemployex: ,m aDy .,iUqhactivityl_e em': 
,.1) ,,1--.;--.-; .. ; ... 
";;; " .1, . (~) if ~y unit'c~rrYi~'o,Q ,~~~iVii~. ~,~ ;tq~uS~ry, 
is severable from the other unit or units of such estabhsh-• ment or undertaking. such unit shall be deemed to be an :i.ndus- 5 
,,1"'-. IbJId edaWllltmeBtor'UDdertakiDg; 
\. 
,. 
., ) 
(b»)i. ,,.¥ .sueb. JUlit if Dot IIQ.lIoWelllble, the ~minant 
i'; ;n"IQf ,'¥ acti~ijes to!' ,the JDtegr.t8li nature oi the establish-
.. t OJ' WlderWUng ehall .be, taken mto ·account ,in ,determining 
'I jWl\«ttbftr ,1M ~Ule elt.lblishment or WHiertaJQng .is an indus-, 10 
trial establishment or Ulldertaking; 
. (18) ~'ins\france, co~p~y" means 4Ulinsur~ce company as 
deDiiect Ifn' ~laUse (8) of section '2 of the InSurance Act, 1938; 
(19) "khadi" has the meaning assigned to it by clause (d) of 
4 of 1938. 
__ nll·of ,the lOIadi uad l\ill1age .lncius1i1ies Com~ion Act, 1956; 15 61 of 1956. 
(20) "lay-off" (with its grammatical vat'iations and cognate 
expressions) means the failure, refusal or inability of an employer 
" : on atCOiWrt Of dlortage df coal, pOwer or raw materials' Or the accu-
mulltlOn; of' '81:deb or' the' brerik-dowt'l of machinery, natum Calamity 
01' for any other reason beyond his ~ntrol, to give'elnptbymertt to an 20 
employee whose name is borne On the' muster rolls of his industrial 
establishment or undertaking and who has not been retrenched. 
; ~, , . E~ l~Evuy' employee whose nanuf is borne on the 
Muatermlls of ithe indUltnal, estabUahmeD.t . or ,undertakiDg and who 
presents himself for work. at such . establishment or :Ullidertaking at 2 5 
the time appointed for the purpose during normal working hours on 
any day and is not given employment by the .employer within two 
hours of his so presenting himself shall be deemed to have been laid~ 
of! fpr ·thft,q.ywitbin t4e ,zp.e~DiD,g of t!Us,cd_.: 
J Provided that if the employee instead' o[ being given e~ploymellt 30 
at the commencement of any shift for any day is asked to present 
':. ,~lf'" (tiLe.pllqlOfia (ltuling tDesecoIld .half,of the shift for the 
day and is given empkJymentj;ttlen, he'lhall De'deeme6·t() have been 
laid-off only for one-half of that day: 
,J:, Pr~vided fri,er' ~ t~t if ,lle is, not ,gi~en any "uch, ,e~loyment 3~ 
• t( ey,n 8lt~ so. p~n~)~~sE;lf, be snaU not be d~d "to have 
.. ,)~ r~ laid~fr:~pr ,the sEFond ,~f of the sh11t jor ,tJ,l~ d~i~,~all be 
; ) 
~dtied to full basic wages and d.eanleas .~OWancea.WX;'f~t,part of 
the clay. 
Y', 1:~' ~WJa,r~,any .ueb.eJnploy~e 85 ,is ~ to in the 40 
'~~~_J~lgtVeD, erqploymeat !When be~ta/himself. 
ill the manner provided therein, he shall not be laid..oiE If 01'1 ,that day; 
(21) "local ~t" m,eans each of-
, " I 
., •. (4) tIN. two or ·more 'IndUstrial etrtabliibments' or UDdertak-
,I' iDgs; lor 45 

s 
35 of 19&2. 
10 
IS 
20 
35 
40 
t 
(b) the two or more units, branches or offices of the same 
industrial establishment or undertaking, 
which have been constituted as a negotiating unit under the pro-
visos to clause (26); 
(22) "lock-out" means the temporary closing of a place of em-
ployment or the suspension of work, or the refusal by an e~ployer 
to continue to employ any number of persons employed'"by him; 
(23) "mine" means a mine as defined in clause (;) of sub-eection 
(1) of section 2 of the Mines Act, 195~; 
(24) "National Commission" means a National I~dustrial Rela-
tions Commission constituted under section 11; 
(25) "negotiating agent" means a registered trade uniOn of 
employees certified as sole negotiating agent or chIef negotiating 
agent under sub-section (1) of section 60, or a negotiating committee 
certified as sole negotiating agent under sub-section (7) of section 61; 
(26) "negotiating unit" means an industrial establishment or 
undertaking or, where the industrial establishment CIt undertaldng 
has more than one unit, branch or office, situated in different. places, 
each such unit, branch or office: 
Provided that the appropriate Government may, having regard 
to the development of trade unionisation, structure of the industrial 
establishments or undertakings concerned or the nature of any in-
dustry and other relevant factors, and ,wherever necesslUjT, after 
consultation with the employers concerned and the registered trade 
union or trade unions of employees carrying on its or their activities 
for the benefit of the employees employed in the concerned industrial 
establishments or undertakings, of units, branches or offices of the 
same industrial establishment or undertaking, by notification, direct 
that-
(4) all establishments wherein any industry specified In such 
notification is carried on, or all undertakings of such industrial 
establishments, situated in the area specified therein, or 
(b) all the units, branches or offices of the same industrial 
establishment or undertaking situated in different places, 
shall be deemed to be one negotiating unit for the purposes of this 
Act: 
Provided further that where the industrial establishments or 
undertakings or, as the caSe may be, the units, branches or oftlces of 
the same industrial establishment QIf undertaking proposed to be 
constituted as a negotiating unit are situated in more than one State 
the powers of the appropriate Government· under the precedln, 

]0 
proviso shall be exerciseJ only by the Central Government and 
Dot by a State Government; 
(27) "notification" means a notification published in the Omclat 
Gazette; 
(28) ''office-beMer'', in relation to a trade union, includes any 5 
member of the executive thereof, but does not include an auditor; 
(29) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this 
Act; 
(30) "registered trade union" means a trade union registered 
under this Act; 
(31) "Registrar" means-
(a) a Registrar of Trade Unions appointed under section 15; 
and - -
(b) in relation to any trade union, the Registrar for the State 
In which the registered office of the trade union is situated; 
(32) "retrenchment" means the termination by the employer of 
the service of an employee for any reason whatsoever, otherwise than 
as a punishment inflicted by way of disciplinary action, but does not 
inelude- --
(a) voluntary retirement of the employee; or 
(b) retirement of the employee on reaching the age of super-
annuation if the contract of employment between the employer 
and the employee concerned contains a stipulation in that behalf; 
or 
10 
IS 
20 
(c) termination of the service of an employee on the ground 30 
of continued ill-health: 
Provided that such termination is made after the employee 
bas faUed to attend to his duties as such employee on account of 
ill-health continuously for a period of not less than two years; 
(33) "sole negotiating agent" means a registered 'trade union of 35 
employees or a negotiating committee certified as sole negotiating 
agent under sub-section (1) of section 60 or sub-section (7) of !lection 
81, as the case may be; 
(34) "strike" means total or partial cessation of work bv a body 
of persons employed in any industrial es·ablishment or undertaking 40 
acting in combination, or Il concerted refusal, or a refusal under a 
common understanding of any number of person" who are or hll~ 
been so employed to continue to work or accept work or employment; 
(35) "terms of employment or conditions of labour" includes-.: 
(a) any matter specified dn the second Schedule or specified 4:S 
in or under the Third Schedule; 
(b) contribution paid. or payable by the employer to any 
provident fund or pension fund or for the benefit of the empioyeps 
under any law for the time being in foree; and 

61 of 1956. 
.5 
10 
IS 
20 
11 
(c) any increase or reduction (other than. casual) in the 
Dumber of persons employed or to be employed in any occupa-
tion or process or department or shift, not occasioned by circu,m, 
stances over which the employer has no control; 
(36) "trade union" means any combination, whether temporary 
or pennanent, formed primarily for the purpose of regulating rela-
tiuna between employees and employers or between employees and 
employees or between employers and employers· and includes any 
association of two or more trade unions; 
(37) "trade union dispute" means any dispute-
(a.) ~ween a trade union and another trade union; or 
(b) between a member or two OIl" more members of a trade 
union and the trade union, or between tw() or more membera o~ 
a trade union, relating to registration, certification, administration 
OIl" management of the affairs of that trade union, including elec-
tion of office-bearers thereof; 
(38) "Tribunal" means an Industrial Tribunal estab1lished under 
section 10; 
(39) "unfair practice" means any of the practices 9pecif\ed in the 
Fourth Schedule; 
(40) "village industries" has the meaning assigned to it by 
clause (h) of section 2 of the Khadi and Village Industries Com-
mission Act, 1956; 
(41) "wages" means all remuneration capable of being express-
ed in tenns of money, which would, if the terms of employment, ex· 
press or implied, were fulfilled, be payable to an employee in respect 
of his employment or of work done in such employment and includ.es--
(a) such aJlowan('es (including dearness allowances) as the 
employee is for the time being entitled 'to; 
(b) the vaiue of any house accommodation, or of supply of 
lligbt, water, medical attendance or other amen.ity or of any ser-
vice or of any concessional supply of food grains or other articles; 
(c) any travelling concession; 
but does not include-
3S (i) any bonus; 
(ii) any contribution paid or payable by the employer 
to any pension fund, provident fund or life insurance fund or 
for the benefit of the employee under any law for the time 
being in force; or 
40 (iii) any gratuity payable on the termination oi his lervice. 
CHAPTER U 
AUTHORITIES UNDICR THE .AJ:r 
3 (1) The Centhl Government may, bYlloti&cati.on, appoint a pet'IOIl Labour 
as the Chief LabOur COIIlmilsioDer who lIball exercise Bach pGwen ad Commll4 
"S perform such duties, throughout india as are cOllferre4 Oil ~IID by or sioner •. 
under this Ad or as the Celltral Government may, by notification. apecify 
from time to time. 

Concilla. 
tioa. 
Oftlcen. 
Regiatrar 
of Trade 
lJnioDa. 
Pcnversof 
supe!"Vi. 
!ion of 
Chief 
Labour 
commia-
lIioDerud 
State 
Labour 
Commis-
~. 
(2) The Central Govenua.eDt may, by notiftcatk»D, appoint such nUDl, 
bel of penoua as it thinks fit to be Joiat ChW Labour CommieeiODMS, 
Deputy Chief Laboar Commrksioners, Kegioaa1 Labour C4NlljyiODer5, 
Assistant LaboQr ('ommJlSiODel'l and. such other oftlcers .. it m.ay COD-
sider DeCessar"1, to assist the Chief Labour CommiYloner, in the d.iscbarp S 
of his dude.. 
(3) The State Government may. by notification, appoint a person as 
the Labour Co.mmissioner ""for the State, who shall exercise such poweJ.15 
and perform such duties, throughout the State, as are conferred. on him. 
by, or Wlder this Act or as the State GoverruneD\t may, by notification, 10 
specify from time to time. " 
(4) The State Government may, by no.tificatlion, appoint such number 
of persons as it thinks fit to be Additional Labour Commissioners, Joint 
Labour Commissioners, Deputy Labour Commi."ISi.oners, Assistant Labour 
Commissioners and such other officers as it may consider necessary, to 15 
assist the State Labour Conunissioner in the discharge of his duties. 
4. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification, appoint such 
Dumber Qf perIODS as it thiaks fit to be Conciliation OlIicers charged with 
the duty of mediating in, and promoting the settlement of, industrial dis-
putes. 20 
(2) A Co.nciliation Officer may be appointed for a specified area or for 
specified industries in a specified area or for one or more specified. indus-
tries and either permanently or fer a limited period. 
5. (1) The State Government may, by notification, appoint a pel"SiOn 
to be the Registrar of Trade Unions for the State. 2S 
(2) The Registrar shall exercise such powers and perform such duties 
as are conferred on him by or under this Act. 
(3) The State Government may, by notificatio.n, appoint o.ne or more 
Adctitional Registrars of Trade Union.~ and Deputy Registrars of Trade 
Unions who. shaJJ. exercise such powers and perform such duties of the 30 
Registrar and with/in such local limits as the St~ Government may, by 
noUikation, specify from time to time. 
(4) Subject to the provisions of any order made by the State Govern-
ment, where an Additional Registrar of Trade Unions or a Deputy Regis-
trar of Trade Uniions exercises and performs the powers and duties of a 35 
Registr81'l in' an area within which the registered office of a trade union 
is situated, the Additional Registrar of 1'rade Unions or Deputy Registrar 
of Trade Unions shall be deemed to be the Registrar in relation to the 
trade union for the purposes of this Act. 
6: The ofticers. referred to in. 8U}).section (~ and sub-section (4) of 40 
sectlon 3 and seatlon 4 shall, sublect to the provIsions of this Act and the 
rules made thereunder, Wo.rk under the general guidance and supervi-
sion of the Chief Labour Commissioner where they" are appointed by the 
Central Government and of the S~te Labour Commissioner where they 
areappojD~ by the State Government. "45 

1a 
,. (1) The aPPl'opria.te Government shall mainWn a ro~r of arbitra. 
tors fro~ w~ the parties to an industrial dispute, individual dispute or 
trade UnIon dispute may choose an arbitrator or a body of arbitrators for 
settlement of such dispu.te. 
S Explanation.-Notbing in this sub-section shall be construed as pre-
cluding the parties to such dispute from choosing an arbitrator or a mem-
ber or members of a body o£ arbitrators from among persons whose 
name or names is or are not included in such roster. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sect2ion (1) where the 
10 parties to an industrial dispute or trade union dispute agree to refer such 
dispu.te for arbitration and-
(4) in the case of an induStrial dispute, the dispute involve;;, ~ 
the opinion of the Central Government, any question vf national im-
portance or is of such a nature that industrial establishments or 
15 undertakings situated in more than one State are likely to be in-
~rested in, or affected. by, such dispute; 
(b) in the case of a trade union dispute, the dispute involves, in 
the opinion of the Central Government any question of national, im-
portance or one oI the parties to the dispu,te is a registered trade 
20 union having offices in more than one State, 
the Central Government may, by order, appoint one or more persons 
(whether or not their names are included in the roster of arbitrators) as 
an arbitrator or body of arbitrators, as the case may be, for the arbitration 
of such dispute and such arbitrator or body of arbitrators shall have the 
~s same powers and jurisdiction in relation to the industriln dispute or trade 
union dispute, as the case may be, as if the arbitrator or body of arbitra-
tors has or have been chosen by the parties to the dispute by mutual 
agreement. 
Explanation.-For the removal of doubts it is hereby declared that in 
30 the case of an. ,industrial dispute, an order may be made by the Central 
Government under sub-section (2) notwithstanding that it is not the ap-
propriate Government in relation to the industrial establishment or under-
taking with which the diispute is concerned. 
Arbltratllt-. 
8. (1) The appropria.te Governmeat mey as occasion ariIea, by DOtifl- Court. of 
3S cation, constitute a Court of Inquiry for inquiring into _y matt. eon- Inqatry. 
nected, or appeari~ to be connectecl with, or relevant to, aD industrial 
dispute or a trade union dispute. 
(2) A Court of Inquiry may consist OD one person only or such num-
ber of persons, not connecteci with or interested in the dispute, as the 
40 appropriaA;e Government may think fit, and where a Court of Inquiry 
consists of two or more persons, one of them shall be appointed a. the 
chairman thereof. 
(3) A Court of Inquiry having the prescribed quorum may act not.-
withstanding the absence of the chairman or any of its members or anY 
45 vacancy in its number: 
ProVided that if the appropriate Government intimates the COllrt ot 
Inquiry that the aervices of the chairman have Qeaaed to be avail.bIe, 
the Court at. Inquiry shall not act .until a new chairman has beenap-
pointed. 

t·bour 
~. 
14 
(I) The Court of Inquiry shall inq\lire into such matters as are refetTed 
to it by the appropriate Government for inquiry and submit its repolt 
to that Government. 
9. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notifieatiOD, establisJi 
such number of Labour COurts as it thinks fit and de6ne the toea! limits ~ 
of their jwiscltdion. 
(2) The Labour Court shall ha,re its headquarleI1S at such place as the 
appropriate Government may, by notification, specify: 
Provided. that 'the Labour Court may hold its sWings at such oth@l1 
place or places within its local limits of jurisdliction as it considers 10 
necessary. 
(3) The appropriate Government may, by notification, appoint such 
number of persons as it thiDks fit to he Presiding OfIicers of Labour Courts 
and may, by order, post each of them to preside over a Labour Court or 
transfer a Presiding Officer from one Labour Court to another Labour 15 
Court. I 
(4) No person shall be qualified for appointment as the Presiding 
Officer of a Labour COUI1t unless-
(a) he has, for a period (,If not less than one year, been a District 
Judge or an Additional District Judge; or 20 
(b) he has been a Presiding Officer of a Labour Court or industrial 
court constituted under any Central, Provincial or State Act for not 
less than five years; or 
(c) he has been an officer of the Ministry or Departmen.t of the 
Central or State Government dealing with Law or Labour, not 2S 
below the rank of a Deputy Secretary or equivalent post, for not less 
than three years; or 
(d) he has held a judic,ial office in India for not less than seven 
years; or 
(e) he has practised as an advocate or attorney for not less than 3C' 
leven years in any court; or 
<f> he has, in the opinion of the appropriate Govenunent Rde. 
quate experience in industrial relations. • 
(5) The Labour Court shall . have, !lubject to the othf!r provfi~ of 
this Act, jurisdidion to adjudicate industrial disputes relating t.o anY' 
matter specified in the Second Schedule, or indiVfidual disputes. 35 
(6) The Labour Court shall discharge such other functions as are 
awaigned to it by or un~tbls ·ACIt. 
Industrial 10. (1) The appropriate Government may, by aoii8eation, establish 
Tribunals. sueh number of Industrial Tribunals as it thinks fit. 
(2) The Tribuhal shall have its headquarters at such place as the 
appropriate Govemmieht may, hy notification, specify: 
40 

15 
Provided "that the Industrial Trib~mal may have its sittings at such 
other place or places as it considers necessary, having regard to the 
convenience of the parties. 
(3) The appropriate Government may, by DotificatieD,appoint such 
S number of persoDs as it thinks fit to be Presiding OIieers of 'rribunals 
and may, by order, post each of them to preside over a Tribunal or 
tr'lnsfer a Presiding OfIlcer from one Tribunal to another. 
10 
(4) No person shall be qualified :lor appointment as the Presiding 
Officer of a Tribunal unless-
(4) he is, or has been, or is qualified to be appointed as, a Judge 
of a High Oourt; or 
(b) he has, fora period of not 'less than three years, been a 
District Judge or an Additional District Judge; or 
(c) he has been a Presiding Officer of a Labour Court for a 
period of not less than five years; or 
(d) he has been' an off\cer of' the Ministry or Departnrem of the 
Central or State Government dealing with Law or Labour, not below 
the rank of a Deputy Secretary or equivalent post, for not less than 
five years; or 
20 (e) he has, in the opinion of the appropriate Government, ade-
quate experience in industrial relations. 
(5) The Tribunal shall have, subject to the 'other provisions of this 
Act, jurisdiction-
(a) to adjudicate industrial disputes relating to any matter 
specified in or under the Third Schedule or trade union disputes.; 
('b) to determine the support for any registered trade union nf 
employees under section 60 and to certify such trade union as sole 
negotiating agent, chie~ negotiating agent, associate union or local 
union; and 
(c) to determine any matter relating to the election of a nego-
tiating committee and the certification of such committee as sole 
negotiating agent. 
(6) The Tribunal shall discharge such other functions as are assigned 
35 to it. by or under this Act. 
11. (l)'The Central Government may 8S QCcasion arises, by notiftca- National 
tlon, eonstltute a NatiODal 'industrial Relatio~ Cou .. nlsston- Industrial 
Relations 
(a) for the adjudication of-
(i) any industrial dispute, (whether. sum disp"- relates to 
&no,. matter specified in the Set!ond Schedule or the Third 
Sehedu.le) coacemmg any industrial estaWw.ment or under-
taking with respect toI whlch the Central Government is the 
aporoprlate Government; or 
Commi.-
sions. 

'8 
(U) any industrial dispute (whether sueh dispute relatet to 
ally matter spec:ifled in the Seeond Schedule or the Third Sche-
dule) concerning any industrial establishment or undertaldn, 
with respect to which the State Government Is the appropriate 
GovemmMt, but such dispute in the opinion of the Centnl 5 
Govemment,-
(l) involves My question of national importance,' or 
(2) Is of such a nature that industrial establishments 
or undertakings situated in more than one State are likely 
to be interested in, or afleeted by, such dispute; or 10 
(iii) aDy trade union dispute which, m the opiaiOll of the 
Central Government, Involves any question of national impor-
tance or ODe of the parties to the dispute is a ~tered trade 
aniOll having otll .. in more than ODe State; 
(b) to enquire into and report to, or advise, the Central Gov- 15 
el'llment in regard to any matter referred to it; or • 
, I 
(e)' to cfiseharge such functions as IllIW be preserihed. 
(2) A Niriional Commission mall consist of one pedon only to be ~ 
appointed by the Central Govemmellt. 20 
(3) No person shall be qualified for appointment as the Presiding 
Officer of a National Commiqsion unless-
(4) he is, or has been, a Judge of a High Court, or 
(b) he is, or has been, the Presiding Officer of a Tribunal for 
~' . l 
.. ., 
a period of not less than five years; or 25 
(e) he has, in the opinion of the Central Government, adequate 
experience in industrial relations. 
Fillinlt of 12. If, for any reason, a vacancy (other th:m a temporary absence) 
vacancies. occurs in the office of the Presiding Officer of " Labour Court, Tribunal 
TerD18 
and con. 
ditionsof 
service of 
Presiding 
Offtcer. 
alLabour 
Court, etc. 
or National Commission or in the office of the chairman or any other 30 
member of a Court of Inquiry, th~n-
(4) in the case of a National Commission, the Central Govern-
ment; and 
(b) in any other case, the appropriate Government, 
shall appoint another person in accordance with the provisions of this 
Act to fill the vacancy and the proceeding before the Labour Court, 
Tribunal, National Commission or Court of Inquiry, as the case may 
be. may be continued from the stage at which the vacancy occurred. 
35 
13. (1) No pierson shall be appointed to. or shall continue in, the 40 
oftlce of the Presiding OfBcer of 8 Labour Court, Tribunal or National 
Commission if he has attained the age of sixty·flve years. 
(2') The othet" terms and conditions of service of the Presiding Of!cer 
of a Labour Court or TrIbunal shall be such as may be prescribed by 
the a~roprlate Government and of the Presidinllt Offtcer of a National 4S 
Commission shall be such as may be preseribed by the ~tral G0v-
ernment. 

17 
14. (1) No order of the appropriate Government or of the Central 
Government, as the case may be, appointing any person as the Presiding 
Officer of a Lab:>ur Court, Tribunal or National Commission or the chair-
man or any other member of a Court of Inquiry shall be called in ques-
S tion in any manner. 
(2) No act of, or proceeding before, any Labour Court, Tribunal Na-
tional Commission or Court of Inquiry shall be called in question i~ any 
manner-
(a) on the ground merely of any defect in the constitution 
10 thereof; or 
Finality 
of orders 
appointing 
Presiding 
Officers of 
Labour 
Courts. 
Tribunals 
and 
National 
Commis-
siom and 
chairman 
8ild 
(b) in the case of a Court of Inquiry, on the ground merely of members 
any vacancy therein. of Courts of 
15. Every Labour Court, Tribunal and National Commission shall be 
deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of sections 345. 348 and 348 
2 of 1974. IS of the Code of Criminal Pro~edure, 1973. 
16. Every Conciliation Officer, Registrar, Additional Registrar of 
Trade Unions or Deputy Registrar of Trade Unions, Presiding Officer of 
11 Labour Court, Tribunal or National Commission, every chairman or 
any other member of a Court of Inquiry, every arbitrator (where there 
20 is only one arbitrator) and every member of a body of arbitratoI's shall 
be deemed to be a Piublic servant within the meaning of section 21 of 
45 of 1860. the Indian Penal Code. 
2S 
30 
CHAPTER III 
TRADE UNIONS 
17. In this Chapter-
(a) "employee" means--
(i) any employee as defined in clause (9) of section 2; and 
(ii) any person (including an apprentice) employed in any 
agricultural operation, whether 01' not such agricultural opera-
tion is carried on along with any industry; 
(b) "emPJl,oyer" means any person employing any employee 
referred to in clause (a). 
18. (1) A trade union may consist of employees only or employers 
only or it may be an association of ttade unions of employees or, as the 
3S case may be, employers only. 
(2) Every trade union shall carry on its management and activities 
in accordance with the provisions made by or under this Act and its 
constitution (hereinafter referred to as the rules of the trade union). 
(3) No trade union which is not registered under this Act shall be 
40 entitled to any rights or privileges under this Act. 
IHJ~'iry. 
Labour 
Co-'m, 
etc., to be 
deemed 
tobea 
civil 
court. 
Conci1ia-
tionOfft-
cers.etc., 
to be 
deemed 
to be 
public 
servants. 
DefInI-
tions of 
"emplo-
yee" and 
"entplo-
yer'for 
the-
purposes 
of this 
Chapter. 
Fonna-
tion of 
trade 
unions. 

Applica-
tion for 
registra-
tion. 
18 
19. (1) Every application for the registration of. a trade union shall 
be made to the Registrar,-
(0) in the case of a trade union of employers, by not less than 
ten emPiloyers;" and 
(b) in the case of a trade union of employees, by ten per cent. 5 
of the employees employed in an industrial establishment or under-
taking or two or more industrial establishments or undertakings or 
unit, branch or office, or units, branches or offices, of an industrial 
establishment or undertaking, as the case may be, for the benefit of 
whom such trade union proposes to carryon its activities, or by ten 10 
employees, whichever is higher: 
Provided that }Vhere ten per cent. of such employees exceeds one 
hundred emp;Loyees, it shall be sufficient if the application is made by 
one hundred of such employees: 
Provided further that in the case of industrial establishments or un- 15 
dertakings which are of a seasonal character, such ten per cent. shall 
be determined with reference to the employees employed on an average 
per working day during the season immediately preceding the date on 
which the application for registration is m?de. 
ExpZanation.-In the case of a trade union which is an association 20 
of trade unions, its membership, for the purpose of this sub-section, shall 
be deemed to be the aggregate of the membership of each of the trade 
unions constituting such association of trade unions. 
(2) Every application for the registration of a trade union shall be 
accompanied by- 2S 
(0) a statement showing-
(i) the names, occupations and addresses of the persons 
making the application, including the name and address of the 
industrial establishment or undertaking, and where the indus-
trial establishment or undertaking has two or more units, 30 
branches or offices, the unit, branch or office, wherein such per-
sons are emp~oyed; 
(ti) the name of the trade union and the address of its head 
office; 
(iii) the title, name, age, address and occupation of each of 35 
the office-bearers of the trade union; 
(iv) in the case of a trade qnion, being an association of 
trade unions, the names, addresses of registered offices and regis-
tration numbers of the member trade unions; 
(b) three copies of the rules of the trade union together with a 40 
copy of the resolution by the members of the trade union adopting 
such rules; 
\ 
(c) a copy of the re!tOlution adopted by thel members of the 
trade union authorising the applicants to make the ap~ication for 
registration: all~ 45 

19 
(d) in the case of a trade union, being an association of trade 
Unions, a copy of the resolution adopted by the members of each of 
the member trade unions, meeting separately, n.greelng to constitute 
the association of trade unions. 
5 Explanation.-For the purposes of clause (c). "resci1ution adopted 
by the members of the trade union" means, in the case of a trade union, 
being an association of trade unions, the resolution adopted by the 
members of each of the member trade unions, meeting separately. 
(3) Where a trade union has been in existence for more than one 
10 year before the making of an application for its registration, there shall 
be delivere j to the Registre.r, together with the application, a general 
statement of the assets and liabilities of the trade union wepared in 
such form and containing such particulars as may be prescribed. 
(4) Where an application has been made under sub-section (1) for the 
IS registration of a trade union, such application shall not be deemed to 
have become invalid merely by reason of the fact that, at any time after 
the date of the application, but before the registration of the trade union, 
some of the aPPllicants, not exceeding one-half of the total number of 
persons who made the a.pplication, have ceased to be members of the 
20 trade union or have given notice in writing to the Registrar dissociating 
themselves from the application. 
20. No craft or category wise trade union shall be registered under 
this Act. 
21. (1) The Registrar may call for furth~ information from th~ per .. 
25 sons who have made the application for registration for the Pfllrpose of 
satisfying himself that any application for registration of the trade union 
complies with the provisions of section 19, and that the registration of 
the trade union is not prohibited by section 20, and may refuse to regis-
ter the trade union until such information is supplied. 
30 (2) If the name under whi-:-h a trade union is proposed to be rep 
tered is identical with that by which any other existing trade union has 
been registered or, in the opinion of the Registrar, so nearly resembles 
such name as to be likely to deceive the public or the members of either 
trade union, the Registrar shall require the persons applying for regis-
3S tra.tion to alter the name of the trade union stated in the application, 
and shall refuse to register the trade union until such alteration has been 
made. 
22. A trade union shall not be entitled to registration under this Act, 
unless the executive thereof is constituted in accordance with the we-
40 visions of this Act, and the rules of the trade union provide for the fol-
lowing matters, namely:-
(a) the name of the trade union; 
(b) the whole of the objects for which the trade union has been 
established; 
Prohibi-
tion of 
registra-
tion ot 
craft or 
category·. 
wi. 
tradt! 
union. 
Power to 
call for 
further 
particu. 
lars and 
to require 
alteratiort 
of name. 
Constitu-
tion of 
executive 
and pro-
visions 
to be 
contained 
in the 
rules of 
a trade 
union. 

Registra-
tion of 
trade 
union. 
. 
20 
(c) the whole of the purposes for which the general funds ot 
the trade union shall be applicable, all of which purposes shall be 
purposes to which such funds are lawfully awlicable under this Act; 
(d) the maintenance of a list of the members of the trade union 
and adequate facilities for the inspection thereof by the office-bearers S 
and members of the trade union; 
(e) the admission of ordinary members (irrespective of their 
craft or category) who shall be persons actually engaged or employed 
in the industrial establishment or undertaking or industrial esta-
blishments or undertakings or unit, branch or office, or units, branch- 10 
es or offices, of an industrial establishment or undertaking, as the 
case may be, with which the trade union is connected, and also the 
admission of such number of honorary or temporary members, who 
are not such employees, as are permitted under section 34 to be 
office-bearers to form the ~xecutive of the trade union; IS 
(f) the PtSyment of a. subscription by members of the trade union; 
(g) the conditions under which any member shall be entitled 
to ,any benefit assured by the rules and under which any fine or 
forfeiture may be imposed on any member; 
(h) the annual general body m~ting of the members of the 20 
trade union, the business to be transacted at such meeting, including 
the election of office-bearers of the trade union; 
(i) the manner in which the members of the executive and the 
other office-bearers of the trade union shall be elected annually and 
removed and filling of casual vacancies; 25 
(j) the safe custody of the funds of the trade union, an annual 
audit, in such manner as may be prescribed, of the accounts thereof, 
and adequate facilities for the inspe~:tion of the acco.mt books by the 
office-bearers and members of the trade union; 
(k) the manner in which the rules shall be amended, varied or 30 
rescinded; and 
(l) the manner in which the trade union may be dissolved. 
23. (1) The Registrar on the receipt of an application for r'egistratior1 
of a trade union shall, after making such enquiries and collecting such 
further inf.ormation as may be necessary, pass order within sixty days 35 
from the date 'of the receipt of the app,lication either granting or refusing 
to grant registration of the trade union and communicate the order to 
the applicant: 
Provided that where the Registrar refuses to grant registration to. a 
trade union, he shall state the reasons therefor in the order refusing to 
grant registration. 40 
(2) When the Registrar grants registration to the trade union, he shall 
enter in a register, to be maintained in such form as may be prescribed, 
the particulars relating to the trade union cootained in the statement 
referred to in claUSe (4) of sub-section (2) of section 19 accompanying 4' 
the application for registration. 

16 of 1926. 
16 of 1926. 
~1 
U; (1) The Registrar, on registering a trade union under this Act, 
shall issue a certi1lcate of regiliu'ation in the PJrescribed form which shall 
be conclusive evidence that the trade union has been registered under 
this Act. 
S (2) A certificate of regist.ration issued under sub-section (1) shall be 
valid for tne whole of India. 
2.5. (1) Every tradt: union registered under the Trade Onions Act, 1926, 
or any otner law, belore ttle commencement of ttlis Act, shall until 
the expiry of six monthS froln SUch commencement be deemed, to be a 
10 regis~red trdde uruon for the purposes of this Act. 
(2) Every trade union registered under the Trade Unions Act, 1926, 
01 any otner law, before the commencement of this Act, may apply 
101' reglSuation under this Act and where such trade union does not make 
any suen application it lihaH, on the expiry of six months tram the com-
15 mencemem of this Act., be deemed to De not a registered trade union for 
the purppses of this Act: 
Provided that the ltegistrar may, after he has received an application 
for the fresh registra?on of the U·ad.c union under this sub-section, direct 
that tne trade union shaH be deemed to be a registered trad~ wlion under 
this Act until he takes a final decision on such application granting or re-
20 fusing to grant registration to the trade union under' this Act. 
(3) The Registrar shall, before the expiry of three months from the 
commencement of this Act, serve on every craft. or category wise trade 
union registered under the Trade Unions Act, 1926, or any other law, 
2~ be~ore the oommencement of this Act, a notice requiring such trade 
UDlon-
(1(1) to amalgamate with a trade union registered or deemed to 
be registered under this Act; or 
(b) to allow membership to all categories of employees. 
within a period of three months from the service of such notice on the 
30 trade union. • 
(4) Where any craft or category wise trade union fails or refuses to 
comPily with a notice under sub-section (3) within the period specified 
therefor in that sub-section, it shall cease to be a registered trade union 
35 for the purposes of this Act. 
26. (1) A certificate of registration of a trade union may be cancelled 
by the Registrar- I .• 
(a) on an application made in that behalf in the prescribed form 
by the trade union concerned and after verification of the facts stated 
40 in the application in such manner as may be prescribed; 
(b) if the trade union wilfully fails to maintain accounts or to 
submit annual return within the prescribed P!eriod; 
(c) if tne annual return submitted by it is false or defective in 
material particulars and the defects are not rectified within the pres-
45 cribed. period; 
Certifi-
cate of 
registra-
tion. 
Fresh 
registra-
tion of 
trade 
unions 
register-
ed under 
Act 16 
of 1926. 
Cancella-
tion of 
registra-
tion. 

Appeal 
against 
non-regis-
tration 
and can-
cellation 
of regis-
tration. 
Re-regis-
tration of 
a trade 
union. 
Rt'gistl'r-
edoffice. 
(d) if the certificate of registration has been obtained by fraud 
Or mistake; 
(e) if the trade union has ceased to exist; 
(1) if the trade union has wilfully and after notice from the Re-
gistrar contravened any provision at this Act or rules made there- 5 
under; 
(9) if the trade union had made, or allowed. to continue, any 
rules of the trade union which are inconsistent with the ProvisiOlls of 
this Act or has rescinded any of its rules providing for any matter, 
provision for which is required to be made by section 22; 10 
(It) if the trade union has not held. annual elections to elect its 
office-bearers before the expiry of such date as may be Wescribed.; or 
(i) if the trade union contravenes its rules: 
Provided that not less than sixty days' previous notice in writing speci-
fying the groWlds on which it is proposed to cancel the certificate of 15 
registration shall be given by the Registrar to the trade union before the 
certificate of registration is cancelled otherwise than on the application 
of the trade union. 
(2) A certificate of registra,tion of a trade Wlion shall be cancelled 
by the Registrar where a Labour Court or a Tribunal recommends the 20 
cancellation of such registration under sub-section (4) of section 93 or 
sub-section (8) of section 108, as the case may be. 
(3) While cancelling the certificate of registration of a trade union the 
Registrar shall record the reasons for doing so and communicate the same 
in writing to the trade union concerned. 25 
27. (1) Any person aggrieved by the refusal of the Registrar to grant 
the application for registration of a trade union under sub-section (1) of 
section 23 or by the cancellation of a certificate of registratlon 
Wlder sub-section (1) of section 26 may, within such period as may be 
prescribed, appeal to the Tribtmal specially authorised in this behalf in 30 
the prescribed. manner. •. 
(2) The Tribunal may, after giving the parties concetned an opppr~ 
tunity of being heard, dismiss the appeal or pass an order directing the 
RegistrBl" to register the trade union and to issue a certificate of registra-
tion under section 24 or setting aside the order of cancellation of the 35 
certificate of registration, as the case may be, and a copy of the order 
shall be forwarded to the Registrar. 
(3) The order of the Tribunal shall be final and the Registrar shall 
comply with such order within a period of thirty days from the date of 
the order. 
28. A trade union whose certificate of registra.tion has been cancelled, 
may apwy for re-registration after the expiry of a period of six months 
from the date of the last cancellation ·of the certificate of registration. 
29. (1) All communications and notices to a registered trade union 
may be addressed to its registered office which shall be the address of 45 
the head. oftlce of the trade union as entered. in the register referred to 
in sub-section (2) of section 23. 

21 of 1860. 
23 
(2) Notice in writing of any change in the address of the registered 
oftlce of the trade union shall be given within fourteen days of such 
change to the Registrar, and such other authorities as may be prescribed, 
and the changed address shall be recorded in the register referred to in 
S sub·section (2) of section 23. 
10 
30. (1) The subscription payable by the members of a trade union 
shall be-
(i) in the case o~ a trade un'on of persons employed in agricul-
ture or agricultural operations, nol less than twenty-five paise per 
month per member; and 
(ii) in other cases, not less than one rupee per month per member. 
(2) Where a trade union, in accordance with its rules, resolves to that 
effect and the employees who are members of such trade union 
execute in favour of the employer a written authorisation in that behalf, 
15 the membership fee shall be deducted from the wages of the employees 
by the employer and paid over to the trade union concerned in the 
prescribed manner. 
31. Every registered trade union shall be a body corporate by the 
name under which it is registered, and shall have perpetual succession 
~ and a common seal with power b acquire and hold both movable and 
immovable property and to contract, and shall by the said name sue and 
be sued. 
32. The following Acts. namely:-
(a) the Societies' Registration Act, 1860. 
2 of 1912. 2S (b) the Co-operative Societies Act, 1912, and 
(e) the Companies Act, 1956, 1 of 1956. 
shall not apply to any registered trade union and the registration of any 
such trade union under any such Act shall be void. 
33. A person shall be disqualified for being chosen as, and for being 
30 an office-bearer of a registered trade union. if-
(i) he has not attained the age of eighteen years; 
(ii) he has been convicted by a court in India of any offence 
involving moral turpitude and sentenced to imprisonment. unless a 
period of five years has elapsed since his release af,ter undergoing 
3S such imprisonment; 
(iii) he is already office-bearer of not less than four trade unions: 
and 
(iv) a Labour Court has directed. under sub-section (2) of 
section 93, that he shall be disQul'llifi~d fo~ bein(! chosen as. or for 
40 being, an office-bearer of a trade union, so long as such order is in 
force. 
Member-
ship fee 
and its 
mode of 
collection. 
Incorpo-
ration of 
registered 
trade 
unions. 
Certain 
Acts not 
to apply 
to regis-
tered 
trade 
unions. 
Disquali-
fications 
for being 
office-
bearer 
of trade 
unions. 

Propor-
tion of 
office-
bearers 
to be con-
nected 
with the 
industry. 
Declara-
tion of 
assets by 
office-
bearers. 
Change 
ofJWne. 
Amalga-
mation 
of trade 
unions. 
Notice of 
change of 
name or 
amalga-
marum. 
24 
34. (1) In the case of a trade union of employees carrying on its 
activities for the benefit of employees employed in one industrial estab-
lishment or undertaking only, the number of office-bearers of such trade 
union who are not persons actually employed in such industrial estab-
lishment or undertaking, shall not be more than two. S 
(2) In the case of a trade union of employees carrying on its activities 
for the benefit of employees employed in two or more industrial estab-
lishments or undertakings, not less than three-fourths of the total num-
ber of the office-bearers of such trade union shall be employees actJ,lally 
employed in any of. the industrial establishments or undertakings with 10 
which the trade union is connected. 
(3) In the case of a trade union of employers not less than three-
fourths of the total number of the office-bearers of such trade union 
shall be employers in relation to the industrial establishments or under-
takings with which the trade union is connected. IS 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section an ex-employee of an 
industrial establishment or undertaking shall be deemed to be a person 
who is actually employed in such industrial establishment or undertaking. 
35. Every office-bearer of a trade union shaH file a statement of his 
8Rsets and liabilities every year, on or before such date as may be 20 
prescribed, with the Registrar and such statement shall be open for fIl.J 
inspection by any employee or, as the case may be, employer, who is a 
member of the trade union. 
36. Any registered trade union may, with the consent of not less than 
two-thirds of the total number of its members and subject to the pro- 25 
visions of section 38, change its name. 
:n. Any two or more registered trade unions which are not associa-
tions of trade unions or two or more associations or trade unions may 
amalgamate together as one trade union or one association of trade 
unions, as the elise may be, with or without dissolution or division of 30 
the assets and liabilities of, such trade unions ot" associations of trade 
unions or either or any of them if the votes of at least one-half of the til 
members of each or every such trade union (including, in the case of 
amalgamation of two or more associations of trade unions, the members 
of the trade unions which are members of. such associations of trade 35 
ugions) entitled to vote are recorded and at least sixty per cent. of 
the votes recorded are in favour of such amalgamation. 
38. (1) Notice in writing of every change of name and of every 
amalgamation shall be signed-
(4) where the registered trade union chanRing its name is not 40 
an association of trade unions or the registered trade unions amalga-
mnting are not associations of trade union8,-
(i) in the case of a change ot name, by the Secretary and 
ten members of the registered trade union changing its name; 
~ ~ 

10 
15 
..... 
(it) In the case of an amalgamation, by the Secretary, and 
ten members, o£ each of the registered trade unions amalgamat-
ing; 
(b) where the registered trade union changi.ne its name is an 
aaaociation of trade unions or the registered trade unions amalgama-
ting are associations of trade unions-
(i) in the case of a change of name, by the Secretary of 
such association of trade unions and by not lees than ftfty-one 
per cent. of the total number of secretaries of the trade unions 
which are members of such association of trade uniona; and 
(ii) in the case of an amalgamation, by the secretaries of 
the asaociations of trade unions amalgamating and by not 1_ 
than fifty-one per cent. of the secretaries of the trade unions 
which are members of such associations of trade unions 
amalgamating, 
and shall be forwarded to the Reg~trar and, in the case of an amalga-
mation of trade unirlDs, where the registered office of the amalgamated 
trade union is situated in a different State, to the Ragistrar of such 
State: 
20 Provided that in a case referred to in clause (a), if the total number 
of members of the registered. trade union whose name UI changed or any 
of the registered trade unions amalgamating, excludilll the secretary, is 
leu than ten, the notice may be signed only by the secretary and all 
the members of the trade union, 
25 (2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2) of section 21, the 
Registrar shall, if he is satisfied that the provisions of· this Act in res-
pect of change of name have been complied with, register the chanae of 
name in the register referred to in sub-section (2) of secUon 23, and ~ 
change of name shall have effect from the date of such registration, 
30 (3) The Reristrar, within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the 
registered office of the amalgamated trade union is situated, shall, if he 
is satisfied that the provisiOns of this Act in respect of amalgamation 
have been complied with and that the registration of the trade union 
formed thereby is not prohibited by section 20 and it is not disentitled to 
35 l'Pgistration under section 22, register such trade union in the manner 
provided in section 23 and the amalgamati()n shall have effect trom the 
date of such registration, 
39. (1) The change in the name. of a registered trade union shall not 
affect any rights or obligations of the trade union or render defectiv.~ 
40 any legal proceeding by or against the trade union, and any legal pro-
ceeding which might have been continued or commenced by or again~ 
~t· by its former name may be contin. .. ed or commenced by or agatnst it 
by its new name. 
(2) An amalgamation of two or more registered trade unions shall 
45 not prej.udice any right of any of such trade unions or any right of a 
credi~ of any ~t tb,em. 
Effect. 
of chan,. 
ot name 
and amal. 
18mation, 

D1teolu-
t1oD. 
... (2) When a registered trade union is dissolved, notice in wriUna 
of the diaolution shall be signed,-
(a) where such trade union is not an association of tra4e unions. 
by lhe Secretary and ten members thereof; and 
(b) where such trade union is an association of trade unions, J 
tae ~ary of such asso<:iat.ion of trade uaiou .. and the aecretarilll 
. of;J)otlfis UtantUty-one .per .cent. of the total..nwnaer of tAe trade 
'W!liooswhieh are members of suchilSiOciation, 
and shall, within fourteen days of the dissolution, be sent to the Regis-
trar, .. d If the Registrar is satisfted that t~ dillOlution has been effected 10 
i'II'accordance with the rules of the t&t8de union, he aball 'make ·.an entry 
to ~ that eftIect in· the' register referred to in 8ub-HCtion .(2) of., 'Metion 23 
and the d~s:>lution shall have effect from the date on whieh such entry 
is made: 
Provided that in a case referred to in clause (4), where the total 15 
number of members of a trade union, excluding the Secretary, is leu. 
than ten, the notice may be signed only by the Secretary and all the 
members of the trade union. 
(2) Where tbe '1iisIolution of It regiitered trade union bas . .Men 
ententd in .their~ter referred to in sub-section (2) of.,88Cgon.23 .. QCi 20 
the rules of the trade union do nOlt provide for· the distribu.tion of t.ae 
funds of the trade union on dissolution, the Registrar shall.divi.d.e the 
funds amongst the members thereof in such manner as may be prescribed. 
Returns. ;'1. (1) '.Every 'J'eFstered trade union shall forward annually 10tbe 
Regiltr.ar, OIl or before 81ICh dateaa may be prescribed, a. genet.l state- 30 
JIHlht, .audited in '-'heprelCribed mumer. of all receipts and e~peQditw'e 
of sueh registered trade union during the ye~r ending on tht: 31st .day of 
December' next preceding such prescribed date, and of the aS8lets and 
lltlbilities of the trade union. existiJ'la on such 31st day of December. 
(2) The g~al statement shall be prepared in such form, and -,hall 35 
C4Nltam such pat1iculars, as may be prescribed . 
. (3) Together with tbe general statement refert-ed to in sub-section 
(l), every registered trade union shall forward to the Registrar a state-
ment showing all changes of office-bearers made by the trade union 
duri~g the year to which such general ~tatement relates, along with :J. 40 
copy of the rules of the trade union corrected up to tbedate IOf jespUch 
thereof to the Registrar. 
(4).A CQPy of every .alteration made in the rul.. of -I N ....... d 
trade union shall be sent to the Registrar within fifteen daye of ·the 
making of the alteration. 4' 
(5) 'F~r the purpose of examining the -documen._ r~' to ta· .... 
MCtton~ (1), (3) and (4), the Registrar, or any om,*, authortled JDr'lIIIIID, 

.-...... .... -. 27 
by general or special order, may at all reasonable times inspect the 
eerttfteate' ofregistratton, account books, registetS'at\d.;other dOcuments, 
relatine to a trade union, at its registered office' or may require their 
production at such place as he may specify in this'~.lf,' but no sueb 
5 place shall be at a distance of more than fifteen kilometers from theo re-
g!stered offtce' of such trade union. 
'2. (1) Where any application to be' made-, 1'l'Gt~·tCJ be' given or any-
thing, to be dorie (including the signing, of any application or notice) 
under this Chapter is required or allowed to be made, ,given or done by 
10 a member of a trade union and such trade union is a trade union of 
employers, such application, notice or thing shall, in the calle of a mem-
ber, being a company or oUier body corporate, be' Irlade given ot done, 
as the case may be, by the secretary of, or any other oftlcer' specially 
authMlsed- in this behalf by, the company or other b~ corporate. 
15 (2) Wbel'e a member of a trade union of employers is .. company or 
other' body corporate, the secretary of, or any other officer specially 
authorised in this behalf by, the company or other body corporate sllall 
be'deemed to' be an employer in relation to an industrial estabUaImlent 
or underta'king with which the trade 'unien is connected for the purpo,acs 
20 of section 34. 
43. (1) Where there 'is--
(4) a diapute relatin~ to,-
Special 
proviaions 
in regard 
to trade 
union of 
emp1o.. 
Yera. 
Adjudica-
tion of 
trade 
(i) the election of an office-bearer or' the disqualification of ~~=tes. 
any person for being chosen as, or for being, an office..beerer of 
30 
a'Tegistered trade union; or 
(ii) whether or not any person is, or has ceased to be, an 
office-bearer, or a member, of a registered-trade union, including 
any' dispute relating to wrongful removal or expulsion of any 
such office-bearer or member from his oftice or membership of 
such trade union, as the case may be; or 
(iii) the J;1I'operty, including account. bookl;, of any registered 
trade union; C1'f 
(b) any other trade union dispute, 
aa application may be made in the prescribed manner to the !ribunal 
3S IpeciaUy authorised in this behalf for th~, ~cati6ll of the di8pute,-
(A) where the dispute is in respect of a regi'si~red trade union 
whieh'is an association of 'trade unions, by any person who is a 
membet of any of'tie trade' uniOM. whieb is a member of the asso-
ctattonj o~ 
(8) ,where the dispute is in respect of a, regIstered' tt!ade u~ion 
whtcb,,,is ,DOi an auociation of trade unions, by any pet'SO'ft' who 15 a 
member of, the trade union, 
within-8Mb period as ,may be p~scribed or the Government of the State 
whereiftthe-registered oftrce of the trade union tssituated may refer such 
45 dispute to ofJwzh Tribunal for adjudication. 

Object. 
lID which 
pneral 
funcb 
'1D83' be 
lI))ent.. 
-.~--
(2) l(otwlthatancUn, anything contained in sub-section (1), where, in 
the opinicm of the Central Government, any dispute referred to thereill 
,involves any queltion of national importance or any of the parties tv 
the dispute is a registered trade union having offices in more than one 
State, that Government may refer such dispute to a National Commis- 5 
alon for adjudiclltion and on such reference being made, sub-section (6) 
of section 104 shall apply in relation to such dispute in the same manner 
as it appUes in relation to an industrial dispute which has been referred 
to a National Commiaalon for adjudication. 
(3) The Tribunal to which an application is made or a dispute is re- 10 
ferred for adjudication unaer sub-section (1), or the National Commis-
sion to which a dispute is referred for adjudication under sub-section 
(2), shall have the power to issue such directions or pass such order's, as 
it thinb ftt, pending the adjUdication of the dispute. 
(4) The Tribunal or National Commission, as the case may be, shall, IS 
after hearing the parties to the dispute and enquiring into the dispute in 
the prescribed manner,adjudicate the dispute and pass such award as 
it thinks just and proper in the case, including an 'order setting aside the 
election of an office-bearer, or declaring that any person is not or has 
ceased to be an office-bearer of a trade union and directing the holdint! 20 
ot eleetion for choosing an oftiee-bearer, 
(5) The award of the Tribunal or the National Commission, as the 
case may be, ul\der sub-section (4) shall be ,final. 
(6) No civil court shall entertain any suit or other proceeQing in re-
lation to any dispute referred to in sub-section (1). 25 
(7) Save as aforesaid, the Tribunal or the National Commission, as 
the ease may be, shall, in adjudicating disputes under this section, exe'r-
eise the same powers and fellow the same procedure as it exercises or 
follows while adjudicating an industrial dispute under this Act. 
«. The general funds of a registered tr~de union shall not be spent 30 
on any object other than the following, namely:-
(a) the payment of salaries and allowances to the oftlce-bearer. 
of the trade union and the expenses incurred by them in the dis-
charge of their duties; 
(b) the payment of expenses for the administration of the trade 35 
union, including audit of the accounts of the general funds of the 
tude 1Jnloa.; 
(c) the prosecution or defen'ce of any legal proceeding to which 
the trade union or any member thereof ill a party, when such prose-
cution or defence is undertaken for the purpose of securing OI: pro- .~o 
tecting any rights of the trade union as such or, in the case of a 
repatered trai1e union of employees, of any member' of the trade 
union against his employer or, in the case of a registered trade union 
ot employers, of any employer against his employees; 
(cl) the cOllduct of individual, lndustrial or trade union disputes 45. 
on behl1f of the trade union OT any member thereof or' {or com-
pensation of members for loss arising out of such dispute; 

29 
(e) allowances to members thereof or their depoendents all ae-
cdurt of death, old age, sickness, accident or unemployment of such 
members; 
(f) the issue of, or the undertaking of liability under, policies of 
5 assurance on the lives of members ther00f or against their sickness. 
accident or unemployment; 
(g) the provision of educational, social 01' religious benefits for 
members thereof (including payment to the heirs of a deceased 
mem ber of expenses of funeral or religious ceremonies of such de-
10 ceased member) or for the dep!!ndents of such members; 
15 
20 
(h) the publication of a periodical mainly concerning matter, 
in relation to trade union aotivities and activities of employers or 
employees or both; 
(i) the payment, in furtherance of any o.f the objec.ts on which 
the general funds of the trade lIlion may be spent, of contributions 
to any cause intended to benefit employees or employers, as the case 
may be, in general, provided that the expenditure towards· such 
payment in any financial year shall not, at any Ume during that year 
be in e'Cc('ss of on ('-fourth of the aggregate gross income which has 
up to that time BC'::rued to the gerieral founds of the trade union durinJ 
that year and of the balance at the credit of those funds at the c0m-
mencement of that year; and 
(j) any other object specified by the State Government, by noti-
fication, subject to such conditions as may be specified therein. 
25 45. (1) A registered trade union may constitute -a separate fUDci, 
which shall consist of money separately realised or paid to that fund, 
from which payments may be made for the promotion of the civic and 
political interests of itr members, in furtherance of any of the objects 
specified in sub-section (2). 
30 (2) The objects referred to in sub-section (1) are-
(G) the payment of any expenses incurred, either directly or 
indirectly, by a candidate or prospective candidate for electiOn. u a 
member of any legislative body constituted uuder the COllititution 
or of any local authority, before, during or after the election in COIl-
35 nectlon with his candidature or election; or 
(b) the holding of any meeting or the c'tistributiOn of any litera-
ture or documents in supPort of any such ~andidate or pr08jJeetfve 
candidate; or· . 
(e) the maintenance of any person who is a member of any 
40 legislatiVe! bOOy constituted under the COmltitutlion or (If any local 
authority; or 
(d) the registration of electors or the sele~tion of a candidate 
for any legislative body constituted under the Constitution or for any 
local authority; or 
45 (e) the holding of political meeting of any kind, or the distri-
bution of political }jJerature or political do,cuments of any kind. 
Con.tttu-
tion of • 
.eparate 
fund for 
political 
PUrpoletl. 

lU&htto 
InIpect 
book. of 
trade 
unions. 
Trade 
union of 
emplo-
yen may 
enter 
into let-
tlement 
with ne,o-
tiatin, 
..-nt. 
Enforce-
ability of, 
811'"-
menu. 
ao 
(3) No member shall be compelled to contribute to the fund cons:td-
tuted ,under sub-section (1) and a member who does not contribute to 
the said fund shall not be excluded from any beneftt of the resistered 
trade union, or placed in any respect either directly or indirectly under 
any· disability or at any disadvantaAe as compared with other members 5 
of S\lcb trade union (except in relation to the control or management of 
the said fund) by reason of his not contributing to the said fund; and 
contribution to the said fund shall not be made a condition for admission 
to such trade union. 
(4) The provisions of this section shall, in so far as it relates t.o pay- 10 
ment of contributions by members of a registered. tra. union to a fund 
. constituted by such trade union uJl.der S\lb-section (l), \)e:'subject to ~he' 
provisions 01 section ~A of the Companies Act, 1956. 1 of 1918. 
fl. The account books of a registered trade union and the list of 
members thereof shall be open to inspection by any ofIee-lMePer or 15 
member of such trade union at such times, as may be specified in the 
rules of the trade union. 
t'l, (l) A regiak!red trade union of employers may enter into a settle-
ment with a negotiating agent in the course of negotiations under section 
97 or in the course of conciliation proceedings under section 98 or may 20 
eDiec' into an arbitration agreement under section 100 anll where a 
r.,pstel'ed trade union of employers enters into such agreement, the 
agreement and, where such agreement is an arbitration agteement, the 
arbitration award sha1l, subject to the other provisions of this Act, be 
.biJ1diDg ,on every member of such trade union of employers. 25 
(2) Where any registered trade union of employers is a party to any 
adjudication proceedings before the Labour Court, Tribunal or National 
-Commission, the award of. such Labour Court, Tribunal or National 
Commission, as the case may be, shall. subject to the other provisions 
of this Act, be binding on all the membe>rs of such trade union of 30 
employers. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section, mC'mber of a regis. 
tered trade union of employers includes any such member who resigns 
or otberwlse relinquishes the membership, or otherwise ceases to be a 
r utint~, of suelf trade' union after any agreement referred to in sub- 3~ 
... ~ '(1)'i8 entered:into or after such trade union has beel\' made a 
party to any adjudication proceedtngs referred to in sub-eection (2) . 
•. No ciV'ill court shall entertain any suilt or other leg-.t, proceedin, 
i~ for thiF e.x.pren purpose' of enforcing, or recovel1ing darn.agM 
for breach of, any of the following agreements, namely:- 40 
<a) any agreement among the- member. ot a regiatered, tral\8 
union u such, concerning the condiltions on which any members at" 
such trade union shall or shan not sell their gocxk, transaet buslnea, 
employ or be employed; or 
(b) any aareement for the. payment by any perron of any .. 45 
scription or penalty to a registered trade union; or 

". 
_ (c) ·MY acreemenrt:fGr the applieationof-the funds &l'a regiAer-
.. tnde uftion-
10 
(ii) to make contributions .to any employee or emploJlitr,-'u 
the case may be, who is not 1I member of such trade union,. in 
consideration of such employee or employer acting in confonntty 
with the ru1~s or resolutions of such trade union; or 
(iii) to pay any-fine impoaltd upon any member, or upon 
any office-bearer (not being a member), of such trade union, hy 
lentence of a court 'of Jaw; or 
(d) any .grecment made between ODe re,;s.tered tracle URion 
Ind. another; or 
(e) any agreement between a registered trade union of emplo-
yees [whether or not such trade union has been certiftedss_a negotJat-
15 iJ)g.agent under sub-leCtion (1) of section.60 or as a local union WMler 
sub-leetion (3) of that section] and an employer or a group of-e.m-
ployers or registelled trade u.nion of employ-ers; or 
(f) any agreement to secure the performance of any of the 
agreements aforesaid. 
20 . f9. (1) No .suit or other le.&al proceeding sball be maintainable in any 
civil coLlrt .aiDst .any r'iistered trade undon or any oftlce-bearer or mem-
ber Ithereof in respect of. any act done in con.templa;tion or furt.herance 
of an industrial dispute or trade union dispute 0Ir' indiv'idual dispute to 
wbieh·.8j memlDer of the kMie union is· a party on thepololDd'Wlly th~ 
2:\ such act imNces lome other pelIOn to break a centtact. of,.~ment 
or tba!t.:ijt is.:8Jl iJaterierence.with the tnde,·buaiDets".Qr~~t..ot 
lIGUle,other penIOIlOf with t~ np.t,. 8()meo,therpenan,.to~ of 
his capital or of his labour. ashe desires. 
(2) A registered trade union shalLnot .be liable in.any .auit or other 
30 legal proceeding in any civil court in respect of any tortious act done in 
CGIltemplairiOll or· furtherance of In indwd;rial ~8pUte or tracie union' dis-
ptl'te ~ individual dispute by an' agcmt of the trade union if it is.~Pl'Oved 
thatsueh -person.aoie3 .wit)aQut· tAe'kBOWled.ae. f)f, or OOft~ll&ryto 'expN&8 
ulIrtruetAiOaa • 'liven, ,by, . tae elNlCutive ·;Of ~ tncie -.ion. 
35 58. NoeAployee,.who is.a member of Ii nctateNd tIt_un_ o£,em.-
~,s_lltDe ctiecriJDinated l .. iDlt~ dtrec:tly or indifec:tly, in any! .. f &he 
~ u.lIIttng' to his CQnditicns of tet.'\'ice for Ule-reuen ·'that Iae ~8f" 
~r IOfsueh· tratie \mi.nn of .employees er contijn ... ' to~ all," .emeer. 
Immunit, 
from 
civil 
suit in 
certain 
cases. 
!>ilcrlmi. 
nation 
.... in.t 
membert 
otreliL 
tered 
trade 
unionot 
f'lnplo-
y .. pro-
~ -, 

06:e. 
bearers or 
members 
of rei is-
terecl 
trade 
unlonsnot 
Uablefor 
c:rI:m1na1 
c:onJPlracy 
lnCfttaln 
ceIH. 
Sole 
andehlef 
nelotiat-
in, 
alents, 
auocl'8te 
union 
and local 
union. 
, .. , 
it. No olice-bearer or member of a retiJteradtrade union shall be 
liable to punishment under sub-section (2') of section l20B of the IR;ian 
Penal Code in respect of any agreement made between the members for 45 of 1800. 
~e p\1.1'}lQle of furthering any such .obj8Clt of the wade union a.c; is ~i-
fled in section 44 tmless the agreement is an agreement to commit an 5 
offence. 
CHAPTER IV 
NEGOTIATING AGENT 
51. (1) A re~tered trade union of employees may, subject to the 
other provisions contained in this Chapter, be certified as the sole 10 
negotiating agent in relation to the employees of. a negotiating unit if 
it has the support of not less than sixty-fi/ve per cent. of such employees. 
(2) A registered trade union of E'mployees may, subject to the other 
provisions contained in this Chapter, be certified RS the chief negotiating 
agent in relation to the employees of a negotiating unit if it has the J 5 
IlUpport of mwe than fifty per cent., but less than sixty-five per cent., 
of such employees. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) or sub-
section (2), where there is only one registered trade union of employees 
carrying on its activities tor the beneftt of the employees of a negotiating 20 
unit and it has the support of not less than forty per cent. of such em-
ployees, it may, subject to the other provisions contained in this Cliapter, 
be certJfied as the sole negotiating agent in relation to such em.ployees. 
(4) Where there are two or more registered trade unions of emplo-
yees C8J:Tying on their activities for the benefit of the employees of a 25 
negotiating unit, and one of such trade uniQns of employees is certified 
as the chief negotiating agent in relation to such employees, such of the 
other registered trade unions of employees having the support of not less 
than twenty per cent. of such employees shall, subject to the other pro-
visions contained in this Chapter, be certified as associate union or asso- 30 
c1ate unions in relation to such employees. 
(5) Where a registered trade union of employees or a negotiating 
committee referred to in sUMeetion (6) has been certJfied as the sole 
negotiating agent in relation tC) the employees employed in two or .more 
industrial establi.hments or undertakings 'or two .or ~ore units, branches 35 
or offices of the same industrial establishment or undertaking constituting 
a negottating unit, any other registered trade uDion of employees carry-
tni on 'its activities for ·.thebenefit of· the employees of any of the local 
units constituting such negotiating unit may, subject to ,the other pro.. 
'9i1ions cOlltained in thi. Chapter, be certified as a local union ill relation 40 
to the employees last mentioned, if such trade union of employeesha. 
the suppqrt of not less than forty per cent. of such employees and is the 
trade union of employees (not being the registered trade union of em-
ployees certified as sole negotiating agent) having the support of the 
maximum number of employees dt such local unit. 45 

33 
US) Where there is no registered trade union of employees carrying 
on its activities for the benefit of the employees of a nego1lating unit (g 
no such trade union is entitled to be cert..fied as the sole negotiating 
&,gent or chief negotiating agent in relation to such employees, a com-
S mittee to be called a negotiating committee, shall be elected by such 
employees in such manner as hereinafter provided to discharge the func-
tions of a sole negotiating agent. 
51. (1) Where-
(0) the support tor a registered trade union of emplqyees is pro-
10 posed to be determined for the purpose of certifying it as sole nego-
tiating agent or chief negotiating agent under sub-section (1) o~ 
section 60 or an election is to be conducted to choose the chairman 
or other members of a negotiating co.mmittee under section 61; or 
(0) the support for a registered trade union of employees is pro-
15 posed to be determined for the purpose of certifying it as local union 
under sub-section (3) of section 60, 
the Tribunal shall noti£y,-
(i) in the case referred to in clause (0), on the notice board 
or notice boards of. the industrial "establishment or undertaking or 
20 industrial establishments or undertakings or the unit, branch or 
office or the units, branches or offices of the same industrial estab-
Hshment or undertaking, as the case may be, constituting a nego--
tiating unit; or 
(ii) in the case referred to in clause (b), on the notice board of 
25 the local unit; and 
30 
35 
(iii) in either case in such other manner as may be prescribed, 
its intention to determine such support or to conduct such election, as 
the case may be, and the date, time and manner and such other parti-
culars relating to such determination or election, as may be prescribed. 
(2) All employees employe:} in the negotiating unit or the local unit, 
as the case may be, and who-
(0) have been so employed (whether continuously or intermit-
tently) for n1t less than ninety days during a period of one hundr'ed 
and eiglity days immediately preceding the date on which the inten-
tion to determine the support of the employees for such trade union 
or to conduct the election to the negotiating committee, as the case 
may be, is notified under clause (i) or clause (ij) of sub-section 
(1); and 
(b) have completed the age of eighteen yean on such date, 
-40 shall be entitled to take part in sueh determination of support for such 
trade union of employees or election. to the ne.,t:iatIn. committee, .. 
the case may be. 
(3) Where the notice referred to in sub-section (1) iI requ.lred by 
that sub-eection to be notified OD more than one notlc:e board the date 
-4S on which it is notified "on the l .. t notice board shall, far the purpoHa of 
sub-section (2), be deemed to be the date on which IUch notice illIOtifted. 
Qualiftca. 
hona for 
taking 
part in 
the deter_ 
mination 
of IUpport 
IIf • trade 
union of 
employees 
or for 
votin,in 
election 
toChoolO 
negotiat, 
u'l c0m-
mittee. 

Appli-
cation for 
certifica-
tion of 
relistered 
trade 
union al 
negotiat-
ing &lent. 
34 
M. (1) A registered trade uni('n of employees may apply for certifica-
tion as negotiating agent in relation to the employees of a negotiating 
unit and such application shall state whether it claims h be certffted 
as sole negotiating agent or chief negotiating agent. 
(2) Save as otherwise provided in sub-section ,(4), the application S 
under sub-section (1) .shall be made-
(a) where a negotiating unit has been constituted by the Cen-
tral Government under the second proviso b clause (26) of section 
2 and the application is fOr certification of a registered trade union 
of employees as negotiating agent in relation to the employees of 10 
such negotiating unit, to the Central Government; 
(b) in other cases, to the appropriate Government. 
(3) Where a registered trade union of employees applies for certi-
fication as negotiating agent and such certification is in relation to the 
employees employed in- 15 
(a) all the establishments wherein is carried on the same indus-
try or all undertakings of such industrial establishments, situated 
in the same area; or 
(b) all tae units, branches or offices of the same industrial 
establishment or undertaking situated in different places, 20 
and such industrial establishments OT undertakings, or units, branches 
or offices of the same industrial establishment or undertaking, have 
not been constituted as a negotiating unit under the provisos to clause 
(26) of section 2, the applicant shall specify in the application the pres-
cribed particulars in respect of such industrial establishments or 25 
undertakings, or units, branches or offices of the same industrial estab-
lishment or undertaking, and such application shall be made-
(a) where such industrial establishments or undertakings, or 
units, branches or offices of the same industrial establishment or 
undertaking are situated in more than one State, to the Central 30 
Government; and 
(b) in other ('ases, to the appropriate Government. 
(4) Where the period for which any registered trade union of em-
ployees was certified as the negotiating agent in relation to the em-
ployees of two or more industrial establishments or undertakings, or 3S 
two or more units, branches or offices of, the same industrial establish-
ment or undertaking, constituting a negotiating unit, has expired under 
sub-section (1) of section 64 or where such certificate is cancelled under 
sub-section (2), or deemed to be cancelled under sub-section (3), of that 
section, any other registered trade union of employees, or the 40 
registered trade union of employees the period of whOSe certification 
88 n~gotiating agent has expired, may apply for the re-constitution of 
the negotiating unit and certifying such registered trade union of em-
ploYees' as the neg:)tiating agent in relation to the employees of the re-
constituted negotiating unit and the provisions of sub-section (3) shall, 4S 
10 far as inay be, ilppJy· in relation to such appiieatlon. . 

~ 
. (5) Where any registered trade union of employees has been certi-
fled as sole negotiating agent in relation to the employees of a 
negotiating unit and such negotiating unit consists of two or more indus-
trial establishments or undertakings or two or more units, branches or 
5 offices of the same industrial establishment or undertaking, any other 
registered trade union of employees may apply, to the Central Govern-
ment or the appropriate Government, as the case may be, to whom the 
trade union first mentioned applied for certification as such sole ne-go-
tiating agent, for certification as local union in relation to the em-
10 ployees of any of the local units constituting such negDtiating unit. 
55. (1) Every appli-cation by a registered trade union of, employees, 
under sub-section (1) of section 54, for certification as negotiating agent 
in rel.,Uon to the employees of a negotiating unit shall state whether 
any other registered trade union of employees was certified as the 
IS negotiating agent in relation t() such employees and shall contain such 
particulars as may be prescribed in respect of such trade union. 
(2) Every application by a registered trade union of employees, 
under sub-section (5) of sect:on 54, for certification as a local union in 
relation to the employees of a local unit shall-
20 (a) contain such particulars as may be prescribed in respect of 
the registered trade union of employees certified as sole negotiating 
agent in relation to the employees of the negotiating unit including 
25 
the employees of such local unit; and . 
(b) state whether any other registered trade union of employees 
was certified as local union in relation to such employees and if So 
also contain such particulars as may be prescribed in respect of such 
trade union. 
(3) Every application by a registered trade union of employees for 
certification as negotiating agent, or local union shall, contain such 
30 other particulars, be in such form and be accompanied by such fee as 
may be prescribed. 
56. (1) No application for the certification of a registered trade union 
of employees-
(a) as negotiating agent in relation to the employees of a nego-
35 tiating unit; or 
(b) as a local union in relatio,n to the empl~yees of a local unit, 
shall be entertained by the Central Government or the appropriate 
Goverr1ment, as the case may be, if-
(i) in the case referred b in clause (a), any other registered 
40 trade union of employees or a neg:>tiating committee has been certi-
fied as negotiating agent in relation to the employees referred to 
therein; or 
(ii) in the case referred to in clause (b). any other registered 
trade union of employees has been certified as local union in rel~ion 
4 ~ to the employees. referred to therein: 
Provided that such application may be entertained if a period of 
two years has expired after the date of certification of th~ o~her regis-
tered trade uniob of employees· or negotiating committee 'as ne,otia~ing 
alent ~r other registered trade· tinion of employees as local union, as the 
50 case may be, or such certification as negotiating agent or local union 
Particu-
lars 
which 
an appli-
cation for 
certificR-
tion as 
negotia_ 
ting agent 
Or local 
union 
~hall 
c'lntain. 
Bar 
a,ainst 
applica-
tion by 
relistered 
trade 
union of 
employees 
for certi. 
fication as 
negotiat-
in. 
&gent, 
as.. .. ociate 
union or 
local 
union in 
certain 
cases. 

Ref ... 
rence of 
lI.pplica-
tion to 
Tribunal 
for certi-
fication of 
negotiat-
ing aJeDt 
or loeal 
uniOB. 
has been cancelled under sub-section (2) of section 64 or is deemed to 
be cancelled under sub-section (3) of that section. 
(2) A registered trade union of employees shall not be eligible to 
apply for certification as j1egotiattng agent, associate union or local 
union-
(II) if it has not been functioning as a registered trade union-
(i) where the application is for certification as local union. 
for the benefit of the employees of the local unit concerned; or 
(ii) in other cases for the benefit of the employees of the 
S 
negotiating unit concerned, 10 
for a period of at least one year immediately preceding the date of 
making such application; or 
(b) if there is a finding of a Tribunal that such trade union of 
employees has indulged in an unfair practice and a period of not 
less than six months has not elapsed after the date of such finding. J S 
S1. (1) The Central Government, or the appropriate Government, as 
the case may be, shall, after giving the appllcant and any other regis-
tered trade union of employees which is desirous of being heard, a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard and after making such further 
enquiry as it deems fit. entertain the application if it complies with the 
provisions of section 55 and is not barred by sub-section (1) 01 section ~o 
56 and the registered trade union of employees is not ineligible to apply 
for certification as negotiating agent or local union. as the case may be, 
under sub-section (2) of section 56. 
(2) The Central Government or the appropriate Government, as the 
case may be, on entertaining an application by a registered trade union 2S 
of employees for certification as negotiating agent, shall after giving the 
applicant and any other registered trade union of employees, which is 
desirous of being heard, and the employer or employers concerned a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard decide whether having regard 
to the matters referred to in the first proviso to clause (26) of section 2 30 
it is necessary or expedient to constitute a negotiating unit consisting 
of two or more industrial establishments or undertakings or two or more 
units, branches or offices of the same industrial establishment or under-
taking. 
(3) Where the Central Government or the appropriate Government, 3S 
as the case may be, is of the opinion that having regard to the matters 
referred to in the first proviso to clause (26) of section 2, it is not neces-
sary or expedient to constitute a negotiating un;t as referred to in sub-
secUon (2). that Government shall-
(4) where the appUcaUOIl referred to in eub-aectlon (2) hu 40 
been made to the Central Government and that Government is not 
the appropriate Government, return such application for preeen-
tatlon to the State Govemment; or 
(b) where such application has been made to the appropriate 
Govemment, refer it to the Tribunal for certifying a negotiatin, 
..-t. .. 5 

37 
(4) Where the Central Government or the appropriate GovernmQnt, 
a5 the case may be, is of the opinion that having regard to the matters 
referred to in the firs~ proviso to clause (26) of section 2 it is nece~sary 
or expedient to constItute a negotiating unit consisting 'Of two or tno"e 
5 industrial establishments or undertakings or two Or m.'1>re units, branch~s 
or offices of the same industrial establishment or undertaking-
(a) if such negotiating unit has already been constituted, 
refer the application referred to in sub-section (2) to the Tribunal 
for certifying a negotiating agent in relati.~n to the employees of 
10 the negotiating unit; or 
('b) if no such negotiating unit has already been constitut-
ed, that Government may, by notification, constitute or re-constitute, 
as the case may be, a negotiating unit CO'nSisting of-
(i) all the establishments wherein any industry specified in 
IS such notification is carried on, or all undertakings of such 
establishments, situated in the area specified therein; or 
(ii) all the units, branches or offices of the same industrial 
establishment or undertaking, situated in different places, 
and thereafter refer the application to the Tribunal for certifyinr _ 
20 a negotiating agent in relation to the employees of such negotiating 
unit: 
Provided that where the application has been made to the Central 
Government and that Government is not the appropriate Government, 
if, having regard to the matters referred to in the first proviSO to 
25 clause (26) of section 2, that GO'Vernment is of the opini.on that it is not 
necessary or expedient to constitute a negotiating unit consisting of two 
or more industrial establishments or undertakings, or tw.o or more units, 
branches or offices of the same industrial establishment or undertaking 
situated in more than one State that Government shall return the 
30 application to the applicant for presentation to the concerned State Gov-
ernment. 
(5) The Central Government or the appropriate Government, as the 
case nUlY be, shall on entertaining an application by a registered trade 
union of employees for certification as the local union in relation to the 
35 employees of a local unit decide whether it is necessary or expedient to 
certify a registered tl'ade union of employees as local union in relation 
to such employees for the effective representation of such employees in 
regard to the matters referred to in clause (4) of section 69 and if it is 
of the opinion that it is necessary or expedient so to do, it shall refer 
40 the applieation . to the Tribunal for certifying ~ ~ union in. relat!on 
to such employees; and i1 it is not of such opinion 1t .ruul reJect ~e 
application: 
Provided that no application shall be referred to the TribWlal or 
rejected under thil sub-section without giving the applicant a reasonable 
4S opportunity of being heard. 

Manner of 
determin-
ing suppor1. 
for regis-
tered trade 
union of 
employees 
for certi-
fying nego-
tiating 
agent, 
associate 
union or 
local 
union. 
Proce_ 
dure for 
enquiry 
t.y Tri-
bunal. 
38 
58. (1) Where, under sub-section (4) or sub-section (5) oj section 57, 
the Central Government or appropriate Government, as the case may b~, 
refers an application for the certification of a registered trade union of 
employees as negotiating agent or local union to the Tribunal, it shall 
direct that the support for the registered trade union or trade unions of 5 
employees. carrying on its or their activities for the benefit of such em-
ployees shall, for the purpose of certif~ing such trade union as negotiat-
ing agent, associate union or local union, be determined by the verifica-
tion of the membership of such trade union or trade unions or by secret 
ballot and the Tribunal shall determine the support for such trade union 10 
or trade unions in accordance with such direction. 
(2) In making any direction under sub-section (1) in regard to the 
manner of determining the support for any registered trade union or 
trade unions ot employees carrying on its or their activities for the bene-
fit of the employees of. a negotiating unit or local unit, the Central Gov- 15 
ernment or the appropriate Government. as the case may be, shall have 
regard to the extent of trade unionization among such employees and the 
ratio of the number of such employees who are members of the registered 
trade union of employees. which has made the application for certifica-
tion as negotiating agent or local union, to the total number of such em- 20 
ployees. 
59. (1) The Tribunal to which the application is referred under 
section 57 shall obtain from the Registrar particulars of the trade union 
or trade unions carrying on its or their activities for the benefit of the 
employees concerned. 25 
(2) The Tribunal shall thereafter cause a notice specifying the date 
of hearing of the application to be served in such manner as may be 
prescribed on the applicant and on each of the .other registered trade 
union, or trade unions, of employees, if any. carrying on its or their 
activities fer the benefit of the employees concerned. 30 
(3) The notice to be served under sub-secti.on (2) on each of the 
other trade unions referred to in that sub-section shall be accompanied 
by a copy of the application. 
(4) The Tribunal shall also cause the notice And a copy of the appli-
cation to be affixed- 35 
(a) in the caSe :>f an application for certiflcation as negotiating 
agent, on the notice board of the industrial establishment or undt-r-
taking or unit, branch Or (·ffice of the same industrial establishment 
or undertaking or. as the case may be, each of the industrial elh!b-
lishments or undertakings or units, branches or oftices ·of the Kame 40 
industrial establishment or undertaking, constituting the negotiating 
unit; or 
(b) in the case of an application for certiftcatiDn as loealu~n, .. 
on the notice b:>ard of'the concerned industrial establishment or 
undertaking or unit. branch or office of the same industrialest8blish- 45 
ment or undertaking, as the case may be. 
(5) Subject to the· provisions of this 88CtiOn, the Tribunal shall en-
quire into the application in accordance with web procedure as may be 
prescribed. 

31 
(6) F,~r the purpose of enquiring into any application referred to it 
under s~tion 57, the Tribunal may direct the Registrar to furnish any 
informatic.n or produce any document which is in the possession of the 
Registrat and the Registrar shall comply with such direction within such 
5 time as may be allowed by the Tribunal. 
60, (1) Where the Tribunal, after ascertaining the support for the 
applicant and the other registered trade unions of employees which have 
appeared before it in pursuance of the notice under sub-section (2) or 
sub-section (4) of section 59 and after making the enquiry under sub-
10 section (5) of that section finds that the registered trade union of emplo-
yees which has applied under sub-section (1) of section 54 for certifica-
tion as sole negotiating agent or chief negotiating agent or any other 
registered trad€' union of employees which has appeared before it in 
pursuance of the, notice under sub-secLon (2) or sub-section (4) of sec-
IS tion 59 satisfies-
(a) the condition specified in sub-section (1) of section 52; or 
(b) the condition specified in sub-section (2) of that section, 
the Tribunal may certify suc}'! registered trade union of employees 
as sole negotiating agent or chief negotiating agE'nt, as the case may be. 
20 Explanation.-For the removal of doubts it is hereby declared that a 
registered trade union of employees which has applied for certification 
as sole negotiating agent in relation to the employees of a negotiating 
unit may, in case it is not eligible to be certified as sole negotiating 
agent;. be certified as chief negotiating agent in relation to such em-
25 ployees if it satisfies the conditions therefor referred to in this sub-
section. 
(2) Where the Tribunal, after the enquiry under suo-section (5) of 
section 59, finds that there are two or more registered trade unions of 
employees carrying on their activities among the employees of a nego-
30 tiating unit and one of such trade unions of employees is certified by 
the Tribunal as the chief negotiating agent in relation to such employees, 
the other such registered trade union or registered trade unions of 
employees shall be certified by the Tribunal as associate union or asso-
ciate unions if such reg:stered trade union or registered trade unions of 
35 employees satisfies pr satisfy the condition specified in sub-section (4) 
of. section 52. 
(9) Where the Tribunal, after ascertaining the support Of the regis-
tered trade' union of employees which bas applied for certification as 
local union in relation to the employees of a local unit and of the other 
40 registered trade unions of employees which have appeared befort" it in 
pursuance of the notice under sub-section (2) or sub-section (4) of sec-
tion 59 and after making the enquiry under sub-section (5) of that sec-
tion finds that the registered trade union of employees which has made 
the application or any of the other registered trade unions of employees 
45 satisfies the conditions specified in sub-section (5) of. section 52, the 
Tribunal .hall certify such trade union of employees as local union 
in relation to the employees of such local unit. 
CertilL 
cation of 
register-
ed trade 
union of 
E'mplo_ 
yees a8 
negotiat-
ing alent, 
associate 
union or 
local 
un'on. 

Negotiat_ 
ing com-
mittee. 
61. (1) Where in relation to the empl()yees of a negotiating unit-
(a) in case such negotiatl1g unit consists of two or 
more industrial establishments or undertakings, or two or more 
lUlits, branches or offices of the same industrial establishment or 
undertaking. situated in more than one State, the Central Govern- ·5 
ment; or 
(b) in other cases, the appropriate Government, 
is of the opinion that there is no registered trade union of employees 
carrying on its activities for the benefit of sueh employees or the regis-
tered trade union of employees or, if there are two or more regis- 10 
tered trade unions of employees, none of such trade unions of employees 
has the support of more than fifty per cent. of such employees, . the 
Central Government or the appropriate Government, as the case may 
be, may direct the Tribunal specially authorised in this behalf by the 
appropriate Government to proceed to hold elections, by secret ballot, IS 
among the employees, of such negotiating unit. who are entitled to take 
part in such election under sub-section (2) of section 53, to constitute a 
negotiating committee to represent such employees. 
(2) The negotiating committee constituted in relation to the em-
ployees of a negotiating unit shall consist of a chairman and such 20 
number of other members as may be specified by the Central Govern-
ment or the appropriate Government, as the case may be, and in speci-
fying the number of the members of the negotiating committee, the 
Central Government or the appropriate Government shall have 
due regard to the total number of employees of the negotiating unit 25 
and the total number of registered trade unions ot employees carrying 
on their activities for the benefit of, such employees. 
(3) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, the manner of the 
election of the chairman and other members of a negotiating committee, 
the persons. qualified to stand for election, the disqualiftcations for being 30 
chosen as and for being such chairman or other member, the manner of 
settlement of disputes relat:ng to the election and the filling up of 
casual vacancies shall be such as may be prescribed. 
(4) Any registered trade union 01 employ-ees carrying on its activi-
ti~ for the benefit of the employees of a negotiating unit shall be .35 
entitled to put up candidates in the elections to the ofB.ce of the chair-
man and other members of the negotiating committee constituted for 
such negotiating unit. 
(5) The procedure to be followed for the transaction of business of 
the negotiating CGmmittee (including the quorum for its meetings) 40 
sha 11 be such as may be prescribed. . 
(6) No act or proc~ of the negotiating committee shall be 
deemed to be invalid by reason only of any vacancy in, or any dflfect 
in the constitution of, the negotiating committee. 
(7) As soon as the chairman and other members ot a negotiatin l45 
committee have been e1ected, the Tribunal which conducted the e1ecttmw 
for choosing the chairman and other members of the negotiating ~. 
miUee shall certify it 88 the sole negotiating agent in relation to tbe 
employees of the ne~ting unit. 

.1 
12. ,Where the Tribunal certifies a registered trade union of employees 
as sole negotiating agent, chief negotiating agent, associate union or 
local union or a negotiating committee as sole negotiating agent it shall 
enter th~ particulars of such registered ~rade union of empl~yees or 
,5 tl~gotiatirig committee, and the fact of its certification as sole negotiating 
"a,~cnt, chief negotiating agent, associate union or local union in a regis-
,ter kf:pt in that behalf and issue a certificate in respect of its certiftca-
'fiatt to such registered trade union of employees or negotiating com-
Enterinl 
particu.. 
lnra of 
certifica-
tion in 
re,mer 
and 
communi.. 
cation ot 
certUl-
cation ot 
negotiat-
ina a,ent, 
ll8IOCiate 
union or 
local 
union. 
mittee, as the case may be. 
10, 63. WheJ"e-
15 
(1) a registered trade union of employees has been certifted-. 
(a) as negotiating agent, or associate union in relation to 
the employees Of a negotiating unit; or 
(b) as local union in relation to the employees of a local 
unit; or 
(2) a negotiating committee has been certified as sole negotiat-
ing agent in relation to the employees of a negotiating unit, 
then, the Tribunal so certifying shall forward a copy of the order of 
certifica.tion- ' 
ZO (i) in the case referred to in subo-clause (a) of clause (1) or 
clause (2) to the employer or each of the employers in relation to 
the industrial, establishment or undertaking or industrial establish. 
ments or undertakings or unit, . branch or office or units, brant'hes 
or offices, of the same industrial establishment or undertaking, as 
'" the case may be, constituting the negotiating unit; or 
(ii) in the case referred to in sub-clause (b) of clause (1) to the 
,employer in relation to the local unit, 
and also: where the negotiating unit waS constituted by the Central 
Government to that Government and, in other cases, to the appropriate 
'30 Government. 
64. (1) Every certification of a registered trade union of employees as 
negotiating agent, associate union or local union or of a negotiating com-
mittee as sole negotiating agent sha~ subject to the provisions of 8U~ 
sections (2) and (3) be in force for a period of two years from the date 
'35 of such certification: 
',I' 
Provided that'notwithstanding the expiry of the aforesaid period of 
two years, the certification of a registered trade union of employees as 
-, IOle negotiating agent, chief negotiating agent or of a negotia~U1g com-
-"mittee as sole negotiating agent shall continue to be in force-
(a) until a registered trade union of employees or negotiating 
committee is certified for the next following term as sole negotiating 
agent in relation to the employees of the negotiating unit;· or 
Copiesot 
certificate 
to be 
fOlwarded 
to emplo_ 
yer. con-
cerned. 
Term tor 
which 
certiftea-
Uon of 
negotiat-
ing'agent 
shall be 
vaHd 
and can-
cellation 
of certifi-
cation. 

htryiD 
reliater 
of cancel-
lation of 
cerWlca-
tioa. 
Employer 
boUQd to 
ncOiniae 
aecOtiJt. 
iDca~nt, 
~te 
~ 
Qd'loC!a1 
aniQD. 
62 
(b) until a registered trade union ofiemployees is oertiAed a. 
chief negotiating agent in relation to such employees for the next 
following term. , 
(2) The Tribunal, which certified a registered trade union o£ em-
p,loyees as negotiating agent. associate union or local union, may cancel 5 
such certification, if, after giving such trade union of employees a reason-
able opportunity of being heard and making such enquiry as may be pra-
cribea, the Tribunal is satisfied that such registered trade union of 
el'Jlployees obtained the certification as such negotiating agent, associate 
union or local union by fraud or misrepresentation. 10 
(3) Where the registration of a trade union of employees, which has 
been c~rtified as the sole negotiating agent. chief negotiating agent, as-
sociate union or local union, is cancelled under Bub-section (1) or sub-
section (2) of section 26, the certification of such trade unt~ as sole 
negotiating agent, chief negotiating agent, associate union or local union, rs 
as the case may be, shall be deemed to have been cancelled . 
. (.1f) Where the certification ot any registered trade union of em-
ployees as chief negotiating agent in relation to the employees of any 
negotiating unit is cancelled or is deemed to be cancelled, the certifica-
tion of any other registered trade union or registered trade unions of ...20 
employees as associate union in relation to such employees shall be 
deemed to be cancelled. 
(5) A copy of every order under sub-6ection (2) shall be fQl'warded 
to the employer or employers, as the case may be, to whom copy of the 
order certifying the registered trade union of employees as negotiating 2S 
"gent, associate union or loeal union would have been forwlWed under 
section 63 and also-
(a) where the negotiating unit was constituted by the Central 
~vernment, to that Government; and 
(b) in other cases, to the appropriate Government. 30 
66. When the certification of a registered trade union of employees as 
negotiating agent, associate union or local union is cancelled or deemed 
to be cancelled under sub-section (2) or sub-section (3), as the case may 
be, of section 64, the Tribunal shall make an entry to that effect in the 
regIster referred to in section 62. . 3S 
66. Where-
(4) any registered trade union of employees has been certified 
as negotiating agent or associate union or a negotiating committee has 
been certified as sole negotiating agent in relation to the employees of 
a negotiating unit;' 40 
(b) a registered trade union of employees has been certified as a 
local union, in relatien to the employees of a local' unit; 
the employer or employers, as the case may be, employing such em-
ployees shall, so long as such certification cootinues to be in force, re-
, cognise- 45 
(i) the registered trade union of employees Teferredto in clause , 
(4) as negotiating agent or associate union Or the ne,atiatlDg com-
mittee as sole negotiating, agent; or 

(ii) the registered trade union of employees referred to in clause 
(0) es local union . 
•. (1) A registered trade union of employees certified as sole nego-
tiating agent or chief negotiating agent, Is the case may be, under sub-
S section (1) of section 60 or a negotiating committee certified as a sale 
BefOttating agent under sub-section (7) of section 61 shall be entitled-
(a) to raise disputes with the employer or employers in relation 
to the industrial establishment or undertaking or industrial establish-
ments or undertakings, or unit, branch or office, or units, branches or 
IQ oftices of the same industrial establishment or undertaking, as the 
case may be, constituting the negotiating unit, in regard to general 
questions concerning employment or non-employment or terms of 
employment and conditions of labour of the employees of the nego-
tiating unit and enter into agreements with such employer or em-
IS players, as the case may be, in pursuance of negotiations under 
section 97 or conciliation under section 98 or to agree to refer such· 
disputes for arbitration under section 100 or adjudication under 
sectioll 101; 
(b) subject to the other provisions of this Act, to (:a11 for a 
20 strike; 
(e) to obtain from the employer such accommodation for its 
oftlce as the employer is capable of providing; 
(d) to put up or cause to be put up a notice board on the pre-
mises of the industrial establishment or undertaking or each of the 
25 industrial establishments or undertakings, or unit, branch or office 
or, each of the units, branches or offices of the same industrial estab-
lishment or undertaking, as the case may be, constituting the nego-
tiating unit, and affix or cause to be affixed thereon, notices relating 
to meetings, statement of accounts of its income and expenditure and 
30 ethel' statements or announcements other than statements or an-
nouncements which are subversive of discipline; 
(e) to hold discussions after prior intimation to the employer 
concerned with the employees of the negotiating unit within the 
premises of the industrial establishment or undertaking or any of the 
3S industrial establishments Or undertakings or unit, branch or office Qr 
any of the units. branches or offices of the same industrial establish-
ment or undert.aking. constituting the negotiating unit, at such place 
as shilll be allowed by the employer concerned: 
Provided that s\lch discussions shall not interfere with the due 
40 working of the industrial establishment or undertaking; 
(I) to hold diSCUssions with the employer or employers concern-
ed or any person nominated by such employer or employers or with 
the representatives of a trade union of employers, for the purpose of 
redressing any grievance of all or any of the employees of the nego-
45 tiating unit; 
(g) to hold discussions with the employer in relation to tht! in-
dustrial establishment or undertaking or any of the industrial estab-
lishments or undertakings or unit, branch or office or any of the 
units, branches or offices of the same industrial establishment or 
Rightaot 
negotiat-
ing agent. 

Rilhtaof 
auociate 
.lnlona. 
undertaking, constituting the negotiating unit, regarding the state 
of finance and economy of such industrial establishment or under-
taking; 
• c' 
(h) to seek and receive as and when required information in rer 
gard to the finance and economy of such industrial establishment. or 5 
undertaking so as to enable such negotiating agent to make suaea-
tions and proposals in order to safeguard the interests of the em-
ployees of such industrial establishment or undertaking or of the 
industrial establishments or undertakings or the public; 
(i) for the purposes of effectively discharging its functions under 10 
this Act, to inspect, by prior arrangement with the employer con-
cerned, books of account maintained in the industrial establishment 
or undertaking or any of the industrial establishments or undertak-
ings or the unit, branch Or office or any of the units, branches or 
offices of the same industrial establishment or undertaking constitut- 15 
ing the negotiating unit; 
(j) to nominate representatives of employees on grievance S(~ tle-
ment authority constituted under rules made under this Act; 
(k) to nominate representatives on behalf of employees on any 
body. whether or not established by or under this Act, in relation to 20 
the negotiating unit and consisting of representatives of employees; 
(1) to represent all or any of the employees ·of the negotiating 
unit before any authority under this Act; 
(m) in the case of a registered trade union of employees certi-
fled as negotiating agent, to collect sums payable by the members 2~ 
thereof to such registered trade union of employees either directly 
or by the check-ofl' system; and 
(n) to exercise such other powers conferred on it by or under 
this Act: 
Provided that a negotiating agent shall not disclose any infonnation 30 
obtained by it under clause (h) or in pursuance (.If inspection of books of 
account under clause (i) to any person for any purpose other than for 
the purpose of properly discharging its functions under this Act. 
(2) A registered trade union of employees certified as chief negotiat-
ing agent in relation to the employees of a negotiating unit shall be en- 3S 
titled to exercise all the powers referred to in sub-section (1) notwith-
standing that any or all of the registered trade unions of employees certi-
fied as associate unions in relation to such employees neglects or refuses 
to associate themselves with the exercise of such powers by such chief 
negotiating agent. 40 
88. The registered trade union of employees certified as an 8fi~~ciate 
Union under sub-section (2) of section· 60 shall be entitled- .. 
(a) to be associated with the chief negotiating agent in nego-
tiation with the employer or employers, !lsthe case may b~.or con-
ciliation proceedings. in regard to the matters specified in Clause (a) ~ 
Of sub-section (1) of section 67: . 

• 
,Pr9vided that any settlement ~rrived at in pursuance of such 
negotiation or conciliation shall be signed only. by the representatives 
of the chief negotiating agent; 
(b) to collect sums payable by members of the assocfate union 
S . either direetly'or by the cheek-off system; 
(e) to hold discussions with the employer concerned in regard 
to individual disputes for the settlement of such disputes; 
(d) to represent the employee or employees concerned in an 
individual dispute before the grievance ,settlement authority or the 
10 Labour Court. 
•. A registered trade union of employees certifled as a local union Hight. 01 
under sub-section (3) of section 60 in relation to the employees of a local 
local unit shall be entitled- union 
20 
(a) to raise disputes with the employer in relation to such local 
unit in regard to matters exclusively of interest to any employee 
or employees of such local unit and to arrive at settlements either 
in pursuance of negotiations under section 97 or conciliation under 
section 98 or to agree to refer the dispute for arbitration under 
section 100 or adjudication under section 101: 
Provided that a local union shall not raise disnutes in regard to 
any matter which has, or is likely to have. repercussions on the 
general conditions of service of the employees employed in two or 
more industrial establishments or undertakings or units, branches or 
offices of the same industrial establishment or undertaking constitu-
ting the negotiating unit: 
Provided further that where any proviSion of any settlement 
arrived at by a local union in relation to the employees of a local unit. 
either in pursuance of negotiations under section 97 or conciliation 
under section 98, is not consistent with any provision of any settle-
30 ment arrived at by the negotiating agent in relation to such em-
ployees also, either in pursuance of negotiations under section 97 
or conciliation under section 98, the provision of the settlement 
arrived at by the negotiating agent (whether such settlement is 
arrived at before or after the settlement arrived at by the local 
3S union) shall prevRi] and the provision of the settlement arrived at by 
the local union shall, to the extent of the inconsistency, be void; 
(b) to collect sums payable by members to the local union either 
directly or by the check-off system; and . 
(c) to be associated with the chief negotiating agent, where the 
40 employees in relation to whom such chief negotiating agent is certi-
fied includes employees of the local unit in relation to whom such 
local union is certified, in discussions with the employer regarding 
industrial disputes or other matters of interest confined only tp the 
employees of such ~ocal unit. 
4S 70. Any registered trade union of employees whicll is not certified as 
a soJ~ IWgotiating agent, chief negotiating agent, associate union or 10caJ 
union under section 60 shall be entitled to represent the employee . ()r 
emplo~s concerned in an individual dispute bef<ore the grievance set-
t1ementauthority or the Labour Court, if such employee or employees 
SO is or are its member or members. 
Rights of 
other 
registered 
trade 
unions 
OIl em. 
ployees. 

Protec_ 
tion of 
conditions 
of service 
of ofBce-
bearer8 
of regis-
tered 
trade 
union of 
employees 
certified 
as nelo-
tiating 
ageat, 
associate 
union 
or local 
uftiOll 
and 
chairman 
anc:I 
members 
of nego-
tiating 
com-
mittee. 
Applica-
tien of 
Chapter. 
Making 
of Stand_ 
ing 
Orders. 
11. During the period when 'PY employee continues to be an office-
bearer of any repstered. trade union of employees certified as negotiating 
agent, associate union or local uniDn or continues to be the chairmMl or 
other member of a negotiating committee and fur a further. period of 
five years immediately after he oeaaes to be such oftice-Dearer or chair- S 
man or member, the employer in relation to such employee shall not-
(a) alter to the prejudice of such employee the coaditiona of 
service applicable to him immediately before he became such office-
bearer, chairman or member; or 
(b) discharge or punish (whether by dismissal or otherwise) 10 
any such employee for anything done by him as such oftlce-bearer 
or chairman or member, not being anything done in contravention 
of any provision of this Act or any other law. 
CHAPTER V 
STANDING ORDERS 
72. The provisions of this Chapte~ shall oot apply to any industrial 
establishment or undertaking,-
(a) which ordinarily employs less than fifty employees; or 
IS 
(b) which, during the period of twelve months immediately 
preceding the commencement of this Act, ordinarily employed less 20 
than fifty employees: 
Provided that the appropriate Government may, after giving not less 
than two months' notice of its intention so to do. by notification, apply 
the provisions of this Act to any industrial establishment or undertaking 
employing sllch number of persons, less than the number specified in 2S 
clause (a) or clause (b), as may be specified in the notification. 
, 73. (1) The Central Gevernment shall, by notification, make Stand-
ing Orders t:> provide for the following matters, namely:-
(a) classification of employees, that is to say, whether })er-
manent, temporary, apprentice. probationers, badlies; 30 
(b) conditions of service of employees, including matters re-
lating tattle issue of orders of appointment of employees, procedure 
to be followed by employees in app1rtng for, and the authority 
which may grant, leave and holidays; 
(c) misconduct of employees, enquiry into such miseonducl and 35 
punishment therefor; 
(d) superannuation of employees; and 
(e) shift working of employees, 
and the provisions of such Standing Orders shall, subject to the provt .. 
lions of sub-section (2), be in operation in every industrial establfib- 40 
ment and undertaking to which this Chapter appJies whether or not 1he 
Central Government is the approprjate Government in relation tOo sUeb 
industrial establishment or undertaking. 

47 
Erplanation.-For the purposes of clause (a), section 82 and the 
Fourth Schedule "badli employee" means an employee who is employed 
in an industrial establishment or undertaking in the place of another 
employee whose name is bome on the muster rolls of such establishment 
5 or undertaking" as the case may be, who shall .:ease to be regarded as 
such for the purposes of the provillions aforesaid if he has completed 
one year of continuous service in the industrial establishment or under~ 
taking, as the case may be. 
(Z) The proviSions of Standing Orders made UDder sulHection (1) 
10 may be modifted by the employer, in relation to ally industrial estab-
lishment or undertaking, if an agreement is entered into by him with 
the negotiating agent in relation to the employees employed in such in-
dulPtrial establishment or undertaking for such modification: 
P!'oVicMtd that where any Ul'lit, branch or office of an industrial estab-
IS' llshment or undertaking is a negotiating unit, the agreement between 
the employer in relation to sucll. unit, branch or offic~ and the negotiating 
agent in relation to the employees employed therein, any such modfft· 
cation shall apply only to such unit, branch or otBee: 
Provided further that no provision of the Standing Orders shall be 
20 modifted if the proposed modification preljudicially affects the employees 
concerned. 
74. If any question arises as to the application, or interpretation. of 
the Standing Orders made under sub-section (1) of section 73 or the 
modifications made therein by an agreement entered into under sub-
25 section (2) of that section, the employer or any employee or employees 
. concemed or the negotiating agent in relation to the employees employed 
in the industrial establishment or undertaking, or untt, branch or oftlce 
of an industrial .establishment or undertaking, wherein the question has 
MiSeD. may apply to the Laoour Court, within the local limits of whose 
30 territorial jurisdiction such industrial establishment or undertaking or 
Uftit. branch or oftice is situated, to decide the question and the Labour 
Court shall, after giving all the parties concem.ed a reasonable oppor-
tunity of being heard, decide the question and such decision shall be 
hal: 
3S Prcm.deci that Where a negotiating unit consists of mOn! thaD one unit, 
branch or oftice of the same industrial establishment or undartakillg 'Atld 
the question aforesaid has arisen between the employer in relation to 
such industrial establishment or undertaking and the employees em-
plofed in two or more units, branches or oftk:es of tnat industrial eetab-
40 lisbment or undertaking, the application to decide the question shall be 
made to the Labour Court within whose territorial jurisdiction the head 
office of such industrial establishment or llnq.ertaking is situated. 
75. (1) Where any employee is suspended by the employer pending 
investigation or enquiry into compwnts or charges of misconduct against 
4S him, such investigation qr enquiry. or where there is an investigation 
followed by an enquiry, bortlh the investigation and enquiry shall be com-
pleted ordinarily within a period of ninety days from the date of suspen-
sion. 
(2) The Standing Orders made under sub-eectlon (1) of section 73 or 
So modified under sub-sectlon (2) of that section shall provide that where an 
employee is suspended as aforesaid the employer in relation to an indus-
trial establishment or under!taking shllU pay to such employee employed 
in such indUstri&1. establilhmefti or undertaking suhsiateaA:e allowance at 
Interpre-
tation, 
etc., of 
Standin. 
Orders . 
Time 
liDda far 
,o.mple. 
tiOll of 
ctiIcipH-
na7 
proceed-
ings and 
liability 
to pay 
subaia. 
tence 
allow-
ance. 

Laying of 
Btandin, 
Order 
before 
the 
Houses of 
Parlia-
ment. 
Notice of 
change Of 
terms of 
employ-
met and 
eODdI-
tJmaI·of 
labour. 
48 
the rates specified in sub-section (3) for the period during w~ich. such em-
ployee is placed under suspension pellding invest4gationor enquiry into 
compladnts or charges of misconduct against su~h employee. 
(J.) The amount or subsistence allowance payable under sub-section 
(2) shall be- 5 
(a) fifty per cent. of the ~ages which the employee coneemed 
was in receipt immediately preceding the date of suspension, for the 
first thirty days of suspension; C 
(b) seventy-five per cent. of such wages for the next thirty days 
of suspension; and 10 
(c) full wages for the remaining PBFt of the period of suspension: 
Provided that where ihe delay in the completion of disciplinary pro-
ceedings ...against the employee is directly attributable to the. conduct of 
\Such" em.plqyee, the rates of subsistence allowance payable to Sij,Ch em-
ployee for any period after the expiry of the first period of thirty days IS 
of suspension shall be le* than the rates specitied in this sub-section f<lr 
such period, by twenty-five per cent. of the rates sQ specified. 
(4) If any doubt or dispute arises regat'ding the quantum or rate of 
subsistence allQwance payable to an employee under this section, the em-
ployee or the employer concerned may apply to the Labour Court within 20 
!the local Jirnits of whose jurisdiction the indwfrial establishment orr 
undert'aking or unit, branch or office of an industrial establishment or 
undertaking wherein such employee is employed i~ situate, ,and the de-
cision of the Labour Court shall be final. 
76. Every Standing Order made by the Central Government under 8ub~ 2S 
section (1) of section 73 shaU be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session for a total period 
~ tJUrlydays, which may be comprised in one sesaion or, in t.w-o QrInOre 
. suqcessive sessions, a.nd if, before the expiry of the seqion ~ediately 
follOWing the session or the s~essive sessions aforesaid, both Houses 30 
agree in making any modifb:ation in the Standini Order or .Qoth Houses 
agree that the Standing Order shotuld not be made, t:hIe ~cijnlJ Ol'der 
shall thereafter have effect only in such modified. form or be of no ~t, 
as the qase may be; &0, however, that ~ such modification ~ ~ul­
ment shall be without prejudice to the validity of, anything. previously 3S 
done under that Standin& Order. 
CHAPTER VI 
PROCEDURE POD CHANGE IN TERMS OF EMPLOYMENT AND CONDITIONS OF LABOUR 
AND REGULATION OF CONDITIONS OF ZMPLOYMZNT BT GoVBRNMlln':, 
77. (1) Where an~loyer proppses to effect any change in the 40 
terms of employment or conditions of labour applicable to any employee 
in respect of-
(a) hours of work and rest interval; .. 
(b) withdr,wal of any. customary concessi~nS 'Or priv~~ge or 
change in usage; or , 45 
(c) any increase or reduction (other than casual) in the num-
ber of persons employed or to be employed in. any occuptltion or 
process or department or shift (not: occasioned by : circums~~es 
over which the employer has no control), 
be .• hall not e1fect such ~hange- 50 
(i) without giving"to the employee likely to be afteeted by IlICh 

48 
change a notice in the prescribed manner of the nature of the chani e 
proposed to be effected; or 
(it) within twenty-one days of the giving of such notice. 
(2) The employees affected by such change or the negotiating agent 
S in relation to such employees may object to the proposed change in the 
conditions of employment and, where the employer and the employees 
do not agree to the proposed change. the provisi'ons of this Act shall 
apply in relation to such dispute as they apply in relation to any other 
industrial dispute. 
10 (3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), no notice 
shall be required under sub-section. (1) for effecting any change where 
the change is proposed to be affected in pursuance of any settlemmt or 
award of an arbitrator or a Labour Court, Tribunal or the National 
Commission. 
IS (4) In respect of any matter relating to terms of employment or condi-
tionsof labour applicable to any employee, other than a matter referred 
to in sub-section (1), no employer shall, subject to the provisions of sub-
section (1), effect any change unless the employees likely to be affected 
by the proposed change have agreed to it by a settlement arrived at 
2.0 by such employer and the negotiating agent. 
(5) Where the employer and the negotiating agent fail to arrive at 
a seLtlement in regard to any change in respect of any matter relating to 
terms of employment or conditions of labour to which sub-section (4) 
applies or the negotiations to arrive at a settlement continue for a 
2S period of more than sixty days, the employer and the negotiating agent 
shall forward, jointly or separately in the prescribed manner a report 
to the Conciliation Officer, having jurisdiction in relation to the dispute, 
regarding the failure of the negotiations or the continuance thereof as 
aforesaid and the facts Of the dispute. 
30 (6) The provisions of this Act, except section 94 and section 112 shall 
apply in relation to any dispute referred. to in sub-section (5) as they 
apply in relation to any other industrial dispute. 
(7) No change in respect of any matter relating to the terms of em-
ployment or conditions of labour to which sub-section (4) applies shall 
3S be made eJreept after and in accordanc? with t~e settlement referre~ .to 
in that sub-section or a settlement arrIved at In the course of concIba-, 
tion under section 98 or the award of an arbitrator or of a Labour Court, 
Tribunal or the National Commission, as the case may be. 
18. (1) Notwithstanding anything ('ontained in section 77, during the 
40 pendency of any conciliation proceeding before a Conciliation Officer or of 
any proceeding before an arbitrator or a Labour Court or a Tribunal or 
the National Commission in respect of an industrial dispute, no em· 
ployer shall-
(II) in regard to any matter connected with the dispute, alter, 
4S to the prejudice of the employees concerned in such dispute, the 
terms 01 employment or conditions of labour applicable to them im-
mediately before the commencement of such proceeding; or 
(b) for any misconduct connected with the dispute, discharge or 
punish, whether by dismissal or otherwise, any employees concern-
SO ed with such dispate, 
ave with the express 111!rtnission, In writing, of the authority before 
which the proceeding is pending.. 
Terms of 
employ-
ment, etc., 
to remain 
un-
ellanged 
under 
certain 
cit'cUIIW-
tancel. 

Reaula-
tion of 
condi-
tiona of 
employ_ 
mentby 
Govern-
ment. 
50' 
(!") During the pendency of any proceeding referred to: in 8ub-seetion 
(1) in regard to an industrial dispute, the employer may, subject to the 
other provisions of this Act-
(a) alter, in regard to any matter not connected with the dis-
pute, the terms of. employment or conditions of labour applicable to 5 
that employee immediately before the commencement of such pro-
ceeding; or 
(b) for any misconduct not connected with the dWpute, diecharCe 
or punish, whether by dismissal or otherwise, that employee: 
Provided that no such employee. shall be discharged or dismissed, 10 
unless he has been paid wages for one month and an application has been 
made by the employer to the authority ,before which the application is 
pending for the approval of the action taken by the employer. 
(3) Where an employer c9ntravenes the provisions of this section dur-
ing the pendency of any proceeding referred to in sub-section (1), any I~ 
employee aggrieved by such contravention, may make, a complaint in 
writing, in the prescribed manner to the authority before which such 
proceeding is pending, and such authority shall, on receipt of such com-
plaint, adjudicate upon the complaint and in so doing the authority shall 
have all the powers conferred by or under this Act on a Labour Court 20 
while adjudicating an individual dispute. 
79. (f) Where it appears to the appropriate Government that an in-
dustrial dispute exists between an employer in relation to an industrial 
establishment or undertaking and the employees employed therein and 
in respect of such industrial dispute that Government has received a re.. 25 
port regarding the failure of conciliation proceedings under sub-section 
(5) of section 98, the appropriate G:lvernment, ,if it appears to that Gov-
ernment that in the public interest it is necessary to make provision in 
regard to all or any of the following matters, it may, by general or 
special order notified in the Official Gazette, make provision- 30 
(a) prohibiting, subject to the provisions of the order, strike or 
lock-out in connection with such industrial dispute in any industrial 
establishment or undertaking, other than an industrial establishment 
or undertaking wherein any industry which is an essential service is 
carried on or any undertaking of such industrial establishment; 35 
(b) requiring employers, em!=lloyees or both to observe such 
terms a.'ld conditions of employment (including terms and conditions 
relating to work load and manning, wages and payment of interim 
or ad hoc bonus) as may be specified by, or datermine<1 in ac:oordance 
with, the order; 40 
(c) requiring any industrial establishment or undertaking or any 
part thereof not to close or remain cloeed or stop production; 
(d) requiring/the employees not to slow down work or continue 
to slow down work; 
(e) requiring any industrial establishment or undertaking not 45 
to suspend, or terminate the services of, any employee or any class 
of' employees; and 
(1) any incidental or supplementary matter which appear to the 
apptopriate Government to be necessary or expedient fOr the pUr-
pose of the order: SO 

51 
.P~vided that no order made under clause (b) shall require an 
employer to observe terms and conditions of employment, less favourable 
to the employees than those which were applicable to them at any time 
within ninety days preceding the date of the order. 
S (2) Where such industrial dispute is referred to tor arbitration under 
sectioa 100, the order made under sub-section (1) shall-
(a) in so far as it makes provi~;on in respect of matters referred 
to in clause (a) of that sub-section, cease to be in force on the date 
on which such reference is made [such cesser being without pre-
10 judi<:e to the provisions of sub-clause (ii) of clause (d) of sub-section 
(2) of section 89 or sub-clause (ii) of clause (d) of sub-section (7) 
of that section]; and 
(b) in so far as it makes provision in respect of matters referred 
to in clauses (b), (c), (d), (e) and (j) of that sub-section cease to 
IS be in force with effect from the date on which the award of the arbi-
trator in regard to such industrial dispute comes into operation. 
(3) Where such industrial dispute is referred to a Labour Court, Tri-
bunal or the National Commission under section 101 or section 104, as 
the case may be, the order made under sub-section (1) shall-
20 . (a) in so far as it makes provision in respect of matters referred 
to in clause (a) of that sub-section, cease to be in force on the date 
on which such reference is made [such cesser being without pre-
judice to the provisions of sub-clause (ii) of clause (d) of suD-sec-
tion (2) of section 90 or sub-clause (ii) of clause (d) of sub-section 
25 (7) of that section]; and 
30 
35 
(b) in so far as it makes provision in respect of any matter re-
ferred to in clauses (b), (c), (d), (e) and (f) of that sub-section 
cease to be in force-
(i) on the expiry of a period of ninety days from the date on 
which the industrial dispute is referred to the Labour Court, 
Tribunal or the National Commission; or 
(ii) where before the expiry of the aforesaid period of 
ninety days, the Labour Court, Tribunal or the National Commis-
sion makes an award granting interim relief in respect of any 
such matter, on the date with effect from which such interbn 
award becomes enforceable. 
(4) Where such industrial dispute is not referred to for arbitration 
under seeti()ft 100 or for adjudication to the Labour Court, Tribunal or 
thel Nati0ll'181 Cmnmission· under section 101 or section 104, as the case may 
40 be, before the expiry of a period of six months from the date on which 
the order made under su\:)..section (1) is notified, the order shall cease 
to be in force. on the expiry of such period. 
CHAPi"ER VII 
L.\Y-<>FF, R.E'1'RENCHMENT AND CLOSURE 
45 80; ·In this Chapter "continuous service", in relation to an employee, Defini-
means the uninterrupted service of such employee, including his service tion of 
. of 'elm th bed 1 contlnuou. which may be interrupted on account Sl ess or unau or eave _.I_ ti se,-y ....... 
or an accident or a strike which is not illegal or a lock-out or a cessa on 
of work which is. not due to any fault on the part of the employee. 

Rights 
ofemp-
loyee 
laid-oft 
tor 
compen.. 
aation 
and 
duty of 
~lnployer 
to main-
tain 
muster 
roll. 
ofemplo-
yee. 
not-
with-
standln, 
Ja7'~ft. 
52 
Explcma.tion I.-Where an employee is not in continuous service 
within the meaning of this clause for a period of one year or six month .. , 
he shall be deemed to be in continuous service under an employer-
(a) for a period of one year, if the employee during a period 
of twelve calendar months preceding the date with reference to 6 
which calculation is to be made has actually worked under the em-
ployer for not less than-
(i) one hundred and sixty days in the case of an employee 
employed below ground in a mine; and 
(ii) two hundred days, in any other case; 
(b) for a period of six months. if the employee during a period 
of six calendar months preceding the date with reference to which 
calculation is to be made has actually worked under the employer 
for not less than-
10 
(i) eighty days in the case of an employee employed below IS 
ground in a mine; and 
(ii) one hundred days, in any other case. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of Explanation 1, the number of 
days on which an employee has actually worked under an employer shall 
include the days on which- 20 
(i) he has been laid-off under an agreement or as permitted by 
or under this Act or any other law applicable to the industrial estab· 
lishment or undertaking; 
(ii) he has been on leave on full wages earned in the previous 
years; 25 
(iii) he has been absent due to temporary disablement caused 
by accident arising out of and in the course of his employment; and 
(iv) in the case of a female, she has been on maternity leave, 
so, however. that the total period of such maternity leave does not 
exceed twelve weeks. 30 
11. (1) Whenever an employee whose name is borne on the muster 
rolls of an industrial establishment or undertaking (whether or not such 
establishment or undertaking is of a seasonal character or in which work 
is performed only intermittently) employing twenty or more persons and 
who has completed not less than one year of continuous service under an 35 
employer is laid-off, whether continuously or intermittently, he shall be 
paid by the employer for all days during which he is so laid-oft, except 
for such weekly holidays as may intervene, compensation which shall 
be equal to fifty per cent. of the tDtal of the wages, that would hav~ 
been payable to him had he not been so laid-off, for the first thirty days 40 
of lay-01l and thereafter compensation which shall be equal to seventy-
five per cent. of the total of the wages so payable: 
Provided that employees engaged in any industrial establishment or 
undertaking which is of a seasonal character shall be entitled to com· 
pensation under this sub-eection only in relation to any lay-oft during 
the season in which such industrial establishment or undertaking ordi- 4S 
narity carries on its activity. 
(2) No compensation shall be payable by the employer under sub-
section (1) to an employee who has been laid-off-
(ct) if he refuses to accept any alternative employment in the SO 
same e$tablishment or undertaking from which he has been laid-off, 
or in any other establishment or unde-rtaking belonging to the same 

5 
10 
J5 
53 
~loy~r situate in ~he same town or village or within a radius of 
eIght kIlometres :from the industrial establishment or undertaking, 
as the case may be, to which he belongs, and-
(i) such alternative employment does not, in the opinion 
of the employer, call for any special skill or previous experi-
ence and can be done by the employee; 
(ii) the wages which would normally ha"e been pai4 to the 
employee had he not been laid-off are offered for the alternative 
employment also; and 
, (iii) the acceptance of the alternative elllployment does not 
involve undue hardship to the employee haVing regard to the 
facts and circumstances of his case; or 
(b) if he does not present himself for work at tbeindustrial 
establishment or undertaking at the appointed time during normal 
working hours at least once a day; 
(c) if such laying-off is due to a strike or slowing 'down of 
production on the part of employees in another part of the industrial 
establishment or undertaking. 
(3) Notwithstanding that employees in any industrial establishment 
20 or undertaking have been laid-off, it shall be the duty of every employer 
to maintain for the purpose of this Chapter a muster roll and to provide 
for the making of entries therein by employees who may present them-
selves for work at the establishment or undertaking at the appointed 
time during normal working hours under clause (b) of sub-section (2). 
2S 8Z. (1) No employee (other than a badli employee or a casual em-
ployee) whose name is borne on the muster rolls of an industrial estab-
lishment or undertaking (not being an industrial establishment or under-
taking of a seasonal character or in which work is performed only inter-
mittently) in which not less than one hundred employees were employed 
30 on an average per working day for the preceding twelve months, shall 
be laid-off by his employer except with the previous permisslon of such 
authority as may be speCified by the appropriate Government by notifi .. 
cation (hereafter in this section referred to as the specified authority). 
(2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall apply to lay-off of employees 
35 nece8Sitated by-
(a) shortage of power; 
(b) natural calamity; 
(c) major breakdown of machinery; 
(d) strike or slowing down of production em the part of em-
40 ployees in another part of the. industrial establishment, or under-
taking; or 
(e) in the case of a mine, flood, fire, excess of inflammable gas or 
explosion: 
:',Provided. tw.t where the lay-off is nec.essitated by the reasons re-
ferred to in clause (c), (d) or (e), the employer shan, wltb1n a period, 
45 of thirty days from the date of the commencement of t~e lay-off, apply 
to the specified authority in the prescribed form fOr the approval of 
such lay-off. 
I'~lan.ation.-For the purposes of this sub-section only a break-down 
of machinery which cannot be :rectified within a period of seven days 
Prohibi-
tion of 
lay-of! ill 
certain 
circums_ 
tances. 

Condl-
tiona PJI!-
ceda 
fOr ~ 
trerdl-
ment-ot 
'em-
ployees. 
from the date on which the employees concerned were rendered idle OD 
account of such break-down shall be deemed to be a major break-down of 
machinery and any lay-off due to a major break-down of machinery shall 
be deemed 1x>have commenced only on the expiry of such period of 
seven days. ' S 
(3) Where the employ~ (other than ba.dli employees or casual f!m-
ployees)' of an industrial establishment or undertaking referred to in 
sub-section (1) and to which Chapter VB of the Industrial Disputes Act, 
1947, did not apply have been laid-off before the commencement of this 14 (If 1947, 
Act, and such lay-oft continues at such commencement the employer in 10 
relation to such establishment shall, within a period of fifteeon days from 
such commencement, apply to the specified authority for permission to 
continue the lay-oJf. 
(4) In the case of every application for previous permission for 1ay-
oft under sub-section (1) for the approval of lay-off under the proviso to IS 
sub.-section (2)" or for permission to continue lay.:otl under sub-section 
(3), the specified authority may, after making such inquiry as it thinks 
fit, grant or refuse, for reasons to be recorded in writing, the permission 
applied for. 
(6) Where an application rot' previous permission to lay-off under sub- 20 
section (1) for· the approval of lay-off under the proviso to SUb-section (2) 
or for permi&s:ion to cODiinue lay-off under sub-section (3) has been made 
andcthe,spee.ified authority does not communicate the permission or ap-
proval to the employer within a period of sixty days Hom the date on 
which the application is made, the permissiOn applied for, shall be deem- 25 
ed to have been granted on the exp!ration of the said period of sixty days. 
(6) Where DO application for the previ()us permission to lay-ott under 
sub-sec~On. (1), for the approval of lay-off under the proviso to sub-
section (B) or for penni.ion to continue lay-off under sub-section (3) has 
been'made or where such permission or approval has been refused, such 30 
lay-oft shall be deemed to be illegal from the date on which the employees 
haw been laidooff and the employees shall be entitled to all the benefits 
und8:auyaawb the time being'iIl force as if they~ad not been laid-off. 
(7) If a question arises whether an industrial establishment or under-
taking is of a seasonal character or whether work is performed therein 3S 
only intermittently, the decision of the appropriate Government thereon 
shall be final. 
83. (1) No employee employedl in any industrial establishment OIl' 
undertaking who has been moentinU0U8 se~ for not less than one 
year under, any employer shall,1)e r.troDChed by that employer untiL- 40 
(4) the employee has been given-
(i) where such establishment or undertaking has been em-
ploying less than one hundred, persons on an average pet work-
in~ ~y d~ the preceding twelve !!'mnths, thirty dap' DOUce; 
and .; 4S 
(ii) in ~ c~ .ofany other ~dusttlal establlabnumt or 
undertaking, ninety days' notice, 
ittwtiting. iDGicatb:a&~,the, ~ ,for retTenc~nt and the perioct. of' 
aotiae hat exp;.red, .or the .employee haa beert· 'paid~ i4 nett' of' sUch 
notice, wages for the period of, notice: 

5 
10 
15 
'Provided that no such n:otice shall be necessary if the retrench· 
ment is under an agreement whk-h specifies a date for the termina-
tion of Service of such employee; 
(~), ,in the case of an em~c>yee"employed.i.Q ,any. industrial es-
taWishment or undertaking in which not less than one hundred em-
ployees were employed on an aV€rage per worki.ng day during the 
preceding twelve months' notice in the prescribed manner stating 
clearly the reasons for the retrenchment is served 011 the appropriate 
Government or such, authority as may be specified .by the appropriate 
Go:vemment, by notification (hereafter in this section referred to 
as the specified authority) and the permission ':),f such Government 
or authority is obtained under aub-section (2); an:! 
(c) the employee has been paid, at the time o~ retrenchment, 
compensation which shall be equivalent to fifteen days' average pay 
for every completed year of continuous service or part thereof in 
excess of one hundred and eighty days. 
(2t On the receipt of a notice under clause (b) of sub-seetion (1), the 
appropriate Government or the specified authorlty,as the case may be, 
may, after making such inquiry as such Government or authority thinb 
20 fit. grant or refuse, for reasons to be recorded in writing, the perrnissio'ft 
far the retrenchment to which the notice relates. 
(3) Where the appropriate Government or specified authority, as the 
case may be, does not communicate the permission or the refusal to grant 
the permission to the employer- within a period of ninety days of the date 
25 of service of the notice untier clause (c) of 9ub-seeti()n' (1), the IiPpro-
priate Government or the specified authority shall be deemed t~ have 
granted permission for' such retrenchment on the expiration of the said 
period of, ninety days. 
(4) Where at the commencement of this Act, the period of notice 
It of 1947. 30 given under clause (a) of section 25F of the In,dustrial Disputes Act, 1947 
for the retrenchment of any employee employed in any industrial esta-
blishment or undertaking to wh'ch Chapter VB of the Industrial Disputes 
Act, 1947, did not apply, has not expired, the employer shall not retrench 
the employee but shall, within a period of' fifteen days from such com-
35 -mencement, apply to the appropriate Government nl" to the specified 
authority for permission for retrenchment of such employee. 
(5) Where an application for permissien has been made under sub. 
section (4) and the appropriate Government or the specified authority, as 
the case may be, does not communicate the permission or refusal to grant 
40 the permission to the employer within a periOd ofstxty ;days from the 
date on which the application is made, the permission applied for shall 
be deemed to have been granted on the expiration of the said period of 
sixty days . 
. (6) Where AO notice under clatule.(b) of sub-section (1) has been 
·45 '~i~en,or whe~ no ' application. under'sub-aection (4) is ,made within thp 
'pel'Jdd specifted therein or, in either case, where 'the, permission for re-
trenchment has been refused, such retJ.renchment shall ,be .deemed to be 
illegal from the date on which the notiee '* retrenchment was given to 
the' employee and the employee shall be entftled to all the benefits under 
50 any law for the time being in' force as if DO sucb notice had been given 
to him. ' 

Procedure 
for 
retrench-
ment. 
Re-
employ-
mentof 
retrench-
ed em-
ployee. 
Computa-
tion ot 
the lay-
off and 
retren-
ment 
compen8a-
tion. 
Compen-
sation 
to em-
ployees 
in case 
of trans-
fer of 
industrial 
establish_ 
ment or 
under-
taking. 
Condi-
tions pre-
cedent to 
closure 
of any 
innus_ 
tria1 
establish-
ment or 
under-
taking. 
M. Where any employee in an indu~trial establishment or undertak-
ing who is a citizen of India, is to be retrenched and belongs to a parti-
cular category of employees in that esta.blishment or undertaking, then, 
in the absence of any agreement between the employer and the employee 
in this behalf, tbe employer shall ordinarily retrench the employee who S 
was the last person to be employed in that category, unless for reasons 
to be ~ecorded the employer retrenches any other employee. 
85. Where any employees are retrenched, and the employer p'l'oposes 
to take into his employment any person, he shall, in such manner as 
may .. be prescribed, give an opportunity to the retrenched' employees 10 
who are citizens of India to offer themselves for re-emJ1loyment and such 
retrenched employees who offer themselves for re-employment shall 
have preference over other persons. 
86. Where an employer refuses or fails to pay lay-off or retrenchment 
compensation, as the case may be, the employee concerned may by an IS 
ap'plication, make a claim before the Labour Court for computing the 
amount so due, and the Labour Court shall, after giving the employer 
and the employee concerned an oppc>rtunity of being heard in such 
manner as may be prescribed, make an award computing the amount 
and directing the employer to pay the same to the empl()yee. 20 
87. (1) Where the ownership or management of any industrial esta-
blishment or undertaking is transferred, whether by agreement or by 
operation of law, from the employer in relation to that establishment or 
undertaking (hereafter in this section referred to as the transferor) 
to a new employer (hereafter in this section referred to as the trans- 25 
feree)-
(a) every emJ1loyee who has been in continuous service for not 
less than one year in that establishment or undertaking immediate-
ly before such tTansfer shall be entitled' to continue employment 
in that establishment or undertaking under the transferee on the 30 
same terms and conditions of service as if such establishment or 
undertaking had not :t>een transferred; 
(b) the transferee shall be liable in respect of all the claims, 
wbich the employees of such industrial establishment or under-
taking had against the transferor and such liability shall not be 35 
extinguished by any agreement entered into by the transferee with 
the transferor, or the employees employed in that establishment or 
undertaking, or with both. 
(2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall be deemed to prohibit the re-
tirement of any employee on the baais of mutual agreement or in pur- 40 
suance of any voluntary tetirement scheme. 
88. (1) No emp'loyer shall close down an industrial establishment or 
urtiertaking unless he has served, for previous permission, at· least 
ninety days before the date on which the intended closure is to become 
effective, a notice in the prescribed manner, on the. approprlate Gov- 45 
ernment stating clearly the reasons for the intended closure of the in-
dustrial establishment or undertaking and obtains the permission of the 
app'rOptiate Govetnme!l;t}~ such closure: 
Provided that not~g in this sectio,n shall apply to an industrial 
establishment or undertaking set up for the construction of only any 

one plltticular bUilding, bridge, road, canal or dam or sueh other cons-
truction work. 
(2'): On receipt of a notice under sub-section (1), the appro}1riate 
Government may, if it is satisfied that the reasons for the intended 
5 closul!e of the iadustrial establishment or undertaking ar~ not adequa.te 
andsuftlcient or II1:lCh closare is prejudicial to public intel'est, by order, 
direct tM etIIployer not to dOle down such establishment or undertak-
ing. i 
(3) Where a notice has been served. on the approp'riate Gi>vernment, 
10 under sub-section (1) of section 25FFA of the Industrial Disputes Act, 
14 of 1947. 1947, by an employer in tela.tion to an industrial establishment or un-
dertll'king to which Chapter V!J of the aforesaid Act does not apply and 
the period of notice has not expired at the commencement of this Act, 
such 'employer shall not close down such industrial establishment or 
15 undertaking but shall, within a period 01. fifteen da;ys from such com-
·men.cement apply to the apprOp1'iate Government for ~ission to 
Close down the undertaking. 
. (4) Where no notice for permission to close down .bas been served 
t:UIlder sub-section (1) or where DO application for permission is made 
20 under sUb-section (3) within the period specified therein or the permis-
'sian for closure has been refused or the industrial establishment or 
undertaking hal been closed down before obtaining such permission, the 
closure of the industrial establishment or undertaking shall be deemed 
to be illegal from the date of closure and the employees shall be entitled 
25 to all the benefits under any law for the time being in force as if the 
industrial establishment or undertaking, as the case may be, has not 
been dosed down. 
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) and sub-
section (3), the aPP'I'opriate Government may, if it is satisfied that owing 
30 to such exceptional circumstances as accident in the industrial estabiish-
ment or undertaking or death of the employer in 1"el8tion to such indus-
trial establishment or undertaking or the like it is necessary so to do, 
by order, direct that the provisions of sub-section (1) shall not apply 
in rekltion to such esta.blishment or undertaking for such period as may 
35 be specified in the order. 
(6) Where on receipt of a notice under sub-section (1) or application 
for permission under sub-section (3) an industrial estabHshment or un-
dertaking is permitted by the appropriate Government to be closed 
down, every employee in such establishment or undertaking, who has 
40 been in continuous service therein for not less than one year immediately 
before the date of the notice under sub-section (1) or application for per-
mission under ~ub-section (3), shall be entitled to DOtice and compen-
sation as specified in section 83 as if the said employee had been re-
trenched under that section. 
45 (7) The provisions of this section shall apply to every industrial es-
tablishment or undertaking irrespective of the number of employees em-
ployed therein: 
Provided that no previoas pennisROIl shan be required for the closing 
down of any industrial establishment or undertaking in which-
50 (a) not more than one hundred employees are employed; or 

Special 
provi-
sion as 
to restar-
ting of 
industrial 
establish· 
ment or 
under. 
takine 
closed 
down 
before 
corn-
-.enee· 
mentof 
the Act. 
Prohibi-
tion of 
strikes 
and lock-
outs. 
(b) not more than one hundred employees were employeci ,on 
any working day during the preceding twelve months. 
iI. If the appropriate Government is Of opinion, in respect of any 
industrial establishment or undertaking, othet than an industrial estab-
lishment or undertaking referred to in the prOViso to sub-section (7) of S 
section 88, to which Chapter VB of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, did aof 1947. 
not apply is closed down before the commencement of this Act,-
(a) that such establishment or undertaking was closed down 
otherwise than on account of unavoidable circumstances beyond the 
control of the employer; 10 
(b) that there are possibilities of restarting such establishment 
or undertaking; 
(c) that it is necessary for the rehabilitation of the employees 
employed in such establishment or undertaking before its closure 
or it is in public interest to reStart sueh establishment or under· l5 
taking; and 
(d) that the restarting of such establishment or undertaking 
shall not result in hardship to the~ employer in re1at.ion to the estab-
lishment or undertaking, 
it may. after giving reasonable opportunity to such employer and the 20 
employees employed in such establishment or undertaking, direct, by 
order published in the Official Gazette, ijlat the establishment or under-
taking shall be restarted within such time (not being less than thirty 
days from the date of the publicatioo of the order) as may be specified 
in the order. 25 
CHAPTER VIII 
"S'I'RlJtES AND LocK-oUTS 
90. (1) No employee employed in any essential service shall go on 
strike in breach of contract. 
(2) No person employed in any industrial establishment or undertak- 30 
ing (other than an essential service) shall go on strike in breach of con-
tract-
(a) without giving to the employer a notice in writing of strike, 
as hereinafter provided., within six weeks before striking; 
(b) within fourteen days of the giving 'of such notice: 
(c) before the expiry of the date of strike specified in any such 
notice as aforesaid; and 
(d) during~ 
35 
(A) (i) the pendency of any conciliation' proceedings in 
respect of any industrial dispute before the Conciliation Offteer 40 
and fourteen' days after the conclusion of such proceedings, or 
(i.i) the pendency of any proceedings before an arbitrator or 
a Labour Court, Tribunal or National Commission, as the case 
may be, and sixty days after the conclusion of such proceedings, 
in repect of any matter in relation to which such proceedings are 45 
. pending; or 

69 
(B) during the peri«l in which a setUement arrived at in 
the course of negotiations under section sn or conciliation under 
section 98 or an award is in operation, in respect of any of the 
matters covered by the settlement or award: 
S Provided that no notice under this sub-section of the proposed strike 
shall be necessary where there is already in existence a lock-out in the 
industrial establishment or undertaking, but the negotiating agent shall 
give intimation of the strike to the appropriate Government in the pres-
cribed manner. 
TO (3) Every decision to go on strike shall be supported by not less than 
lixty per cent. of the employees in a strike ballot conducted in such 
manner as may be prescribed prior to the giving of the notice referred 
to in clause (a) of sub-section (2) and the notice shall be given by the 
negotiating agent in such form as may be prescribed. 
IS (4) The Registrar shall have general power of supervision and super-
intendence over the conduct of strike ballot and he sball also decide, in 
such manner as may be prescrlbed, any dispute pertaining to a strike 
ballot and he may exercise such powers either on his own motion or on 
a request made in that behalf by any employee or the employer. 
20 (5) No employer in relation to an essential service sball lock-out his 
employees. 
(6) No employer in relation to any industrial establishment or under-
taking (other than an essential service) shall lock-out any of bis emplo-
yees-
2S (a) without giving them notice of lock-out as hereinafter pro-
vided, within six weeks before locking out; 
(b) within fourteen days of the giving of such notice; 
(c) before the expiry of the date of lock-out specified in such 
notice as afOl'esaid; and 
30 (d) during-
3S 
(A) (i) the pendency ot; any conciliation proceedini/i in 
respect of any industrial dispute before the COnciliation Officer 
and fourteen days after the conclusion of such proceedings, or 
(ii) the pendency of any proceedings before an arbitrator or 
a Labour Court, Tribunal or National Commission, as the case 
may be, and sixty days after the conclusion of such proceedings, 
in respect of any matter in relatioon to which such proceedings are 
pending; or 
(B) during the period in which a settlement arrived at in 
the course of. negotiations under section 97 or conciliation under 
section 98 or an award is in operation, in respect of any of the 
matters covered by the settlement or award. 
(7) No notice under sub-section (6) of the proposed lock-out shall be 
necessary where there is al~ady in existence a strike in the industrial 
establishment or undertaking, but the employer shall give intimation 
45 of such lock-out to lhe appropriate Government in the prescribed man-
ner, 

Power to 
prohibit 
conti-
nuance of 
strike or 
lock-out. 
Illegal 
strikes 
and 
lock-outs. 
(8JNOlloUce- ....... lMIcUOII (6) .t'tbe,p1'CJPOMCi ledt-out .hall be 
1IItici 1JJ1Ieu such notice • liVeR-
(a) where the industrial establishment or undertakiDi belon. 
to a company within the meaning of the Companies Act. 1956, in 
pursuance of a .deeisionof the board f1l din!ctol'l of the .company; 
(b) where the industrial establishment or undertaking belongs 
to a partnership firm, in pursuance o£ a decision at a. meetmg of the 
partners; _ j 
(c) where the industrial establisbmentor UDCiertaking belongs 
5 
L to any other association of persons; in pw:suance of a dacislon of tee 10 
committee (by whatever name called) man~a the affaira 01. that 
body of persons; and 
(d) wher-e the iMUBtrial establishment belongs to a Hindu un-
divided family or an individual, bJ the k4Tta of the Hiadu undivided 
family or the individual, as the case may be. 
(9) The notiCe of strike referred to in I1lb-section (2) shall be given 
to -such pe1'BOn or pe1'8Oll1 B'I'ld in sneh manner as may be prescribed and 
the notice of lock-out referred to in sWrftetiOD (6) shall be given in 
such manner as may be prescrib-ed. 
IS 
(l 0) If the employer receives from any negotiating ageru notioe or 20 
notices ref-erred to in sub-section (2) or gives to any person employed by 
him notioe or notices referred' to in sub-sectian (~), he BRaD, within five 
claYs of the receipt or giving, al case may be, of luch notice or notices 
intimate, in such manner as may be prescribed, the appropriate 
Government or such authority as may bepreacribed and the Conciliation 25 
Ofticer having jurisdiction in relatiOJl to the industrial estabUabment or 
undertaking, the number of such notice or notices received or given by 
him on taat date. . 
1 of 19M. 
91. Where an indu~trial dispute or any matter appeariagto be con-
nected with, or relevant to, the dispute has been referred to, or is pend- ~o 
ing before,- • 
(.~ an arbitratm', where SUCh dispute is not a dispute referred 
to for arbitrBtioft under sub~section (2) of section 7, or a Court of 
Inquiry 01' Labour Court or Tribunal, the appropriate Govemmeat; 
or II ,tli~3S 
(b) an arbitrator, where such dispute fa a dispute referred to 
for arbitration under sub-seetion (2) of section 7, IiIr a National Com-
mission, the Cen1lral Gcwe~ 
may, by order, prohibit the continuance of any strike or lock-out, in con-
nection with streb dispute or matter, which may be in existence on the 40 
date of the reference. 
92. (1) A strike or lock-out shall be illegal ff-
(a) it is commenced or declared In contravention of section 80; or 
(b) it is continued in contravention of an order made, under 
I8dIon II. . 
4S 
(Z) . Where a strike or lock-out in pursuance of an industrial dispute 
has already commenced or is in existence at the time of the reference 

."tlle 4tilpute to-an arbitrator, a lAbour Court; a TnOaDll,. tba Natiozill 
Commission, the continuance of such strike or lock-out shall AUt be 
deemed to be illegal provided that such strike or lock-out was not at its 
commencement in contravention of the provisions of this Act or the 
S continuance thereof was not prohi'hited under section 91. 
(3) A lock-out declared in coIUlequellQe of an illegal strike or a I'trike 
declared in consequence of an illegal lock-out shall not be deemed to be 
i'tlegal. 
99. (1) Where there is a dispute as to whether any strike or lock-out 
Ib is illegal, either the employer concemed or the negotiating agent ill rela-
tion to the employees locked out may apply to the Labour Court, within 
the local limits of whose jurisdiction the strike or lock-out has taken 
place, or the appropriate Government may make a reference to such 
Labour Court, requesting the Labour Court to adjudicate thedilpute and 
I S the Labour Court shall adjuclicate the di8pl1te and the deciaien· o£ tae 
Labour Court shall be final. 
(2) Where the Labour Court on an application or a reference made 
to it under sub-section (1), finds that any strike or lock-out is illegal and 
any person has taken part in or has instigated or otherwise ab,tted such 
20 strike or lock-out, as the caR may be, or where any person has been 
convicted under section 136, section 137 or section 138, the Labour Court 
may, by order, direct that such person shall be disqualified for being, or 
being chosen as, an office-bearer of a registered trade union of employees 
or chairman or member of a negotiating committee or, as the case may 
25 be, registered trade union of employers, f<>r such period not exceeding 
two years as may be specified in the order. 
(~) Where the Labow- Courtt 011 aD apphcation.OI' a refereace maGle to 
it under sub-section (l), ftBds that any stri.kle is.illepl an«. that a -rep. 
tered trade union of employees has given the call for such strike or where 
30 any registered trade union of employees has been convicted under section 
137, the Labour Court may, having regard to all the circumstances of 
the case (including an earlier finding of the Labour Court that such 
trade union had given call for illegal strike ana the refusal of the trade 
union to arrive at a settlement in respect of the matters in dispute by 
3S negotiations under section 91, conciliation under section 96, arbitration 
under section 100 or adjudication by mutual agreement under section 101, 
as the cpse may be) by order, direct that the certificate of registration 
of the trade Wlion of employees shall be canoeUed. 
(4) Where the Labour Court, on an application or reference made to 
40 it under sub-section (1), finds that any lock-out is illegal and that a 
registered trade union of employers hu given the call for such lock-out 
or where any registered trade wUQIl of ~~II bas been. convicted 
under section 137, the LaboW' Court may, baving regard,to all the cir-
cumstances of the case (including an earlier finding of the Labour Court 
4S that such trade unUm had given call for tllegallock-out) by order, direct 
that the cer*ate ofregmtration of -the trade union of employers shall 
be cancelled. 
(5) The or<ler of the Labour Co1.l1't under sub-sedlon (1) shall be 
bindin. O~ 
(~ all the parties to the complaint 'or reference, as fhecase mq 
be; 
Ccmae. 
quence. 
otm •• 
Itrike 
or lock-
out. 

Strike or 
lock-out 
not to 
terminate 
relation-
ship bet-
ween em-
ployer 
and em-
ployee. 
Prohibi-
tion of 
financial 
aid to 
ille,al 
strikes 
and lock-
out •. 
Parties 
to an 
industrial 
dispute-
interpre-
tation ot 
the ex-
pression 
in certain 
cases. 
e-
. tb)· every emplo7~ of the induatrial .. tablishment or ~. 
inai or 
(c) in the case of an employer in relation to an industrial estab· 
lishment or undertaking, who is a party to the complaint or reference, 
as the case may be, on his heirs, successors or assignees in respect 5 
of such indu'Stzial establishment or undertaking, 
(6) No order shall be made by the Labour Court under sub-section 
(2), sub-section (3) or sub-section (4), unless the person, registered trade 
uniono!' employees or registered trade union of employers concerned has 
been :given a reasonable opportunity of being heard. 10 
(1) Every order made by the Labour Court under this section shall 
be final. 
(8) Where the Labour Court passes an order under sub-section (2), 
6Ub~edion (8) C1t sub-section (4), it shall forward a copy of the order 
to the Hegistrar. IS 
94. F'or the removal of doubts it is hereby declared that a strike or 
lock-out, whether illegal or otherwise, shall not by itself be deemed to 
terminate the relationship between the employer and the employeel:J con-
cerried. . 
85. No person shall knowingly ,expend or apply any mODey in direct 20 
f.urtherance or support of any illegal strike or lock"Out. 
CHAPI'ER IX 
PROCiDURE FOR :SETTLEMENT OF DISPUTES 
96. In this Chapter and Chapter XI parties to an industrial dispute 
between. employer or employers and his or their employees means the 2S 
emJ?loyer or e~ployers, as the case may ~, and-
(4) where a registered trade union of employees or a negotiating 
cdmmittee has been certified as a sole negotiating agent in relation 
·to such employees, such sole negotiating agent; or 
(b) where a regis~ered· trade union of employees has been certi-
fled as cpief negotiating agent in relation to such employees, such 30 
chie~ negotiating agent: 
Provided that where there 'is a registered trade union of employees 
certified as local union in relation to the employees of a local unit, in 
r~pect of any industrial dispu~ raised by it under clause (a). of section 
'69, such local union shall be deemed to be a party to the industrial dispute. 35 
J' ,. 

;63 
.,.. (1) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, if an . industrial 
dispute arises or is apprehended between the employees of a negotiating 
unit and the employer or employers emph>ying such employees, the sole 
negotiating agent or chief negotiating agent, as the case may be, in rela-
5 tion to such employees, may intimate, in writing, the employer or em-
ployers, as the case may be, the particulars of the dispute and request 
such employer or employers to commence negotiations for the settlement 
of the dispute. 
(2) The employer or employers, as the case may be, shall commence 
10 negotiations with the sole negotiating agent or chief negotiating agent, 
as the case may be, within fifteen days of the receipt of the intimation 
undersub .. section (1): 
Provided that in any negotiation between the employer or employers, 
as the case may be, and the chief negotiating agent, for the settlement 
IS of any industrial dispute the associate union or associate unions, if any, 
in relation to the employees of the negotiating unit shall Ibe entitled to 
be associated with such chief negotiating agent. 
(3) Where as a result of the negotiations under sub-section (2) a 
settlement is arrived at, the terms of the settlement shall be recorded 
20 in writing (the terms so recorded being hereinafter referred to as the 
memorandum of settlement) and signed by the employer or employers 
or the authorised representative of the employer or employers and the 
authorised representative of the sole negotiating agent or the chief nego-
tiating agent, as the case may be. 
~S (4) Copies of the memorandum of settlement arrived at under sab-
section (3) shall, within such time as may be prescribed, be forwarded 
by the employer or the employers, as the case may be, to such authorities 
as may be prescribed. 
(5) Every memorandum of settlement arrived at under sub-sertinn 
30 (3) shall be re~istered in the p!I"escribed manner by the parties to the 
industrial dispute, with the Conciliation Officer having jurisdiction in 
relation to the negotiating unit. 
(6) Every settlement arrived at under sub-section (3) shall come 
into operation on such d8te as may be ~Il'l'eed upon by the parties to the 
35 dispU}e~d, ~r no date is ~gr~ upon. on the date on .. vhich the metTloran-
dum ot tettlement is I!~ed and such settlement shall operate for such 
nertod (being not leu··than ·t1voyears) as may be sp.eCift~diin' the set~te­
ment and shall continue to operate ;"ftet' tlle expiry of the period aforp.-
Raid until the eXpiry of sixty days from the date on which a notice in 
40 w!ritinli{ of the intention to terminate the settlement is given by the 
employer to the negotiating agent or "ice t'eTEa. 
(7) A settlement arrived at under sub-section (3) sh a.ll , so Ion". ~s 
it i~ in oDera,tion,' be binding on all the employees of the ne~oti1tin!!, 
unit and the emp'loyer or, where theI'e are more than one employer em-
45 playing such emplovees, on all such employers and Ell~o on 'the heim, 
successors and assignees of such employer Or employers and all per-
!\II")OS who may subsequently become employees of such negotiating unit. 
(8) Every settlement arrived at under sub-section (3) may provide 
thAt if any difficulty or doubt regarding the interp'retation of any pro-
Bipartite 
negotia-
tions. 
• 

• 
Concilia-
tion of 
diapute. 
vision thereof ariaes, it aball be referred to 'far arbitration 'by either 
'party 'to the settlement and where a settlemeRt makes any such provi-
sion 'it shall also specify the arbitrator or arbitrators to wmoll!l. the dls-
pate ~hal1 be Tefared for arbitration and how the arbitrator or arbitra-
tors shall be choaen. 5 
(90) The 'arbitrator or arbitrators to whom any difficulty or doubt is 
referred under sub-section (8) shall, after giving the parties a reason-
able opportunity of being heard, decide the queStion and such decision 
shall be hal. 
lB. (1) Where no settlement has been arrived at in the course of 10 
negotiations under section 97 or such negotiatiens have continued for 
a period of more than sixty days without arriving at any settlement 
and, in either case, the P'Brties to the dispute do not agree to tefer the 
dispute to a mutually agreed arbitrator under section 100 or for adjudi-
cation under section 101, the parties jointly or separately- 15 
(a) shall-
. (i) in a case where the dispute relates to an essential ser-
vice; or 
(ii) in a cue where the dispute does not relate to an essen-
tial service but a notice of strike under clause (a) of sub-section 20 
(2) of section 90 or a notice of IOck-out under clause (a) of sub-
section (7) of tha.t section has been given; and 
(b) may, in any other case, 
forward in the prescribed. manner a I'eport to the Conciliation Officer 
having jurisdiction in relation to the dispute and the appropriateGov- 25 
i!rnment, regarding the failure of negotiations or the continuance thereof 
as aforesaid along with the facts of the dispute: 
Provided that the parties to t.ht! inclustrialdispute may agree to con-
tinue the negotiations UDdeor -.ctioD 97 for such fUt'ther period 
bey.,. the aforesaid period of sixty days as may be agreed up<m and in 30 
such a case such report in the cases referred to in clauae(a) shall and, 
in the cases referred to in clause (b) may, be forwarded to the Concilia-
tion Officer on the expiry of such further period. 
(2) On receipt of the report referred to in sub-section (1), the Con-
'cilia.tion O1Jlcer,in the cases referred ~ in clause (a) of sub-section (1) 35 
shall and, ill otber cases, may, commence conciliation proceedings in 
the prescribed manner. 
(3) The Conciliation Offtcer on commencing conc1liation pToceedings 
shall, for the purpose of bringing about a settlement of the dispute, in-
vestigate into the dispute and aD matters aftectiug the merits thereof 40 
and may do all such things as he thinks fit for the purpoSe of inducing 
the PlBrUes to come to a fair and amicable settlement of the dispute. 
(4) If a settlement of the dispute or 'IIny of the maUers mdispute is 
arrived at in the course of the concUiaUion proceedingH, the COIl-
anatMm Of1\cer 1Iha11 send a report thereof to 'the appropriate Govern- 415 
men:t 'ar to neh dIlcer as 1IDay bewthorieed' in this behalf by the 
appropriate Government, together with a memorandum of the settle-
ment signed by the parties to tbe dispute or their authorised represen-
tatives. 

tsa 
(S) It no such lIt!ttlement is arrived at within the time Axed. by o~ 
under sub-section (6), the Conciliation Oftlcer shall, al soon ~s pracU-
cable after the close of the investigation, forwaxd to the appropriate 
Q)vernment a. full report setting forth the steps taken by him for as-
, oertaining the facts and circumstances relating to the dispute and for 
bringing about a settlement thereof, together with a full statement of 
8udh facts and circumstances, and the reasons on account of which in 
his opinion, the settlement could not be arrived at: ' 
Provided that no report regarding the failure of conciliation proceed-
10 ing!. need be forwarded by the Conciliation Officer to the appropriate 
Government under this sub-section where, in the course of conciliation 
proceedings, the parties to the dispute agree to refer the dispute iOI 
arbitrati'on under &ection 100 and sign an agreement to that effect in the 
prescribed manner; but, in such a case, the Conciliation Officer shall senJ 
IS report thereof to the appropriate Government or to such oftl~ as 
may be authorised in this behalf by the appropriate Government, to-
gether with a coPy of the arbitration agreement. 
(6) The report referred to in sub-section (5) shall be submitted by 
the Conciliation Officer before the expiry of sixty days from the com-
~o inencement of the conciliation proceedings or within such shorter period 
as ma.y be fixed by the appropriate Government: 
Provided that, subject to the app.roval of the appropriate Govern-
ment, the Conciliation Officer may continue the conciliation proceedings 
beyond such period of sixty days or shorter period, if all tne p'arties to 
~s the, dispute agree therefor and in such a case the report referred to in 
sub-section (5) shall be submitted within such further periOd as may be 
agreed to by all the parties to the dispute: 
Provided further that an agreement arrived at in the course of con-
ciliation proceedings shall not be deemed to be invalid merely because 
30 it was arrived at after the expiry of the period fixed by or under this 
sub-section or &uch further period as may be agreed to by all the parties 
to the dispute under the preceding proviso. 
(7) As soon as may be after the report referred to in sub-section (5) 
has been forwaI'ded by the Concilia.tion Officer to the appropriate Gov-
35 ernment, he shall give intimation thereof to all the parties to the dispute. 
(8) The appropriate Government .hall, before the expiry of a period 
Idf sixty day!t from the date of the receipt of the report-
(a) consider whether there is a caSe for reference to the Labour 
Court or Tribunal; and 
(b) if on such consideration of the report, the appropriate Gov .. 
ernment is satisned that there is a case for such reference it shall 
proceed to make the reference in the manner provided in section 
104. 
(9) A settlement arrived at in the course of conciliation proceedings 
4 Shall be binding and enforceable in the same manner 8a a settlement 
S arrived at during negotiations under section 97 and sub-section (3), suI). 
section (4), sub-section (5), sub-section (6) and sUb-section (7), of that 
.ection .hall apply to a settlement arrived at in the course of conciliatIon 
proceedings as if it were a settlement arrived at in the course of neao" 
~o tiation. under that lection. . .. _ 

Concilla. 
tionOffi. 
eer may 
assist in 
bipartite 
negotia-
tions. 
Arbitra-
tion of 
disputes. 
Reference 
of indus-
trial dis-
pute for 
adjudica-
tion \",hen 
agreed 
toby 
partie •. 
, .:...' 
I. ~. 
n: Where any party to an industrial dislArte, individual dlsputt (jf 
trade union dispute makes a request to a Conciliation Officer havlna 
jurisdiction to assist that party in negotiations for settlement of the dIs-
pute, the Conciliation Ofticer may render such as~stance as may be 
necessary to bring about a settlement among the partIes to the dispute. 5 .. 
100. (1) Where no settlement is arrived at in the course of any nego-
tiations under section 97 or conciliation proceedings under section '98-, 
and the parties to the dispute agree to refer thedisp'ute for arbitration, 
they shall enter into an agreement for arbitration in such form and such 
manner as may be prescribed which shall specify the name of the arbi •. I') 
trator to whom the dispute shall be referred for arbitration and the terms 
of reference and a copy ea:h of such agreement shall be forwarded by 
the employer to the Conciliation Officer having jUrisdiction and to the 
a,pp'ropriate Government. 
(2) The appropriate Government shall, within thirty days of the re- is 
ceipt of the copy of the . arbitration agreement under sub-section (1), 
refer the dispute fOr arbitration to the arbitrator agreed upon by the 
parties to the dispute: 
Provided that in any case referred to in sub-section (2) of section 
7, the dispute may be referred to a single arbitrator or body of arbitra- 20 
tors appointed by the Central Government. 
(3) Where an industrial dispute has been referred to a Labour Court, 1 
Tribunal or National Commission for adjudication and the parties to j 
!that dispute agree jn writing for the withdrawal of such reference -and .~ 
reference of the dispute for arbitration by such arbitrator as may be 25 
spe~ified in the agreement and forward a cop'y of such agreement to the .. 
appropriate Government or the Central Government, as the case may be, 
that Government may wlLhdraw .the reference of the dispute fromi the 
.Labour Court, Tribunal or National Commission, as the case may be, and 
refer the dispute for arbitration by the arbitrator so specified. 30 
(4) Where an arbitl"ation agreement seeks to refer the dispute to a 
body of even number of arbitrators, or where the Central Government, 
by order, appoints a body of even number of arbitrators under sub-
section (2) of section 7, the agreement or order, as the case may be, 
'shall specify the umpire who shall enter upon the reference if the ar- 3S 
bttrators are equally divided in their opinion and the award of the 
umpire shall prevail and shall be. deemed to be the arbitration award 
-for the purposes of this Act. . 
. (5) The arbitrator shall investigate the dispute and, after 'haaling 
the parties, make an award and pronounce it in the manner provided in 46 
section 118. '.: 1 
(6) N<lthing in the Arbitration Act, 1940, shall apply to any arbitration ~ lOot i940. 
under this section. 
101. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, where both the 
farties to an industrial dispute ap.ply in the .prescribed manner, whether 4--; 
,ointly or sepal"ately, for the reference of an industrial dispute specified 
. in the appli~ation for adjudication, the ap'p,ropriate Government, if 
satisfted that the persons applying represent. the negotiatfnQ 
~gent and the employ~r Or the m3jority of. eniploYE1rs, as the case maj 
be, ~p~ll make. a reference iIi accordance with the ~p'pl1cation to" the La: 5<1 
b~ur Court; whete the dispute relates to po 'ma~ter ~pecified' in .the Second 
.. 1 \ ...... ,. .., - - - ~ t-.... ~ 

87 ,-,. , 
Schedule, or to a Tribunal, where the dispute r~lates. to a matter specified 
. in the Third Schedule. " 
102, Where the appropriate Government on receipt of the failure of 
conciliation report referred to in sub-section (5) of section 98 or other-
, wise is of op~ion that any industrial dispute exists or is apprehended, it 
msy at any tIme, by order, refer any matter app'earing to be connected 
with, or relevant to, the dispute to a Court of Inquiry for investigation and 
report. 
103. (1) If an individual dispute aI'i~es, the employee ot' any or all of 
~o the employees concerned or any registered trade union of employees of 
which such employee Or emp'loyees, as the case may be. is a member or 
a,re members may refer the dispute to the grievance settlement authority, 
set up by the employer in accordance with the rules made under this Act, 
for its decision. 
(2) Where the decision of the grievance settlement authority is not 
acceptable to any of the parties to an individual dispute, the parties to 
the disp'Ute may refer the dispute for arbitration to a mutually agreed 
arbitrator. 
(3) The nrrwhlions of section 100 shall, so far as may be, apply to the 
20 arbitratiol1 of any individual dispute referred for arbitration under sub-
section (2). I ' 
(4) Where the decision of the grievance settlement authority is not 
acceptable to any of the parties to the dispute and either party or both 
the p'arties to the dispute is or are not am-ceable to refer the dispute to a 
2S ml1tually agreed arbitrator, the aggrieved D8rtv may apply. in the pres-
cribed manner, to the Labout' Court for adjudic9.tion of the dispute. 
(5) Notwithstnnding anything contained in' this section, if any indi-
vidual di!;pute arises in respect of the termination of the employment of 
any emplovee or the rlischar/.!e or di<1tTlissal of such E'IIlplovpe by way of 
30 punishment. su~h employee ~ay apply. in the prescribed man.ner, to the 
LahOlur Court for adjudicqtion of thp. di~pute V.;thol1t referring the die;-
pute to the grievance Se'alement a'.lthQrity referred to in sub-section (1) 
or for arbitration. 
(6) No ~pp1icn1:inn shall be mClde under !';ub-section (4) or sub-section 
35 (5) to the Labour Court after the expiry of one year f.rom the final deci-
sion of the grievance sett.lement authority: 
40 
Provided that the Labour Court may entertain ·an l'IP'Plication under 
sub-section (4) or sub-section (5) after the expiry of .. the aforesaid 
period-
(a) if the Labour Court is "aUsfied that the delay in makin(! the 
application is for reasons beyond the control of the party maldng the 
application; 
(b) if the parti~ to the disp"Ute m~ke the application joil1tly and 
a~ree that the application may be entertained notwithstanding the 
4S expiry of the aforesaid period of one year. 
(7) Notwithstanding ~nvthing containerl in 9lI1h-~on (6). the awro-
pri:>te Government may, on being s~Usfied that it is necessary so to cW 
Reference 
of an,. 
matter to 
a Court 
oflnqWI7 
for inves-
tigation. 
Procedure 
for settle-
thent of' 
iridMdual 
~putea, . 

It.ference 
of JDdu.-
,rial ~ 
pute f~ 
adjudiC8 
tion; 
'''1 
In the interests of industrial pteace or justice, refer an individual dl8pute 
to the Labour Court fot adjudication at any time after the decision of the 
grievance settlement authority. 
(I) On receipt of an application under sub·section (4) or sub-section 
(5), or a reference under sub-section (6), the Labour Court shall proceed S 
to adjudicate the dispute as if such dispute has been referred to it fOIl' 
adjudication and accordingly all the provisions of this Act relating; to 
adjudication of industrial disputes by the Labour Court shall apply to 
such adjudication. 
1M. (1) On receipt of a report under sub-section (5) of section 98 by 1:> 
the appropriate Government or where the approp'I'iate Government 1s of 
opinion that any industrial dispute exists or is apprehended and, in 
either ('ase, no other proceedings unrler this Act in respect of the dis-
pute have commenced and have not concluded, it may, at any time, by 
o.rder,- IS 
(a) if the dispute relates to any matter specified in the Second 
Schedule, refer the dispute or any matter appearing to be connected 
with, or relevant to, the dispute, to a Labour Court for adjudication; 
or 
(b) if the dispute relates to any matter specified in the Third 20 
Schedule, refer the disp'Ute or any matter aprearing to be connected 
with, or relevant to, the dispute to a Tribunal for adjudication. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where the 
appropriate Government is of opinion that an industrial dispute exists or 
is apprehended in an essenHal service, 'the appropriate Government shall, 2S 
on the receipt of a report uncler sub-section (5) of section 98, make " 
reference of the dispute for adjudication to the Labour Court or Tribunal, 
M the case may be. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) or sub-
section (2). where the Central Government is of opinion, either on a 30 
request made in that behalf by the appropriate Government (being a State 
Government) or otherwise, that any industrial dispute exists or is appre-
hended and the dispute involves any question of national importance (,1' is 
of such a nature that industrial establishments or undertakings situated in 
more than one State aTe likely to be interested in or affected by, sut'h dis- 3S 
pute and that the disp'Ute should be adjudicated by a National Commis-
sion, then, the Central Government may, whether or not it is the appro-
priate Government in relation to that disp!Ute, at any time, by order. refer 
the dispute or any matter appearin~ to be connected with, or relevant 
to the dispute to a National Commission for adjudication. 40 
(4) No dispute shall be referred fot adjUdication under this section 
where the parties to the dispute agree to refer the diSpUte for arbitra.tion 
under section 100. 
(5) Where on receipt of a report under sub-section (5) of section 98, 
the appropriate Government does not make a reference of the industrial 45 
dispute (not being an industrial dispute relating to an essential service) 
or any matter appearing to be connected with,or relevant to, the dispute, 
it shall communicate to the parties concerned, within sixty d~ys o.f th, 
~ipt of ,~cl\ report, the reasons ther~f().r,\ ",j 

s 
]0 
20 
89 
(6) Where any reference has bet!n made under sub-section (3) to s 
tolational Commission, then, notwithstanding anything contained in this 
Act,- -
(4) if, on the date of such reference, any negotiation under 
sp.ction 97 or conciliation under section 98 for the settlement of the 
dispute is pending, such negotiation or conciliation shall abate; 
(b) no Labour Court or Tribunal shall have jurisdiction to 
adjudicate upon any matter which is under adjudication before the 
National Commission, and accordingly,-
(i) if the matter under adjudication before the National 
Commission is pending in a proceeding befQre a Labour Court 
or Tribunal, the proceeding before the Labour Court or the Tri-
bunal, as the case may be, in so far as it relates to sU'ch matter, 
shall be deemed to have been quashed on such reference to the 
National Commission; and 
(ii) it shall not be lawful for the appropriate Government 
to refer the matter under adjudication before the National Com-
mission to any Labour Court or Tribunal for adjudication during 
the pendency of the proceeding in relation to such matter before 
the National Commission. 
l:xplanatilJn.-In this sub-seetinn. "Labour Court" or "Tribunal" in-
cludes any court, tribunal or other authority constituted under any law 
relating to inves~gation and settlement of industrial disputes in force in 
any State. 
2~ (7) Where any industrial dispute. in r£'lation to wh'ich the Central Gov-
ernment is not the appropriate Government, is r'eferred to a National 
Commi~sion, then, notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, any 
reference in sub-section (2) of section 115 and sub-section (.1) of section 
118 ar.d section 122, to thE' appropriate Govcmmen1t in relation to such 
30 dispute shall be construed as a. reference to the Cen'tral Government but, 
save as afotesaid and as otherwise exp'ressly provided in this Act, any re-
ference in any provision of this Act to the appropriate Government in 
relation to that dispute shal1 mean a reference 10 t~e Strite Government. 
105. The provisions of this Chapter shall app'ly in relation to an indus-
35 trial dispute that may be raised by a local union under clause (4) of sec-
tion 69, in the same manner as it aprJies in relation to an industrial dispute 
that may be raised by a sole negotiating agent. 
108. The provisions of section 98, section 100, section 101 and section 
104 shall, so far as may be, apply in relation to an industrial dispute bet-
40 ween employees and employees or between employers and employers in 
the same manner as they apply in relation to an industrial dispute bet-
9{~11 ~ ~rnplor" ~lld his empioyees, 
Appticabl-
lityof 
provisions 
to indus-
trial dis-
putes 
raised 
by local 
unions. 
Settle-
ment ot 
industrial 
dispute 
between 
employees 
and 
employees 
and 
employers 
and 
em-
l'l03,fI. 

ProhIbi-
tion of 
unfair 
practice. 
Procedure 
on com-
plaints 
relating to 
unfair 
practices. 
,.l' 
to 
CHAPTER X 
UNFADl PRACTICE 
107. No employer or employee or a trade union, whether registered 
under ihis Act W" not, shall commit any unfair practice. 
108. (1) Where any trade union has committed, or is committing, any 5 
unfeir practice, any employee or employer or registered trade union or 
the appropriate Government or an officer of that Government specially 
authorised in this behalf. may,-
(4) dn R case where such unfair practice is a continuing one, at 
any time befQre the expiry of ninety days from the cesser of such II) 
continuance; or 
(b) in any other case, within ninety days from the date on which 
~uch unfllir practice W:1S committed, 
make a complaint to the Tribunal specially authorised in this behalf by 
the appropriate Government: IS 
Provided that the Tribunal may entertain a complaint a.ft.er the ex-
piry of the aforesaid period, if for ~ood and sufficient reason shown by 
the complainant thp. Tribunal is satlisfted that the de-lay in making Itbe 
complaint was for reasons beyond the control of the complainant. 
(2) On receipt of the complaint referred to in sub-section (n. thp. 20 
Tribunal shall forward a copy thereof to the trade union. which is al1e~ed 
to have committed the unfair practk:e, alonJ?' with a notice specifying a 
date and requiring it to apoear before the Tribunal on that date . to 
show cause against the complaint. 
(3) The Tribunal may, if it so considers necessary, by order, direct- 25 
(a) the Registrar; or 
(b) the Chief. Labour Commissioner, where the appropriate 
Government is the Central Government; or 
(e) the State Labour Commissioner, where the appropriate Gov-
ernment is the State Government, 30 
to make or calise to be made an investi~ation into thp compl:iint and Make 
a report on the result of the inyesti~atjon to the Tribunal, wilthin such 
time as may be speCified in the o.rder or such further time as may be 
granted by the Tribunal. 
(4) The Registrar or the Chief. Labour Commissioner or State Labour 35 
CommiSSioner, as the' case mav be, shall; when so directed bv the Tribu-
nal under SUb-section (2), make or cause to be made such inve8ti~ation 
as he may consider necessary and make efforts to promote n setnement 
among the parties to the complaint ann submit a report to th~ Tribunal 
within the time or further time specified under sub-section (3) setting 40 
out 1he full fRets! and circumstance!,! of the case and the efforts made hv 
:Wm for settltn~ the co-'npl~inti and i! ~ny settjement ha.s been arrived 

H among the parties to the complaint, he shall forward with such report 
a deed incorp,?rating the terms of the settlement (hereafter in this 
Chapter referred to as· the settlement deed). 
. (5) If on the receipt of the report referred to in sub-section (4), the 
5 Tribunal finds that a settlement has been arrived at among the parties to 
the complaint in regard to the ~ubject matter of complai11i~ and such 
settlement is fair and reasonabie. it shall record the settlement 
(6) Where on a receipt of the report ref.zrred to in sub-section (4) j 
the Tribunal finds that no settlement has been arrived at among the 
10. parties to the complaint in regard to the subject matter of the compla;nt, 
or that such settlement is not fair and reasonable. it shall, after making 
such enquiry as may be prescribed and after giving the parties to the 
complaint a reasonable opportunity of being heard, pass orders as to 
whether any or all of the unfair practices alleged in the complaint has 
IS or have been committed and it: so by which of the parties to the com-
plaint. 
(7) The finding and the order of the Tribunal under sub-section (6) 
shall be final. 
(8) Where-
20 (01)' a Tribunal finds that an unfair practice has been committed 
by a registered ,t.rade union; Qr 
(b) a registered trade union is convicted of an offence punishable 
under section 141, 
the Tribunal may having regard to all the circumstances of the cns~ (in-
25 eluding the nature of the unfair praC'tice and an earlier ftnding. if any, 
regarding the commission of any unfair practice by the trade union) by 
order, dUrect that the registration of the trade union shall be cancelled: 
Pr'ovided that no OTder shall be made under this sub-section unless the 
trade union concerned has been given a reasonable opportunity of being 
30 heard; 
(9) A copy of the order under sub-section (8) shall be forwarded by 
the Tribunal to the Registrar. 
(10) The Tribunal shall pass orders under sub-section (6) and sub" 
-&eetion (8\ within ninety days from the date on whith it received the 
~s oomplaint. 
i ;: • 
109. The' ordet of the 'tribunal under sub-section (6) or sub-section 
(8) of section 108 shall be binding on-
. (a) 811 the partieS to the complairltj 
(b) in the case of an employer in reiation to an industI1iati estab-
·lishtrleritOr undertaking who is a party to the complaint. on his heirs, 
successors or assignees in respect of such industrial establi3hment or 
undertaking: and 
PerAoitA 
bn whorft 
the 
brder 
tinder 
In,ib-see; 
Hons (0' 
and (8) 
of sectiorl 
108 shaU 
be 
bindiiii· 

Adjudi-
cating 
authori-
ties to 
determine 
their pro. 
cedure 
subject 
to thll 
.provisions 
of the 
Act and 
the 
rules. 
Power 
to sum-
mon wit_ 
nesses, to 
inspect 
premises, 
etc. 
I ,. I 
(c) in the case of a trade union which is a party to the compiaint, 
on aU pe~ons who are members of the trade union on the daite on 
which the compla:nt is made and on all persons who may become 
such members after such date; and where the trade uruon is a trade 
union of employers, also on the heirs, successors or assignees, of every 5 
member of such trade union, in respect of the industrial establish-
ment or undertaking in relation to which such member is the em-
ployer. 
CHAPTER XI 
PROCEDURE, POWERS AND DUTIES OF AtJ"11{ORITIES 
110. Subject to the provisions of this Act, and any rules made there-
under-
(a) by the appropriate GQvernmp.n1., in the case of an. arbitrator, 
a Court of Inquiry, Labour Court or Tribunal; or 
]0 
(b) by the Central Government, in the case of a National Com- IS 
mission, 
an arbitrat:>r or a Court of Inquiry, Labour Court, Tribunal or National 
Commission shall follow such procedure as he or it thinks fi~ 
111. (1) Every arbitrator, Presiding Officer of a Labour Court, Tribu-
nal or National Commission or chairman or member of a Court 0.£ 20 
Inquiry shall have the same powers as are vested in a Civil Court under 
the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, when trying a suit, in res~t of the 
folloWling matters, namely:-
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and 
examining him on oath; as 
(b) compelling the production of documents and material objects: 
(c) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses; and 
(d) in respect of such other matters as may be prescribed; 
and every enqwry or investigation by an arbitra'tor, a Presidin~ Oftlcer 
of a Labour Court, Tribunal or National Commission or Chairman or!O 
member of Ii CoWl~ of Inquiry sha.11 be deemed to be a judicial proceed-
I of 11101. 
ling within the meaning of section 193 and section 228 of the Indian 4a of lase. 
Penal Code. 
(2) A Conciliation Officer shall have the same powers as are vested 
in a Civil Court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1808, in respect of 3' I of 1901. 
the following matters, namely:-
(a.) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any perlOn; 
(b) e1Camining any person: 
Provided that such examination shall not be Qn: oath; 

73 
(c) compelling the production of documents and material 
objects; and 
(d) in respect of sUch other matters as may be prescribed. 
(3) A Conciliation Officer, a single arbitrator or member of a l:>ody Qf 
S arbitrators, Presiding Officer of a Labour Court. Tribunal or National 
Commission or chairman or member of a C(ltUI1t of Inquiry, for the purpose 
of enqUliring into any ma/tter connected with any existing or apprehended 
tinduruial dispute, individual dispute or trade union dispute, may, after 
giving reasonable notice (not being less than twenty-four hours), enter 
10 the premises in which any establishment or dndumrial unde~aking W 
the office of a trade union. to which the dispute relates, is situated. 
112. (1) Where on the day fixed for the hearing of any di~ute or any 
other proceeding, pending before a Labour Court, Tribunal or Na,tional 
Commissi~, any of the parties to the dispute or other proceeding, having 
15 notice of .the hearing does not appear, the Labour Court, Tribunal 
or National Commission, as the case may be, may proceed with the hear-
ing of the dispute or other proceeding n~~withstanding the absence ot 
lSuc·h party and, where it does so, it shall have the same powers iIll rela-
tion to the making of any award or determining or deciding any question , ... 
20 as it would have had such party appeared as aforesaid. 
Explanatiov .. -In this sub-!;ection "day fixed fqr hearing" includes the 
day fixed for the appearance of any party, fl1ing of any statement, exami-
nation of witnesses, production of documents, hearing of argument6 or 
the doing of any other thing by the party concerned or his authorised 
25 representatlive in connection with the adjudication of the dispute or 
qther proceeding. 
(2) Where any party to a d spute or other proceeding to whom time 
has been granted for producing hiE evidence, or causing 3;~tendance (If 
witnesses, or performing any other act necessary for the further progress 
30 of the adjudication of the dispute or other proceeding fails to do so with-
in the tlime so granted, the l.abour Court, Tribunal Ott' Nation:al Commis-
sion, as the case may be, may, notwithstanding such failure,-
..... j 
(a) if the parties are present, proceed to adjudicate the dispute 
or other proceeding forthwith; or 
3S (b) if any of the parties is absent, proceed under sub-section (1). 
(3) Where any of the parties to the dispute OIl" Qther proceeding, who 
fails to appear, or to do any act referred to in sub-section (2) within the 
time allowed therefor, subsequently satisfies the Labour Court, Tribunal 
or National Commission, as the case may be, within such time as may be 
40 prescribed, that there was sufficient cause for his non-appearance or for 
such failure. it may make such order as it considers just and proper in 
the circumstances of the case (including an order se1tting aside any 
award or order made and directing re-hearing of the dispute or other 
proceeding) subject to such conditJions (including a concUtion as to, pay-
45 ment of costs) as it may think fit to impose. 
Power of 
Labclur 
Court, 
etc .• to 
proceed 
in absence 
of parties 
to dispute. 

Appoint_ 
ment of 
assessors 
to assist 
Court 
of In-
quiry. 
etc. 
Power 
to grant 
Interim 
reliefs. 
Power to 
transfer 
proceed-
ings. 
Power of 
Labour 
Court to 
give 
proper 
relief in 
" 
74 
.t13. An arbitra.tor, a Court of Inquiry, Labour Court, Tribunal oil 
National CQrnmiS$ion may, if he or it so thinks fit, appoint one or more 
persons having special knowledge of the matter under consideration as 
assessor to advise him or it in the proceeding before such arbitrator, Court 
of Inquiry, Labour Court, Tribunal or Na,11o.nal Commission, as the case S 
may be. 
114. It shall be lawful for the Labour Court, Tribunal or National 
Commission to grant to any party to any proceeding in relation to any 
individual dispute, indus~rial dic;pute o,r trade union dispute pending 
before it, such interim reliefs (whether subject to any conditions or not) 10 
including stay of any order, issue of injunction or direction in regard to 
payment of wages or subsistence allowance, as it deems just and proper 
in the circumstances of the case: 
Provided that the Labour Court, Tribunal or National Commission 
shall not grant any such interim relief unless all the parties to the pro- IS 
ceeding have been served with a n:ltice on the application for such 
interim relief and have been given a reasonable opportunity of being 
heard: 
Provided further that the Labour Court, Tribunal or National Com-
mission may, having regard to the nature of the interim relief sought 20 
and the circumstances of the case pass appropriate orders granting such 
interim relief as it deems just and proper in the circumstances of the 
case before the notice referred to in the preceding proviso is served on 
the parties to the proceeding: 
Provided also that where the Labour Court, Tribunal or National 25 
Commission makes any order under the pr:>viso immediately preceding, 
it shall record the reasons for making the order before complying with 
the requirements specified in the first proviso. 
115. (1) Where any proceeding relating to the adjudication, of any in-
dividual dispute is pending before a Labour Court, th~ appropriate Gov- 3c 
ernment on an application made to it in that behalf by anv party to. such 
proceeding and aeer notice to the other party or parties to such proceed-
ing, and after hearing such of them as desire to be heard, may, at any 
stage, by order and for reasons to be stated therein, transfer the proceed-
ing to another Labour Court. 35 
(2) The appropriate Government may, by order and for reasons 10 
be ~tated therein, withdraw any proceeding re~ing to the adjudication 
of any industrial dispute or trade union dispute or any other pro~eeding 
under this AC't, o,ther than a proceeding referred to in sub-section (1), 
pencbing before any Labour Court, Tribunal or National Commission and 40 
transfet" the same to another L81bour Court, Tribunal or National Com-
mh;si.on, as the case may be, for the disposal of such proceeding. 
(3) The Labour Couri, Tribunal or National Commission, as the case 
may be, to which a proceeding is transferred under sub-sec'ion (1) or 
sub-section (2') may, subjpct to any spec-iat directiolUl in the order of 45 
transfer, proceed either de nOvo or from the stage at which it was so 
transferred 
116. Whelle any application has been made to the Labour Court for 
adjudication of an individual di!lpUf1:e relating to the discharge or dis-
missall of an employee under sub-section (1) of section 10~, or where any 50 
such dispute has been referred by the appro.priate Government to the 
Labour Court for adjudication under sub-section (1) of section 104 and, 

75 
.&l either caSe, the Labour Court is satisfied, whether on the basis of the 
records of the proceeding that led to the dischalrge or disrnist1a1 of such 
emp]Qyee or on the basis of additional evidence produced before such 
Labour Court, that the ord~r of discharge or dismissal was not justified, 
5 'the Labour Coum may, by Its award, set aside 'the order of discharge or 
dismissal and direct reinstatement of the employee on such terms and 
conditions, if any, as it may think fit, or give such Oither relief to the em-
ployee, including the imposition of a lesser punishment in lieu of dis-
charge or dismissal. as tt appears to the Labour Court to be just and 
10 proper ;n the circumstances of the case. 
117. (1) The report of a Caurt of Inquiry shall be in writing and shall 
be rigned by the person who constitutes the Court of Inquiry or, where 
the Cou~ of Inquiry conSlists of more than one person, by the chairman 
and the remaining member or members thereof: 
IS Provided that nothing in this sub-~ection sh.a1tl be deemed to prevent 
any member of the Court of Inquiry from recording any minute of dis-
sent from the report of the Court of Inquiry or from any recommendation 
made thereunder. 
(2) Every report of a Court of Inquiry together with the minute of 
20 dissent, if any, recorded by any member thereof shall be published within 
a period of thirty days from the date of its receipt by the appropriate 
Government, in such manner as that Government may think fit. 
118. (1) Every award or other determination or decision by an arbitra-
tor Oif a Labour Court, Tribunal or National Commission shall be prc~ 
25 nounced on a date of which notice has been given to the parties to the 
dLc;pute and shall be dated and signed by the person or persons pronounc-
ing the award and when once signed shall not thereafter be alltered or 
added to, save as provided in this Act. 
(2) The award of an arbitrator shall be pronounced in his office and 
30 the award of a Labour Court, Tribunal or Na.tional Commission shall be 
pronounced in the open court. 
(3) A copy of every award or other determination or decisiOlIl referred 
to in sub-section (1), certified in such manner as may be prescribed, shall 
be given by the arbitrator, Labour Court, Tribunal or National Gommis-
3S sion, as the case may be, to each of the parties tQ the dispute free of cost 
'and a copy of the award or other determination or deciSion so certified 
shall be sent by the arbitrator, Labour Court, Tribunal or National Com-
mission, as the case may he, to the appropriate Government. 
119. (1) A Court of Inquiry shall submit its report, on the matters 
40 referred to it, to the appropriate Gcwernment ordinarily Withi~ a period 
of one hundred and eighty days from the commencement of Its inq~1ry 
or within such further period 86 may be allowed by the approprIate 
Government from 'time to time. 
_ (2) The Labour Court shall pronounce its sward ordinarily within 
45 a period of ninety days from the date on which the application is made, 
or the dispute is referred, to it. 
(3) The Tribunal or National Commission shall pronounce Its 
award ordinarily within a period of one hundred and eighty days lrom 
the date on which the dispute is referred to it. 
case of 
discharge 
Or dis-
missal of 
emplo-
yee.. 
Form of 
report of 
Court of 
Inquiry 
and its 
publica-
tion. 
Pronoun.. 
cement of 
award 
byarbi· 
trator, 
Labour 
Court, 
etc. 
Time 
limit for 
submis-
sion of 
report. 
makin, 
of award, 
etc. 

Date on 
which 
award be-
comes en-
forceable. 
Persons 
onwhorr 
awards 
are 
binding. 
76 
(4) Where the Labour Court, Tribunal or National Commission is 
unable to make its award within the periods referred to in sub-section 
(2) or sub-section (3), as the case may be, it shall record the reaSODS 
therefor. 
120. (1) Every award referred to in sub-section (1) of section 118 S 
shall become enhrceable on the expiry of thirty days from 1ts pro-
nOUPlcement: 
Provided that-
(a) if the appropriate GoveI11ment is of opinion, in case where 
the award has been given by an arbitrator or a Labour Court or 10 
Tribunal in relation to an industrial dispute to which it is a party; 
or 
(b) if the Central Government is of opinion in case where the 
award has been given by a National Commission, 
that it will be inexpedient on public grounds affecting national economy IS 
or social justice to give effect to the whole or any part of the award, 
the appropriate Gov,ernment or, as the case may be, the Central Go-
vernment, may, by notification, declare that the award shall not become 
enforceable on the expiry of the said period of thirty days. 
(2) Where any declaration has been made in relation to an award 20 
under the proviso to sub-section (1) , the appropriate Government or 
the Central Government, as the case may be, may within ninety days 
from the date of the award, by notification, make an order rejecting or 
modifying the award, and shall, on the first available opportunity, lay 
the award and a copy of such order (where any such order has been 2S 
made) before the Legislature of the State, if the order has been made 
by the State Government, or before Parliament, if the order has been 
made by the Central Government. 
(3) Where any award is rejected by the appropriate Government 
or the Central Government, as the case may be, under sub-section (2), 30 
it shall nJt be enforceable. 
(4) Where any award is modified by an ordfl'r made under sub-
_tion (2), such award as so modified shall become enforceable on the 
expiry of fifteen days from the date on which the order making the 
modification is published in the Official Gazette. 35 
(5) Where a declaration under the proviso to sub-section (1) has 
been made but no order is made under sub-section (2), the award shall 
become enforceable on the expiry of the period of ninety days referred 
to in sub-seqtion (2). 
(~) Subjec,t to the provisions (l,f sub-s~tions (3), (4) and (5) regar- 4S 
ding enforceability of an award, the award shall come into operation ~ 
with effect from such date as may be specified therein, and Where no 
date is so specified, it shall come into operation on the date when the 
award becomes enforceable under SUb-section (1) or sub-section (4) 
or sub-section (5), as the case may be. So 
121. (1) The award of an arbitrator which has become enforceable 
under section 120 shall be binding on-
(a) the parties to the agreement in pursuance of which the 
dispute was referred to for arbitration; and 

77 
(b) where a negotiating agent is a party to tilt: tlgreement 
and the agreement is in respect of an industrial dispute, on all 
the employees of the negotiating unit in relation to whom the 
registered trade union of employees or negotiating committee has 
S been certified as negotiating agent. 
(2) An award of a Labour Court, Tribunal or National Commi!ilsion 
which has become enforceable under section 120 shall be binding on--
(a) all ,the parti~ to the individual dispute, industrial dis-
pute or trade union dispute; 
10 (b) all other parties summoned to appear in the proceedmg as 
parties to the dispute, unless the Labour Court, Tribunal or Na-
tional Commission, as the case may be, records the opinion that they 
were so summoned without proper cause; 
(c) where a party referred to in clause (a) or clause (b) js 
IS an employer, his heirs, successors 'or assignees in respect of the 
industrial establishment or undertaking to which the dispute rela-
tes; 
(d) where a party referred to in clause (/1) or clause (b) is a 
negotiating agent, all persons who were employees of the nego-
20 tiating unit on the date of the dispute and all persons who subse .. 
quently become employees of the negotiating unit; and 
(e) where a party referred to in clause (/1) or clause (ll) is a 
local union and the dispute is an industrial dispute in respect of 
any mJtter referred to in clause (a) of section 69, on all per~ons 
25 who were employees, on the date of the dispute, of the indu~trial 
establishment or undertaking or unit, branch or office of an indus-
trial establishment or undertaking, in relation to the employees 
employed wherein the registered trade union of employees has 
been certified as a local union; and all persons who subsequently 
30 become employees of such industrial establishment or undertaking 
or unit, branch or office. 
122. (1) Every award of an arbitrator or a Lahour Court, Tribunal 
or National Commission shall, subject to the provjsions of this sect:on, 
remain in operation for a period of two years ff om the date on which 
3S the award becomes enforceable: 
Provided that the appropriate Government may, by notifilation and 
for reasons to be stated therein, before the expiry Of the said peri::xi of 
two yt:ars, extend the period of operation of the award by any period 
not exceeding one year at a time, as it thinks fit; so, however, that the 
40 total period of operation of any award does not· e'Xceed three years 
from the date on which it came into operation. 
(Z) Where the appropriate Government, after one year of the en-
forcement of the award, whether of its own motion or on the applica-
tion of. any party bound by the award, considers that since the award 
45 was made, there has been a material change in the circumstances on 
which it was based, the appropriate Government may, af~r giving the 
parties bound by the award a reasonable opportunity of being heard. 
shorten the period of operation lof the award. 
Period 
of opera-
tion of 
award. 

Review 
2)f award 
by 
Labour 
Court. 
Tribunal 
or 
National 
Commis-
sion and 
correc-
tion of 
mistakes. 
Award of 
costs. 
Execu-
tion of 
settle-
ment or 
award by 
Labour 
Court, 
etc. 
18 
"r 
(3) Nothing contained in sub-section (1) shall apply to any award 
which by its nature. terms or other circumstances, does not impose, 
after it has been given eftect to, any continuing ohligation on the par-
ties bound by the award. 
(4) Notwithstanding the expiry of the period of operation referred S 
to in sub-section (1). or the shortened period under sub-section (2), 
the award shall continue to be binding on the parties until a period of 
sixty days has elapsed from the date on which notice 1n writing is 
given by any party bound by the award to the other party or parties, 
as the case may be, intimating its intention to terminate the award. 10 
(5) No application made under wb-section (2) or notice given under 
sub-section (4) shall be entertained or be valid, in the case of an indus-
trial dispute, unless it is made or given-
(4) where such dispute is between employees and thp. em-
ployer or employers, by the negotiating agent, or the employer or, IS 
where more than one employers are bound by the award, by the 
majority of such employers; or 
(b) where dispute is between employees and employees or 
employers and employees by the majority of any of the parties 
bound by the award. 20 
123. (1) Any party to an individual dispute, industrial disput.e or 
trade union dispute, who, on account of some mistake or error appalent 
on the face of the record or for any other sufficient reason, desirp.s to 
obtain a review of an award made by a Labour Court, Tribunal or 
National Commission, may apply to such authorHy and whert;' such 25 
authqrity, after giving all the paztles to the individual dispute, indus-
trial dispute or trade union dispute, as the case may be, a reasonable 
opportunity of be~ng heard is of the opinion th~t the application for 
review should be granted, it shall grant the same. 
(2) Clerical or arithmetical mistakes in awards or errors arising 30 
therein from any accidental slip or omission may, at any time, be correc-
ted by the arbitrator, Labour Court, Tribunal or National Commission, 
as the case may be, either of its own motion or on the application of 
any of the" parties to the dispute or the appropriate Government. 
1M. Subject to any rules made under this Act, tne costs oI, and inci- 3S 
dental to, any proceeding befure, an arbitrator or a Labour Court, 
Tribunal or National Commission shall be in the discretion of the arbi-
trator, Labour Court, Tribunal or National Commission and the arbitra-
tor, Labour Court, Tribunal lOr National Commission, as the case may 
be, shall have full power to detennine by whom, to whom and to what 40 
extent and subject to what conditions. if any, such costs are to be paid, 
and to give all necessary directions for ,the purpose aforesaid and such 
costs may be recovered under section 125 in the same manner as if it 
were money due under any settlement or award. 
125. (1) Every award or determination or decision of a Lab~UI 4S 
Court, Tribunal or National Commission shall 'be executed by the 
authority which made it, in such manner as may be provided by or 
Wlder this Act. 

79 
(2) Every award of the arbitrator or a settlement arrived at in the 
course of negotiations under section 97 or conciliation under section 98 
shall be executed by the Labour Court, in the same manner as if it were 
an award made by such Labour Court. 
S 126. (1) Where any 'money is due to any of the parties to a su:>ttJe-
ment or award, under such settlement or award, such party or any 
person, in, or on, whom the rights of such party under the settlement 
or award have been vested or devolved, by assignment, inheritance or 
otherwise, may, without prejudice to Elny other mode of recovery, 
10 make an application b the Labour Court, T~ibul1Rl or National Com-
mission, to whom an application for the execution of the settlement or 
laward may be made under section 125 for the recovery of the money 
so due to such party and where the Lab()ur Court, Tribunal or Nation-
al Commission, as the case may be, is satisfied that any money iR so 
IS due, it shall issue a certificate for that amount to the Collector who shall 
proceed to recover the same in the same manner as an arrear of land 
revenue and remit the amount so recovered to the Labour Court, Tri-
bunal or National Commission, as the case may be: 
Provided that every such app1ica:~ion shan be ma~ within one 
20 year from the date on which the money becomes due to such party: 
Provided further that any such application may be entertained 
after the expiry of the said period of one year if the Labour Court, 
Tribunal or Natiomi Commission, as the case may be, ;<; satisfied that 
the applicant ha:1 sufficient cause for not making U1e application wi:hin 
25 the said period. 
(2) The Labour Court, Tribunalnr National Commission, as the 
case may be. shall disburse or cause to be disbursed in such manner as 
may be prescribed. the amounts remitted to it by the Collector under 
sub-section (1) to the person or pcrs')ns entitled to receive the SIlITIe. 
30 Explanati01t.-In this section "parties to a settlement or award" in-
cludes, where a negotiating agent or local union is a party to the settle-
ment or award, all employees who are bound by such settlement or award. 
127. Where an arbitrator, Labour Court, Tribunal or National Com-
mission, by its award, directs the reinstatement of any emplnyee or em-
35 ployees and the employer does not reinstate such employee or employ~es, 
the employee or employees concerned shall be entitled to wages and all 
other benefi,ts, as if he or they has or have been reinstated--
(a) where the award spec;ifies a date on or before which such 
employee or employees should be reinstated, with effect from such 
40 date; and 
(b) in other cases, when the award becomes enforceable. 
1%8. (1) A conciliation proceeding shall be deemed to have commeneed 
on the date on which notice summoning the parties for conciliation has 
been issued by the Conciliation Officer. 
45 (2) A conciliation proceeding shall be deemed to have concluded-
(a) where a settlement is arrived at. on the date on which a 
Procedure 
for re-
covery of 
money 
due 
under 
settle-
ment or 
award, 
etc. 
Employee 
entitled 
to wages, 
etc .• 
though 
award 
for re-
instate-
mentis 
not 
complied 
with. 
Com-
mence-
ment 
and con_ 
clusion 
of pro-
ceedings, 
etc. 

Nodt'. 
mand in 
regard 
to same 
matter 
to be 
raised 
so long 
as settle. 
ment or 
award is 
in force. 
Penalty 
for 
failure 
to sub. 
mit state-
ment, 
making 
falsp 
state. 
ment. 
etc. 
Supply. 
ing 
false 
informa· 
tion ,'e-
garding 
trade 
union. 
80 
memorandum of the settlement is signed by the parties to the dispute; 
and 
(b) where no settlement is arrived at, on the expiry o~ fifteeo 
days from the submission of a report regarding the failure of conci-
liation proceedings under sub-section (5) of section 98 to the apprc- S 
priate Government. 
(3) Proceedings before an arbitrator shall be deemed to have com-
menced when the dispute is referred to the arbitrator for arbitration. 
(4) Proceedings before a Labour Court shall be deemed to have com-
menced when an applicat:on is made or a dispute is referred to it for 10 
adjudication. 
(5) Proceedings before a Tribunal or National CommisS'ion shall be 
deemed to have commenced when the dispute is referred to it for adjudi-
cation. 
(6) Pr.oceedings referred to in sub-sections (3), (4) and (5) shall be IS 
deemed to have concluded on the date on which Ithe award in such pro-
ceedings becomes enforcealble under section 120. 
129. So long as any settlement arrived at in the course of negotiations 
under section 97 or conciliation under section 96 or any awaM of an 
arbitrator or a Labour Court, Tribunal or National Commission is in 20 
operation, it shall not be lawf.ul for the employees Or employer or em-
ployers, as the case may be, to raise any dispute with respect to any 
matter covered by such settlement or award. 
CHAPTER XII 
PENALTIES 
130. (1) If default is made on the part of any registered trade union 
in giving any notice or sending any statement or other document as re-
quired by or under any provision of this Act, every office-bearer or other 
person bound by the rules of the trade union to give or send the same, 
or, if there is no such office-bearer or person, every member of the exe- 30 
cutive of the trade union, shall be punishable with fine which may extend .. 
to ten rupees and, in the case of a continuing default, with a further fine .. 
which may extend to five rupees for each week during which the default 
continues after the convictiop:l for the first default: 
Provided that the aggregate of such fine shall not exceed one hundred 35 
rupees. 
(2) Any person who wilfully makes, or causes to be made, any felse 
entry in, or any omission from, the ge~eral statement required by section' 
«, or in or from any copy of rules or of alteration of rules sent to the 
-qes:!istrar under that section shall be punishable with fine which may 40 
extend to five hundred rupees. 
131. Anv person who, with intent to deceive. gives to any member of a 
registered trade union or to any person intendin~ or Anplylng to become 
a member of such trade union anv document nurportin~ to he It cony of 
the ruleA of the trade union or of any altcratiOllB to the ~ame whi('hi he 4S 
knows 01' has reason to believe. i!'l not a correct copy of !'I\Jch r1lles 01" 
alteratfnns as are for the tIme hefn!! in fot'ce. or Imy nerso" who. w'th 
the like intent, ~ves 9 cOPy of Any ntlpR of an unt'e~istered trade union 

81 
to any perSQn on the pretence that such rules are the rules of a registered 
trade union, shall be punishable with fine which may extemi to five 
hundred rupees. 
132. If an employer fails or refuses to recognise a sole negotiating 
S agent or a chief negotiating agent or an associate union or a loeal union 
in accordance with ·the provisions of sec:tion· 66 or refuses or fails to 
recognise the rights or to provide the facilities specified in section 87, 
section 68 or section 69, as the case may be, in regard to such negotiating 
agent, associate union or local union, he shall be punishable with im-
10 prisonment which may extend to one year, or with fine which may ex-
wnd to two thousand rupees, or with both. 
IS 
133. Any person who wilfully discloses-
(a) any information in contravention of the proviso to Iiub. 
section (1) ot; section 67; or 
(b) any information as is referred to in section 152, 
Shall, on complaint made by or on behalf. of the employer or the trade 
union or indiVidual business affected, be punishable with imprisonment 
for Ii term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may 
extend to two thousand rupees, or with both. 
ao 134. An employer who does any act in contravention of the Standing 
Orders in force in his industrial establishment or undertaking shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, 
or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both, and, 
where the contravention is a continuing one with a further fine which 
25 may extend to one hundred rupees for every day, during which the con-
travention continues, after the conviction for the first such contravention. 
30 
35 
135. Any employer who-
(a) changes the terms 01 employment or conditions of labour of 
any employee in contravention of section 77; or 
(b) alters the terms of employment or conditions of labour of 
any employee or dismisses, discharges or otherwise punishes any 
employee for misconduct in contravention of the provisions of sec-
tion 78; or 
(c) contravenes an order made under sectlon '79;· br 
(d) lays off or retrenches any employee in contravention of the 
provisions of Chapter VII, 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
one year, or with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees, or with 
both. 
40 136. Any employer who closes down any industrial establishment or 
undertaking in contravention of the prov:sions of section 88 shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, 
or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both. 
Penalty 
for 
failure to 
recognise 
ne,otiat-
ing agent, 
ete. 
Penalty 
fOr dIs-
closure of 
conftden.. 
tial infol'-
mation; 
Penalties 
for 
b:each at 
Standing 
Orders. 
Penalty 
for lay_ 
off, ret-
rench_ 
ment, etc., 
in contra-
vention of 
provi_ 
sions at 
the Act. 
Penalty 
for clo-
sure of 
industrial 
establish-
ment or 
undertak-
ing in 
contra-
vention 
of pro-
visions 
of section 
88. 

Penalty 
for 
illegal 
strikes 
and 
lock. 
outs. 
Penalty 
for insti-
gation, 
etc. 
Per-lAity 
for 
giving 
financial 
aid to 
illegal 
strike or 
lock-out. 
Penalty 
for 
breach 
of settle-
ment or 
award, 
etc. 
Penalty 
for oom-
mitting 
unfair 
practice. 
Penalty 
'for 
wrongful 
with-
holding 
of infor-
mation. 
m. (1) Any employee who commences. continues or otherwise a:ets 
in furtherance of, a strike whkh is illegal under this Act, shall be punish-
able with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, 
or with fine which may extend to one hundred rupees, or with both. 
(2) Any employer who commences, continues, or otherwise acts in 5 
furtherance of a lock-oU!t w~ch is illegal under this Act, shall be punish-
able with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, 
or with fine which may extend to two thousand. rupees, or with both. 
138. Any person who instigates or incites others to take part in, or 
otherwise acts in furtherance of, a strike or lock-out which is illegal 10 
under this Ad, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to two thou-
sand rupees, or with both. 
139. Any perlOn who knowingly expends or applies any money in direct 
furtherance or support of any illegal strike or lock-out shall be punish- IS 
able with imprisonment for a term which may extena to six months, or 
with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees, or with both. 
140. Any person who commits a breach of any term of settlement or 
award., which is binding on him under this Act, shall be punishable with 
imprisomnent for a term which may extend to one year', or with fllne 20 
which may ex:t;end to two thousand rupees, or with both, and, where the 
breach is a continuing one, with a f,urther fine which shall not be less 
than one hundred rupees but which may extend to fiVe hundred rupees 
for every day during which the breach continues after conviction for the 
first, and the Court trying the offence may direct that the vlhole or any 2j 
part of the fine realised from such person shall be paid, by way of COM-
pensation ~ any person 'Who, in its opinion, h_ been injured by such 
breach. 
141. Any person who commits any unfair practice shall be punishable 
with imprisonment for a term which may ex-tend to six months, or Wi,th 30 
fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both. 
10. If an employer or other person-
(a) required by or under this Act to furnish any information or 
return. (no,t being a general statement or other document referred to 
in section 120) ,- 35 
(i) refuses or neglects to furnish such infonnation or return; 
or 
(ii) furnishes or caullH!S ,to be furnished: any infonnation or 
return which is false or which he either lmows or believes to be 
false or does not believe to be true; Qr 40 
(b) refuses or wilfully negleCts to· afford reasonable facilities for 
making inspecl1ion, examination or inquiry authorised by or under 
this Act, 
shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to six months, 
or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both. 4S 

83 
143. If any person without lawful authority removes, alters, defaces, 
obliterates or in a~y way tampers with any notice affixed or displayed 
in pursuan:e of this Act he shall be punishable with imprisonment for 
a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend 
$ to two thousand rupees, or with both. 
1". Any person who contravenes any of the provisions of this Act or 
any rule made thereunder shall. if no other penalty is elsewhere provid-
ed by or under this Act for such contravention, be punishable with im-
prisonment for a term which may extend to six months or with fine 
10 which may extend to two thousand rupees. or with both.' 
14.5. (1) No Court shall take cognizance o£ any offence punishable 
under this Act, other than an offence punishable under clause (b) of 
section 133, or of the abetment of any such offence. save on complaint 
made by or under the authority of the appropriate Government. 
IS (2) No Court inferior to that of a Presidency Magistrate or Magistra~e 
of the First Class shall try any offence under this Act. 
CHAPTER XIII 
EXEMPTIONS AND MIODIFICATIONS 
US. Nothing in this Act shall apply to-
20 (a) any hospital, including a dispensary; 
(b) any educational, scientific, research or training institution; 
(c) any organisation exclusively engaged in any charitable, 
social or philanthropic service; or 
(d) khadi or village industries, 
25 or to any employee employed therein or any employer in relation thereto. 
14'7. The provisions of the Standing Orders made under sub-section 
(1) of section 73 or modifications made therein under Sll b-section (2) of 
that section and the provisions of section 75 and section 77 shall not apply 
in the case af employees to whom the Fundamental and Supplementary 
30 Rules, Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, CIvil 
Services (Temporary Service) Rules, Revised Leave Rules, Civil Services 
Regulations, Civilians in Defence Services (Clas9i~ation, Control and 
Appeal) Rules, the Indian Railway Establishment Code or such other 
rules or regulations as the appropriate Govemmen~ mav. bv notiftcation. 
3S specify in this behalf, apply. 
148. (1) The State Government may, having regard to the develop-
ment of trade unionism among such class of employees, by general or 
special order, declare that the provisions of. section 34 shall not apply to 
trade unions of employees employed in agricultural operations in any 
40 area specified in the order or employed in any small scale industry or 
class of small scale industries in any area specified in the order. 
(2) The appropriate Government may, having regard to the rilles i."1 
force in any Industrial establishment or undertaking in respect of th-t 
matters refp.rred t.o in suib·section (1) of section 73, by notification and 
4S subject to such conditions, if any, tiult may be· specified in such notifl.ca-
Penalty 
for remo. 
val, etc., 
of notice 
affixed Or 
displayed 
in pursu-
ance of 
this Act. 
Penalty 
for 
other 
offences. 
Cogni-
zahce of 
offence. 
and 
courtl 
which 
may 
take 
cognl. 
zance of 
offence. 
Act not 
to apply 
to certain 
indus· 
tries. 
Exemp-
tion 
from 
certain, 
provi-
sions. 
Power of 
Govern-
ment to 
exempt. 

Modifica-
tion of 
provi-
sions of 
Chapters 
IV, IX 
and XII 
in their 
applica-
tion to 
certain 
indus-
trial 
establish-
ments or 
under-
takings. 
Offence 
by trade 
union, 
c-.>mpany, 
etc. 
84 
tion, e1rempt any industrial establishment or Wldertaking or any class of 
industrial ~tablishments or undertakings from an or any of the provi. 
sions of Chapter V. 
(.1) Where the appropriate Government is of the opinion that the ap-
plication of the provisions of section 77 to any class of industrial establish- 5 
ments or undertaldngs or any class of employees employed in any indus-
trial establishment or undertaking is likely to affect prejudicially the em-
ployers in relation thereto and that the public interest so requires, the 
appropriate G')vemment may, by noti&ation, direct that the provisiCJlls of 
the said section shall not apply or shall apply subject to such modifiea- 10 
tion'S, as may be specified in the notification to that class of industrial 
establishments or undertakings or to that class of employees employed 
in any industrial establishment or undertaking, as the case may be. 
(4) Where the appropriate Government is of the opinion that it is 
!nexpedien·t on puhlic grounds affecting national economy to apply all IS 
or any of the provisions of this Act to any industrial establishm~nt or 
industrial establishments wherein any small scale industry or class of 
small scale industriE's, or any industry eMploying mainly the employer 
hitrulelf, is carried on that Government may, by notification. exempt 
such inciustrial establishment or industrial e~tablishments from all the 20 
prov'ision~ of this Act or such of the provisions of this Act as it is of the 
opinion shall not apply to such industrial establishment of indu~rial 
esiablishmen ts. 
148. Where in any industrial establishment or undertaking any joint 
consultative macnincry consisting of represcnltatives of employees and 2S 
employers or any other body consisting of one or more persons (by what-
ever name called) has ~)een set up for the purpose of settling individual 
disputes or indU8trial disputes and the appropriate Government is satis-
fied that the functioning ot such joint consultative machinery 
or other body has been beneftcial to the employees employed in such in- 30 
dustrial establishment or undertaking, the appropriate Government may, 
by notification, direct that the provisions of Chapter IV, Chapter IX 
and Chapter XII shall apply in relation 10 such 'industrial establishment 
or undertaking with sllch modification.; as may be specified in such no.ti-
fication. 3S 
CHAPTER XIV 
MISCELT.ANEOUS 
150. (1) Where an offence under this Ad has been committed by 
a company. every person who at the time the offence was committed 
was in charge of, and Was' responsible to, the company for the conduct 
of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deem- 40 
ed to be guHty of the offence and shall be liable 1:0 be proceeded against 
and punished accordingly: 
Provided that nothing contained in this tmb-section shall render 
any such pero;('In liable to any punishment, if he proves ·that the offence 
was committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised all 4S 
due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where 
any offence under this Act has been committed by a company nnd it 
is proved that the off~nce has been committed 'Vlth the consent or conni. 
vance of, or is attritutable to any neglect on the part of, any director, So 
manager, 8ecretvry, or other officer of the company, such director, 
manager, secretary or other officer shall be deemed to' be guilty of that 
offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accor-
dingly. 

85 
Explonaticm .. -For the purpose of this section.-
(G!) "company" means any body corporate and includes a finn 
or other association of individual; and 
(b) "director", in relation to a firm, means a partner in the 
S firm. 
151. (1) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, if in the opinion 
of the appropriate Government any difficulty or doubt arises 8S to the 
interpretation of any provision of an award or settlement, it may refer 
the question to sllch Labour Court, Tribunal, or National Commission: 
10 as it Jruly think fit. 
(2) The Labour Court, Tribunal or National Commission to which 
such question is referred shall, after giving the parties an opportunity 
of being heard, c!ecide such question and its decision shall be final. 
]52. There shall not be included in any report or award under this 
IS Act any information obtained by an arbitrator or a Conciliation Officer or 
Court of Inquiry or Labour Court or Tribunal or National Commission in 
the course of any investigation or inquiry relating to a trade union or 
any individual business· (whether carried on by a person, firm or COI.1.-
pany) whlich is nQt available otherwise than through the evidence given 
20 before such arbitrator, Conciliation Officer, Cowt of Inquiry, La'botlr 
Court, Tribunal or National Conunission, if the trade union, person, 
firm or company in question has made a request in writing to the arbi-
trator, Conciliation Officer, Court of Inquiry, Labour Court, Tribunal 
or National Commission, as the case may be, that such ipforrnation 
2S shall be treated as confidential; nor shall such arbItrator, Conciliation 
Officer, the Presidin b Officer of the Labour Court, Tribunal or Na:tional 
Commission or chairman or other member of the Court of Inquiry or 
any person present at or concerned in the proceedings disclose any 
such information without the consent in writing of the secretary of 
30 the trade union or of the person, firm or company in question, as the 
case may be: 
Provided that nothing contained ir. this section shall apply to a dis-
closure of any such infol'lmation for the purposes of a prosecution 
45 of 1860. under :;ection 193 of the Indian Penal Code. 
35 
40 
45 
5 of 1908. 
so 
153. (1) Sub~ect to the o';her provisions of this Act, every authority 
(including an arbitrator) or officer who makes any order in writing, 
other than an award, shall-
(a) in the case of an order of a general n.ature or affec;Jing or 
whieh is likelv to affect a class of per90ns. puhlish such ord.P.r in 
such manner ~s may in the opinion of such authority or officer 
being bef;t adapted for informing the persons aft'ec~ed or likely to 
be affected by the order; 
(b) in the case of an order affecting or which is likely to 
affect any c()rporation or firm serve 't.he order or cause the order 
to he served, in the manner pro\oided for the service of summons 
in rule 2 of Order XXIX, or rule 3 of Order xxx, as the case may 
be: of the Corle of Civil Procedure, 1908; and 
. (c) in the case of an order affecting or which is likely to 
affect an individual serve the order or cause the order to he 
served on that individual--
(0 pers~mally, by delivering or tendering him the order; 
(ii) by registered post; or 
Power to 
remove 
difficul-
ties in 
the inter-
pretation 
of settle-
mentor 
award. 
Certain 
matters 
to be 
kept 
confiden-
tial. 
Publica-
tion, 
affixation 
and 
deface-
meontof 
notjce, 

Power to 
require 
produc-
tiOn of 
. books, 
etc. 
Protec-
tion of 
action 
taken 
under the 
Act and 
protec-
tion of 
persons. 
Represen_ 
tation of 
parties. 
86 
(iii) where the person cannot be fouad, by leaving an 
authentic copy Of the order with IOIlle adult male member of 
his family or by affixing such copy on Bome conspicuous part 
of the premises in which he is known to have last resided or 
carried on business or personally worked for gain. 5 
(2) If in the course of any proceeding under this Act a question 
arises whether a person was duly informed of an order made in pursu-
ance of this Act, compliance with sub-section (1.) shall be conclusive 
proof that he was so informed. but a failure to comply with 5ub-section 
(1)- 10 
(i) shall not preclude proof that he was so informed by other 
means; and 
(ii) shall not affect the validity of the erder. 
l54. Where any person is required by or under this Act to m~ke any 
statement or furnish any information to any authority, that authority IS 
may by order, with a view 10 verifying the $tatement made or the infor-
mation furnished by such person. require him to produce any books, ac-
counts or other documents relating thereto which may be in his posses-
sion or under his control. 
155. (1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against 20 
the Government or any officer of the Government for anyth<ing which is 
in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or 
any rules made thereunder. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the rules of a trade 
union or society, no person refusing to take part or to continue to take 25 
part in any strike or lock-out which is illegal under this Act shall, by 
reason of such refusal or by reason (If any action taken by him under 
this section, be sub.iect to expulsion from "uch trade union or society. or 
to any fine or penalty, or to deprivation of any right or benefit to which 
he or his legal representatives would otherwise be entitled, or be liable 30 
Ito be placed in any respect, either diredly or indi1"eCtly, under any dis-
ability or at any disadvantage as compared with other members of such 
trade union or society. 
(3) Nothing in the rules of a trade union or society requiring thf' 
settlf'ment of dispute in any manner shall apply to any proceeding for 35 
enforcing any right sf'cured by thic; section, and in any such proceeding 
the Civil Court. may. in lieu of ordering a person who has been expelled 
from membership. order that he be paid out of the funds of the trade 
union or society such sum by way of compensation or damages as that 
Court thinks just. 40 
156. (1) An employee who is a party to any proceeding under this Act. 
in relation to an individual dispute, shall be entitled to be represented in 
such proceeding by-
(a) an office-bearer o~ a registered trade union of employees of 
which he is a member; or 45 
(b) an office-bearer of a registered trade union which is an asso-
ciation of trade unions of employees of which the trade union re-
ferred to in clause (a) is a member. 
(2) An employer who is a party to any proceeding under this Act 
aIlall be entitled to be represented In such proceeding by- so 

., 
(a) an office-bearer of a registered trade union of employers of 
which he is a member; . 
(b) an office-bearer of a registered trade union which is an asso-
ciation of trade unions of employers of which the trade union re-
S ferred to in clause (a) is a member; or 
(c) where the empolyer is not a member of any registered trade 
union of employers, by an office-bearer of any registered trade union 
of employers connected with, or by any other employer engaged in. 
the industry in which the employer is engaged and authorised by 
10 such employer in such manner as may be prescribed. 
(3) No party to an individual dispute or industrial dispute shall be 
entitled to be reJ?resented by a legal practitioner in any conciliation pro-
ceedings under this Act or in any proceedings before an arbitrator. 
(4) In any proceeding before a Labour Court, Tribunal, or National 
IS Commission, a party to such proceedings may be represented by a legal 
practitioner only with the consent ot the other party or parties to the pro-
ceeding and with the leave of the Labour Court, Tribunal or National COlll-
mission, as the case may be. 
Explanaltion.-For the purposes referred to in sub-section (1) or sub-
20 section (2), it shall b~ sufticient that the trade union of employees or em-
ployers, as the case may be, referred to therein has been registered in any 
State under this Act. 
1l;'1. (1) Where the appropriate Government is satisfied that public 
in\terest :requires that an industry, which is essential to the ldfe of the 
25 communilty and which is not specified in the First Schedule shouldi be 
daclared aa an essential service, it may, by notification. make a declara-
tion to that effect and on such declaration being made the industry so 
declared shall be deemed to have been included in the First Schedule. 
(2) The appropriate Government may, by notification, omit any 
30 industry from the First Schedule and on the issue of such notification 
the First Schedule shall be deemed to be amended accordingly. 
(3) The Central Government may, by notification, add to or alter or 
amend the Second Schedule, the Third Schedule or the Foudh Schedule 
and on the issue of any such notification, the Second Sclledule,the Third 
3S Schedule or the Fourth Schedule, as the case may be, shall be deemed to 
. be amended accordingly. 
(4) Every notification issued by the State Government under 
this section shall be laid, as soon as possible after it is issued. before the 
State Legislature. 
40 (5) Every notification issued by the Central Government under this 
seetlon shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is issued, before each 
House of Parliament, while it is in session for a total period of thirty 
days, which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive 
sessions. and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following 
45 the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the notification or both Houses agree tl1at the 
notifiea·tion should not be made, the notification shall thereafter have 
effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; 
so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without 
So prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that notifi-
cation. 
Power to 
amend 
Sche-
dule •• 

Deiega-
tion of 
powers. 
Pbwerto 
ntake 
rUles. 
i58. The appropriate Government may, by notification, direet that 811, 
power exercisable by it under this Act or the rules made thereunder 
shall, in relation to such matters and subject to such conditions, if any, as 
may be specified in the direction, be exercisable also-
(a) where the appropriate Government is the Central Govern- S 
ment, by such officer or authority subordinate to the Central Gov. 
ernment or by the State GWernment or by such officer or 'avthority 
subordina.te to the Stalte Govcnunent) as may be specified in\ the 
nctificaticn; and 
(b) where the appropriate Government is a State Government, to 
by such ofllcer or authority subordinate to the State Government as 
may be specified in the notification; 
lit. (l) The appropriate Government may, b~ notificatien, make 
rules for the purpose of giving effect to the provisions of this Act. 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the Jore- IS 
going power, such lI'ules may provide for all or any of the following mat-
ters, namely:-
(a) the authority which would be the employer in relation to an 
industrial establishment or undertaking managed by, or on behalf of, 
a department of the Central or State Government under sub-clauae 20 
(a) of clause (12) of section 2; 
(b) the quorum for a meeting of a Court of Inquiry, under sub-
section (3) of section 8; 
(c) the terms and conditions of service of the Presiding Oftlcer 
of a Labour Court or Tribunal, under sub-section (2) of section 13; 3S 
(d) the manner of notifying by the Tribunal of its intention to 
determine the suppOrt of a registered trade union of employees or 
election to choose the chairman or other members of a negotiating 
committee and the particulars to be specified in such notice, under 
sub-section (1) of section 53; 30 
(e) the particulars, of any registered trade union of em-
ployees certified as negotiating agent in 'l'elation to the employees of 
a negotiating unit, to be specified in an application by a registered 
trade union of employees for certification as negotiating agent, under 
sub-section (1) of section 55; 3S 
U) the particulars of any registered trade union of employees 
certified as sole negotiating agent to be specified in an applfcation of 
a registered trade union of employees for certlfication as a local union 
under sub-section (2) of section 55; 
(g) the form in which an application by a registered tr-ade union 40 
of employees for certification as sole negotiating agent, chief nego-' 
tiating agent, associate union or local union shall be made, the par.ti-
cuJars which such appLicetio,n shall contain and the fees whdch shall 
aeeompany such application, under sub-sectlon(3) of section 55; 
(h) the manner in which the notice referred to in sub-i1ection 4S 
(2') of section 59 shall be served; 

5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
88 
(i) the procedure in enquiring into an applicailion by a register-
ed trade union of employees for certificati~ as negotiating agent or 
local union under sub-section (5) of section 59; 
(j) the manner of the election of the Chairman and other mem-
bers: of a negotiating committee. the persbns qualified to stand for 
election, the disqualifications for being chosen as and for being such 
Chairman or other member, the manner of settlement of disputes 
relating to the election and the filling up of casual vacancies, under 
sub-section (3) of section 61; 
(10) the procedure to be followed for the transaction of business 
of the negotiating committee (including the quorum for its meetings), 
under sub-section (5) of section 61; 
(l) the constitution and procedure ot grievance settlement 
authority referred to in clause (j) of sub-section (1) of section 67; 
(m) form of application or notice, as the case may be. for per-
mission to lay-off employees or for approval of lay-off of employees 
or to retrench employees or for closure of any industrial establis1:l-
ment or undertaking under section 82, section 83 or section 88. as 
tbe case may be; 
(n) the manner in which opportunity shall be given to retrench-
ed employees to otIer themselves for re-employment, under section 
i 85; 
" (0) the manner in which intimation of strike or lock-out shall 
be given to the appropriate Government under sub-section (2) or 
sub-section (7), as the case may be. of section 90; 
(p) the manner in which any dispute pertaining to a strike ballot 
shall be decided under sula-section (4) of section 90; 
(q) the person or persons by whom and the manner in which a 
notice of strike is to be given, and the manner in which a n~ice of 
30 lO\Ck-out is to be given, under sub-section (9) of section 90; 
35 
40 
45 
so 
(r) the authority to which an employer shall report the number 
of notice or notices of strike received by him or notice or notices of 
lock-out given by him 011 any day, under sub-section (10) of section 
90' , 
(8) the time within which and the authorities to which the copies 
of a settlement shall be forwarded by the employer under sub-section 
(4) of section 97; .. 
(t) the manner in which a memorandum of settlement arrived 
at under sulb-section (3) of section 97 is to be registered wd-thl the 
Conciliation Officer under sub-section (5) of that section; 
('\l;) the manner in which a report is to be submitted to the Con-
ciliation Officer regarding the failure of negotialtions or the continu-
ance of negotiations for a period of more than sixty; days under sub-
section (1) of section 98; 
(v) the manner in which conciliation proceedings are to be com-
menced by the Conciliation Officer Wlder sub-section (2) of section 
98; 
(w) the manner of applying to the Labou~' Court for the, adjudi~ 
calion of an individual dispute under sub-sectlQrl (4) of sectIon 103, 

90 
(x) the procedure relating to the enquiry referred to In sub~ 
section (6) of section 108; 
(y) the manner in which any award, determination or decision 
of a Labour Court, Tribunal or National Commission is to be executed 
under section 125; S 
(z) the manner in which an employer may authorise an office-
bearer of any trade union of employers or another employer t~ re-
present him in any proceeding under this Act, under clause (cJ of 
sub-se<$ioo (2) of section 156; 
I 
(za) any other matter which has to be or, may be, prescribed 10 
und.er this Act. 
(3) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules to pro-
vide for all or any of the following matters, namely:-
(a) the functions of. a National Commission under clause (c) of 
sub~section (1) of section 11; IS 
(b) the terms and conditions of service of the Presiding Officer 
of a National Commiss;on under sub-section (2) of section 13. 
(4) The State Government may, by notification, make rules to pro-
vide for all or any of the following matters, namely:-
(a) the form in which the general statement of assEtts and! liabi- 20 
lities of a trade union is to be delivered to the Registrar and the 
particulars which such statement shall contain, under sub-section (3) 
of section 19; 
(b) the manner of audit of the a~counts of trade union~ under 
clause (j) of section 22; 25 
(c) the form in which the register referred to in sub-section (2) 
of section 23 is to be maintained; • 
(d) the form in which a certificate of registration of a trade 
union is to be issued, under sub-section (1) of section 24; 
(e) the form of the application for the cancellation of the certi- 30 
ficate of registration of a trade union and the manner in which the 
facts stated in such application may be verified, under clause (a.) 
of sub-section (1) of section 26; the period. within which the annual 
return referred to in clause (b) of that sub-setion is to be submitted 
and the period within which the defects in such annual return may 3S 
be rectified under clause (c) thereof; the date before which the 
annual elections to elect the office-bearers of a trade union shall be 
held, under clause (h) of sub-section (1) Of that section; 
(1) the manner in which and the time within which a person 
aggrieved by the refusal of the Registrar to register a trade union, 40 
or by the cancellatio~ of, a certificate of registration, may appeal to 
the Tribunal. under sub-section (11) of section 27; 
(g) the authorities to which notice of any change in the addren 
of the registered office of a ,trade union is to be given under sub-
~ectfon (2) of section 29; . 4S 
(h) the manner in which the membership fee deducted by the 
employer from lhe wages of the employees is to be paid over by 

16 of 1926. 
20 of 1946. 
14 of 1947. 
]6 of 1926. 
91 
such employer to the trade union concerned, under sub-section (2) 
of section 30; 
(0 the date on or before which an offlce-bearer of a trade union 
is t~ file a statement of his assets and liabilities every year, under 
5 secbon 35; 
10 
IS 
(j) the manner in which the Regi~trar shall, on the dissolution 
of a trade union, divide its funds amQtlg its members in the circum-
stances referred to in sub-section (2) of section 40; 
(k) the manner in which the general statement of receipts and 
expenditure of a trade union is to be audited, the date on or before 
which such general statement is to be forwarded to the Registrar. the 
f()rm in which lruch statement shall be prepared and the particulars 
which it shall contain, under sub-section (1) of section 41; 
(1) the manner in which, and the time within which, an applica-
tion is to be made to the Tribunal for the adjudication of a dispute 
referred to in sub-section (1) of section 43; and the manner in which 
the Tribunal or National Commission may enquire into such disp!1te 
under sub-section (4) of section 43. 
(5) All rules made under this section shall be subject to the condition 
20 of previous publication. 
160. (1) Every rule made by the Sta~e Government under this Act 
shall be laid, as soon as may be a~ter it is made, before the State· Legis-
lature. 
(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall 
2S be laid, as! soon as may be after it is made, before each House o.f Parlia-
meI'l\t, while it is in session for a total period of Ithirty days, which may 
be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and 
df, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or 
the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any lOodi-
30 ficatiotlJ in the rule or roth Houses agree that the rule ShOUild nat be made, 
the rule shall thereafter have effect only in ~ch modified form or be of 
no effect, as the case may be; st'. however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anythling pre-
viously done under that rule. 
3S 161. (1) The Trade Unions Act, Hl26, the Industrial Employment 
(Standing Orders) Act, 1946, and the Industrial Disputes ACI~, 1947, are 
45 
hereby repeaood. 
(2) Notwithstanding the repeal of the Acts referred to in sul>-section 
(1).-
(a.) where no appeal has bEen preferred before the commence-
ment ot this Act under section 11 of the Trade Unions Act, 1m, from 
any order of the Re~i!';trar registering or cancelling the registration 
of a trade union and the period for preferring such appeal has not 
expired at such commencement, the aggrieved person may prefer 
an appeal to the Industrial Tribunal within ninety days from the 
commencement of this Ad, as if such order were an order made by 
a Registrar under this Act; 
Layin, 
of rules 
before 
State 
Legis_ 
lature 
and 
Houses 
ot Par-
liament. 
Repeal 
and 
savin,. 

(b) any appeal preferred to a High Court or 'to any other Court 16 o~ 1928. 
under seetion 11 of the Trade Unions Act, 1926, and pending at the 
commencement of this Act shall be di~ed of by the High Court 
or other CoUI"t, as the case may be, as if it were an appeal preferred 
under seclion 27 of this Act to a Tribunal; S 
(e) all Standing Orders in force in any industrial establishment 
or undertaking shall, in so far as they relate to any matter specified in 
sub-section (7) of section 73 and are not inconsistent with the provi-
sions of this Act. continue to be in force in that industrial establish-
ment or undertaking until Standing Orders to provide for that matter 10 
are made by the Central Government under sub-section (1) of sec-
tion 73; 
(d) every Labour Court and Industrial Tribunal comtituted by 
the appropriate Government under the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 14 of 1947. 
(hereafter in this section referred to as the Industrial Disputes Act) IS 
and functioning at the commencement of this Act shall be deemed to 
be a Labour Court and Tribunal respectively established by the res-
pective appropriate Government under this Act (such Labour Court 
or Tribunal hereinafter being referred to as the corrcsponding Labour 
Court or corresponding Tribunal. as the case may be) and every Na- 20 
tional Industrial Tribunal constituted by the Central Government for 
the adjudication of any industrial dispute as defined in the Industrial 
Disputes Act shall be deemed to be a National Commission constitu-
ted by the Central Government for the adjudication of such dispute 
(such National Commission hereinafter being referred to as the cor- 25 
responding National Commission); 
(e) every person appointed before the commencement of this 
Act, as a Presiding Officer of a Labour Court, Industrial Tribunal 
or National Industrial Tribunal constituted under the Industrial Dis-
putes Act, and holding office as such immediately before such 30 
commencement shall, on and from such commencement, be deemed 
to have been appointed as Presidin~ Officer of a Labonr Cour1t. Tri-
bunal or National Commission, as the case may be. established or 
constituted under this Act, and shaH hold such office with the same 
rights and privileges as to pension, gratuity and other matters as 35 
would have been admissible to him if this Act had not been enacted 
and shall continue to do so unless and until the employment of such 
person is duly terminated or until his remuneration and other condi-
tions of service are duly altered by the appropriate Government, in 
the case of the Presiding Officer of a Labour Court or Tribunal, or 40 
by the Central Government, in the case of a National Commission; 
(f) any reference for arbitration made by the employers and 
employees of any matter which is an individual dispute, industrial 
dispute or trade union dispute as defined in this Act and pending at 
the commencement of this Act shall be deemed to be a refeIence for 45 
arbitration of such matter made under this Act and shall be dealt 
with accordingly; 
(g) any settlement arrived at in pursuance of negotiations bet-
ween employers and employees or in pursuance of conciliation by a 
Conciliation Officer under the Industrial Disputes Act, or any So 
award made by a Labour Court, Industrial Tribunal or National In-
~ustrlal Tribunal under that Act, befo,re the commencement of this 

Act and subsisting at such commencement may be executed 
as if it were a settlement arrived at in pursuance of negotiation 
under section f1I or conciliation under section 98 or an award made 
by a Labour Court, Tribunal or National Commission under the pro-
S visions of this Act; 
(h) any proceeding pendir.g before a Labour Court, Industrial 
Tribunal or National Industrial Tribunal constituted under the Indus-
trial Disputes Act, at the commencement of this Act shall stand 
transferred to, and be continued from the stage at which such procee-
10 dings are pending, by--
(a) where such proceedings are pending before a Labour 
Court or Industrial Tribunal constituted under the Industrial 
Disputes Act, the corresponding Labour Court or Industrial 
Tribunal; and 
IS (b) where such proceeding are pending before a National 
Industrial Tribunal constituted under the Industrial Disputes 
Act, the corresp.onding National Commission: 
Provided that no application for the execution of such settle-
ment or award shall be made after the expiry of n"inety days from 
20 the commencement of this Act; 
30 
(i) any reference of an industrial dispute for adjudication 
made tJ a Labour Court, Industrial Tribunal or National Industrial 
Tribunal under the Industrial Disputes Act, shall be deemed-
(A) where such reference is for the adjudication of an 
industrial dispute referred to in section 2A of the aforesaid 
Act, to be an application for adjudication of an individual dis-
pute made under section 103 of this Act; and 
(B) where su-:-h reference is for the adjudication of any 
other industrial dispute, under the Act aforesaid, to be a refe-
rence for adjudication of an industrial dispute under section 
104 of this Act, 
and shall be dealt with accordingly; and 
(j) any application for permission made under sub-section (1) 
of section 25M or notice given under sub-section (1) of section 
3S 25N or under sub-section (1) of section 250 of the Industrial Dis-
putes Act. shall be deemed to be an application made or notice given 
under the corresponding provisions of this Act. 
(3) The mention of particular matters in sub-section (2) shall not 
be held to prejudice or affect the general application lof section 6 and 
10 of 1897. 40 section 24 of the General Clauses Act, 1897, with regard to the effect of 
repeal and the effect of repeal and re-enactment. 
162. Where before the commencement of this Act, any industrial 
dispute concerning any industry as defined in the Industrial Disputes 
140! 11147. Act, 1947, has been referred 1br adjudication under that Act, to a 
4S Labour Court Industrial Tribunal or National Industrial Tribunal , 
constituted under that Act, but the provisions of this Act do not apply 
Provision 
regardin, 
pending 
proceed_ 
ings lOt 
adjudJ-

cation of 
industrial 
disputes 
to which 
this Act 
does not 
apply. 
Transi-
tional 
provision. 
Repeal of 
State 
laws 
and 
savings. 
Over-
riding 
effect 
of the Act. 
to such industry, then, if· such adjudication proceedings are pending 
at the commencement of this Act-
(a) where such proceedings are pending before a Labour Court 
or Industrial Tribunal constituted under the Industricll Disputes 
Act, 1947, the corresponding Labour Court lOr corresponding Tribunal; S 14 ot 1947. 
and 
(b) where such proceedings are pending before a National 
Industrial Tribunal constituted under the Industrial Disputes Act, 
1947, the corresponding National Commissiun, 
shall proceed with th~ adjudication of such dispute in accordance with 10 
the provisions of this Act as if this Act applied to such industry 
and the award made in such adjudication proceedings shall, 
for all the purposes of this Act, be deemed to be an award made by a 
Labour Court, Industrial Tribunal or National Commission. as the case 
may be, established or constituted under this Act in an industrial dis- IS 
pute referred to it for adjudication. 
163. Without prejudice to the prOVISIons contained in section 
161, where any provision of this Act is brought into !orce in any State 
before the commencement of that section, the corresponding provision, 
14 of 1947. 
if any, in the Trade Un.ion~ Act, 1926, the Industrial EmplpymeDt 20 16 of 1926. 
(Standing Orders) Act, 1946, or the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, shall 20 Of 1941l 
fltand repealed and the provisions of sub-section (2) and sub-l'ection 14 of 1947. 
(3) of section 161 shall, so far as may be, apply to such repeal. 
164. (1) If on the commencement of any provision of this Act in any 
State, there is any corresponding provis:on in any State Act in force 2S 
in that State, such provision shall stand repealed. 
(2) Where any provision crf any State Act stands repealed under 
sub-section (1), the provisions of sub-section (2) of section 161 shall, 
so far as may be, apply to such repeal in the same manner as they apply 
in relation to the repeal of the Acts mentioned in sub-section (1) of 30 
that section (hereafter in this section referred to as Central Acts): 
Provided that any reference in sub-section (1) of section 161 to any 
provision of any of the Central Acts or any officer, authority, tribunal or 
court appointed or constituted by or under any of the Central Acts 
shall be deemed to be reference to the corresponding provision of, or 3S 
corresponding officer, authority, tribunal or court appointed or consti-
tuted by lOr under, the corresponding State Act so repealed: 
Provided further that if any question arises as to who or which such 
corresponding officer, authority, tribunal or court is, the dechlion of 
the Central Government thereon shall be final 40 
(3) The provision jbr particular matters made by sub-section (2), 
read with sub-section (2) of section 161. shall not be held to prejudice 
or affect the general application of section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 
1897, with regard to the effect of repea1. 
165. Save 88 otherwise provided herein, the provisions of this Act shall 45 
have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained 
in any other law for the time bein~ in force. 
10 of 1897. 

1 ... (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Act, the Central Government may, by order, do anything, not inconsis-
tent with such provisions, which appears to it to be necessary or expedi-
ent for the purpose of removing the difficulty. 
S (2) No order ul!der sub-section (1) shall be made after the expiration 
10 
of a period of two years from the commencement of this Act. 
167. In section 6 of the Sales Promotion Employees (Conditions of 
Service) Act, 1976, sub-section (2) shall be omitted. 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
[See section 2 (13)] 
EssENTIAL SERVICES 
1. Any establiShment of, or connected with, the armed forces of th~ 
Union or other establishments or installations connected with the defence 
ot the country against war or external aggression. 
IS :l. Any railway service, or any other transport service for the carriage 
of passengers or goods by air, water or land. 
3. Any service in the Internati!onal Airport Authority of India consti-
tuted under section 3 of the Int~rnational Airports Authority Act, 1971. 
4. Any service in, or in connection with the working of, any major 
20 port or dock. 
5. Any section of an industrial establishment or undertaking on the 
working of which the safety of such establishment or undertakine or the 
employees employed therein depends. 
6. Any postal, telegraph or telephone service. 
2S 7. Any service in, or in connection with, the working of any public 
sector undertaking engaged in the purchase, procurement, storage, sU~ 
ply or distribution of food grains. 
8. Any industry which generates, supplies lor distributes power, light 
or water to the public, whether directly or indirectly. 
~ 9. Any system of public conservancy or sanitation. 
10. Banking. 
11. All atomic energy installations including nuclear power .tatlons. 
12. Production, supply and distribution of coal. 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE 
[See section 9 (5)] 
MA'l"RRS WITHIN THE .JURISDIC'l'ION 01' LABOua COUBTS 
1. The propriety or legality of an order passed by an employer under 
the Standing Orders. 
2. The application and lnterpretatio,n of Standin, Order •. 
power 
to 
remove 
difficul-
ties. 
Amend-
ment of 
Act 11 
of 1976. 

3. Discharge or dismissal or termination otherwise ,of services (not 
being retrenchment) of employees including reinstatement <If, or grant 
of relief to, employe~ wrongfully dismissed. ' 
4. Withdrawal of any customary co,nceSSlion or privilege. 
5. Illegallity or otherwise of a strike or lock-ou't. 
6. Computation of dues payable to employees. 
7. Ala. other matters other than those spe<jfied in or under the Third 
Schedule. 
THE THIRD SCHEDULE 
5 
[See section 10(5) (a)] 10 
MATTEBS WITHIN THE JUJUSI)JlCTION OF INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAlS 
1. Wages, including the period and mode of payment. 
2. Compensatory and other allowances. 
3. ~s of work and rest intervals. 
4. Leave with wages and holidays. 
5. Bonus, profit sharing, provident fund and gratuity. 
6. Shift working otherwise than in accordance with the Standing 
Orders. 
7. Classifica1tion by grades. 
8. Rules of discipline. 
9. Rationalisation. 
15 
20 
10. Retrenchment of employees and closure of an industrial establish~ • 
~ment or underlaking. 
11. Any other matter which may be prescribed. 
THE FOURTH SCHEDULE 
[See section 2 (39) ] 
UNFAIR PRACTICES 
I. On the pan of employers and trade unions of employers 
(l) To lin,terfere with, restrain from, or coerce in the ma~ter of, the 
exercise by employees of their rights to organise, form, join or assist a 30 
trade union o~ employees or to engage in concerted activities for the pur-
pose of mutual aid or protection, that is to say,- t(~ 
(a) thrpatening employees with discharge or dillmissal, if they 
join a !trade union of employees; 
(b) threatening a lock-out Ojl' closure, if a trade union of em- 3S 
ployees is organised; or 

t7 
(c) granting wage increase at crucial periods of traa.e union or-
ganisation, with a view to undermining the efforts of the trade union 
at ~anisation. 
(2) To dominate, interfere with the working of, or contribute support 
5 (ftnancial or otherwise) to any trade union of employees, that is to 88Y,-;-
10 
15 
. «I) an employer taking an active interest in organising a trade 
union o~ his employees; or 
(b) an employer showing partiality or granting favour to one 
of several trade unions of employees attempting to organise or to 
its members. 
Ezplanation.-This provision shall not apply to recognition by em-
ployer of the rights of any registered trade union of employees conferred 
by this Act or provision by employer to such registered trade union of 
employees facilities which he is bound to provide for under this Act. 
(3) To establisl1 employer-sponsored trade unions of employees. 
(4) To encourage or discourage membership in any trade uNon of 
employees by discriminating against any employee, that is to say,-
«I) di8charging or punishing an employee because he urged otUr 
employees to join or organise a trade union of employees; 
aa (b) refusing to reinstate an employee because he took part ill 
30 
35 
. a lawful strike; 
(e) changing seniority rating o~ employees because of hiJ trade 
union activities; 
(d) refusing to promote an employee to higher posts on account 
of his trade union activities: or placing restrictions on promotions 
and training in respect of any employee because of his trade union 
activities; 
(e) giving unmerited promotions to any employee with a view to 
ereatin~ discord amongst other employees or to undermine the 
strength of their trade union; 
(I) dischar$ng office-bearers or active members of trade 
unions of employees or transferrin~ them from one pl~e to another 
on account of their trade union activities; 
(g) allocation oil unfair task to certain employees including af'-
sfgnment to the lower grade employees duties of higher grades of 
employees, or entrustment of the most strenuous jobs to particular 
employees, on account of their trade union activities; 'Or 
(h) payment of extra bonus or other financial incentives to non-
unionised employees as an incentive to becoming members of any, 
40 , particular trade union. 
(5) T~ di!':('harge 01' discrimInate against any employee for ruln'f 
charges O!' testifying against an employer in any inquiry or proceedingl 
relating to any individual dispute or industrial aispute. 

(t) To refuse to bargain collectively in good faith with the registered 
traile union of employees certified as negotiating agent, or weal U'IIic»n 
in accordance with the provisions of this Act and to interfere WIth the 
right of employees to bargain collectively. 
(7) To coerce employees, through administrative measures, with I '5 
view to securing their agreement to voluntary retirement. 
(8) To discharge or dismiss or transfer employees-
(a) not in good faith but in the colourable exerdle uf the 
'ployer's rights; 
(b) by falsely implicating them in a criminal case; 
(e) for patently false reasons; 
em-
(d) on untrue or trumped up allegations of absence witho!lt 
leave; 
(e) in utter disregard of. the pr:nciples of natural justice in the 
10 
conduct of domestic inquiry or with undue haste; IS 
(1) for miSMnduct of a minor or technical character, without 
having any regard to the nature of the particular miscOnduct,1IMl'eby 
. leading to disproportionate punishment; or 
(g) to avoid payment of statutory dues. 
. (9) Tq abolish the work which is being done by the employees and to 20 
give suCh work to contractors as a measure for breaking a sttike or 
weakening a trade union of employees or generally terrorising the em-
p~. ' 
(10) To insist upon individual emnloyees who were on legal strike. to 
sign a good conduct bond as a pre-condition to allowing them to resume 25 
work. 
(11) To show favouritism or partiality to one set of employees on 'the , 
ground of caste, religion, language. trade union affiliation or on any other 
ground regardless of merit. 
(12) To employ workmen as flbadlis", c8sual or temporary and to ~o 
continue them as such indefinitely, with the object of depriving them of 
the status and privileges of permanent workers. 
'(13) To violate established procedures of personnel management re-
garding appointment, confirmation, transfer, promotion, wage." incentive 
earnings, redress of grievances and other relate~ matters. ~( 
(14) To violate, or refuse to implement properly, any award or settle-
ment. : . . I 
(15) To discontinue any customary privileges. 
(18) To delay tn making payment of, or fail or reluse to ply, 'iUms 
payable by employer as his contribution, or the eMployees' eoritllbtiUon 40 
dech1cted by such employer from the wages of his employees, under the 
Employees' Provident Funds and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, '1~, to- 19 of 1901. 
wards the provident fund or Deposit-linked Insurance P'und eatab11sbed 
under that Act. .' ~. --1' .... : 
.. 1..:. 

; 
(17) To introduce labour saving techniques or machines without 
prior consultation with the negotiating agent and 'without planning for 
the alternative employment of the employees, thereby rendered surplua, 
either within or outside the industrial establishment or undertaking con-
5 cerned. 
10 
(18) To declare a lock-out, for the purpose of pre-empting any fair or 
leJ1timate trade union activity or for coercing the employees or their 
uniotlS to accept unfavourable terms of employment, including servtce 
eon'ditionl. work enVironment, or for curtailing produ<:tion. 
fl. On the pa.rt of employees and trade unions of employees 
(1) To coerce employees in the exercise of their right to self-orpld-
"ion or to join a trade union of employees of their choice or refrain 
from joiDUla any trade union of employees. 
(2) For the Itriking members of a trade union of employees to picket 
IS 1lOD4triking employees in such a manner that such non-striking em 
floy ... are physically debarred from enter!ng the work place. 
(3) To inuulge in acts of force or violence or to hold out threats of 
mtlmidation, in connecti<m with a strike against non-striking emplo,.... 
&t agaiftst the managerial staff or with the intention of compeUing the 
20 employer to do or omit to do any particular thin8. 
(4) To refuse to negotiate collectively in good faith with the employer 
an. diahonour an agreement entered into in the course of negotiatiOns 
under section 97 or conciLation under section 98. 
(5) To indulge in coercive activities with the intention of preventing 
2S the certification of a registered trade union of employees as sole negotiat-
ing agent or chief negotiating agent or the constitution of a negotiatine 
committee. 
(6) To encourage or instigate or engage in slowing down production 
(whether it is called "work to rule" or by any other name) to compel the 
30 employer to accept the demands of the employees or any section thereof. 
(1) To stage demonstrations at the residence o~ the employers or tbe 
managerial staff. 
(I) To refute to work overtime when exigencies of service Nq1I'lIe 
ptI'I'Wrrumce of overt· me work. 

stATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The three Central enactments which, at present, regulate matters re-
lating to industrial relations are the Trade Unions Act, 1926, the Indu.-
trial Employment (Standing Orders) Act, 1946 and the Industrial Dis-
putes Act, 1947. Besides, there are State Laws on these matterl in some 
States to supplement the Central Laws. A voluntaI'y Code of Discipline 
has also been in existence since 1958. It provides for the setting up of 
a grievance procedure for the redress of individual gr;cvances, and laYI 
down a set of criteria for the recognition of unions. The National Com-
mission on Labour (1969) which studied the industrial relations practices 
and procedures found a number of shortcomings which had impeded the 
growth of industrial harmony. It came to the conclusion that it waa 
essential to create a climate conducive to industrial harmony and foster 
proper attitudes, in the minds of employers as well as employees, SO tba\ 
cooperative endeavour might promote rapid economic progresa. The 
Commission made useful recommendations concerning the scope and 
coverage of the laws, procedure and machinery for speedy setUement of 
disputes and registration and recognition of unions. Later, a aQ-Member 
Tripartite Committee on Comprehensive Industrial l'-elations Law and 
Composition of the Indian Labour Conference set up by the Central Gov-
ernment in pursuance of a recommendation of the Tripartite Labour Con-
ference (May 19'17) studied the existing laws and made recommendations 
regarding the broad framework of a comwehensive law on industrial re-
lations. The Committee's report indicated that there was a large mea-
sure of agreement on some of the basic aspects relating to the .. industrial 
relations law but there were divergent views on some details. 
2. In the light of the experience gained, the views expressed by all the 
interests concerned and the growing expectations of the working class, 
it is considered necessary to have a comprehensive Industrial RelatiOll8 
Law which would integrate the three Central enactments, incorporate 
some of the more important provisions of the State enactments and 
the Code of Discipline and ·bring about certain improvements to meet 
the needs of changing socio-economic conditions. 
3. The objective of the new law is to delineate a legal framework that 
will promote cordiality and peace in industrial establishments, protect the 
legitimate rights of employees and the legitimate interests of 1nd~, 
so that industrial harmony and cooperation may lead to increased pro-
duction and productivity, increased flow of, goods and services and con-
sequent improvement in the standards of living of the people and a 
greater measure of social justice. 
4. The exwession • 'indus try" has been widely interpreted by the 
Supreme Court recently. Having !regard to the nature of the work per-
formed! in hospitals, the need to maintain in educational and training 
institutions and in scientific and research organisations an atmosphere 
different from that in industrial and commercial undertakings, and to 
meet the special needs of organisations engaged in charitable, social and 
100 

101 
philanthropic services, such institutions and organisations are being ex .. 
oluded from the provisions of the Bill. It is proposed to have a separate 
law to protect employees of such institutions and organisation from 
llt'bitraryaction and to provide procedures and machinery for the rediresa 
of their individual and collective grievances. All these have been taken 
note of and the term "industry" in the Bill has been made more specific 
even while making the coverage wider. The SCope of the term "employee" 
has also been enlarged. to cover the supervisory staff whose wages do 
not exceed Rs. 1,000 per month as well as those eml-)loyed in sales promo-
tion, professional or recreational work. 
. 5. Multiplicity of trade unions has often led to difficulty in identifying 
the negotiating agent. This has sometimes resulted in competitive de-
mands and irt"esponsible industrial action. The Bill, therefore, seeks to 
provide for conditions which are conducive to the growth of a health, 
and responsible trade union movement. The existing minimum condt-
tionsfor registration are being changed in the light of the growth that 
the trade union· movement has registered in the last few decades. It 
is sought to encourage leadership from within the trade unions. The pro-
cedure for registration of unions and other connected mattera are being 
streamlined. A Plfocedure is being laid down for the speedy resolution 
of trade union disputes. The Bill also provides that employers and em-
ployees and the trade unions of employers and employees should adhere 
to fair practices. 
6. One of the crucial issues confronting the industrial relations scene 
i. the question of identifying a negotiating unit on which there is at 
pr.esent no Central Law. The Bill provides for the determination of a 
negotiating unit by the appropriate Government. Industrial Tribunala 
will determine through the wocess of verification of membership of the 
unions or by secret ballot the "negotiating agent", the "associate union" 
and the "local union". It will be fur the appropriate Government to de-
cide inter alia in the light of the state of unionisation in the industry and 
certain other matters, whether such determination will be done through 
a secret ballot or through verification of membership. According to the 
&cheme ot certification, a registered trade union can be certified as a 
101e negotiating agent jf it has the support of 65 per cent. or more of the 
emwoyees of an establishment or as chief negotiating agent if it baa. the 
support of less than 65- per cent. but not less than 50 per cent. of the 
em,p~?)"e¥- In the latter case, other registered trade unions with the 
8Uppprt ofa.t lellit 2O.~r cent. of the employees will function as associate 
~o~ %exe there is, no trade union or none qualifies as a negotiating 
~en,t,. :~egotiati~ committee would be formed by election tbrou8h 
~~, ~~ to functicm. as th~ sole negotiating agent. Ina local unit of 
lQestabUshnleQ.t where there is an industry-wise negotiating agent, a 
reSa-tered ~~ union with the maximum support but not less than 40 
Per cent. of tb.e employees of that unit can be certified as a local union. A 
'e89tiatingagent would hold office for two years and be competent t(, 
negotiate with the management and enter into binding settlements. The 
Bill provides for the rights and privileges of a negotiating agent, associate 
unions and local unions. It also provides additional protection to the 
office-bearers ot; such\Ulions against anti-union practices. These measures 
would provide the much-needed stability in the employer-employee rela-
tiolUlhip ,in industrial establishments. 

,. 
IO~ 
7. The Bill, for the first t!ime, makes a specific proviaion lor biplfw. 
negotiations 81 the first step for settling industrial dilputel. TbiI M ... 
tended flo promote mutual understanding and IOOdwill '1'he BW. .., 
lays stress 011 the need to exhaust all modea of settlement Wr.e ~ 
tiOD, conciliation, arbitration, etc., before ettlier party decidet to l'8Iort 
to direct action. These procedures would b. time-bouAd. A dilUnctlioll 
will be made between establishments or undertaldDp that cater to 
essential services and others. In the former, there would be compulloq 
reference of disputes for adjudication, or arbitration faWng biputUe 
negotiations and conciliation; in these Ca&eII there would. therefore. be 
no need for any work-stoppage either in the fonn of a strike or lock-
out; and all sections of SOCiety will be assured of continue4 availability 
of these essential services. In non-essentiai services, where diapuaet 
c~t be settled by any other means and the employees want to l'eIOrt te 
strike. it would be necessary for a negotiating agent to conduct a Itrike 
blilot and obtain the support of 60 per cent. of the employee. bebe 
8 strike is resorted to. It would also be req\lired. to give 14 dey.' notice 
before going on strike. In the cne of a lock-out, it wouid be Deeell11U'J 
tor the employer to give 14 days' notice after record.int the approval of 
the highest authority in the establishment to such DOtice. 
8. Disputes are classified in the Bill into three caiegoriel, Damel¥, 
individual, industrial and trade union disputes. In 10 far a8 iIldivic&.l 
disputes are concerned, the law would provide for a statuGny grievance 
procedure within an establishment and every employee with a grievance 
ean have recourse to it. If the aggrieved employee is not satided. with 
the deciSion of the griev8l\ce settlement authority be wmdd be endt1ecl 
to approach a Labour Court direct to have his cue judicially detezmlBed. 
In industrial disputes, the referel'lce would be made by the appropdate 
Government. In the case of trade union disputes the matter ean be taIteA 
to a Tribunal by any member of a trade union or a trade union or the 
appropriate Government. If the appropriate Government i. aatisfied that 
there is a Joint Consultative Machinery, Tribunal or other body alreIMI, 
fI1nctioning in any industrial establishment or undertaking to tlae beD ... 
of the employees, that Government may, by notiAcation In the 01Bcial 
Gazette, direct that the provisions of Chapters IV, IX and XU shaH app., 
in re:tation to that establishment or undertaking with the modifteattooa 
~ed in the notiftcation. 
9. Industrial judiciary would consist of Labour Courts, Industtfai 
Tribunals and National Industrial Relations Commission. These bodies 
would have their runctions clearly defined. The National Industrlft 
Relations Commission, besides adjudicating luch disputes as are at 
present adjudicated by the National Tribunals, will also advise the 
Central Government on such matters as may be referred to it. The 
Labour Courts, Tribunals, etc., would ~lao be required. to give their 
decision within certain stipulated time limits. The Bill seeks to confer 
on these authorities power to issue interim order 01 stay and injuncttml~ 
to grant relief d.uring the pendency of proceedings and to execute their 
awards and orders. 
10. Under the Bill. employees in establishments employing 20 or more 
employees and affected by lay-off would be entitled to 50 per eat. of 
their wages for the first month of lay-off and 75 per cent. for flb~ueDt 

ro! 
months. In respect of lay-off, retrenchment and closure the em-
ployment limit of an establishment for the purpose of prior permission 
would be 100 instead of 300, as at present. There would be exemptions 
from this requirement in certain cases. 
11. Change in conditions of service sometimes becomes a major lrrl-
taftt in the labour--management relations. At present the law requirel 
in certain cases a notice to be given before the employers can effect 
8ft1 changes. The BUl provides that as a rule, all changes in the condittOrl8 
of service, except in respect o~ specified matters can be brought about only 
\\lith the ronsent of the employees likely to be affected by the changes. The 
law would also empower the appropriate Government to specify, as an 
interim measure a set of conditions of service and relief for any class of 
employees in any collective disputes. 
12. With a view to simplifying procedures, the Bill provides for the 
making of uniform Standing Orders on certain specified matters by 
l'lOttfleation 1J:y the Central Govemment. Parties would be free ~ 
supplement them by bipartite settlements. A statutory provision is alsn 
being made for the payment of subsistence allowance to emp,loyeer; under 
suspension, pending domestic enquiry. 
13. A serious draw·back of the existing enactments is that the pro-
vfIlDM l'OI1tained in them particularly for the enforcement of _Uements 
aaa awaM.. for ehecting Illegal strikes and loek-outs, ete., baW! not been 
elllettve and persons entttled to relief ftnd it difficult to enforce-their 
nib-t. To maD the law efteettve, the Bill aeeks to make the peMl 
preV1etons in tl1e law more stringent. . 
14. With the enactment of the Industrial Relations Bill, the tliree 
Central Laws would be repealed. Under the transitional provisions, 
provision has been made to enable the bringing into force of the legislation 
in dift'erent States on different dates. A State Law would cease to be in 
fMoe on the enforcement of the provisions of this legislation in that State. 
NEW DE.un; RAVINDRA VARMA. 
?he 18th Augun, 19?6. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Sub-clause (1) of clause 3 of the Bill empowers the Central Govern-
ment to appoint a Chief Labour Commissioner and sub-clause (2) of that: 
clause empowers that Government to awoint Joint Chief LaobourCom-
missioners, Deputy Chief Labour Commissioners, Regional Labour Com-
missioners, Assistant Labour CommissiOners and such other officers as it, 
may consider necessary to assist the Chief LaboUT. Commissioner in the. 
dilcharge of his duties. 
2. Under sub-clause· (1) of clause 4, the Central Government' may ap-
point such number of Conciliation Officers as it thinks fit charged with 
the duty of mediating in and promoting the settlement of industrial dis-
putes. 
3. Under sub-clause (1) of clause 8, the Central Government may conI-
tituteCourts of Inquiry for inquiring into any matter' connected or ap-
pearing to be connected with or relevant to an industrial dispute or trade 
union di~ute. 
4. Under sub-elause (1) of clause 9 of the Bill, the Central Govemm~t 
Is empowered to eltabHsli such number of LabourCeurts a81t tb.tnka fit . 
and under sub-elauae (Il of that clause, the Central Government ism 
appoint the Prestdfng OfIlcers of such La'bour Courts.. Similarly, un_ 
IU.b-elnIe (1) of clauae 10, the Central Government is empowered ;to, 
establish Industrial Tribunals and under sub-clause (3)· of. that clause, tlle . 
Central Government is to appoint Presiding Officers of such Industrial 
Tribunals. 
5. Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to constitute 
National Industrial Relations Commissions.' 
8. There are at present a Chief Labour Commissioner, a Joint Chief 
Labour Commissioner, Deputy Chief Labour Com~issioners, Regional 
Labour Commissioners, Assistant Labour Commissioners, Concilia.tion 
Oftlcers and Labour Courts-cum-Industrial Tribunals. But if, the Bill 
is enacted and brought into force, a few more surh officers may have to 
be appointed for its effective implementation. Similarly for more expedi-
tious adjudication of disputes. within the t:me limits provided therefor 
in the Bill, the number of La:bour Courts and Jndu~trial Tribunals may 
have to be lnc1'eased. Additional staff to assist the aforementioned officers 
and Labour Courts and Industrial Trlbun"ls also would have to be 
provided. 
7. It is difficult to make an accurate assessment at this stage of the 
number of additional officers of the categories aforementioned or addi-
tional staff that will have to be appointed, or the additional number of 
Labour Courts and Tribunals that may be needed, for the effective en-
forcement of the proposed legislation, Courts of Inquiry and National Ir.-
dustrial Relations Commissions are to be appointed .as and when the nped 
arises. It is, however, estima.ted that the annual recurring expenditure 
If the Bm 11 enacted and brought int.o operation is likely td be Rs. 13 
Jakm. The non-recurring expenditure is likely to be Rs. 7 lakhs. 
I. J04 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 148(3) of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government, by 
DOtification in the Oftlcial Gazette, to direct that the provisions of clause 
77 of the Bill shall not apply or shall apply subject to such modifications, 
as may be specified in the notification, to any class of industrial estab-
Uahments or \Ulciertakings or any class of employees employed in any 
indus1lrial;establishment or I undertaking where tile awroF1l'iate G0-
vernment is of the opinion that the application of the provisions of clause 
77 to such class of industrial establishments or undertakings or such 
class of employees is likely to affect prejudicially the employers in rela-
tion thereto and that the public interest so requires. 
2. Clause 149 of. the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to 
direct, by notification in the Official Gazette, that the provisions of 
Chapter IV, Chapter IX and Chapter XII shall apply in relation to '.ny 
industrial establishment or undertaking with such modifioations as may 
be specified in such notification, where in such industrial establishment 
or undertaking any joint consultative machinery consisting of representa-
tives of employees and employers or any other body has been set up 
for the purpOse of settling individual disputes or industrial disputes and 
the appropriate Government is sati9fied that the functioning of such 
joint consultative machinery or other body has been benefiCial to the 
employees employed in such industrial establishment or undertaking. 
3. Sub-clause (1) of clause 15 mpowers the appropriate Government 
to include in the First Schedule .... QII .. ~dustry not specified therein, where 
the appropriate Government is sa that public interest requires 
that such industry, whiCh is essenti to the life of the community, 
should be declared as an essential serVI 
4. Sub-clause (2) of clause 157 of the Bill empowers the Central Gov-
ernment to omit, by notification in the omeial Gazette, any industry 
from the First Schedule. 
5. Sub-clause (3) of clause 157 of the Bill empowers the Centr~l Gov-
ernment, to add to or alter or amend, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, the Second Schedule, the Third Schedule or the Fourth Sche-
dule. 
6. Sub-clause (1) of clause 159 empowers the appropriate Government 
to make rules for the purpose of giving effect to the provisions of the 
BilL Sub-clause (2) of the clause enumerates the m~tters in regard to 
whi::h such rules may be made. The matters in regard to which such 
rules may be made relate, inter alia, te>-
(i) the terms and conditions of service of the presiding officer 
of a Labour Court or Tribuna1; 
(ii) the manner of ~Qtifyiqg by t~e Tribunalof its intertion 
to determine the support of a registered trade union 01 emplbyees 
I ' 

106 
or election to choose the chairman or other members of a negotiating 
committee; 
(iii) the form in which an application by a registered trade 
union of employees for qertification as sole negotiating agent, chief 
negotiating agent, associat4; union or local union shall be made, the 
particulars which such application shall contain and the fees which 
shall accompany such application; 
(iv) the procedure in enquiring into an application by a regis-
tered trade union of employees for certification as negotiating agent 
or local union; 
(v) subject to the provisions of the Bill, the manner of the 
election of the chairman and other members of a negotiating com-
mittee, the persons qualified to stand for election, the disqualifications 
for being chosen as and for being such chairman or other meml,er, 
the manner of settlement of disputes relating to the election and the 
filling up of casual vacancies in the negotiating committee; 
(vi) the constitution and procedure of grievance settlement 
authority; 
(vii) the manner in which any dispute pertaining to a strike 
ballot shall be decided by the Registrar; 
(viii) the manner in which any award, determination or deci-
sion of a Labour Court, Tribunal or Nat~onal Commission is to be 
executed. 
7. Sub-clause (3) of clause 159 e 
to make rules to provide for th 
under sub-clause (1) (c) of cIa 
service of the Presiding Officer 
wers the Central Governmf>nt 
ctions of a National Commission 
and the terms and conditions of 
8. Sub-clause (4) of clause 159 empowers the State Government to 
make rule.; to provide for th~ various matters enWDefated in that sub-
clause. The matters in regard to which such rules may be made relate, 
inter alia, t~ 
(i) the form in which the general statement of assets Ilnd 
liabilities of a trade union is to be delivered to the Registrar and the 
particulars which such statement shall contain; 
(ii) the manner of audit of the accounts of a tracie union; 
(iii) the manner in which and the time within which n per/!vn 
aggrieved by the refusal of the Registrar to register a trade union 
or by the cancellation of a certificate of registration. may appeal 
to the Tribunal; 
(iv) the manner in which the membership fee deducted by.the 
employer from the wages of the employees is to be paid over by 
such employer to the trade union concerned; 
. (v) the date on or before which an office-bearer of a trade union 
is to file a statement of his assets and Jiabilities every year. 
9. The rules which the appropriate Government, Central Govern-
ment or State Government are empowered to make under clause 159 

107 
are to be made by notification in the Official Gazette and the power to 
make such rules is subject to the condition of previous publication. Every 
notification issued by a State Government under clause 157, amending 
the Schedules, and every rule made by that Government under clause 
159 are to be laid before the State Legislature and every notification 
issued by the Central Government under clause 157 and every rule made 
by the Central Government under clause 159 are to be laid before the 
Parliament. 
10. The delegation of legislative power under the aforementioned 
provisions relates to matters of procedure or administrative detail or to 
matters in respect of which it is not practicable to make detailed provi-
sions. Hence, thE! delegation of legislative pOWer is of a normal 
character. 

14 of 1947. 
ANNEXURE 
EXTBACT I'SO!ii THE SALEs PBOMOnON EMPOOYUS (CONDmONS or SnMCI') 
ACT, 1976 
(11 ,01' 1976) 
• • " • " 
10 (1) • ... ... ... • 
(2) The provIsIons of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, as in force 
for the time being, shall apply to, or in relation to, sales promotion 
employees as they apply to, or in relation to, workmen within the mean-
ing of that Act and for the purposes of any proceeding under that Act in 
relation to an industrial dispute, a sales promotion employee shall be 
deemed to include a sales promotion employee who has been dismissed, 
discharged or retrenched in connection with, or as a consequence of, that 
dispute or whose dismissal, discharge or retrenchment had led to that 
dispute. 
... ... • 
. 
" 
... ... 
roS 
Applica-
tion of 
certain 
Acts to 
sales 
promo-
tiOn Em-
ployees. 

LOK SABHA 
.. 
BILL 
to colllQUdate and amend the law relating to the reg1stratioll of trade 
UDiODI of employees and employers, the rights and liabilities of 
registered trade unions and settlement of trade union disputes, the 
COIlditiODS of employment of employees. and the investigation and 
eeWement of disputes between employees employed in ind~trial 
eatabU.bments or undertakings and their employers, and for matters 
connected therewith or incidental thereto, with a view to promoting 
healthy industrial relations leadiGg to accelerated economic develop. 
ment and social justice, '.' 
'\\' . . ,;, 
", 
(Shri Ravindra Varma, MiniBter of Parliamentary Affairs aM Labour) 