1
THE FARMERS (PROTECTION FROM NATURAL CALAMITIES AND
OTHER WELFARE MEASURES) BILL, 2014
By
SHRI DEVJI M. PATE L, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the protection of farmers affected by natural calamities and for
other welfare measures and for matters connected therewith.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Farmers (Protection from Natural Calamities and
Other Welfare Measures) Act, 2014.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No.  137 of  2014
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "farmer affected by natural calamity" means a farmer whose property,
including livestock, crop, orchard, field, machine or tools, is lost, destroyed or
damaged due to natural calamity;
(c) "Fund" means the Farmers Welfare Fund constituted under section 4;
(d) "natural calamity" includes drought, flood, cyclone, hailstorm, cloud burst,
tsunami, landslide or earthquake or such other conditions as may be notified by the
appropriate Government from time to time;
(e) "old age farmer" means a farmer who has completed sixty years of age;
and
(f) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force, every farmer affected by natural calamity shall be paid adequate compensation by
the appropriate Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The amount of compensation payable to a farmers under sub-section (1) shall be
such as may be specified by the appropriate Government from time to time, by notification
in the Official Gazette;
(3) The appropriate Government, while specifying the compensation under
sub-section (2), shall take into account the actual loss suffered by a farmer affected by
natural calamity;
(4) Every claimant shall apply to an officer nominated by the appropriate Government
for the purpose of payment of compensation in such form and giving such information as
may be prescribed:
Provided that nothing in this Act shall prevent a Gram Panchayat from applying
for compensation on behalf of all the farmers affected by natural calamity living within
the jurisdiction of such Gram Panchayat.
(5) Every application for compensation under this Act shall be disposed of within a
period of thirty days from the date of its filing.
4. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette,
constitute a Fund to be known as the Farmers Welfare Fund.
(2) The initial corpus of the Fund shall be rupees five thousand crore of which rupees
four thousand crore shall be credited by the Central Government, after due appropriation
made by Parliament by law in this behalf, and rupees one thousand crore shall be credited
by the State Governments in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) The Central Government and the State Governments shall contribute every year
to the Fund in such ratio as may be prescribed.
(4) There shall also be credited to the Fund any grant or donation that may be made
by any person or institution.
5. (1) The appropriate Government shall take such measures as it may think necessary
and expedient for the removal of indebtedness amongst farmers.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision, the measures shall
include giving remunerative prices to farmers for their agricultural produce and provision
of a comprehensive crop insurance scheme for farmers.
Definitions.
Payment of
adequate
compensation
to farmers
affected by
natural
calamities.
Farmers
Welfare Fund.
Measures for
removal of
indebtedness
amongst
farmers.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
6. The appropriate Government shall pay such pension, being not less than rupees
one thousand per month, as it may deem appropriate keeping in view the rate of inflation
and other necessary factors, to every old age farmer, whose income from all sources is
not more than two thousand rupees per month, in such manner as may be prescribed.
7. (1) The Central Government, in consultation with the State Governments,
formulate a scheme to be known as the Farmers Credit Scheme for providing loans to
farmers through banks and financial institutions.
(2) The scheme shall provide for—
(i) terms and conditions governing the flow of credit to the farmers;
(ii) procedure of settling outstanding loans of farmers;
(iii) guidelines regarding rate of interest to be charged on loans;
(iv) relief measures for farmers affected by natural calamities; and
(v) such other matters as the Central Government may deem necessary.
8. The Central Government may issue such directives to the banks and the financial
institutions, as it may deem necessary, for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
9. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any
other law for the time being in force, relating to matters provided in this Act.
10. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if,
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses
agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under
that rule.
Pension to old
age farmers.
Farmers Credit
Scheme.
Central
Government
to issue
directives to
banks and
financial
institutions.
Act not to be
in derogation
of other laws.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25

4
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
In our country farmers constitute nearly seventy per cent. of the total population.
Being a vast country, natural calamities do occur in one part of the country or the other
almost round the year. For instance, the State of Rajasthan and parts of Gujarat,
Maharashtra, Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh are
drought prone. Every year, half of Bihar is flooded and the other half faces drought. Similarly,
in southern States, coastal areas are lashed with cyclones or tsunami whereas other parts
of these States face drought conditions. Many parts of the country face earthquake,
hailstorm, cloud bursts, extreme cold conditions and other natural calamities. Farmers mostly
bear the brunt of such natural calamities. They lose their crops, livestock and many a time
their dwelling units and household items including food grains. Despite this, farmers are
supposed to repay their loans whether their harvest is good or not. In depression, many
of them end their lives. Thousands of farmers have committed suicide in recent years in
the States of Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra, Punjab, Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Tamil
Nadu and Karnataka. Indebtedness of our farming community is a chronic and continuing
problem which has to be taken care of through active efforts. Due to increase in life
expectancy, the number of old age farmers is increasing and in their old age they have to
face a number of problems compelling them to lead a miserable life. Since ours is a welfare
State, the Government is duty bound to provide social security to the farmers by giving
them old age pension, remunerative prices of their produce and also provide them adequate
compensation if their crops and property are affected by natural calamity.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; DEVJI M. PATEL
November 3, 2014.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the compensation to farmers affected by natural
calamity. Clause 4 provides for constitution of Farmers Welfare Fund. Clause 6 provides
for old age pension to farmers. Clause 7 provides for the formulation of Farmers Credit
Scheme. The expenditure in relation to the States shall be borne out of the Consolidated
Funds of the respective States. However, the expenditure in respect of Union territories
shall be borne out of the Consolidated Fund of India. Further, the Central Government is
also required to assist the State Governments by crediting monies into the Farmers Welfare
Fund for carrying out the purposes of the Act. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees five
thousand crore may be involved as recurring expenditure per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees five hundred crore is also likely to
be involved.
5

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation
of legislative power is of a normal character.
6

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the protection of farmers affected by natural calamities and for
other welfare measures and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Devji M. Patel, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—2720LS(S3)—02-12-2014.