1
THE JUVENILE JUSTICE (CARE AND PROTECTION OF CHILDREN)
AMENDMENT BILL, 2018
A
BILL
to amend the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children)
Amendment Act, 2018.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill  No.  137 of  2018
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
CHAPTER II
AMENDMENTS TO CHAPTER VIII OF THE JUVENILE JUSTICE (CARE AND PROTECTION OF CHILDREN)
ACT,  2015
2. In the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015, in
CHAPTER VIII,—
(i) in section 56, in sub-section (5), for the words "valid order from the Court",
the words "valid order from the District Magistrate" shall be substituted;
(ii) in section 58, —
(a) in sub-section (3), for the words "in the court", the words "before the
District Magistrate" shall be substituted;
(b) in sub-section (4), for the words "the receipt of a certified copy of the
court order", the words "receipt of the certified copy of the order passed by the
District Magistrate" shall be substituted;
(iii) in section 59,—
(a) in sub-section (7), for the words "in the court", the words "before the
District Magistrate" shall be substituted;
(b) in sub-section (8), for the words "the receipt of a certified copy of the
court order", the words "receipt of the certified copy of the order passed by the
District Magistrate" shall be substituted;
(iv) in section 60, in sub-section ( 1), for the words "an order from the
court", the words "an order from the District Magistrate" shall be substituted;
(v) in section 61,—
(a) for the marginal heading, the following marginal heading shall be
substituted, namely:—
"Procedure for disposal of adoption proceedings.";
(b) in sub-section (1), for the words "the court shall satisfy itself that", the
words "the District Magistrate shall satisfy that" shall be substituted;
(c) in sub-section (2), for the words "and the case shall be disposed of by
the court", the words "and the proceeding shall be disposed of by the District
Magistrate" shall be substituted;
(vi) in section 63, for the words "issued by the court", the words "issued by the
District Magistrate" shall be substituted;
(vii) in section 64, for the words "concerned courts", the words "District
Magistrates" shall be substituted;
(viii) in section 65 in sub-section (4), for the words "order from the court", the
words "order from the District Magistrate" shall be substituted.
CHAPTER III
M
ISCELLANEOUS
3. All the proceedings pending before any court for adjudication under Chapter VIII
of the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015, before the commencement
of this Act, shall stand transferred to the District Magistrate having jurisdiction over the area
to entertain such proceedings.
Amendments
to Chapter
VIII.
2 of 2016.
Transfer of
pending
matters under
Chapter VIII of
the Juvenile
Justice (Care
and Protection
of Children)
Act, 2015 to
the District
Magistrate.
2 of 2016.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015 (the Juvenile Justice
Act) has come into with effect from the 15th January, 2016, with comprehensive provisions
for the children alleged and found to be in conflict with law and children in need of care and
protection. The Juvenile Justice Act, has been enacted keeping in view of the standards
prescribed in the Convention on the Rights of the Child, the United Nations Millennium
Rules for the Administration of Juvenile Justice, 1985 (the Beijing Rules), the United Nations
Rules for the Protection of Juveniles Deprived of their Liberty (1990), the Hagge Convention
on Protection of Children and Co-operation in respect of Inter-country Adoption (1993) and
other related international instruments.
2. Chapter VIII of the Juvenile Justice Act deals with adoption. Sub-section ( 1) of
section 56 of the Juvenile Justice Act provides that adoption shall be resorted to for ensuring
right to family for the orphan, abandoned and surrendered children, as per the provisions of
the said Act and the rules and regulations made thereunder. Section 63 of the Juvenile
Justice Act states that the adoption is final on the issuance of the adoption order by the
Court. Sub-section (2) of section 61 of the said Act provides that the adoption proceedings
shall be disposed of by the court within a period of two months from the date of filing of an
application.
3. However, it has been observed that there is inordinate delay in issuing adoption
orders by the courts due to heavy work load. As on 20th July, 2018 there are 629 cases
relating to passing of orders for adoption pending in various courts across the country.
Due to delay in issuing the adoption orders by the courts, the child continues to languish
in the child care institutions, even after getting a family.
4. In order to address the aforesaid issue and in the best interest of the child, it has
been decided to amend the Juvenile Justice Act to empower the 'District Magistrate' to
issue orders for the purpose of adoption. This would ensure timely processing of adoption
cases and to provide orphaned, abandoned and surrendered children with familial care and
protection.
5. Accordingly, the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of  children) Amendment
Bill, 2018, inter alia, proposes:—
(a) substituting the words "District Magistrate" for "court" and empowering
the District Magistrate to issue order for adoption under section 63 and proposes to
make consequential amendments in sections 56(5), 58(3), 58(4), 59(7), 59(8), 60(1),
61(1), 61(2), 64 and 65(4) of the Juvenile Justice Act; and
(b) transfering all the proceedings pending before any court relating to adoption
orders under Chapter VIII of the Juvenile Justice Act to the District Magistrate having
jurisdiction over the area to entertain such proceedings.
6. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; MANEKA  SANJAY  GANDHI.
The 27th July,  2018.

4
 ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE JUVENILE JUSTICE (CARE AND PROTECTION OF CHILDREN) ACT, 2015
(2 OF 2016)
* * * * *
CHAPTER VIII
ADOPTION
56. (1) * * * * *
(5) Any person, who takes or sends a child to a foreign country or takes part in any
arrangement for transferring the care and custody of a child to another person in a foreign
country without a valid order from the Court, shall be punishable as per the provisions of
section 80.
* * * * *
58. (1) * * * * *
(3) On the receipt of the acceptance of the child from the prospective adoptive parents
along with the child study report and medical report of the child signed by such parents, the
Specialised Adoption Agency shall give the child in pre-adoption foster care and file an
application in the court for obtaining the adoption order, in the manner as provided in the
adoption regulations framed by the Authority.
(4) On the receipt of a certified copy of the court order, the Specialised Adoption
Agency shall send immediately the same to the prospective adoptive parents.
* * * * *
59. (1) * * * * *
(7) On receipt of the acceptance of the child from the prospective adoptive parents, the
Specialised Adoption Agency shall file an application in the court for obtaining the adoption
order, in the manner as provided in the adoption regulations framed by the Authority.
(8) On the receipt of a certified copy of the court order, the specialised adoption
agency shall send immediately the same to Authority, State Agency and to the prospective
adoptive parents, and obtain a passport for the child.
* * * * *
60. (1) A relative living abroad, who intends to adopt a child from his relative in India
shall obtain an order from the court and apply for no objection certificate from Authority, in
the manner as provided in the adoption regulations framed by the Authority.
* * * * *
61. (1) Before issuing an adoption order, the court shall satisfy itself that—
(a) the adoption is for the welfare of the child; ( b) due consideration is given
to the wishes of the child having regard to the age and understanding of the child;
and (c) that neither the prospective adoptive parents has given or agreed to give
nor the specialised adoption agency or the parent or guardian of the child in case
of relative adoption has received or agreed to receive any payment or reward in
consideration of the adoption, except as permitted under the adoption regulations
framed by the Authority towards the adoption fees or service charge or child care
corpus.
Adoption.
Procedure for
adoption by
Indian
prospective
adoptive
parents living
in India.
Procedure for
inter-country
adoption of
an orphan or
abandoned or
surrendered
child.
Procedure for
inter-country
relative
adoption.
Court
procedure and
penalty
against
payment in
consideration
of adoption.

5
(2) The adoption proceedings shall be held in camera and the case shall be disposed
of by the court within a period of two months from the date of filing.
* * * * *
63. A child in respect of whom an adoption order is issued by the court, shall become
the child of the adoptive parents, and the adoptive parents shall become the parents of the
child as if the child had been born to the adoptive parents, for all purposes, including
intestacy, with effect from the date on which the adoption order takes effect, and on and from
such date all the ties of the child in the family of his or her birth shall stand severed and
replaced by those created by the adoption order in the adoptive family:
Provided that any property which has vested in the adopted child immediately
before the date on which the adoption order takes effect shall continue to vest in the
adopted child subject to the obligations, if any, attached to the ownership of such
property including the obligations, if any, to maintain the relatives in the biological
family.
64. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
information regarding all adoption orders issued by the concerned courts, shall be forwarded
to Authority on monthly basis in the manner as provided in the adoption regulations framed
by the Authority, so as to enable Authority to maintain the data on adoption.
65. (1) * * * * *
(4) In case any Specialised Adoption Agency is in default in taking necessary steps on
its part as provided in this Act or in the adoption regulations framed by the Authority, for
getting an orphan or abandoned or surrendered child legally free for adoption from the
Committee or in completing the home study report of the prospective adoptive parents or in
obtaining adoption order from the court within the stipulated time, such Specialised Adoption
Agency shall be punishable with a fine which may extend up to fifty thousand rupees and in
case of repeated default, the recognition of the Specialised Adoption Agency shall be
withdrawn by the State Government.
* * * * *
Effect of
adoption.
Specialised
Adoption
Agencies.
Reporting of
adoption.

MGIPMRND—1164LS(S3)—30-07-2018.
LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to amend the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015.
————
(Smt. Maneka Sanjay Gandhi, Minister of  Women and Child Development)