                                                            Bill No. 137 of 2024
THE SPECIAL FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO KBK
REGION OF STATE OF ODISHA BILL, 2024
By
SHRI SAPTAGIRI SANKAR ULAKA, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for special financial assistance to KBK region comprising the
districts of Koraput, Rayagada, Malkangiri, Nabarangpur, Balangir,
Subarnapur, Kalahandi and Nuapada of the State of Odisha for
the purpose of promoting the welfare of Scheduled Tribes,
Scheduled Castes and Other Backward Sections of  the
people and for the development,exploitation and
proper utilization of its resources.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of
India as follows:–
1. (1) This Act may be called the Special Financial Assistance to KBK
Region of State of Odisha Act, 2024.
Short title
and
commencement.
 AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. There shall be paid such sums of moneys out of the Consolidated
Fund of India, every year, as Parliament may by due appropriation
provide, as special financial assistance to KBK Region comprising the
districts of Koraput, Rayagada, Malkangiri, Nabarangpur, Balangir,
Subarnapur, Kalahandi and Nuapada of the State of Odisha to meet the
costs of such schemes of development, as may be undertaken by the State
with the approval of the Government of India for the purpose of
promoting the welfare of Scheduled Tribes, Scheduled Castes and Other
Backward Sections of the people and for the development, proper
utilization and exploitation of the resources in KBK region of the State
of Odisha.
3. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation
of any other law for the time being in force.
Special
Financial
Assistance to
the KBK
region of the
State of
Odisha.
5
10
Act not in
derogation of
any other law. 15

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The KBK region comprising Koraput, Nabarangpur, Malkangiri,
Rayagada, Subarnapur, Balangir, Kalahandi and Nuapada districts of the
State of Odisha is one of the poorest and most backward regions of the
country. Despite years of focused development intervention by both Central
and State Government of Odisha, large proportion of rural poor and Tribals
in the KBK region continue to face chronic hunger and reportedly starvation
deaths. Reduced forest cover, farmer distress, no visible employment
opportunity – people are forced to migrate to other States in search of jobs.
As per one National Family Health Survey, only 47.38 per cent. women in
the KBK region are literate against the State average of 67.4 per cent.,
while the literacy level among men in the region is 72.93 per cent. against
the State’s 84.3%. In case of institutional delivery, the region with
76.48 per cent. lags behind the State’s average of 85.4 per cent.
Central assistance for Area development programmes like special plan
for KBK, Backward Region Grant Fund (BRGF) and Integrated Action Plan
have been discontinued. The Central Government has discontinued ST/SC
scholarship scheme thus depriving beneficiaries in the tribal region. Some of
the Schemes delinked from support of the Centre during the budget 2015/16:
National e-Governance Plan, Backward Regions Grant Funds, Modernization
of Police Forces, Rajiv Gandhi Panchayat Sashaktikaran Abhiyaan (RGPSA),
Scheme for Central Assistance to the States for developing export
infrastructure, Scheme for setting up of 6000 Model Schools, National Mission
on Food processing and Tourist Infrastructure.
Though the State Govt. has launched its own Biju KBK Plan, this is not
sufficient. Justice Puncchi Commission on Centre-State relation has
recommended for higher Central transfers to backward States for improving
the physical and human infrastructure. The economic divide emanating from
asymmetric growth and backwardness, dominated by Tribals and vulnerable
groups rise to regional imbalance and calls for focused attention of the
Government for achieving inclusive growth.
It is, therefore, necessary that the Central Government should provide
special financial assistance to the KBK Region of the State of Odisha for its
all-round development including the welfare of weaker sections and for the
development and exploitation of its vast natural resources. Such a step of
providing financial assistance to this Region would go a long way in building
this nation more and more strong.
Hence this Bill.
   NEW DELHI;                          SAPTAGIRI SANKAR ULAKA
July 18, 2024.
3

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides that there shall be paid such sums of moneys
out of the Consolidated Fund of India, every year, as Parliament may by due
appropriation provide, as special financial assistance to the KBK Region
comprising the districts of Koraput, Rayagada, Malkangiri, Nabarangpur,
Balangir, Subarnapur, Kalahandi and Nuapada of the State of Odisha to meet
the costs of such schemes of development, as may be undertaken by the State
with the approval of the Government of India.
The Bill, therefore, on enactment, will involve expenditure out of the
Consolidated Fund of India for providing special financial assistance to the
KBK Region of the State of Odisha. As the sums of moneys which will be
given to the KBK Region of the State of Odisha as special financial assistance
by appropriation by law made by Parliament will be known only after the
welfare schemes to be implemented by the State Government with the approval
of Government of India are identified, it is not possible to give the estimates
of recurring expenditure, which would be involved out of the Consolidated
Fund of India at this stage.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be incurred from the
Consolidated Fund of India.

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
to provide for special financial assistance to KBK region comprising the
districts of Koraput, Rayagada, Malkangiri, Nabarangpur, Balangir,
Subarnapur, Kalahandi and Nuapada of the State of Odisha for
the purpose of promoting the welfare of Scheduled Tribes,
Scheduled Castes and Other Backward Sections of the
 people and for the development, exploitation and
proper utilization of its resources.
————
(Shri Saptagiri Sankar Ulaka, M.P .)