1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017
By
SHRI OM BIRLA , M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE  it enacted by the Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2017.
2. After article 28 of the Constitution, the following new article shall be inserted,
namely:—
"28 A. (1) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, until Parliament by
law otherwise provides, religious education related to Hindu religion shall be
Short title.
Bill No.  137 of  2017
Insertion of
new article
28A.
Hindu
Religious
Education in
certain
educational
institutions.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
imparted in an educational institution wholly maintained out of State Funds, if
majority of the students studying in that institution are Hindus:
Provided that such religious education shall not be compulsory for non-Hindu
students studying in such institution:
Provided further that no Hindu student studying in such institution shall be
compelled to such religious education.
(2) Nothing in clause ( 1) shall apply to an educational institution which is
administered by the State but has been established under any endowment or trust
which requires that religious instruction shall be imparted in such institution.
(3) No person attending an educational institution recognised by the State or
receiving aid out of State funds shall be required to take part in Hindu religious
instruction that may be imparted in such institution or to attend such religious worship
as may be conducted in such institution or in any premises attached thereto unless
such person or, if such person is a minor, his guardian, has given his consent thereto.".
5
10

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Religious education is needed for all. Introduction or religious education as a subject
can prove effective remedy against deteriorating morality among students. It is said that
religious books like 'Gita', etc. are the essence of life. Every person should study it for the
upliftment of his life. "Gita" inspires us from escapism to efforts. It is the best way to face
the situation of challenges with cool mind. This instruction is applicable to all the persons
in this world. Therefore, it is imperative for children to imbibe the morals of the 'Gita'.
Moreover, students belonging to minority community gets their religious education
through their minority institutions but majority of Hindu students are devoid of it so far.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to insert a new article 28A to the Constitution with a view to
provide for imparting of Hindu religious education to Hindu students in State funded
institutions.
N
EW DELHI; OM BIRLA
July 3, 2017.

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides for imparting of religious education related to Hindu
religion to Hindu students in an institution wholly maintained out of the State funds. The
Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. At
this stage, it is not possible to give exact expenditure to be involved on this account.
However, it is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees two hundred
crore is likely to be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Om Birla, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—1119LS(S3)—20-07-2017.