f} 0 Ar a :
~ FUEL C Z 4

As INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

Bill No. 137 of 2005

THE PETROL PUMP WORKERS (WELFARE) BILL, 2005
By
(Dr K.S. Manoj, M.P.)

A

BILL

to provide for certain welfare measures for petrol pump workers and for matters
connected therewith.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—

1. (/) This Act may be called the Petrol Pump Workers (Welfare) Act, 2005 Short title,
extent and
(2) It extends to the whole of India pe ae

(3) It shall come into force at once.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— — | Definitions.

(a) "Fund" means Petrol Pump Workers Welfare Fund constituted under section
3 of this Act;

(5) "petrol pump" means an outlet selling petrol, diesel, Liquefied Natural Gas
Liquid Petroleum Gas and Compressed Natural Gas



es

(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;

| (वी) "worker" means any person who is engaged in any activity connected with
the operation of the petrol pump.

Setting up of 3. (1) The Central Government shall set up a fund to be known as the Petrol
ee Pump Workers Welfare Fund for the welfare of petrol pump workers in the country.
Welfare Fund. (2) The Central Government and every State Government/Union territory
Administration shail contribute to the Fund in such ratio as may be prescribed.
(3) The owners of petrol pumps shall also contribute to the Fund in such proportion as
may be prescribed by the Central Government.
Administration 4. The Fund shall be administered by a Committee consisting of:—
of Petrol Pump - ह
Workers (i) a Chairman who shall be appointed by the Central Government;
Welfare Fund. a | ।
(ii) a member to represent the owners of the petrol pumps;
(iii) a member representing the workers; and
(iv) one representative each from all States/Union territories who shall be
nominated by the respective State Government/Union territory Administration.
Utilisation of 5, The Fund shall be used for the following purposes, namely:—
Fund. ,
(i) to provide free health facilities for the workers and their families;
(ii) to provide free educational facilities to the children of the workers:
(iii)to pay compensation to workers who are injured during the course of their
duty; |
(iv) to pay compensation to the next of the kin of workers who die in harness,
(v) to pay disability allowance to workers who are injured in accidents or contract
_ ailments during the course of their duty and are not able to work;
(vi) to pay old age pension to those workers who have attained the age of sixty
years; : ms |
(vii) to pay family pension to the family members after the death of a worker.
Power to make 6. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for _

rules. “carrying out the purposes of this Act.



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Lakhs of workers are engaged in the work related to distribution/supply of Petrol,
Diesel, Liquefied Natural Gas, Liquid Petroleum Gas and Compressed Natural Gas, etc.
throughout the country but they are not covered under any labour laws. They are not paid
even minimum wages which they deserve by virtue of their work. The condition of these
workers is worse than the contract labourers. In the circumstances, provision of certain
facilities to these workers during their service as well as in their old age is desirable.

Hence this Bill.

New [)1:1.11: K.S. MANOJ
November 8.2005.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the setting up of a Petrol Pump Workers Welfare
Fund for the welfare of petrol pump workers in the country. It further provides that Central
Government shall also contribute to the fund. Clause 4 provides for the setting up of a
Committee for administration of the Fund. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely to involve a recurring expenditure
of about rupees one hundred crore per annum |

A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore per annum is also
likely to be involved



MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 6 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

Lo


LOK SABHA |

AT
BILL

to provide for certain welfare measures for petrol pump workers and for matters
connected therewith

(Dr. K.S. Manoj, M.P.)

MGIPMRND—3494Is(S5)—18. 11.2005.