II of 1948. 
As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA ON 
t 8 .fUI 1960· 
aiM He. 137 ef ... 
THE DOCK WORKERS (REGULATION OF EMPLOYMEN1') 
AMENDMENT BILL, 1980 
A 
BILL 
Further to amend the Dock Workers (Regulation of i:mploym8ftt) 
Act, 1948. 
Bt: it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty..fi.l'st Yeai' of tile Republic 
of India as fbl1-bWS:-
1. This Act may be oalled the Dock Workers (Regulation of Employ- Short 
meat) Amendment Act, 1980. title. 
S 2. In sectioa 3 of the Dock Workers (Regu19tion of Employment) AmMtt.. 
10 
Ad, 1948 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), after cla~se (f) ment ot 
of sub-aecuon (2), the foUowing clause shall be inserted and shall be sectiOn 3. 
deemed always to have been inserted, namely:-
"(ft) for creatiag such fund or funds as may be necessary or 
expedient for the purposes of the scheme and for the administration 
of such fund or f.unds;··. 
3. Every fund created or purporting to have been created and every Valida. 
provision with respect thereto made or purporting to have been made tion. 
under the principal Act before the commencement of this Act shall, 'for 
15 all purposes, be deemed to be, and to have always been, as validly and 
effectively created or made as if the provisions of section 3 of the principal 
Act, as amended by this Act, he.Q. ~~en ~n tQrce at all mateJ;'i.al tim~ and. 

Amend-
mentof 
section S. 
Insertion 
of new 
section 
SA. 
Schemes 
and rules 
to be 
laid 
before 
Parlia_ 
ment. 
2 
, 
accordingly, notwithstanding any judgment, decree or order of any 
court,-
(a) all contributions to any such 'fund received or collected be-
fore the commencement of this Act shall be deemed to be and shall 
be deemed always to have been as validly received or collected BS if S 
the provisions of section 3 of the principal Act, as amended by this 
Act, were in force at all material times; 
(b) no suit or other proceeding shall be maintained or continued 
in any court for the refund of, and no enforcement shall be made by 
any court of any decree or order directing the refund of, any such 10 
contribution which had been received or collected and which would 
have been validly received or collected if the provisions of section 
3 'Of the principal Act, as amended by this Act, had been in force at 
all material times; 
(c) recoveries shall be made of all contributions to any such IS 
funds which have not been received or collected but which would 
have been received or collected if the proviSions Of section 3 of the 
principal Act, as amended by this Act, had been in force at all mate-
rial times. 
Explanation~For the removal of doubts it is hereby declared that no 20 
act or omission on the part of any person, before the commencement of 
this Act, shall be punishable as an offence which would not have been so 
punishable if this Act had not come into force. 
4. Sub-section (3) of section 8 of the principal Act shall be omitted. 
5. After section 8 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 25 
inserted, namely:-
"SA. Every scheme and every rule made· under this Act by the 
Central Government shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total 
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in 30 
two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the ses-
sion immediately following the session or the successive sessions 
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modiflcation in the 
foicheme or rule or both Houses agree that the scheme or rule should 
not be made, the scheme or rule shall thereafter have effect only 35 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; 80, 
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without 
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that 
scheme or rule.". 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Dock Workers (Regulation of Employment) Act, 1948 does not 
contain any express provision authorising the Dock Labolll' Boarcm 
established thereunder to create funds and administer them for the 
welfare of dock workers and other purposes. The Committee on Sub-
ordinate Legislation of the Fifth Lok Sabha in its Twelfth Report 
recommended that the Act may be amended so as to provide therein 
an express provision for the aforesaid purpose. As the Dock Labour 
Boards are already maintaining such funds for the purpose of adminis-
tering Dock Workers (Regulation of Employment) Schemes, it is pro-
posed to regularise such funds and also to authorise the Dock Labour 
Boards to create such founds in future. 
2. As recommended by the Committee on Subordinate Legislatio:l of 
the Sixth Lok Sabha in its Seventh Report, it is also proposed to make 
a provision in the Act for laying of schemes framed thereunder before 
Parliament. Opportunity is being taken to bring the rule laying pro-
vision in conformity with the recommendation of the Committee on 
Subordinate Legislation. 
3. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 3rd July, 1980. A. P. SHARMA. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
CJauae 2 of the Bill seW to amend section 3 of the principal Act to 
provide, in accordance with the recommendation of the Committee on 
Subordinate Legislation af the Sixth Lok Sabha, that a scheme framed 
under the Act may provide for the creation of such fund or funds as 
may be nec:essal'Y or expedient for the purposes of the scheme and for the 
administration of such fund or funds. This pertains to a matter of 
detail. Further, according to new section SA as proposed to be inserted 
by clause 5 of the Bill in. the principal Act, all schemes and rules made 
under the Act have to be laid before each House of Parliament. 
2. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal 
character. 
'f 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM 'mE DocK WORKERS (REGULATION OF EMPLOYMENT) 
ACT, 1948 
(901' 1946) 
• • • • • • 
3. (1). • • •. • • 
(2) In particular, a scheme may provide-
• • • • • 
8. (1) • • • • • • 
(3) Every rule made under this section by the Central Government 
shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made before each House of 
Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two successive sessions, and if 
before the expiry of the session in which it is so laid or the session 
immediately following, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the 
rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no 
effect, as the case may be; so however that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything pre-
viously done under that rule. 
• • • • • 
G 
Scheme 
for en-
suring 
regular 
employ_ 
ment of 
workers. 
Power to 
make 
rules. 

LOK SABlIA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Dock Workers (Regulation of Employment) Act, 
1948. 
(Shri A. P. Sharma, Minister of Shipping and 7'TampoTt.) 