ww

AS _ INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

Bill No. 137 of 2021

THE AMBULANCE DRIVERS AND HELPERS (WELFARE) BILL, 2021
By
SHRI M.K. RAGHAVAN, M.P.
A

BILL

to provide for the welfare of ambulance drivers and helpers and for
matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-second Year of the Republic
of India as follows: —

1. (J) This Act may be called the Ambulance Drivers and Helpers
(Welfare) Act, 2021.

(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
'y, bY PP

2. In this Act unless the context otherwise requires, —

(a) “appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the
Government of that State and in other cases, the Central Government:

Short title and
commencement.

Definitions.


Formulation of
Insurance
Scheme for the
Welfare of
Ambulance
Drivers and
Helpers.

Payment for
premium for
Insurance.

Implementation
and Monitoring
of the Act,

Registry.

2

(b) "ambulance" means a vehicle registered under section 66 of the
Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 and as defined in the National Ambulance Code
provided by: the National Injury Surveillance Trauma and Registry and
Capacity Building Centre ( NISC); है

(2) "ambulance driver" means the driver of an ambulance who holds a
valid driving license and registered with the Ambulance Registry of the
State Transport Department concerned;

(व) "beneficiary" means an ambulance driver or a helper registered
with the registry under section 6;

(e) "dependent" includes the parents, spouse, children or siblings of
any ambulance driver or helper, as the case may be;

(0 "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;

(g) "registry" means the registry of ambulances within the State
maintained under section 6; and

(A) “Scheme” means the Insurance Scheme for the Welfare of
Ambulance Drivers and Helpers formulated under section 3.

3. The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official
Gazette, formulate an Insurance Scheme for the Welfare of Ambulance
Drivers and Helpers.

4, The payment for the annual premium in respect of the Insurance
Scheme formulated under section 3 shall be borne as under:—

(a) the Central Government — thirty-five per cent. of the total
insurance premium;

(5) the State Government — forty-five per cent. of the total insurance
premium;

(c) the hospital or the trust which runs the ambulance - ten per cent.
of the total insurance premium; and

(व) ambulance drivers — ten per cent. of the total insurance premium.

5. The appropriate Government shall designate an authority not below
the rank of State Transport Commissioner to implement and monitor the
provisions of this Act.

6. (1) The appropriate Government shall maintain an online
Registry of the ambulance drivers and helpers under their respective
jurisdiction.

(2) The Registry maintained under sub-section(/) shall contain details
of the —

(व) ambulance drivers and helpers including their dependant family
members; and

(0) entry of transfer of each patient undertaken by every ambulance
driver.

59 of 1988,

20

25

30

35

40


5

a

20

30

35

40

7. (1) The appropriate Government shall enter into an agreement with
such Insurance Company, as it may deem appropriate, to extend health and
life insurance coverage to every beneficiary.

(2) The Insurance Company shall enter into agreement with privately
owned hospitals to provide healthcare services to the beneficiaries.

(3) The Insurance Company shal!,—

(a) make payment to private hospitals at such rate, as may be agreed

upon by both the parties, for providing healthcare services to the
beneficiaries;

(4) make payment for annual full body medical checkup of every
beneficiary;

(c) extend life insurance cover upto rupees fifty lakh to each
beneficiary against personal mishappening or accident; and

(व) extend health insurance cover upto rupees ten lakh to the
beneficiary and his dependent family members.

8. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by
Parliament by law in this behalf, provide in each financial year such
sums of money to the State Governments and Insurance Companies as
it thinks necessary for implementation of the provisions of this Act.

9.11) Any Insurance Company which has entered into an agreement
with private hospital under section 7. may either itself or through an agency
designated in that behalf. inspect privately owned hospitals from time to
time to ensure that provisions of this Act are complied with,

(2) If any hospital does not comply with the provisions of this Act, such
hospital shall be liable to pay such compensation, as may be prescribed in
the agreement under section 7.

10. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in
derogation of any other law for the time being in force regulating any of the
matters dealt with in this Act.

11. (/) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.

(2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be
laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament,
while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if,
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any
modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule should not be
made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.

(3) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be
laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before the State Legislature.

Agreement
with Insurance
Companies and
private
hospitals.

Central
Government to
provide fund.

Inspection of
hospitals.

Act not in
derogation of
any other law.

Power to make
tules.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Ambulances are categories of special vehicles as defined under section 66
of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988. These life saving vehicles ply on road at a
high speed. Even though the ambulances are emergency life saving vehicles,
there is no safety of drivers and helpers lives who drive to save lives of others.
Most of these vehicles have helpers who takes care of emergency needs of the
patient being transported.

India has a large number of driving professionals who are registered as
ambulance drivers. Unfortunately they have not been provided any social
security by the Government. Even though the new Labour Code takes gig
workers into consideration, it neglects a large number of such ambulance
drivers who saves thousands of lives every day. There is imminent threat to
their own life considering the speed at which they undertake their journey.
Hence considering the importance of service they render to humanity, the State
has the responsibility to protect them.

The Bill, therefore, seeks to provide for formulation and implementation of
an health and life insurance scheme for the welfare of ambulance drivers and
helpers in the country.

Hence this Bill.

New DELI; M.K. RAGHAVAN
shuly 7, 2021.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 3 of the Bill provides for formulation of an Insurance Scheme for
the Welfare of Ambulance Drivers and Helpers. Clause 4 provides for the
Central Government to contribute thirty-five per cent. of the total amount of
insurance premium for the Scheme. Clause 6 provides for the appropriate
Government to maintain an online Registry of the ambulance drivers and
helpers under their respective jurisdiction. Clause 8 provides for the Central
Government to provide funds to the State Governments and Insurance
Companies as it thinks necessary for implementation of the provisions of this
Act, The expenditure in respect of States shall be met out of the Consolidated
Funds of the State Government concerned. The expenditure in respect of Union
territories shall be borne by the Central Government. The Bill, therefore, if
enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is
estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred
crore would involve from the Consolidated Fund of India.

A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also
likely to be involved.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to make rules
for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of

detail only, the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.


LOK SABHA

BILL

to provide for the welfare of ambulance drivers and helpers and
for matters connected therewith,

(Shri M.K. Raghavan, M.P.)