1
THE NATIONAL FLOOD CONTROL AND REHABILITATION
AUTHORITY BILL, 2010
By
SHRI A.T. NANA PA TIL, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the setting up of a National Flood Control and Rehabilitation Authority to
suggest measures to prevent and control floods, provide relief to people affected by
floods and for matters connected therewith.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the National Flood Control and Rehabilitation Authority
Act, 2010.
(2) It shall come into force at once.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) “Authority” means the National Flood Control and Rehabilitation Authority
established under section 3; and
Bill No. 137 of  2010
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title and
commencement.
Definitions.5

2
(c) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish
an Authority to be called the National Flood Control and Rehabilitation Authority.
(2) The head office of the Authority shall be at Mumbai in the State of Maharashtra.
4. (1) The Authority shall consist of:—
(i) a Chairperson, who shall be an expert in the field of flood control, to be
appointed by the Central Government; and
(ii) one member representing each State and Union territory, who shall be
experts on flood control measures and relief management, to be nominated by the
Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of
the Chairperson and members of the Authority shall be such as may be prescribed.
(3) The Central Government shall make available to the Authority such number of
officers and staff as may be required for efficient functioning of the Authority.
5. The Authority shall perform the following functions:—
(a) identify areas which are prone to floods;
(b) suggest and recommend to the Central Government measures to prevent and
control floods and rehabilitation of flood victims;
(c) frame a time-bound plan for inter-linking of rivers which are prone to floods
with the ones which are not so;
(d) suggest measures for the development of land in areas which are prone to
floods;
(e) install flood forecasting system in flood prone areas;
(f) advise State Governments on rehabilitation measures during floods;
(g) advise State Governments on proper storage of rainwater and construction
of dams to prevent floods; and
(h) give direction to the District Committee set up under section 8 in regard to
assistance to be provided to the persons affected by flood.
6. The expenditure incurred on implementation of flood control and other measures
suggested by the Authority shall be borne by the Central Government and the State
Governments in such ratio, as may be prescribed.
7. It shall be the duty of the Central Government to implement the recommendations of
the Authority:
Provided that where any recommendation of the Authority cannot be implemented due
to financial or any other reason, the Central Government shall inform the Authority
accordingly.
8. (1) The appropriate Government shall set up a Committee in each district to be
known as the District Committee under the Chairmanship of the District Collector/District
Magistrate/Deputy Commissioner.
(2) The District Committee shall consist of five members to be nominated by the
appropriate Government.
(3) The District Committee shall function under the guidance and supervision of the
Authority.
Establishment
of National
Flood Control
and
Rehabilitation
Authority.
Composition
of the
Authority.
Functions of
the Authority.
Cost to be
borne by
Central and
State
Governments.
Central
Government to
implement the
recommendations
of the
Authority.
District
Committee.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
(4) The District Committee shall provide financial assistance, shelter and other facilities
to the people affected by floods within a period of fifteen days from date of occurrence of
flood in its jurisdiction.
(5) If the District Committee does not deliver assistance to the persons affected by the
flood within fifteen days of the occurrence of the flood, the District Committee shall be
subject to such action as may be determined by the Authority.
9. (1) The Authority shall prepare, in such form and manner, as may be prescribed, an
annual report giving a true and full account of its activities during the previous year and
submit it to the Central Government.
(2) The Central Government shall cause to be laid before each House of Parliament the
reports submitted to it under sub-section ( 1).
10. (1) The Central  Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of the Act.
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Annual Report.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Floods are a frequent occurrence across the country and result in widespread loss of
life and property. The Government is under constant pressure to manage the natural calamities
and to undertake relief measures. Every time it is observed that there is delay in providing
relief to the persons affected by floods due to lack of coordination among various relief
providing agencies.
There are a number of perennially flowing rivers in the country and enormous amount
of water of these rivers flows into the sea. This wastage of water should be prevented and
utilised by diverting water from water surplus to water deficit areas. On the other hand, our
ground water level is also rapidly declining. Thus, if there is no proper planning and mechanism
to harvest water, the country will face water crisis in future.
It is the need of the hour to formulate a national policy for water harvesting, creating
public awareness and preservation of water and adopting a scientific approach for the
control of floods and related natural calamities.
Hence, this Bill seeks to provide for the setting up of an authority to suggest measures
to the Government to prevent and control floods and to provide relief to flood affected
people in a time-bound manner.
N
EW DELHI; A.T. NANA PATIL
October 22,  2010.
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for setting up of a National Flood Control and Rehabilitation
Authority. Clause 4 provides for payment of salary and allowances to the members of the
Authority. Clause 6 provides that the expenditure incurred  on implementation of flood
control measures suggested by the Authority shall be borne by the Central Government and
State Governments. Clause 8 provides for setting up of District Committees to provide
financial assistance, shelter and other facilities to the victims of the floods. While the
expenditure relating to District Committees in the States shall be met out of the Consolidated
Funds of the respective States, the expenditure relating to District Committees under the
Union Territory Administration shall be met out of the Consolidated Fund of India. The Bill,
therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is
likely to involve a recurring expenditure of about rupees five thousand crore per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees two hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.
5

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 10 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to frame rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of detail only and as such the
delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.
6

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the setting up of a National Flood Control and Rehabilitation Authority to
suggest measures to prevent and control floods, provide relief to people affected by
floods and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri A.T. Nana Patil, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—5212LS(S3)—18-11-2010.