Short title and
extent.
THE AGRICULTURAL AND OTHER WORKERS IN RURAL AREAS
(PROTECTION, INCENTIVES AND WELFARE) BILL, 2016
By
SHRI RAJESH RANJAN, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for protective measures to the agricultural and other rural workers against
exploitation and for ensuring minimum wages, pension, provident fund facilities
and financial compensation with paid leave in case of accidents, medical,
maternity and creche facilities to women workers, education and
nutrition for the children and such other welfare measures to be
ensured by the State and for the establishment of a Welfare
Authority and a Welfare Fund for such workers of the
rural areas and for matters connected therewith
or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by the Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Agricultural and other Workers in Rural Areas
(Protection, Incentives and Welfare) Act, 2016.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
Bill No. 137 of 2016
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "agricultural worker" means a person who works as a labourer on being hired
or works in exchange, whether in cash or kind or partly in cash and partly in kind, in any
of the agricultural or related operations of an employer, farmer or other person, as the
case may be;
(b) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(c) "Authority" means the National Agricultural and other Rural Workers Welfare
Authority established under section 3;
(d) "employer" means any person who employs directly or through any other
person or agent or contractor, whether on his own behalf or on behalf of any other
person, one or more agricultural or other rural worker, for any work or work connected
with the agricultural or horticulture operations or for any other work connected with
village industries;
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(f) "rural worker" means a worker who works as artisan, weaver, potter blacksmith,
in rural areas on hire or contract or in exchange whether in cash or kind or partly in cash
and partly in kind for any other person or employer; and
(g) "Welfare Fund" means the Agricultural and other Rural Workers Welfare
Fund constituted under section 5.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, by notification in the Official
Gazette, establish the National Agricultural and other Rural Workers Welfare Authority
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) The Authority shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual
succession and common seal, with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both
movable and immovable and to contract and shall by the said name sue and be sued.
(3) The headquarters of the Authority shall be at Madhepura in the State of Bihar and
the Authority may establish regional and branch offices at other conspicuous places in the
country as it may deem necessary for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(4) The Authority shall consist of the following members, namely:—
(a) a Chairperson to be appointed by the Central Government having adequate
experience, qualifications and knowledge of labour laws and issues related to working
class or of agricultural operations or of the higher Judiciary at least of sessions
level;
(b) a Deputy Chairperson to be appointed by the Central Government having
such educational qualifications and experience as may be prescribed;
(c) five members to be appointed by the Central Government each to represent
the Union Ministries of Agriculture, Finance, Labour and Employment, Rural
Development and Social Justice and Empowerment;
(d) five Members of Parliament of whom three shall be from the House of the
people and two from the Council of States to be nominated by the Presiding Officers of
the respective Houses concerned;
(e) four members to be appointed by the Central Government from amongst the
agricultural and other rural workers:
Provided that one such member shall be a woman;
(f) four members from amongst the agricultural and other rural workers to be
nominated by the Government of the States which shall be rotated amongst the States
in alphabetical order.
(5) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of
the Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson and members of the Authority shall be such as may
be prescribed.
Establishment
of the
National
Agricultural
and other
Rural
Workers
Welfare
Authority.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Definitions.
50

3
(6) The Authority in discharging of its functions and procedure to be followed during
the meetings shall be such, as may be prescribed.
(7) The Authority shall have a Secretariat with such number of officers and other staff
with such terms and conditions of service as may be prescribed from time to time.
4. (1) The Authority shall, for the purposes of this Act, promote and undertake by such
measures as it thinks fit or deem necessary and expedient, welfare measures so as to provide
protective measures to agricultural and rural workers from exploitation.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-section (1) the welfare
measures referred to therein may provide for:—
(a) maintaining district and village-wise register of all the agricultural and other
rural workers, gender-wise, with such particulars, and in such manner as may be
prescribed;
(b) maintaining land records and micro and small industrial units at homes or
other places from village to district level in such manner and with such details as may
be prescribed;
(c) maintaining district and village-wise register of employers of agricultural and
other rural workers, as the case may be, with such particulars and in such manner as
may be prescribed;
(d) maintaining village and district-wise list of doctors, dispensaries, clinics,
health centres and hospitals for providing medicare facilities, both indoor and
outdoor, with medicines to the agricultural and other rural workers;
(e) long term action plan for making work available throughout the year to the
agricultural and other rural workers;
(f) payment of minimum wages fixed by the appropriate Government by each
employer by setting up grievances redressal committees at conspicuous places;
(g) maternity and creche facilities with paid maternity leave and for making
available necessary medicines, iron and multi-vitamin capsules for the female agricultural
and other rural workers covered under this Act;
(h) financial compensation with paid leave in case of accidents of agricultural
and other rural workers in such manner as  may be prescribed;
(i) grant of old age pension to the agricultural and other rural workers covered
under this Act;
(j) provident fund facility to the agricultural and other rural workers;
(k) educational and vocational training facilities to the children of agricultural
and other rural workers free of cost;
(l) insurance cover for the agricultural and other rural workers covered under
this Act for such works and in such manner as may be prescribed;
(m) regular supply of meals and nutrition for the children, old and incapacitated
agricultural and other rural workers; and
(n) such other provisions as the Authority may deem necessary for carrying out
the purposes of this Act.
5. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, by notification in the Official
Gazette, constitute the Agricultural and other Rural Workers Welfare Fund with an initial
corpus of ten thousand crore rupees to be provided by the Central Government by due
appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf and Governments of the States shall
contribute to the Welfare Fund to such extent and in such manner as may be prescribed.
Functions of
the Authority.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Constitution
of the
Agricultural
and other
Rural Workers
Welfare Fund.
45

4
(2) The Welfare Fund may also receive moneys from body corporates, financial
institutions, both domestic and international ones, firms, partnerships, individuals and
other bodies in the form of contributions or donations, as the case may be.
(3) The Welfare Fund shall be utilized for the welfare of agricultural and other rural
workers covered under this Act in such manner and for such purposes as may be prescribed.
6. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
it shall be the duty of every employer to:—
(a) engage only such workers who have registered themselves with the Authority;
(b) pay minimum wages to the workers engaged by him or such wages in cash or
kind as may be voluntarily agreed to by such workers;
(c) not to deduct the wages in case of accident or illness or maternity stage of
his workers;
(d) give rest and leave to his workers from time to time.
(2) The appropriate Government shall provide necessary assistance to the Authority
in carrying out the provisions of this Act within the territorial Jurisdiction of such Government.
7. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
made in  this behalf, provide, from time to time the requisite funds to the States and Union
territories and for expenditure of the Secretariat and other purposes of this Act.
8. The Authority shall prepare and submit an Annual Report in such manner and in
such form as may be prescribed, of its activities, achievements and shortfalls, if any, pertaining
to the welfare and protection of agricultural and other rural workers covered under this Act
to the President of India, who shall cause the Report to be laid in both Houses of Parliament
along with action taken by the Central Government thereon after its receipt, as soon as may
be, but within three months of the receipt thereof.
9. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
whoever contravenes simple imprisonment which may extend to six months and also with
fine which may extend to four lakh rupees.
10. The provisions of this Act and rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force but save as aforesaid the provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not
in derogation of any other law for the time being applicable to any matter dealt with by this
Act.
11. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Miscellaneous
provisions.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Annual
Report.
Penalty.
Act to have
overriding
effect and to
supplement
other laws.
Power to make
rules.
10
15
20
25
35
30
40
5

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Our is an agriculture based country and economy as around eighty per cent. of our
population lives in rural areas and are involved in agriculture activity in one way for the
other. The agriculture sector generate maximum employment opportunities in comparison to
other sectors of economy. As a result, crores of agricultural workers in the country including
women constitute a major chunk of this workforce. Similarly, there are village industries
which also provide substantial employment opportunities in rural India. However, the
agricultural and rural workers are still unorganised and, as a result, they remain exploited
throughout their lives. It has been observed that in the organised sectors there are trade
unions and associations to take care and protect the interests of their workers who get their
genuine demands fulfilled by their employers and also get the welfare measures implemented
but the unorganised agricultural and rural workers do not even get their reasonable and just
demands fulfilled by their employers. They are denied minimum wages, provident fund,
pension, maternity benefits, creche facility, medical care, accident insurance, rest, leave, etc.
There is no guarantee of work round the year or for majority of days during the year. Policy
of hire and fire is applied at the whims and fancy of the employers. As a result the agricultural
and other rural workers remain exploited, poverty-stricken and indebted throughout their
lives. When there is natural calamity, their living condition goes from bad to worse and they
do not even get two square meals a day. It is matter of serious concern that their condition is
going from bad to worse and their is no legal protection for these hapless workers. Though
the centre has initiated a legislation for unorganized workers but it does not cover most of
the issues of the agricultural and other rural workers.
Ours is a welfare State and it is the sacred duty of the State to protect the poor
agricultural and other rural workers by extending protective umbrella to them and initiating
welfare measures for them so that they too get their share of the development of the nation.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RAJESH RANJAN
April 13, 2016
5

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of the National Agricultural and
other Rural Workers Welfare Authority. Clause 5, provides for the constitution of the
Agricultural and other Rural Workers Welfare Fund with an initial corpus of ten thousands
crore rupees to be provided by the Central Government and thereafter, the Central and State
Governments will contribute to the Welfare Fund. Clause 7 makes it obligatory for the Central
Government to provide funds for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. The Bill, therefore, if
enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a
sum of rupees thirty thousand crores may involve as recurring expenditure per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees five thousand crores is also likely to be involved.
6

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
7

LOK SABHA
A
BILL
to provide for the protective measures to the agricultural and other rural workers against
exploitation and for ensuring minimum wages, pension, provident fund facilities
and financial compensation with paid leave in case of accidents, medical,
maternity and creche facilities to women workers, education and
nutrition for the children and such other welfare measures to be
ensured by the State and for the establishment of a Welfare
Authority and a Welfare Fund for such workers of the
rural areas and for matters connected therewith
or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Rajesh Ranjan, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—255LS(S3)—04-05-2016.