1
THE CLINICAL ESTABLISHMENTS (REGISTRA TION AND
REGULATION) AMENDMENT BILL, 2015
By
SHRI RA VNEET SINGH, M.P.
A
BILL
to amend the Clinical Establishments (Registration and Regulation) Act, 2010.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Clinical Establishments (Registration and Regulation)
Amendment Act, 2015.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the Clinical Establishments (Registration and Regulation) Act, 2010 (hereinafter
referred to as the principal Act), for section 7, the following section shall be substituted,
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 137 of  2015
23 of 2010. Substitution of
new section
for section 7.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
namely:—
“7. The National Council shall follow a consultative process with the State
Council or the Union territory Council, as the case may be, and the concerned State
Government for determining the standards and for classification of clinical
establishments in accordance with such procedure as may be prescribed.”.
3. In section 12 of the principal Act, for sub-section ( 2), the following sub-section
shall be substituted, namely:—
“(2) The clinical establishment providing round the clock emergency services
shall undertake to provide within the staff and facilities available, such medical
examination and treatment as may be required to stabilise the emergency medical
condition of any individual who comes or is brought to such clinical establishment:
Provided that in no case an individual who comes or is brought to such clinical
establishment shall be denied emergency medical treatment:
Provided further that if an individual, who comes or is brought to such clinical
establishment, is unable to meet the cost of emergency medical treatment, the State
Government concerned shall reimburse such cost to the clinical establishment at
such rate and in such manner, as may be prescribed.”.
4. In section 13 of the principal Act, after sub-section (2), the following section shall
be inserted, namely:—
“(3) Notwithstanding anything in this Act, the Central Government shall, while
prescribing minimum different standards for classification of different categories of
clinical establishments, relax such conditions of adherence to the standards for small
and medium health care establishments which include clinics and small nursing homes
(less than twenty beds), as it may deem appropriate, having regard to the local
conditions, as determined by the State Council or the Union territory Council, as the
case may be, or the State Government concerned.
(4) Minimum standards prescribed for small and medium health care
establishments shall be same for Government as well as private sector establishments
and there shall be no discrimination between allopathic (modern medicine), alternate
systems (AYUSH), Y oga and Sowa-Rigpa establishments of similar size and facilities
in terms of minimum standards shall be required to be fulfilled for registration under
this Act.”.
Amendment of
Section 12.
Amendment
of section 13.
National Council
to follow
consultative
process with the
State or Union
territory Council
and concerned
State
Governments.
5
10
15
20
25
30

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Clinical Establishments (Registration and Regulation) Act, 2010 was enacted to
ensure that a quality standard is maintained by clinical establishments. But the Act has
proved to be detrimental to the growth of nation’s healthcare sector, especially the small and
medium clinical establishments.
Health being a State subject and the registration of clinical establishments being done
under the State Government, any centralization of healthcare sector will not provide enough
space to the State Governments and the local authorities to build this sector in a contextual
manner. Therefore, the State Governments must be given at least equal authority to make
changes in the standards and requirements for registration of clinical establishments.
In the existing legal framework, only large private sector hospitals with substantial
finances are able to register themselves and provide healthcare services. Due to paucity of
funds, the smaller and medium healthcare establishments, providing healthcare services to
seventy five to eighty per cent. of the population, are finding it difficult to abide by the
requirements needed for registration under the Act and are being pushed out of the system.
Several State Governments including the Governments of West Bengal and Tamil Nadu
States have refused to implement the Act stating that it penalizes private clinics and the
doctors. Similarly, various medical groups like the Medicos’ Legal Action Group Trust (MLAG)
and Indian Medical Association (IMA) have stated that the Act is safeguarding the interests
of large private sector hospitals only.
Though the Indian Medical Association and Medicos’ Legal Action Group Trust have
stated that the Act ensures the quality and standard in healthcare/medical services in the
country, but at the same time, also leading to an Inspector Raj and harassment of small and
medium medical establishments in the country. The registration of individual practicing
doctors is being cancelled nationwide due to their  inability to meet the requirements prescribed
under the Act.
Moreover, the small and medium clinical establishments which provide 24 hour medical
emergency services cannot be expected to stabilize all emergencies without a mechanism for
reimbursement of the cost incurred in such stabilization. The need of the hour is that in
prescribing the standards for clinical establishments, concession in complying with the
standards be provided to smaller and medium clinical establishments in areas where people
do not have physical and financial access to healthcare facilities.
The ratio of number of doctors to per one thousand population in India is 0.47, which
is much lower than the global average of 1.5. If the Act is not amended suitably, this ratio will
further decline and may lead to a poor healthcare service in the country.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Clinical Establishments (Registration and
Regulation) Act, 2010 with a view to—
(a) enable the State Councils, Union territory Councils and State Governments
to have their say in the formulation of standards and classification of clinical
establishments with regard to local conditions;
(b) compensate the clinical establishments for providing emergency medical
services to individuals who cannot afford the cost of the treatment in clinical
establishments during emergency; and
(c) provide concessions to the small and medium clinical establishments in
adherence to prescribed standards for classification of clinical establishments.
N
EW DELHI; RAVNEET SINGH
February 16, 2015.

4
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CLINICAL ESTABLISHMENTS (REGISTRATION AND REGULATION) ACT, 2010
(23 OF 2010)
******
7. The National Council shall follow the consultative process for determining the
standards and for classification of clinical establishments in accordance with such procedure
as may be prescribed.
* *** * *
12. (1) **** *
(2) The clinical establishments shall undertake to provide within the staff and
facilities available, such medical examination and treatment as may be required to stabilize
the emergency medical conditions of any individual who comes or is brought to such
clinical establishments.
*****
13. ( 1) Clinical establishment of different systems shall be classified into such
categories, as may be prescribed by the Central Government, from time to time.
(2) Different standards may be prescribed for classification of different categories
referred to in sub-section (1):
Provided that in prescribing the standards for clinical establishments, the Central
Government shall have regard to the local candidates.
******
National
Council to
follow
consultative
process.
Condition for
Registration.
Classification
of clinical
establishment.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to amend the Clinical Establishments (Registration and Regulation) Act, 2010.
————
(Shri Ravneet Singh, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—23LS(S3)—30-04-2015.