10K SABRA 
CORRI GENDUM 
THE. MEECHANI' SHIPPING (AMENDHENT) BILL, 1978 
no be/~ introduced in Ipk sabhU 
proposed 
1. Page 2, against~ection 87C,-
!.~~ the following marginal heading -
"E.xemption from section 87B. " 
NEW DELHI; 
~st ~' 196& Bliaora ,19 (Saka) 

As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA ON 
, 
Bill No. 138 of 1978 
THE MERCHANT SHIPPING (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1978 
A 
BILL 
i' further to amend the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-ninth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Merchant Shipping (Amendment) Act, Short 
1978. title. 
44 of 1958. S Z. In the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 (hereinafter referred to as the Insertion 
principal Act), after Part VI, the following Part shall be inserted, of new 
namely: _ Part VIA. 
'PART VIA 
OBLIGIATION OF CER'l'AlN CERTIFICATE HOLDERS TO SERVE GOVERNMENT 
10 OR IN INDIAN SHIPS 
IS 
87A In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "appointed day" means the date on which the Merchant 
Shipping (Amendment) Act, 1978, comes into force; 
(b) "certificate" means-
(i) a certificate of competency referred to in section 78; 
Defini-
tions. 

Holders 
ofcerti-
ficates 
to serve 
the Gov-
ernment 
or in 
Indian 
Rhips for a 
certain 
period. 
2 
(ti) a certificate of. service referred to in section 80; or 
(iii) a certificate of competency or serv:ce referred to in 
section 86. 
which has been obtained by any person by availing of training 
facilities in any of the merchant navy training establishments in 5 
India. or experience of sea service on board any Indian ship or 
Indian Naval ship; 
(c) "Government" include~ 
(i) a Board of Trustees constituted under the Major 
Port Trusts Act. 1963, for any port, JO 38 of 1963. 
(ii) a corporation established by or under a Central, 
Provincial or State Act. 
(iii) a Government company within the meaning of 
section 617 of the Companies Act, 1956, and 
(iv) a Merchant Navy Training Institution financed 15 
wholly or mainly by Government; 
(d) "suitable employment", in relation to the holder of any 
certificate, means employment !n a 'Capacity for which the hold-
ing of· such certificate is an essential qualification. 
87B. (1) Every citizen of India who obtains, on or after the 20 
appointed day, a certificate shall be liable to serve the Government, 
or in aDy Indian ship, for such period not extending beyond four 
years from the date on which he obtains such certificate or for such 
shorter period as the Central Government may, by a general or 
speCial order published in the Official Gazette, specify. 25 
(2) No citizen of India who has obtained. on or after the 
appointed day, a certificate shall accept any employment other than 
an employment under the Government or in any Indian. ship, before 
the expiry of, the period during which he is liable to serve the Gov-
ernment or in any Indian ship in accordance with the provisions of 30 
sub-section (1) and the orders made thereunder. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) or 
sub-section (2), a citizen of India who has obtained, on or after the 
appointed day, two or more certiftcates shall not be liable to serve 
under the Government or in any Indian ship for any period or 35 
per!ods exceeding, or, as the case may be, exceeding in the aggre-
gate, seven years. 
87C. (1) When any person refet1'ed to in st!Ction 87B h8'!I failed 
to secure suitable employment. within a reasonable period from the 
date on which he applied for the same, he may make an application 40 
to the Director-General for exempting him from the requirements 
ot sub-sections (1) and (2) of that section and if the Director-
General is satisfied that the grounds stated in the application justify 
the exemption sought hr, he shall, by order, exempt such person 
from the requirements of those sub-sections. 4S 
(2) The Director-General may. either on his own motion or on 
an application made bv any person referred to in section 87B, by 
1 of 1956. 

5 
10 
IS 
,20 
3S 
4S 
3 
or.Qer in writing, ex~pt su'Ch perSOn from the requtremen'ts of sub-
sections (H and (3) of that section, if the Director..Qeneral is satis. 
fied-
(4) that it is necessary so to do for compliance with any 
r.equest made by the Government of any foreign country to 
make available the services of Indian personnel for meeting 
shortage of qualified personnel in its ships or shore establish-
m,ents, or for compliance with any request made by any agency 
of the United Nations Organisation for making available Indian 
personnel for providing consultancy services on its behalf in 
technical co-operation or technical assistance programme in any 
country; or 
(b) that such person is likely to suffer undue hardship if 
he is not so exempted. 
(3) An application for exemption under sub-section (1) or sub-
section (2) shall set out clearly all the particulars on the basis of 
which such exemption is applied for. 
(4) Every such application shall be disposed of by the Director· 
General as expeditiom;}y as possible and where the Director-General 
refuses to grant the exemption applied for, he shall record his 
reasons therefor and communicate the same to the applicant. 
(5) Wnere, within a period of forty-five days of the date of 
receipt of any such application, the Director-General does not refuse 
to grant the exemption applied for, or does not communicate the 
rejusal to the applicant, the Director-General shall be deemed to 
have granted the exemption applied for. 
(6) Where the Director·General refuses to grant the exemption 
applied for, the applicant may prefer an appeat against such refuaal 
to the Central Government within thirty days of the receipt of the 
brder of the Dirtctor·General refusing the exemption and the Cen-
tral Government may make such orders as it deems fit: 
PrdVided that the Central GovernMent may Admit any appeal 
~fter thE! expiry Clf the period aforesaid, if it is satisfied that the 
appellant had sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal in time: 
Provided fUrther that no order confirming the drcier of the 
Director-General shaH be made under this sub-section without 
giving the appellant an opportunity to represent his case. 
87D. Every Citizen of India who obtains, on or after the appoint-
ed day, a certificate, shall furnish, in such form and at such intervals 
as may be prescribed, particulars of the certificate or certificates 
obtained by him and' of his employment.'. 
3. In section 377 of the principal Act,-
(a) after sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be 
inserted, namely:-
"(IA) Any certificate within the meaning of clause (b) of 
section 87 A may be cancelled or suspended for any specified 
period by the Central Government if the person to whom such 
Particu .. 
lars of 
certiflcate, 
etc., to be 
furnished. 
Amend· 
mentol 
section 
377. 

4 
certificate has been granted has contravened the provisions of 
sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) of section 87B: 
Provided that no order under this sub-section shall be pass-
ed by the Central Government unless the person concerned has 
been given an opportunity of making a representation against 5 
the order proposed."; 
(b) in sub-section (2), for the words, brackets and figure "sub-
section (1) or", wherever they occur, the words, brackets, figures 
and letter "sub-section (1) or sub-section (lA) or" shall be substi-
tuted. 10 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Government of India is responsible for the training of the Merchant 
Navy personnel and it incurs substantial expenditure on the training 
institutions for the officers. By the drift abroad of the trained personnel, 
not only the expenditure incurred on training becomes infructuous but 
Indian shipping industry is also handicapped to a great extent as it is 
unable to find adequate qualified personnel to man their ships. 
2. With a v~ew to increaSing the availability of the trained Merchant 
Navy personnel for employment on Indian ships, shore-based establish-
ments, etc., it is proposed to cast obligation on the holders of Certificate 
of Competency and other certificates under the Merchant Shipping f.ct, 
1958, to serve for a certain, minimum period on Indian ships, ports and 
other establishments. 
3. The Bill seeks to achieve the above object. 
NEW DELHI; CHAND RAM. 
The 23rd Augu.st. 1978. 
s 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Tae Dew section 87B proposed to be inserted in the Act by clause 2 
of the Bill empower.s the Central Government to make rules regarding 
the form in whiclla and the intervals at which certificate holders will 
have to furnish particulars of the certificates obtained by them and 
of their employment. 
2. The matters in respect of which rules may be made are of admi-
niStrative detail and procedure and as such. delegation of legislative 
power is of a normal character. 

• 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACT FROM THE MERCHANT SHIPPING ACT, 1958 
(44 OF 1958) 
• • • • 
PART XII 
''"1 
INVESTIGATIONS AND INQUIRIES .. 
• • • • • 
Miscellaneous provisions rel.a.ting to cancellation and suspeneion of 
certificates 
377. (1) • • • • 
(2) The Central Government may at any time. if· it thinks the justice 
of the case so requires,-
(a) revoke any order of cancellation or suspension made by it 
under sub-section (1) or set aside any order of cancellation or sus-
pension made by a court under section 370 or any order of suspension 
made by a Marine Board under clause (b) of sub-section (1) of 
section 376 or any order of censure made by a court under section 
371; or 
(b) shorten or length:m the period of suspension ordered by it 
ur14ier sub-section (1) or by a CO'.l~t under sect'on 370 or by a Marine 
Board under clause (b) of sub-s~ction (1) of section 376 or cancel 
a certificate suspended by a Marine Board under that clause; or 
(c) grant without examination a new certificate o~ the same or 
any lower grade in the case of any certificate cancelled or ~uspended 
by it under sub-section (1) or by a court under sect:on 370 or any 
certificate suspended by a Marine Board under clause (b) of sub-
section (1) of section 376: 
Provided that no order under clause (b) either lengthening the peri<') I 
of suspension of or cancelling a certificate shall be passed by the Central 
Government unless the person concerned has been g:ven an opportunity 
oi making a representation "against the order proposed. 
1 
Powero of 
Central 
Govern-
ment to 
cancel, 
suspend, 
etc., cer-
tificate of 
master, 
mate or 
engineer. 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Merchant Shipping Act, i958. 
(ShT'i Chand Ram, 
MinisteT' of State in chaT'ge of 
the Ministry of Shipping and 
TT'anspOT't. ) 