AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

Bill No. 138 of 2005
[OY (BLE WORE Ts BEEN Re ae

THE FISHERMEN (WELFARE) BILL, 2005 |

By
Dr. K.S. MANoJ, M.P.

A

BILL
to provide for certain welfare measures for fishermen and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto

BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—

1. (/) This Act may be called the Fishermen (Welfare) Act, 2005. Short title,
| extent and
(2) It extends to the whole of India. commencement.

(3) It shall come into force at once.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— | Definition.

| (7) ‘fishermen’ means and includes any person who is engaged in fishing and
fishing related works such as repairing, maintaining and manning boats, nets and other
equipments used in fishing and peeling, drying and selling of fish


x:

(7) 'Fund' means the Fishermen Welfare Fund constituted under section 3 of |
this Act; and |

(iii) 'prescribed' means prescribed by rules framed under this Act.

Constitution of 3. (1) The Central Government shall set up a Fund to be known as Fishermen

Fishermen Welfare Fund for the welfare of fishermen in the country.
Welfare Fund.

(2) The Central Government and every littoral State Government/Union territory
administration shall contribute to the Fund in such ratio as may be prescribed.

(3) The Fund shall be administered by a Committee consisting of:—
(i) a Chairman who shall be appointed by the Central Government;

(ii) not more than one representative each from the littoral States/Union
territories to be nominated by the respective State Government/Union Territory
Administration;

(iii) not more than one representative from the littoral States/Union
territories representing the fishermen who shall be nominated in such manner as
may be prescribed. 7 ?

(4) The terms and conditions of the appointment of Chairman and other members
of the Committee shall be such as may be prescribed by the Central Government.

Utilisation of 4. The Fund shall be used for the following purposes:—

the Fund.
(i) payment of unemployment/subsistence allowance to fishermen during off-

season period;
(ii) providing free health facilities for the fishermen and their families;
(iii) providing free educational facilities to the children of fishermen;
(iv) payment of compensation to fishermen injured while fishing;
(v) payment of compensation to families of fishermen dying in harness.

(vi) payment of disability allowance to fishermen incapacitated due to accident
while fishing;

८, (vii) payment of old age pension to fishermen who have attained the age of
sixty years; and 3

(viii) payment of family pension to the next of kin including minor children of
the deceased fishermen.

Power to make 5. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
rules. carrying out the purposes of the Act.



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Millions of men and women throughout the length and breadth of the coastal areas are
engaged in fishing and works related to it. Their living conditions are extremely poor, as
they have to depend on the nature to venture into the sea leading to a situation where there is
no work during the greater part of the year. Due to their extreme poverty, their children are
not properly educated. No health care is available to them. By the time they reach the age of
sixty they become physically unfit to work and are left on the mercy of others. Risk factor in
their profession is also very high. It is the responsibility of the Government to provide
minimum security and welfare for these people.

Hence this Bill.

New DELHI; * , | 1९.५. MANOJ
November 8, 2005.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the setting up of a Fishermen Welfare Fund for the
benefit of fishermen. It further provides that the Central Government shall also contribute to
the Fund. Therefore, the Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India. It is likely to involve a recurring expenditure of rupees one hundred crore per
annum. a a |

A non-recurring expenditure of rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be involved.

a
ae to


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 5 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out

the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of

legislative power is of a normal character.


LOK SABHA |

A
BILL

to provide for certain welfare measures for fishermen and for matters

connected therewith or incidental thereto.
« a

(Dr. K.S. Manoj)

MGIPMRND--3493LS—18.11.2005. —

~