1
THE COMPULSORY REGISTRATION OF MARRIAGES BILL, 2009
By
SHRIMATI SUPRIYA SULE, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the compulsory registration of all marriages solemnized in the country
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixtieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Compulsory Registration of Marriages Act, 2009.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, "appropriate Government" means
in the case of a State, the Government of that State, and in all other cases, the Central
Government.
3. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, or
in any custom or usage to the contrary, every marriage solemnized in the country shall be
compulsorily registered within one month from the date of marriage.
4. The marriages shall be registered,—
(i) in the office of Gram Panchayat in rural areas; and
(ii) with the Sub-Registrar or Tehsildar, or such municipal authority, as may be
authorized by the State Government in this behalf, in the Urban areas:
Short title and
extent.
Bill No. 138 of 2009
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Definition.
Compulsory
registration of
Marriages.
Marriage to
be registered
with
designated
authorities.
5
10

2
Provided that where there is no Gram Panchayat, the marriages shall be registered with
the nearest Sub-Registrar or Tehsildar or any other authority, which may be authorized by
the appropriate Government in this behalf.
5. (1) The particulars of the marriage to be entered in the marriage register to be
maintained by the Gram Panchayat, Sub-Registrar or Tehsildar or municipal authority, as the
case may be, and the form and manner in which such particulars shall be entered, shall be
such as may be prescribed.
(2)  The appropriate Government shall also prescribe the documents relating to
solemnization of marriage to be furnished at the time of registration of marriage for record.
(3) The designated officer or authority shall, if satisfied with the documents and
details furnished by either party to the marriage for registration of marriage, issue a
marriage certificate to such person.
6. Any marriage which is not registered within thirty days of its solemnization shall
not be treated as a valid marriage and shall be null and void.
7. The provisions of the Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force regulating any of the matters dealt with in this Act.
8. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2)  Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Particulars to
be entered in
the marriage
register.
Marriage
without
registration to
be null and
void.
Act not to be
in derogation
of other laws.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
25

3
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
There are a number of people who are married and are not registered with any
Government agency. There have been reports that a large number of men desert women after
solemnising the marriage. Thus, women are being unnecessarily harassed. There are people
who marry their daughters to the foreigners for monetary considerations, but such women
are often deserted later on. A number of such cases have come to the notice of the Central
and State Governments. A large number of foreigners come and marry in this country only to
desert their wives later.
There are a number of States where child marriages are still taking place and there is no
check on such marriages by the Central Government or the State Governments. These
marriages are mostly unsuccessful. Many women organizations in the country have opposed
such practice and have demanded that the Government should check child marriages.
As there is no such law making registration of marriages compulsory, it is necessary
that the Central Government and the State Governments should make a provision to register
all the mariages that have taken place in their respective jurisdictions. So, all marriages, in
whatever form they are solemnized, should be compulsorily registered to save women from
harassment. Even the Supreme Court has urged the Central Government and the State
Governments to enact such a law.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SUPRIYA  SULE
November 12, 2009.

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 5 of the Bill provides that the designated officer or authority shall, if satisfied
with the documents and details furnished by either party to the marriage for registration of
marriage, issue a marriage certificate to such person. While expenditure in respect of marriages
registered with authority of the State Governments will be borne by the respective State
Governments, the expenditure in relation to Union territories in this regard shall be borne by
the Central Government. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of rupees
one hundred crore is likely to be involved for the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.
4

5
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 8 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of this Bill.
As the rules will relate to the matters of detail only, the delegation of legislative power
is, therefore, of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the compulsory registration of all marriages solemnized in the
country and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shrimati Supriya Sule, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—1613LS(S5)—15-04-2010.