1
THE PRE-CONCEPTION AND PRE-NATAL DIAGNOSTIC
TECHNIQUES (PROHIBITION OF SEX SELECTION)
AMENDMENT BILL, 2015
By
SHRI BAIJAYANT PANDA, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Pre-conception and Pre-natal Diagnostic Techniques
(Prohibition of Sex Selection) Act, 1994.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Pre-conception and Pre-natal Diagnostic Techniques
(Prohibition of Sex Selection) Amendment Act, 2015.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 138 of  2015
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In section 2 of the Pre-conception and Pre-natal Diagnostic Techniques (Prohibition
of Sex Selection) Act, 1994 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), after clause (a), the
following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
‘(aa) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government
of that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;’.
3. After section 6 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:—
“6A. On and from the commencement of the Pre-conception and Pre-natal
Diagnostic Techniques (Prohibition of Sex  Selection) Amendment Act, 2015, no person
or genetic counselling centre or genetic laboratory or genetic clinic, after having
conducted pre-natal diagnostic procedure or test, shall conduct or cause to be
conducted any surgical or any other procedure or administer medication or cause to
be administered medication in any manner with the intention to remove the female
foetus.”
4. In section 23 of the principal Act,—
‘(i) in sub-section (1), for the words “punishable with imprisonment for a term
which may extend to three years and with fine which may extend to ten thousand
rupees and on any subsequent conviction, with imprisonment which may extent to
five years and with fine which may extent to fifty thousand rupees”, the words
“punishable with imprisonment for a term which may  extent to four years and with
fine which may extend to one lakh rupees and on any subsequent conviction, with
imprisonment which may extend to ten years and with fine which may extend to five
lakh rupees” shall be substituted.’.
(ii) after sub-section (4),  the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
“(5) Any person or organization, by whatever name called, who aids or
abets the commission of offence of removal of female foetus or withholds
information regarding commission of such offence shall be punished with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years and with fine which may
extend to fifty thousand rupees.”.
5. In section 25 of the principal Act, for the words “punishable with imprisonment for
a term which may extend to three months or with fine, which may extend to one thousand
rupees or with both”, the words “punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend
to six months or with fine, which may extend to ten thousand rupees or with both” shall be
substituted.
6. After Chapter VII of the principal Act, the following Chapter shall be inserted,
namely:—
“CHAPTER VIIA
E
STABLISHMENT OF FAST TRACK COURTS
28A. Nothwithstanding anything contained in this Act, whoever contravenes any of
the provisions of this Act or any rules made thereunder shall be deemed to be guilty of
committing an offence under this Act and shall be dealt with in accordance with the procedure
laid down in this Chapter.
28B. (1) For the purpose of providing speedy trail of offences, the appropriate
Government shall establish such number of Fast Track Courts as it may deem necessary, to
deal exclusively with the matters arising out of offences committed under this Act.
(2) The Fast Track Courts under sub-clause (1) shall be established in consultation
with the Chief Justice of the High Court concerned.
Amendment
of section 2.
Insertion of
new section
6A.
Prohibition on
removal of
female foetus.
Amendment
of section 23.
Insertion of
new sub-
section 23(5).
Amendment
of section 25.
Procedure to
deal with
offences
committed
under the Act.
Establishment
of Fast Track
Courts.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Insertion of
new Chapter
VIIA.
40
45

3
(3) The expenses incurred in establishing the Fast Track Courts and the
administrative expenses of such courts, including salaries, allowances and pensions payable
to or in respect of persons serving in that office, shall be borne by the Central Government.
28C. An investigation into an offence committed under this Act and the filing of
charge-sheet in the Fast Track Court shall be completed within a period of sixty days from
the date of filing of a complaint.
28D. The Fast Track Court shall complete the trial within a period of one hundred and
twenty days from the date of filing of charge-sheet in the court:
Provided that where the trial cannot be completed within a period of one hundred and
twenty days, the Fast Track Court shall record in writing the reasons therefor and complete
the trial within a further period of not more than sixty days, or within such further periods not
exceeding sixty days at a time, for reasons to be recorded in writing, but not exceeding a total
period of one year.
28E. On and from the commencement of the Pre-conception and Pre-natal Diagnostic
Techniques (Prohibition of Sex Selection) Amendment Act, 2015, the jurisdiction, powers
and authority in relation to offences committed under this Act shall be exercisable by a Fast
Track Court established under this Chapter and no other Court except the High Court
concerned and the Supreme Court shall have jurisdiction, powers or authority in relation to
such offences.
28F. Every suit or other proceeding filed or initiated under this Act and pending before
any other court, Tribunal or Authority immediately before the date of commencement of the
Pre-conception and Pre-natal Diagnostic Techniques (Prohibition of Sex Selection) Amendment
Act, 2015 shall stand transferred on that date to the Fast Track Court of competent jurisdiction:
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall apply to a suit or other proceedings
pending in the High Court or the Supreme Court, as the case may be.”.
Investigation
and filing of
charge-sheet
to be
completed
within sixty
days.
Fast Track
Court to
complete the
trial within
one hundred
and twenty
days.
Offences
committed to
be exercisable
by a Fast
Track Court.
Transfer of
cases to the
Fast Track
Court.
5
10
15
20
25

4
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The practice of female foeticide is prevalent in many parts of our country. According
to estimates, foetal sex determination and selective abortion of female foetus has grown
into a huge industry with doctors making at least rupees 1,000 crore by conducting illegal
sex-selection procedures in India. The 2001 census revealed a decrease in child sex ratio
from 945 in 1991 to 927 in 2001. The latest census in 2011 shows that the child sex ratio has
dropped to 914 females against 1000 male the lowest since independence. Also, there is
ample evidence to suggest that this practice of sex determination and female foeticide has
grown among the upper and middle class of the society and has moved to cities and towns.
An estimated 15 million girls were wiped out simply not born in India over the last decade
due to sex selection and female foeticide. And not surprisingly, India ranks 113th out of
135 countries in the World Economic Forum’s Global Gender Gap Index for 2011.
The Pre-conception and Pre-natal Diagnostic Techniques (Prohibition of Sex Selection)
Act was enacted in 1994 to prohibit sex selection, before or after conception, and for
preventing the misuse of pre-natal diagnostic techniques for sex determination. However,
ineffective implementation of this Act has led to minimum number of convictions and dented
the fight against female foeticide. In 2001, seven years legislation, the Supreme Court
directed State Governments to enforce the provisions of the aforesaid Act effectively.
Therefore, it is necessary to establish Fast Track Courts to quickly and efficiently
deliver justice and convict those who commit the horrendous crime of female foeticide.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; BAIJAYANT  PANDA
April 6, 2015.

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 6 of the Bill provides for establishment of Fast Track Courts to deal exclusively
with matters arising under the Act. All expenditure in respect of Fast Track Courts shall be
met out of the Consolidated Fund of India.
It is estimated that a sum of rupees twelve crore will be required as recurring
expenditure per annum. A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is
also likely to be involved.

6
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE PRE-CONCEPTION AND PRE-NATAL DIAGNOSTIC TECHNIQUES
(PROHIBITION OF SEX SELECTON) ACT, 1994
(57 OF 1994)
* * * * * * * *
23. (1) Any medical geneticist, gynaecologist, registered medical practitioner or any
person who owns a Genetic Counselling Centre, a Genetic Laboratory or a Genetic Clinic or
is employed in such a Centre, Laboratory or Clinic and renders his professional or technical
services to or at such a Centre, Laboratory or Clinic, whether on an honorary basis or
otherwise, and who contravenes any of the provisions of this Act or rules made thereunder
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and with
fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees and on any subsequent conviction, with
imprisonment which may extend to five years and with fine which may extend to fifty thousand
rupees.
(2) * * * * * * *
(3) * * * * * * *
(4) * * * * * * *
25. Whoever contravenes any of the provisions of this Act or any rules made thereunder,
for which no penalty has been elsewhere provided in this Act, shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months or with fine, which may extend to
one thousand rupees or with both and in the case of continuing contravention with an
additional fine which may extend to five hundred rupees for every day during which such
contravention continues after conviction for the first such contravention.
* * * * * * * *
Offences and
penalties.
Penalty for
contravention
of the
provisions of
the Act or
rules for
which no
specific
punishment is
provided.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Pre-conception and Pre-natal Diagnostic Techniques (Prohibition
of Sex Selection) Act, 1994.
————
(Shri Baijayant Panda, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—296LS(S3)—30-04-2015.