As IntRopucep In Lok SABHA oN

20 AUG i292

Bill No, 138 of 1992
THE PASSPORTS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1992
A
BILL
further to amend the Passports Act, 1967.

Br it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-third Year of the Republic
| India as follows: —

1. (1) This Act may be called the Passports (Amendment) Act,
1992.

2) (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.

2. In section 5 of the Passports Act, 1967 (hereinafter referred
to as the principal Act), in sub-section (1), for the words “a fee of
rupees fifty”, the following words shall be substituted, namely:—

“such fee as may be prescribed to meet the expenses incurred on

special security paper, printing, lamination and other connected

miscellaneous services in issuing passports and other travel docu-
ments.”,

3. For section 8 of the principal Act, the following section shall be
15 substituted, namely:

10

“g, Where a passport is issued for a shorter period than the
prescribed period under section 7, such shorter period shall, unless
the passport authority for reasons to be recorded in writing other-
wise determines, be extendable for a further period (which together

Short
title and
com-
mence-
ment.

Amend-
ment of
section 5.

Substi-
tution of
new
section


2

with the shorter period shall not exceed the prescribed period) and
the provisions of this Act shall apply to such extension as they
apply to the issue thereof.”,

Amend- 4, In section 10 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3), after clause
ment of (b), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:— |
Section

10. “Provided that if the holder of such passport obtains

another passport, the passport authority shall also impound or cause
to be impounded or revoke such other passport.”.

Amend- 5. In section 11 of the principal Act, in sub-section (4), for the words

ment of and brackets “by such fee (if any) not exceeding rupees twenty-five as

eects may be prescribed”, the words “by such fee as may be prescribed for

कु meeting the expenses that may be incurred in calling for relevant
records and for connected services” shall be substituted.

हलक 6. In section 12 of the principal Act— -

ment of

seein (a) in sub-section (1), for the words “six months or with fine 15

12, which may extend to two thousand rupees”, the words “two years
or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees” shall be
substituted;

(0) after sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be in-
serted, namely: — 20.

“(1A) Whoever, not being a citizen of India —

(a) makes an application for a passport or obtains a
Passport by suppressing information about his nationality, or

(b) holds a forged passport or any travel document,

shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall 5
not be less than one year but which may extend“to five years
and with fine which shall not be less than ten thousand Tupees
but which may extend to fifty thousand rupees,”

(०) in sub-section (2), for the word, brackets and figure “sub-—
section (1)”, the words, brackets, figures and Jetter “sub-section 3
(1) or sub-section (1A)” shall be substituted,

is 7, In section 13, in sub-section (7) and in section 14, in sub-section
Mxrot (2) of the principal Act; for the wards “officer of police”, the words

sections “officer of police or immigration officer” shall be substituted.
13 and 14,

हे आओ 8. Sections 18 and 26 of the principal Act shall be omitted,

of .

sections q
18 and 2 zo
26.

9. In section 23 of the prineipal Act, for the words and figures “the
Amend Emigration Act, 1922", the words and figures “the Emigration Act,
jection 2, 1983” shall be substituted,



3

10, In section 24 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), @ in clause Amend.
(f), for the words “any application for the issue or renewal of a passport”, ment of
the words, figures and brackets “any application for the issue of a pass- ०1% 36
port under sub-section (1) of section 5 or issue of a passport” shall be
5 substituted, A 4 ORE DARASS



STATEMENT OF UBJECTS AND REASONS
On the basis of the experience gained in the administration of |

Passports Act, 1967, it is found necessary to amend the said Act for its
better administration,

2. The Bill proposes, inter alia,—

(a) to empower the Central Government to preseribe the fee by
rules taking into consideration the actual expenditure to be incurred
in designing and preparation of the passport booklet;

(6) provides for extension of validity period of passport issued
for a shorter period;

(०) for impounding other passports of the holder of a passport if,
he obtains a passport by suppression of material information, ete;

(०) to enhance the punishment from six months imprisonment to
two years imprisonment and from two thousand rupees to five thou-
sand rupees fine for the offences under section 12;

(e) to make a new provision providing for stringent punishment
for a person who is not a citizen of India if he makes or obtains a
passport by suppression of information about his nationality, ete.

3. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects,

New Denn;

The 11th August, 1992. R, L, BHATIA,



MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 10 seeks to amend clause (f) of sub-section (2) of section 24 of
the Passports Act, 1967 so as to empower the Central Government to pro-
vide fees payable in respect of any application for issue of a passport under
sub-section (1) of section 5.

2.-The matter in respect of which rules may be made are matters of
procedure and detail, The delegation of legislative power is thus of a
| character.


Applica-
tions for
passports
travel
docu-
ments,
ete., and
orders
thereon,

Renewal
of pass.
Ports.

Variation,
impound-
ing and
Tevoca-
tion of
passports
and
travel
docu-
ments,

Appeals.

Offences
and_
penal-
ties,

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE Passports Act, 1967
(15 oF 1967)

* * * is *

5. (1) An application for the issue of a passport under this Act for
visiting such foreign country or countries (not being a named foreign
country) as may be specified in the application may be made to the pass-
port authority and shall be accompanied by a fee of rupees fifty.

Explanation.—In this section, “named foreign country” means such
foreign country as the Central Government may, by rules made ‘ander
this Act, specify in this behalf,

* * Aiea * *

8. Every passport shall, unless the passport authority for reasons to
be recorded in writing otherwise determines in any case, be renewable
for the same period for which the passport was originally issued and the
provisions of this Act (including the provisions as to fees) shall apply
to the renewal of a passport as they apply to the issue thereof,

10. (1) * * * * .

(3) The passport authority may impound or cause to be impounded
or revoke a passport or travel document,—

i. @) * * * * *

(4 Every appeal under this section shall be made by a petition in
writing and shall be accompanied by a copy of the statement of the rea-
sons for the order appealed against where such copy has been furnished
to the appellant and by such fee (if any) not exceeding rupees twenty-
five as may be prescribed.

* * * * =

12. (1) Whoever—

(a) contravenes the provisions of section 3; or

(9) knowingly furnishes any false, information or suppresses any
material information with a view to obtaining a passport or travel
document under this Act or without lawful authority alters or
attempts to alter or causes to alter the entries made in a passport or
travel document; or

(c) fails to produce for inspection his passport or travel docu-
ment (whether issued under this Act or not) when called upon to
do so by the prescribed authority; or

(d) knowingly uses a passport or travel document issued to
another person; or


ih

(e) knowingly allows another person to use a passport or travel
document issued to him;

shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to
six months or with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees or
with both.

(2) Whoever abets any offence punishable under sub-section (1) shall,
if the act abetted is committed in consequences of the. abetment, be
punishable with punishment provided in that sub-section for that offence.

* * * * *

13. (2) Any officer of customs empowered by a general or special
order of the Central Government in this behalf and any officer of police
not below the rank of a sub-inspector may arrest without warrant any
person against whom a reasonable suspicion exists that he has committed
any offence punishable under section 12 and shall, as soon as may be,
inform him of the grounds for such arrest.

* * * * *

14, (1) Any officer of customs empowered by a general or special
order of the Central Government in this behalf and any officer of police
not below the rank of a sub-inspector may search any place and seize
any passport or travel document from any person against whom a rea-
sonable suspicion exists that he has committed any offence punishablq
under section 12,

* * * * *

18, Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, where a person
has applied for a passport, or an endorsement on his passport, for visiting
a foreign country for the purpose of emigrating to such country, the
passport shall not be issued to such person or, as the case may be, the
endorsement shall not be made on his passport, for visiting such country
if he is not permitted to emigrate, or is prohibited from emigrating, to
such country by or under the provisions of the Emigration Act, 1922.

Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, “emigrate” and “emi-
gration” shall have the meanings assigned to those expressions under
clause (e) of sub-section (1) of section 2 of the Emigration Act, 1922.

23. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in dero-
gation of the provisions of the Passport (Entry into India) Act, 1920, the
Emigration Act, 1922, the Registration of Foreigners Act, 1939, the Foreig-
ners Act, 1946, the Trading with the Enemy (Continuance of Emer-
gency Provisions) Act, 1947 the Foreigners Law (Application and
Amendment) Act, 1962, the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1973 and
other enactments relating to foreigners and foreign exchange.

2) .  # * * * *
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the

Power to
arrest.

Power of
search
and
seizure.

Passports,
ete, not

issued to
persons
who
cannot
emigrate
under
Act 7 of
1922,

Act to
be in
addition
to certain
enact-
ments,

Power to
make
ules,


Ord, 4 0f
1907.

foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the |
matters, namely: —

* * * + *

(f) the fees payable in respect of any application for the issue or
renewal of a passport for visiting a foreign country referred to in
sub-section (1A) of section 5 or travel document or for verying any
endorsement or making a fresh endorsement on a passport or a, travel
document and the fees payable in respect of any appeal under this
Act;

* * * * *

26. (1) Every passport and every travel document issued by or under
the authority of the Central Government before the commencement of +
the Passports Ordinance, 1967 and in force immediately before such com-
mencement shall be deemed to have been issued under this Act and shall,
subject to the provisions of this Act, continue in force—

(a) for the unexpired portion of the period for which such pass-
port or travel] document had been issued; or

(9) for a period of five years from such commencement;
whichever is shorter.

(2) All applications for the issue or renewal of, the making of an
endorsement on, or the performance of any service in relation to, a pass-
port or travel document made to the Central Government or to any officer
or authority appointed by that Government in that behalf before the 5th
May, 1967 and pending before the commencement of this Act shall, after
such commencement, be disposed of in accordance with the provisions

of this Act, है


i A
BILLS = =
further to amend the Passports Act, 1967