1
THE PERSONS LIVING BELOW POVERTY LINE (RESERV ATION OF
V ACANCIES IN POSTS AND SERVICES) BILL, 2017
By
SHRI VISHNU DAYAL RAM, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for reservation of vacancies in posts and services in establishments for
persons living below poverty line and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth  Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Persons Living Below Poverty Line (Reservation of
Vacancies in Posts and Services) Act, 2017.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "establishment" means an establishment which is owned, established,
controlled, managed or financed by the Government and includes—
Bill No.  138  of  2017
Short title and
extent.
Definitions.5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(i) a Ministry or department or subordinate office or attached office of the
Government;
(ii) a public sector undertaking or statutory authority constituted under
any Central Act;
(iii) a corporation in which not less than fifty-one per cent. of the paid-up
share capital is held by the Government;
(iv) a university established by a Central Act and its affiliated colleges,
including medical and engineering colleges and institutions;
(v) a primary or secondary school or any other educational institution,
which is wholly owned by the Government or receives grant or aid from the
Government;
(vi) a Government company as defined under  clause (45) of section 2 of
the Companies Act, 2013; and
(vii) an autonomous body, organisation or institution receiving grant or
aid from the Consolidated Fund of India;
(b) "Government" means the Central Government;
(c) "persons living below poverty line" means such persons who according to
norms fixed by the Central Government from time to time are deemed to be persons
living below poverty line; and
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) There shall be reserved such percentage of posts, not below ten per cent. of total
posts in every establishment, for persons living below the poverty line for appointment in
civil services by direct recruitment.
(2) The vacancies reserved for the persons living below poverty line under sub-
section (1) shall be filled in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) The vacancies reserved for persons living below poverty line during a calendar
year and not filled in that year shall be carried forward to the next calendar year.
4. Every appointing authority shall maintain such documents and records, and furnish
every year a report on the appointments by direct recruitment of persons living below
poverty line, in such manner and at such time, as may be prescribed.
5. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything contained in
any other law for the time being in force or any judgement, decree, order or direction of a
court to the contrary regarding ceiling on reservation.
6. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of the Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any  such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Reservation
of posts in
establishments
for persons
living below
poverty line.
Maintenance
of documents
and records
and furnishing
of report by
appointing
authority.
Over-riding
effect of the
Act.
18 of 2013.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
About twenty seven per cent. of population in India is living below poverty line.
When we look into the matter of deprivation of rights of people due to poverty, the picture
that emerges is not satisfactory. Poverty compels men and women to lead a miserable financial
and social life due to which they have to face hunger and illness. Their income is meagre and
they have to struggle for their existence. It is now an established fact that people belonging
to reserved categories have made progress on the basis of caste based reservation. Therefore,
it is rational to provide reservation in posts and services to persons who are living below
poverty line as a method to enable them to have a better standard of living.
We have to understand that in the case of appointments, reservation is not
discrimination or a negative approach, rather it is beneficial, positive and necessary step for
social and economic upliftment of neglected people facing starvation for a long time. In the
present caste-based reservation system, the beneficiaries belong to middle or upper class
families within that community. The extremely poor persons in the society have rarely benefited
from it. Till date, a very small proportion of people living below poverty line have received
the benefit of reservation.
To overcome the problems being faced by the persons living below poverty line, it is
necessary that special provision is made for providing reservation in posts and services to
such persons.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; VISHNU DAY AL RAM
June 29, 2017.

4
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 6 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to the matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

GMGIPMRND—913LS(S3)—21-07-2017.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for reservation of vacancies in posts and services in establishments for
persons living below poverty line and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram, M.P .)