THE ARMS BILL, 1958 
(As INTRODUCBD IN LOK SABRA) 

TIIE ARMS BILL, 1958 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CHAPTER I 
PRELlMINARY 
Clauses 
1. Short title, extent and commencement. 
2. Definitions and interpretation. 
CHAPTER II 
ACQUIsmON. POSSESSION, MANUFACTURE. SALE, IMPORT, EXPORT AND 
TRANSPORT OF ARMS AND AMMUNITION 
3. Licence for acquisition and possession of firearms . and 
ammunition. 
4. Licence for acquisition and possession of arms bf'eDY descrip-
tion in specifred cases. 
5. Licence for manufacture, sale, etc., of arms and ammunition. 
6. Licence for the shortening of guns or conversion of imitation 
firearms into firearms. 
7. Prohibition of acquisition or possession, or of .manufacture 
or sale of prohibited arms or prohibited ammunition. 
S. Prohibition of sale or transfer of firearms not bearing identi-
fication marks. 
9. Prohibition of acquisition or possession .by, or of sale or 
transfer to, young persons and certain other persons of 
firearms, etc. 
10. Licence for import and export of arms, etc. 
11. Power to prohibit import or export of arms, etc. 
12. Power to restrict or prohibit transport of arms. 
o 

(ii) 
CHAPTER III 
PROVISIONS RELATING TO LICENCES 
13. Grant of licences. 
14. Refusal of licences. 
15. Duration and renewal of licence. 
16. Fees, etc., for licence. 
17. Variation, suspension and revocation of licences. 
18. Appeala. 
CHAPTER IV 
POWERS AND PROCEDURE 
19. Power to demand production of licence, etc. 
• 
20. Arrest of persons conveying arms, etc., under suspicious 
clrcumltances. 
21. Deposit of arms, etc., on possession ceasing to be lawful. 
22. Search and seizure by magistrate. 
23. Search of vessels, vehicles for arms, etc. 
24. Seizure and detention under orders of the Central Govern-
mat. 
CHAPTER V 
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES 
25. Punishment for certain offences. 
26. Secret contraventions. 
27. Punishment for possessing arms, etc., with intent to use them 
for unlawful purpose. 
28. Punishment for use and possession of firearms or imitation 
firearms in certain cases. 
29. Punishment for knowingly purchasing arms, etc., from un-
licensed person or for delivering arms, etc., to person not 
entitled to possess the same. 

~ili) 
30. Punishment for contravention of licence or rule. 
31. Punishment for subsequent offences. 
32. Power to confiscate. 
33. Offences by companies. 
CHAPTER VI 
MISCELLANEOUS 
34. Sanction of Central Government for warehousing of arms. 
35. Criminal responsibility of persons in occupation of premises 
in certain cases. 
36. Information to be given regarding certain offences. 
37. Arrest and searches. 
38. Offences to be cognizable. 
39. Previous sanction of the district magistrate necessary in 
certain cases. 
40. Protection of action taken in good faith. 
41. Power to exempt. 
42. Power to take census of firearms. 
43. Power to delegate. 
44. Power to make rules. 
45. Act not to apply in certain cases. 
46. Repeal of Act 11 of 1878. 

5 
10 
IS 
Bill No. 138 of 1958. 
THE ARMS BILL, 1958 
(As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
to consolidate and amend the law relating to arms and ammunition. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Ninth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Arms Act, 1958. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Govern-
ment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
z. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
Short t tie, 
extent and 
commence .. 
ment. 
Definitions 
( ) " . .." ·th·t t· I .. d and inter-a acquisition, Wi 1 S gramma lca variations an pretation. 
cognate expressions, includ'Cs hiring, borrowing, or ,accepting as 
a gift; 
(b) "ammunition" means ammunition for any firearm and 
includes--
(i) rockets, bombs, grenades, shells and other like 
missiles, 
(ii) articles designed for torpedo service and submarine 
mining, 
(iii) other articles containing, or designed or adapted to 
contain, explosive, fulminating or fissionable material or 

2 
noxious liquid, gas or other such thing, whether capable of 
use with firearms or not, 
(iv) charges for firearms and accessories for such charges, 
(v) fuses and friction tubes, 
(vi) parts of, and machinery for manufacturing, ammu- 5 
nition, and 
(vii) such ingredients of ammunition as the Central Gov-
ernment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify 
in this behalf; 
(c) "arms" means articles of any description designed or 10 
adapted as weapons for offence or defence, and includes firearms, 
sharpedged and other deadly weapons, and parts of, and machi-
nery for manufacturing, arms, but does not include articles 
designed solely for domestic or agricultural uses and weapons 
incapable of being used otherwise than as toys or of being con- IS 
verted into serviceable weapons; 
(d) "district magistrate", in relation to a presidency town 
or the city of Hyderabad, means the Commissioner of Police 
thereof; 
(e) "firearms", means arms of any description designed or 20 
adapted to diseharge a projectile or projectiles of any kind by 
the action of any explosive or other forms of energy and 
includes-
(i) artillery, hand-grenades, riot-pistols or weapons of 
any kind designed or adapted for the discharge of any noxi· 25 
ous liquid, gas or other thing, 
(ii) accessories for any such fireann designed or adapted 
to diminish the noi~ or flash caused by the firing thereof, . 
(iii) parts of, and machinery for manufacturing, fire-
al'IIll, and 30 
(iv) carriages, platforms and appliances for mounting. 
transporting and serving firearms; 
(f) "licensing authority" means an officer or authority 
empowered to grant or renew licences, under rules made under 
this Act, and includes the Government; 35 
(g) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this 
Act; 
(h) "prohibited ammunition" means any ammunition con-
taining, or designed or adapted to contain, any noxious liquid, 
eas or other thine; 40 

3 
(i) "prohibited arms" means-
(i) firearms so designed or adapted that, if pressure ia 
applied to the trigger, missiles continue to be discharged 
until pressure is removed from the trigger or the magazine 
containing the missiles is empty, or 
(ii) weapons of any description designed or adapted for 
the discharge of any noxious liquid, gas or other thing; 
(j) "public servant" has the same meaning as in section 21 
of the Indian Penal Code; 
10 (k) "transfer", with its grammatical variations and cognate 
expressions, includes letting on hire, lending, giving and part-
ing with pOlieuion. 
(2) For the purposes of this Act, the length of the barrel of a 
firearm shall be measured from the muzzle to the point at which 
IS the charge is exploded on firing. 
CHAPTER II 
ACQUISITION, POSSESSION, MANUFACTURE, SALE, IMPORT, EXPORT AN; 
TRANSPORT OF ARMS AND AMMUNITION 
3. No person shall acquire, have in his possession, or carry any ~i~~.{or 
zo firearm or ammunition unless he holds in this behalf a licence issued :~WS;!:I_ 
in accordance with the provisions of this Act and the rules made aionof'fiIc-
arms • thereunder: aIDmUlll. 
Provided that a person may, without himself holding a licence, 
carry any firearm or ammunition in the presence. or under the written 
25 authority, of the holder of the licence for repair or for renewal of the 
licence or for use by such holder for purposes of sport. 
4. If the Central Government is of opinion that having regard to L" :ncefor 
the circumstances prevailing in a:r.y area it is necessary or expedient 'c'"'duisition . n posses-
in the public interest that the acqulsition, possession or carrying of on ofarml 
30 arms other than firearms should also be regulated it may, by notifi- .C.8pnr d~.­
CIl uon In 
cation in the Official Gazette, direct that this section shall apply to specified 
the area specified in the notification, and thereupon no person shall cases. 
acquire, have in his possession or carry arms of any description in 
that area unless he holds in this behalf a licence issued in accordance 
3S with the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder. 
5. No person shall- Licence for 
(a) manufacture, sell, transfer, repair, test or prove, or !t~~~~. 
(b) expose or offer for sale or transfer or have in his posses- =~~ 
sion for sale, transfer, repair, test or proof, don. 

4 
any arms or ammunition, unless he holds in this behalf a licence 
issued in accordance with the provisions of this Act and the rules 
made thereunder: 
Provided that a person may, without holding a licence in this 
behalf, sell or transfer any arms or ammunition which he lawfully 5 
possesses for his own private use to another person who is entitled 
by virtue of this Act or any other law for the time being in force to 
have, or is not prohibited by this Act or such other law from having, 
in his possession, such arms or ammunition; but the person who 
has sold or transferred such arms or ammunition shall, immediately 10 
after the sale or transfer, inform in writing the district magistrate 
having jurisdiction, or the officer in charge of the nearest police 
station, of such sale or transfer and the mame and ad:ckess of the 
other person to whom the arms or ammunition haw or has been sold 
or transferred. 15 
~~h~;t_for 6. No person shall shorten the barrel of a firearm or convert an 
ening of guns imitation firearm into a firearm unless he holds in this behalf a licence 
~ fnti~~:'': issued in accordance with the provisions of this Act and the rules 
fireaI1JlS made thereunder. 
into fireanns. 
Prohibition 
of acquisi-
Explanation.-In this section the expression "imitation firearm" 20 
means anything which has the appearance of being a firearm, whe-. 
ther it is capable of discharging any shot, bullet or other missile or 
not. 
7. No person shall-
tion or pos- (a) acquire, have in his possession or carry', or session, or 
ofmanufac- (b) manufacture, sell, transfer, repair, test or prove; or tun: or sale, 
of prohibi- (C) expose or offer for sale or transfer or have in his 
ted arms Or i f 1 f . prohibited possess on or sa e, trans er, repaIr, test or proof; 
ammunition. 
Prohibition 
of sale or 
trallsfcr of 
firearms 
not bearing 
identifica-
tion marks. 
any prohibited arms or prohibited ammunition unless he has been 
specially authorised by the Central Government in this behalf. 30 
8. (l) No person shall obliterate, remove, alter or forge any name, 
number or other identification mark stamped or otherwise shown 
on a firearm. 
(2) No person shall self or transfer any firearm which does not 
be.ar the name of the maker, manufacturer's number or other iden- 35 
tification mark stamped or otherwise shown thereon in a manner 
approved by the Central ·Government. 
(3) Whenever any person has in his posses&lon any firearm 
without such name, number or other identification mark or on 

~ 
which such name, number or other identification mark has been 
obliterated, removed, altered or forged, it shall be presumed unleu 
the contrary is proved, that he has obliterated, removed, altered or 
forged that name, number or other identification mark: 
5 Provided that in relation to a person who has in his possession 
at the commencement of this Act any firearm without such name, 
... number or other identification mark stamped or otherwise shown 
thereon, the provisions of this sub-section shall not take effect until 
after the expiration of six months from such commencement. 
10 9. (1) Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of Prohibition 
this Act,- ~~~ lion or pos-
session by, 
( ) s or ohal. 01 a no per on,- transfer to, 
(i) who has not completed the age of eighteen years, or ~ID~-
(ii) who has been sentenced on conviction of any offence :b~r-
IS involving violence or moral turpitude to imprisonment for lonloffire-. " arm_,eu:. a term of not less than SIX months, at any time durIng a 
period of five years after the expiration of the sentence, or 
(iii) who has been ordered to execute under Chapter 
VIII of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, a bond for 
keeping the peace or for good behaviour, at any time during 
the term of the bond, 
shall acquire, have in his possession or carry any firearm or 
ammunition; 
(b) no person shall sell or transfer any firearm or ammuni-
tion to, or repair, test or prove any firearm or ammunition for, 
any other person whom he knows, or has reason to believe-
(i) to be prohibited under clause (a) from acquiring, 
having in his possession, or carrying any firearm or ammuni-
tion, or 
(ii) to be of unsound mind at the time of such sale or 
transfer, or such repair, test or proof. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything in sub-clause (i) of clause (a) 
of sub-section (1), a person who has completed the age of fourteen 
years but has not completed the age of eighteen years, may use 
35 under prescribed conditions a point 22 bore rifle or an air rifle in 
the course of his training in the use of such rifle. 

1.icence Cor 
import and 
export of 
anns. etc. 
Power to 
prohibit 
import or 
ellport of 
• rms. etc. 
Power to 
restrict or 
prohibit 
tran.port 
of arm •• 
10. (1) No person shall bring into, or take out of, India by sea, 
land or air any arms or ammunition unless he holds in this behalf 
a licence issued in accordance with the provisions of this Act and 
the rules made thereunder: 
Provided that- S 
(a) a person who is entitled by virtue of this Act or any 
other law for the time being in force to have, or is not prohi-
bited by this Act or such other law -from having. in his posses-
sion any arms or ammunition, mayl without a licence in this 
behalf bring into, or take out of, India such arms or ammunition 10 
in reasonable quantities for his own private use; 
(b) a person being a foreigner coming to India for a period 
not ordinarily exceeding three months who is not prohibited by 
the laws of his country from having in his possession any arms 
or ammunition, may without a licence under this section bring IS 
with him into India such arms or ammunition in reasonable 
quantities to be used by him for purposes of sport. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the proviso to sub-
section (1). where the collector of customs or any other officer 
empowered by the Central Government in this behalf has any doubt 20 
as to the applicability of clause (a) or clause (b) of that proviso to 
any person who claims that such clause is applicable to him, or 
as to the reasonableness of the quantities of arms or ammunition in 
the possession of any person referred to in such clause, or as to the use 
to which such anns or ammunition may be put by such person, may 2S 
detain the arms or ammunition in the possession of such person 
until he receives the orders of the Cent.ral Government in relation 
thereto. 
(3) Arms and ammunition taken from one part of India to 
another by sea or air or across any intervening territory not formini 30 
part of India, are taken out of, and brought into, India within the 
meaning of this section. 
11. The Central Government may, by notification in the Officiftl 
Gazette, prohibit the bringing into, or the taking out of, India, arms 
or ammunition of such classes and descriptions as may be specified 3S 
in the notification . 
12. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette,-
(a) direct that no person shall transport over India or any 
plrt thereof arms or ammunition of such classes and descriptions 40 
as may be specified in the notification unless he holds in this 
behalf a licence issued in accordance with the provisions of this 
Act and the rules made thereunder; or 

1 
(b) prohibit such transport altogether. 
(2) Arms or ammunition trans-shipped at a seaport or an airport 
in India t;\re transported within the meaning of this section. 
CHAPTER III 
PROVISIONS RELATING TO LICENCES 
13. (I) An application for the grant of a licence under Chapter <;irant of 
II shall be made to the licensing authority and shall be in such form, licence •. 
contain such particulars and be accompanied by such fee, if any, 
10 
as may be prescribed. 
(2) On receipt of an application, the licensing authority, after 
making such inquiry, if any, as it may consider necessary, shall, 
subject to the other provisions of this Chapter, by order in writing 
either grant the licence or refuse to grant the same. 
(3) The licensing authority shall grant-
IS (a) a licence under section 3 where the licence is required-
(i) by a citizen of India in respect of a smooth bore gun 
having a barrel of not less than twenty inches in length to 
be· used for protection or sport or in respect of a mw:de 
loading gun to be used for bona fide crop protection, or 
zo (ii) in respect of a point 22 bore rifle or an air rifle to 
be used for target practice by a member of a ritle club or 
rifle association licensed or recognised by the Central Gov-
ernment; . • 
(b) a licence under section 3 in any other case or a licence 
25 under section 4, section 5, section 6, section 10 or section 12, if 
the licensing authority is satisfied that the person by whom the 
licence is required has p good reason for obtaining the same. 
• 
14. (1) Notwithstanding anything in section 13, the licensing Refusal of 
authority shall refuse to grant- licences. 
30 (a) a lirence under section 3, section 4 or section 5 where 
such licence is required in respect of any prohibited arms or 
prohibited ammunition; 
(b) a licence in any oth~r case under Chapter II,-
(i) where such licence is required by a person whom the 
35 licensing authority has reason to believe-
(1) to be prohibited by this Act or by any other 
law for the time being in force from acquiring, having 
in his possession or carrying any arms or ammunition, or 

8 
(2) to be unsound mind, or 
(3) to be for any reason unfit for a licence under 
this Act; or 
(ii) where the licensing authority deems it necessary 
for the security of the public peace to refuse to grant such 5 
licence. 
(2) The licensing authority shall not refuse to grant any licence 
to any person merely on the ground that such person does not own 
or possess sufficient property. 
(3) Where the licensing authority refuses to grant a licence to 10 
any person it shall record in writing the reasons for such refusal and 
furnish to that person on demand a brief statement of the same 
unless in any case the licensing authority is of the opipion that it 
will not be in the public interest to furnish such statement. 
Duration 15. (1) A licence under section 3 shall, unless revoked earlier, IS 
:ft~~~~ continue in force for a period of three years from the date on which 
it is granted: 
Provided that such a licence may be granted for a shorter period 
if the person by whom the licence is required so desires or if the 
licensing authority for reasons to be recorded in writing considers in 20 
any case that the licence should be granted for a shorter period. 
(2) A licence under any other provision of Chapter II shall, 
unless revoked earlier, continue in force for such period from the 
date on which it is granted as the licensing authority may in each 
case determine. 2S 
(3) Every licence shall, unless the licensing authority for reasons 
to be recorded in writing otherwise decides in any case, be renew-
aBle for the same period for which the licence was originally granted 
and shall be so renewable from time to time, and the provisions of 
sections 13 and 14 shall apply to the renewal of a licence as they 30 
apply to the grRnt thereof. 
Peel, etc., for 16. The fees on payment of which, the conditions subject to which 
li<:tnce. and the form in which a licence shall be granood or renewed shall 
be such as may be prescribed: 
Provided that different fees, different conditions and different 35 
forms may be prescribed for different types of licences: 
Provided further thet a licence may contain in addition to pre-
scribed conditions such other conditions as may be considered neces-
sary by the licensing authority in any particular case. 

9 
17. (1) The licensing authority may vary the conditions subject Variation. 
to which a licence has been granted except such of them as have suspension 
. h l' h ld and revoea-been prescribed and may for that purpose requIre t e lcence- 0 er ti on of 
by notice in writing to deliver-up the licence to it within such time I iccncel. 
5 as may be specified in the notice. 
(2) The licensing authority may, on the application of the holder 
of a licence, also vary the conditions of the licence except such of 
them as have been prescribed. 
(3) The licensing authority may by order in writing suspend a 
10 licence for such period as it thinks fit or revoke a licence,-
15 
20 
2S 
(a) if the licensing authority is satisfied that the holder of 
the licence is prohibited by this Act or by any other law for the 
time being in force, from acquiring, having in his possession or 
carrying any arms or ammunition or is of unsound mind, or is for 
any reason unfit for a licence under this Act; or 
(b) if the licensing authority deems it necessary for the 
security of the public peace to suspend or revoke the licence; or 
(c) if the licence was obtained by the suppression of mate-
rial information or on the basis of wrong information provided 
by the holder of the licence or any other person on his behalf at 
the time of applying for it; or 
(d) if any of the conditions of the licence has been contra-
vened; or 
(e) if the holder of the licence has . failed to comply with 
a notice under sub-section (I) requiring him to deliver-up the 
licence. 
(4) The licensing authority may also. revoke a licence on the 
application of the holder thereof. 
(5) Where the licensing authority makes an order varying a 
30 licence under sub-section (I) or an order suspending or revoking 
a licence under sub-section (3) it shall record in writing the reasons 
therefor and furnish to the holder of the licence on demand a brief 
statement of the same unless in any case the licensing authority is 
of the opinion that it will not be in the public interest to furnish 
35 such statement. 
(6) The authority to whom the licensing authority is subordinate 
may by order in writing suspend or revoke a licence on any ground 
on which it may be suspended or revoked by the licensing authority; 
and the foregoing provisions of this section shall, as far as may be, 
40 apply in relation to the suspension or revocation of a licence by 
such authority. 

10 
(7) A court convicting the holder of a licence of any offence 
under this Act or the rules made thereunder may also suspend or 
revoke the licence: 
Provided that if the conviction is set aside on appeal or other-
wise, the suspension or revocation shall become void. S 
(8) An order of suspension or revocation under sub-section (7) 
may also be made by an appellate court or by the High Court when 
exercising its powers of revision. 
(9) The Central Government may, by order in the Official 
Gazette, suspend or revoke or direct any licensing authority to 10 
suspend or revoke all or any licences granted under this Act 
throughout India or any part thereof. 
(10) On the suspension or revocation of a licencc under this 
section the holder thereof shall without delay surrender the licence 
to the authority by whom it has been suspend'cd or revoked or to 15 
"uch other authority as may be specified in this behalf in the order 
'f suspension or revocation. 
Appeal.. 18. (1) Any person aggrieved by an order of the licensing autho-
rity refusing to grant a licence or varying the conditions of a licence 
or by an order of the licensing authority or the authority to whom 20 
the licensing authority is suboNlinate. suspending or revoking a 
licence may prefer an appeal against that order to such authority 
(hereinafter referred to as the appel1a~ authority) and within such 
period as may be prescribed: 
Provided that no appeal shall lie against any order made by, or 25 
under the direction of. the Government. 
(2) No appeal shan be admitted if it is preferred after the expiry 
of the period prescribed therefor: 
Provided that an appeal may be admitted after the expiry of the 
period prescribed therefor if the appellant satisfies the appellate 30 
fluthority that he had sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal 
within that period. 
(3) The period prescribed for an appeal shall be computed in 
aceordance with the provisions of the Indian Limitation Act, 1908, 9 of 1908• 
with respect to the computation of periods of limitation thereunder.3S 
(4) Every appeal under this section shall bE' made by a petition 
in writing and shall be accompanied, by rl brief statement of the 
reasons for tIle order appealed against where such statement has 
been furnished to the appellant and by such fee ~s may be presqrtbecl, 
,~ 
' .. 

It 
(5) In disposing of an appeal the appellate authority shall follow 
such procedure as may be prescribed: 
Provided that no appeal shall be disposed of unless the appel. 
lant has b'een given a reasonable opportunity of being heard. 
S (6) The ord~r appealed against shall, unless the appellate autho-
rity, conditionally or unconditionally directs otherwise, be in force 
pending the disposal of the appeal. against such order. 
10 
(7) Ewry order of the appellate authority confirming, modifying 
or reversing the order appealed against shall be final. 
CHAPTER IV 
POWERS AND PROCEDURE 
19. (I) Any police officer, or any other officer specially empower- Power to 
ed in this behalf by the Central Government, may demand the pro- derodmand. 
h .' P UCUOD 
duction of his licence from any person w 0 IS carrymg any arms or of licence, 
IS ammunition. etc. 
(2) If the person upon whom a demand is made refuses or faHi 
to produce the licence or to show that he is entitled by virtue of this 
Act or any other law for the time being in force to carry such arms 
or ammunition without a licence, the officer concerned may seize 
20 from that person the arms or ammunition which he is carrying and 
require him to give his name and address. 
(3) If that person refuses to give his name and address or if the 
officer concerned suspects that person of giving a false name or 
address or of intending to abscond, such officer may arrest him with-
2S out warrant. 
20. Where any person is found car!:ying or conveying any arms Arrest of 
or ammunition whether covered by a licence or not, in such manner person~ 
d h · t t ff d . ds f .. conveYlni or un er suc Clrcums ances as 0 a or Just groun 0 SUspICIon arms, etc., 
that the same are or is being Carried by him with intent to use them, ~~er sus-
• P100US 
30 or that the same may be used, for any unlawful purpose, any magIS- circums-
trate, any police officer or any other public servant or any person tances. 
employed or working upon a railway, aircraft, vessel, vehicle or any 
other means of conveyance, may arrest him without warrant and 
seize from him such arms or ammunition. 
35 21. (I) Any person having in his possession any arms or ammuni- Depositor 
tion the possession whereof has, in consequence of the expiration of arms, etc., 
th d t· f l' f h' on POssel. e ura lon 0 a Icence or 0 t 'e suspenSIOn or revocation of a sion ceaain, 
licence or by the issue of a notification under section 4 or by any to be laWful. 
reason whatever, ceased to be lawful, shall without unnecessary 

Ii 
delay deposit the same either with the officer in charge of the nearest 
police station or subject to such conditions as may be prescribed, 
with a licensed dealer or where such person is a member of the 
armed forces of the Union, in a unit armoury. 
ExpZanation.-In this sub-section "unit armoury" includes an S 
armoury in a ship or establishment of the Indian Navy. 
(2) Where arms or ammunition have or has been deposited under 
sub-section (1) the depositor or in the case of his death, his legal 
representative, shall, at any time before the expiry of such period 
as may be prescribed, be entitled- 10 
(a) to receive back anything so deposited on his becoming 
entitled by virtue of this Act or any other law for the time being 
in force to have the same in his possession, or 
(b) to dispose, or authorise the disposal of, anything so' 
deposited by sale or otherwise to any person entitled by virtue IS 
of this Act or any other law for the time being in force to have, 
or not prohibited by this Act or such other law from having, the 
same in his posltession and to receive the proceeds of any such 
disposal: 
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall be deemed to 20 
authorise the return or disposal of anything of which confiscation 
has been directed under section 32. 
(3) All things deposited and not received back or disposed of 
under sub-section (2) within the period therein referred to shall be 
forfeited to Government by order of the district magistrate: 25 
Provided that in the case of suspension of a licence no such 
forfeiture shall be ordered in respect of a thing covered by the 
licence during the period of suspension. 
(4) Before making an order under sub-section (3) the district 
magistrate soo11, by notice in writing to be served upon the depositor 30 
or in the case of his death, upon his legal representative, in the pres-
cribed manner, require him to show cause within fourteen days from 
the service of the notice why the things specified in the notice should 
not be forfeited. 
(5) After considering the cause, if any, shown by the depositor 35 
or, as the case may be, his legal representative, the district magis-
tmte shall pass such order as he thinks fit. 
(6) The Government may at any time return to the depositor or 
his legal representative things forfeited to it or the proceeds of dis-
posal thereof wholly or in part. 40 
, 

13 
22. (1) Whenever any magistrate has reason to believe- ~.nd 
IeIZUI'e by 
(a) that any person residing within the local limits of his magiatrate. 
jurisdiction has in his possession any arms or ammunition for 
any unlawful purpose, or 
S (b) that such person cannot be left in the possession of any 
arms or ammunition without danger to the public peace or 
safety, 
the magistrate may, after having recorded the reasons for his belief, 
oouse a search to be made of the house or premises occupied by such 
10 person or in which the magistrate has reason to believe that such 
arms or ammunition are or is to be found and may have such anns 
or ammunition, if any, seized and detain the same in safe custody for 
such period as he thinks necessary, although that person may be 
entitled by virtue of this Act or any other law for the time being in 
IS force to have the same in his possession. 
(2) Every search under this section shall be conducted by or in 
the presence of a magistrate or by or in the presence of some officer 
specially empowered in this behalf by the Central Government. 
23. Any magistrate, any police officer or any other officer specially Search of 
20 empowered in this behalf by the Central Government, may for the yes~ela, 1 
purpose of ascertaining whether any contravention of this Act or =~:~or 
the rules made thereunder is being or is likely to be committed, stop 
and search any vessel, vehicle or other means of conveyance and 
seize any arms or ammunition that may be found therein alongwith 
as such vessel. vehicle or other means of conveyance. 
24. The Central Government may at any time order the seizure Scizureand 
of any arms or ammunition in the possession of any person, notwith- de:cn~ 
standing that such person is entitled by virtue of this Act or any ~th! Cen~ 
other law for the time being in force to have the same in his posses- tral Go-
. d d' h f h . veroment. 30 Slon, an may etam t e same or sue period as it thinka necessary 
3S 
for the public peaee and safety. 
CHAPI'ER V 
OrlrENCES AND PENALTIES 
25. (1) Whoever-
\ 
(a) acquires, has in his possession or caries any 
or ammunition in contraventIon of section 3; or 
firearm Puni&bment 
for certaiD 
offences. 
(b) acquires, has in his possession or carries any arms of 
any description in any place specified by the Central Govern-
ment under section 4, in contravention of that section; or 

14 
(c) manufactures, sells, transfers, repairs, tests or proves, 
or exposes or offers for sale or transfer, or bas in his possession 
for sale, transfer, repair, test or proof, any arms or ammunition 
in contravention of section 5; or 
(d) shortens the barrel of a firearm or converts an imitation 5 
firearm into a firearm in contNvention of section 6; or 
(e) acquires, has in his possession or carries, or manufac· 
tures, sells, transfers, repairs, tests or proves, or exposes or offers 
for sale or transfer, or has in his possession for sale, transfer, 
repair, test or proof, any prohibited arms or prohibited ammuni- 10 
tion in contravention of section 7; or 
(/) sells or transfers any firearm which does not bear the 
name of the maker, manufacturer's number or other identifica-
tion mark stamped or otherwise shown thereon as required by 
sub-section (2) of section 8 or does any act in contravention of 15 
sub-section (1) of that section; or 
(g) being a person to whom sub-clause (ii) or sub-clause 
(iii) of clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 9 applies, 
acquires, has in his possession or carries any firearm or ammu-
nition in contravention of that section; or zo 
(h) sells or transfers, or repairs, tests or proves any fire-
arm or ammunition in contravention of clause (b) of sub-section 
(1) of section 9; or 
(i) brings into, or takes out of, India any arms or ammuni-
tion in contravention of section 10; or 25 
(j) brings into, or takes out of, India, arms or amm1;U1ition 
of any class or description in contravention of section 11; or 
(k) tnmsports any arms or ammunition in contravention of 
section 12; or 
(Z) fails to deposit anns or ammunition as required by sub- 30 
section (1) ·of section 21; or 
(m) being a manufacturer of, or dealer in, arms or ammu-
nition, fails on being required to do so by rules made under 
section 44, to maintain a reCord or account or to make therein 
all such entries as are required by such rules or intentionally 3S 
makes a false entry therein or prevents or obstructs the inspec-
tion of such record or account or the making of copies of entries 
therefrom or prevents or obstructs the entry into any premises 
or other place where arms or ammunition are or is manufac-

15 
tured or kept or intentionally fails to exhibit or conceals such 
arms or ammunition or refu3es to point out where the same are 
or is manufactured or kept; 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend 
S 1..J three years, or with fine, 9r with both. 
(2) Whoever being a person to whom sub-clause (i) of clause 
(a) of sub-section (1) of secti~n 9 applies, acquires, has in his posses-
sion or oorries any firearm or ammunition in contravention of that 
section shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which 
10 may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both. 
(3) Whoever having sold or transferred any arms or ammuni-
tion under the proviso to section 5 fails to inform the district magis-
trate having jurisdiction or the officer in charge of the nearest police 
station, of such sale or transfer shall be punishable with imprison-
15 ment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine of 
an amount which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both. 
(4) Whoever fails to deliver-up a licence when so required by 
the licensing authority under sub-section (1) of section 17 for the 
purpose of varying the conditions specified in the licence or fails to 
20 surrender a licence to the appropriate authority under sub-section 
(10) of that section on its suspension or revocation sooll be punish-
able with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, 
or with fine of an amount which may extend to five hundred rupees, 
or with both. 
25 (5) Whoever when required under section 19 to give his name 
and address refuses to give such name and address or gives a DBme 
or address which subsequently transpires to be false shall be punish-
able with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, 
or with fine of an amount which may extend to two hundred rupees, 
30 or with both. 
26. Whoever-
Secret COn-
( ) d t . tr t· f traventionl. a oes any ac In con aven IOn 0 any of the provisions 
of sections 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 10 or 11 in such manner as to indicate 
an intention that such act may not be known to any public 
35 s~rvant or to any person employed or working· upon a railway, 
Qlrcraft, vessel, vehicle or any other means of conveyance; or 
(b) on any search being made under section 22 conceals or 
attempts to conceal any arms or ammunition; 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may 
40 extend to seven years, or with fine, or with both. 

18 
Punishment 27. Whoever has in his possession any arms or ammunition with 
for posses- intent to use the same for any unlawful purpose or to enable any ling arms, 
~tc., with other person to use the same for any unlawful purpose shall, whe-
l~tent}O usc ther such unlawful purpose has been carried into effect or not be 
t em lor un- . h bi . h" f ' lawful pur- purus a e WIt Impnsonment or a term which may extend to s 
pose. seven years, or with fine, or with both. 
Punishment 28. Whoever makes or attempts to make eny use whatsoever of for usc and 
possession a firearm or an imitation firearm with intent to resist or prevent the 
offin:arms lawful arrest or detention of himself or any other person shall be or imitation firearms in punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 10 
cemin caSCI. seven years, or with fine, or with both. 
Explanation.-In this section the expression "imitation firearm" 
has the same meaning as in section 6. 
Punishment 
for know-
ingly pur-
chasma arm.. 
29. Whoever-
(a) purchases any arms or ammunition from any other IS 
person knowing that such other person is not licensed or author-
ised under section 5; or etc., from 
unlicc'teed 
person or 
for deUver-
ing arms, 
etc., to per-
son not en-
titled to 
possess the 
lame. 
Punishment 
for contra-
vention of 
lioeDceor 
rule. 
Punishment 
for subse-
quent oIfeD-
eel. 
Powcrto 
confiscate. 
(b) delivers any arms or ammunition into the possession of 
another person without previously ascertaining that such other 
person is entitled by virtue of this Act or any other law for the 20 
time being in force to have, and is not prohibited by this Act or 
such other law from having, in his possession the same; 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to six months, or with fine of an amount which may extend 
to five hundred rupees, or with both. 
38. Whoever contravenes any condition of a licence or any pro-
vision of this Act or any rule made thereunder, for which no punish-
ment is provided elsewhere in this Act shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, or with 
2S 
ftr.e which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both. 30 
31. Whoever having been convicted of an offence under this Act 
is again convicted of an offence under this Act shall be punishable 
with double the penalty provided for the latter offence. 
32. (1) When any person is convicted under this Act of any 
offence committed by him in respect of any arms or ammunition, it 3S 
shall be in the discretion of the convicting court further to direct 
that the whole or any portion of such arms or ammunition, and any 
vessel, vehicle or other means of conveyance and any receptacle or 
t!ling containing, or used to conceal, the arms or ammunition shall 
be confiscated: 40 
Provided that if the conviction is set aside on appeal or other-
wise, the order of confiscation shall become void. 

v: 
I 
:'. 
)'. 
, 
; 
1"1 
(2) An order of confiscation may also be made by the appellate 
court or by the High Court when exercising its powers of revision. 
33. (1) Whenever an offence under this Act has been committed Offence. 
by a company, every person who at the time the offence was com- ::ni~-
s mitted was in charge of, or was responsible to the company for the 
conduct of, the business of the company, as well as the company, 
shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be 
proceeded against and punished accordingly: 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render 
10 any such person liable to any punishment under this Act if he proves 
that the offence was committed without his knowledge and that he 
exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such 
offence. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), 
20 where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company 
and it is proved that the offence has been committed. with the consent 
or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, 
any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, 
such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed. 
25 to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against 
and punished accordingly. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section,-
(a) "company" means any body corporate, and includes a 
firm or other association of individuals; and 
30 (b) "director", in relation to a firm, means a partner in the 
firm. 
CHAPTER VI 
MISCELLANEOUS 
34. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Sea Customs Sanction of 
35 Act, 1878, no arms or ammunition shall be deposited. in any ware- Central Go-
house licensed under section 16 of that Act without the sanction of ;~~=t 
the Central Government. housing of 
arIlll. 
35. Where any arms or ammunition in respect of which any Criminal 
offence under this Act has been or is being committed are or ii resofponaibili-
f d . . ty penon' 
40 oun m any premises or other place in the joint occupation or under i~ occupa-
the joint control of several persons, each of such persons shall millon o~ pre-• ' ees In cer-
unless the contrary IS proved, be liable for that offence in the same tain cue •. 
manner as if it has been or is being committed. by him alone. 

Information 
to be given 
regarding 
c:ertain 
oOicncca. 
Arrest and 
searches. 
18 
36. (1) Every person aware of the commlSSlon of any offence 
under this Act shall, in the absence of reasonable excuse the burden 
of proving which shall lie upon such person, give information of the 
same to the officer in charge of the nearest police station or the 
magistrate having jurisdiction. 5 
(2) Every person employed or working upon any railway, 
aircraft, vessel, vehicle or other means of conveyance shall, in the 
absence of reasonable excuse the burden of proving which shall lie 
upon such person, give information to the officer in charge of the 
nearest police station regarding any box, package or bale in transit 10 
which he may have reason to suspect contains arms or ammunition 
in respect of which an offence under this Act has been or is being 
committed. 
37. Save as otherwise provided in this Act,-
(a) all arrests and searches made under this Act or under 15 
any rules made thereunder shall be carried out in accordance 
with the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, 5 of 189: 
relating respectively to arrests and searches made under that 
Code; 
(b) any person arrested and any arms or ammunition seized 20 
under this Act by a person not being a magistrate or a police 
officer shall be delivered without delay to the officer in charge 
of the nearest police station and that officer shall-
(i) either release that person on his executing a bond 
with or without sureties to appear before a magistrate and 25 
keep the things seized in his custody till the appearance of 
that person before the magistrate, or 
(ii) should that person fail to execute the bond and to 
furnish, if so required, sufficient sureties, produce that person 
and those things without delay before the magistrate. 30 
Oft'c:ncct to 38. Every offence under this Act shall be cognizable within the 
~ coJDiza- meaning of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898. 
Previous 
sanction of 
the diatriet 
magistrate 
necessary in 
certain QlICS. 
Protection 
of action 
taken in 
load faith, 
39. No prosecution shall be instituted against any person in res-
pect of any offence under section 3 without the previous sanction 35 
of the district magistrate. 
40. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against 
an)' person for anything which is in good faith done or intended to 
be done und'er this Act. 
S of 1898. 

10 
18 
41. Where the Central Government is of the opinion that it is Power to . exempt. 
necessary or expedient in the public interest so to do, It may by 
notification in the Official Gazette and subject to such conditions, if 
any, as it may specify in the notification,-
(a) exempt any person or class of persons, or exclude any 
description of arms or ammunition, or withdraw any part of 
India, from the operation of all or any of the provisions of this 
Act; and 
(b) as often as may be, C8llcel any such notification and 
again subject, by a like notification, the person or class of persons 
or the description of arms and ammunition or the part of India 
to the operation of such provisions. 
42. (1) The Central Governm€'nt may, by notification in the Powerto 
Official Gazette, direct a census to be taken of all firearms in any ~ke~a=. 
IS area and empower any officer of Government to take such census. 
(2) On the issue of any such notification all persons having in 
their possession any firearm in that area shall furnish to the officer 
concerned such information as he may require in relation thereto 
and shall produce before him such firearms if he so requires. 
20 43. (l) The Ctntral Government may, by notification in the Powerto 
be delepte Official Gazettp., direct that any power or function which may 
exercised or performed by it under this Act other than the power 
under section 41 or the power under section 44 may, in relation to 
sll~h matters and subject to such conditions, if any, as it may specify 
25 in the notification, be exercised or performed also by-
(a) such officer or authority subordinate to the Central 
Government, or 
(b) such State Goyernment or IUch officer or authority 
subordinate to the State Government, 
30 as may be specified in the notification. 
(2) Any rules made by the Central Government under this Act 
may confer powp.rs or imposp. duties or authorise the conferring of 
powers or imposition of duties upon any State Government or Gny 
officer or authority subordinate thereto. 
3S 44. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the l)owcr to 
Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. make ru1ct. 

Informati( 
to be givel 
reprdin, 
certain 
~I. 
Arreat inc 
aearches. 
Oft'eDCIf 
becopU 
ble 
Previou! 
aanction 
the dian 
magi-ttl 
ncc:e_sar 
certain' 
ProteeU 
ofactiOl 
takenir 
lood fa! 
20 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the fol-
lowing matters, namely:-
(a) the appointment, jurisdiction. control and functions of 
licensina authorities; 5 
(b) the form and particulars of application for the grant or 
renewal of a licence and where thP. application is for the renewal 
of a licence. the time within which it shall be made; 
(c) the form in which and thf> conditions subject to which 
any licence may be granted or refused, renewed, varied, suspend- 10 
ed or revoked; 
(d) where no period haR been specified in this Act, the 
period for which any licence shall continue to be in force; 
(e) the fees payable in respect of any application for the 
grant or renewal of B licence and in respect of any licence 15 
granted 01' renewed and the manner of paying the same; 
(f) the manner in which the maker's name, the manufac-
turer's number or other identification mark of a firearm shall 
be stamped or otherwise shown thereon; 
(g) the procedure for the test or proof of any firearm; 20 
(It) the conditions for use by a person who has completerl 
the age of fourteen years but has not completed the age of 
eighteen years, of a point 22 bore rifle or an air rifle in the 
course of his training in the use of such rifle; 
(i) the authority to whom appeals may be preferred undp.r 25 
section 18, the procedure to be followed by such authority and 
the period within which appeals shall be preferred, the fees to 
be paid in respect of such appeals GIld the refund of such fees; 
(;) the maintenance of records or accounts of anything 
done under a licence other than a licence under section 3 or 30 
section 4, the form of, and the entries to be made in, such records 
or accounts and the exhibition of such records or accounts to 
any police omcer or ~o any I)fficer of Government empowered 
in this behalf; 
(k) the entry and inspection by any police oftlcer or by any 35 
officer of Government empowered in this behalf of any premises 
or other place in which arms or ammunition are or is manufac-
tured or in which arms or ammunition are or is kept by • 

21 
manufacturer of or dealer in such arms or ammunition and the 
exhibition of the same to such officer; 
(l) the conditions subject to which arms or ammunition 
may be deposited with a licensed dealer or in a unit armoury 
S es required by sub-section (1) of section 21 and the period on 
the expiry of which the things so deposited may be forfeited; 
(m) any other matter which is to be, or may be prescribed. 
(3) All rules made under this Act shall be laid for not less than 
thirty days before each House of Parliament as soon as may be after 
10 they are made and shall be ~bject to such modifications as Parlia-
ment may make duri~g the session in which they are so laid or the 
session immediately following. 
45. Nothing in this Act shall apply t~ Act not to 
apply in oer-
IS 
(a) arJTI.8 or ammunition on board any sea-going vessel or tain casel. 
any aircraft and forming part of the ordinary armament or 
equipment of such vessel or aircraft; 
20 
30 
('b) the acquisition, possession or carrying, the manufacture, 
repair, test or proof, the sale or transfer or the import. export 
or transport of arms or ammunition-
(i) by or under orders of the Central Government, or 
(ii) by a public servant in the course of his duty 8S 
such public serwnt, or 
(iii) by a member of the National Cadet Corps raised 
and maintained under the National Cadet Corps Act, 
1948, or by any officer or enrolled person of the Territorial 
Army raised and maintained under the Territorial Army 
Act, 1948, or by any member of any other forces raised and 
maintained or that may hereafter be raised and maintained 
under any Central Act in the course of his duty as such 
member, officer or enrolled person; 
(c) Any weapon of an obsolete pattern or of antiquarian 
value or in disrepair which is not capable of being used as a 
firearm either with or without repair; 
(d) the acquisition, possession or carrying by a person of 
35 minor parts of arms or ammunition which are not intended to 
be used along with complementary parts acquired or possessed 
by that or any other person. 
46. The Indian Arms Act, 1873; is hereby repealed. Repeal of 
Act II of 
187i. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Indian Arms Act at present in force was enacted eighty years 
ago (Act 11 of 1878), for consolidating and amending the then existing 
laws for control of arms and ammunition. Certain amendments have 
since been made and the Government have since the achievement 
of independence followed a liberal policy in the administration of the 
Indian Arms Act and the Rules framed thereunder. The present 
Bill seeks in the main to liberalise the licensing provisions and to 
reduce the inconvenience to the public to the minimum. while at 
the same time keeping in view the overall demands of public 
security and the maintenance of public order. 
NEW DzLHI; G. B. PANT. 
The 12th December, 1958. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 44 of the Arms Bill. 1958, empowers the Central Govern-
ment to make rules to carry out the purpose of the Act, and the 
various matters in respect of which such rules may be made have 
been specified in sub-clause (2) of that clause. They relate inter alia 
to the appointment, jurisdiction, control and functions of licensing 
authorities; applications for grant or renewal of licences; conditions 
of granting or refusing, renewing, varying, suspending or revoking 
licences, fees for licences; the procedure for stamping the identi-
fication marks on firearms and their test or proof; conditions for use 
of a 22 bore rifle or an air rifle by a person between fourteen years 
and eighteen years of age in the course of training; the appellate 
authority and its procedure; entry and inspection by any police 
officer or specially empowered officer of any premises or other 
place in which arms, ammunition or military stores are manufac-
tured., or stored; and the conditions of depositing arms, ammunition 
and military stores with a licenced dealer or in a police station or a 
unit armoury. These are either matters of procedure or matters of 
administrative detail and rules with respect thereto will be necessary 
for the daY'-to-day administration of the Act. Moreover, the rules to 
be made by the Central Government are to be laid before each 
House of Parliament as soon as they are made and shall be subject 
to such modiftcatiolll al Parliament may make during the .eaton in 
which they are so laid or the session immediately following. The 
deleg9tion of legislative powers is thus of a normal character. 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
co consolidate and amend the law relating to arms and ammuni-
tion. 
(Shri GOfJind Ballabh Pant, 
Minister of Home Affairs.) 