  AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
                                                        Bill No. 138 of 2021
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2021
By
SHRI M.K. RAGHA VAN, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-second Year of the Republic
of India as follows:–
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2021.
 2. After article 239B of the Constitution, the following article shall be
inserted, namely:–
“239C. (1) There shall be a Legislative Assembly for the Union
territory of Lakshadweep and the total number of seats in the
Legislative Assembly shall be filled by members chosen by direct
election from territorial constituencies in the Union territory of
Lakshadweep.
(2) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the total number of
seats in the Legislative Assembly shall be thirty.
(3) For the purposes of election to the Legislative Assembly, the Union
territory of Lakshadweep shall be divided into single-member assembly
Short title.
Insertion of
new article
239C.5
10
Special
provisions
with respect to
Lakshadweep.

2
constituencies in such manner that the population of each of the constituencies
shall, so far as practicable, be the same throughout the Union territory.
(4) Seats shall be reserved for the Scheduled Tribes in the Legislative
Assembly, and the number of seats so reserved shall bear, as nearly as may be,
the same proportion to the total number of seats in the Assembly as the population
of the Scheduled Tribes in the Union territory bears to the total population of the
Union territory and the provisions of article 334 shall apply to such reservation.
Explanation.—For the purpose of clause (4), the expression “population”
means the population as ascertained in the last preceding census of which the
relevant figures have been published:
Provided that where such figures have not been published, then for the
purpose of election for the constitution of the first Legislative Assembly under
this Act, the provisional figures of the population of the Union territory as
published in relation to the 2011 census shall be deemed to be the population of
the Union territory.
 (5) The provisions of articles 324 to 327 and 329 shall apply in relation to
the Union territory of Lakshadweep, the Legislative Assembly of Lakshadweep
and the members thereof as they apply, in relation to a State, the Legislative
Assembly of a State and the members thereof respectively.
(6) (a) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the Legislative
Assembly shall have power to make laws for the whole or any part of the
Union territory of Lakshadweep with respect to any of the matters
enumerated in the State List or in the Concurrent List in so far as any
such matter is applicable to Union territories.
(b) Nothing in sub-clause (a) shall derogate from the powers of
Parliament under this Constitution to make laws with respect to any matter
for a Union territory or any part thereof.
(c) If any provision of a law made by the Legislative Assembly with
respect to any matter is repugnant to any provision of a law made by
Parliament with respect to that matter, whether passed before or after
the law made by the Legislative Assembly, or of an earlier law, other
than a law made by the Legislative Assembly, then, in either case, the
law made by Parliament, or, as the case may be, such earlier law, shall
prevail and the law made by the Legislative Assembly shall, to the extent
of the repugnancy, be void:
Provided that if any such law made by the Legislative Assembly has been
reserved for the consideration of the President and has received his assent, such
law shall prevail in the  Union territory:
Provided further that nothing in this sub-clause shall prevent Parliament
from enacting at any time any law with respect to the same matter including a
law adding to, amending, varying or repealing the law so made by the Legislative
Assembly.
 (7) There shall be a Council of Ministers consisting of not more than
twenty per cent. of the total number of members in the Legislative Assembly,
with the Chief Minister at the head to aid and advise the Lieutenant
Governor in the exercise of his functions in relation to matters with respect
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
to which the Legislative Assembly has power to make laws, except in so far
as he is, by or under any law, required to act in his discretion:
Provided that in the case of difference of opinion between the Lieutenant
Governor and his Ministers on any matter, the Lieutenant Governor shall refer it
to the President for decision and act according to the decision given thereon by
the President and pending such decision it shall be competent for the Lieutenant
Governor in any case where the matter, in his opinion, is so urgent that it is
necessary for him to take immediate action, to take such action or to give such
direction in the matter as he deems necessary.
(8) The Chief Minister shall be appointed by the President and the other
Ministers shall be appointed by the President on the advice of the Chief Minister
and the Ministers shall hold office during the pleasure of the President.
(9) The Council of Ministers shall be collectively responsible to the
Legislative Assembly.
(10) Parliament may, by law, make provisions for giving effect to, or
supplementing provisions contained in the foregoing clauses and for all matters
incidental or consequential thereto .
(11) Any such law as is referred to in sub-clause (a) shall not be deemed to
be an amendment of this Constitution for the purposes of article 368
notwithstanding that it contains any provision which amends or has the effect of
amending this Constitution.”.
5
10
15
20

4
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Even after 75 years of Indian independence, the Union territory of
Lakshadweep has not been provided with a legislative Assembly. There has
been a high concentration of power in the hands of Executive and
Administrator. There is no proper consultations with the people regarding
the various schemes being introduced. Democracy has withered and power
of dialectics has been curtailed. This has led to an increase in the distrust
of the people of Union territory against the Government of India.
The Union territory is at a severe threat due to increasing sea level
rise. This has been caused due to the exploitation of resources in the mainland
which has significantly altered the climatic patterns of the area. A large scale
destruction of ocean wealth due to uncontrolled sea trawling by externals to
island has caused tremendous harm to the Union territory. The ecological
footprint of this tropical island is devastated and its economy is in shambles.
Hence the need for a legislative assembly is felt to regulate the life on the
island and its surroundings.
The people of island are highly literate and forms part of participative
democracy. The people are dependent more on the neighbouring sister State
of Kerala. The inter linkage of culture of State of Kerala and Union territory
has forced to think of a new model of polity where the ecological Governance
model of Kerala can be imbibed in the region. Hence the Governor of Kerala
should be made the De-facto Lieutenant Governor of the Union territory to
carry on this unique relationship forward. This will help the island to achieve
a high level of progress in health and education fields.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
   NEW DELHI;                                  M.K. RAGHA VAN
 July 7, 2021.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides for creation of Legislative Assembly for
the Union territory of Lakshadweep. It further provides for appointment of
Council of Ministers to be headed by a Chief Minister to aid and advise the
Lieutenant Governor. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. At this stage, it is not
possible to give exact estimate of expenditure, both recurring and non-
recurring, which will be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.
5

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
 further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri M.K. Raghavan, M.P .)