1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2014
By
SHRI C.R. PATIL,  M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2014.
2. After article 21A of the Constitution, the following new articles shall be inserted,—
“21B. Every citizen shall have the right to shelter in such manner as
Parliament may, by law, determine.
Explanation:.—For the purpose of  this article, “shelter” means a dwelling unit
with all basic civic amenities.
Short title.
Bill No. 138 of  2014
Insertion of
new articles
21B, 21C and
21D.
Right to
shelter.
5
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
21C. (1) Every citizen shall have the right to safe and adequate quantity of
drinking water.
(2) The State shall, within a period of five years from the date of coming into
force of this Act, provide adequate number of hand pumps or piped water connections
in every village or habitation in order to ensure adequate availability of safe drinking
water to every citizen.
21D. Every citizen who has attained the age of eighteen years shall have the
right to work in such manner as Parliament may, by law, determine.”.
Right to safe
and adequate
drinking water.
Right to work.
5

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Constitution gives us a number of fundamental rights in order to enable the
citizens to live with dignity. To live with dignity, there is need for a large number of things but
the most basic among them are shelter, water and means of livelihood. Unless these are
secured, there cannot be dignity in life. Shelter is one of the basic necessities for sustaining
the life. Right to life and other similar rights guaranteed by the Constitution for the
well being of citizens will be worthless if citizens remain without shelter. A shelter without a
source of potable water nearby is an incomplete dwelling unit.  Similarly, growing
unemployment has led to resorting to arms and indulgence in extremist activities by youth of
the country. Hence,  it is necessary that right to shelter along with a source of potable water
nearby and employment be guaranteed and made fundamental rights.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; C.R. PA TIL
November 12, 2014.

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to insert new articles 21B, 21C and 21D in the Constitution,
with a view to making right to shelter, right to safe and adequate drinking water and right to
work as fundamental rights of the citizens. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure
of rupees fifty thousand crore per annum will be involved.
 No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.

GMGIPMRND—2887LS(S3)—02-12-2014.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri C.R. Patil, M.P .)