THE COMMERCIAL DIVISION OF HIGH COURTS BILL, 2009
A
BILL
 to provide for the constitution of a Commercial Division in the High Courts for
adjudicating commercial disputes and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixtieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
 CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
 1. (1) This Act may be called the Commercial Division of High Courts Act, 2009.
(2) It extends to the whole of India, except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint:
Provided that different dates may be appointed for different High Courts and for
different provisions of this Act and any reference in any such provision to the High Court
or to the commencement of this Act shall be construed as a reference to that High Court or
the commencement of that provision:
 Provided further that no notification under this sub-section shall be issued in relation
to a High Court unless the Central Government has consulted the Chief Justice of the
concerned High Court and the concerned State Government or State Governments.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. 139-C of 2009
AS PASSED BY LOK SABHA
ON 18 DECEMBER, 2009

2
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “commercial dispute” means a dispute arising out of ordinary transactions
of merchants, bankers and traders such as those relating to enforcement and
interpretation of mercantile documents, export or import of merchandise, affreightment,
carriage of goods, franchising, distribution and licensing agreements, maintenance
and consultancy agreements, mercantile agency and mercantile usage, partnership,
technology development in software, hardware, networks, internet, website and
intellectual property such as trademark, copyright, patent, design, domain names and
brands and such other commercial disputes which the Central Government may notify.
Explanation I.— A dispute, which is commercial, shall not cease to be a
commercial dispute merely because it also involves action for recovery of immovable
property or for realisation of monies out of immovable property given as security or
for taking any other action against immovable property.
 Explanation II.— A dispute which is not a commercial dispute shall be deemed
to be a commercial dispute if the immovable property involved in the dispute is used
in trade or put to commercial use.
Explanation III.— An application under section 34 or section 36 or an appeal
under section 37 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 shall be deemed to be a
commercial dispute if the amount in dispute or claim relates to a specified value;
(b) “Commercial Division” means the Commercial Division in a High Court
constituted under section 3;
(c) “High Court” has the meaning as assigned to it in clause (14) of article 366 of
the Constitution;
(d) “notification” means a notification published in the Official Gazette and the
expression ‘notify’ with its cognate meanings and grammatical variations shall be
construed accordingly;
(e) “specified value” has the meaning as assigned to it in section 7.
(2) Any reference in this Act to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 or any provision
thereof which is not in force in any area to which this Act applies shall be construed to have
a reference to the corresponding enactment or provision thereof in force in such area.
 (3) Words and expressions used herein and not defined but defined in the Code of
Civil Procedure, 1908 shall have the meanings assigned to them in that Code.
CHAPTER II
C
ONSTITUTION AND JURISDICTION OF COMMERCIAL DIVISION OF HIGH COURTS
 3. (1) A High Court may, by order, constitute a division to be called the “Commercial
Division” of that High Court having one or more Division Benches.
(2) The Judges of the Commercial Division shall be such of the Judges of the High
Court as the Chief Justice of that High Court may, from time to time, nominate.
 4. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force, after
the issuance of an order under sub-section (1) of section 3 by a High Court, all suits relating
to commercial disputes of specified value shall be filed in the High Court and such suits
shall be allocated to the Commercial Division of that High Court.
(2) All execution proceedings, arising out of the suits referred to in sub-section ( 1)
and arising out of the matters specified in sections 11 and 12 , shall be disposed of by the
Commercial Division of the High Court.
 Definitions.
 5 of 1908.
 5 of 1908.
Constitution
of Commercial
Division of
High Courts.
Jurisdiction of
High Court and
allocation of
matters to
Commercial
Division.
26 of 1996.

3
 Explanation.— For the purposes of this section, “High Court” means the High Court
exercising jurisdiction over the court of ordinary civil jurisdiction in which the suit or
application could have, but for the provisions of this Act, been filed.
5. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Arbitration and Conciliation Act,
1996, after issuance of an order under sub-section (1) of section 3 by a High Court,—
(a) all applications under sections 34 and 36; and
(b) all appeals under clause ( a) of sub-section ( 1) or sub-section ( 2) of
section 37,
of that Act relating to commercial disputes of specified value shall be filed in the High Court
and every such application or appeal, as the case may be, shall be allocated to the Commercial
Division of that High Court.
 (2) Every application under section 34 or section 36 of the Arbitration and Conciliation
Act, 1996 relating to commercial disputes of specified value, pending in any Court
subordinate to a High Court immediately before the issuance of any order under sub-
section (1) of section 3 shall stand transferred to the High Court and shall thereafter be
allocated to the Commercial Division of that High Court.
(3) Every application under section 34 or section 36 or an appeal under section 37 of
the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 relating to commercial disputes of specified
value, pending in the High Court immediately before the issuance of an order under sub-
section (1) of section 3, shall, on the issuance of such order, be allocated to the Commercial
Division of that High Court.
 (4) Every application or appeal referred to in this section shall be disposed of by the
Commercial Division as expeditiously as possible and endeavour shall be made to dispose
of the matter within one year from the date of service of notice on the opposite party.
 (5) The applicants or appellants in respect of the matters referred to in sub-section
(1) shall, within sixty days from the date of service of notice on the opposite party, file paper
books containing relevant documents including copies of oral evidence recorded, if any,
and the opposite party shall likewise file a paper book within sixty days from the date of
service of notice on such party.
(6) The applicants or appellants in respect of the matters referred to sub-section ( 2)
and the opposite parties shall file paper books within sixty days from the date of service of
notice on such parties or from the date of issuance of the order under sub-section ( 1) of
section 3, whichever is later.
(7) Within thirty days from the date of filing of the paper books, all parties to the
proceedings shall file brief written submissions after exchanging copies of the same.
(8) Where any party fails to comply with the time limits referred to in sub-sections (5)
to (7), the Commercial Division may, if reasonable cause is shown, extend the time limit for
a further period not exceeding thirty days, subject, however, to such order as to costs as the
Commercial Division may deem fit.
 6. Notwithstanding anything contained in section 4, the Commercial Division of a
High Court shall not entertain or decide any suit, application or revision application or
proceeding relating to any commercial dispute in respect of which the jurisdiction of the
civil court is either expressly or impliedly barred under any other law for the time being in
force.
CHAPTER III
S
PECIFIED V ALUE AND ITS DETERMINATION
 7. (1) For the purposes of this Act, “specified value”, in relation to a matter before a
High Court, means such value of the subject matter of the commercial dispute in a suit,
26 of 1996.
 26 of 1996.
 26 of 1996.
Jurisdiction
and procedure
of Commercial
Division in
arbitration
matters.
Exclusion of
jurisdiction of
Commercial
Division.
Definition of
specified
value.

4
appeal or application which is not less than five crore rupees or such higher value as the
Central Government may, in consultation with the Government of the State or States to
which the jurisdiction of the High Court extends, notify.
(2) Every notification issued under sub-section ( 1) shall be laid, as soon as may be,
after it is made, before each House of Parliament.
 8. (1) The specified value of the subject matter of the commercial dispute in a suit or
appeal or application shall be determined in the following manner, namely:—
(a) where the relief sought in a suit, appeal or application is for recovery of
money, the money sought to be recovered in the suit or appeal or application inclusive
of interest, if any, computed up to the date of filing of the suit, appeal or application,
as the case may be, shall be taken into account for determining such specified value;
(b) where the relief sought in a suit or appeal or application relates to movable
property or to a right therein, the market value of the movable property as on the date
of filing of  the suit, appeal or application, as the case may be, shall be taken into
account for determining such specified value;
(c) where the relief sought in a suit, appeal or application relates to immovable
property or to a right therein, the market value of the immovable property, as on the
date of filing of the suit, appeal or application, as the case may be, shall be taken into
account for determining specified value;
(d) where the relief sought in a suit, appeal or application relates to any other
intangible right, the market value of the said rights as estimated by the plaintiff shall
be taken into account for determining specified value;
(e) where the counter-claim is raised in any suit, appeal or application, the value
of the subject matter of the commercial dispute in such counter-claim as on the date of
the counter-claim shall be taken into account.
 (2) Where, in a suit, application, revision application or appeal filed in a High Court,
or transferred to the High Court in accordance with the provisions of this Act or pending
before the High Court, a dispute arises as to whether the subject matter of such suit,
application, revision application or appeal, as the case may be, is a commercial dispute or
not or such commercial dispute is of specified value or not, then, the said dispute shall be
decided by the Commercial Division of that High Court.
(3) Where the Commercial Division of a High Court upon reference to it under sub-
section (2) and after hearing the parties comes to conclusion,—
(a) that the subject matter is a commercial dispute and the value of the subject
matter in the commercial dispute in a suit, appeal or application is equal to the specified
value so as to fall within the pecuniary jurisdiction of the Commercial Division, the
suit, appeal or application (together with the counter claim, if any) shall be dealt with
by the Commercial Division of the High Court;
(b) that the value of the subject matter in commercial dispute in a suit, appeal or
application is less than the specified value and does not fall within the preliminary
jurisdiction of the Commercial Division, the suit, appeal or application (together with
the counter claim, if any) shall remain where it is pending before such conclusion of
the High Court.
(4) The manner of valuation and determination of the subject matter of commercial
dispute in a suit, appeal or application under this Act shall override any provision for
valuation of the subject matter of any suit under any law for the time being in force.
Determination
of specified
value of
subject matter
of commercial
disputes in a
suit.

5
CHAPTER IV
PROCEDURE TO BE FOLLOWED BY COMMERCIAL DIVISION OF HIGH COURTS
9. (1) Except to the extent otherwise provided by or under this Act, the Commercial
Division of a High Court shall follow the procedure specified in the Code of Civil Procedure,
1908.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), the following procedure
shall be followed by the Commercial Division of every High Court, in respect of the subject
matter of commercial dispute of specified value in a suit which is filed on or after the
commencement of this Act, namely:—
 (a) the plaintiff shall file along with the plaint,—
(i) the documents on which he sues or relies;
 (ii) as many copies of the plaint and documents referred to in this clause
as to the number of defendants;
 (iii) an affidavit containing his statement in examination-in-chief;
(iv) affidavits containing statements of other witnesses in examination-
in- chief;
(v) brief issues that are likely to arise;
(vi) list of interrogatories, if any;
(vii) application for discovery and production of documents, if any,
maintaining their relevancy;
(viii) such other material as the plaintiff may consider necessary;
(ix) full address, including e-mail, fax and telephone number of all the
claimants and defendants to the extent known to the plaintiff;
(b) the plaintiff shall furnish along with the plaint, requisite fee for service of
summons on the defendants;
(c) where the plaintiff has furnished electronic mail addresses of the defendants,
he shall be directed by the Commercial Division, without any prejudice to the procedure
for delivery of summons referred to in Order V of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, to
send the summons along with the copy of the plaint to the defendant by electronic
mail;
(d) the defendants shall, within a period of one month from the date of receipt of
the copy of the plaint along with all the relevant documents, file his written statement
along with all documents except copies of plaint referred to in clause (a);
(e) the defendants shall, along with the written statement, also file counter-
claim, if any, along with all documents except the copies of plaint or documents
referred to in clause (a);
(f) the defendants shall, along with the written statement, also file counter-
claim, if any, along with all documents, except the copies of plaint, referred to in clause
(a);
(g) the defendants shall also send, copies of written statement and all documents
filed along with the written statement, to the plaintiff;
(h) the plaintiff shall, at the time of trial, file affidavit containing evidence in
examination-in- chief of other witnesses, if any;
(i) the plaintiff may, within fifteen days of service of the written statement,
apply to the Commercial Division for granting leave for filing of rejoinder;
5 of 1908.
5 of 1908.
Fast Track
Procedure to
be followed by
Commercial
Division of
High Court.

6
(j) the plaintiff shall file rejoinder within one month from the date of the order of
the Commercial Division granting leave to file such rejoinder;
(k) where the Commercial Division allows any application for discovery of
documents, plaintiff and the defendants, as the case may be, shall be permitted to file
supplementary statements, within a period as may be specified by the Commercial
Division.
(3) For the purposes of recording of statement in cross-examination and re-examination
of parties and witnesses, the Commercial Division may appoint an advocate of not less than
twenty years standing at Bar or a Judicial Officer not below the rank of Senior Civil Judge as
Commissioner.
(4) In a case before the Commercial Division,—
(a) all parties shall file written submission before the commencement of oral
submission;
(b) the time limits for making submissions (including oral submission) shall be
fixed in advance, at the case management conference.
(5) The Commercial Division shall, within thirty days of the conclusion of argument,
pronounce judgment and copies thereof shall be issued to all the parties to the dispute
through electronic mail or otherwise.
10. ( 1) Save as otherwise provided under this Act, a single judge sitting in the
Commercial Division may—
(a) hold one or more case management conferences;
(b) fix a time schedule for finalisation of issues, cross-examination of witnesses,
filing of written submission and for oral submission;
(c) provide for record of evidence in cross-examination and re-examination;
(d) appoint commissioner for recording of cross-examination or re-examination
provided any order for the purpose of fixing limits which may lead to the disposal of
the matter for default or ex parte, shall be passed by a Bench of two Judges.
(2) Any objection as to the admissibility of any evidence may be recorded by single
judge but shall be decided by the Bench of two Judges sitting in the Commercial Division.
CHAPTER V
T
RANSFER OF PENDING SUITS, APPLICATIONS OR PROCEEDINGS TO COMMERCIAL DIVISION OF THE
HIGH COURT
11. All suits, applications or proceedings relating to commercial disputes of specified
value pending in the courts subordinate to a High Court shall, on the issuance of an order
under sub-section (1) of section 3, stand transferred to the High Court having jurisdiction
over such courts and shall thereafter be allocated to the Commercial Division of such High
Court.
12. The following suits, applications or proceedings in which the subject matter of
commercial dispute is equal to specified value and pending in every High Court
 shall, on the
issuance of an order under sub-section ( 1) of section 3,  be allocated to its Commercial
Division, namely:—
Case
management
conference
and
examination
of witnesses.
Transfer of
suits,
applications
or other
proceedings
from courts
subordinate to
a High Court
to such High
Court.
Allocation of
suits,
applications or
other
proceedings
pending in a
High Court to
its Commercial
Division.

7
(i) all suits wherein subject matter of the commercial dispute in such suit is of
specified value;
(ii) all appeals against decrees by courts subordinate to the High Court wherein
subject matter of the commercial dispute in such appeal is of specified value;
(iii) appeals against a judgment of a single judge on the original side of the
High Court wherein subject matter of the commercial dispute in such appeal is of
specified value;
(iv) appeals against orders passed in interlocutory applications in suits, by
courts subordinate to the High Court, wherein subject matter of the commercial dispute
in such appeal is of specified value;
(v) revision applications filed under section 115 of the Code of Civil Procedure,
1908, for setting aside interlocutory orders of the courts subordinate to the High
Court, wherein subject matter of the commercial dispute in such revision application
is of specified value;
(vi) applications under article 226 or article 227 of the Constitution filed for
setting aside or quashing the interlocutory orders passed by courts subordinate to
the High Court, wherein subject matter of the commercial dispute in such application
is of specified value.
CHAPTER VI
M
ISCELLANEOUS
13. (1) In respect of suits of the category referred to in sub- section ( 1) of section 4,
section 5, section 11 and clause (i) of section 12, an appeal shall lie to the Supreme Court
against any decree passed by the Commercial Division.
(2) An appeal shall lie to the Supreme Court against the orders of the Commercial
Division referred to in clauses ( a) to ( w) of Rule 1 of Order XLIII of the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908.
Explanation.— In this section, the word “decree” shall include all decrees which are
to be treated as decrees for purposes of Rule 4 of Order XXI, Rule 58 and Rule 103 of Order
XXI of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.
14. The decrees or orders passed by the Commercial Division shall be executed by the
said Division and the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 relating to execution of
decree or order shall, so far as may be, apply to the Commercial Division.
15. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of, the
provisions of any other law for the time being in force.
16. Save as otherwise provided, the provisions of this Act shall have effect, notwith-
standing anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in
force or in any instrument having effect by virtue of any law other than this Act.
17. The High Court may, by notification, make rules for carrying out the provisions of
this Act.
 18. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to it to be necessary for removing
the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of a
period of two years from the commencement of this Act.
Appeal to
Supreme
Court.
5 of 1908.
5 of 1908.
Execution of
decrees or
orders.
Application
of other laws
not barred.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power of High
Court to make
rules.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
5 of 1908.
5 of 1908.

8
 (2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be, after it is
made, before each House of Parliament.
19. In the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996,—
(a) in section 2, in sub-section (1), for clause (e), the following clause shall be
substituted, namely:—
‘(e) “Court” , in relation to,—
(i) sections other than sections specified in sub-clause (ii), means—
(a) the principal Civil Court of original jurisdiction in a district,
or
(b) any Court of co-ordinate jurisdiction to which the Court
referred to in sub-clause (a) transfers a matter brought before it,
and includes the High Court in exercise of its original jurisdiction to decide the
questions forming the subject matter of the arbitration if the same had been the
subject matter of a suit, but does not include any Civil Court of a grade inferior
to such principal Civil Court, or any Court of Small Causes ; and
(ii) sections 34, 36 and 37 where the arbitration is relating to com-
mercial disputes of specified value, means the Commercial Division of the
High Court constituted under sub-section (1) of section 3 of the Commer-
cial Division of High Court Act, 2009.'.
(b) in section 37, in sub-section (1), in clause (b), the following proviso shall be
inserted, namely:—
“Provided that where the arbitration relates to a commercial dispute of
specified value, the appeal shall lie to the Supreme Court in accordance with the
provisions contained in section 13 of the Commercial Division of High Courts
Act, 2009.”.
Amendment
of Act 26 of
1996.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of a Commercial Division in the High Courts for
adjudicating commercial disputes and for matters connected therewith
or incidental thereto.
————
(As passed by Lok Sabha )
GMGIPMRND—5591LS(S5)—18-12-2009.