AS INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

27

Bill No. 139 of 2005
—— _-+5

THE MEGA PROJECTS (TIMELY C OMPLETION)
BILL, 2005

By
Suri K. 5, Rao, M.P.
A
BILL

10 provide for timely completion of mega projects and | for matters connected therewith
or incidental thereto.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-—
1. (/) This Act may be called the Mega Projects (Timely Completion) Act, 2005.

(2) It extends to the whole of India.

(3) It shall come into force at once.

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—

(i) ‘mega project' means and includes any project which has been undertaken by
the Central Government either on its own or asa joint venture with any State Government

Short title,
extent and
‘commencement,

Definitions.


‘Preparation of

list of pending
mega projects.

Constitution
of a
Committee to
be known as
the Project
‘Monitoring
Committee.

Review of the
progress of
the
implementation
of the mega
projects in
the country.

Meeting of
the
Committee.

Central
Government
to provide
fund for
completion of
the mega
project.

Timely
completion of
mega projects.

Fixing
responsibility
for delay in
completion
of mega
project.

release necessary funds for completion of a mega project.

2

or a Corporation or a Company or a private limited company for setting up of any industry

or construction of any dam, irrigation scheme or roads or any communication facility or

power project or any other developmental scheme for the welfare of the public in any part

of the country or where the major share of the expenses on the project is borne by the
Central Government and where the cost of project exceeds fifty crore rupee

(7) ‘prescribed’ means prescribed by rules made under the Act.

3. The Central Government sha!! prepare a list of mega projects perding with all
Ministries and departments of the Centra] Government including public sector undertakings —
under its control

4, (1) The Central Government sha!! constitute a Committee to be known as the Project .
Monitoring Committee (hereinafter referred to as the Committee) to monitor the progress of |
implementation and completion of mega projects, |

2) The Project Monitoring Committee shal! consist of the 10110५9/192 :--
j 8 8

(7) the Deputy Chairman, Planning Commission who shall be the Convener of |
the Committee

| (ii) Secretaries of the Central Ministries of Finance, Industry, Road Transport
Shipping, Civil Aviation, Energy and Agriculture

(iii) any other Minister or Secretary of the Central Government or of a State
Government who may be invited by the Convener of the Committee to attend the —
sittings of the Committee “=

(iv) members, as may be deemed necessary, to be nominated by the Central
Government from amongst the persons who are experts in the fields of Agriculture,
Energy, Water Resources, Industry, Civil Aviation, Transport and Shipping

5. On and from the date of the commencement of this Act, the Committee shall review

the progress of the implemeniation of all the mega projects and fix a target date for completion
of each of such projects. 9

6, The Committee shal! meet once in a month and review the progress of the work of
the pending mega projects. ?

न 7, The Central Government shall, on the basis of the recommendation of the Committee,

8. The Central Government sha!! ensure timely completion of ali mega projects within
the time schedule fixed by the Committee a

Provided that if any mega project is not completed within the time schedule, due to :
any reason beyond the control of the Central Government, the Central Government shall
record the reasons thereof. ,

9. If any project is not completed within the time schedule, except the reasons beyond. कर
control, the officer-in-charge of the mega project shall be held responsible for delay and
shall be subject to such action as may be prescribed by the Centrai Government.


sa

re
2

10. The Central Government shal! cause the annual report together with a memorandum
of action taken on the recommendations contained therein, insofar as they relate to the
Central Government and the reasons for non-implementation, if any, of any of such
recommendations of the Committee to be laid.as soon as may be after the reports are received,
before each House of Parliament. 39395 |

11, The Central Government may. by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the provisions of this Act.

Central
Government
to lay report
on action
taken in the
1005८.

Power to
make rules.

SRE rg rene te meee ter

me tey
7


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Development is the buzzword today in emerging India, even as the country resolves to
build an economically stronger, more efficient set up which is devoid of bureaucratic delays.

Mega projects popularly known as infrastructure projects are started with much pomp
and show. But they are hardly completed in time. The estimated cost of project always
overrun for the simple reason that the projects are not completed within the target date. In
many cases, the escalation in cost of projects results in manifold expenditure and loss to the
public exchequer. Time and cost overruns in projects in the environment of uncertainties,
inadequate funding, delay in land acquisition, law and order problems, general escalation in
costs, etc. are required to be eliminated altogether.

At present, there is no mechanism to supervise the progress of the completion of mega
projects. Moreover, for many projects necessary funds are not released by the Central
Government. As a result, the projects are held up.

Therefore, in order to ensure timely completion of all projects, it is proposed to provide
a mechanism at the bureaucratic level and also accountability of the executive to the legislature.

The Bill seeks to achieve the above objective.

New DE-Ht: K.S. RAO
November 7, 2005


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 4 of the Bill seeks to provide for the setting up of a Committee to monitor the
progress of implementation and timely completion of mega projects. Most of the members on
the Committee will be Government functionaries, but a few experts in the fields of agriculture,
energy, etc. are to be associated with the Committee. C lause 7 provides for release of necessary
funds by the Central Government for completion of all mega projects. The Bill, therefore, if
enacted wiil involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely to involve
an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees ten thousand crore from the Consolidated
Fund of India.

A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees twenty five thousand crore will also be
involved.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the Government to make rules for carrying out the
- purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of anormal character

.<



LOK SABHA

. । A
BILL

to provide for timely completion of mega projects and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.

f

(Shri K.S. Rao, MP)

‘

MGIPMRND—3480LS—18. 11.2005.