1
THE PAYMENT OF PENSION TO FARMERS IN DROUGHT
AFFECTED AREAS BILL, 2016
By
SHRI SHIV AJI ADHALRAO PA TIL, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for payment of pension and certain other facilities to farmers in drought
affected areas.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Payment of Pension to Farmers in Drought Affected
Areas Act, 2016.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No. 139 of  2016
Short title and
commencement.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "drought affected area" means any district or part of a district which has
been declared as drought affected area by the Central Government under section 3;
(b) "farmer" means a person who possesses agricultural land measuring not
more than five acres in a drought affected area and has no income from any source
other than agriculture; and
(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) The Central Government may, from time to time, declare any area as drought
affected area either on its own or on the recommendation of the concerned State Government.
(2) The Central Government may take into consideration such factors as it may deem fit
before declaring an area as a drought affected area.
4. The Central Government shall—
(a) provide pension to every farmer at the rate of five thousand rupees per
month;
(b) provide free educational facilities including supply of books, uniform and
writing materials to the children of farmers;
(c) make provision for life insurance cover free of cost to farmers; and
(d) provide free healthcare facilities to farmers and their dependent family
members.
5. (1) If the Central Government is satisfied at any point of time that drought situation
no longer exists in any district or in any part of a district declared as drought affected area
under section 3, the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify
the date from which such district or part of district shall cease to be a drought affected area.
(2) All facilities other than monthly pension provided to farmers in a district or part of
a district under section 4 shall continue for a period of one year from the date of notification
of cessation of that district or part of that district as drought affected area.
6. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days, which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Definitions.
Declaration
of drought
affected area.
Central
Government
to provide
pension and
certain other
facilities to
farmers.
Cessation of
an area as
drought
affected area.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
India is predominantly an agricultural State. Sixty per cent. of the population is directly
or indirectly engaged in agricultural activities. But our agriculture, even after sixty-nine years
of independence, is fully dependent on monsoon. Whenever monsoon fails, agriculture
sector is affected to a great extent. Moreover, due to urbanization and industrialization,
agricultural land is shrinking. Most of times, a large number of districts in the country are
affected by drought. The farmers in the drought affected areas face a lot of problems in
carrying on their livelihood. They are compelled by extreme situations to commit suicide
because they are not able to meet their daily needs and repay their loans to banks and
moneylenders.
Therefore, it is proposed in the Bill to provide certain measures for welfare of farmers
living in drought affected areas.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SHIVAJI ADHALRAO PA TIL
April  13, 2016.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for payment of pension and other certain facilities to
farmers in drought affected areas by the Central Government. The Bill, therefore if enacted,
will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of
rupees five hundred crore will be involved as a recurring expenditure per annum from the
Consolidated fund of India.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.
4

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 6 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative powers is of a normal character.
5

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for payment of pension and certain other facilities to farmers in drought
affected areas.
————
(Shri Shivaji Adhalrao Patil, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—315LS(S3)—06.05.2016.