     AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
                                                           Bill No. 139 of 2021
THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2021
By
SHRI M.K. RAGHA V AN, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1951.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-second Year of the Republic of
India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Representation of the People  (Amendment)
Act, 2021.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government, may by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title
and
commencement.
5

2. For section 61 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951, the following
section shall be substituted, namely:—
“61. With a view to preventing personation of electors, provisions may be
made by rules made under this Act:—
(a) for usage of biometric authentication using Aadhaar for each electors
before casting his vote so as to identify each electors based on the
serial number provided in the electoral roll;
(b) for allowing only those electors whose name and serial number has
been verified using the Aadhaar biometric to proceed towards the voting
compartment;
(c) for the verification of identity by the Presiding Officer in case of all
those electors who do not have Aadhaar or who wish to vote otherwise
under traditional means;
(d) for remote voting including postal ballot by means of electronic ballots
to be authorized through Aadhaar based OTP enabled system for electors
above the age of sixty years.”.
Special
Procedure for
preventing
personation of
Electors. 5
10
2
43 of 1951.Substitution of
new section for
section 61.
15

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
In the year 1951, the Representation of the People Act was enacted to provide
conduct of elections of House of Parliament and to House or Houses of Legislatures
of each State, the qualifications and disqualifications of the membership of those
Houses, the corrupt practices and other offences at or in connection with such
elections and decisions and doubts and disputes arising out of or in connection
with such elections.
Section 61 provides for special procedure for preventing personation of electors.
The usage of indelible ink was prescribed as a means to prevent personation of electors.
However with the advent of modern technologies, a much easier way using electronic
mode can be used to prevent personation of electors. The usage of Aadhaar enabled
biometric system has helped India in building an efficient PDS system. The same
principle can be used to enable identify the electors. This would totally eliminate any
chance of personation of electors and would save time of the officials conducting
polls. It will ensure that ‘No V oter is left behind’.
All those aged sixty years and above may find it difficult to walk to the polling
booths. Considering the vulnerabilities in health caused as a result of pandemic, it’s
always better to keep senior citizens out of the polling booths. They can be given a
better alternative to vote based on the OTP enabled system in a secure and safe manner.
The need is to do away with the traditional postal ballot system for all employees
engaged in election duty and to bring in an electronic system by means of a portal
system authenticated via an OTP system. The method shall be based on secure
encrypted technologies and shall be foolproof.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
Hence this Bill.
   NEW DELHI;         M.K. RAGHA V AN
July 7, 2021.
3

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
           Cla us e  2 of the  Bill vide proposed section 61 empowers the Central Government
to make rules regarding special provision for preventing personation of elections. As
the rules relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of legislative powers is of a
normal character.
4

ANNEXURE
[EXTRACT FROM THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE ACT, 1951]
(43 OF 1951)
* * * * *
61. With a view to preventing personation of electors provision may be made by
rules made under this Act:—
(a)    for the marking with indelible ink of the thumb or any other finger of every
elector who applies for a ballot paper or ballot papers for the purpose of
voting at a polling station before delivery of such paper or papers to him;
(b) for the production before the presiding officer or a polling officer of a
polling station by every such elector as aforesaid of his identity card before
the delivery of a ballot paper or ballot papers to him if under rules made in
that behalf under the Representation of the People Act, 1950 (43 of 1950),
electors of the constituency in which the polling station is situated have
been supplied with identity cards with or without their respective photographs
attached thereto; and
(c)  for prohibiting the delivery of any ballot paper to any person for voting at a
polling station if at the time such person applies for such paper he has already
such a mark on his thumb or any other finger or does not produce on demand
his identity card before the presiding officer or a polling officer of the polling
station.
* * * * *
Special
procedure for
preventing
personation of
electors.
5

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
further to amend  the Representation of the People Act, 1951.
————
(Shri M.K. Raghavan, M.P .)