AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 139 of 2022
THE  NA TIONAL EMISSIONS TRADING SYSTEM (CONTROL
OF GREEN HOUSE GAS EMISSIONS) BILL, 2022
By
SHRI VISHNU DAYAL RAM, M.P.
————
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
————
CLAUSES
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
  1. Short title, extent and commencement.
  2. Definitions.
CHAPTER II
GREEN HOUSE GAS EMISSION PERMIT
  3. Central Authority.
  4. Nodal Authority.
  5. Installation of CEMS.
  6. Green House Gas Emission Permits.
  7. Application for Green House Gas Emission Permits.
  8. Conditions for Issue of Permit.
  9. Contents of Permit.
10. Guidelines for monitoring and reporting emissions.
CHAPTER III
ALLOCATION OF ALLOWANCES
11. Allocation and Issue of Allowances.
12. Method of allocation of allowances.
13. Transfer, surrender and cancellation of allowances.
14. Validity of Allowances.
CHAPTER IV
AUCTION AND TRADING SYSTEM
15. Auction of allowances.
16. Trading of allowances.
17. Allowance Price Ceiling and Floor.

(ii)
18. Compliance V erification.
19. Environmental Damage Compensation.
20. Imputation Rules for  missing CEMS data and Penalties.
CHAPTER V
MISCELLANEOUS
21. Pooling.
22. Force Majeure.
23. Registry.
24. Review and Development.
25. Dispute Resolution.
26. Central Government to provide funds.
27. Act to have overriding effect.
28. Power to remove difficulties.
29. Power to make rules.
THE FIRST SCHEDULE
THE SECOND SCHEDULE
THE THIRD SCHEDULE
CLAUSES

AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 139 of 2022
THE  NA TIONAL EMISSIONS TRADING SYSTEM (CONTROL
OF GREEN HOUSE GAS EMISSIONS) BILL, 2022
By
SHRI VISHNU DAYAL RAM, M.P.
A
BILL
to set up a system for green house gas emission trading and  establishment of
Authorities for the control of green house gas emissions and for
matters connected therewith.
WHEREAS India has made significant commitment in its intended National by
Determined Contribution (NDC) submitted to the United Nations Framework
Conventions on Climate Change (UNFCC) in 2015 as part of the Paris Agreement;
And WHEREAS the Paris Agreement is a legally binding international treaty on
climate change adopted by 196 parties in 21st session of the Conference of Parties
(COP 21) on 12 December 2015 and entered into force on 4 November, 2016;
And WHEREAS India’s pledge at 26th session of the Conference of the Paris
(COP 26) in Glasgow in 2021 is to achieve the target of net zero emission by the year
2070.

BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India
as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called as the National Emissions Trading System
(Control of Green House Gas Emissions) Act, 2022.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may by
notification in the official Gazette, appoint and different dates may be appointed for
different States and for different provisions of this Act and any reference in any such
provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed as a reference to the
coming into force of that provision.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) ‘allowance’ means an allowance to emit one tonne of carbon dioxide equivalent
during a specified period;
(b) ‘appropriate Government’ means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State, and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(c) ‘Central Authority’ means the Authority established under section 3;
(d) ‘CEMS’ means a Continuous Emission Monitoring System which refers to
the instrumentation and software required to measure carbon dioxide or
equivalent emissions from a stationary source on a practically continuous
basis;
(e) ‘compliance period’ means the period which is notified by the nodal authority
during which the participating units are required to emit carbon dioxide or
equivalent only as per the allocated allowance;
(f) ‘emissions’ means the release of greenhouse gases into the atmosphere from
sources in an installation;
(g) ‘environmental damage compensation’ means the compensation imposed for
excessive emissions in accordance with sub-section (1) of section 19;
(h) ‘environmental damage compensation deposit’ means the deposit in
accordance with sub-section (2) of section 19;
(i) ‘greenhouse gases’ means the gases listed in the First Schedule;
(j) ‘greenhouse gas emissions permit’ means the permit issued in accordance
with section 6;
(k) ‘nodal authority’ means the authority mentioned under section 4;
(l)  ‘operator’ means any person who operates or controls a unit or to whom
decisive economic power over the technical functioning of the unit has been
delegated;
(m) ‘person’ means any natural or legal person;
(n) ‘prescribed’ means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
(o) ‘tonne of carbon dioxide equivalent’ means one metric tonne of carbon dioxide
(CO2) or an amount of any other green house gas listed in the First Schedule
with an equivalent global-warming  potential; and
(p) ‘unit’ means an industrial unit involved in manufacture that results in the
release of carbon dioxide or any other green house gas listed in the First
Schedule with an equivalent global-warming potential;
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
5
10
2
Definitions.

CHAPTER II
GREEN HOUSE GAS EMISSION PERMIT
3. (1) The Central Pollution Control Board established under the Water
(Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 shall be deemed to be the Central
Authority for the purposes of  this Act.
(2) The Central Authority shall,—
(a) decide the permits and the allowances under this Act;
(b) monitor the effective implementation of the emission trading system by
maintaining an independent transaction log recording the issue, transfer and
cancellation of allowances;
(c) conduct an automated check on each transaction in registries through the
independent transaction log to ensure there are no irregularities in the issue,
transfer and cancellation of allowances;
(d) if irregularities are identified through the automated check, ask the Nodal
Authority concerned not to register the transactions in question or any further
transactions relating to the allowances concerned until the irregularities have
been resolved.
4. (1) The State Pollution Control Boards established under the Water (Prevention
and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 shall be deemed to be the Nodal Authority for the
respective States under this Act;
(2)  Each Nodal Authority  shall,—
(a) Supervise the emission trading system in each State by identifying industrial
units as well as the emissions prevalent in that particular State;
(b) monitor the effective implementation of the emission trading system in that
State by maintaining an independent transaction log recording the issue,
transfer and cancellation of allowances;
(c) conduct an automated check on each transaction in registries in the respective
State through the independent transaction log to ensure there are no
irregularities in the issue, transfer and cancellation of allowances; and
(d) undertake any other responsibility that is vested on it under the provisions
of this Act.
5. Every unit shall mandatorily install and operate a Continuous Emission
Monitoring System (CEMS) device as per the guidelines and Standard Operating
Procedures (SOP) issued for the same by the Central Authority.
6. The Central Authority shall, in consonance with the Nodal Authorities, ensure
that from the date of notification in the Official Gazette, no unit shall undertake any
activity listed in the Second Schedule resulting in emissions specified in relation to
that activity unless its operator holds a permit issued by the Central Authority in
accordance with sections 7 and 8 or the unit is temporarily excluded from the application
of this Act by the Central Authority.
7. An application to the Central Authority for green house gas emissions permit
shall include,—
(a) the unit and its activities including the technology used;
(b) the raw and auxiliary materials, the use of which is likely to lead to emissions
of gases listed in the First Schedule;
(c) the sources of emissions of gases listed in the Second Schedule from the
unit;
3
Central
Authority.
Nodal
Authority.
Installation of
CEMS.
Green House
Gas Emission
Permits.
Application for
Green House
Gas Emission
Permits.
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
5
10
6 of 1974.

(d) the measures planned to monitor and report emissions in accordance with the
guidelines adopted pursuant to  section 10; and
(e) a non-technical summary of the details referred to in clause (a) of
sub-section (1).
8. The Central Authority may issue a greenhouse gas emissions permit granting
authorisation to emit greenhouse gases from all or part of a unit only if it is satisfied
that the operator is capable of monitoring and reporting greenhouse gas emissions.
9. (1) Every Greenhouse gas emissions permit issued under section 8 shall contain
the following:
(a) the name and address of the operator of the unit;
(b) a description of the activities and emissions from the unit;
(c) monitoring requirements, specifying monitoring methodology and frequency;
(d) reporting requirements; and
(e) an obligation to surrender allowances equal to the total emissions of the
installation in each calendar year, as verified in accordance with section 18,
within four months following the end of that year.
(2)  A greenhouse gas emissions permit may cover one or more units on the same
site operated by the same operator.
10. (1) The Central Authority shall, within six months from the date of which this
Act comes into force, issue guidelines for the monitoring and reporting of emissions
resulting from the activities mentioned under the Second Schedule.
(2) Each Nodal Authority shall ensure that,—
(a)  the guidelines issued by the Central Authority is being followed; and
(b) each operator of a unit reports the emissions from that unit during each
calendar year to the Nodal Authority after the end of that year in accordance
with the guidelines.
CHAPTER III
ALLOCATION OF ALLOWANCES
11. (1) The Central Authority, in consultation with the Union Ministry of
Environment, Forest and Climate Change and the Nodal authority, shall by notification,
notify the units regarding the allocation of allowances for emissions resulting from
activities mentioned under the Second Schedule before each compliance period.
(2) The Central Authority shall give sufficient notice of at least three months to
the units regarding the commencement and period of each compliance period as well
as the total quantity of allowances.
12. The Central Authority, through the Nodal Authorities shall allocate eighty per
cent. of the allowances free of cost to all units at the start of each compliance period on
pro rata basis based on the technology employed by the unit and the remaining twenty
per cent. shall be sold by the Central Authority through auctions as notified by them:
Provided that if a unit has different emission standard as against the Second
Schedule, then the allowance shall be adjusted accordingly.
 13. (1) The Central Authority and the Nodal Authorities shall ensure that transfer
of allowances take place between units operating in India.
(2)  The Central Authority shall ensure that by the date notified by it each year, the
operator of each unit surrenders a number of allowances equal to the total emissions
4
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
5
10
Conditions for
Issue of Permit.
Contents of
Permit.
Guidelines for
monitoring and
reporting
emissions.
Allocation and
issue of
Allowances.
Method of
allocation of
allowances.
Transfer,
surrender and
cancellation of
allowances.

from that installation during the preceding calendar year as verified in accordance with
section 18 and are subsequently cancelled.
(3) The Central Authority shall take the necessary steps to ensure that allowances
may be cancelled at any time at the request of the person holding them.
14. (1) Each allowance shall be valid for emissions during the period referred to in
section 11for which they are issued.
(2) At the beginning of the first compliance period and after the beginning of each
subsequent compliance period referred to in sub-section (2) of section 11, allowances
which are no longer valid and have not been surrendered and cancelled in accordance
with sub-section (2) of section 13 shall be cancelled by the Central Authority.
(3) The Central Authority shall issue allowances to persons for the current
period to replace any allowances held by them and cancelled in accordance with sub-
section (2).
CHAPTER IV
AUCTION AND TRADING SYSTEM
15. (1) The auction of allowances in accordance with section 12 shall be sold
through a platform set up by the National Commodities and Derivatives Exchange
e-Markets Limited (NeML) in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The Central Authority shall, in the initial auction of the compliance period,
offer twenty per cent. of allowances at the floor price in accordance with section sub-
section (1) of section 17:
Provided that in case the allowances are not completely sold in the first
auction, then the Central Authority shall hold subsequent auctions until all of the
allowances are sold:
Provided further that no unit shall hold greater than one hundred and fifty per
cent. of initial allocation of allowances or greater than five per cent. of the total
allowances in the market.
16. (1)The Central Authority shall, in consonance with the NeML, set up a
platform for trading of allowances under this Act.
(2) The NeML shall, within three months of the passing of this Act, notify the
detailed market operations manual that includes the rules of auction clearance and
order matching.
(3) Each unit may engage in the trading of the allowances on the particular platform
in accordance with the market operations manual.
(4) Each unit shall appoint a nodal representative to be the point of contact
between the unit and the NeML for auction participation and trading of allowances
who is actively involved in monitoring the CEMS.
17. (1) The allowance price ceiling shall be imposed at rupees 100/kg and the
allowance price floor shall be maintained at rupees 5/kg.
(2) The price ceiling and floor may be adjusted by the Market Oversight Committee,
from time to time, as the market performance is reviewed.
18. (1) The Central Authority shall notify the criteria for verification of the reports
to be submitted by the units within three months of commencement of this Act.
(2) The Nodal Authorities shall ensure that the reports submitted by operators in
pursuant to section 10 are verified in accordance with the criteria set out by the Central
Authority in the notification mentioned under sub-section (1).
5
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
5
10
Validity
of
Allowances.
Auction of
allowances.
Trading of
allowances.
Allowance Price
Ceiling and
Floor.
Compliance
Verification.

(3) The Nodal Authorities shall ensure that no operator whose report has not
been verified as satisfactory in accordance with the criteria set out in the notification
by the date so mentioned in the notification for emissions during the preceding year
may make further transfers of allowances until a report from that operator has been
verified as satisfactory.
19. (1) The Central Authority shall impose an Environmental Damage
Compensation (EDC) applied at a rate of rupees 200/kg for each kg of excess for every
kilogram of emissions in excess of a unit’s allowance holdings at the end of the
compliance period.
(2) The units shall post an Environmental Damage Compensation Deposit (EDCD)
for the amount of rupees two lakh for       small-scale, rupees three lakh for medium-scale
and rupees ten lakh for large-scale industries.
(3) The tenure for the EDCD shall be  notified at least three months ahead of each
compliance period by the Central Authority.
(4) The EDCD shall not be forfeited in case of compliant industries:
Provided that for industries exceeding their allowance holdings, the EDC
specified in sub-section (1) shall be deducted from the EDCD specified in sub-
section (2) and additional EDCD may then be required to be posted to meet any
shortfall.
(5) The persistent or gross non-compliance shall be a ground for removal from the
system and additional penalties available under Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution)
Act, 1981 shall be applicable.
20. In case of any missing or invalid CEMS data, emissions shall be imputed as per
the Third Schedule and knowingly reporting any inaccurate data shall and be treated
as non-compliance with the system and incur penalties under this Act.
CHAPTER V
MISCELLANEOUS
21. (1) The Central Authority may allow operators of units carrying out one of the
activities listed in the Second Schedule to form a pool of units from the same activity
for the period referred to in sub-section (1) of section 11 and/or the period referred to
in sub-section (2) of section 11 in accordance with sub-sections (2) and (3) of this
section.
(2) Operators carrying out an activity listed in the Second Schedule who wish to
form a pool shall apply to the Central Authority, specifying the units and the period for
which they want the pool and supplying evidence that a trustee shall be able to fulfil
the obligations referred to in sub-section (3).
(3) Operators intending to form a pool shall nominate a trustee who shall be:
(a) issued with the total quantity of allowances calculated by installation of the
operators, by way of derogation from section 11; and
(b) responsible for surrendering allowances equal to the total emissions from
installations in the pool, by way of derogation from clause (e) of sub-section
(1) of section 9 to be restricted from making further transfers in the event that
an operator’s report has not been verified as satisfactory in accordance sub-
section (3) of section 18.
22. (1) During the period referred to in sub-section (1) of section 11, the Nodal
Authorities may apply to the Union Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate
Change and the Central Authority for certain units to be issued with additional
allowances in cases of force majeure.
6
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
5
10
Environmental
Damage
Compensation.
Imputation
Rules for
missing CEMS
data and
Penalties.
Pooling.
Force Majeure.

(2) The Central Authority shall, in consonance with the Union Ministry of
Environment, Forest and Climate Change, determine whether force majeure is
demonstrated, in which case it shall authorize the issue of additional and non-
transferable allowances by that Nodal authority to the operators of those units.
(3) The Central Authority shall, within three months from the time this Act comes
into force, without prejudice, develop guidance to describe the circumstances under
which force majeure is demonstrated.
23. (1) The Nodal Authorities shall establish and maintain a registry in order to
ensure the accurate accounting of the issue, holding, transfer and cancellation of
allowances in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The Nodal Authorities may maintain their registries in a consolidated system,
together with one or more other Nodal Authorities.
(3) The registry maintained under sub-section (1) shall be accessible to the public
and shall contain separate accounts to record the allowances held by each person to
whom and from whom allowances are issued or transferred;
(4) The Union Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change shall adopt a
standardized procedure and secured system of registries in the form of standardized
electronic databases containing common data elements to track the issue, holding,
transfer and cancellation of allowances, to provide for public access and confidentiality
as it deem appropriate to implement the provisions of this Act.
24. (1) The Central Authority may, on the basis of progress achieved in the
monitoring of emissions of greenhouse gases, make a proposal to the Union Ministry
of Environment, Forest and Climate Change to amend the First Schedule to include
other greenhouse gases and other activities listed in the Second Schedule.
(2) The Central Authority shall, on the basis of experience of the application of
this Act and of progress achieved in the monitoring of emissions of greenhouse gases,
draw up a report on the application of this Act, considering:
(a) how and whether the Second Schedule shall be amended to include other
relevant sectors, inter alia the chemicals, aluminium and transport sectors,
activities and emissions of other greenhouse gases listed in the First Schedule,
with a view to further improving the economic efficiency;
(b) further harmonisation of the method of allocation;
(c) the relationship of emissions trading with other policies and measures
implemented at Central and State level, including taxation, that pursue the
same objectives;
(d) the level of excess emissions penalties, taking into account, inter alia, inflation;
(e) the functioning of the emissions trading market, covering in particular any
possible market disturbances; and
(f) pooling.
25.  In the case where there is no consensus between the Central Authority and
the Nodal Authority with respect to any provision in this Act, or the operator(s) of the
units under the presumption that the Central Authority or the Nodal Authorities have
not adhered to the powers vested in them by this Act, the aggrieved party(s) may
approach the National Green Tribunal for the same.
26. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament
by law in this behalf, provide adequate funds, from time to time, for carrying out the
purposes of this Act.
7
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
5
10
Registry.
Review and
Development.
Dispute
Resolution.
Central
Government to
provide funds.

27. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything
inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
28. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the
Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such
provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to it to be
necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of a
period of two years from the commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is
made, before each House of Parliament.
29. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this section shall be laid, as
soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session,
for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or
more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following
the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any
modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the
rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the
case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
(3) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon
as may be after it is made, before the State Legislature.
8
15
20
5
10
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Power to make
rules.

THE FIRST SCHEDULE
[See Section 2(i)]
List of Green houses Gases that fall under the purview of this Act
* Carbon dioxide (CO2)
* Methane (CH4)
* Nitrous Oxide (N2O)
* Hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs)
* Perfluorocarbons (PFCs)
* Sulphur Hexafluoride (SF6)
* Nitrogen Trifluoride (NF3)
9

THE SECOND SCHEDULE
[See Section 6]
List of industrial activities that fall under the purview of this Act
1. This Act does not cover activities related to research and development and
testing of new products and processes.
2. The threshold value in the below table refers to production capacities.
    Sl. No.     Industrial Activities/Units
Energy related activities
1. Combustion related units with a rated thermal input exceeding 20 MW
(except hazardous or municipal waste installations)
2. Mineral oil refineries
3. Coke ovens
Metal production
4. Metal ore (including sulphide ore) roasting or sintering installations
5. Installations for the production of pig iron or steel (primary or secondary
fusion) including continuous casting, with a capacity exceeding
2,5 tonnes per hour
Mineral industry
6. Units involved in the production of cement clinker in rotary kilns with a
production capacity exceeding 500 tonnes per day or lime in rotary kilns
with a production capacity exceeding 50 tonnes per day or in other
furnaces with a production capacity exceeding 50 tonnes per day
7. Units involved in the manufacture of glass including glass fibre with a
melting capacity exceeding 20 tonnes per day
8. Units involved in the manufacture of ceramic products by firing, in
particular roofing tiles, bricks, refractory bricks, tiles, stoneware or
porcelain, with a production capacity exceeding 75 tonnes per day, and
or with a kiln capacity exceeding 4 m3 and with a setting density per kiln
exceeding 300 kg/m3
Other activities
9. Industrial plants involved in the production of pulp from timber or other
fibrous materials
10. Industrial plants involved in the production of paper and board with a
production capacity exceeding 20 tonnes per day
10

THE THIRD SCHEDULE
[See Section 20]
Validation Protocol for Missing CEMS Data mentioned in Section 20
Data available      Load imputation for missing data values (kg/hr)
from CEMS during
the designated
reporting period
>95% Impute industry’s mean operating emissions load during the
compliance period
80-95% Impute industry’s 75th percentile emissions load during the
compliance period
50-80% Impute industry’s 90th percentile emissions load during the
compliance period
<50% Impute industry’s 90th percentile emissions load during the
compliance period and prior three months of valid CEMS data,
up to start of the compliance period and notice sent to the
concerned Nodal Authority of very poor data availability of
the unit
11

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Climate Change is a growing concern for India. In the wake of India’ declaration
to achieve net zero by the year 2070 at the Conference of Parties held in Glasgow in
2021, it becomes imperative to take the necessary measures, including legislations to
combat the evil of Climate Change.
The present Bill aims to replicate the Emission Trading System pilot project by
the Gujarat Pollution Control Board which has showed positive outcomes with regards
to reducing the green house gas emissions.  Therefore, this Bill is the first attempt for
bringing about legislation on Climate Change so as to meet India’s Nationally
Determined Contributions under the Paris Agreement as well as recent obligations.
Hence this Bill.
    NEW DELHI;
7 March, 2022.       VISHNU DAYAL RAM
12

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 16 of the Bill provides for setting up of platform for trading by the Central
Government. Clause 23 provides for the establishment and maintenance of  a registry
in order to ensure the accurate accounting of the issue, holding, transfer and
cancellation of allowances. Clause 26 provides that the Central Government shall
provide adequate funds for carrying out the purposes of the Act. The Bill, therefore,
if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is
estimated that a recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore per annum
would be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about ten crores is also likely to be involved.
13

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGA TED LEGISLA TION
Clause 29 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to make rules for
carrying out the provisions of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail
only, the delegation of legislative power is of normal character.
14

LOK SABHA
—————
A
BILL
to set up a system for green house gas emission trading and establishment of
Authorities for the control of green house gas emissions and
for matters connected therewith
—————
(Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram, M.P.)