10K SABHA 
OJRi-l I GENnA. 
to 
'IRE .A.LlTMINIUM OORPORATI)N OF n~DIA LIMiTED (ACQUISITION AND 
TRANSFlit OF. ALIDUNIUM UNDERTAKING) BILL, 1983 
(To be/As introduced in 10k Sabha) 
1. page 11,-
( 1) after line 2, insert -
"CLAUSm" 
( 11) line 7,-
~ "CLo\USES" 
2. Page 1i, line 6 from bot tom,-
!Ql: "com,a1nes" ~ "companies" 
3. Page 4, line 43,-
~ "undrtaking II ~ "undertaking" 
4. Page 5, line 19,-
~r_ "the company" ,read "that company" 
5. Page 5, line 4ll-,_ 
m "a mount" ~ . "amount II 
" 
,. pap.e 7, line 20,-
!cl:. "us ch " ~ "such" 
7. page 8, -
in the marginal healiing to clause 14,-
!Ql: ".A,.ppoln ment" ~ ""ppointment" 
8. page 8, line 32,-
9. Page 11,-
"enure n 
.' 
d " t .lause 25,-in 'the m3:r'ginal 11(.:~ l.n g 0 
" ".:. n "(hntrarts" !cl: "Q)b.tract" L~ 
10. page 17, li~e 11,-
.t:o.r.-, I~S. 1, '75" ~ 
NEW DEIllI; 
Dece:nber 1', 1,,83 Agrahayana 25, 1~O5' (Saka) 
\ '. 

As INTRODUCED IN loB: SABRA Olt 
BID No. 139 of 1183 
THE ALUMINIUM CORPORATION OF INDIA LIMITED (ACQUISI. 
'!'ION AND TRANSFER OF ALUMINIUM UNDERTAKING) BILL, 1983 
CLAtrSIS 
1. Short title. 
2. Definitiens. 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CHAPTER I 
Pil:Ln.uNAIY 
CHAPTER II 
AecttJrBI'rtON AMJ) TRAN8FER OF ALUMINroM UNDER'l'AKING 0' THE COMPANY 
\ 3. Transfer to, and vesting in, the Central Government of the 
Aluminium undertaking of the Company. 
4. General effect of vesting. 
5. Central Government or the Bharat Aluminium Company not to 
be liable for prior liabilities. 
6. Vesting of the Aluminium undertaking in Bharat Aluminium 
Company. 
CHAPTER III 
PAYMENT OF AMOUNTS 
7. Payment of amounts. 
8. Payment of further amounts. 
CHAPTER IV 
MANAGEMENT, ETC., OF THE ALUMINIUM UNDERTAKING 
9. Management, etc., of the Aluminium undertaking. 
10. Power of Central Government to issue directions. 
11. Duty of persons to account for assets, etc., in their possession. 
CHAPTER V 
PaoVIs'IONS RELATING TO CERTAIN EMPLOYIZS OF THE COMPANY 
12. Continuance of employees. 
13. Provident fund and other funds. 

i1 
CH.c\PTER VI 
COMMISSIONER OF PA YMJ:N'l'S 
14. Appointment of Commissioner of Payments. 
15. Payment by the Central Government to the Commissioner. 
18. Certain powers of the Central Govern~ent or Bharat Aluminium 
Company. 
CLAuns 
17. Claims to be made to the Commissioner. 
18. Priority of claims. 
19. Examination of claims. 
20. Admission or rejection of claims. 
21. Disbursement of money by the Commissioner to claimants. 
22. Disbursement of mounts to the Company. 
23. Undisbursed or unclaimed amount to be transferred to tilt 
general revenue account. 
CHAPTER VII 
MISCJ:LLAK&Ot7S . 
24. Act to have overriding effec:t. 
25. Contracts in relation to the Aluminium undertaking to ce .. to 
have eftect unless ratified by the Central Government 01' .. 
Bharat Aluminium Company. 
26. Penalties. 
27. Oftences by compaines. 
28. Protection of action taken I;D good falth. 
29. Delegation. of powe~. 
30. PoWer to make rules. 
31. Power to remove difficulties. 
THE SCHEDULE. 

' .. 1_. 
Bill No. 139 of 1983 
i SAUIL I 
THE ALUMINIUM CORPORATION OF INDIA LIMITED (ACQUJSI. 
nON AND TRANSFER OF ALUMINIUM UNDERTAKING) BILL, 1983 
A 
BILL 
to ~Tovide for the acquisition and transfer of the right, title and interest 
~f the. Aluminium Corporation of Indi4 Limited in relation to its un-
dertaking at Jaykay Nagar, near Asansol (West Bengal) for the 
purpose of ensuring the continuity of production of alumrinium and 
aluminium fabricated products which are essential to the needs of 
the community and thereby to give effect to' the policy of the Stat~ 
towards securing the principles specified in clause (b) of article 3'9 
of the Constitution. . 
WHEREAS the undertaking of the Aluminium Corporation of India 
Limited, a company within the meaning of the Companies Apt, 1956 at 
Jaykay Nagar, near Asansol (West Bengal) waS engaged in the produc-
tion of aluminium and aluminium fabricated pr9ducts falling under the 
5 First Schedule to the Industries (Development and Regu1~tion) Act, 19151: 
AND WHEREAs as a result of deterioration of operating efficiency, 
grave financial improprieties, failure to maintain harmonious industrial 
relations and other reasons, the Co~pany had to. resort to the closure 
of the said undertaking in 1973; . 
10 AND WHE'RF.AS efforts were made from 1975 onwards by the Central 
Government and the Government of West Bengal to secure the revival 
of the said undertaking with a view to the rehabilitation of the workmen 
adversely affected by the c1oS'Ure of the undertaking and also fOr augmen-
ting the'· supply of aluminium and aluminium fahricated products and 
the efforts did not succeed as the entire capital of the Company had 
'5 ' t 'll" . been eroded by ou,tstandil1g li~bi1ities. an~ th~" managemen w~s un WI mg 
to invest any funds; . . . ~ 

Short 
title. 
AND WHOUS with a view to re-startinQ the said undertaking, the 
management of the said undertaking was taken over by the Central Gov-
ernment on the 1st day of May I 1978 under the provisiC?DS of the Industries 
(Development and Regulation) Act, 1951; 
AND WHERJ.AS owinS to the condition of the plant and machinery 5 
and other equipment and the grave deterioration which had already 
taken place in the operating efficiency thereof, the undertaking bas not 
been able, in spite of financial ansi other assistance provided by the 
Central Government and the Government of West Bengal, to become 
. viable or generate the funds needed for the proper utilisation of its 10 
capacity; 
AND WHEREAS further Investment of substantial sums of money is 
needed for the rehabilitation and replacement of the capital equipment 
and in view of the serious adverse· financial condition ~f the Company 
and the state of the undertaking, the Company is not in a position to 15 
.ecure the funds necessary for such investment; 
AND WHEREAS it is necessary to make such investment tor securing 
proper utilisation of available facilities <for production of aluminium 
od aluininfom fabricated products which are essential to the needs of 
the community, particularly In the industrial and pOwer sectors; 20 
AND WHEREAS such investmellt is also necessary for securing the 
continued employment of the workmen employed in the said under-
taking; 
AD -wHEREAs it il neeessary in the public interest to acquire the 
said' undertaking to eDable the Central Government to Have such invest- 15 
ment made and to ensure that the interests of the general pubUc are 
served by the continuance of the oid undertaking of the production of 
albminiuin and aluminium fabricated products; 
AND WHlUAS such acq~isition is for giving effect to the pollcy of 
the State towards securing the princip1es specified in clause (~) of article 30 
39 of the Constitution; 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-fourth Year of the 
Republic of lDdfa as follows:-
• Pm.u.nNARY 3S 
f. This Act may be called the Alumini'um CorpOration of India LImI-' 
ted (Acquisition aod Transfer of Aluminium UndetUJdn,) Aet, I •. 
Z. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requiret,-
(0) "Aluminium undertaking", in relation to the C~mpanYI 
means the undertaking of the Company located at Jaykay Nagar, 40 
near ~ansol, (W~st Bengal). being t~e industrial undertaking refer-
red to In th, order of the Governm~t of India In the Ministry of 
Industry (J:?epartment of Industrial. Developme,nt) No. S.O. 293 (E) I 
18AA/lDRA/78, dated the lit. day of lIlay, 19'1i 
8S of 1811• 

-I e! lHe. S 
3 
(b) "~ppointed day" means the date of commencement of tbtI 
Act; 
(e) "Bharat Aluminium Company" means the Bharat Alumi-
niUm. Company Limited, a Government company within the mean .. 
ing of ·the Companies Act, 1966, and having its registered office at 
New Delhi; 
(d) "Commissioner" means the Commissioner of Payments ap-
pointed under section 1'; 
10 
(e) "Company" means the Aluminium Corporation o~ India 
Limited, being a company within the meaning. of the Companies 
Act, 1956, and having its registered office at 7, Council House Street, 1 of 1808. 
Calcutta; . . . . 
U) "notification" means a notification published in the OftlC!lal 
Gazette;· 
. (-g) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this 
Act; . 
(h) "specified date", in relation to any provision of this Act, 
means such date as the Central Government may, by notification; 
.pettfy for the purposes of that provision and different dates. may 
~ specified for different provisions of this Act; 
(i) words and expressions used herein and not defined but 'de-
IDed in the Companies Act, i956, sq,ul have the meanings, r~ 
tively, assigned to them in that Act. 
CHAPTER II 
.CQUlSlnON AND TRANSFER OF ALUMINIUM UNDERTAKING OF THE COMPANY. 
. . 3. On the appointed day, the Aluminium undertaking of the Com-
pany and the right, title and interest. of the Company in relation to that 
un'dertakjn~, sh~ll, by virt"de of this Act, stand transferred to, and shall 
vest in, the Central Government. 
• (1) The Aluminium undertaking of the Company.shall be deemed 3°' •. . . . to include all properties and assets (mcludin~ lands, quarrJe~, mmes, 
bUildings, offices, factories, workshops, store~, plants, mac~Jllery and 
equipment, installations, instruments, laboratorIes, office ~urnJt~e, sta-
• t;onery and equipment, Nehicles, staff qua~~e~s, workers . colomes toge-
ther with amenities and installations pertammg thereto, cash bal~nces. 
3S h h nd reserve furids investments, books, book debts, nghts, eas . on a ,., . h d 
leaseholds powers authorities and privileges) pertainmg to t e un er-
taking and all oth~r rights and interests in, or arising ~&lt of, suc~ pro-
perties and assets as were immedia~ely before the appomted day m. the 
h. possessJ'on power or 'control of the Company and all bOoks owners Jp, ., . . t lilt 
40 of account, registers and all other documents .of whatever na ure re .. 
fng thereto . 
• 
Transfer 
to, aDel 
vesting 
in, the 
Central 
Govern-
ment of 
the Alu-
minium 
uncler-
t.Idniof 
the 
Company. 
.. . 
General 
effect 
ofveet-
in,. 

Central 
Govern-
ment or 
the Bharat 
Alumi-
nium 
Comp-
aD,. not 
to be Ua· 
(2) All properties and assets as aforesaid. whieh have vested in the 
Central. Government under section· 3 shall, . by force of such vesting, be 
freed and discharged from any trust, obligation; mortgage, charge, lien 
and an other inC\Ullbrances affecting them, and any aftachment, injunc-
tien, decree or order of any court or other· authority restricting the use 5 
of such properties or assets in any maimer Or appointing any receiver in 
respect of the whole or any part o~ such properties or assets shall be 
dee~ to have been withdrawn. 
(3) Every .mortgagee of any property which has vested UIlder this 
Act in the Central Government and every person holding any charge, 10 
lien or other ihterest "in, or in relation to, any Nch property, shall give 
within such time and in such manner as may be prescribed, an intima-
tion to the Commissioner of such mortgage, charge, lien or other in-
terest. 
(4) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the mort- 15 
gagee of any property referred to ·in sub-section (3) or any other person 
holding any charge, lien or other interest in, or in relation to, any such • 
property shall be entitled to claim, in accordance with his rights and In-
terests, payment of the mortgage money or other dues ·in whole or in 
part, out of the amounts referred to in sections 7 and 8 but no such mort- 20 
gage, charge, lien or other interest shall be enforceable against any pro-
perty which has y~sted in the Central Government. • 
(5) Any licence or other ipstrument granted to the Company in re-
lation to the Aluminium undertaking which has vested in the Central 
Government under section 3, at any time before the appointed day ande.;aS 
in force immediately before that day sball continue to be in force on and 
after such day in accordance with its tenor in relation to, and for tllae 
purposes ·of the said undertaking, and, on and from the date of vesting 
of such '1lDdertaking under section 6, in the B~arat Aluminium Com-
pany, that company shall be deemed to be substituted in S'UCh licence 30 
or other instrument as if such licence or other instrumeRt had been 
granted to it and shall hold such Ucence or other instrument for the re-
mainder of the period for which the Company would have held it ·un-
der the terms thereof. 
(6) If, on the appointed day, any suit, appeal or other proceeding 35 
of whatever nature in relation to any property or asset which has vested 
in the Central Government under section 3, instituted or ·preferred by 
or against the Company is pending, the same shall not abate, be discon-
tinued or be, in any way, prejudicially affected by reason of the transfer 40 
of the Ahtminium undertaking or of anything contained in this Act, but 
the suit, appeal or other.. proeeeding may be continued, prosecuted or 
enforcea by or against the Cen!r81 GO\'ernment or where th •. Aluml-
nium unclrtaking ·is directed under section 6, to vest in the Mtarat Alu-
minium Company, by or against that company. 
5. (1) Every liability of the Company in relation to the Aluminium 45 
undertaking ip respect of any period prior to the appointed day shaD 
be the liability of the Company and shall be enforceable against it and 
not against the Central Government or where the Aluminium under-
. taking is direeted under section 6: to vest in the Bharat Aluminium 
Company, against ·that comp~ny. 50 
• 

5 
(I) For the removal of dO'Ubts, it is hereby declared that,-: 
, (a) save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, no liabi-
lity of the Company in re.lation to the Aluminium undertaking' 
respect ~f any period prior to the appointed day, shall be enfo~~ 
able agamst the Central Government or where the Alum' . d k' . . mlum un-~rta 109 IS dIrected under section 6 to vest in the Bharat Alumi-" 
nlum Company, against that company; 
10 
(b) no award, decree or order of any court tribunal or" other 
authority, in relation to the Aluminium under~ng, passed after 
the appomted day, in respect of any matter, claim or dispute which 
arose before that day, shall be enforceable against the Central Gov-
ernment or where the Alumini'Um undertaking is directed under 
section 6 to vest in the Bharat Aluminium Company, against that 
company; 
(c) no liability incurred by the Company before the appl)inted 
day, for the contravention of any provision of law for the time be-
ing in force, shall be enforceable against the Central Government 
or where the Aluminium undertaking is directed under section 6 
to vest in the Bharat Aluminium Company, against the company. 
flO G" (l) Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 3 and 4, the 
Central Government shall, as soon as may be, after the appointed day, 
direct, by notification, that the Aluminium undertaking and the right, 
title and interest of the Company in rel{ltion to that undertaking which 
have vested in the Central Government under section 3, shall, instead 
fl5 of continuing to vest in the Central Government, vest in the Bharat 
. Alumini'Um Company either on the date of notification or on such ear-
lier or later date (not being a date earlier than the appointed day) as 
may be specified in the notification. 
(2) Where the right, title and interest of the Company in relation 
30 to the Aluminium undertaking vest in the Bharat Aluminium Company 
under sub-section (1), the Bharat Aluminium Company shall, on and 
from the date of such vesting, be deemed to have become the owner 
in relation to the Aluminium undertaking, and all the rights and liabi-
lities of the Central Government in relation to the Al'uminium under-
35 talting shall, on and from the date of such vesting, be deemed to. ~ave 
become the rights and liabilities, respectively, of the Bharat Aluml~llum 
Company. 
CHAPTER III ~ •. : 
PAYMENT OF AMOUNTS 
40 1. For the transfer to, and ve.itiDe in, the Central Governm_t, 
under section 3, of the AJuml.nium undertaking and the ri"ht, title and 
laterest 01 tile Compaay In reIatioD to that ~ tbere sW IMt 
Jiven by th~ Central Govenunent to the Company, in cash, and in the 
manner specified. in Chapter VI, an a mount of rupees four clOres and 
45 tweRty.four lakba. 
prloJ:' 
liabili-
ties. 
Vesting 
of the 
Alumi-
nium 
under-
taking 
in Bharat 
Alumi· 
nium 
CompanJ. 
PaYltlent 
of 
amount •. 

Payment 
c1f fur-
ther 
amounts. 
N ...... 
ment,ete., 
of the 
Alumi-
nium 
under-
taking. 
powet of 
Central 
Govern-
I'\ent to 
bsue 
direc-
tiona. 
DutJOf 
perSOlli 
to ac-
count for 
_ta, 
etc., in 
their 
poues-
lion. 
8. (1) F_ the .te,rivatiea of die Company of the maaapmat of 
tbe Alu ..... uDl UIIdeI'tIIkiaa, 'fbere sbaO be Rivea by tile Ceatnl Gov· 
e1'lUDeilt to the Company, in cash. an amount calculated at the rate of 
rupees two thousand five hundred per mensem for the period eom-
menclui On the date on which the manacement of the Aluminium un· 5 
_ dertaIdDg was taken over in pursuance of the orders made by the Cen-
tral Govermnent under the provisions of the Industries (DevelopmeDt 
aDd Regulation) Act, 1951 and ending on the appointed day. 860! 1951. 
(2) The aaount .,.cUl- ia Medon 7 aacI the 'UllOUDt calculated in 
......... wiDa the p~ of 8ub-sedion (1) shaD carry .imple iDa 10 
·tenat .. tile rate of four per CeDt. per aDDUID for the period CO_eDe-
.. oa die appoiuted day aDd eDdIng on the date on which payment 
.. .... _rat is... by.... CeIItnd Go.ena-a to tile CG- I 
..... r. .AI' I.,fi 
(J) The amoUDts determiDed in accordance with the provlaloas of 15 
sub-seetions (1) and (2) shall be gi:ven by the Central GoverameBt to 
the Ccaapaay in .. dditlon to the amount specified in sect_ 7. 
E4} FfIr the nmeval of cIoabts, it is ilereby declared that the IlabDi· 
tiea· af die C-pa,. ia relatio. to the Aluminium undertaldq which 
.... ftMe.t .. the c.tral Gov--.ent uncle .. sedio. 3,...... be dis- flO 
charged from the amount referred to in section 7 and also from the 
amounts determined under sub·sections (1), (2) and (l) in accordance 
-. the ttpts ad lateiesl8 of Che creditors of the CHlpBIIy. 
CHAPTER IV 
MANAGIMEIn', ETC., or THE ALt1MlNIl1M VNDERTAKlNG 
9. The general superintendence, direction, control and management 
of the affairs and business of the Aluminium undertaking shall, where 
a direction has been issued by the Central Government ·i.1nder section 
6, vest in the Bharat Aluminium Company and thereupon the Bharat 
Aluminium Company shall be entitled to exercise, to the exclusion of 30 
all other persons, all such powers and do all such things at the Com-
'pany is authorised to exercise and do in rrlation to such undertaking. 
10. The Central Government may issue strch directions as it may 
deem desirable in the circumstances of the case to the Bharal AlumJ-
nium Company and the Bharat Al'.1minium Company may also, if it 80 35 
desires, apply to the Central Government at any time for instruction. 
as to the manner in which the management of the Aluminium under-
takillg shall be conducted by it or in relation to any other matter an-
sing in the course of such management. 
11 .. (J) Any person who hal, on the appointed day, in his possession 
or under his control, any assets, books, documents or other papers 40 
relating to the Aluminiun1 undertaking which has vested in the Central 
Government or the Bharat Aluminium Company under this Act &hall 
De liable to 8CCCYilDt for the aaid assets, books, documents and o1.ber 
paper" to the Centl'al' Government or the Bharat Aluminium Company 45 
aud .hall deliver them up to the Central Government or the Bharat 
Ahlminium Company or to such person or persons as the Central Gov-
ernment or the Bharat Aluminium Company may specify in this behaU. 

14 of 1947, 
7 
(Z) 'the CentIal Government th 
may takE' or cause to be taken 11 or e Bharat Aluminium ComnJI_ 
of the AJ ' a necessary step I ' r--J 
ummium undertakin rr h' h h s or securIng posSession 
ment or the Bharat Alumini~:n Wc IC as vested in the Central Govem-
ompany "Ilnder this Act 
.5 (3) The Company shall with' h . ment 1 .' In suc period as th ·C . may al ow in this behalf fu 'h t e entral Govem-
inventory of all its properties ~nd r:ls t 0 that Government a complete 
ta:r.ing to the Aluminium undertak' sse s, ~ on the appointed day, per-
Government under section 3 and I mg ~hich has vested in the Central 
10 ment or the Bharat Aluminiu C or thIS purpose the Central Govern-
all reasonable facilities. m ompany shall afford to the Company 
CHAPTER V 
PROVISIONS REf,A TING TO CERTAIN EMPLOYE&; C 
12 (1) OF THE OMPANY 
'5 d ' I Ever~ Pf'rson who has been, immediately belore the appointed 
ay, emp oyed In the Aluminium undertaking shall become,-
20 
(a) on and from thE' appointed day, an e~ployee of th C t I Government; and e en ra 
(b) w~ere the Aluminium undertaking is directed 'Under section 
6, to vest In the Bharat Aluminium Company, an· em~oyee of that 
company on and from the date of usch vesting, 
and shall hold office or service under the Central Government o~ the 
Bharat, ~luminium Co.mpany, ao; the case may be, with the,same rights 
and priVileges as to pension, gratuity and other matters as would have 
been admissible to him if there had been no such vestil\g and shAll 
25 continue to do so lmle!;!; and until his employment under thl~ Central 
Government or the Bharat Aluminhlm Company, as the case may be, 
is duly terminated or until his remuneration and other conditions of 
service are duly altered by the Central Government or the Bharat 
JO 
Aluminium Company, as the case may be, 
(2) Notwithstariding anything contained in the Industrial Disputes 
Act, 1947, or in any other law for the time being. in force, the transfer 
of the services of any officer or other person employed in the Aluminium 
undertaking to the Central Government or the Bharat Aluminium 
Company shall not entitle such officer or other employee to any com-
Conti_ 
nuance 
ofemp_ 
lOYeei. 
:~5 pensation under thi!' Act or under any other law for the time being in 
force and no such cla:m shall be entertained by any court, tribunal (lr 
other authority, 
13, (1) Where the Company has established a provident fund, super-
annuation fund. welfare fund or any other fund for the benefit of the 
40 persons employed by it, the moni~ relatable to the officers or other 
employees, who"le !;ervices have become transferred, by or under 
this Act to the Central Government or the Bharat Aluminium 
Company, shall, out of the monies standing orr the appointed day, to 
the credit of such provident fund, superannuation fund, welfare fund 
ProVi-
dent 
fun:! 
and 
other 
funda, 
45 or 'othertund, stand trano;ferred to, and vest in. ·the 'Central Govern-
ment or the Bharat Aluminium Company, as the case may be, 
(2) The mon;eo:; which stand transferred under sub-s~ction (1) to the 
Central Government or the Bharat Aluminium Company, as the case 
mnv he shall. be dealt with by that Government or that company in such 
50 manner ~s may be pre~cribed. 

Appoln'-
ment of 
Commis-
sioner of 
Pay-
ments. 
Payment 
by the 
uDtralGov 
ernment to 
tbeCom-
missioner 
Certain 
powers 
of the 
Central 
Govern-
ment or 
Bbarat 
Alumi-
nium 
Company. 
r 8 
CHAPTER VI 
CO~Ml5S10~ER or PAYMENTS 
14. (I) TIle CdiralGover,:1D1eat . shaH, f'Or the puI'pOIe of cYsbunlaa 
the aaaoua.&.s payable to the Company under section 7 and section 8, by 
DMileation, appoint a Commissioner of Payments, 5 
(2) The' Central GovemmeDt may appoint such otber persons as it 
may tbink fit to assist the Commissioner and thereupon the Commissioner 
may authorise one 0'1' more of such p"rsons also to exerdae all or any 
of 'the powen exercisahle hy him under this Ad aDd dltrerent penon! 
may be authorised to exercise different powen. 10 
(3) Any person authorised by the. Commissioner to exercise any of 
the powers exercisable by the Commissioner may exercise those powers 
in the !lame manner and with the same effect as if they have been con-
fert~d on that persoll directly by this Act and not by way of authorisa-
tiott. 15 
(4) TIle saIM'ies and allowaac:es of the ColDlllissloner .... oCher 
persons appoiDted under thh section shall 'be defrayed out of the Con-
solidated F'bnd of India, 
15. (1) The Central Government shall, within thirty. days from the 
speCified date, pay, in cash, to the Commissioner. fof' payment to the':.Io 
Company an amount equal to the amount specified in Rcction 7 :and the 
amounts payable to the Company under section 8. 
(2) A deposit account shaH be opened bY.the Central Government 
in favour of the Commis.'1ion~r, in the Public Account of tndia, and 
every amount pnid under this Act to the Commissioner shall be deposited 25 
hy him to the credit of the said depoo;it account and t.he said deposit 
aecount shall be operated ~. the Commissioner. ' 
(3) Records shan be maintained by the CommissioMf in T'espect of 
the Aluminiu.m undertaking in relation to which paymen~ have been 
made to him under this Act. 
(4) The interest accruing on the amount standing to the credit of the 
deposit account referred to in sub-section (2) shall ensure to the benefit 
of the Company. 
. 18. (1) The Central Government or the Bharat Aluminium Company, 
as the ,case may be, shall be entitJ,ed to r~eive up to the specified date, 35 
to the exclusion of all other persons, any money due to the Company, 
in relation to the Aluminium undertaking. realised aft-er. the appointed 
day. notwithstandinp, that the realisation pertains to a period prior to the 
appointed day. . , 
(2) The Central Government or the Bharat Aluminium Company, 8'S 40 
the case may be, may make a claim to the Commissioner with regard 
to every payment made by it after the appointed day for discharging 
any liability of the Company pertaining to the Aluminium undertakin~ 
in relation to any period prior to the appointed day; and every such 
claim shall have priority in accordance with 'the priorities attaching 45 

9 
under this ~ct. 10 the matter in relation to which SUCh liability has 
been discharged by the Central Government or the Bharat Aluminium 
Company, as the case may be. 
(3) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the liabilities of the 
5 Company in relation to the Aluminium undertaking in I'espect of any 
transaction prio~ to the appointed day, which have 'not been discharged 
on or before the specified date, shall be the liabilities of the Company. 
17. Every person having a claim against the Company in relation to 
the Aluminium Undertaking shall prefer such claim before the Conllnis-
10 .sioner }\ ithin thirty days froll~ the specified date: 
Prov;ded that if the Commissioner is satisfied that the claim~nt was 
prevented by suffiCient cause from preferring the claim within the said 
period·of thirty days, he may entertain the claim within a further period 
ot thirty days and not thereafter. 
15 ]8. The claims ariSing out of the matters specified in the Schedule 
shaH have priorities in accordance with the following principles, 
nameJy:-
. 25 
(a) Category I shall have precedence over all other'Categories 
and Category II shall have precedence over Category III and so on; 
(b) the claims specified in each of th~ Categories shall rank 
equally and be paid in full, but, if the amount is insufficient to meet 
such claims in full they shall abate in equal proportions and be 
paid accordingly: ' • 
(c) the question of discharging any liability with regard to a 
matter specified in a lower category shall arise only if a surplus is 
left after meeting all the liabilities specified in. the immediately 
higher category. 
19. (1) On receipt of the claims made under s~ct~~n 17, t~e Co~is­
sioner shall arrange the claims in the order of prIOrItIes speCIfied In ther 
• . . danc with such order 0 
30 Schedule and examme the same In accor e 
35 
priorities. 
(2) If. on ~xamination of the claims, the Commis, .. io~er is of OPinj~n 
that the am.ount paid to him \1nder this Act is n~t l~uffi~'e;;: ~q:7:d t t: 
liabilities specified in any lower category, he s a no . 
examine the claims in. respect of such lower category. 
Claims 
obe 
made to 
the Com-
mis.,ioner. 
Priority 
of claims. 
Examina-
tion of 
Claims. 
. " g the claims with reference to tl~e priorities 
20 ( 1) After examlOlO. d . r before 
. . h S hed Ie the Commissioner shall fix a ate on 0 
set out In t e c u, h' l' 
which every claimant shall me the proof of IS calm. 
. f f the date' so fixed shall be 
(2) Not less. than fo~rteen ~:~: :fo :c~a~y newspaper in the English 
Admis_ 
sion Or 
rejeetion 
of 
cla,ims. 
given by advertlse~ent I.n o~e . r art of the country and in one 
40 language having ~irculat~on In t~e :~~o r~gional language as the Com-
issue of such dally. new~paper In d uch notice shall call upon 
miS'5ioner may consider sUitable'h~n I ~very ':h the Commissioner within 
the claimant to file the proof of . IS C a.m Wl 
4 the- time speCified in the advertIsement. . 
5· 

Dbburae. 
meat of 
JJUJney 
by the 
Comm's-
.lour to 
clai-
mants, 
Disburse-
mcntof 
amoUlltato 
tbccompany 
10 
(3) Every claimant who fails to file tbe proof of his c1ai·m withift 
the time specified by the Commissioner shall be excluded from the 
disbursements made by the Commissioner. 
(4) The Commissioner shall, after such investigation as may, in his 
opinion, be necessary and after "lving the Company an opportunity of 5 
refuting the claim and" after giving the claimant a reasonable opportu-
nity of being heard admit or reject, by order in writing, the claim in 
whole or in part, ' 
(5) The Commissioner shall have the power to regulate his own 
procedure in all matters arising out of the discharse of hi3 functions, 10 
including the place or places at which he may hold his sittings and 
shall, for the purpose of making an investigation under this Act have 
the same powers as are. vested in a civil Co,urt under the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908, while trying a lUit, ,in re!pect of the following matters, ' of J9OI, 
namely:- 15 
(a) the 'summoning and enforcing the attendance of any witness 
and examining him on oath; 
(b) the discovery and production of any document or other 
material object producible as evidence; 
(r) the reception of evidence on aftidavits; llO 
(d) the issuing of any commission for the examination of 
witnesses. 
, . 
(6) Any investigation before the Commissioner shall be deemed to 
be a judicial proceeding within the meaning of sections 193 and 228 of 
the Indian Penal Code and the Commissioner shall be deemed to be a,llS 45 of 1860, 
eivil court for the purposes of section 195 and· Chapter XXVI of the 
Code .of Criminal Procedure, 1973. 2 otiS"., 
(7) A claimant who is dissatisfied with the decision of the Commis-
sioner may prefer an appeal against the decision to the principal civil 
court of original jurisdiction within the local limits of whose jurisdietion 30 
the registered otftce of the Company is situated: ' 
Provided that where a Person who is a Judge of a High Court is 
appointed to be the Comm'issioner, the appeal shall lie to the High Court 
within the local limits of whose jurisdiction such registered oftlce is 
situated, and such appeal shall be ooard and disposed of· by not less 35 
than two Judges of that High Court. 
21. Alter admitting a claim under this Act, the amount due in respect 
of such claim shall be paid by the Commissioner to the person or 
persons to whom such amount is due, and, on such payment, the lla-
bility of the Company in respect of such claim shall stand discharged. 40 
22. (1) If. out of the monies paid to him under section 1$, there it 
a balance left after meeting the liabilities,,, specified in the Schedule, 
the Commissioner shall disburse such balance to the Company, 
(2) Where the possession ~f any maehinery, equipment or other 
property, has vested in the Central Government or the Bharat Alumintufn 45 
• 

tt 
Company under this Act, but such machinery, equipment, or other 
~roperty does not belong to the Company, it 'shall be lawful for the 
Central Governme~t or the Bharat Aluminium Comp.any to continue to 
possess such machmery or equipment or other propert th 
t d d't' Y on e same 5 ,erms ~n con 1 Ions under which it was possessed by the Com an 
tmmedJately before the appointed oay, P y 
23, A~y mo~ey paid to the Commissioner which remains undisbursed 
or un~lalmed on the date immediately preceding the date on which the 
oftic.e ~I ,the Commissioner is wound up, shall be transferred by the 
JO Commlsslon-er, before his office is finally wound up, to the general 
revenue account of the Central Government; but a claim to any money 
so transfer~ed may be preferred to the Central Government by the 
person entitled to such payment and shall be dealt with a'S if such 
transfer had not been made, and the order, if any, for pa~ment of the 
'5 claim being treated as an order for the refund of revenue, 
€HAPTER VII 
M!SCELLAND>US 
24. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time 
:l()o being in force or in any instrument having effect by virtue of any law, 
other than this Act. or in any decree or order of any Court, tribunal ()r 
other authority. , , 
25, Every contract entered into by the Company in relation to 
the Aluminium undertaking for any service, sale or supply, ·and in force 
Immediately before the appointed day, shall, on and from the expiry of 
25 one hundred ·and eighty days from such day, cease to have effect unless 
such contract is before the exp!ry of that period, ratified, in writing, by 
the Central Government or the Bharat Aluminium Company and, in 
ratifying such contract, the Central Government or the Bharat Alu-
minium Company may make such alterations or modifications therein 
30 as it may think fit: 
35 
Provided that the Central Government .or 'the Bharat AI~minium 
Company shall not omit to ratify a contract, and shall not make any 
alteration or modification in a contract,-
(a) unless it is satisfied that such contract is unduly onerous 
or has been entered into in bad faith or is detrimental to the inter-
ests of the Central Govermpent or the Bharat Aluminium Company; 
and 
(b) except after giving the parties to the contract E! reasonable 
opportunity of being' heard and except after recordi~ in writing its 
reasons for refusal to ratify the contract or for makmg any altera-
tion or modification therein, . 
26. Any person who,-
(a) having in his possession, custody or control any property 
or asset'$ forming part of the Aluminium undertaking, wrongfuny 
withholds such property or assets from the Central Gowrnment or 
the Bharat. Aluminium Company; or 
UDdA-
bursed or 
unclaimed 
amount 
to be 
trans-
ferred to 
the gene· 
ral re-
venue 
8C'Count. 
Act to 
have 
over-
riding 
elTect. 
Contract in 
relation to 
the Alu-
minlLml 
under· 
taking 
to cease 
to have 
effect un. 
less rati-
fied by 
the Cen-
tral Gov-
errunent 
or Bharat 
Alumi-
nium 
Company, 
Penalties. 

Offences 
by com-
panies. 
Protec-
tion of 
action 
taken in 
load 
faith. 
(b) WlleDgfuU, obtains posaes&ion of, or retains, any property 
or 'assets forming part of the Aluminium undertaking; or . 
tc) wilfully withholds or fails to furnish to the Central Gov-
ernment, or the Bharat Aluminium Company or to any person or 
body of persons specified by that Government or company, any 5 
document or inventory relating to that undertaking which may be 
in his possession, custody or control; or 
(d) fails to deliver to the Central Government, Or the Bharat 
Aluminium ~ompany or to any person or body of persons specified 
by that Government' or company, any property,· assets, books ot 10 
account, registers or other documents in, his poIIIession, custO(ly or 
control, relating to the Aluminillm undertakingj or 
(e) wrongfully removes or destroys any property or asset 
torming part of' the Alumini'",m undertaking or prefers any claim 
under this Act which he knoW'S or has leasonable cause to believe 15 
to be false Or grossly inaccurate, 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
two years, or with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees, or 
with both. 
21. (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 110 
company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was 
in charge 0(, and was responsible to, the company for the conduc~ of 
the bU'siness of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed 
to be guilty of the OfteDC8 and shan be liable to be proceeded against 
and punished' accordingly: • Sl5 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-tection shall render any 
such perSon liable to any punishment, if he proves that the offence was 
committea without his knowledge or that he had exercised aU due 
diligence to preven t the commission of such offence. 
(2)' Notwithstancftng anything contained in 'SulHection (1), where So 
any offence under this Act' has been committed by '" company and it Is 
proved that the offence has been committed with the conaent or con-
nivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, 
manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director, 
manager, secretary or otbel" omcer shall be deemed to be guilty of that 3.S 
otrem:e and shall be liable to ~ proceeded against and punished accord-
~~ . 
EzpZClTl4tion.-For the purpoaes of this section,-
(4) "company" me... any body corporate and includes a 
or· other 8I!IOOiation of jndividuals; and 
firm 
(b) "director", in rt!olation to a ftrm, means a partner in the 
finn. 
ZI. (1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall Ue againtt 
the Central Government or the Bbarat Aluminium Company or any 
officer or other employee of that GO\l'emment, or that company, or any 45 
person autherised by that Government or that company for anything 
which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act. 

(2) No suit or other legal proceedi 
Government or the Bharat Alu " ng shall lie against the Central . mmlum Comp . , employee of that Government th any or any officer or othet or at compan ' by that Government or that com f y or any person authorised 
.; to be caused by anything which i:~~y or an~ damage caused Or likely 
done under this Act. good f8Jth done or intended to be 
21. (1) The Central Governm t • or any of th . en may, by notiftcation, direct that all e powers exercisable by it und th' Act power conferred by thi tJ er s , other than the 
IU exercised by such pers s sec on, section 30 or section 31 may also be 
cation. on or. persons as may be specified in the notift-
(2) Whenever any delegation of power is made under S'Ub-section 
( 1), t.he ~rson to whom such Power has been delegated shall act under 
the direction, control and supervision of the Central Gov~rnment. 
15 30: (1) The Central Government may, by notification. make rules for 
cnrrymg out the provisions of this Act. 
(2). In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregomg power, such rules may provide for aU Or any of the following 
m:tttcrs, namely:-. 
(4) the time within which, and the manner in which. an inti-
mation shall be given to ihe Commissioner under 'Sub-section (3) of 
section 4; 
(b) the manner in whic~ the moneys in any provident fund or 
other fund referred to in sectfon 13 shall be dealt With; 
25 (c) any other matter which is required to be. or may be, 
prescribed. 
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this' Act 
shall be laid. as soon as may be after it is made, before each House ot 
Parliament. while it is in se'ssion, for a total period of thirty days which 
30 ,may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive selsions, 
and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the 
session or the successive sessions aforesaid. both Houres asp'ee in making 
any modification in the rule or both' Houses agree that the rule should 
'not be JMde, the 'rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified 
15 form or be of no effect, as the cac;e may be; so. howevE>r, that any such 
modification or annulment shall ,be without prejudice to the validity of 
anything previously done under that rule. 
31. If any difficulty arises in glvmg effect to the provisions of this 
Act, the Central Government mllY, bv order. not inconsistent with the 
40 provisions of this Act, remove the difficulty: . 
Provided that no such order shall be .made after the expiry of a 
period of two' years from the appointed day. 
\ 
I 
Dele,s-
tion of 
powers. 
Power to 
make 
rules. 
Power to 
remove 
diftlcul-
ties. 

THE SCHEDULE 
[~ee sections 18, i9(1), 20(1) and 22(1)] 
ORDa 0.. PRIORITIES FOR. THE DIIICHARGE OF LI.(BILITIII:S 01" TH& . 
Cutegof'y 1- 5 
Employees' dues on accOunt of . unpaid salaries and wages, contribu-
tions to be made by the Company and the employees to the provident 
fund and Employees' State Insurance, premium relating to Life Insurance 
Corporation of India and any other amounts due to employees, in rea-
peet of any period whether before or a(ter the management of the 10 
Aluminium undertaking had been taken over by the Central Govern-
ment. . . 7 ~ 
CategOTY 11-
Loans advanced by banks and financial institutions during the post-
take over management period. '5 
CutegOTy III-
Loans ac:Ivanced by the Central Government and State Government 
during the post-take over management period. 
Category IV-
Any credit availed of for the purpose of carrying on any trading or 20 
manufacturing operations during the post-take over management period. 
Category V-
Any other loans obtained during -the post-take over management 
period. 
CategoTY VI-
Secured loans obtained during the pre-take over management period. 
Cutegory VII~ 
• 
Unsecured loans or other dues to creditors in relation to' any tran. 
saction which took place during the pre-take over management period. 
Cutegory V 111-
Revenue. taxes. (.'esses, rates or ,other dues for tfle Central Govern-
ment. State Gowrnment and loc~ authorities or State Electricity Board 
tn respe::t of any period whether before or after the management of the 
Aluminium undertakhg 'had been taken over by the Central Govern-
30 
ment ... , 35 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Aluminium Corporation of India Limited at J k N 
Asan I (W Be ay ay agar near 
~o. est ngal) is engaged in the production of aluminium and 
alumlOJ.um fabricated prod~cts falling ~nder the First Schedule to the 
IndustrIes (Development and Regulation) Act 1951 In S t be 973 h .. , . ep em r, 1 
t e undertaking of the Company located at Ja ka N ' . ' y y agar near Asansol 
was closed due to financial and other difficulties At the t1 f c1 . . me 0 osure, 
the undertakmg was employing abou~ 2,500 persons. 
2. Efforts ~ere made from 1975 onwards by the Central Government 
and the Government of West Bengal to ,revive the undertaking, with a 
view to rehabilitate the' workmen adversely affected by the closure and 
also for augmenting the supply of alumini'UIll and aluminium fabri ~ated 
products. However, the efforts did not succeed as the entire capital of 
the Comparly had been e~roded by the outstanding liabilities and the 
. management was unwilling to invest any funds. In the circumstances, 
the management of the undertaking of the Company lOcated at Jaykay 
Nagar near Asansol was taken over on the 1st May, 1978 by the Cent~al 
Government under section 18AA of the Industr~s (Development ,and 
Regulation) Act, 1951 . • -. 3. The undertaking has the facilities' for production' of primary metal 
and down-stream facilities for production of aluminium rolled products, 
extruded sections, foils and conductors which are essential to the needs 
of the community, particularly in the industrial and power sectors. The 
working of the \lndertaking after the take over of its management con-
firmed the possibility of re-starting the facilities and of making the opera-
tion viable provided adequate funds for modernisation were injected and 
the management structure was re..or~anised. The fabrication facilities 
at Asansol were re-commissioned in 1979. The performance of these 
facilities has not been very satisfactory and can be improved only by 
rnoderni~ation. For the improvement jn the performance of the under-
taking, further investment of public funds is considered necessary. Such 
investment is necessary for seC"olring the proper utilization of available 
facilities for production o~ aluminil~m and aluminium fabricated products' 
whim are essential to the needs of the community and also for securing 
the continued employment of the workmen empioyed in the said under~ 
taking. It is lelt that further investment of public funds should be 
preceded by some arrangement which ensures continuity of management 
11 

with the' Government. It is,. therefore, proposed ·to acquire the s8td 
-undertaking. 
4. The Bill seeks to achieve the. above objec~. 
NEW Own; N. K. P. SALVE. 
The 29th November, 1983. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 'OF 
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDlA 
[Copy of letter No. 12/B/BI-Met.lV, dated the 12th December, 
1~83 from Shri N. K. P. Salve, Minister of State. of the Ministry of Steel 
and Mines to the. Secretary, Lok Sabha.] fB 
The Presicient having been infonned of the subject matter of the 
Aluminium Corporation of India LimHed (Acquisition and. Transfer of 
Aluminh.lm Undertaking) Bill, 1983 recommends under clauses (1) and 
(3) of article 117 of the Constitution of India, the introduction of the 
Bill in Lok Sabha and also recommends to Lok Sabha the consideration 
of the Bill. 
• 
• 

. , 
FINAft'CIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 7 of the Bill provides for the payment in cash of an amount ot 
~ Rs. 424 lakhs for vesting in the Central Government the right, title and 
interest of the Company in relation to its· aluminium undertaking. 
2. Sub-clause (1) of clause 8 of the Bill provides for the payment in 
cash of a further -amount calculated at the rate of Rs. 2,500 per mensem 
for the deprivation of the Company. of the management of its aluminium· 
undertaking fer the period comnien~ng on the date the manage~ent ot 
. the aluminiUm undertaking was taken over by the Central Government 
and ending on the appointed day. It is estimated that this amaunt will 
be of the order of Rs. 1,675 lakhs. 
3. Sub-clause (2) of clause 8 of the Bill provides for the payment of 
simple interest at the r-ate of 4 per cent. per annum in respect I)f the 
amounts payable under clause 7" and sub-clause (1) of clause 8 for the 
- period commencing on the appointed day -and ending on the date on 
which the payment cf the amounts is made by the Central Government 
to the Commissioner of Payments_ It is estimated that tnis amount. 
will be of the order 'of Rs. 1.42 hkhs per mensem. 
4. Clause 14 of the Bill provides for the appointment of a Com~is~ 
sioner of Payments by the Central Government for the purpose ot" dis-
burSing the amount payable to tbe Company. This clause also provides 
for the appointment of !rLlchother persons as it thinks fit to as!list the 
Commissioner in the exercise of his powers under the Bill. Under 'sub-
clause (4) of this clause, the salaries and allowances of th~ -Commissioner 
of Payments and other persons appointed to assist him will be defrayed 
out of the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that this amo}l!lt 
will be of the order of Rs. 15,000 per mensem. 
5. Funds will also have to be prov~ded by the Central Governm~nt 
for the following-
(1) a sum of Rs. 100 lakhs to Bharat Aluminium Company 
Limited to which the ·undertaking is proposed to bp. trimsferred as 
part of margin money for working capital; 
(ii) a -sum of Rs. 60 lakhs by way of equity for modernisation; 
. and 
(iii) an estimated sum of Rs. 370 lakhs to make good the un-
discharged post take-over dues of Bharat Aluminium Company 
Limited relating to the aluminium undertaking. 
6. The Bill, if enacfed, is not likely to involve any other recurring or 
Bem-recurring expenditure. 
1'1 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clau.\e 30 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make. 
rules to carry out the provisions of the Bill. The matters i" respect of 
whicl?- rules may be made, inter alia, relate to the time within whi~ 
and the manner in which. intimation regarding any mortgage, charge, 
lien, etc., 'on the properties which have vested in the Central Govern .. 
ment may be given to the Commissioner of Payments and the manner 
in which the monies in any provident fund, superannuation, welfare or 
other fund maintained by the Company shall be dealt wttti by the 
Central Government or the Bharat Aluminium Company. 
2. The matters in respect of ~hich such rules may be made are mattet'l . 
of procedure and adminisfrative detail. The delegation of legislative 
power is thus of a nonnal character. 
• 
• 

LOKSABHA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the acquisition and transfer of the right, title and 
interest of the Aluminium Corporation of India Limited in relation 
to its undertaking at Jaykay Nagar, near Asansol (West Bengal) 
for the purpoae of ensuring the continuity of production of 
aluminium and aluminium fabricated products which are euential 
to the needs of the community and thereby to give effeCt to the 
policy of the State towards securing the principles specifted in 
clause (b) of article 39 of the Constitution. 
(Shri N. K. P. Scalve, 
Minilter of State of the Mintat'7J 
of Steel and Mine •. ) 