As Intropucep in Lok SaBHa
U

9 ZNOVI992

Bill No. 139 of 1992
THE NATIONAL COUNCIL FOR TEACHER EDUCATION BILL, 1992

ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES.

CHAPTER I
(PRELIMINARY
CLAUSES
1. Short title, extent and commencement.
2. Definitions.
CHAPTER II
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE COUNCIL
3. Establishment of the Council.
4. Term of office and conditions of service of Members.
5. Disqualification for office of Member
6. Vacation of office of Member.
7. Meetings of the Council.
8. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of the Council.
9. Power to co-opt.
10. Appointment of officers and other employees of the Council.
11. Authentication of the orders and other instruments of the
Council.
t CHAPTER III
Funerions or THe CounciL
12. Functions of the Council.

13. Inspection.
CHAPTER IV

Recognition or TEACHER EpucaTion INSTITUTIONS
14, Recognition of institutions offering course or training in teacher

education.

15. Permission for a new course or training by a recognised institu-

tion.
@


(ii)
CiausEs ; |

16. Affiliating body to grant affiliation after recognition or permis-
sion by the Council.

17. Contravention of the provisions of the Act and consequences
thereof.

18, Appeals.
CHAPTER V
Bopres or THe Councr,
19. Executive Committee .
20. Regional Committees.
21. Power to terminate the Regional Committee.
CHAPTER VI
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT
22. Payment to the Council
23. Fund of the Council.
24. Budget of the Council.
25. Annual report,
26. Accounts and audit,
CHAPTER VII
MISCELLANEOUS
27. Delegation of powers:and functions.
28. Protection of action taken in good faith.
29. Directions by the Central Government,
30. Power to supersede the Council.
31. Power to make rules.
32. Power to make regulations.

33. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament.
34, Power to remove difficulties,



As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

Bill No, 139 of 1992, No. 139 of 1992
THE NATIONAL COUNCIL FOR TEACHER EDUCATION BILL, 1992
A
BILL

to provide for the establishment of a National Council for Teacher Educa-
tion with a view to achieving planned and co.ordinated develop-
ment of the teacher education system ‘throughout the country, the
regulation and proper maintenance of norms and standards in the
teacher education system and for matters cownected therewith.

Br it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-third Year of the Republic
of India as follows: —

CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY

5 1, (1) This Act may be called the National Council for Teacher Edu-
cation Act, 1992. ri
(2) It extends to the whole of India, except the the State of Jammu
and Kashmir.
(3) It shall come into force-on such date as the Central Government
|0 May, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(@) “appointed day” means the date of establishment of the
National Council for Teacher Education under sub-section (1) of
section 3;
5 (0) “Chairperson” means the Chairperson of the Council
appointed under clause (a) of sub-section (4) of section 3;

Short
titte
extent
and.
com=
mence-
ment.

Defini-
tions.


Establish:
ment

of the
council.

> |

(c) “Council” means the National Council for Teacher Educa-
tion established under sub-section (1) of section 3;

(8) “examining body” means a University, a;
to which an institution is affiliated for co
teacher education qualifications;

gency or authority
nducting examinations in

(e) “institution” means an institution which offers

courses or
trainings in teacher education;

(f) “Member” means a Member of the Council and includes the
Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson;

(g) “Member-Secretary” means the Member-Secretary of the
Council appointed under clause (८) of sub-section (4) of section 3

(R) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under section
31;
(i) “recognised institution”

means an institution recognised by
the Council under section 14;

(9) “Regional Commitiee” means a committee established under
section 20;

(k) “regulations” means regulations made under section 32;

(9) “teacher education” means Programmes of education,
research or training of persons for equipping them to teach at
pre-primary, primary, secondary and senior secondary stages in
schools, and includes non-formal education, pari-time education,
adult education and Correspondence Education;

(m) “teacher education qualification” means a degree, diploma
or certificate in teacher education awarded by University or exami-
ning body in accordance with the provisions of this Act;

(n) “University” means a University defined under clause (f)
ot section 2 of the University Grants Commission Act, 1956, end in-

cludes an institution deemed to be a University under section 3. of
that Act;

(0) “Vice-Chairperson” means the Vice-Chairperson of the
Council appointed under clause (6) of sub-section (4) of section 3,

CHAPTER वा

ESTABLISHMENT oF THE CoUNCIL

3% (1) With effect from such date as the Central Government maty, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, there shall be established 9
Council to be called the National Comell for Teacher Education,

(2) The Council shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid,

having perpetual succession and a common seal, with power to contract
and shall by the said name, sue and be sued,

(3) The head office of the Council shall be at Delhi and the Council

may, with the previous approval of the Central Government, establish
regional offices at other places in India.


20

30

35

3
(4) The Council shall consist of the following Members, namely:—
(a) a Chairperson to be appointed by the Central Government;

(b) a Vice-Chairperson to be appointed by the Central Govern-
ment;

(©) a Member-Secretary to be appointed by the Central Govern-
ment;

(d) the Secretary to the Government of India in the Department
dealing with Education ex officio;

(e) the Chairman, the University Grants Commission established
under section 4 of the University Grants Commission Act, 1956 or a
member thereof nominated by him, ex officio;

(f) the Director, National Council of Educational Research and
Training, ex-officio;

(g) the Director, National Institute of Educational Planning and.
Administration, ex-officio;

(h) the Adviser (Education), Planning Commission, ex-officio,

(@®) the Chairman, Central Board of Secondary Education, ex-
officio;

(j) the Financial Adviser to the Government of India in the
Department dealing with Education in the Government of India;

(00 the Member-Secretary, All-India Council for ‘Technical
Education, ex-officio;

(0) the Chairpersons of all Regional Committees, ex-officio;

(m) thirteen persons possessing experience and knowledge in
the field of education or teaching to be appointed by the Central
Government as under from amongst the—

(i) Deans of Faculties of Education and Professors
of Education in Universities —Four

(8) experts in Secondary teacher education —One
(ii) experts in pre-primary and primary teacher
education —Three
(iv) experts in non-formal education and adult
education / —Two;

(०७) experts in the fields of natural sciences, social
sciences, linguistics, vocational education, work
experience, educational technology and special
education by rotation in the manner prescribed —Three,

(n) nine Members to be appointed by the Central Government
to represent the States and the Union territory Administrations in the
manner prescribed;

(०) three Members of Parliament of whom one shall be nomi-
nated by the Chairman of the Council of States and two by the
Speaker of the House of the People;


Term of
office
and con-
ditions
of
Member,

Disquali-
fication
for office

of
Member,

(9) three Members to be appointed by the Central Government
from amongst teachers of primary and secondary education and
teachers of recognised institutions.

(5) It is hereby declared that the office of the Member of the Council
shall not disqualify its holder for being chosen as or for being a member |
of either House of Parliament. ‘

4. (1) The Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and the Member-Secretary
shail hold office on a full-time basis,

(2) The term of office of the Chairperson, the Vice-Chairperson and
the Member-Secretary shall be four years, or till they complete the age {|
of sixty years, whichever is carlier, |

(3) The conditions of service of the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and
the Member-Secretary shall be such as may be prescribed,

७) The term of oflice of Members other than the Members specified in
clauses (a) fo (I) and clause (0) of sub-section (4) of section 3 shail be two 4
years or til fresh appointments are made, whichever is later, and other condi
fions of service of such Members skali be such 5 may be prescribed.

(5) If a casual vacancy occurs in the office of Chairperson, whether
by reason of death, resignation or inability to discharge the functions of
a Chairperson owing to illness or other incapacity, the Vice-Chairperson 5p
holding office as such for the time being, shall act as the Chairperson
and, shall, unless any other person is appointed earlier as Chairperson,
hold office of the Chairperson for the remainder of the term of office of
the person in whose place the said person is to so act.

(6) If a casual vacancy occurs in the office of the Vice-Chairperson 5,
or any other Member, whether by reason of death, resignation or
inability to discharge his functions owing to illness or other
incapacity, such vacancy shal be filled up by making fresh appointment
and the person so appointed shall hold office for the remainder of the
term of the office of the person in whose place such person is so appointed, ;

(7) The Chairperson shall, in addition to presiding over the meetings
of- the Council, exercise and discharge such powers and duties of the
Council as may be delegated to him by the Council and such other powers:
and: duties as may be prescribed,

(8) ‘The Vice-Chairperson shall perform such functions as may be 3
assigned to him by the Chairperson from time to time. aa

5. A person shall be disqualified for being appointed as a Member
if he— on

(a) has been convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for an.
offence, which, in, the opinion of the Central Government, involves g
moral turpitude; or

(b) is an undischargd insolvent; or


other interes!
discharge by him of his functions as a Member.
6. The Central Government shall remove a Member if he

(a) becomes subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned
section 5:

has become subject to the disqualification mentioned in’
clause (e) of that section, unless he has been given a reasonable
opportunity of being heard in the matter; or

~ (@) im the opinion of the Central Government ४
position as to render his conti e in office detrimental to the

no Member shall be removed under this clause
8 reasonable opportunity of being heard

meetings (including the quorum at such meetings) as may be pro-

Provided that the Council shall meet at least once every year.

(2) The Chairperson, and in the absence of the Chairperson, the
‘Vice-Chairperson shall preside at the meetings of the Council.
ar के
(8) If for any-reason the Chairperson and the Vice-Chairperson,
both are unable to attend any meeting of the Council, any other Member
chosen by the Members present at the meeting shall preside at that
(10 theetingctmiwy) ०४ pri tw geiiue’

‘come up before any meeting of the
a majority of the votes of the Memb

९ event of any equality of votes, the

‘the Chairperson the person presiding,



Vacan-
cles, etc.,
not to
invali-
date pro-
ceedings
of the
Council.

Power to
co-opt.
etc,

Appoint-
ment of
officers
and
other
em-
Ployces
of the
Council.

Authen-
tication
of the
orders
and
other
instru-
ments of
the
Council,

Func-
tions of

‘the
Council.

6

8. No act or proceeding of the Council shall be invalid merely
reason of —_

(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the
Council; or

(0) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a 5
member of the Council; or

(6) any irregularity in the procedure of the Council, not affec-
ting the merits of the case.

9. (1) The Council may vo-opt, in such manner and for stich purposes
&s may be determined by regulations, not more than three persons, whose 10.

assistance or advice it may desire in carrying out any of the provisions
of this Act.

(2) The persons co-opted by the Council ander sub-section (1) for
any purpose shall have a right to take part in the discussions relevant
to that purpose, but shall not have a right to vote at a meeting of the 15.
Council, and shall not be a Member for any other purpose.

urpose of enabling the Council to discharge ifs functions

efficiently under fhis Act, the Council shall, subject to such regulations as

may be made in this ehalf, appoint (whether on deputation or otherwise)

Such number of officers and other employees as it may consider necessary: 20.
Provided that the category of pnsts equivalent to Group ‘A’ posts

in the Central Government shall be subject to the approval of the

Central Government.

(2) Every officer or other employee appointed by the Council shall he
Subject 10 such conditions of service as may be determined by the regulations.

LU. All orders and decisions of the Council shall be authenticated by
the signature of the Chairperson or any other Member authorised by the
Council in this behalf, and all other instruments issued by the
Council shall be authenticated by the signature of the Member-Secretary

or any other officer of the Council authorised in like manner in this 3
behalf by the Chairperson,

CHAPTER III
FUNcttons or THe Councn.

12, It shail be the duty of the Council to take all such steps as it |,
may think fit for ensuring planned and co-ordinated development of
teacher education and for the determination and maintenance
of standards for teacher education and for the purposes of performing its
functions under this Act, the Council may— ee. .

(@ undertake surveys and studies relating to

various aspects
of teacher education and publish the results thereof;

(0) .-make ..recommendations to the Central and State
Governments, Universities. University Grants Commission and
Tecognised institutions in the matter of preparation of suitable plans

and programmes in thr *ald of teacher education; !


7 —

(c) co-ordinate and monitor teacher education and its deve-
lopment in the country;

(6) Jay down guidelines in respect of minimum quelifications for
a person to be employed as a teacher in schcols or in recognised
institutions;

(e) lay down norms for any specified category of courses or
training in teacher education, including the minimum _ eligibility
criteria for admission thereof, and the method of selection of
candidates, duration of the course, course contents and mode of
curriculum; यु

(f) lay down guidelines for compliance by recognised institutions
for starting new courses or training, and for providing physical and
instructional facilities, staffing pattern and staff qualifications;

(g) lay down standards in respect of examinations leading to
teacher education qualifications, criteria for admission to such exemi-
nations and schemes of courses or training;

(hy lay down guidelines regarding tution fees and other
fees chargeable by institutions;

(i) promote and conduct innovation and reséarch in various
areas of teacher education and disseminate the results thereof;

(j) examine and review periodically the implementation of the
norms, guidelines and standards: Jaid down by the Council, and to
Suitably advise the recognised institutions;

(k) evolve suitable performance appraisal systems, norms and
1 \agechanisms for enforcing accountability on recognised institutions;

"+. .@)-ormulate. schemes. for various: levels of teacher education;
and identify institutions and-set up new — institutions for teacher
development. programmes;

(m) take all necessary steps to prevent commercialisation of
teacher education; and

"7 @) perform such other functions as may be entrusted to it by
_ .the Central Government. fy

"43. (1) For the purposes of ascertaining whether the institutions are
functioning in accordance with the provisions of this Act. the Council
may cause inspection of any institution to be made by such persons as
it may. direct, and in such manner as may be prescribed.

(2) The; Council shall communicate to the  institutinn. the date on
which inspection under sub-section (1) is to be made and the institu-
tion shall be entitled to be associated. with the inspection in such manner
as may be prescribed.

(3) The Council shall communicate to the institution, its views in
regard to the results of anv such insnection and mav. after asrertaining
the opinion of that institution, recommend to that institution the action
to be taken as a result of such inspection.

Inspec
tion.


tutions OF recognition under this Act, make an avlication 10 the Regional Com:

offering mittee concerned in such form and in such manner as may be determined
course or by regulations:

training

in teacher Provided that an institution offering @ course or training in teacher

ge education immediately before the apoointed day. shail be entitled to
0

(4) All communications
made to the executive au
the institution shall repo:
proposed to be taken for
mendation as is referred

to the institution under this section shall be
‘thority thereof, and the executive authority of
rt to the Council the action, if any, which is

the purposes of implementing any such recom. 4
to in sub-section (3),

CHAPTER IV

Recoanrrion or Tracner EDUCATION INSTITUTIONS

14 (1) Every inst'tution offering or intendin,

ig to offer a cource or
training in teaiher education on 0

77 afer the appointed day, may for grant

continue such course or training
an application for recognition
posal of the application by th

for a period of six months, if it has made
within he said period and until the dig:
e Regional Committee,

(2) The fee to be paid along with the a

pplication under sub-section
(1) shall be such as may be prescribed,

(3) On receipt of an application by the Regional Commitete from any
institution under sub-sect

tion (1), and after obtaining from the institu-
tion concerned such other particulars as it may consider necessary, it
shall,—

(4) if it is satisfied that such institution has adequate financial
resources. accommodation. library, qualified staff, laboratory and that
it fulfils such other conditions required for
institution for a iourse or training in. tea
determined by regulations,
institution, subject to such conditions as may be determined by re-
gulations; or *

(8) if it is of the opinion that such institution does not fulfil the
Yequirements laid down in sub-clause (०), pass an order refusing ©
recognition to such institution for reasons to he recorded in writing:

Provided that before passing an order under sub-clause (b), the Re-
gional Commitee shall provide a reasonable opportunity to the concerned 35
institution for making 2 writen representation,

(4) Every order erfantin:
for a course or traini

examining 4
Government and the Central |

(5) Fvery institution, in resnect of which recognition has heen refused
shall discontinye the course or trai;

of 178 academic session next folowing the dae of
refusing recognition passed under clause (b) of subs

receipt of he order
section (3).


(6) Every examining body shall, on receipt of the order under sub-
| (४),-- | .

(@ grant affiliation to the institution, where recognition has been
granted; or j

(0) cancel the affiliation of the institution, where recognition has
been refused,

15. (1) Where any recognised institution intends to start any new
course or training in teacher education, it may make an application to
seek permission therefor to the Regional Committee concerned in such
10 form and in such manner as may be determined by regulations.

(2) The fee to be paid along with the application under sub-section
(1) shall be such as may be prescribed.

(3) On receipt of an application from an institution under sub-section
(J), and after obtaining from the recognised institution such other parti-
jg Culars as may be considered necessary, the Regional Committee shall—

(a) if it is satisfied that such recognised institution has adequate
financial resource, accommodation, library, qualified staff, laboratory
and that it fulfils such other conditions required for proper conduct
of the new course or training in teacher education, as may be deter-
mined by regulations, pass an order granting permission, subject to
such conditions as may be determined by regulation; or

(0) if it is of the opinion that such institution does not fulfil the
requirements laid down in sub-clause (a), pass an order refusing per-
mission to such institution, for reasons to be recorded in writing:

Provided that before passing an order refusing permission under
sub-section (b), the Regional Cnmmittee shall provide a reasonable
opportunity to the institution concerned for making a written re-

presentation. f

(4) Every order granting or refusing permission to a recognised ins-
titution for a new course or training in teacher education under sub-sec-
tion (3), shall be published in the Official Gazette and communicated in
writing for appropriate action to such recognised institution and to the
concerned examining body, the local authority, or the State Government
and the Central Government,

16. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time
being in force, no examining body shall, on or after the appointed day,—

(a) grant affiliation, whether provisional or otherwise, to any
institution; or i

(b) old examination, whether provisional or otherwise, for a
course or training conducted by a recognised institution,
unless the institution concerned has obtained recoguition from the
Regional Committee concerned, under scction 14 or permission for a
course or training under section 15.


Contra
vention
of pro-
visions of
the Act
and

quences
thereof.

Appeals.

lw

37, (1) Where the Rezonal Committee is, on its own motion or on
any representation received from sy yerson, satisfied that a recognise
institution has contravened any of the provisions of this Act, or th
subject to which recognition under sub-section (3) of section 14
rules, regulations, orders made or issued thereunder, or any conditi
permission under sub-section (3) of section 15 was granted, it
withdraw recognition of such recognised institution, for reasons to
recorded in writing:

Provided that no such order against the recognised institution shall be
passed unless a reasonable opportunily of making representation aga
the proposed order has been given to such recognised institution:

Provided further that the order wiithdrawing or refusing recognition,
passed by the Regional Committee shall come into force only with effec
from the end of the academic session next following the date of
munication such order.

(2) A copy of every order passed by the Regional Committee under
sub-section (1),—

(०) shall be communicated to the recognised institution co!
cerned and a copy thereof shall also be forwarded simultaneously
to the University or the examining body to which such instituti
Was affiliated for cancelling affiliation; and

(6) shall be published in the Official Gazette for general infor

tion.

(3) Once the recognition of a recognised institution is withdrawn unt
sub-section (1), such institution shall discontinue the course or trainii
in teacher education, and the concerned university or the exami
body shall cancel affiliation of the institution in accordance with
order passed under sub-section (1), with effect from the end of

academic session next following the date of communication of the sa
order,

(4 I£ an institution offers any course or training in teacher edi
tion after the coming into force of the order withdrawing recognition
under sub-section (1), or where an institution offering a course or
training in teacher education immediately before the appointed day fe
or neglects to obtain recognition or permission under this Act, the qu
fication in teacher education obtained pursuant to such course or t
ing or after undertaking a course or training in such institution;
not be treated as a valid qualification for purposes of employment
the Central Government, any State Government or University, or in
school, college or other educational body aided by the Central Gor
ernment or any State Government.

18, (1) Any person aggrieved by an order made under section 14, of
section 15 or section 17 of the Act may prefer an appeal to the cil
within such period as may be prescribed.

(2) No appeal shall be admitted if it is preferred after the expi
of the period prescribed therefor:

Provided that an appeal may be admitted after the expiry of
period prescribed therefor, if the appellant satisfies the Council, that 1


ii

had sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal within the prescribed
period,

(8) Every appeal made under this section shall be made in such form
and shall be accompanied by a copy of the order appealed against and

5 by such fees as may be prescribed.

(4) The procedure for disposing of an appeal shall be such as may
be prescribed: पे

Provided that before disallowing an appeal, the appellant shall be
given a reasonable opportunity to represent its case.

10° (5) The Council may confirm or reverse the order appealed against.

CHAPTER V नि
छकाएड or THE COUNCIL

| (0) The Council shall constitute a Commitiee, called the Executive
Committee for discharging such functions as may be assigned to it by
15 the Council or as may be determined by regulations. pes

(2) The Executive Commitiee shall consist of the following mem-
bers, namely:—
(a) the Chairperson;
(b) the Vice-Chairperson; ~
20 (c) the Member-Secretary;
(d) the Secretary to the Government of India in the Depart-
ment dealing with Education ex officio;
(० the Secretary, University Grants Commission, ex officio;
(0 the Director, National Council of Educational Research and
Training, ex officio;
(g) the Financial Adviser to the Government of India in the
.. Department dealing with Education, ex officio;
(h) four experts in teacher education to be nominated by the
Central Government; ~
6) four State representatives to be nominated by the Central
Government in such manner as may be prescribed;
Q) the Chairpersons of the Regional Committees.

(3) ‘The Chatrperson and the Member-Secretary of the Council shall
ively, function as the Chairperson and the Member-Secretary of
the Executive Committee. :

(4) The Chairperson or in his absence, the Vice-Chairperson of the
1 shall preside at the meetings of the Executive Committee and in
‘absence of both the Chairperson and the Vice-Chairperson, any other
ber chosen by the members present at the meeting shall preside
the meeting.

Ya


Regional
Commit-

12
(5) The quorum necessary for the transaction of business at the

meetings of the Executive Committee shall be as laid down by regula-
tions, |

(6) The Executive Committee may co-opt, in such manner and for.
such purposes, as may be determined by regulations, not more than two
Persons whose assistance and advice it may desire in carrying out any
of the functions assigned ig the Executive Committee: -

Provided that the persons co-opted by the Executive Committee for
any purpose shall have a right to take part in the discussions relevant
to that purpose, but shall not have a right to vote at a mectiny of the
Executive Committee, and shall not be a member for any other purpose,

(7) The Council may, if it considers necessary, establish such other
committees, for such specific Purpose, as it may deem fit.

20, (1) The Council shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish
the following Regional Committees, namely:— 15

(@ the Eastern Regional Committee;
(00 the Western Regional Committee;
(ii) the Northern Regional Committee; and
(iv) the Southern Regional Committee,

(2) The Council may, if it considers necessary, establish with the
approval of the Central Government, such other Regional Committees
88 it may deem fit.

-() The Regional Committee shall consist of the following members;

namely:.—
(@) a Member to be nominated by the Council;

++ ++ (6) one representative fom cach of the State and the Union terri-
tories of the region, fo be siominated by the respective States and the
Union territories;

(८) such number of persons, having special knowledge and experience
in matters relating to teacher education, as may be determined by
regulations, 30

(4) The Council shall nominate one of the members of the concerned
Regional Committee to function as ike chairperson of the said Committee,

(5) The term of office of the members referred to in clause (c) and the
allowances payable to such members shalt be such as may be determined by
regulations, 35

(6) The Regional Committee shall, in addition to its functions under
sections 14, 15 and 17, perform such other functions, as may be assigned
to it by the Council or as may be determined by regulations,

25

(7) The functions of, the procedure to be followed by, the territorial
Jurisdiction of, and the manner of filling casual vacancies among 40
members of, a Regional Committee shall be such as may be determined
by regulations.


‘

13

21, (1) If the Council is of the opinion that a Regional Committee
is unable to perform, or has persistently made default in the performance
of the duties imposed on it by or under this Act or has exceeded or abused
its powers, or hus wilfully or without sufficient cause, failed to comply
with any direction issued by the Council for carrying out the provisions of
this Act, the Council may, by notification in the Official Gazette, termi-
nate forthwith the Regional Committee,

(2) Upon the publication of a notification under sub-section (1),—

(a) all members of the Regional Committee shall, notwithstand-
ing that their term of office had not expired, as from the date of
the termination, vacate their office as such members; and

(b) all the powers and duties which may, by or under the pro-
visions of this Act be exercised or performed by or on behalf of the
Regional Committee shall, during the period when the term of office
of its members stand terminated, be exercised and performed by
such person or persons as the Council may direct.

(3) The Council may at any time after publication of a notification
under sub-section (2), re-constitute the Regional Committee in the
manner provided in sub-section (3) of section 20.

Provided that it shall be competent for the Council to appoint any
person, who was a member of a Regional Committee which was termi-
nated, as a member of the re-constituted Regional Committee.

CHAPTER VI
FINANC#, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT
25. 22, The Central Government may, after due appropriation made by
Parliament by law in this behalf, pay to the Council in each financial

year such sums as may be considered necessary for the performance of
the functions of the Council under this Act.

23. (1) The Council sha!l have i!s own funds; and all sums which may,
30 from time to time, be paid to it by the Central Government or a State
Government and all the receipts of the Council, including any sum
which any other authority or person in India or abroad may pay to the
Council, shall be credited to the fund and all payments by the Council
shall be made therefrom.

35 (2) All moneys belonging to the fund shall be deposited in such banks
or invested in such manner as may be decided by the Council.

(3) The Council may spend such sums as it thinks fit for performing
its functions under this Act, and such sums shall be treated as expenditure
payable out of the fund of the Council.

21, The Council shall prepare, in such form and at such time cach
year as may be prescribed, a budget! in respect of the financial year next

ensuing, showing the estimated receipts and expenditure, and cop'es thereof
shall be forwarded to the Central Government,

Power to
termi-
nate the
Regional
Commit-
tee.

Payment

Council.

Fund of
the
Council,

Budget
of the
Council.


Annual
Teport.

Accounts:

audit.

Protec-
tion of
action
taken,

faith.

’
14

25. The Council shall prepare once every year, in such form
such time as may be prescribed, an annual report giving a true ar
account of its activities during the previous year and copies thereof ;
be forwarded to the Central Government and that Government shi
cause the same to be laid before both Houses of Parliament,

26. (1) The Council shall catise to be maintained such :
account in such form and in such manner as the Central Goyernm

may, in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of Indi
prescribe.

(2) The Council shall, as soon as may be, after closing its r
accounts, prepare a statement of accounts in such form and forward.
same to the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India by such date
the Central Government may, in consultation with the Comptroller at
Auditor-General, determine. ६८

(3) The accounts of the Council shall be audited by the Comptroller
and Auditor-General of India at such times and in such manner as
thinks fit. "

(4) The accounts of the Council as certified by the Comptroller ne
Auditor-General of India or any other person appointed by him in this
behalf, together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded a
to the Central Government and that Government shall cause the
to be laid before both Houses of Parliament.

CHAPTER VII
(MisvetLANzous

27. The Council may, by general or special order in writing, del :
to the chairperson or to any other member or to any officer of the R n
Committee, subject to such conditions and limitations, if any, as may be
sepcified in the order, such of its powers and functions under this Act.
(except the power to make regu’stions under section 32) , as it may deem _
necessary. 4

28, No prosecution or other legal proceeding shal] lie against the Cen-
tral Government, the Council or any commitees appointed by it, or any”
Member of the Council or member of such committees, or any officer or
employee of the Central Government or the Council or any other person
authorised by that Government or the Council, for anything which is in 35
good faith done or intended to be done under this Act or the rules or
regulations made thereunder,

29. (1) The Council shall, in the discharge of its functions and duties.
under this Act be bound by such directions on questions of policy as the
Central Government may give in writing to it from time to time. 40

(2) The decision of the Central Government as to whether 3 question
is one of policy or not shall be final,


nal

15

(1) If the Central Government is of the opinion that the Council Power to
_ is unable to perform, or has persistently made default in the performance supersede:
of the duties imposed on it by or under this Act or has exceeded or abused oe cil
"its powers, or has wilfully or without sufficient cause, failed to comply ©
with any direction issued by the Central Government under section 29, the
Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, super-
sede the Council for such period as may be specified in the notification:

Provided that before issuing a notification ‘under this sub-section,
the Central Government shall give a reasonable opportunity to the
10 Council to show cause why it should not be superseded and shall con-
sider the explanation and objections, if any, of the Council.

(2) Upon the publication of a notification under sub-section (1)
superseding the Council—

(a) all the Members of the Council shall, notwithstanding that
15 their term of office had not expired, as from the date of supersession,
vacate their offices as such Members;

(b) all the powers and duties which may, by or under the pro-
visions of this Act be exercised or performed by or on behalf of
the Council shall, during the period of supersession, be exercised and
20 performed by such person or persons as the Central Government
may direct;

(०) all property vested in the Council shall, during the period
of supersession, vest in the Central Government,

(3) On the expiry of the period of supersession specified in the noti-
25 fication issued under sub-section (1), the Central Government may—

(a) extend the period of supersession for such further period as
it may consider necessary; or

(b) reconstitute the Council in the manner provided in section 3.

31. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Power to

30 Gazette, make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act. wi
rules.

(2) In particular, and-without prejudice to the generality of the fore-
going powers, such rules may provide for all or any of the following
matters, namely: —

(a) the manner in which the Central Government is to appoint
35 experts to the Council under sub-clause (v) of clause (m) of sub-
section (4) of section 3; *

(b) the manner in which the Central Government is to appoint
Members to the Council from amongst the States and the Union
territory Administrations under clause (m) of sub-section (4) of
section 3;

_ (c) the conditions of service of the Chairperson, the Vice-Chair-

person and the Member-Secretary under sub-section (3) and of
Members under sub-section (4) of section 4;


Hy 16

(d) the powers and duties of the Chairperson under sub-section
(7) of section 4;

(०) the manner in which and the persons by whom the inspection —
of an institution is to be made and the manner in which the institu-

tion is to be associated in such inspection under sub-sections (1) and—
(2) of section 13;

(f) the fees payable on
under sub-section (2) of ६९०४०;
Sub-section (2) of section 15:

application for obtaining recognition
n 14 aad for obta‘ning permission under

(g) the period of limitation for &

*n appeal under sub-section (1)
of section 18, the form in which suc!

h appeal is to be made ‘and the
ection (3) of that section and the
procedure for disposal of an appeal under sub-section (4) of that
section;

00 the manner in which the Central Government is to nominate

the State representatives in the Executive Committee under clause
(i) of sub-section (2) of section 19;

(i) the form in which and the time within which the budg

under section 24 and the anual report under section 26 of the Co
cil is to be prepared;

(j) the manner and the form in which the accounts of

Council are to be maintained under sub-section (1) of section 26;

() any other matter which has to be, or may be. prescribed.

hares 32. (1) The Counci: may, by notifieation in the Official Gazett
to meke make regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act a
xegule- the rulgs made thereunder, generally to carry out the Provisions
‘tions. this Act.

(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of
foregoing power, such resulations may provide for all or any of
following matters, namely: —

(@) the time and the

procedure for conductin,
section 7:

place of the meetings of the Council and th
g business threat under sub-section (1) «

(०) the manner in which and

the purposes for which person
may be co-opted by the Council und

ler sub-section (1) of section 9;

1
(c) the appointment and. term, ०
officers and other employees of the
(2) respectively of section 10;

is and conditions of service
Couneil under sub-sections (1)

(4) the norms, guidelines and standards in respect of —

(i) the minimum qualifications for 8 person to be emplo
as a teacher under clause (d) of section 12;

(ii) the specified category of courses on training in

education under clause (९) of section 12;


“di
(iii) establishment of new institutions, and starting of new

courses or training in existing institutions under clause (f) of
section 12; -

(iv) standards in raspect of examinations leading to teacher
education qualifications referred to in clause (g) of section 12;

(७) the tuition fees and other fegs chargeable by Institu-
tions under clause (h) of section 12;

(०) the schemes for various levels of teacher education, and
| of institutions for offering teacher development
programmes under clause (1) of section 12;

(f) the form and the manzer in which an application for recogni-
tion is to be submitted under sub-section (1) of section 14;

(g) conditions required for the proper functioning of the institu-
tion and conditions for granting recognition under clause (a) of sub-
section (3) of section 14;

(h) the form and the manner in which an application for permis-
sions is to be made under sub-section (1) of section 15;

(i) conditions required for the proper conduct of a new course ot
training and conditions for granting permission under clause (a) of
sub-section (3) of section 15;

(7) the functions which may be assigned by the Council to the
- Executive Committee under sub-section (1) of section 19;

(k) the procedure and the quorum necessary for transaction of
business at the meetings of the Executive Committee under sub-sec-
tion (5) of section 19;

(1) the manner in which and the purposes for which the Execu-
tive Committee may co-opt persons under sub-section (6) of section
19;

(m) the number of persons under clause (९) of sub-section (3)
of section 20;

(n) the term of office and allowances payable to members under
‘sub-section (5) of section 20;

(०) additional functions to be performed by the Regional Com-
mittee under sub-section (6) of section 20;

(p) the functions of the procedure to be followed by, the terri-
torial jurisdiction of, and the manner of filling casual vacancies amon%
bers of, a Regiona) Committee under sub-section (7) of section 20;

(q) any other matter in respect of which provision is to be, or
be, made by regulations.


Rules and
regula-
tions to
be laid
before
Parlia-
ment.

Power to
remove
difficul—
ties,

18

33, Every rule and every regul:
38 soon as may be after it is made,
it isin Session, for a total Period

in one session or in two or more
expiry of the session immediately

lation made under this Act shall be laid,
before each House of Parliament, while
of thirty days which may be comprised
successive sessions, and if, before the
following the session or the | 5

& May be; so, however,
that any such modification or annulment shall be wit!

validity of anything Previously done under that Tule or regulation.

छः
3
हि
iS
a
8
oe
कि
के

0

34. (1) Ie any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this
Act, the Central Government may, by order, published in the Official
Gazette, make such Provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of
this Act as may appear to be necessary for removing the difficulty:

Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the
expiry of two years from the commencement of this Act,

(2) Every order made ‘under this section shall be laid, as soon as may
be after it is made, before each House of Parliament.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The Nationa] Council for Teacher Education (NCTE) was set up in
1973 by a Government Resolution as a National expert body to advise
Central and State Governments on all matter pertaining to teacher educa-
tion, NCTE’s status and role have so far been purely advisory and,
mainly due to this reasons, it has had very little impact on the standards
of teacher training institutions in the country and on their unplan-
ned growth,

2. To maintain the standards of teacher education, the National Policy
on Education (NPE) stated that the NCTE would be provided with neces-
sary resources and capability of accredit institutions of teacher education
and provide guidance regarding curricula and methods. The Programme
of Action prepared for implementation of the NPE in 1986, realising the
inherent difficulties in the constitution of the NCTE to be able to guide
the system of teacher education, envisaged conferring it with statutory
status,

3. The present Bill seeks to provide statutory powers to the NCTE with
the objective of determination, maintenance and coordination of standards
in teacher education, laying down norms and guidelines for various
courses, promotion of innovation in this field and establishment of a suit-
able system of continuing education of teachers,

4, The Bill seeks to empower the Council to make qualitative improve-
ment in the system of teacher education by phasing out sub-standard ins-
titutions and courses for teacher education, The NCTE would also be
empowered to grant recognition to institutions for teacher education and
permission to recognised instituions for new course or training in teacher
education, The Bill also provides for delegation of various powers to
Regional Committees and other Committee for effective implementation
of the function of the Council,

5, The Notes on Clauses appended to the Bill explain the various pro-
visions of the Bill,

6, The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects,

New Deum; ARJUN SINGH
The 13th August, 1992,


Notes on clauses

Clause 2 provides for definitions of “appointed day”, “Council”, +
titution”, “member”, “prescribed”, “recognissd institution”, “Regi:
Committee”, “regulations”, “teacher education” and certain other
sions used in the Bill,

Clause 3 provides for establishment of the National Council 1
‘Teacher Education ( NCTE) .

Clause 4 makes provisions for the terms of the office of the Mem!

of the Counci! and conditions of Service of the Members, ~

Cause 5 enumerates disqualifications of the Members of the Council,

Clause § lays down the

circumstances under which a Member of #
Council can be removed, हे .

Clause 7 provides for procedure, etc. of the meetings of the Council, |

Clause 8 provides that the

vacancies, ete, in the Council would
invalidate its proceedings. ८

Clause 9 empowers the Council for co-option of persons as mem!
cf the Council,

Cause 10 provides: for appointment of
of the Council and for their conditions of
benefits. : t

Clause 11 provides for authenticat;
ments of the Council,

officers. and other empl
Service. remuneration and ot

ion of the orders and other instru

Clause 12 sets out functions 106 the Council for planned and coordi-

nated development of teacher education systems and for the determina-
tion and maintenance of standards in teacher education. ‘This inch
laying down guidelines in respect of mini.
to he employed asa teaover in schools ar in recognised Ins‘itutions, and’
to lay down norms and standards for aby specified category of cotirses or
ira’ning in teacher education, including the minimum @igibility criteria
for admission and methods of selection, of the candidates duration of the
course, course contents, mode of curriculum, ete,

Clause 13 provides for i

inspection by the Council of any institution,
course and training.

Clause 14 provides for grant of recognition to
education on or after the appointed day.

Clase 15 provides for
by reengnised institutions.

institutions in teacher

grant of permission for a new course or training |

Clause 16 provides that every affiliating body shall grant affi'iation to

®n institution for a course or training in teacher education, only after it
has received recognition from the Council,

Clause 17 relates to contravention of the provisions of the Act and
consequences thereof. . ok! i

20


21

Clause 18 provides for filing of appeals to the Council against the orders
passed by the Regional Committees.

Clause 19 provides for constitution of the Executive Committee of
the Council as also the functions of the Executive Commitee.

Clause 20 provides for the setting up of Regional Committees of the
Council and their composition, functions and territorial jurisdiction.

Clause 21 relates to the power of the Council to terminate a Regional
Committee. t

Clause 22 provides for payment of sums by the Central Government
to the Council for performance of its functions under the Act.

Clause 23 relates to the fund of the Council as also its utilisation.

Clause 24 relates to the preparation of the budget of the Council in
respect of each financial year, showing the estimated receipts and
Clause 25 provides for the preparation and laying of annual report of
the Council by Central Gnvernment before both the Houses of Parliament.

Clause 26 provides for maintenance of accounts of the Council and
its audit by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.

Clause 27 empowers the Council to delegate some of its powers and
functions to the chairperson, members, clc., of the Regional Committees.

Clause 28 provides for protection of action taken in good faith by the
Council, its Members, its Committees and their members, and other
officers against prosecution or legal proceeding.

Clause 29 provides for giving of direction by the Central Government
to the Council on questions of policy,

Clause 30 empowers the Central Government to supersede the Coun-
cil in the case of persistent default in the performance of the duty im-
posed on it by or under the Act or if the Central Government is satisfied
that the Council has exceeded or abused its powers or has wilfully or
without sufficient cause failed to comply with any direction issued by
the Central Government.

Clause $1 empowers the Council to make rules to carry out the pro-
visions of the Act. Titis may include appointment of Members of the
Council from amongst the States and Union Territory Administrations,
laying down of fees, procedure regarding appeal, appointment of State
representatives in the Executive Committee, etc.

Clause 32 empowers the Council to make regulations which may in-
clude regulating the meetings of the Council and the procedure for con-
ducting business of the Council, appointment, terms and conditions of
service of officers and other employees of the Council laying down of
guidelines, norms and standards in respect of minimum qualifications
establishment of new institutions, starting of new courses, examinations
to be conducted by examining bodies, etc.

Clause 33 provides for laying of rules and regulations before Parlia-
ment.

Clause 34 empowers the Central Government to remove difficulties
in giving effect to the provisions of the Act.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

expenditure per annum,

2. The entire expenditure on the establishment of the National Coun
cil for Teacher Education would be met out of the Consolidated F
of India. +


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 31 of the Bill seeks to empower the Central Government to
make rules for carrying out the provisions of the Act. The matters in
respect of which such rules may be made relate, inter alia, to the man-
ner in which the Central Government is to appoint the Members of the
Council, the fees payable on application for permission and for grant of
recognition by the Regional Committees to the institutions, the manner
in which appeals may be filed against the orders of the Regional Com-
mittees by the institutions, the manner in which the Central Government
is to appoint State representatives in the Executive Committee, the form
in which and the time within which the budget and annual report of the
Council is to be prepared, etc.

2, Clause 32 of the Bill seeks to empower the Council to make regula-
tions not inconsistent with the Act and the rules made thereunder for
carrying out the provisions of the Act. The matters in respect of which
such regulations may be made relate, inter alia, to regulating the pro-
cedure for conducting business at the meetings of the Council, the ap-
pointment, terms and conditions of service of officers and employees of
the Council laying of norms, guidelines and standards in respect of
minimum qualifications for a person to be employed as a teacher,
establishing new institutions and starting of new courses, tution fees
and other fees chargeable by institutions, functions to be delegated by
éstablishing new instiutions and starting of new courses, tuition fees
which an application for recognition or permission is to be filed by an in-
stitution, the functions which may be assigned by the Council to the Ex-
ecutive Committee and the constitution, functions and the territorial
jurisdiction of the Regional Committees.

3. ‘The matters in respect of which rules may be made under clause
31 and the matters in respect of which regulations may be made under
clause 32 are all matters of detail or procedure or matters for which it
is not practicable to make provision in the Act. Further, as provided in
clause 33 of the Bill, therules and regulations are to be laid before the
Parliament, Hence, the_delegation of legislative power is of a normal
character.

23


4 |
BILL
>

10 provide for'the’establishment of a National Council for Teacher Eduea-
tion’ with a‘ view to"achieving planned and co-ordinated development
of the’ teacher education system throughout the country, the regula-
tion and proper maintenance of norms and standards in
education system and) for matters cotinected therewith:

(Shri Arjun Singh, Minister of Human Resource Development)