 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 of 2024. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bill No. 139 of 2026 
 
THE PUBLIC EXAMINATIONS (PREVENTION OF UNFAIR 
MEANS) AMENDMENT BILL, 2026 
A 
BILL 
to amend the Public Examinations (Prevention of Unfair Means) Act, 2024. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy -seventh Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:— 
1. This Act may be called the Public Examinations (Prevention of Unfair 
Means) Amendment Act, 2026. 
2. In the Public Examinations (Prevention of Unfair Means) Act, 2024 
(hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in section 10,––  
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words “three years but which may extend 
to five years and with fine up to ten lakh rupees. In”, the words “five years but 
which may extend up to ten years and with fine up to fifty lakh rupees, and in” 
shall be substituted;   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Short title. 
 
 
 
Amendment of 
section 10. 

2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of 
section 11. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of 
section 12. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Insertion of new 
sections 12A and 
12B. 
 
Fast tracked 
investigation and 
Special Fast 
Track Courts. 
 (b) in sub-section (2),–– 
(i) for the words “one crore rupees”, the words “five crore rupees” 
shall be substituted;  
(ii) for the words “four years”, the words “eight years” shall be 
substituted; 
(c) in sub-section (3),–– 
(i) for the words “three years”, the words “five years” shall be 
substituted; 
(ii) for the words “one crore rupees. In”, the words “five crore 
rupees, and in” shall be substituted. 
3. In section 11 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1),–– 
(i) for the words “five years”, the words “seven years” shall be 
substituted; 
(ii) for the words “one crore rupees. In”, the words “ten crore rupees, 
and in” shall be substituted. 
4. In section 12 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),–– 
(a) after the words “Central Investigating Agency”, the words “or a 
Special Task Force, as that Government may, by notification, constitute in this 
behalf” shall be inserted; 
(b) the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:–– 
 “Provided that where the Central Government constitutes a 
Special Task Force under this sub -section, such investigation shall be 
done only by the Special Task Force so constituted.”. 
5. After section 12 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be 
inserted, namely:–– 
“12A. ( 1) The investigation of an offence under this Act, shall be 
completed–– 
(a) by an officer empowered to investigate under sub -section (1) 
of section 12, within a period of two months from the date on which        
the information was recorded by the officer in -charge of the police 
station; or  
(b) by a Central Investigating Agency, within a period of two 
months from the date of a reference made to it by the Central 
Government under sub-section (2) of the said section; or 
(c) by a Special Task Force, within a period of two months from 
the date of issuance of notification in this behalf by the Central 
Government under sub-section (2) of the said section.  
(2) For the purposes of providing a speedy trial on day -to-day b asis, 
every State Government and Union territory Administration shall, in 
consultation with the Chief Justice of the concerned High Court, by 
notification, designate a Court of Session, to be a Special Fast Track Court to 
try offences under this Act. 
(3) A Special Fast Track Court designated under sub -section (2) shall, 
while trying offences under this Act, also try other offences connected thereto 
with which the accused may be charged under the Bharatiya Nyaya        
Sanhita, 2023 or any other law for the time being in force, at the same trial. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
40 
 
 
 
 
 
 
45 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
45 of 2023. 

3 
46 of 2023. 
46 of 2023. 
46 of 2023. 
46 of 2023. 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 
(4) In every trial of an offence under this Act, the proceedings shall be
continued on day-to-day basis, until all the witnesses in attendance have been 
examined, unless the Special Fast Track Court, for reasons to be recorded in 
writing, finds that adjournm ent of the same beyond the following day is 
necessary: 
Provided that such trial shall be completed within a period of three 
months from the date of filing of the chargesheet. 
(5) The cases or trials pertaining to offences under this Act or any other
law fo r the time being in force  as specified in sub -section ( 3), which are 
pending on the date of commencement of the Public Examinations (Prevention 
of Unfair Means) Amendment Act, 2026, shall stand transferred to the Special 
Fast Track Court designated under sub-section (2). 
(6) The trial of cases transferred under sub-section (5) shall be conducted
by the Special  Fast Track Court designated under sub -section (2) from the 
stage it is received upon such transfer and shall be completed within a period 
of three months from the date of such receipt. 
(7) Every State Government and Union territory Administration shall, by
notification, appoint one or more Special Public Prosecutors for every Special 
Fast Track Court in accordance with  sub-section ( 8) of section 18 of the 
Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023, for conduct of cases under this Act. 
(8) Every person appointed as a Special Public Prosecutor under this
section, shall be deemed to be a Public Prosecutor within the meaning of 
clause (v) of sub-section (1) of section 2 of the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha 
Sanhita, 2023 and the provisions of that Sanhita shall apply accordingly. 
12B. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Bharatiya Nagarik 
Suraksha Sanhita, 2023, an appeal shall lie fro m any judgment, sentence or 
order, not being an interlocutory order, of a Special Fast Track Court to the 
High Court. 
(2) Every appeal under sub-section (1) shall be heard by a bench of two
Judges of the High Court and shall, as far as possible, be disposed of within a 
period of three months from the date of admission of the appeal.  
(3) Except as aforesaid, no appeal or revision shall lie to any Court from
any judgment, sentence or order including an interlocutory order of a 
Special Fast Track Court.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (3) of section 419
of the Bharatiya Nagarik  Suraksha Sanhita, 2023, an appeal shall lie to the 
High Court against an order of the Special Fast Track Court granting or 
refusing bail.  
(5) Every appeal under this section shall be preferred within a period of
thirty days from the date of the judgment, sentence or order appealed from: 
Provided that the High Court may entertain an appeal after the expiry of 
the said period of thirty days if it is satisfied that the appellant had sufficient 
cause for not preferring the appeal within the period of thirty days:  
Provided further that no appeal shall be entertained after the expiry of 
the period of ninety days.”. 
Appeals. 

4 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Public Examinations (Prevention of Unfair Means) Act, 2024 (the said 
Act) was enacted to prevent resorting to unfair means in public examinations and to 
provide for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto. The said Act, being 
a pan-Indian legislation, aims at effectively deterring persons, organised groups and 
institutions from indulging in unfair means thereby committing offences, adversely 
impacting the sanctity of public examinations. The objective of the said Act is to 
bring greater transparency, fairness and credibility and inspire confidence i n the 
public examinations system. 
2. In recent years, there have been some incidents of question paper leakages
and malpractices in examinations conducted by public examination authorities, 
which tend to affect the transparency and fairness of the public examinations 
system. 
3. Hence, in order to further strengthen the fairness, to enhance the credibility
of the public examinations system and to facilitate speedy trial and ensure time 
bound investigations of offences under the said Act, it is necessary to make 
amendments in the said Act, inter alia,–– 
(i) to empower all State Governments and Union territory
Administrations to designate any Court of Session to be a Special Fast Track 
Court to try offences under the said Act; 
(ii) to provide that the proceedings in such Special Fast Track Courts are
continued on day-to-day basis and the trial shall be completed within a period 
of three months from the date of filing of the charge sheet; 
(iii) to empower the Central Government to also constitute Special Task
Force for investigation of any offence, if necessary; 
(iv) to provide that the investigations for offences under the said Act are
completed within a period of two months; 
(v) to empower all State Governments and Union territory
Administrations to appoint one or more Special Public Prosecutors for conduct 
of cases under the said Act;  
(vi) to enhance the term of imprisonments and fines provided therein for
offences committed under the said Act; and 
(vii) to provide for appeal mechanism as against any judgement,
sentence or order to a bench of two Judges of the High Court, and for disposal 
of the same within a period of three months from the date of admission of 
appeal. 
4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
NEW DELHI;   DR. JITENDRA SINGH. 
The 24th July, 2026. 

5 
45 of 2023. 
45 of 2023. 
45 of 1860. 
45 of 2023. 
45 of 2023. 
45 of 1860. 
45 of 2023. 
45 of 2023. 
45 of 1860.
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE PUBLIC EXAMINATIONS (PREVENTION OF UNFAIR MEANS)         
ACT, 2024 
(1 OF 2024) 
* * * * * 
10. (1) Any person or persons resorting to unfair means and offences under
this Act, shall be punished with imprisonment for a term not less than three years 
but which may extend to five years and with fine up to ten lakh rupee s. In case of 
default of payment of fine, an additional punishment of imprisonment shall be 
imposed, as per the provisions of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023: 
Provided that until the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 is brought into force, 
the provisions of the Indian Penal Code, shall be applicable in place of the said Act. 
(2) The service provider shall also be liable to be punished with imposition of
a fine up  to one crore rupees and proportionate cost of examination shall also be 
recovered from such service provider and he shall also be barred from being 
assigned with any responsibility for the conduct of any public examination for a 
period of four years. 
(3) Where it is established during the investigation that offence under this Act
has been committ ed with the consent or connivance of any Director, Senior 
Management or the persons in-charge of the service provider firm, he shall be liable 
for imprisonment for a term not less than three years but which may extend to ten 
years and with fine of one cror e rupees. In case of default of payment of fine, an 
additional punishment of imprisonment shall be imposed as per the provisions of 
the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023: 
Provided that until the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 is brought into force, 
the provisions of the Indian Penal Code, shall be applicable in place of the said Act. 
* * * * * 
11. (1) If a person or a group of persons including the examination authority
or service provider or any other institution commits an organised crime, he shall be 
punished with imprisonment for a term not less than five years but which may 
extend to ten years and with fine which shall not be less than one crore rupees. In 
case of default of payment of fine, an additional punishment of imprisonment shall 
be imposed as per the provisions of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023: 
Provided that until the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 is brought into force, 
the provisions of the Indian Penal Code, shall be applicable in place of the said Act. 
* * * * * 
CHAPTER IV 
INQUIRY AND INVESTIGATION
12. (1) * * * * * 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), the Central
Government shall have the  powers to refer the investigation to any Central 
Investigating Agency. 
* * * * * 
Punishment for 
offences under 
this Act. 
Organised 
crimes. 
Officers 
empowered to 
investigate. 

LOK SABHA 
———— 
A 
BILL 
to amend the Public Examinations (Prevention of Unfair Means) Act, 2024. 
———— 
(Dr. Jitendra Singh, MoS (I/C) of Science and Technology; MoS (I/C) of 
Earth Sciences; MoS in the Prime Minister’s Office; MoS in the Ministry of 
Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions; MoS in the Department of 
Atomic Energy; and MoS in the Department of Space) 