S3 \F\BILL 2014\2986LS(E)
THE  CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT)  BILL,  2014
By
SHRI P.P. CHAUDHARY, M.P .
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment)
Act, 2014.
2. In the Seventh Schedule to Constitution, in List II-State List, after entry 41, the
following entry shall be inserted, namely:—
"41A. Services of the institutions of self-government and self-government Service
Selection Board.".
Amendment
of the
Seventh
Schedule.
Bill No. 139 of 2014
Short title.
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Article 40 of the Constitution provides for organization of Village Panchayats and
endow them with such powers and authority as may be necessary to enable them to function
as units of self-Government. Keeping in view this Constitutional mandate of the Directive
Principles of State Policy, Part IX relating to panchayats was incorporated by 73rd amendment
in the Constitution. Artcle 243(d) defines "panchayat" as "an institution (by whatever name
called) of self-government constituted under article 243B for rural areas".
State legislatures are competent to endow the Panchayats with such powers and
authority as may be necessary to enable them to function as institutions of self-government
in relation to the matters enumerated in the Eleventh Schedule to the Constitution. The
matters enumerated in entries 17, 18 and 19 of the Eleventh Schedule are "education including
primary and secondary schools; technical training and vocational education; and adult and
non-formal education", respectively. As per article 246(3), the legislature of any State has
exclusive power to make laws with respect to any of the matters enumerated in List II-State
List in the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution.
However, in the State List, there is no entry providing for the services of institutions
of self-government and constitution of Service Selection Board for conducting recruitment
for services of institutions of self-government. Hence, State Legislatures do not have
legislative competence with respect to services of institutions of self-government and
constitution of  Service Selection Board.
In view of the above, it is necessary to empower State legislatures to legislate with
respect to the services of the institutions of the self-government.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution with a
view to insert a new entry 41A in List II-State List of the Seventh Schedule relating to the
services of the institutions of self-government and Constitution of the Service Selection
Board to conduct examinations/interviews for appointment to services of the institutions of
self-government in the States.
Hence this Bill.
P.P. CHAUDHARY
N
EW DELHI;
November 12, 2014.
2

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * *
List II-State List
* * * * *
41. State public services, State Public Service Commission.
* * * * *
3

loLOK  SABHAL
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri P.P . Chaudhary, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—2986LS—02.12.2014.