Bdl NO.;I' of 195$ 
THE SPIRITUOUS PREPARATIONS (INTER-STATE 
TRADE AND COMMERCE) CONTROL BILL, 1955 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABRA) 
A 
Bn..L 
to make provision for the imposition in the public interest of certain 
restrictions on inter-State trade and commerce in spi'rituous 
medicinal and other preparations and to provide for matters 
connected therewith. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Spirituous Preparations 
State Trade and Commerce) Control Act, 1955. 
S (2) It extends to the whole of India. 
(Inter- Short title. 
extent and 
commence-ment. 
10 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Gov-
ernment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,- DefiJ:Utiona. 
(a) 'alcohol' means ethyl alcohol of any strength and purity 
having the chemical composition H.OJi; 
(b) 'prescribed' means presarfbed by rules made under this 
Act; 
(c) 'prohibition State' means any State which the Central 
Government may, by notificatiO'n in the Official Gazette, specify 
as being a State in which or in any part of which the consump-
tion of alcoholic liquors is generally prohibited by law; 

Control of 
Wer·State 
trade aDd 
commerce in 
lpirituoua 
preparatioDl. 
2 
(d) 'spirituous preparation' means-
(i) any medicinal preparation containing ~ol whe-
ther self-generated or otherwise; or ) 
(ii) any mixture or compound of wine with medicinal 
substances, whether the wine is fortified with spirit or not; 5 
or 
(iii) any other substance notified under section 4 to be 
a spirituous preparation. 
3. (1) No person shall, in the course of inter-State trade and 
commerce,- 10 
(a) import into a prohibition State any spirituous prepara-
tion; or 
(b) export from any State or transport from one place to 
another or sell any spirituous preparation for the purpose of 
its importation into a prohibition State; IS 
save in accordance with rules made under sub-section (2) and with 
the conditions of any licence for that purpose which he may be re-
quired to obtain under those rules. 
(2) The Central Government may, by notification in the OfBcial 
Gazette, make rules regulating such import, export, transpart or :ao 
sale, and such rules may prescribe the form and conditions of licences 
therefor, the authorities by which such licences may be granted and 
the fees that may be charged with respect thereto, and any other 
matter required to render effective the control over such import, 
export, transport or sale. 
(3) Save in so far as may be expressly provided in the rules 
made under sub-section (2), nothing in this section shall apply to 
spirituous preparations which are the property of the Government. 
Other pre- 4. If the Central Government is satisfied, after making such in-
::,:fJ!g quiry in this behalf as it may think fit and after taking into account 30 
alcobol may such representations as may be made in the matter, that control of 
:'=~I inter-State trade and commerce in any preparation containing alcohol 
preparatioDl. other than a preparation referred to in sub-clause (i) or sub-clause 
(ii) of clause (d) of section 2 is necessary i~ the public interest, it 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare such preparation 35 
to be a spirituous preparation within the meaning of this Act and 
thereupon the provisions of this Act shall apply thereto. 
Penaltiea. 5. If any person contravenes any ()f the provisions of this Act or 
of any rules made thereunder, or the terms and conditidlls of any 
licence granted under such rules, he shall, for every such offence, 40 

Vof 1898. 
Vof 1898. 
3 
be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
one ~ear, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, 
or wIth both. • 
6. In all trials for offences under this Act or the rules rna'de Procedure 
5 thereunder, the magistrate shall follow the procedure prescribed in t~ ~e folIo:!: 
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, for the trial of summary cases ~aJ. mag 
in which an appeal lies. 
7. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of. Criminal Offences 
Procedure, 1898, all offences under this Act and the rules made under this 
10 thereunder shall be cognisable. :I~~gnis-
8. (1) Any officer of the department of prohibition, excise, Power to 
police, revenue or public health authorised in this behalf by the ~:e' ::er:-
State Government, by general or special order, who has reasons to with~t 
believe from personal knowledge or from information given by any :~::~: 
IS person and taken down in writing that any spirituous preparation in offences. 
respect of which an offence punishable under section 5 has been 
committed is kept or concealed in any house, building or enclosed 
space, or is being transported in any vehicle, vessel or aircraft to 
any place or is in transit may-
20 (a) enter at any time by day or by night into any such 
house, building, enclosed space, or vehicle, vessel or aircraft; 
,(b) in case of resistance, break open any door and remove 
any other obstacIt' to such entry; 
(c) seize such preparation and any document or other 
2$ article which he has reason to believe may furnish evidence of 
the commission of an offence punishable under this Act or the 
rules made thereunder; and 
30 
(d) detain and search any person whom' he has reason to 
believe to be guilty of an offence punishable under this Act 
or the rules made thereunder, and if such person has any 
spirituous preparation in his' possession and such possession 
appears to him to 'be unlawful, arrest him and any other persons 
in the company. 
(2) Where an officer takes down any information in writing 
3S under sub-section (1), he shall forthwith send a copy thereof to his 
immediate official superior. 
(3) The State Government may empower any officer of the 
prohibition or excise department to investigate offences under this 
Act and the rules made thereunder. 

4 
(4) An officer empowered under sub-section (3) shall in the 
conduct of such investigation exercise the powers conferred by the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, upon an officer in charge of a V of 1898. 
police station for the investigation of cognisable oftence~. 
Offences by 
companies. 5 . ". t. (1) If the person committing an offence under section 5 is a 
company, every person who at the time the 'contravention was com-
mitted was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for 
the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company 
shall' be. deemed to be' guilty of the contravention and shall be 
liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly: 10 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render ) 
any such person ,liable to any punishment provided in this Act if 
he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge 
or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of 
such offence. IS 
(2) Notwithstandin/Z anything contained in sub-section (1), where 
an offence under this Act has been committed by a company and" 
it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent 
or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, 
any director. manager, secretary or other officer of the company. 20 
such director, manager, secretary dr other officer shall also be 
deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be pro-, 
ceeded against and punished accordingly. ;:: 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section.-
(a) "company" means any body corporate, and includes a 25 
firm, or other association of individuals; and 
(b) "director" in relation to a firm means a partner in the 
firm. . ~~ 
Prel1Ul1ption 10. In trials under this Act, it may be presumed unless and until 
!~or"'es- the contrary is proved, that the accused has committed an offence 30 
.pirltu~s under this Act or the rules made thereunder in respect of any 
preparations. •. t' f th . f h' h h f'l spintuous prepara Ions or e possessIon 0 w IC e al s to 
Delegation 
of powers. 
account satisfactorily. 
11. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette. direct that the power to make rules under section 3 shall, 35 
subject to such conditions, if any, as may be specified in the notifi-
cation be exercisable also by a .state Government. 
Officera and ]2. All officers empowered to exercise any powers or to perform perIODS " 
acting under any duties under this Act shall be deemed to be public servants 
" , .. , 
this Act, to within the meaning of seetion 21 of the Indi~n' Petta1 Code. 40 XLV Qf be pubbc," 1860. 
1ervllJlts, 

13. No suit, prosecution or other legal -proceeding shall lie against Protection of 
any officer or person empowered to exercise powers or to perform ~i:Jaken 
duties under this Act for anything in good faith done Or intended, faifb. 
to be done under this Act or the rules made thereunder. 
5 If. Nothing in this Act or in the niles made thereunder shaH Saving of 
affect the validity of any Provincial Act or a State Act for the ~~li:r~W8. 
time being in force, or of any rule, regulation or order made there~ 
under, which imposes any restriction not imposed by or under this' 
Act, or imposes a restriction greater in degree than a corresponding 
10 restriction imposed by or under this Act on the traffic in any 
spirituous preparations within the territories. of the State. 

6 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Governments of certain States in which 'prohibition' is in 
force have represented to the Central Government that medicinal 
and other preparations containing alcohol in some form or other 
. are being incre~ingly used as alcoholic beverages to the detriment 
of public health and further that in the absence of powers to control 
the import of such preparations from outside the States the basic 
objective underlying prohibition is being frustrated. 
2. The existing law contained in the Drugs Act, 1940, is not 
suffident to control inter-State movement in spirituous preparations. 
It has also been pointed out that a State law regulating trade and 
commerce in these preparations with or within prohibition States 
is not likely to be as effective as a Central law. It is accordingly 
considered necessary for the Central Government to undertake legis-
lation with reference to article 302 of the Constitution for the 
purpose of controlling inter-State movement in such spirituous pre-
parations. 
3. The Bill seeks to regulate importation of spirituous prepara-
tions into the States in which the consumption of alcoholic liquor 
is generally prohibited. 
T. T. KRISHNAMACHARI. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 5th March, 1955. 

1 
Memorandum regarding delegated legislation 
Clause 3 of the Bill delegates to the Central Government powers 
td make rules regulating certain matters connected with the move-
ment, transport and sale of spirituous preparations that enter into 
inter-State trade and commerce. Some of the more important 
matters to be· provided for in tlie'ru1es'are indicated in sub-clause (2) 
of clause 3 itself. 
The rules will provide for a system df licensing and for other 
forms of control (like regulation of the quantity of import etc.) with 
respect to the movement of spirituous preparations so that the 
impdrt of spirituous preparations into 'prohibition States' is so regu-. 
lated that spirituous preparations are not misused as alcoholic 
beverages. The power to make rules may in suitable cases be dele-
gated to the State Governments. Somewhat similar powers are given 
to the Government by section 8 of the Dangerous Drugs Act, 1930, 
and the rule-making pdWer is of a normal character. 

LOK SABRA 
A 
BILL 
to make provision for the imposition in the public interest of 
certain restrictions on inter-State trade and commerce in 
spirituous medicinal and other preparations and to provide 
for matters connected therewith. 
-
(Shri T. T. Krishnamachari, 
Minister of Commerce and Industry) 