Bill No. 13-F of 1977
LT

Published in a Gazette of Initia, "xtraordinary, Part II, Seetion l,
१६४७१ the 18th April, 1977 as act Now)3 of 19772.

THE PETROLEUM PIPELINES (ACQUISITION
OF RIGHT OF USER IN LAND) AMEND-
MENT BILL, 1977

(AS PASSED BY THE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT—

Lox SABHA ON 6TH APRIL, 1977
RajYA SABHA ON LITH APRIL, 1977)



50 of 1962,

vee

Bill No. 13-F of 1977

THE PETROLEUM PIPELINES (ACQUISITION OF RIGHT
OF USER IN LAND) AMENDMENT BILL, 1977
(As. PASSED BY THE HouSES 07 PARLIAMENT) ,
oa.
BILL

to amend the Petroleum Pipelines (Acquisition of Right of User in
Land) Act, 1962.

Br it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-eighth Year of the
Republic of India as follows:— :

1. (1) This Act may be called the Petroleum Pipelines (Acquisition
of Right of User in Land) Amendment. Act, 1977,

(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 3rd day of
February, 1977. हि 1 ty

2. In the Petroleum Pipelines (Acquisition of Right of User in Land)
Act, 1962 (hereinafter referred to ag the principal Act), in the long
title, for the words “for laying petroleum pipelines”, the words “for lay-
ing pipelines for the transport of petroleum and minerals” shall be sub-

हर 3. In section 1 of the principal Act, in sub-sectlon (1), for the words
‘Petroleum Pipelines”, the words “Petroleum and Minerals Pipelines”
shall be substituted. :

Short
title and
commence-

1 ment.

Amend-
ment of
long title.

Amend-
ment of
section 1.



2

-incipal Act,—
section 2 of the prin हि ह
Amend- 4. In sec ), the following words shall be inserteq at th
ment of (i) in clause (a), e
section 3 end, namely:— ;
‘ferent persons or authorities may be authoriseg to pep.
“and different nw the functions of the competent authority under
form all हि है किम area or different areas specified in the Notig,
this Ac ee -
cation”;
(ii) after clause (0), the following clause shall be inserteg
ii) aft कि १ ,
namely: —
= “(ba) “minerals” have the meanings assigned to them in the
Mines Act, 1952, and include mineral oils and stowing sand but
1 y a8
do not include petroleum;’.
inci i -section (1), after ६
Amend ieee pir र (8 ian ane sub Great fe be we Words
ment of “transport of petroleum”, the words “or any > inserteg.
section 3. $
“no; “ हि
Amend- 6. In section 4 of the principal Act, oer e words for transporting
ment of petroleum”, the words “or any mineral” shall be inserted.
section 4.
Amend- 7. In section 6 of the principal Act,—
ment of ,
section 6. (४) in sub-section (1),—

(a) for the words “submit a report accordingly to the Central
Government”, the words, brackets and figures “either make a
report in respect of the land described in the notification under
sub-section (1) of section 3, or make different reports in respect
of different parcels of such land, to the Central Government
containing his recommendations on the objections, together with
the record of the proceedings held by him, for the decision of
that Government” shall be substituted;

(b) after the words “the Central Government shall”, the
words “, if satisfied that such land is required for laying any

Pipeline for the transport of petroleum or any mineral,” shall be
inserted;

(c) the words, brackets and fi

. gures “and different declara-
tions may be made from time to tim

e in respect of different par-

different reports h

ave been made by t
under this section” y

shall be inserted at the end;
Section (2), for the words “j

’ in the land”, the words “in
ed therein” shall be substituted; anos

section ae en metlon (3), for the words “no declaration under this

any parcel of Tand coven’ by mods “no declaration in respect of
ले e t ificat; नि

under this section” shall be substi cation has been published

(४) in sub-
the land specifi



(iv) after sub-section (3), the followin, -secti
inserted, namely: — & sub-section shail be

“(3A) No declaration in respect of an:

of Right of User in Land)
after the expiry of thr
publication.”,

made
ce years from the date of such

8. In section 7 of the Principal Act, in sub-section (1) —

@ in clause (i), the word “and” at the end shall be omitted;

(ti) after clause (i), the following clause shall be inserted,
namely: — *

+ (६) for laying pipelines for the transport of petroleum, it
shall be lawful for any person authorised by the Central Govern-
ment or such State Government or corporation to use such land
for laying pipelines for transportiig any mineral and where the
right of user in any land has so vested for laying pipelines for
transporting any mineral, it shall be lawful for such person to
use such land for laying pipelines for transporting petroleum or
any other: mineral; and”.

9. In section 9.of the principal Act, after sub-section (2), the following

sub-section’ shall be ‘inserted, namely:—

“ (3) Where the owner or occupier of the land with respect to
which a declaration has been made under sub-section (70) of sec-
tion 6.— -

“= (9), constructs. any building or any other structure, or

= (b) constructs or excavates any well, tank, reservoir or dam,
or ;
“-(c) plants any tree,

on that land, the Court of the District Judge within the local limits
of whose jurisdiction such land is situate may, on an application =
to it by the competent authority and after holding such inquiry as i
may deem fit, cause the building, structure, reservoir, dam or tree °
~be removed or the well or tank to be filled up, and the costs of suck हि
removal or filling up shall be recoverable from such owner or 0०० r
pier in the same manner as if the order for the recovery of suc
costs were a decree made by that Court.”.

10. In section 17 of the principal Act,—

(i) in sub-section (1), for the word “purposes”, the word “provl-
sions” shall be substituted;

(४) in sub-section (3), for the words “before the expiry हित te
Session in which it is so laid or the successive sessions aforesaid”, the
words “before the expiry of the session immediately aie
Session or the successive sessions aforesaid” shall be substituted.

Amend-
ment of
section 7,

Amend-
ment of
section 9.

Amend-
ment of
section 17.


Repeal
and
anviNg

4

troleum Pipelines (Acquisition of Right of User in Lana)

11, (1) The Pe
1977 is hereby repealed,

Amendment Ordinance,

(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken
under the principal Act, as amended by the said Ordinance, shall be
deemed to have been done or taken under the principal Act az amendeg

by this Act.

The above Bill has been passed by the Houses of Parliament.

3५,

+


RAJYA SABHA

A
BILL

to amend the Petroleum Pipelines (Acquisition of Right of Us

er in Land)
Act, 1962.

(As passed by the Houses of Parliament)