BID No. 13 of 1960 
THE BOMBAY REORGANISATION 
BILL, 1960· 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA 
ON 28TH MARCH, I960) 

THE BOMBAY REORGANISATION BILL, 1960 
CLAUSES 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
PART I 
PRELIMINARY 
1. Short title. 
2. Definitions. I 
PART II 
REoRGANISATION OF BOMBAY STATE 
3. Formation of Gujarat State. 
4. Amendment of the First Schedule to the Constitution. 
5. Saving powers of State Government. 
PART III 
REPRESENTATION IN THE LEGISLATURES 
The Council of States 
6. Amendment of the Fourth Schedule to the Constitution. 
7. Allocation of sitting members. 
8. Bye-elections to fill vacancies. 
9. Term of office. 
The House of the People 
10. Representation in the House of the People. 
11. Delimitation of Parliamentary constituencies. 
12. Provision as to sitting members. 
The Legislative Assemblies 
13. Strength of Legislative Assemblies. 
14. Delimitation of Assembly constituencies. 
15. Allocation of members. 
16. Duration of Legislative Assemblies. 
17. Speakers and Deputy Speakers. 
18. Rules of procedure. 
2113 (B) L.S.-l. 

(ii) 
The Legislative Council 
CLAUSES 
19. Legislative Council of Bombay. 
20. Council constituencies. 
21. Provision as to certain sitting members. 
22. Special provision as to biennial elections. 
23. Chairman and Deputy Chairman. 
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes 
24. Amendment of the Scheduled Castes o.rder. 
25. Amendment of the Scheduled Tribes Order. 
PART IV 
HIGH COURTS 
26. High Court for Gujarat. 
27. Judges of Gujarat High Court. 
28. Jurisdiction of Gujarat High Court. 
29. Power to enrol advocates, etc. 
30. Practice and procedure in Gujarat High Court. 
31. Custody of seal of Gujarat High Court. 
32. Form of writs and other processes. 
33. Powers of Judges. 
34. Procedure as to appeals to Supreme Court. 
35. Transfer of proceedings from Bombay High Court to 
Gujarat High Court. 
36. Right to appear or to act in proceedings transferred to 
Gujarat High Court. 
37. Interpretation. 
38. Savings. 
PART V 
AUTHORISATION OF EXPENDITURE 
39. Authorisation of expenditure of Gujarat State. 
40. Reports relating to accounts of Bombay State. 
41. Allowances and privileges of Governor of Gujarat. 
42. Distribution of revenues. 

(iii) 
PART VI 
ApPORTIONMENT OF AssETS AND WBILI'l'D8 
CLAUSES 
43. Application of Part. 
44. Land and goods. 
45. Treasury and bank balances. 
46. Arrears of taxes. 
47. Right to recover loans and advances. 
48. Credits in certain funds. 
49. Special Revenue Reserve Fund in GUjarat. 
50. Assets and liabilities of State undertakings. 
51. Public debt. 
52. Floating Debt. 
53. Refund of taxes collected In excess. 
54. Deposits, etc. 
55. Provident Fund. 
56. Pensions. 
57. Contracts. 
58. Liability in respect of actionable wrong. 
59. Liability as guarantor. 
60. Items in suspense. 
61. Residuary provision. 
62. Apportionment of assets or liabilities by agreement. 
63. Power of Central Government to order allocation or adjust-
ment in certain cases. 
64. Certain expenditure to be charged on consolidated Fund. 
PART VII 
PROVISIONS AS TO CERTAIN CORPORATIONS 
65. Provisions as to Bombay State Electricity Boards and State 
Warehousing Corporation. 
66. Continuance of arrangements in regal'd to generation and 
supply of electric power and supply of water. 
67. Provisions as to Bombay State Financial Corporation. 
68. Amendment of Act 64 of 1950. 
69. Special provision for Bar Council of Gujerat. 
70. General provision as to statutory corporations. 
71. Amendment of Act 38 of 1957. 

(iv) 
CLAUSES 
72. Temporary provisions as to continuance of certain existing 
road transport permits. 
73. Special provision relating to retrenchment compensation in 
certain cases. 
74. Special provision ~s to income-tax. 
75. Continuance of facilities in certain State institutions. 
PART VIII 
PROVISIONS AS TO SERVICES 
76. Provisions relating to All-India Services. 
77. Provisions relating to other services. 
78. Provisions as to continuance of officers in same post. 
79. Power of Central Government to give directions. 
80. Provisions as to Bombay Public Service Commission. 
PART IX 
LEGAL AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
81. Amendment of Act 37 of 1956. 
82. Territorial extent of laws. 
83. Power to adapt laws. 
134.. Power to construe laws. 
85. Power to name authorities, etc., for exercising statutory 
functions. 
86. Legal Proceedings. 
87. Transfer of pending proceedings. 
88.. Right of pleaders to practise in certain cases. 
89. Effect of provisions of the Act inconsistent with other laws. 
90. Power to remove difticulties. 
91. Power to make rules. 
, , 
'-
THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE 
THE THIRD SCHEDULE 
THE FOURTH SCHEDULE 
THE FIFTH SCHEDULE 
THE SIXTH SCHEDULE 
THE SEVENTH SCHEDULE 
THE EIGHTH SCHEDULE 
THE NINTH SCHEDULE 
THE TENTH SCHEDULE 
-THE ELEVENTH SCHEDULE -
THE TWELM"H SCHEDULE , t-

Bill No. 13 of k96o_ 
THE BOMBAY REORGANISATION BILL, 1960 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the reorganisation of the State of Bombay and for 
matters connected therewith. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Eleventh Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:--
PAR'r I 
PRELIMINARY 
.5 I. This Act may be called the Bombay Reorganisation Act, 1960. Short titil'. 
43 of 19S0. 10 
IS 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-· 
(a) "appointed day" means the 1st day of May, 1960; 
(b) "article" means an article of the Constitution; 
(c) "assembly constituency", "council constituency" and 
"parliamentary constituency" have the same meanings as in the 
Representation of the People Act, 1950; 
(d) "law" includes any enactment, ordinance, regulation, 
order, bye-law, rule, scheme, notification or other instrument 
having, immediately before the appointed day, the force of law 
in the whole or in any part of the Stoate of Bombay; 
(e) "notified order" means an order published in the official 
Gazette; 
(f) "population ratio", in relation to the States of Bombay 
and GUjarat, means the ratio of 66-31 to 33'69; 
20 (g) "sitting member", in relation to either House of Parlia-
ment or of the Legislature of the State of Bombay, means a per-
son who, immediately before the appointed day, is a member of 
that House; 
nefinitions. 

Penn'tio 1 
of Gujar t 
St.te. 
Amendment 
of the FiIlt 
Schedule t" 
the Co.I-
atitution. 
2 
(h) "transferred territory" means the territories which, as 
from the appointed day, are the territories of the State of Gujarat; 
(i) "treasury" includes a sub-treasury; 
(j) any reference to a district, tnluka, village or other terri-
torial division of the State of Bombay shall be construed as a S 
reference to the area comprised within that territorit.ll division 
as recognised for l:md r~veI.&UE: purPOSt:5 Oll thl: 1I;t day of De,,-em-
ber, 1959. 
PART II 
REORGANISATION OF BOMBAY STATE 
3. (1) As from the appointed day, there shall be formed a new 
State to be known as the State of Gujarat comprising the following 
territories of the State of Bombay, namely:-
10 
(a) Bwlaskantha, Mehsana, Sabarkantha, Ahmedabad, Kaira, 
Panch-mahals, Baroda, Broach, Surat, Dangs, Amreli, Surendra- IS 
nagar, Rajkot, Jamnagar, Junagadh, Bhavnegar and Kutch dis-
tricts; and 
(b) the villages in Umbergaon taluka of Thana district, the 
villages in Nawapur 'J.nd Nandurbar talukas of West Khandesh 
district and the villages in Akkalkuwa and Taloda talukas of 20 
West Khandesh district, respectively spP.Cified in Parts 1, II and 
III of the First Schedule; 
and thereupon, the said territories shall cease to form part of the 
State of Bombay. 
(2) The villages in Umbergaon taluka specified in Part I of the 35 
First Schedule shall form a separate taluka of the same name and 
be included in Surat district, and the remaining villages in the said 
taluka shall be included in, and form part of, DahGllu taluka of Thana 
district; and the villages specified in Parts II and III of the First 
Sche(hlle ~hltll respE:Ctively be included in, and form part of, Songadh 30 
taluka of Surat district and Sagoora taluka of Broach district. 
4. As frem the appointed day, in the First Schedule to the Consti-
tution, under the heading "1. THE STATES",-
(11) for entry 4, the following entries shall be substituted, 
namely:-- 35 
"4. Bombay .. The territories spedfied in sub-section (1) 
of section 8 of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956, but ex-
cluding the territories referred to in sub~s!'ction (1) of aec--
tion 3 of the Bombay Reorganisation Act, 1960. 

3 
5. Gujarat .. The territories referred to in sub-section 
(1), of section 3 of the Bombay Reorganisation Act, 1960."; 
(b) entries 5 to 14 shall be renumbered as entries 6 to 15 
rt!specUvely. 
5 5. Nothing in the foregoing provisions of this Part shall be deemed Saving 
to affect the power of the State Government to alter, after the ~~':'G~~­
appointed. day, the name, extent or boundaries of any district, taluka emment. 
ot' village in the State. 
10 
PART III 
REJ'RESEN'JhTION IN THE LEGISL~TURES 
The Council oj States 
6. As from the appointed day, the number of seats allotted to the Amendment 
State of Bombay in the Council of States shall be reduced from 27 If tht' h 
to 18, and there shall be allotted 11 seats to the State of Gujarat in ~~!:t.ule to 
t 5 the said Council, and in the Fourth Schedule to the Constitution, in the. Consti-
the Table,- tutlon. 
20 
(a) for entry 4, the following entries shall be subsWuted. 
namely:-
"4. Bombay ,. 18 
5. Gujarat .. 11"; 
(b) entries 5 to 18 shall be renumbered as entries 6 to ]9 
respectively; and 
(c) for the figures "221", the figures "223" shall be substi-
tuted. 
25 'I. (1) The twelve sitting members of the Council of States repre- ~l?lstion of 
senting the State of Bombay, whose names are specified in Part I of Iltung 
the Second Schedule, and such six of the nine members elected to memhers. 
represent thl'lt State at the biennial elections held for the purpose of 
filling the V'3cancies existing on the 3rd day of April, 1960, as the 
30 Chairman of the Council of States shall by order specify shall, as 
from the appointrd day, be deemed to have been duly elected to fill 
the eighteen seats allotted to the State of Bombay. 
(2) The five sitting members of the Council of States representing 
the State of Bombay, whose names are specified in Part II of the 
3S Second Schedule, Wld the remaining three of the nine members 
elected at the said biennial elections shall, as from the appointed day, 
be deemed to have been duly elected to fUI eight of the elev~n seats 
allotted to the State of Gujarat. 

4 
Bye-elections 8. As soon as may be after the appointed day, bye-elections shall 
t~ fill vacan- be held to fill the existing casual vacancy in the seats allotted to the 
Ciel. State of Gujarat and the two additional seats allotted to that State. 
9. (1) The term of office of the sitting members and of the mem-Term of 
o1ftce. ber chosen to fill the casual vacancy shall remain unaltered. S 
(2) Out of the two members elected to fill the two additionGI seats, 
the term of office cf that member who, at the counting of votes, is 
last declared elected, or if an eq~ality of votes is found to exist, the 
term of office of such one of them as the returning officer shall decide 
by lot, shall expire on the 2nd day of April, 1964 and the term of 10 
office of the other member shall expire on the 2nd day of April, 1966. 
The H OUBe of the People 
Repreaenta- 10. As from the appointed day, the number of seats allotted in the 
~on in ~:the House of the People to the State of Bombay shall be reduced from 66 
P::ie~ to 44, and there shall be allotted 22 seats to the State of Gujarat in IS 
that House, and in the First Schedule to the Representation of the 
People Act, 1950-
(a) for entry 4, the following entries shall be substituted, 
namely:-
"4. Bombay .... 44 20 
5. Gujarat .... 22"; and 
(b) entries 5 to 22 shall be renumbered as entries 6 to 23 
respectively. 
~~imffation 11. As from the appointed day, the First Schedule to the Delimita-
~ent~;- tion of Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies Order, 1956, shall 25 
C:Onatituen- stand amended as directed in the Third Schedule to this Act. 
Cle!. 
ProviSion II 
to8ittina 
members. 
12. Every sitting member of the House of the People representing 
a constituency the extent of which is altered by virtue of the provi-
sions of section 11 shall be deemed to have been elected to the House 
of the People by that constituency as so altered. 
The Legislative Assemblies 
30 
Strength of 13. As from the appointed day, the total number of seats to be ftll-
~rc:!~t~. ed by persons chosen by direct election in the Legislative Assembly 
of Boml:>ay shall be reduced from 396 to 264, and the total number 
of such seats in the Legislative Assembly of Gujarat shall be 132, and 3S 
in the Second Schedule to the Representation of the People Act, 
1950-
(a) for entry 4, the following entries shall be 
namely:-
"4. Bombay .... 264 
5. Gujarat .... 132"; and 
substituted, 
43 of 1950. 
4 ~ of 19S0. 

(b) entries 5 to 13 shall be renumbered as entries 6 to 14 
respectively. 
14. As from the appointed day, the Second Schedule to the Delimi- Delimitation 
tation of ,Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies Order, 1956, :ns~:n~ll 
5 shall stand amended as directed in the Fourth Schedule to this Act. ciea. 
15. (1) Every sitting member of the Legislative Assembly of Bom- Allocation of 
bay representing a constituency which on the appointed day by memberS. 
virtue of the provisions of section 14 stands transferred, whether with 
or without alteration of boundaries, to the State of Gujarat shall, as 
10 from that day, cease to be a member of the Legislative Assembly of 
Bombay and shall be deemed to have been elected to the Legislative 
Assembly of GUjarat by that constituency as so transferred. 
(2) Every other sitting member of the Legislative Assembly of 
Bombay representing a constituency the extent or the name and ex-
IS tent of which is altered by virtue of the provisions of section 14 shall 
be deemed to have been elected to the said Legislative Assembly by 
that constituency as so altered. 
(3) The sitting member of the Legislative Assembly of Bombay 
nominated to that Assembly under article 333 to represent the Anglo-
20 Indian community shall, notWithstanding the diminution in the area 
of that State, continue to represent the said community in that 
Assembly under that article. 
16. The period of five years referred to in clause (1) of article 172 Duration of 
of the Constitution shall, in the case of the Legislative Assembly of ALesi1latihl'ive . 8sem ea. 
25 GUJarat, be deemed to have commenced on the date on which it 
actually commenced in the case of the Legislative Assembly of Bom-
bay. 
17. (1) The persons who immediately before the appointed day Speakcrs and 
are the Speaker and Deputy Speaker of the Legislative Assembly of Deputy 
30 Bombay shall continue to be the Speaker and Deputy Speaker res- SpeakcrS. 
pectively of that Assembly. 
(2) As soon as may be after the appointed day, the Legislative 
Assembly of Gujarat shall choose two members of that Assembly to 
be respectively Speaker and Deputy Speaker thereof and until they 
35 are so chosen, the duties of the office of Speaker shall be performed 
by such member of the Assembly as the Governor may appoint for 
the purpose. 
18. The rules as to procedure and conduct of business in force Rules of 
immediately before the appointed day with respect to the Legislative procedure. 
40 Assembly of Bombay shall, until rules are made under clause (1) of 
2113 (B) LS-2. 

Legislative 
Council of 
Bombay. 
8 
~rtic1e 208, have effect in relation to the Legislative Assembly of 
GUjarat, subject to such modifications and adaptations as may be made 
therein by the Speaker thereof. 
The Legislative Cpuncil 
19. As from the appointed day, the total number of seats in the 
Legislative Council of Bombay shall be reduced from 108 to 78, and 
in the Third Schedule to the Representation of the People Act, 1950,43 of 1950. 
for the entry relating to Bombay, the following entry shall be substi- ' 
tuted, namely:-
"3. Bombay. 78 22 7 7 30 12". 
Council con-Btituencies. 20. As from the appointed day, the Delimitation of Council 
Constituencies (Bombay) Order, 1951 shall stand amended as 
directed in the Fifth Schedule. 
Proviaio!, as 21. On the appointed day, the sitting members of the Legislative to certaIn 
sitting mem- Council of Bombay specified in the Sixth Schedule shall cease to 
hers. be members of that Council. 
S'p~l pro-
\'1810n as to 
biennial 
elections. 
22. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 16 of 
the Representation of the People Act, 1951, no notification under 43 of 1951. 
that section shall be published before the appointed day for holding 
biennial elections to fill the seats of members of the Legislative 
Council of Bombay, retiring on the expiration of their term of office 
on the 24th day of April, 1960. 
(2) The term of office of the members of the said Council elected 
to fill the vacancies at the said biennial elections shall expire on the 
24th day of April, 1966. 
Chairman 23. (1) The person who immediately before the appointed day is 
~~~~~y the Deputy Chairman of the Legislative Council of Bombay shall 
continue to be the Deputy Chairman of that Council. 
(2) As soon as may be after the appointed day, the Legislative 
Council of Bombay shall choose one member of that Council to be 
the Chairman thereof. 
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes 
Amendment 24. As from the appointed day, the Constitution (Scheduled 
d~l!d ~~:; Castes) Order, 1950, shall stand amended as directed in the Seventh 
Order. Schedule. 
Amendment 25. As from the appointed day, the Constitution (Scheduled 
~~elrit:; Tribes) Order, 1950, shall stand amended as directed in the Eighth 
Order. Schedule. 
10 
IS 
20 
25 
30 
3S 

... 
7 
PART IV 
HIGH COURTS 
26. (1) As from the appointed day, there shall be a separate Hiah 90un 
High Court for the State of Gujarat (hereinafter referred to as "the for GUJarat. 
• High Court of Gujarat"). 
(2) The principal seat of the High Court of Gujarat shall be at 
such place as the President may, by notified order, appoint. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), the 
Judges and division" courts of the High Court of Gujarat may sit at 
IO such other place or places in the State of Gujarat other than its 
principal seat as the Chief Justice may, with the approval of the 
Governor of Gujarat, appoint. 
27. (1) Such of the Judges of the High Court of Bombay holding Ju~ge8 of 
office immediately before the appointed day as may be determined g~~~~t Hiah 
IS by the President shall on that day cease to be Judges of the High 
Court of Bombay and become Judges of the High Court of Gujarat. 
(2) The persons who by virtue of sub-section (1) become Judges 
of the High Court of Gujarat shall, except in the case where any 
such person is appointed to be the Chief Justice of that High Court, 
20 rank in that Court according to the priority of their respective 
appointments as Judges of the High Court of Bombay. 
28. The High Court of Gujarat shall have, in respect of any part Jurisdiction. 
of the territories included in the State of Gujarat, all such jurisdic- ~~UjCo~ 
tion, powers and authority ~s, under the law in force immediately 
2.S before the appointed day, are exercisable in respect of that part of the 
said territories by the High Court of Bombay. 
29. (1) The High Court of Gujarat shall have the like powers to Power to 
approve, admit, enrol, remove and suspend advocates and attorneys, enrol advo-
and to make rules with respect to advocates and attorneys, as are, cateS, etc. 
30 under the law in force immediately before the appointed day, exer-
cisable by the High Court of Bombay. 
(2) The right of audience in the High Court of Gujarat shall be 
regulated in accordance with the like principles as, immediately 
before the appointed day, are in force with respect to the right of 
3S audience in the High Court of Bombay: 
Provided that, subject to any rule made or direction given by the 
High Court of Gujarat in exercise of the powers conferred by this 
section, any person who immE'diately before the appointed day is an 
advocate entitled to practise, or an attorney entitled to act, in the 

a 
High Court of Bombay shall be recognised as an advocate or an 
attorney entitled to practise or to act, as the case may be, in the 
High Court of Gujarat. 
Practice and . .. . procedure 30. SubJect to the provisIOns of thIS Part, the law in force Imme-
~. ~j~~ diately before the appointed day with respect to practice and proce- S 
11 dure in the High Court of Bombay shall, with the necessary modifi-
cations, apply in relation to the High Court of Gujarat, and accord-
ingly, the High Court of Gujarat shall have all such powers to make 
rules and orders with respect to practice and procedure as are imme-
diately before the appointed day exercisable by the High Court of 10 
Bombay: 
Provided that any rules or orders which are in force immedi~tely 
before the appointed day with respect to practice and procedure in 
the High Court of Bombay shall, until varied or revoked by rules or 
orders made by the High Court of Gujarat, apply with the necessary 1, 
modifications in relation to practice and procedure in the High Court 
of Gujarat as if made by that Court. 
I~~t~t~a_ 31. The law in force immediately before the appointed day with 
~:m-:::gh re~pect to the custody Of. the ~eal of the High Court of Bombay shall, 
wlth the necessary modIficatIOns, apply with respect to the custody 2.0 
of the seal of the High Court of Gujarat. 
Form of 
writs and 
other pro-
cesset. 
Powers of 
Judges. 
Procedure 
as to appeals 
to Supreme 
Court. 
32. The law in force immediately before the appointed day with 
respect to the form of writs and other processes used, iSSUed or 
awarded by the High Court of Bombay shall, with the necessary 
modifications, apply with respec,t to the form of writs and other pro- 25 
cesses used, issued or awarded by the High Court of Gujarat. 
33. The law in force immediately before the appointed day relat-
ing to the powers of the Chief .Justice, single Judges and division 
courts of the High Court of Bombay and with respect to all matters 
ancillary to the exercise of those powers shall, with the necessary 30 
modifications, apply in relation to the High Court of Gujarat. 
34. The law in force immediately before the appointed day relat-
ing to appeals to the Supreme Court from the High Court of Bombay 
and the Judges and division courts thereof shall, with the necessary 
modifications, apply in relation to the High Court of Gujarat. 35 
Transfer of 35. (1) Except as hereinafter provided the High Court of proceedmgs .' from Bom- Bombay shall. as from the appomted day, have no jurisdiction in 
bay High respect of the transferred territory. 
C~rtm . 
Gujarat 
High Cllurt. (2) Such proceedings pending in the High Court of Bombay 
immediately before the appointed day as are certified, whether 
before or after that day, by the Chief Justice of that High Court, 40 

9 
having regard to the place of accrual of the cause of action and 
other circumstances, to be proceedings which ought to be heard and 
decided by the High Court of Gujarat shall, as soon as may be after 
such certification, be transferred to the High Court of Gujarat. 
S (3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (1) and 
(2) of this section or in section 28, but save as hereinafter provided, 
the High Court of Bombay shall have, and the High Court of Gujarat 
shall not have, jurisdiction to entertain, hear or dispose of appeals, 
applications for leave to appeal to the Supreme Court, applications 
10 for review and other proceedings where any such proceedings seek 
any relief in respect of any order passed by the High Court of 
Bombay before the appointed day: 
Provided that if after any such proceedings have been entertained 
by the High Court of Bombay, it appears to the Chief Justice of that 
IS High Court that they ought to be transferred to the High Court of 
Gujarat, he shall order that they shall be so transferred, and such 
proceedings shall thereupon be transferred accordingly. 
(4) Any order made by the High Court of Bombay-
(a) before the appointed day, in any proceedings trans-
~o ferred to the High Court of Gujarat by virtue of sub-section 
(2), or • 
(b) in any proceedings with respect to which the High 
Court of Bombay retains jurisdiction by virtue of sub-section 
(3), 
25 shall for all purpcses have effect, not only as an order of the High 
Court of Bombay';' but also as an order made by the High Court of 
Gujarat. 
36. Any person, who, immediately before the appointed day, is Right to 
an advocate entitled to practise, or an attorney entitled to act, in appear (t 
30 the High Court of Bombay and was authorised to appear or to act ~~oc:e~~ 
in any proceedings transferred from that High Court to the High tranger!c 
Court of Gujarat under section 35, shall have the right to appear or ~jgh ~:~. 
to act, as the case may be, in the High Court of Gujarat in relation 
35 
4Q 
to those proceedings. 
37. For the purposes of section 35- Interpreta-
(a) proceedings shall be deemed to be pending in a court tion. 
until that court has disposed of all issues between the parties, 
including any issues with respect to the taxation of the costs of 
the proceedings and shall include appeals, applications for leave 
to appeal to the Supreme Court, applications for review, peti-
tions for revision and petitions for writs: 

Savings. 
(b) references to a High Court shall be construed as includ-
. ing references to a Judge or division court thereof,and refer-
ences to an order made by a court or a Judge shall be construed 
as including references to a sentence, judgment or decree passed 
or made by that court or Judge. S 
38. Nothing in this Part shall affect the application to the High 
Court of Gujarat of any provisions of the Constitution, and this 
Part shall have effect subject to any provision that may be made on 
or after the appointed day with respect to that High Court by any 
Legislature or other authority having power to make such provision. 10 
PART V 
AUTHORISATION OF EXPENDITURE 
~utboriaa- 39. The Governor of Bombay may, at any time before the appoint-
lion of ex- d h' h d' fr th C l'd F penditure of ed ay, aut Oflse suc expen Iture om e onso 1 ated und of 
Gujarat the State of Gujarat as he deems necessary for a period of not more IS 
State. than six months beginning with the appointed day pending the 
sanction of such expenditure by the Legislature of the State of 
Gujarat: 
Reports 
relating to 
accoUDU of 
Bombay 
State. 
Provided that the Governor of Gujarat may, after the appointed 
day, authorise such further expenditure as he deems necessary from 20 
the Consolidated Fund of the State of Gujarat for any period not 
extending beyond the said period of six months. 
40. (1) The reports of the Comptroller and Auditor-General of 
India referred to in clause (2) of article 151 relating to the accounts 
of the State of Bombay in. respect of any period prior to the 2S 
appointed day shall be submitted to the Governor of each of the 
States of Bombay ,and Gujarat who shall cause them to be laid 
before the Legislature of the State. 
(2) The President may by order-
(a) declare any expenditure incurred out of the Consoli- 30 
dated Fund of Bombay on any service in respect of any period 
prior to the appointed day during the financial year 1960-61 or 
in respect of any earlier financial year in excess of the amount 
granted for that service and for that year as disclosed in the 
reports referred to in sub-section (1) to have been duly autho- 3S 
rised, and 
(b) provide for any action to be taken on any matter arisjng 
out of the Slid reports. 
~~owancct 41. The allowances and privileges of the Governor of Gujarat 
rr;vileges of shall. until provision in that behalf is made by Parliament by law 40 
GG°,:,crnnr of under clause (3) of article 158, be such as the President may, by U)8rat. 
order, determine. 

S5 of 1951· 
57 of 1957· 
58 of 1957. 
11 
42. (1) Section 3 of the Union Duties of Excise (Distribution) Distribution· 
Act, 1957, sections 3 and' 5 of the Estate Duty and Tax on Railway of revenue. 
Passenger Fares (Distribution) Act, 1957, section 4 of and the Second 
Schedule to the Additional Duties of Excise (Goods of Special Im-
5 portance) Act, 1957, and paragraph 3 of the Constitution (Distri-
bution of Revenues) No.2 Order, 1957, shall have effect subject to 
such modifications as are specified in the Ninth Schedule. 
(2) The total amount payable to the State of Bombay under 
the enactment~ and Order referred to in sub-section (1) in respect 
10 of the part of the financial year 1960-61 beginning with the appointed 
day and the financial year 1961-62 shall be reduced by a sum of 602 
lakhs of rupees and 614 lakhs of rupees, respectively and the total 
amount payable to the State of Gujarat under those enactments and 
Order in respect of each of those periods shall be correspondingly 
15 increased. 
PART VI 
ApPORTIONMENT OF ASSETS AND LIABILITIES 
43. The provisions of this Part shall apply in relation to the Application 
apportionment of the assets and liabilities of the State of Bombay of Part. 
20 immediately before the appointed day. 
44. (1) Subject to the other provisions of this Part, all land and Lut and 
all stores, articles and other goods belonging to the State of Bombay goo 8. 
shall,-
(a) if within the transferred territory, pass to the State of 
Gujarat; or 
(b) in any other case, remain the property of the State of 
Bombay: 
Provided that where the Central Government is of opinion that 
any goods or class of goods should be distributed otherwise than 
30 according to the situation of the goods, the Central Government 
may issue such directions as it thinks fit for a just and equitable 
distribution of the goods and the goods shall remain the property 
of the State of Bombay or, as the case may be, pass to the State of 
Gujarat, accordingly. 
3S (2) Any such stores of the State of Bombay as are referred to 
in the Tenth Schedule shall be divided between the States of 
Bombay and Gujarat in the manner specified therein. 
(3) In this section, the expression "land" includes immovable 
property of every kind and any rights in or over such property, and 
40 the expression "goods" does not include coins, bank notes and cur-
rency notes. 

TteasUry 
and bank 
balances. 
Arrean of 
taxes. 
12 
45. The total of the cash balances in all .treasuries of the State of 
Bombay and the credit balances of that State with the Reserve 
Bank of India, the State Bank of India and, the State Bank of Sau-
rashtra immediately before the appointed day shall be divided bet-
ween the States of Bombay and Gujarat according to the popu- 5 
lation ratio: • 
Provided that for the purposes of such division, there shall be 
no transfer of cash balances from any treasury to any other treasury 
and the apportionment shall be effected by adjusting the credit 
balances of the two States in the books of the Reserve Bank of India 10 
on the appointed day: 
Provided further that if the State of Gujarat has no account on 
the appointed day with the Reserve Bank of India, the adjustment 
shall be made in such manner as the Central Government may, by 
order, direct. 15 
46. The right to recover arrears of any tax or duty on property, 
including arrears of land revenue, shall belong to the State in which 
the property is situated, and the right to recover arrears of any 
other tax or duty shall belong to the State in whose territories the 
place of assessment of that tax or duty is included on the appointed 20 
day: 
Provided that any sum recovered after the appointed day in 
respect of any arrears of tax accruing during the period between 
the '1st day of January, 1960, and the 30th day of April, 1960 (both 
days inclusive) under the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956, or the25 74 of 1956. 
Bombay Sales Tax Act, 1959, shall, after deducting the cost of :t~95~~ LI 
collection thereof, be divided between the States of Bombay and 
Gujarat according to the population ratio. 
Right to. 1 recover loans 47. (1) The rIght of the State of Bombay to recover any oans 
and advan- or advances made before the appointed day to any local bodY'30 
cos. society, agriculturi&t or other person in an area within that State 
shall belong to the State in which that area is included on that day. 
(2) The right of the State of Bombay to recover any loans or 
advances made before the appointed day to any person or insti-
tution outside that State shall continue to belong to the State of3S 
Bombay: 
advance shall be divided between the States of Bombay -and Gujarat 
advance shall be divided between the States of Bombay and Gujarat 
according to the population ratio. 

13 
48. (1) Out of the investments of the State of Bombay made Credits in 
before the appointed day in the cash balance investment account certain 
of the State, such securities of the value of ten crores of rupees, as fUI~ds. 
the Central Government may by order specify, shall pass to the 
S State of Gujarat in connection with the construction of a capital for 
that State; and the remaining investments in the said account shall 
be divided between the States of Bombay and Gujarat according to 
the population ratio. 
(2) The investments of the State of Bombay immediately before 
10 the appointed day in the State Famine Relief Fund, the State Road 
Fund, the Fund for Development Schemes, the Insurance l"und, the 
Bombay State Milk Fund, the Securities Adjustment Reserve Fund 
and any other general fund and the sums at the credit of that State: 
in the Central Road Fund shall be divided between the States of 
1 S Bombay and Gujarat according to the population ratio. 
(3) The investments of the State of Bombay immediately before 
the appointed day in the Dangs District Reserve Fund, the Port 
Reserve Fund, the Port Development Fund and the Anand Institute 
Fund shall pass to the State of Gujarat and the investments in any 
20 other special fund the objects of which are confined to a local area 
shall belong to the State in which that area is included on the 
appointed day. 
(4) The investments of the State of Bombay immediately before 
the appointed day in any private commercial or industrial under-
25 taking, in so far as such investments have not been made or are 
deemed not to have been made from the cash balance investment 
account, shall pass to the State in which the principal seat of busi-
ness of the undertaking is located. 
(5) Where any body corporate constituted under a Central Act, 
30 State Act or Provincial Act for the State of Bombay or any par'. 
thereof has, by virtue of the provisions of Part II, become an inter-
State body corporate, the investments in, or loans or advances to, 
any such body corporate by the State of Bombay made before the 
appointed day shall, save as otherwise expressly provided by or 
35 under this Act, be divided between the States of Bombay and Guja-
rat in the same proportion in which the assets of the body cor-
porate are divided under the provisions of Part VII. 
49. (1) Out of the investments in the cash balance investment Speciui 
account which remain with the State of Bombay after giving effect Revenue 
40 to the provisions of section 48, such securities of the value of 1420 ~~ve in 
lakhs of rupees as the Central Government may by order specify Gu;nrar. 
shall stand transferred to the State of Gujarat. 
2113 (B) LS-3 

14 
'(~) There shall be constituted in the State of Gujarat a Fund to 
be called the Special Revenue Reserve Fund consisting of the secu-
rities transferred to that State under sub-section (1) and such other 
securities belonging to the State of Gujarat of the value of 1,419 
lakhs of rupees as the Central Government may by order specify. 
(3) From and out of the fund constituted under sub-section 
(2), there shall be transferred as receipts in the revenue account 
s 
of the State of Gujarat in each of the financial years specified in 
column 1 of the following Table a sum set out against that year in 
column 2 thereof, and in the financial year 1969-70, the balance, if 10 
any, remaining in that fund:-
TABLE 
Financial year A mount in Zakhs 
of rupees. 
(1) (2) IS 
1962-63 612 
1963-64 585 
1964-65 561 
1965-66 526 
1966-67 433 20 
1967-68 340 
1968-69 209 
Assets and 50. (1) The assets and liabilities relating to any commercial or 
liabilities of industrial undertaking of the State of Bombay shall pass to the 
~ai~~gs~nder- State in which the undertaking is located. 25 
Puhlic debt. 
(2) Where a depreciation reserve fund is maintained by the 
State of Bombay for any such commercial or industrial undertaking, 
the securities held in respect of investments made from that fund 
shall pass to the State in which the undertaking is located. 
51. (1) The public debt of the State of Bombay attributable to 30 
loans raised by the issue of Government securities and outstanding 
with the public immediately before the appointed day shall, as from 
that day, continue to be the debt of the State of Bombay: 
Provided that-
(a) the State of Gujarat shall be liable to pay to the State 35 
of Bombay its share of the sums due from time to time for the 
servicing and repayment of the debt; and 
(b) for the purpose of determining the said share, the debt 
shall be deemeq. to be divided between the States of Bombay 
and Gujarat as if it were a debt referred to in sub·section (2) 40 
or sub-section (3), as the case may be. 

15 
(2) The public debt of the State of Bombay attributable to loans 
taken from the Central Government, the National Co-operative 
Development and Warehousing Board or the Khadi and Village 
Industries Commission or from any other source for the expres~ 
'purpose of re-Iending the same to a specific institution and out-
standing immediately before the appointed day shall,-
10 
IS 
(a) if re-Ient to any local body, body corporate or other 
institution in any local area, be the debt of the State in which 
the local area is included on the appointed day; or 
(b) if re-Ient to the Bombay State Electricity Board, the 
Bombay State Road Transport Corporation, or the Bombay 
Housing Board or any other institution which becomes an inter-
State institution on the appointed day, be divided between the 
States of Bombay and Gujarat in the same proportion in which 
the assets of such body corporate or institution are divided under 
the provisions of Part VII. 
(3) The remaining public debt of the State of Bombay attri-
butable to loans taken from the Central Government, the Reserve 
Bank of India or any other body corporate and outstanding imme-
20 diately before the appointed day shall be divided between the States 
of Bombay and Gujarat in proportion to the total expenditure on 
all capital works and other capital outlays incurred or deemed to 
have been incurred up to the appointed day in the territories included 
respectively in each of those States: 
25 Provided that .for the purposes of such division, only the expen-
diture on assets for which capital accounts have been kept shall be 
taken into account. 
Explanation.-Where any expenditure on capital works or other 
capital outlays cannot be allocated hetween the territories included 
30 in the States of Bombay and Gujarat, such expenditure shall, for the 
purposes of this sub-section, be deemed to have been incurred in 
those territories according to the population ratio. 
(4) Where a sinking fund or a depreciation fund is maintained 
by the State of Bombay for repayment of any loan raised by it, the 
3S securities held in respect of investments made from that fund shall 
be divided between the States of Bombay and Gujarat in the same 
proportion in which the total public debt is divided between the two 
States under this section. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this sub-section, the fund in 
40 the public account of the State of Bombay known as the Debt 
Redemption and Avoidance Fund shall be deemed to be a sinking 
fund. 

18 
(5) The share of the State of Gujarat in the liability on account 
of public debt apportioned under sub-section (3) shall be reduced 
by 1,419 lakhs of rupees and the share of the State of Bombay in 
such liability shall be correspondingly increased. 
(6) In this section, the expression "Government security" means , 
a security created and issued by a State Government for the pur-
pose of raising a public loan and having any of the forms specified 
in, or prescribed under, clause (2) of section 2 of the Public Debt 
Act. 1944. III of 1944. 
Fll.l3ti1w 52. (1) The liability of the State of Bombay in respect of any 10 
Dcht. floating debt of a Merged State shall be the liability of the State in 
whose territories the area of the Merged State is included on the 
appointed day. 
(2) The liability of the State of Bombay in respect of any other 
floating loan to provide short-term finance to any commercial under- IS 
taking shall be the liability of the State in whose territories the 
undertaking is located. 
Refund 01 53. The liability of the State of Bombay to refund any tax or 
tUd1l~s .:;ullc-."t-duty on property, including land revenue, collected in excess shall e In exccsa. 
be the liability of the State in which the property is situated, and 20 
the liability of the State of Bombay to refund any other tax or duty 
collected in excess ~hall be the liability of the State in whose terri-
tories the place of assessment of that tax or duty is included: 
74 of 19,6. 
80m. Act 
LI of 19'9. 
Provided that the total amount refunded after the appointed day 
by the States of Bombay and Gujarat on account of any excess 2$ 
collected in respect of any tax accruing during the period between 
the 1st day of January, 1960, and the 30th day of April, 1960 (both 
days inclusive) under the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956 or the Bom-
bay Sales Tax Act, 1959, shall, after deducting the cost of collection 
thereof, be apportioned between the two States according to the 
population ratio. 30 
DepoaitB, 54. (1) The liability of the State of Bombay in respect of any 
etc. civil deposit or local fund deposit shall, as from the appointed day, 
be the liability of the State in whose area the deposit has been made. 
(2) The liability of the State of Bombay in respect of any charit- 3S 
able or other endowment shall, as from the appointed day, be the 
liability of the State in whose area the institution entitled to the 
benefit of the endowment is locaterl or of the State to which the 
objects of the endowment~ lmder the terms thereof, are confined. 

• 
17 
51. The liability of the State of Bombay in respect of thE: pro- Provident 
vident fund account of a Government servant in service on the fund. 
appointed day shall, as from that day, be the liability of the State 
to which that Government servant is permanently allotted . 
56. The liability of the State of Bombay in respect of pensions Penliuns. 
shall pass to, or be apportioned between, the States of Bombay and 
Gujarat in accordance with the provisions contained in the Eleventh 
Schedule. 
57. (1) Where, before the appointed day, the State of Bombay Contracts. 
10 has made any contract in the exercise of its executive power for 
any purposes of the State, that contract shall be deemed to have 
been made in the exercise of the executive power,-
(4) if such purposes are, as ·from that day, exclusively pur-
poses of either the State of Bombay or the State of Gujarat, 
J S of that State; and 
(b) in any other case, of the State of Bombay; 
and all rights and" liabilities which have accrued, or may accrue, 
under any such contract shall. to the extent to which they would 
have been rights or liabilities of the State of Bombay, be rights or 
20 liabilities of the State of Bombay or the State of Gujarat, as the case 
may be: 
Provided that in any such case as is referred to in clause (b). 
the initial allocation of rights and liabilities made by this sub-section 
shall be subject to such financial adjustment as may be agreed upon 
2S between the State of BOa'lbay and the State of Gujarat or, in default 
of such agreement, as the Central Government may by order direct. 
(2) For the purposes of this section, there shall be deemed to 
be included in the liabilities which have accrued or may accrue 
under any contract-
(a) any liability to satisfy an order or award made by any 
court or other tribunal in proceedings relating to the contract; 
and ~ .... 
I (b) any liability in respect IIf expenses incurred in or in 
connection with any such proceedings. 
3S (3) This section shall have effect subject to the other provisions 
of this Part relating to the apportionment of liabilities in respect 
r1f loans, guarantees and other financial obligations; and bank balan-
ces and securities shall, notwithstanding that they partake of the 
nature of contractual rights, be dealt with under those provisions, 

Liability in 
tHf'Ce! of 
Ictlon.ble 
wrong. 
18 
58. Where, lmmediately before the appointed day, the State of 
Bombay is subject to any liability in respect of any actionable wrong 
other than breach of contract, that liability shall,-
(a) if the cause of action arose wholly within the territories 
which, as from that day, are the territories of the State of Bom- , 
bay or the State of Gujarat, be a liability of that State; and 
(b) in any other case, be initially a liability of the State 
of Bombay, but subject to such financial adjustment <US may be 
agreed upon between the States of Bombay and Gujarat or, in 
default of such agreement, as the Central Government may by 10 
order direct. 
Liability 59. Where, immediately before the appointed day, the State of 
as guarantor. Bombay is liable as guarantor in respect of any liability of a regis-
tered cooperative spciety or other person, that liability shall,-
Item. in 
IUSpensc. 
R,esiduary 
provision. 
(a) if the area of operations of such society or person is r 5 
limited to the territories which, as from that day, are the terri-
tories of the State of Bombay or of the State of Gujarat, be a 
liability of that State; and 
(b) in any other case, be initially a liability of the State of 
Bombay, subject to such financial adjustment as may be agreed 20 
upon between the States of Bombay and Gujarat or, in default 
of such agreement, as the Central Government may by order 
direct. . 4 • 
60. If any item in suspense is ultimately found to affect an asset 
or liability of the nature referred to in any of the foregoing provi- 25 
sions of this Part, it shall be dealt with in accordance with that pro-
vision. 
61. The benefit or burden of any asset or liability of the State of 
Bombay not dealt with in the foregoing provisions of this Part shall 
pass to the State of Bombay in the first instance, subject to such 30 
financial adjustment as may be agreed upon between the States of 
Bombay and Gujarat before the 1st day of April, 1961 or, in default 
of such agreement, as the Central Government may by order direct. 
Apportion- 62. Where the States of Bombay and Gujarat agree that the 
ment of benefit or burden of any particular asset or liability should be 35 
IIss(1s or 'd d liabilities by apportioned between them in a manner other than that prOVl e 
aJ1'cemcnt• for in the foregoing provisions of this Part, then, notwithstanding 
anything contained therein, the benefit or burden of that asset or 
llabfllty shall be apportioned in the manner agreed upon. 

2!1 or 1956. 
19 
63. Where, by virtue of any of the provisions of this Part, any Power or 
of the States of Bombay and Gujarat becomes entitled to any pro- &~~~ment 
perty or obtains any benefits or becomes subject to any liability, to ord~r 
d th C t 1 G t f d 'th' , d allocation Or an e en ra overnmen, on a re erence rna e WI In a perlo adjustment 
. S of three years from the appointed day by either of the States, is of in <.:ertJin 
opinion that it is just and equitable that that property or those caSC1, 
benefits should be transferred to, or shared with, the other State or 
that a contribution towards that liability should be made by the 
other State, the said property or benefits shall be allocated in such 
10 manner between the two States, or the other State shall make to 
the State subject to the liability such contribution in respect thereof, 
as the Central Government may, after consultation with the two 
State Governments, by order determine, 
64. All sums payable either by the State of Bombay or by the Certai~ 
I S State of Gujarat to the other State or by the Central Government to ~penb~lture 
either of those States, by virtue of the provisions of this Act, shall C'h3rae~ on 
be charged on the Consolidated Fund of the State by which such ~~~d~lidatC;.l 
sums are payable or, as the case may be, the Consolidated Fund of 
20 
India. 
PART VII 
PROVISIONS AS TO CERTAIN CORPORATIONS 
65, (1) The following bodies corporate constituted for 
of Bombay, namely:-
(a) the State Electricity Board constituted under 
tricity Supply Act, 1948; and 
the State Provitiona ns 
to Bombay 
State Eleetti-
cit yBo ardiUld 
the Elec- State Ware-
housina Cor-
poration. 
(b) the State Warehousing Ccrporation established under 
the Agricultural Produce (Development and Warehousing) 
Corporations Act, 1956, 
shall, as from the appointed day, continue to function in those 
30 areas in respect of which they were functioning immediately before 
that day, subject to the provisions cf this section and to such direc-
tions as may, from time to time, be issued by the Central Govern-
ment. 
(2) Any directions issued by the Central Government under 
35 sub-section (1) in respect of, the Board or the Corporation shaH in-
clude a direction that the Act under which the Board or the Cor-
poration was constituted shall, in its application to that Board or 
Corporation, have effect subject to such exceptions and modifica-
tions as the Central Government thinks fit. 

(j) The Board or the Corporation referred to in sub-section (1) 
shall cease to function as from, and shall be deemed to be dissolved 
on, the 1st day of October, 1960, or such earlier date as the Central 
Government may, by order, appoint; and upon such dissolution, its 
assets, rights and liabilities shall be apportioned between the State ., 
of Bembay and the State of Gujarat in such manner as may be 
agreed upon between them within one year of the dissolution of 
the Board or the Corporation, as the case may be, or if no agree-
ment is reached, in such manner as the Central Government may 
by order determine. 10 
(4) Nothing in the preceding prOVlSIOns of this section shall be 
.!onstrued as preventing the Government of the State of Bombay 
or, as the case may be, the Government of the State of Gujarat 
from constituting, at any time on or after the appointed day, a 
State Electricity Board or a State WarehOUSing Corporation for IS 
that State under the provisions of the Act relating to such Board 
or Corporation; and if such a Board cr Corporation is so constituted 
in either of the States before the dissolution of the Board or the 
Corporation referred to in sub-section (1) ,-
(a) provision may be made by crder of tke Central Gov- 20 
ernment enabling the new Board or the new Corporation to 
take over from the existing Board or Corporation all or any 
of its undertakings, assets, rights and liabilities in that State, 
and 
(b) upon the dissolution of the existing Board or Corpora- 2, 
tion, any assets, rights and liabilities which would otherwise 
have passed to that State by or under the provisions of sub-
section (3) shall pass to the new Board or the new Corpora-
tion instead of to that State. 
66. If it appears to the Central Government that the arrange- 30 
ConlJnU3n\:C . . 
of arranle- ment in regard to the generatIOn el' supply of electrIC power or the 
menud in supply of water for any area or in regard to the execution of any rqar to . ..' ,cner:.tion project for such generatIOn or supply has been or IS hkely to be 
~rct e1ec~~!jIY "modified to the disadvantage of that area by reason of the fact 
power lind that it is, by virtue of the provisions of Part II, outside the State in 35 
~':';: of whkh the power stations and other installations for the generation 
and supply of such power, or the catJ;:hment area, reservoirs and 
other works for the supply of water, as the case may be, are located 
the Central Government may give such directions as it deems 
proper to the State Government or other authority concerned for 40 
the maintenance, so far as practicable, of the previQUI arrlUleement. 

11 
ft. (1) Thf Bombay State Ffnanclal Corporation established Pron,lone 
':i of 1951. under the State Financlal Corporations Act, 1M! shall, as from the ~~y to ~~-: 
appointed day, continue to function in those areas in respect of Financial. 
which it was functioning immediately before that day, subject to CorporatlOD. 
5 the provis~ons of this section and to such directions as may, from 
time to time, be issued by the Central Government. 
(2) Any directions issued by the Central Government under 
sub-section (1) in respect of the Corporation shall include a direc-
tion that the said Act, in its application to the Cm-poration, shall 
10 have effect subject to such exceptions and modifications as may 
be specified in the direction. 
(3) A general meeting of the Corporation shall be convened, in 
accordance with the rules to be made in this behalf by the Central 
Government, by the Board thereof before the 31st day of July, 
IS 1960, or within such further time as the Central Government may 
allow, for the consideration of a scheme for the reconstitution or 
reorganisation or dissolUtion, as the case may be, of the Corpora-
tion, including proposals regarding the fonnation of new corpo-
ration'l, and the transfer thereto of the assets, rights and liabilities 
20 of th~ existing Corporation, and if such a scheme is approved at 
the general meeting by a resolution passed by a majority of the 
shareholders present and voting, the scheme shall be submitted to 
the Central Government for its sanction. 
(4) If the scheme is sanctioned by the Central Government 
25 either without modifications or with modifications which are ap-
proved at a general meeting, the Central Government shall certify 
the scheme, and upon such certification, the scheme shall, notwith-
standing anything to the contrary contained in any law for the 
time being in force, be bindinl! on the corporations affected by the 
30 scheme as well as the shareholders and creditors thereof. 
(5) If the scheme is not so approved or sanctioned, the Central 
Government may refer the scheme to such Judge of the High Court 
of Bombay as may be nominated in this behalf by the Chief Justice 
thereof, and the decision of the Judge in regard to the scheme shall 
35 be final and shall be binding on the Corporations affected by the 
scheme as well as the shareholders and creditors thereof. 
88. In the RoacLTransport Corpor.ations . Act, 1950, in section Ammf..m.. 
47A,- of ACC64 0 .f 
19JO. 
(a) in sub·seetion· (1) ,-
(i) far the words, letters and figures, "the whole Of 
any pert of a State in' reaped at which 8 CorporatiOJ1 WIt. 
aua ~) x..s.-.. 

lpecbl pro-
"Iioll for 
aar CoancU 
of Glljarat. 
.... ~ ... " . " '" 
·immediately before the 1st day .of November,. .1958," the 
words" "or any other enactment relating to reorganisation 
of States, the whole or any part of a State in respect of" 
which a Corporation was, immediately before the day on" 
which the reorganisation takes place," shall be substituted; S 
(ii) in the Explanation, for clause (i), the following 
clause shall be substituted, namely:-
.. (i) in relation to the Bombay State Road Trans-
port Corporation, shall mean the Government of the 
State of Bombay or of Gujarat as formed under the Ie 
Bombay Reorganisation Act, 1960;"; 
(b) in sub-section (3), in clause (f), after the wards and 
ftgures "the States Reorganisation Act, 1956", the words "or 
'any other enactment relating to reorganisation of States" shall 
be inserted. " IS 
... (1) In the In~an Bar Councill Act, 1926,- 31 of 191~. 
(a) in section 4,-
(i) to sub-section (2), the following Explanation shall 
be added, namely:-
"Explanation.-For the purpose of election to the 2e 
Bar Council for the High Court of Gujarat, the period 
of ten years aforesaid shall be computed after taking 
into account the period for which the person concerned 
was entitled as of right to practise in the High Court of 
Bombay before the 1st day of May, 1960."; •. ___ 2S 
(ii) for the proviso to sub-section (4), the following 
proviso shall be substituted, namely:-
"Provided that the Advocates-General of Weat 
Bengal, Madras, Bombay and Gujarat shall be Chair-
men e:c-ofJicio, respectively, of the Bar Councils con- 3e 
stituted for the High Courts af those States."; 
(b) after section 5, the following section shall be inserted, 
" ... aamely:-
.. ~ .',' .-.... . 
A~ ~' ~: ; ... ~: -~ " :.: : :"5A~ :N ot'C'tithstandtng'~ arijth.ing::Q{)ritain:ecf~ in"' thie Ad, 
r:-~!-'" the Chief Justice of the High Court of Gujarat shall ncmii-1$ 
IIIth Coari. nate the members of the first· Bar Council under this Act 
. for the.l~lgh Court o~ Gujax:at ~d the members. so nomina- . 
: .. ~ ,!lij!~t~~'~: in ~m~_ ~'?I: ; •. .,.~od. c4. ~el!~. ~th;I:~. 

,for 15139. 
• 
(%) The assets and liabilities of the Bar Council for ~he HiBh 
Court of Bombay shall be divided between· the Bar Councils for 
the High Courts of Bombay and Gujarat in such manner as may 
be agreed upon, and in default of such agreement, as may be direc-
~ ted by the Attorney-General for India. 
70. (1) Save as otherwise expressly provided by the foregoing General Pro. 
provisions of this Part, where any body corporate constituted under vilion 91 .. 
• Central Act, State Act or Provincial Act for the State of Bombay :;::.zCNII. 
or any part thereof has, by virtue of the previsions of Part II, be-
iO come an inter-State body corporate, then, the body corporate shall, 
l
as from the appointed day, continue to function and operate in 
those areas in respect of which it was functioning and cperating 
immediately before that day, subject to such directions as may 
. from time to time be issued by the Central Government, until other 
I ~Jprovision is made by law in respect of the said body corporate. 
, (2) Any directions issued by the Central Government under 
sub-section (1) in respect of any such body corporate shall include 
• direction that any law by which the said body corporate is gov-
erned shall, in its application to that body corporate, have effect 
subject to such exceptions and modifications as may be specified 
JQ in the direction. 
71. In the Inter-State Corporations Act, 1957, in the preamble, in Amendment 
section 2, in clause <f) of sub-section (2) of section 4 and in section ~!:;.~~.!;S of 
5, after the words and figures "the States Reorganisation Act, 1956'\ 
3S wherever they occur, the words "or of any other enactment relat-
ing to reorganisation of States" shall be inserted. 
r" 
72. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 63 of the TemponrJ 
'. prUV1I10ni al 
Motor Vehicles Act, 1939, a permIt granted by the State Transport to condra-
Authority of Bombay or any Regional Transport authority in that anee of. cer-. flaJn ellllUrl 
30 State shall, if such permit was, immediately before the appointed road tranl-
day, valid and effective in any area in the transferred territory, be port popmiu. 
deemed to continue to be valid and effective in that 
area after that day subject to the provisions of that Act 
as for the time being in force in that area; and it shall not be neces-
aary for any such permit to be countersigned by the State Trans-
~~ port Authority. of Gujarat or any Regional Transpcxrt Authority 
therein for the purpose of validating .it for use in such area: 
. : Provided that the Ceritral Government may, a~r. cO.Jl.!Plil~ation 
'~'frlth the Stat!! Governmen_ of Bomba1 and Gujarat, - Ida- to, 
I: 

/ 
24 
amend or vary the conditions attached to the permit by the AutJut. 
rityby which the permit was granted. 
(2) No tolls, entrance fees or other charges of a like nature shall 
be levied after the appointed day in respect of any transport vehicle 
fer its operations in the State of Gujarat under any such permit, if • 
such vehicle was, immediately before that day, exempt from the 
payment of any such toll, entrance fees or other charges for its 
operations in the transferred'territory: 
Provided that the Central Government may, after consultation 
with the State Governments of Bombay and Gujarat, authorise the 10 
levy of any such tell, entrance fees or other charges, as the case 
may be. 
Sreclal PrO- 73. Where on account of the reorganisation of the State of 
~t.: reLt- Bombay under this Act, any body corporate constituted under a 
retrenchment Central Act, State Act or Provincial Act, any co-operative society 15 
compenu- . t d d 1 I t' t t" t' tlon in eer- regls ere un er any aw re a 109 0 co-opera lve soele les or any 
tain Calel. commercial or industrial undertaking of that State is reconstituted 
or reorganised in any manner whatsoever or is amalgamated with 
any other body corporate, co-operative society or undertaking, or, 
is dissolved, and in consequence of such reconstitution, reorganisa- zo 
tion, amalgamation or dissolution, any workman employed by such 
body corporate or in any such co-operative society or undertaking, 
is transferred to, or re-employed by, any other body corporate, co-
operative society or undertaking, then notwithstanding anything 
eontained in section 25F of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, such 25 14 of 1947. 
transfer or re-employment shall not entitle him' to any compensa-
tion under that section: 
Provided that-
(a) the terms and conditions of service applicable to the 
workman after such transfer or re-employment are not less 30 
favourable to the workman than those applicable to himim-
mediately before the transter or re-employment; 
(b) the employer in relation to the body corporate, the co-
operative society or the undertaking where the workman is 
transferred or re-employed is, by agreement or otherwise, 35 
legally liable to pay to the workman, in the event of his re-
trenchment, compensation under section 25F of the Industrial 
Disputes Act, 1947 cn the basis that his service has been con-
tinuous and has not been interrupted by _ the transfer or re-
.,toyzqent. " flJ 
14 of 1947-'a 

25 
1'. Where the assets, rights and liabilities of any body corporate Special pro. 
carrying on any business are, under the provisions of this Part, vilion al to 
transferred to any other bodies corporate which after the transfer Income-tas. 
carry on the same business, the losses of profits or gains sustained 
S by the body corporate first mentioned which, but for such transfer, 
would have been allowed to be carried forward and set off in ac-
cordance with the provisions of section 24 of the Indian Income-tax 
11 of 19U. Act, 1922, shall be apportioned amongst the transferee bodies cor-
porate in accordance with the rules to be made by the Central 
10 Government in this behalf and, upon such apportionment, the share 
of loss allotted to each transferee body corporate shall be dealt 
with in accordance with the provisions of section 24 of the said 
Act, as if the transferee body corporate had itself sustained such 
loss in a business carried on by it in the years in which these losses 
15 were sustained. 
75. The Government of the State of Bombay or, as the case may Continuance 
be, the Government of the State of Gujarat shall, in respect of the i~ fa~;~~r: 
institutions specified in the Twelfth Schedule located in that State, ~t;;te inltitu-
continue to provide facilities to the people of the other State which tiO.l8. 
3C shall not, in any respect, be less favourable to such people than 
what were being provided to them before the appcinted day, for 
such period and upon such terms and conditions as may be agreed 
upon between the two State Governments before the 1st day of 
October, 1960 or, if no agreement is reached by the said date, as may 
25 be fixed by order of the Central Government. 
PART VIII 
PROVISIONS AS TO SERVICES 
16. (1) In this section, the expression "State cadre"-
(a) in relation to the Indian Administrative Service, has the Provisions 
meaning assigned to it in the Indian Administrative Service ~t~~i!O 
(Cadre) Rules, 1954, and Service •• 
(b) in relation to the Indian Police Service, has the meaning 
assigned to it in the Indian P(.lice Service (Cadre) :n'lles, 1954. 
(2) In place of the cadres of the Indian Administrative Service 
35 and the Indian Police Service e~isting in the State of Bomhay imme-
diately before the appointed day, there shall, as from that day, be 
two separate cadres, one for the State of Bombay and the other for 
the State of Gujarat, in respect of each of these services. 
(3) The initial strength and composition of each of the State cadres 
#/J shall be such as the Central Government 1l'Ull' by order neterDlJrte be-
ro." the appointed day. 

Ie 
(f) The members of each of the said services borne on those cadr. 
for the State of Bombay immediately before the appointed day shall 
'be allocated to the State cadres of the same service for each of the 
States of Bombay and GujQ.rat in such manner and with effect from 
such date or dates as the Central Government may, by order, specify. S' 
(5) Nothing in this section shall be deemoo to affect the operation, 
after the appointed day, of the All-India Services Act, 1951, or the rulel 
made thereunder in relation to the State cadres of the said services 
constituted under !:ub-section (2) and in relation to the. members of t 
those services borne on the said cadres. Ie; 
ProvisioDi 77. (1) Every person who, immediately before the appointed day, 
:~~~~~~0ic- is serving in connE:ction with the affairs of the State of Bombay shall, 
•. as from that day, provisiooolly continue to serve in connection with 
the affairs of the State of Bombay, unless he is required, by genera] 
or special order of the Central Government, to serve provisionally in 15 
connection with the affairs of the State of Gujarat. 
(2) As soon as may be after the appointed day, the Central Govern 
ment shall, by general or special order, determine the State to which 
every person provisionally allotted to the State of Bombay or Gujarat, 
shall be finally allotted for service and the date with effect from :ac 
which such allotment shall take effect or be deemed to have taken 
effect. ,'. I~j ,till 
. L -';!ar.P"'. 
(3) Every person who is finally allotted under the provisions of 
sub-section (2) to the State of Bombay or Gujarat shall, if he is not. 
already serving therein, be made available for serving in that State 25 
from such date as may be agreed upon between the two State Govern-
ments or, in default of such agreement, as may be determined by the 
Central Government. 
(4) The Central Government may by order establish one or more 
Advisory Committees for the p~ose of assisting it in regard te>- ,5° 
(a) the division and integration of the services amons the 
State& of Bombay and Gujarat; and 
.---._---(b) the ensuring of fair and equitable treatment to all per-
sons lElffected by the provisions of this section and the proper con-
alderatjon of any representations made by such persons . . 35 
(5) The foregoing provisions of this section shaH not apply in re-
lation to any person to whom the provisiolls of section 76 apply, 
(6) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to affect, after the . 
appointed day, the operation of the provisions of Chapter I of Put . 
XIV of thf' Constitution in relation to the detet1nfnltfon of th~"coridl- ... 

29, 
tions of Rrvtce of pennns' !IIerving in connection with the etram. ot the 
State of Bombay or Gujarat: 
Provided that the conditions of service applicable immedlatelv be-
fore the ap~inted. day to the case of any perRon provisionallv or finally 
S allotted. to the State of Bombay or Gujarat Wlder,this section soo11 not 
he varied to his tiisadvantage excp.pt with the previous approval of thp 
Central Government. 
78. Every p .. rson who, immediately before the appointed day, I!: Provf.l .... 
holding or discharging the duties of any post or office in connectior ~~':'~.Cf':t 
10 with the affairs of the Stete of Bombay in any arp.a which on that day offICers I. 
falls within the State of Gujarat ~hall cot'ltinue to hold the same post IUD8 poIt. 
or ~mce in the Stab~ of (;u1;;rat anrl shall be deemad, as from that day, 
to have been duly appointed to the post or oftlce by the Government 
of, or other appropriate authority in, the State of Gujarat: 
IS Provided that nothing in this section shall bo tieemed to prevent .. 
competent authority, after the appointPd day, from passing, in relation 
to such -person, any order affecting his continuance in such post or 
oftlce.·- - ---I 
7!1. The Central Government may give such directions to the St$lt .. Power of 
. . b Ce:ttr '\ GOT-a Governments of Bombav and GUlarat es may appear to It to e nece!'C-ernmnt to 
lIarv for the purpose of vvin/t effect to the forp./toing provi!:;ions of thi!" a,lve mree-. nOnL 
PRrt and the Stat~ Government shall comply with such directions. V.'-'I 
80. (1) The Public Service Commj'lsion for the StRtp of Bombav ProYl.lon ••• 
shall. as from the apoointed day. continue to be the Public Servic,. ;'u~~~;:~ 
2S 'Commission for that Statp. with its arell. es alterPd by the provisions of vi~'e .Com-
Part n. JDl'.'On. 
(2) The report of th .. Bombay Public Service Commission as tn 
the work done bv the Commission in respect of any period prinr to thp. 
anpointed day shall be presented under clause (2) of article 323 to the 
30 Governors of Bombay and Gujarat, and the Governor of Bombay 
shall. on receipt of such report, cause a coPy thereof together with a 
memorandum explaining. as far as possible, as respects the cases, if 
any, where the advice of the Commission was not accepted, the 
reasons for such non-acceotfmce to be Jllid before the Lelric;l~ture of 
~.S the State of Bombay and it shall not be necec;sary to caURe such 
report or any such memor~ndum to be laid before the Legislative 
,Assembly of the State of Gujarat. 
,'. PART IX ' 
LEGAL AND MISCELI.ANEOUS PROVISIONS 
040 _ 8~L.ln ~~t1on 15 ,of the S1Iates Reorganisation Act, 1958- AJaen&la. 
,(i) ,in.clause (d), for the word "Mysnre". the word "Gujarat" ~~~~ 37~, 
.hall . 1){.': IU batitutec;t ~ and 

Territorial 
extent of 
la~. 
Power to 
ad~Pt laWi. 
Power to 
;o:utrue 
I~WI. 
• 
(it) in clause (e), for the words "Madras and Kerala", the 
words "Madras, Mysore and Kerala" shall be substituted. 
82. The provisions of Part II shall not be deemed to have eftected 
any change in the territories to which any law in force immediately 
before the appointed day extends or applies, and territorial references , 
in any such law to the State of Bombay shall, until otherwise provid-
ed by a competent Legislature or other competent authority, be cons-
trued as meaning the territories within that State immediately before 
the appointed day. 
83. For the purpose of facilitating the application in relation to the 10 
State of Bombay or Gujarat of any law made before the appointed day. 
the appropriate Governm~nt may, before the expiration of one year 
from that day, by order, make such adaptations and modifications of 
the kiw, whether by way of repeal or amendment, as may be neces-
sary or expedient, and thereupon evf'ry such law shall have effect I,S 
subject to the adaptations and modifications so made until altered, re-
pealed or amended by a competent Legislature or other competent 
authority. 
Explanatinn.-In this section, the expression "~pproprfate Govern-
ment" means as respects any law relating to a matter Mlumerated in 20 
the Union List. the Central Government, and as respects any other law, 
the State Government. 
84. Notwithstanding that no provision or insufficient provision has 
been Ill"3do under section 83 for the adaptation of a law made before 
the appointed day, any court, tribunal or authority, required or em- 2S 
powered to enforce such Jaw may, for the purpose of facilitating its 
appl;cation in relation to the Stqte of Bombay or Gujarat. construe the 
law in such manner, without affecting the substlBnce, as may be neces-
sary or proper in regard to the matter before the court, tribunal or 
:~uthority. 30 
p.lwer to 85. The Government of the State of Gujarat, as respects the trans- \ 
n. ~e uth~ferred territory may, by notification in th~ Official Gazette, specify the 
r~:e~~e~~~! authority, officer or person who, on or after the -appointed day, shall 
illg statuto be competent to exercise such functions exercisable under any law in 
functiOn.. force on that day as may be mentioned in that notification and such 35 
law shall have effect aecordingly. 
86. Where immediately before the appointed day, the State of Bom-
bay is a llarty to any legal proceedings with respect to any prop~rty, 
rtgbts at UabUities eubJect to apportionment between the States of 

it 
Bombay and Gujarat under this Act, the State of Gujarat which ..w; 
ceeds to, or acquires a share in, that property or those rights or liabi-
lities by virtue of any provision of this Act shall be deemed to be subs-
tituted for the State of Bombay as a party to those proceedings. or 
agded as a party thereto, as the case may be, and the proceedings may 
5 continue accordingly. 
87. (1) Every proceeding pending inunediately before the appointed Trar~ier of 
dsy b~fore a court (other than a High Court), tribunal, authonty or ~=~.pro. 
officer in any area which on that day falls within the State of Bombay 
10 shall, if it is a proceeding relating exclusively to the transferred terri-
tory, stand transferred to the correspondini court, tribunal, authority 
or officer in the State of GUjarat. 
(2) If QIly question arises as to whether any proceeding shouid 
stand transferred under sub-section (1), it shall be referred to the 
IS Hiih COl1.rt of Bombay and the decision of that Hiib Court shall be 
final. 
(3) In this section-
(a) "proceeding" includes any suit, case or appeal; BDd 
(b) "corresponding court, tribunal, authority or officer" ill the 
2.0 State of Gujarat m€6D.S-
(i) the court, tribunal, authority or officer in which, at 
before whom, the proce~ would have lain if it had been 
instituted after the appointed day; or 
(ii) in case of doubt, such court, tribunal, authority, or 
25 officer in that State. as may be determined after the appointed 
d~y by the Government of that State. or before the appointed 
day by the Government of Bombay, to be the correspond-
ing court, tribunal, authority or officer. 
88. Any person who, immediately before the appointed day, is en- Right of 
30 rolled as a pleader entitled to practise in any subordinate courts in the ple~~ ~ pra' .... e m State of Bombay shall, for a period of six months from that day, con- .:crt~ln ~alel. 
tinue to be entitled t.o practise in those courts. notwithstlUlding that 
the whole or any part of the territories within the jurisdiction of 
those courts has been transferred to the State of Gujarat. 
35 89. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwJtbstanding any- Effect of 
thing inconsistent therewith contained in any other law., pr<JViliorlof 
the Act in-
~ODIlltent 
with other 
Is",. 
90. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of thJs Power to 
Act, the President may, by order, do anything not inconsistent with r~~~~_ 
such provisions which appears to him to be necessary' or eXpedient for d"""uJ ..... 
40 the purpose of removing the difficulties. 
2113 (B) LS-5. 

30· 
Powec to 'I. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the omctai 
mate rulII. Gazette, make rules to give effect to the provisions of this Act. 
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid as 800,n as may 
be after it is made before each House of Parliament while it is in 
session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one 5 
session OJ; in two successive sessions, and if before the expiry of the 
session in which it is so laid or the session immediately following, both 
Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses 
agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have 
eftect only in such modified fonn or be of no effect, as the case may be, 10 
so however that any such modifications or annulment shall be with-
out prejudice to the validity of e.nything previously done under that 
rule. 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
[See section 3(1) (b)] 
TEIIRrroJw:s TRANSn:R!U!:D FROM THE STATE OF BOMBAY TO THE 
STATE 0 .. GUJARA'l 
(AftJI reference in. thil Schedule to a census code n.umber in. relation. 
to q t>illage mea",. the code n.umber asrigned to that village in the 
IS 
cen&tLS of 1951). ~o 
PART I 
Umbergaon taluka of Thana District 
Name of Village Cen.aus Code No, 
·Umbergaon 1 
Kalgaon 2 
Kalai 3 
Govad 4 
Tadgaon 6 
Dehart 7 
Nargol 8 30 
Phansa (whole) 9 
Mamakwada 11 
·Maroli 12 
Saronda 13 
Acbhari \4 

31 
Na7'lle of Village C~ Code No. 
Angaon 15 
Abu 1~ 
Eklahare 17 
5 Kachigaon 18 
Bhati Karambeli 19 
Karambl!li Pali 20 
Karambele 21 
* Khattahwda 22 
10 Ghimse Kakaria 23 
Jamburi 24 
Tembhi 25 
Tumb 28 
I~ Dahad 1:1 
Nahuli 28 
PaIgaon zt 
Pali ao 
Punat 11. 
Borigaon Tarf Kachipon 32 
Borlai J3 
Bhilad Sf 
Manda as 
Manikpur H. 
Mohan . a1 
25 Vankas 38 
Valvada 38 
Shirgaon 40 
Sanjan 41 
Sand O. 
30 SOlsumba ..., 
Humran 
'" Dehali 48 
Talwada G 
Dhanoli 50 
35 Nandgaon 51 
Malav . '2 
Anklas S5 

Name of Village 
Zaroli 
Nagvas 
Census Code No. 
rtI 
70 
Note: *includes towns of the same name. 
PART n 
West Khandesh District 
Nawapur taluka 
Name of Village 
Abhankuwa (Forest) 
Anandpur 
Cen.nu COtW Nf!I 
Babarghat 
Bhadbunja 
Bhint Bk. 
Bhint Khurd. 
Cbacharbunde 
Chadhavbunde (Forest) 
Chhapti 
Chikhli (Forest) 
Dhaj 
Ha.ripur 
Jamald 
Jamane 
Kachali 
Kamalapur 
Kataswan 
Khabade 
Kolmmbe (Forest) 
Manikpur 
Mirkot 
Mogarbara (Forest) 
Mograni (Forest) 
Nanchhal 
Narayanpur 
Nurabad 
Pakhari 
2 
3 
e 
11 
12 
18 
11» 
• 70 
72 
D 
77 
82 
83 
10,) 
IS 
20 

Name of Village Cemus Code No. 
Parchuli 86 
Pethapur 89 
Sak!arde (Digar) 1M 
5 Sue OR 
Shelud 101 
StUldarpur 1M 
Thuti 108 
Uchhal 111 
10 VadadheKd. 115 
Vadapatal 117 
Zaranpada 123 
Na1tdurbar talukn. 
Adade 2 
IS Anturli 5 
Arkunda (Forest) 
BhUbhavali 18 
Bhiljamboli 2() 
Borathe 25 
~o Borde D 
Chinchode 28 
Chorgaon (Deserted) 28A 
Devhale 11 
Dev Mogra-Gaibi Umber (Forest village Coupe Nos. 1, 2 
I 
~s and 20 of felling series XX 
and Coupe Nos. 1 to 9 of 
felling series XXI). 
Oamadi Sf 
Gujerpur a 
30 Harduli (Digar) 44 
Hatnoor (Digar) 46 
Hingani (Digar) 48 
Kavithe .63 
Khairave Kd. T. Dhanore 65 
35 Khodade • 

Name of Village C'en.BU8 Cod'! No. 
Kothali Budruk 7'1 
Lakhmikhede 79 
Lekurwali 80 
Mubarakpur 88 
Nasarpur 81 
Newale 96 
Nizar 99 
Pimplod T. Niaar 108 
Raigad 109 
Ranikhadkale (Deserted) 112A 
Sarvale 115 
Shale 119 
Shelu 121 
Sulvade 125 
Tapikbadkale 128 
Vadati 138 
Vue 143 
Vellllde 148 
Vy:awal 1M 
PART III 
West Khande~h District 
Akkalkuwa taluka 
Name of Village 
Akkalkuva B~ruk 
Anghat 
Barktura 
Bhogwad 
Chatwad 
ChoU Korali (Deserted) 
Davariamba 
Dongaripade (R) 
Gangtha 
Itwai 
Cenaus Code No. 
1 
8A 
"-
21 
D 
3&A 
IT 
44 
SO 
118 
10 
IS 
It"I 
2 

Ii 
Name of Village Cen.tU8 Code No. 
Javali ea 
Kenvada 78 
Kevadamoi 79 
S Khairpada ~ 
Khanore 85 
Khokwad G1 
Koktipada M 
Kolwan 86 
10 Langadi UK 
Medhi 111 
Navagaon 121 
Nevadi (Amba) 126 
Palaswada 132 
IS Pana 133. .. 
Parod 135 
Parodi 136 
Petipada 138 
Pimpripada 142 
Ranipur 150 
Ranjaruwad 152 
Rundigavan 156 
Uman 176 
p'mja 175 
25 Umran 180 
Vadgav 189 
Zapa-amli 198 
Ziribeda un 
TaZoda taluka 
30 Akkalutar 1 
Amode Tarf Satone II 
Amode T. Talods 7 
Asapur 10 
Aahrave 11 

·tJ ame oj Village Cemua ernie rfo. 
Ashte T. Budhawal 13 
Bahurupe 14 
Balade 18 
Balambe 11 
Bej 28 
Bhamsal 21 
Borikuva • Chirmati 31 
Chokhiamali 31 TO 
Fulwadi 91 
Gadid 41 
Gorue 44 
Hatode 47 
Hoi .a 15 
Kelani Sf' 
Kondaraj 84 
Kukurmunde 8R 
Mohammadpur (Deserted) 70A 
Matawal 73 
Mendhpur 74 
Modale 77 
Morambe ItO 
NimbhorP 1M 
Fmlibare 87 
~s 
Pati 88 
Pimplas 91. 
Pisawar .. 
Raj pur g' . . ' 
Ranaichi 98 30 
Sadgaven 106 
Satolp ]08 
Torande 120 
Tul8e 122 
Ubha4 123 35 

TO 
15 
20 
30 
37 
Name of Village 
Untavad 
Varpade 
Vesgaon 
Zumkati 
C'ensus Code rid. 
126 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE 
(See section 7) 
PART I 
128 
129 
131 
Bombay Members of the Council of States 
Members whose term of ofJi.ce expires on the 2nd April, 1962-
1. Shri P. N. Rajabhoj. 
2. Dr. Waman Sheodas Barlingay. 
3. Shri T. R. Deogirikar. 
4. Shri G. R. Kulkarni. 
5. Shri Dhairyashilrao Yeshwantrao Pawar. 
6. Shri M. D. Tumpalliwar. 
Members whose term of of}i.ce expires on the 2nd April, 19M. 
7. Shri Babubhai M. Chinai. 
8. Shri Ramrao Madhaorao Deshmukh. 
9. Shri Bhaurao Dewaji Khobaragade. 
10. Shri Sonusing Dhansing PatH. 
11. Shri Lalji Pendse. 
12. Shri Abid Ali. 
PART II 
Gujarat Members of the Council of States. 
Members whose term of ofJi.ce expires on the 2nd April, 1982. 
1. Shri Jadvaji Keshavji Modi. 
2. Professor Dr. Raghu Vira. 
3. Vacant: (Seat of a deceased sitting member). 
Members whose term of ofJi.ce expires on the 2nd April, 19M. 
4. Shri Rohit Manushankar Dave. 
5. Shri Khandubhai K. Desai. 
6. Shri Dahyabhai Vallabhbhai Patel 
2113 (B) LS-6. 

... 38 "' 
THE THIRD SCHEDULE 
(See section 11) 
AMENDMENTS TO THE FIRS'l' Scm:oULE TO THE DELIMITATION OF PARLIA-
MENTARY AND AssDlBLY CONSTITUENCIES ORDER, 1956. 
(1) For the heading "4-BOMBAY", substitute "4-GUJARAT". S 
(2) In entry 111, after the word "Pardi", imert the word "Umber-
gaon" and for the words "Surat district", substitute the words "Surat 
district; and Dangs district". 
(3) After entry 111, add the following note:-
"Not e.-Any reference in this Part to Broach, Surat or 10 
Dangs district or to Songadh or Umbergaon taluka of Surat dis-
trict or to Sagbara taluka of Broach district shall be taken to 
mean the area comprised in that district or taluka, as the case 
may be, on the 1st day of May, 1960.". 
(4) Immediately before entry 112, insert the heading "4 A- IS 
BOMBAY". 
(5) In entry 129, omit the words "Dangs district;". 
(6) To the note after entry 148, add:-
"(3) Any reference in this Part to Thana or West Khandesh 
district or to Nawapur, Nandurbar, Akkalkuwa or Taloda taluka 20 
of West Khandesh district shall be taken to mean the area com-
prised. in that district or taluka, as the case may be, on the l:o;t 
day of May, 1960.". 
(7) In the Appendix-
(a) for the heading "II-Bombay", substitute "I1-Gujarat"; 25 
and 
(b) immediately before the sub-heading "KOLABA District", 
insert the heading "I1-A BOMBAY". 
THE FOURTH SCHEDULE 
(See section 14) 
AMENDMENTS TO THE SECOND SCHEDULE TO THE DELIMITATION OF 
PARLIAMENTARY AND ASSEMBLY CONSTITUENCIES ORDER, 1956. 
(1) For the heading "4-BOMBAY", substitute "4-GUJARAT". 
(2) In entry 103. for the words "Sagbara mahal", substitute 
"Sagbara taluka". 35 

39 
(3) For the sub-heading "SURAT DISTRICT" appearing before 
entry 106, substitute the sub-heading "SURAT AND DANGS DIS-
TRICTS". 
(4) In entry 114, for the words "Bansda taluka;", substitute the 
5 words "Dangs district; Bansda taluka;". 
10 
(5) In entry 118, for the words "Pardi taluka" in column 3, sub-
stitute the words "Pardi and Umbergaon talukas". 
(6) After entry 118-
(a) add the following Note:-
"Note.-Any reference in this Part to Broach, Surat or 
Dangs district or to Sagbara taluka of Broach district or to 
Songadh or Umbergaon taluka of Surat district shall be taken 
to mean the area comprised in that district or taluka, as 
the case may be, on the 1st day of May, 1960."; 
15 (b) after the said Note, insert an Appendix reproducing 
items (1) to (33) of the existing Appendix to Part 4 of the 
Order. 
(7) Immediately before the sub-heading "GREATER BOMaA Y 
DISTRICT", insert the heading "4-A BOMBAY" to make all follow-
20 ing entries, together with the Appendix and Annexure, a separate 
Part for the State of Bombay. 
(8) Omit the asterisk mark before the sub-heading "'GREATER 
BOMBA Y DISTRICT" and foot-notes 1 and 2. 
(9) In entry 143, for the words "Dahanu and Umbergaon talukas", 
2S substitute the words "Dahanu taluka". 
(10) For the sub-heading immediately before entry 228, for the 
words "NASIK AND DANGS DISTRICTS", substitute "NASIK 
DISTRICT". 
(11) In entry 230, for the words "Peint and Surgana mahals", 
30 substitute the words "Peint mahal". 
(12) In entry 231, for the word "Dangs" in column 2, substitute 
the word "Kalwan" and for the words "Dangs district;" in column 3, 
substitute the words "Surgana mahal". 
(13) In entry 238, for the entry in column 3, substitute "Sakri and 
35 Nandurbar talukas". 
(14) In entry 239, for the entry in column 3, substitute "Nawapur 
taluka". 

(15) For the Note appearing immediately after entry 339, substi-
tute:-
"Note.-(l) Any reference in this Part to Thana or West 
Khandesh district or to Dahanu taluka of Thana district or to 
Nawapur, Nandurbar, Akkalkuwa or Taloda taluka of West S 
Khandesh district shall be taken to mean the area comprised in 
that district or taluka, as the case may be, on the 1st day of May, 
1960. 
(2) The names of the 77 census wards of Greater Bombay 
are set out in item (1) of the Appendix; and a fuller description 10 
of the Assembly constituencies Nos. 1 to 21 in tenns of roads, 
streets and other thoroughfares and of villages is given in item 
(2) of the Appendix. 
(3) The names of the villages in Banoti and Soegaon circles 
referred to in the Assembly constituencies Nos. 220 and 221, res- IS 
pectively, are set out in the Annexure to this Part.". 
(16) Renumber entries 119 to 339 as entries 1 to 221 respectively, 
and the references in those entries to items (36) to (71) and (73) to 
(79) of the Appendix as (3) to (45) respectively. 
(17) In the Appendix,- 20 
(a) omit items (1) to (33) and the sub-headings thereof; 
(b) renumber items (34) to (71) as items (1) to (38) res-
pectively; 
(e) omit item (72); 
(d) renumber items (73) to (79) as items (39) to (45) res- 2:-
peet1vely; and 
(e) in item (2) as so renumbered, renumber the references 
to Assembly constituencies Nos. 119 to 139 as Nos. 1 to 21 res-
pectively. 
THE FIFTH SCHEDULE 
(See section 20) 
AI.o::NDMENTS TO THE DELIMITATION OF COUNCIL CONSTITUENCiES 
(BoMBAY) ORDER, 1951 
In the Table, omit 
(a) the entries relating to-
(i) Gujarat (Graduates) constituency; 
(it) Gujarat (Teachers) constituency; 
3S 

, 
and 
(iii) Saurashtra (Local Authorities) constituency; 
(iv) Gujarat North (Local Authorities) constituency; 
(v) Gujarat South (Local Authorities) constituency; 
(b) the word "Dangs" wherever it occurs in column 2. 
THE SIXTH SCHEDULE 
(See section 21) 
SrrrING MEMBERS WHO SHALL CEASE TO BE MEMBERS OF THE BoMBAY 
LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL 
10 (i) Members representing any of the five Constituencies specified 
in item (a) of the Fifth Schedule. 
iii) The following members elected by the members ell the 
Bombay Legislative Assembly, namely:-
1. Shri Dadoobhai Amin. 
IS 2. Shri Chandrakant Chhotalal Mehta. 
3. Shri Gulam Haider Walimohammed Momin 
4. Shrimati Madinabai Akbarbhai Nagori. 
5. Shrimati Bhanumatiben ManUal Parekh. 
6. Shrima1i Anasuya Chhotalal Shah. 
20 7. Shrimati Jyotsnaben Bahusukhram Shukla. 
THE SEVENTH SCHEDULE 
(See section 24) 
AMENDMENTS OF THE CONSTITUTION (ScHEDULED CASTES) ORDER, 1950 
(l) For paragraph 4, substitute:-
2S "4. Any reference in this Order, except Parts IV and IV -A of 
the Schedule, to a State or to a district or other territorial divi-
sion thereof, shall be construed as a reference to the State, dis-
trict or other territorial division, constituted as from the 1st day 
of November, 1956; and any reference in Parts IV and IV-A of 
30 the Schedule to a State or to a district or other territorial divi-
sion thereof shall be construed as a reference to the State, dis-
trict or other territorial division constituted as from the 1st day 
of May, 1960", 

(2) In Part IV,-
(4) in paragraph 1, for the words "Bhir, Osmanabad, Halar, 
Madhya Saurashtra, Zalawad, Gohilwad, Sorath and Kutch", 
substitute "Bhir and Osmanabad"; 
(b) in paragraph 2, omit the word "Dangs"; 5 
(c) omit paragraphs 9 and 10. 
(3) After Part IV, insert the following:-
"PART IVA. Gujarat 
1. Throughout the State except the districts of Jamnagar, Rajkot, 
Surendranagar, Bhavnagar, Junagadb and Kutch:- 10 
1. Ager 
2. Bakad or Bant 
3. Bhambi, Bhambhi, Asadaru, Asodi, Chamadia, Chamar, 
Chambhar, Chamgar, Haralayya, HaraH, Khalpa, Machigar, 
Mochigar, Madar, Madig, Telegu Mochi, Kamati Mochi, Rani-I, 
gar, Rohidas, Rohit or Sam gar 
4. Bhangi, Mehtar, Olgana, Rukhi, Malkana, Halalkhor, Lalbegi, 
Balmiki, Korar or Zadmalli 
5. Chalvadi or Cbannayya 
6. Chenna Dasar or Holaya Dasar 20 
7. Dhor, Kakkayya or Kankayya 
8. Garoda PI' Garo 
9. Halleer 
10. Halsar, Haslar, HuIasvar or Halasvar 
11. Holar or Valhar 
12. Holaya or Holer 
13. Lingader 
14. Mahar, Taral or Dhegu Megu 
15. Mahyavanshi, Dhed, Vankar or Maru Vankar 
16. Mang, Matang or Minimadig 
17. Mang.Garudd 
18. Meghval or Menghvar 
19. Mukri 
20. Nadia or Had! 
21. Pasi 
22. Shenva, Chenva, Sedma or Rawat 
23. Tirgar or Tirbanda 
24. Turi. 

2. In the district of Dangs, Mochi. 
3. In the districts of Jamnagar, Rajkot, Surendranagar, Bhav-
nagar and Junagadh:-
1. Bawa (Dedh) or Dedh-Sadhu 
5 2. Bhangi or Rukhi 
3. Chamadia 
4. Chamar, Nalia or Rohit 
5. Dangashia 
6. Garoda 
10 7. Gannatang 
8. Hadi 
9. Meghwal 
10. Senva 
11. Shemalia 
IS 12. 'Thori 
13. Turi 
14. Turi-Barot or Dedh-Barot 
15. Vankar, Dhedh or Antyaj 
4. In the district of Kutch:-
20 1. Bhangi 
25 
30 
2. Chamar 
3. Garoda 
4. Meghwal 
5. Turi 
6. Turi-Barot 
THE EIGHTH SCHEDULE 
(See section 25) 
AMENDMENT OF THE CONSTITUTION (SCHEDULED TRIBES) ORDU, 1950 
(1) For paragraph 3, substitute:-
"3. Any reference in this Order, except Parts IV and IV -A of 
the Schedule. to a State or to a district or other territorial divi-
sion thereof, shall be construed as a reference to the State, dis-
trict or other territorial division, constituted as from the 1st day 
or November, 1956; and any reference in Parts IV and IV-A of 

the Schedule to a State or to a district or other territorial divi-
sion thereof shall be construed as a reference to the State, dis-
trict or other territorial division, constituted as from the 1st day 
of May, 1960.". 
(2) In Part IV,-
(a) in paragraph 1, for the words "Bhir, Osmanabad, Halar, 
Madhya Saurashtra, Zalawad, Gohilwad, Sorath and Kutch", 
substitute "Bhir and Osmanabad". 
(b) Omit paragraphs 2, 3, 9, 10, 11 and 12. 
(3) After Part IV, insert the following:-
"PART IV A.-Gujarat 
1. Throughwt the State except the districts of Jamnagar, Rajkot, 
Surendranagar, Bhavnagar, Junagadh and Kutch:-
1. BanIa 
s 
10 
2. Bavacha or Bamcha J 5 
3. Bhil, including Bhil Garasia, Dholi BhiI, Dungri Bhil, Dungri, 
Garasia, Mewasi Bhil, Rawal Bhil, Tadvi Bhil, Bhagalia, Bhi~ 
lala, Pawra, Vasava and Vasave 
4. Chodhara 
5. Dhanka, including Tadvi, Tetaria and Valvi 20 
6. Dhodia 
7. Dubla, including Talavia or Halpati 
8. Gamit or Gamta or Gavit, including Mavchi, Padvi, Vasava, 
Vasave and Valvi 
9. Gond or Rajgond 25 
10. Kathodi or Katkari, including Dhor Kathodi or Dhor Katkari 
and Son Kathodi or Son Katkari 
11. Kokna, Kokni, Kulma 
12. Koli, Dhof, Tokre Koli, Kolcha or Kolgha. 
13. Naikda or Nayaka, including Cholivala Nayaka, Kapadia 30 
Nayaka, Mota Nayaka and Nana Nayaka 
14. Pardhi, including Advichincher and Phanse Pardhi 
15. Patella 
16. Pomla 
17. Rathawa 3S 
18. Varlt 

46 
19. Vitolla, Kotwalia or BarocUa 
2. In Dangs district, Kunbi. 
3. In Surat District, Chaudhri. 
4. In the districts of Jamnagar, Rajkot, Surendrana~cU.·, Bhavnagar 
5 and Junagadh:-
Siddi 
5. In Nesses area in the forests of Alech, Gir and Barada:-
1. Bharwad 
2. Charan 
10 3. Rabari. 
6. In Surendranagar district: -' 
Padhar 
7. In Kutch district:-
1. Bhll 
IS 2. DhocUa 
20 
3. KoU 
4. Paradhi 
5. Vaehri 
THE NINTH SCHEDULE 
[See section 42 (1)] 
I-MODIFIED FORM OF SECTION 3 OF THE UNION DUTIES OF EXCISE 
(DISTRIBUTION) ACT, 1957 
(1) Section 3 of the Union Duties of Excise (Distribution) Act, 
1957, shall, as from the 1st day of May, 1960, have effect subject to 
25 the following modifications, namely:-
In the Table below section 3, for the entry relating to 
Bombay, the following entries shall be substituted, namely:-
"Bombay 8'07 
Gujarat 4'10" 
30 (2) For the purposes of calculating the amount payable under 
section 3 to Bombay in the first month of the financial year com-
mencing on the 1st day of April, 1960, and to Bombay and Gujarat 
during the remaining eleven months of that financial year, the distr!-
butable union duties of excise shall be deemed to be one-twelfth and 
..,' ele:ven-tweUths, respectively, of the distributable union duties of 
excise for that financial year. 
2113 (B) LS-7. 

II-MODIFIED FORM OF SECTIONS 3 AND 5 OF THE ESTATE DUTY AND 
TAX ON RAIWAY PASSENGER FARES (DIsTRmuTloN) ACT, 1957. 
A-Distribution of estate duty 
(1) Section 3 of the Estate Duty and Tax on Railway Passenier 
Fares (Distribution) Act, 1957, shall, as from the 1st day of May, S 
1960, have effect subject to the following modifications, namely'-
In clause (b) of sub-section (2), for the entry relating to 
Bombay, the following entries shall be substituted. namely:-
"Bombay 8.97 
Gujarat 4' 55" 
10 
(2) For the purposes of calculating the amount payable under 
sub-section (1) of section 3 to Bombay in the first month of the 
financial year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1960. and to 
Bombay and Gujarat during the remaining eleven months of that 
financial year, the total amount falling to be distributed shall be 15 
deemed to be one-twelfth and eleven-twelfths, respectively, of th~ 
total amount falling to be distributed for that financial year. 
B-Distribution of tax on railway passengeT faTes 
(1) Section 5 of the Estate Duty and Tax on Railway. Passenger 
Fares (Distribution) Act, 1957, shall, as from the 1st day of M-ay, 30 
1960, have effect subject to the following modifications, namely:-
For the entry xelating to Bombay, the following entries shall be 
substituted, namely:-
"Bombay 10.80 
Gujarat 5.48" 
(2) For the purposes of calculating the amount payable under 
section 5 to Bombay in the first month of the financial year com-
mencing on the 1st day of April, 1960, and to Bombay and Gujarat 
during the remaining eleven months of that financial year, the net 
proceeds of the tax on railway passenger fares shall be deemed to i O 
be one-twelfth and eleven-twelfths, respectively, of the net pro 
ceeds of such tax for that financial year. 
III-MODIFIED FORM OF THE SECOND SCHEDULE TO THE ADDmoNAL 
DOTIES OF EXCISE (GOODS OF SPECIAL IMPORTANCE) Act, 1957. 
A-DtBtribution of additional duties on su.gar ' 
(1) In the Second Schedule, the Table at the end of Part I shaUl( 
u from the 1st day of May, 1960, have effect subject to the follow-

, 
ing modifications, namely:-
For the entry relating to Bombay, the following entries shall 
be substituted, namely:-
"Bombay 
Gujarat 
162 
83 
13·37 
6·SO" 
(2) For the purposes of calculating the amount payable under 
Part I of the Second Schedule to Bombay in the first month of the 
financial year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1960, and to 
Bombay and Gujarat during the remaining eleven months of that 
10 financial year, the net proceeds of the additional duties in respect of 
sugar shall be deemed to be one-twelfth and eleven-twelfths, respec-
tively, of the net proceeds of such duties for that financial year; 
and in respect of thJt financial year, the sums specified in the third 
eolumn of the Table shan be deemed to have been replaced by 20 
IS for the first month and 149 for the remaining eleven months, in re-
lation to Bombay, and by 76 in relation to Gujarat. 
20 
&-Dmribution of additional duties on tobacco 
(1) In the Second Schedule, the Table below paragraph 4 shall, 
as from the 1st day of May, 1960, have effect subject to the follow-
ing modifications, namely:-
For the entries relating to Bombay, the following entries 
shall be substituted, namely:-
"Bombay 
Gujarat 
76 
39 
11'54 
5'87" 
25 (2) For the purposes of calculating the amount payable under 
paragraph 4 to Bombay in the first month of the financial year com-
mencing on the 1st day of April, 1960, and to Bombay and Gujarat 
during the remaining eleven months of that financial year, the net 
proceeds of the additional duties on tobacco shall be deemed to be 
30 one-twelfth and eleven-twelfths, respectively, of the net proceeds <.If 
such duties for that financial year; and in respect of that financial 
year, the sums specified in the third column of the Table shall be 
deemed to have been replaced by 10 for the first month and 70 for 
the remaining eleven months, in relation to Bombay, and by 35 in 
35 relation to Gujarat. 
C-Distribution of additional duties on tertiles 
(1) .. In the Second Schedule, the Table at the end of Part III shall, 
as from the 1st day of May, 1960, have effect subject to the following 

modifications, namely:-
For the entry relating to Bombay, the following entries shall 
be substituted, namely:-
"Bombay 398 10' 91 
Gujarat 202 5: 55" 
(2) For the purposes of calculating the amount payable under 
Part III of the Second Schedule to Bombay in the first month of the 
financial year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1960, and to 
Bombay and Gujarat during the remaining eleven months of that 
financial year, the net proceeds of the additional duties in respect of 10 
cotton fabrics, rayon or artificial silk fabrics and woollen fabrics shall 
be deemed to be one-twelfth and eleven-twelfths, respectively, of 
the net proceeds of such duties for that financial year; and in respect 
of that financial year the sums specified in the second column of the 
Table shall be deemed to have been replaced by 50 for th") first month IS 
and 365 for the remaining eleven months, in relation to ] lombay, and 
by 185 in relation to Gujarat. 
IV-MODIFIED FORM OF PARAGRAPH 3 OF THE CONSTITUTION (DISTRIBU-
TION 9F REVF.l'4UES) No.2 ORDER, 1957. 
(1) Paragraph 3 of the Constitution (Distribution of Revenues) ~ 
No.2 Order, 1957, shall, as from the 1st day of May, 1960, have effect 
subject to the following modifications, namely:-
In the Table at the end of paragraph 3, for the entry re-
lating to Bombay, the following entries shall be substituted, 
namely:- 3, 
"Bombay 10' 59 
Gujarat 5: 38" 
(2) For the purposes of calculating the amount payable under 
paragraph 3 to Bombay in the first month of the financial year com-
mencing on the 1st day of Apri1. 1960, and to Bombay and Gujarat 30 
during the remaining eleven months of that financial year, the net 
proceeds of taxes on income shall be deemed to be one-twelfth and 
eleven-twelfths, respectively, of the net proceeds of taxes on income 
for that financlal year. 
THE TENTH SCHEDULE 
[See section 44 (2) ] 3S 
1. Stores held for specific purposes such as for use or utilisation in 
particular institutions, workshops or undertakings or on particular 
works under construction shall pass to the State in which such insti-
tutions, workshops. undertakings or works are loeatedon the 40 
appointed day. • 

49 
2. Stores relating to Sachivalaya and ofBces of Heads of Depart-
ments having, immediately before the appointed day, jurisdiction 
over the whole of the State of Bombay shall remain the property 
of the State of Bombay: 
, Provided that typewriters, duplicators, clocks and vehicles shall 
be divided between the States of Bombay and Gujarat according to 
the population ratio. 
3. All other unissued stores, pooled stores, and stores purchased 
on or after the 1st July, 1959, of any class shall be divided between 
10 the States of Bombay and Gujarat in proportion to the total stores 
of that class purchased in the period of three years ending with the 
31st March, 1960 for the territories included respectively in each of 
those States: 
Provided that where such proportion cannot be ascertained in 
15 respect of any class of stores or where the value of any'class of such 
stores does not exceed Rs. 10,000, that class of stores shall be divided 
between the two States according to the population ratio. 
~o 
THE ELEVENTH SCHEDULE 
(See section 56) 
APPoRTIONMENT OF LIABILITY IN RESPECT OF PENSIONS 
1. Subject to the adjustments mentioned In paragraph 3, each of 
the States of Bombay and Gujarat shall, in respect of pensions grant-
ed by the State of Bombay before the appoin~ day, pay the pen-
sions drawn in its treasuries. 
25 2. Subject to the said adjustments, the liability in respect of 
pensions of ofBcers serving in connection with the affairs of the State 
of Bombay who retire or proceed on leave preparatory to retirement 
before the appointed day, bu,t whose claims for pensions are out-
standing immediately before that day, shall be the liability of the 
30 State of Bombay. 
3. There shall be computed in respect of the part of the ftnancial 
year commencing on the appointed day and in respect of each sub-
sequent financial year, the total payments made in each of the 
States of Bombay and Gujarat in respect of pensions referred to in 
3S paragraphs 1 and'!!; that total, representing the liability of the State 
of Bombay in respect of pensions, shall be apportioned between the 
States of Bombay and GUjarat in the population ratio, and the State 
paying more than its due share shall be refmbursed the excess 
amount by the other State. 

so 
4. (1) The liability in respect of the pensiOll of any ofticer serving 
Immediately before the appointed day in connection with the affairs 
of the State of Bombay and retiring on or after that day, shall be 
that of the State which grants him the pension; but the portion of 
the pension attributable to the service of any such officer before the S 
appointed day in connection with the affairs of the State of Bombay 
shall be allocated between the States of Bombay and Gujarat in 
the population ratio, and the Government which grants the pension 
shall be entitled to receive from the other Government its share 
of this liability. 10 
(2) If any such officer was serving after the appointed day for 
some period in connection with thp. affairs of the State of l30mbay 
and for some period in connection with the affairs of "the State of 
Gujarat, the Government other thrut the one ganting the pension 
shall reimburse to the Government by which the pension is granted IS 
an amount which bears to the portion of the pension attributable to 
his service after the appointed day the same ratio as the period of 
his qualifying service after the appointed day under the reimbursing 
State bears to the total qualifying service after the appointed day 
reckoned for the purposes of pension. 20 
5. Any reference in this Schedule to a pension shall be construed 
88 including a reference to t.he commuted value of the pension. 
THE TWELFTH SCHEDULE 
(See section 75) 
1. J. J. College of Architecture, Bombay. 
2. J. J. Institute of Applied Art, Bombay. 
3. School of Printing Technology, Bombay. 
4. Government Tanning Institute, Bombay. 
5. Government Leather Working School, Bombay. 
6. Veterinary College, Bombay. 
7. R. A. Podar Medical College (Ayurved1c), Bombay. 
8. C. E. M. Dental College, Bombay. 
9. Haffkin Institu,te, Bombay. 
10. Forensic Science Labontory and Chemical Analysers Depart-
2$ 
ment, Bombay. 3$ 
11. State Fire School, Ghatkopar, Bombay. 
12. Secretariat Record Office, Bombay. 

51 
13. Mathematical Instruments Depot and Workshop, Bombay. 
14. Drugs Testing Laboratory, Bombay. 
15. Engineering College, Poone. 
16. Government Polytechnic, Poona. 
S 17. Agricultural College, Poona. 
18. Jail Officers' Training School. Yeravda, Poona. 
19. Alienation Office, Poona. 
20. Government Photozinco Press, Poona. 
21. Government Photo Registry. Poona. 
10 22. Institute of Veterinary Biological Products, Poon&. 
23. Government Polytechnic, Nagpur. 
24. Public Health Institute, Nagpur. 
25. Vaccine Institute, Nagpur. 
26. L. D. College of Engineering, Ahmedabad. 
IS 27. R. C. Technical Institute, Ahmedabad. 
28. Bhavansinbji Polytechnic Institute, Bhavnagar. 
29. A. V. Parekh Technical Institute, Rajkot. 
30. Police Training School, Nasik. 

STATEMENT OF O:eJECTS AND REASONS 
In the Address delivered by the President to Parliament at the 
inauguration of the current session, it was announced that the Gov-
ernment of India proposed to introduce a Bill for the reorganisation 
of the present State of Bombay. The Bombay Reorganisation Bill 
is designed to reconstitute the present State as two separate States. 
The Bill provides for the territories of the two States, and makes 
the necessary supplemental and incidental provisions relating to 
representation in Parliament and in the State Legislatures, the 
apportionment of assets and liabilities and other matters. 
As required by the proviso to article 3 of the Constitution, this 
Bill was referred by the President to the Legislature of the State 
of Bombay and has been considered by both Houses of the State 
Legislature. Its views have been received and will also be placed 
before Parliament. 
The notes on clauses explain the various provisions of this Bill. 
O. B. PANT. 
NEW DELHI, 
rhe 19th March, 1960. 

Notes on Clauses 
Clause 2-Sub-clause (f) .-According to the 1951 census, the 
population of the existing State of Bombay is 48: 265 millions, the 
population of the residuary State of Bombay is about 32.003 millions 
and that of Gujarat is 16.262 millions. The population ratio between 
the States has been ascertained on that basis. 
Clauses 3 to 5 and the First Schedule.-Sub:clause (1) of clause 
3 provides for the formation of the new State of Gujarat by trans-
fer thereto from the existing State of Bombay of 17 districts, 50 
villages of Umbergaon taluka of Thana district and 156 villages of 
Nawapur, Nandurbar, Akkalkuwa and Taloda talukas of West 
Khandesh district. 
Provision has been made in sub-clause (2) that the aforesaid 
villages shall be included in Surat and Broach districts of Gujarat. 
This would facilitate the making of suitable administrative 3rrange-
ments on and from the appointed day without a break. Clause 5 
expressly saves the power of the State Government to alter there-
after the name of any district or other territorial division in the State. 
Clause 4 seeks to make certain consequential amendments in the 
First Schedule to the Constitution. 
Clauses 6 to 9 and the Second Schedule.-These clauses deal with 
the representation of Bombay and Gujarat in the Council of States. 
There are at present 27 members representing the existing State of 
Bombay in the said Council. The present allocation is based on the 
formula, one seat per million for the first five millions and one seat 
for every additional two millions or part thereof exceeding one mil-
lion. On this basis, the residuary State of Bombay has been allotted 
18 seats, and Gujarat 11 seats, in the Council of States. There will 
thus be two additional seats in the said Council. 
Out of the 27 sitting members, 9 members will retire on 2nd 
April, 1960. Of the remaining 18 sitting members, 12 hav~ been 
allotted to Bombay and 6 to Gujarat as specified in the Secor..d Sche-
dule. ' ;~- .~. 
Out of the 9 members to be elected at the biennial elections, 6 
roembers will be selected by the Chairman of the Council or States 
to represent Bombay and the remaining 3 will represent Gujarat. 
53 
2113 (B) LS-S. 

S4 
After such allocation of members, there will be no vacancy in the 
scats allotted to Bombay but there will be 3 vacancies in the seats 
allotted to Gujarat, namely, one existing casual vacancy caused by 
the death of e. sitting member and two additional seats allotted 
to that State. These will be filled by bye-elections to be held 
soon after the appointed day. 
In order that, as nearly as may be, one third of the members 
allotted to the State of Gujarat may retire every second yellr, it is 
proposed to make modifica tions in the terms of office of the two mem-
bers to be elected to fill the two additional seats allotted to that 
State. 
ClaU8es 10 to 12 and the Third Schedule.-These clauses deal with 
the representation of the State of Bombay and Gujarat in the House 
of the People. There are at present 66 members representing thp 
existing State of Bombay in that House. The number of seats allot-
ted to Gujarat is 22 and the remaining 44 members will ~ontinue to 
represent the State of Bombay. The allocation of seats has been 
based on the territorial location of the constituencies concerned. 
Consequential amendments have been made iR the First Schedule 
to the Representation of the People Act, 1950. 
Clause 11 seeks to make modifications in the First Schedule to 
the Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assemblies Constituencies 
Order, 1956, in view of the formation of the new State of Gujarat 
and the transfer thereto of certain territories from the existing 
State of Bombay. The Dangs district and the Umbergaon taluka 
transferred to Gujarat have been included in the Bulsar consti-
tuency. The necessary modifications have been set out in the Third 
Schedule. Provision has been made in clause 12 that every sitting 
member of the House of the People representing a constituP.nCY the 
extent of which has been altered by clause 11 shall be deemed tn 
have been elected to the said House by that Constituency as so 
altered. 
Clauses 13 to 18 and the Fourth Schedule.--At present there are 
397 members in the LegislatiYe Assembly of Bombay, one of whom is 
a member nominated to represent the Anglo-Indian community. It 
is proposed that the nominated member should continue to be a 
member of the Bombay Legislative Assembly. Of the remaining 396 
members, 264 members have been allotted to Bombay and remaining 
132 to Gujarat. 
The allocation of seats in this case also has been based on the 
territorial location of the constituencies concerned. NeceSSAry conse-
quential amendments have been made in the Second Schedule to 
the Representation of the People Act, 1960. 

SS 
Clause 1. read with the Fourth Schedule provides for the neces-
sary adjustments in the assembly constituencies in both the States. 
Other clauses are consequential and self-explanatory. 
Clauses 19 to 23 and the Fifth and Sixth Schedules.-These clauses 
deal with the Legislative Council of Bombay. At present there are 
108 members in that Council. It is proposed not to have any Legis-
lative Council in the State of Gujarat and the strength of the Legis-
lative Council of Bombay has been reduced from 108 to 78 
There are 18 members in the Legislative Council representing 
graduates' constituency, teachers' constituency and local authorities' 
constituencies located wholly in Gujarat. These constituencies have 
been specified in the Fifth Schedule. It is proposed that members 
representing such constituencies should cease to be members of that 
Council. 
There are 42 members in the Council elected by the membQrs of 
the Legislative Assembly of Bombay. Of them, 12 members who 
have affiliations with GUjarat should also cease to be members of 
the Council. Out of these twelve members, 5 members arc retiring 
on 24th April, 1960. The names of the remaining 7 members have 
been specified in the Sixth Schedule. 
Necessary consequential amendments have been made in the Third 
Schedule to the Representation of the People Act, 1950, and 78 seats 
have been distributed among the categories referred to in clauses 
(a), (b), (c), (d) and (e) of article 171 (3) of the Constitution, 
as 22, 7, 7, 30 and 12 respectively. 
As some of the members of the Bombay Legislative Council will 
retire on the 24th April, 1960, it would have been necessary to hold 
biennial elections before that day. It is, however, desirabJe that sllch 
elections should be held after the reorganisation of Bombay and pro-
vision has accordingly been made in clause 22 that the biennial elec-
tions shall be held after the appointed day. 
The Chairman of the existing Legislative Council of Bombay who 
belongs to Gujarat areas will cease to be a member of that Council 
on the appointed day. Provision has, therefore, been made in clause 
23 for the election of a new Chairman of the Council after the 
appointed day. 
Clauses 24 and 25 and the Seventh and Eighth Schedul.es.-In 
view of the territorial changes brought about by the formation of 
the new State of GUjarat, certain amendments are necessary in the 
Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950, and the Constitution 

" 
(Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950. The necessary modifications have 
been set out in the Seventh and Eighth Schedules. 
Clauses 26 to 3B.-These clauses deal with the establishment of 
a High Court for the State of Gujarat, its composition, powers and 
fWlctions and the procedure to be followed by it. The detailed pro-
visions contained in these clauses follow in the main provisions made 
for the setting up of a new High Court in the Andhra State Act, 
1953, and the States Reorganisation Act, 1956. 
Clause 39.-1n order that the administration of the new State of 
Gujarat can be carried on until the Legislature of that State has 
sanctioned expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of that State 
and passed the necessary Appropriation Act, provision has been 
made in this clause for the Governor of Bombay to authorise at any 
time before the appointed day such expenditure as he thinks neces-
sary for a period of six months from that date; a similar power is 
conferred on the Governor of Gujarat after the appointed day. 
Clause 40.-This clause contains the usual provision that the re-
ports of the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India for any period 
prior to the appointed day should be submitted to the Governors of 
Bombay and Gujarat and enables the President to take such further 
action as may be appropriate under the circumsbnces. 
Clause 41.-This clause seeks to empower the President to deter-
mine by order the allowances and privileges of the Governor of the 
new State of Gujarat, until Parliamentary legislation is undertaken 
for the purpose. 
Clause 42 (1) and the Ninth Schedule.-The distribution among 
the States of the proceeds of certain taxes and duties like income-tax, 
excise duties, estate duty, etc., is regulated by certain Parliamenvlry 
enactments and the Constitution (Distribution of Revenues) No. 2 
Order, 1957. Provision has been made in the Ninth Sch-:!dule that 
the amount payable to the existing State of Bombay on account of its 
share of such taxes and duties shall be divided between the States or 
Bombay and Gujarat according to the population ratio and neces-
sary modifications have been made in all such enactments and 
Order. 
Clause 42 (2), 4B (1), 49 and 51 (5) .-These clauses deal with cer-
tain financial provisions in connection with the reorganisation of the 
existing State of Bombay. It is proposed to allocate a sum of Rs. 10 
crores from the oosh balance investment account of the existing State 
for financing the construction or development of the capital of the 
Gujarat State. This provision has been made in clause 48 (1). 

51 
The annual deficit of the new State of Gujarat which is to be pro-
vided for is estimated to range from Rs. 6.02 crores in the year 1960-
61 (11 months) to Rs. 1.14 crores in 1969-70. 
The payment in the two financial years ending on the 31st March, 
1962, towards meeting of this deficit will be made by the transfer to 
Gujarat in each of these years of the necessary amount from out of 
the share of the divisible hE'ads of revenue accruing to the State of 
Bombay under the d"volution of revenues by the Central Govern-
ment. This provision has been made in clouse 42 (2). 
As regards the subsequent. financial years, it has been proposed 
that in the division of assets and liabilities as on the appointed day, 
a financial benefit equal to the present value of the recurring pay-
ments due to Gujarat in each of the 8 financial years from H162-63 to 
1969-70 should be passed on by the residuary State of Bombay to 
the new State of Gujarat. The present value of the benefit due to 
Gujarat has been computed at Rs. 28.39 crores. The adjustment on 
this account will be made in the following manner:-
(i) securities to the value of Rs. 14.20 crores will be trans-
ferred by the State of Bombay to Gujarot, and 
(ii) the liability of the State of Gujarat on account of its share 
to public debt will be reduced by Rs. 14.19 crores, the 
liability of the State of Bombay being correspondingly 
increased. 
Clauses 49 (1) and 51 (5) seek to give effect to these proposals. 

S8 
It has been further proposed that Gujal'at should establish a speciel 
revenue reserve fund which will be utilised for supplementing the 
receipts on the revenue account during the period in respect of which 
this spacial provision is being made. Provision in this behalf has 
been made in clauses 49 (2) and 49 (3). 
Clause 48.-Sub-clauses (2) to (5), Clause 51-Sub-clauses (1) to 
(4) and Clause 52.-In view of the substantial investments of the 
Government of Bombay in certain funds and commercial undertak-
ings and statutory bodies, it is proposed to make a specific provision 
for the allocation of assets representing such investments. Sub-
clauses (2) to (5) of clause 48 seek to make such provisions. 
In respect of the public debt of Bombay, the provisions made in 
clause 51 generally follow the corresponding provisions of the States 
Reorganisation Act. Where, however, the Stete of Bombay has taken 
a specific loan from the Central Government or from any other 
source for the purpose of re-lending the same to specific institutions, 
it is proposed to make a separate provision in clause 51 (2) for th(' 
allocation of public debt attributable to such loan. Other changes 
made in cleuse 51 are of a minor character and are self-explanatory. 
A specific provision has also been made in clause 52 for the allocation 
of the liability of the State of Bombay on account of its floating loan. 
Clauses 43 to 47, 50, 53 to 64 and the Tenth Schedule.-These 
clauses also relate to the apportionment of the assets and liabilitips 
of the State of Bombay. They generally follow the corresponding 
provisions of the States Reorganisation Act, but there have been 
slight deviations in certain respects. 
In respect of stores referred to in the Tenth Schedule, the prin-
ciples of division have been specified therein. The allocation of assets 
representing arrears of taxes as provided in clause 46 generally 
follows the principle laid down in section 78 of the States Reorgani-
sation Act, but in respect of arreurs of sales tax accruing during the 
period between the 1st January, 1960 and the appointed day and col-
lected after that day, it is proposed ti?-at they should be treated as 
common receipts and shared between the two States of Bombay and 
Gujarat according to the popUlation ratio. The proviso to clause 46 
seeks to achieve this object. Similarly, the liability for any refund 

59 
in respect of such payments should also be shared by the two State. 
as provided in clause 53. 
A specific provision has also been made in clause 62 empowering 
the two State Governments to vary, by agreement, the manner of 
apportionment of any asset or liability. 
Clause 65.-This clause enables the Bombay State Electricity 
Board and the Bombay State Warehousing Corporation to continue 
to function in the same areas as at present, even after the formation 
of the State of Gujarat, until the 1st October, 1960. As 'lnd when 
the State of Gujarat and the residuary State of Bombay set up their 
own electricity boards and warehousing corporations, the existing 
board and corporation will be dissolved and their assets and liabilities 
shall be transferred to the corresponding new boards and corpora-
tions. Provision has also been made for the contingency of either 
State not setting up its electricity board or warehousing corporation 
by the 1st October, 1960, in which case the State itself will take over 
its due share of the assets and liabilities of the existing board or cor-
poration on its dissolution. 
Clause 67.-This clause contemplates that the existing Bombay 
State Financial Corporation will continue to function in the same 
ar£lSs as at present, even after the appointed day, until a scheme is 
framed in this behalf for the reconstitution, reorganisation or di:::-
solution of the corporation, including proposals rcgarding the forma-
tion of new corporations and transfer thereto of all the assets, rights 
and liabilities of the existing corporation. Such a scheme h'3s to be 
approved at a general meeting of all the shareholders and sanctioned 
by the Central Government. In case of disagreement, the matter has 
to be referred to a Judge of the Bombay High Court whose decision 
thereon shall be final. 
CLauses 68 and 7I.-Clause 68 seeks to amend section 47A of the 
Road TI'3nSport Corporations Act, 1950 so as to make it applicable to 
any road transport corporation which becomes an inter-State body 
by virtue of the provisions of any enactment relating to reorgani-
sation of States. 
Clause 71 seeks to amend the Inter-State Corporations Act, 1957 
for the same purpose. 
Clause 69.-This cllSuse enables a separate Bar Council to be set 
up for the State of Gujarat and provides for the manner in which the 
first Bar Council of that State shall be constituted, and the division 
of assets and liabilities of the Bombay Bar Council between the Guja-
rat Bar Council ISnd the Bar Council for the residuary State of Bom-
bay. 

60 
Clause 74.-Under section 24 of the Indian Income-Tax Act, 1924, 
an assessee who sustains a loss of profits or gains is entitled to have 
the amount of loss set off against his income under certain cir-
cumstances. It is proposed to extend the benefit of this section to a 
body corporate to which the assets, rights and liabilities of any exist-
ing body-corporate, including any loss sustained by it, are transferred 
under the provisions of Part VII. 
Clauses 66, 70. 72, 73 and 75.-These clauses follow the correspond-
ing provisions of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956. 
Clauses 76 to 79.-These clauses make provisions relating to ser-
vices. Clause 76 provides for two separate oodres--one for the State 
of Bombay and the other for the State of Gujarat-in respect of the 
Indian Administrative Service and the Indian Police Service in place 
of the existing cadres in respect of these services in the State of 
Bombay. It also confers power on the Central Government to deter-
mine the strength and composition of the new oodres and to allocate 
individual officers thereto. Clause 77 provides for the allocation of 
. other officers serving in connection with the affairs of the State of 
Bombay. 
These clauses generally follow the corresponding provisions of the 
States Reorganisation Act. 
Clause BO.-It is not prnposed to make any provision in the Bill 
for the division of the Public Service Commission of the existing 
State of Bombay os the intention is that this Commission should 
continue to function for the residuary State of Bombay only and a 
new Public Service Commission should be set up for the State of 
Gujarat under the relevant provisions of the Constitution. 
Clause 81.-The existing States of Bombay and Mysore are in the 
Zomtl Cl)uncil for the Western Zone. There has been a long-sttmding 
demand that Mysore should be included in the Southern Zone. It 
has been accordingly proposed to transfer Mysore to the Southern 
Zone. The Zonal Council for the Western Zone will be composed 
of Bombay and Gujarat only. This clause seeks to make necessary 
amendments in section 15 of the States ReorganiSGtion Act, 1956. 
Clauses 82 to 91.-These clauses are of a miscellaneous and legal 
nature and they generally follow the corresponding provisions of the 
States ReorganiRation Act, 1956. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 42 (1) read with the Ninth Schedule and clause 42 (2) con-
template payment of certain sums of money to the new State of 
Gujarat. As these payments will be made out of the amount payable 
to the existing State of Bombay, no additional expenditure wfil be 
involved from the ConsolidatEd Fund of Indio. 
61 
2113 (B) L5--9. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 91 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make 
rules to give effect to the provisions of the Bill when enaeted. This 
power will be required mainly with reference to clause 67 (3) for 
prescribing the manner in which a general meeting of the Bombay 
State Financial Corporation is to be convened for the purpose men-
tioned therein and with reference to clause 74 for prescribing the 
manner in which the losses of profits and iams sustained by any 
body corporate are to be apportioned among other bodies corporate. 
Moreover, such rules when they are made shall be placed before 
Parliament. 
Clause 83 empowers the Central Government as well as the Gov-
ernments of Bombay and Gujarat to adapt existing laws in order to 
facilitate their application to the two States after reorganisation. 
This power will be available until the expiration of one year from 
the appointed day. 
The proposed. delegation of legislative power is of a normal 
character. 

4. 
ANNEXURE 
ExTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
• 
Ntlme 
• 
Bombay 
• 
• • • 
FIRST SCHEDULE 
[Articles 1 and 4] 
1. THE STATES 
Te1Titories 
• • • 
The terr1toriea specifted in sub-
section (1) of section 8 of the 
States Reorganisation Act, 1956. 
• • 
FOURTH SCHEDULE 
[Articles 4 (1) and 80(2)] 
• 
Allocation of seats in the Council of States 
To each State or Union territory specified in the first column of 
the following table, there shall be allotted the number of seats 
specified in the second column thereof opposite to that State or that 
Union territory, as the case may be. 
TABLE 
• • • • 
4. Bombay 27 
• • • • 
TOTAL 221 
• • • • 

Ex'I'RACTS "'OM THE REPREBNTATION OF THE PBoPLI ACT, 19M) 
(43 OF 1950~. 
• • • 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
(See section 3) 
• 
Alloca.tion of semI in the House of the PeopLe 
Name of State, Union territory or 
area 
Total number of 
seats 
• • • • 
4. Bombay 66 
• • • • 
THE SECONfJ SCHEDULE 
(See section 7) 
Tot4l number of Se4U in the Legislative Assemblies 
------------------_ .. 
Name of State Total number of seats in 
the Legislative Assembly 
------.---- --.. _-----_.- .. _---------_ ... _------
I 
~-----. ------------_. --_.- -----
• 
4. Bombay 
• 
• • 
• • 
THE THIRD SCHEDULE 
(See section 10) 
• 
196 
• 
Allocation of leats in the Legislative Councils 
- --.. ---------
Name of State 
I 
• 
3. Bombay 
• 
Total 
number 
of scats 
2 
• 
108 36 
• 
Number to be elected or Domi-
nated under article 171 (3) 
Sub- Sub- Sub- Sub- Sub-
clause clause clause clause clause 
(a) (b) (C) (d) (e) 
3 4 s 6 7 
• • 
9· 9 42 12 
• • 

EXTRACTS FROM THE DI!'.LIMITATION OF PARLIAMENTARY AND AssEMBLY 
CONSTITUENCIES ORDER, 1956. 
In pursuance of sub-section (2) of section 47 of the Statetl Reol·· 
ganisation Act, 1956, read with section 16 of the Bihar and West 
Bengal (Transfer of Territories) Act, 1956, section 6 of the Scheduled 
Castes and Scheduled Tribes Order (Amendment) Act, 1956, and 
the rules and orders made thereunder, we hereby make the followin~ 
order, namely:-
1. This Order shall be known as the Delimitation of Parliamentary 
and Assembly Constituencies Order, 1956. 
2. The territorial constituencies into which each of the States 
other than Jammu and Kashmir and each of the Union Territories 
of Delhi, Himachal Pradesh, Manipur and Tripura shall be divided 
for the purpose of elections to the House of the People, the extent 
of each such constituency, the number of seats allotted to each con-
stituency and the number of seats, if any, reserved for the Scheduled 
Castes or for the Scheduled Tribes, as the case may be, in each 
constituency shall be as shown in the First Schedule. 
3. The territorial constituencies into which each of the States 
other than Jammu and Kashmir shall be divided for the purpose of 
elections to the Legislative Assembly of the State, the extent of each 
such constituency, the number of seats allotted to each constituency 
and the number of seats, if any, reserved far the Scheduled Castes 
or for the Scheduled Tribes, as the case may be, in each constituency 
shall be as shown in the Second Schedule. 
4. Any reference in the Schedules to a district or other territorial 
division shall, save as otherwise expressly provided in this Order, 
be taken to mean the area comprised within that district or territo-
rial division on the 1st day of December, 1956. 
5. For the avoidance of doubt, it is hereby declared that save 
as otherwise expressly provided in this Order, a Revenue Inspec-
tor's Circle (R.I. C.) or other territorial division shall for the purpose 
of this Order be deemed to include all forest villages and municipal 
towns lying within the periphery of that Ci:rcle or territorial dfvfsfcm. 

• • • 
of-1I0MBAY 
;-
I 
I 5 erial Name of Extent of Conatitumcy 
No. Constituency 
I 
I 
I 
I 2 3 
91 Kutch Kutch district; and 
Virampm taluka [ex-
cluding the villages 
specified in item (4) 
of the Appendix], of 
Ahmedabad district. 
92 Zalawad Zalawad distric.."t ; and 
Wankaner and Morvi 
talukas, and Malia and 
Paddhari mahals, of 
Madhya Saura.'1htra I 
distt'icr, 
I 
93 Madhya Madhya Saurashtra dis-
Saurashtra' trict (excluding Wan-
kaner and Morvi 
talukas, and Malia 
I and Paddhari mahals). 
94 HaJar IHalar district; Okham-
andal taluka of Amreli 
district and Porbandar 
and Bhagvadar circles 
in Porbandartaluka, of 
Sorath district. 
9S I Sorath Sorath district (exclud-
ing Porbandar and 
~dar circles in 
Po· dar taluka, Una 
aDd Visavadar talukas, 
! Bhesan and Mendarda 
I 
66 
• 
Total 
number 
of 
seats 
4 
1 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I i 
• 
Seats reserved for 
Sche-
duled 
Castes 
5 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 
Sche-
duled 
Tribea 
6 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 

.7 
-
Seats reserved 
Total for 
Serial Name of ~nt of ConttitueDCY number ---No. Constitu1rtcy I of Sche- Sche-
seats duled duled 
Castes Tribes 
I .1 3 4 5 
I 
6 
mahals, Sasan, Jam-
vala, Juadhar and Visa-
vadar forest ranges); 
and Kodinar taluka [ex-
cluding the villages 
specified in item (2) of 
the Appendix], of 
Amreli district. 
I 
96 Girnar I Una and Visavadar talu- Nil Nil I I 
I 
I 
kas, Bhesan and Men- , 
darda mahals, and Sasan. I 
I 
Jamvala. Jasadhar and I Visavadar forest ranges I 
I 
of Sorath district ; 
AmrelilJld Dhari talu-
kas, Khamba mahal. 
such Qf the villases in 
Kodinar taluka as are 
specified in item. (2) 
of the Appendix. and 
Damnapr mahal [ex-
cludiq the Vill;rcs spe-
cified in item (3 of the 
Appendix]. of Amreli 
district; Kundla taluka. 
Flajula-De~. Jafra-
bad-Babariawad, Lathi 
and Lilia mahals, and 
Dhola circle in Umrala 
peta mahal, 
Gohilwad district. 
uf 
97 Gohilwad Gohilwad district (ex-
cluding Kundla taluka, 
I Nil Nil 
Flajula-De~. Iafra-
bad-Babariawad, LatlU 
and Lilia mahals and 
Dhola circle in Umrala 
peta mahal); and 
Ghogho mahal and such 

88 
--~-----------------------------------------------
Serial Name of 
No. ConstituCRCY 
I 
Extent of CoDItituency 
reserved 
Total for 
nwnb~I------,--~--
of Sche- Sche-
seats duled duled 
Castes Tribes 
--------------------------------
I 2 3 4 5 6 
-- ------1------------ ---- ---- ----
of the villages in Dam-
nagar mahal as are 
specified in item (3) 
of the Appendix, of 
Amreli district. 
98 Banaskantha Banaskantha district. 
99 Sabarkantha Sabarkantha district. 
100 Mehsana 
101 Patan 
Mehsana, Kadi, Kalol, 
Vijapur and Visnagar 
talukas of Mehsana 
district. 
Mehsana district (exclud-
ing Mehaana, Kadi-
Kalol, Vijapur and 
Vianagar talobs) . 
. 
102 Ahmedabad Ahmedabad district [ex-
cluding Vir8JJ1i8Dl and 
Dhandhuka talulw 
but including the 
villages in Viramgam 
taluka specified in item 
(4) of the Appendix]. 
103 Kaira Mehmedabad, Nadiad, 
Kapadwanj, Thasra 
and Baiasinor talukas 
of Kaira district. 
104 Anand Anand, Petlad, Matar 
and Cambay talukas of 
Kaira district; and 
Dhandhuka taluka of 
I Ahmedabad district. 
105 Panchma~! Panchmahals district [ex-
I eluding Jha1od, Dohad 
I --'------'-------- ----
I Nil 
Nil 
I Nil 
I Nil 
2 I 
I Nil 
I Nil 
r I Nil 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 

--' - _ .. - .. - .. --.~ .. -- .---.- ---------_ .. _-- .. .-._-_ .. ---- ..... 
Serial . Name .of Extent of Constituency 
No. Constituency 
I 
1.l6,- Dohad! 
I 
I 
I 
I 
10,1 Baroda 
I 
loS Broach 
T09 Mandvi 
3 
and LimkhClda .talukas . 
and J}1e . -villages 
in Baria' taluka 
as are specified in item 
(5) of the Appendix]. 
lhalod, . Dohad and 
Limkheda taIukaa .and 
such of the villages 
in Baria taluka as ate 
specified in item (5) of 
. the Appendix, of 
Panchmahals district; 
and Cbhota Udepur, 
Jabugam, Naswadi and 
Sankheda talukas· of 
Baroda district. 
Baroda, Savli, Waghodia, 
Dabhoi and Karjan 
talukas and Sinor 
mahal, of Baroda 
district. 
Broach, Vagra and Jam-
busar talukas and 
Amod mahal, of Broach 
district; Borsad taluka 
of Kaira district; and. 
Padra taluka of Baroda 
district. 
Mandvi; Songadh, Kamrej, 
Mangrol and Olpad 
talukas, Valod mahal 
and such of the villages 
in Vyara taluka 88 
are specified in item 
(6) of the Appenaix, of 
Surat district;· and 
Total 
number 
of 
seats 
Seats reserved 
for 
Sche-
duled 
Cast<:h 
Sche-
duled 
Tribes 
-1.-------
4 5 6 
1------1----- ----
I' Nil:. r' 
. I Nil Nil 
Nil Nil 
I Nil 
----------------_._------------_.-
2113 (B) LS-IO. 

Serial 
No. 
I 
uo 
III 
Jl2 
lJ3 
IlS 
I 
Name of 
Constituency 
2 
.-
Surat 
Bulsar 
Bombay City 
South 
Bombay City 
Central 
Bombay City 
NOrth 
Thanp 
'70 
Extent of Constituency 
-
3 
Sagbara, Dediapeda, 
Nandod, Jhagadia and 
Ankleahwar talum, and 
Valia and HlIDIOt 
mahals, of Broach 
district. 
Chorui, Navsari, Mahuva 
and Bardoli taluba 
and PaIIIna mahal of 
Surat district. 
Bulsar, Pardi, Dhanm-
pur, Chithli and Banada 
taloka, Ganc:tevi 
mahal, and Vyara taloka 
r excluding the villqea 
specified in item (6) 
of the Appendix], of 
Surat diatrict. 
\ Census Wards Nos. 1 to 
12 and electonl arc:8 
D-I of Census ward No. 
13, of Grester Bombay . . 
Census wards NOI. 14 
to 33 and Censua ward 
No. 13 (excludinll 
eJector81 area D-I) of 
Greater Bombay. 
Census Wards Nos. 34 
to 
" 
of Gnater 
Bombay ; Borivlitplub 
end Mulund town in 
Thana talub ofThlna 
district. 
Tt"lana district (exc1uc1ing 
Borivli taluka and 
Mulund town in Thana 
-
Seats reserved 
for 
Total 
number Sche- Sche· 
of duled duled 
sCllls Qstes Tribes 
-
4 S 6 
1 Nil Nil 
I Nil I 
I Nil Nil 
2 I Nil 
I Nil Nil 
2 Nil I 
----

Serial Name of 
No ConstitucDcy 
I 2 
71 
Bxtcnt of Constituency 
3 
Totsl 
number 
of 
seats 
Seats reserved 
for ~i 
---------~ 
Sche-
dul~d 
Castes 
ScJt-. 
duled 
Tribes 
4 S 6 
-------1-------------- 1---01--
116 Kolaba 
117 Poona 
lIS Baramati 
JI9 Khed 
taluka); MatherI'D town, 
P8nvel taluka, and such 
of the villages in Uran 
mahal as are specified 
in item (7) of the 
Appendix, of Kolaba 
district. 
Kolaba district (excluding 
Matheran town, Panvel 
taluka ~od Poladpur 
mahal, and the 
villages in Uran mahal 
as are specifie:l in item 
(7) of the Appendix, 
and Mahad taluka ex-
cept the villages spe-
cified in item (8) of 
the Appendix]. 
Poona City and Haveli 
talukas of Poona 
district. ~ 
Baramati, 'Junnar, 
Ambegaon, Sirur, 
Dhond and Indapur 
talukas of Poona district. 
! I 
Khed, Maval, Mulshi, 
Bhor and Purandhar 
talJkas and Velhe 
mlhal of Paona dis-
trict; Khed taluka of 
Ratnlltiri district; and 
Poladpur mahal and 
Mahad taluka (exclud-
ing the villages 
specified in item (8) 
of the Appendix] of 
Kolaba district . 
I Nil Nil 
Nil Nil 
I Nil Nil 
I Nil Nil 
. ------~ .... ----------~----------.--------

------;-------
Serial . Name of· 
No. Constituency 
t" . 
Extent of Coustituency 
Total 
Seats reserved 
for 
number I----i-------
of 
seats 
Sche-
duled 
Castes 
Sche-
duled 
Tribes 
--:'· ....... I·-.---~--I---------.L~t~"--I-----I--:.-~ 
_I_-:l~~_2 __ __1---_---3 __ ~~.-~--S-:-~_6~~ 
120 Ratnagiri Ratnagiri, SengameSh- \ 
]2] 
]22 
123 
Rajapur 
i 
I Kolhapur 
I 
I 
I Mira; 
war,Chiplun,Guhagar, \' 
Dapoli and Mandan-
gad talukas of Ratna- , 
giri district. I 
Rajapur, Dcogad and 
Malwan talukas, and 
Vengurla, Kudal, 
Kankavli and Lanja 
mahals of Ratnagit i 
district. 
1 Koillapur district.' and 
Sawantwadi taluka of 
i Ratnagiti district. 
South Sat8J"a district (ex-
cludin~ Walva taluka 
and Shirala mahal). 
124 Karad Walva taluka andShirala 
mahal of South 
Satara district, and 
Karad, Patan and Jaoli 
talukas, and Maha-' 
baleshwar mawl of 
North Satara district. 
127 
1 ' 
"1' .. 
Satara J.~. North Satara district (ex-
cluding Karad, Patan 
and Jaoli talukas and 
I, Mahabaleshwar mahal). 
Shalapur. Sbolapur dist.rict. 
Ahmednagarl Ahmednagar, Newasa, 
Sheogaon, Pathardi, 
I
I II Shrigonda ~ Karja~ 
talukas, and Jamkhed 
I I mallal, of Ahmednagar 
\ ~. district . 
Nil 
I Nil 
2 
Nil 
Nil 
1 Nil 
2 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 

'II. 
-~-----------------'-.-,. 
L 
Scrw Name ,of 
No .• , Constituency 
" 
Extent of Constituency Total 
number 
of 
seats 
Seats reserved 
for 
Sche- " 
duled 
Castes 
Sche-
duled 
Tribes 
~- ----- ----------_ .. -- -.--~ ------ - -- .--
I 2 3 4 5 6 
128 i-K-O-p-arga-o-n-I-K-o-par-ga-O-n-,-Ako-~-, -S-an-_i --J-I--N-jl-- --N-il--
gaumer, Shnrampur, ,. I 
Rahuri and Pamer I 
talukas of Ahmednagar . 
district. , 
129 Nasik 
I 
130 ll\1alegaOn 
131 West 
Khandesh 
Dangs district j Dindori, 
Chandor, Kalwan, I 
N:asik and 19atpuri.,. 
talukas and Peint and I i Surgana mahals, of i 
I Nasik district. I 
I Malegaon, Baglan, Nand- I 
I gaon, Yeola, Niphad ,i 
I and Sinnar talukas of 
I Nasik district. 
Sakri, Nawapur, Nandur-I 
bar, Akkalkuva, Taloda, 
Shahada and Shirpur 
talukas and Akiani 
mahal of West Khan-
desh district. 
132 Dhulia Dhulia and Sindkheda 
talukas of West Khan-
desh district; and 
Amalner, Chopda and 
Parola talulcas and 
Bhadgaon peta of East 
Khandesh district. . 
! 
133 East Chalisgaon, Pachora, I 
Khandesh Jamner, Jalgaon and 
Erandol talukas, and 
Bhusaval municipality 
and such of the villages 
in Bhusawal taluka 
as are specified in 
item (9) of the Ap-
pendJx, of East 
Khandesh district .. 
--_ .. _---_._---------
I 
Nil Nil 
Nil Nil 
Nil 
Nil Nil 
Nil Nil 

7. 
----
Seats reserved 
for 
Serial Name of Extent of Constituency Total --------
No, Constituency number Sche- Sche-
of duled duled 
seats Castes Tribes 
--- ------- ------------ --- ---- ----1 .2 3 4 5 6 
--- ------ ------------ -------- ---
134 Buldana Malkapur tahsil and Nil Nil 
Chikhli tahsil (ex-
clud' 
R,I.~, 
Amdapur 
of Buldana 
district; &rul Raver and 
Yawal talukas, Edla-
bad peta. and Bhusawal 
taluke (excludin& Bhu-
sawal municipal~ and 
the villages spec' ed in 
item (9) of the 
Appendix), of East 
Khandesh district. 
135 Akola Akola district j and Jai- I Nil 
gaon, Khamgaon and 
Mehkar tahsils. ana 
Amdapur R.I.C. in 
Chikhli tahsil of 
B uldana district. 
136 Amravati Amravati district (ex- I NiJ Nil 
eluding Morsi tahsil 
and Achalpur and Chan-
dur Bazar R.1.Cs. in 
Achalpur tahsil). 
137 Ramtek Katol, Saoner and Ram- I NIl Nil 
tek tahsils, and Hingna 
and Bori R.I.Cs. in 
Nagpur tahsil of 
Nagpur district ; and 
Morsi tahsil, and 
AChalpur and Chandur 
Bazar R.I.Cs. 111 Achal-
pur tahsil of Amravati 
district. 
138 Nagpur Nagpur district (exclud- I Nil Nil 
i.ng Katol, Saoner and 
Ramtek tahsils, and 
---- -~ ... -

'15 
---------------_._----,-._--_ .... " 
Serial Name of Bxtent of Constituency 
No. Constituency 
Seats reserved 
Total for 
number-------
of Sche- Sche-
seats duled duled 
Cutes Tribes 
-- ------ ------------ ---- ---- ---
I 2 3 4 6 
-------- -~--------- ---- ---- ----
139 Bhandara 
140 Chanda 
141 Wardha 
142 Yeotmal 
143 Nanded 
Hingna 
RI.Cs. 
tahsil). 
and Bori 
in Nagpur 
Bhandara district ; and 
Warora tahsil and Brah-
mapuri tahsil (exclud-
ing Pathri R.I.C.) of 
Chanda district. 
Chanda district (exclud-
ing Warora tahsil and 
Naghbir, Brahmapuri 
and Sindewahi R.I.Cs. 
in Brahmapuri tahsil) ; 
and Rajura taluk. 
of Nanded district. 
Wardha district; and 
Wani tahsil, and Rale-
pon and Wadki R.I.Cs. 
lD Kelapur tahsil, and 
Kalamb and Yelabara 
R.I.Cs. in Yeotmal 
tahsil. 
Yeotmal district (excluding 
Wani tahsiJ, and Rate-
pon and W'adldR.I.Cs. 
10 Kelarur tahsil and 
Kalamb and Yelabara 
R.I.Cs. in Yeotmal 
tahsil). 
Nanded district (exclud-
ing Rajura taluk.) ; 
Udgir, Ahmadpur and 
Latur talul~s and 
Nilanga taluk (ex-
cluding Kasar Sirsi 
circle) of Osmanabad 
1 
I 
1 
2 
Nil 
Nil Nil 
Nil Nil 
Nil Nil 
T Nil 
.-...!------:.... .--..;..... ----

_._-------- ---.---- ---- .--
I 
i Seats reserved. 
Total for 
Serial Name of 
No. Constituency 
Extent of Constituency number 
I 
--- -------.-....-
I 2 
, 
144 Osmanabad 
i 
145 I Bhir 
146 Parbhani 
147 JaIna 
148 Aurangabad 
'---'---
3 
district; and Momina-
bad taluk t excludin~ 
Mominabad circle) 0 
Bhir diStrict. 
Osmanabad distrlct (ex-
eluding Udgir, Ahmad-
pur and Latur taluks 
and Nilanga taluk 
except Kasar Sirsi 
circle). 
I 
Bhir district (excluding I 
Parli, Ghatnandur and 
Ren&J?ur circles in j' 
Mommabad taluk). I 
I. 
. Parbhani district (ex- I 
eluding Jintur and I 
Partur taluks, and 
Sailu circle in Pathri 
taluk). 
Jalna. Ambad and Bhok-
ardhan taluks and Jaf-
farabad mahal of 
Aurangabad district ; 
and Jintur and Partur 
taluks, and Sailu circle 
in Pathri . taluk, of 
Parbhani district. 
AU~bad district (ex-
cl . g Ambad, Jalna 
and Bhokardhan talub 
and Jaffarabad mahal). 
of Sche- S~be-
seats duled duled 
Castes Tribe8 
4 5 6 
! 
1 Nil Nil 
I 
i 
Nll Nit I 1 I 
Nil 
Nil Nil 
I Nil Nil 

• • • • 
4-BOMBAY 
i Serial I Name of Extent of Constituency 
No. Constituency . 
• 
Seats reserved 
Total for 
nwnber -----,----.---
of Sche- I Sche-seats duled duled 
Castes I TrIbes --- ----·--·1----..,.------- ---- '----- ----I 2 3 4 5 6 --- ------ ------------ ----- ---- ----KUTCH DISTRICT 
Abadasa Abadasa and Lakhapa t I NIl Nil 
talukas ; and Nakha-
trana taluka excluding 
Mangwana, Roha and 
Kotda police stations). 
2 Bhu; Bhuj taluka; Khawda and Nil Nil 
Kbadir mahals ; and 
Mangwana, Roha and 
Kotda police stations 
in Nakhatrana taluka. 
3 Mandvi Mandvi taluka ; and Bhuj- Nil Nil 
apur and K,argoga po-
lice stations in Mundra 
taluka. 
4 Anjar I Anjar taluka; and Mundra Nil Nil 
taluka (excluding Bhuj-
I apur and Kargoga 
I police stations). 
5 Vagad Rapar and Bhachau Nil Nil 
talukas. 
ZALAWAD DISTRICT 
6/ Dhrangadhra Dhrangadhra and Dasada Nil Nil 
I talukas. 
I 
71 Surendra- Limbdi, Lakhtar and .2 I Nil 
nagar 
I 
Wadhwan talukas; and 
Mull circle in Muli 
taluka. 
I , I I . __ . __ ~ _________ . ____ ~~ _____________________ 
---L~_-
77 
211S(B) LS-ll. 

78 
Seats reserved 
Total for 
Serial Name of Extent of Constituency number ----1----No. Constituency of Sche- Sche-
seats duled duled 
Castes Tribes 
-- ------ ------------ ---- ---- ----
1 ~ 3 4 S 6 
-- ------ ------------ ---- ---- ----
8 Halvad Halvad, Chorila and Sayla Nil Nil 
talukas; and Sara 
circle in Muli taluka. 
MADHYA SAURASHTRA DISTRICT 
9 Morvi Malia mahal ; and Morvi 1 Nil Nil 
taluka (excluding 
Tankara circle). 
10 Wankaner Wankaner taluka; Paddh- I Nil Nil 
ari mahal; and Tankara 
circle in Morvi taluka. 
II Rajkot Ra;kot municipality. I Nil Nil 
I2 Jasdan Jasdan taluka and Rajkot 
taluka (excluding Rajkot 
I Nil Nil 
municipality). 
13 Kunkavav Kunkavav, Babra and ~ Nil 
Gonda! talukas j and 
Lodhika and Kotda-
sangani mahals. 
14 Jetpur Jetpur taluka j Kandoma 
mahal; and Bahayavadar 
I Nil Nil 
circle in U pleta peta 
mahal. 
IS Dhoraji Dhoraji taluka ; and 1 Nil Nil 
Upleta circle in Upleta 
peta mahal. 
HALAR DISTRICT 
16 Jamnagar . Jamnagar circle in Jam- 1 Nil Nil 
nagar taluka. 
17 ]OOia Jodia mahal ; Dhrol talu- I Nil Nil 
ka ; and Jamnagar 
tsluka (excluding 
Jamnagar circle). 
.---.---~ 
• 

78 
Seats reserved 
for 
Total ---- ----
Serial Name of Extent of Constituency number Sche- Sche-
No. Constituency of duled duled 
seats Castes Tribes 
- - ------ ------------ ---- ---- ----
T 2 3 4 S 6 
-- ------ ------------ ---- ---- ----
18 Jamjodhpur Jamjocihpur and Kalawad I Nil Nil 
talukas. 
19 Bhanvad Bhanvad and Lalpur I Nil Nil 
mahals ; and Kham-
bhalia taluka (exclud-
ing Salaya circle). 
'lO Dwarka Okhamandal taluka of I Nil Nil 
Amreli district ; and 
Kalyanpur taluka ; 
and Sa!aya circle in 
Khambhalia taluka of 
Halar district. 
SORATH DISTRICT 
21 Porbandar Porbandar and Bhagvadar I Nil Nil 
circles in Porbandar 
taluka. 
22 Kutiyana . Kutiyana and Ranavav 
mahals ; and Naviban-
I Nil Nil 
dar circle in Porbandar 
taluka. 
:3 Mangrol Mangrol and Manavadar-
Bantwa talukas ; and 
2 I Nil 
Keshod and Vanthali 
mahals. 
24 Somnath Veraval-Patan taluka. I Nil Nil 
2S Malia Malia taluka and Talala 1 Nil Nil 
mahal of Sorath dis-
trict ; and Kodinar ta-
luka (excluding the 
villages specified in 
item (I) of the 
Appendix) of Amreli 
district. 

80 
--;-------_._._---------_._----- .. --- -----
/seats reseIVed for 
-----I Sche- Sche-
duled duIed 
i Total 
Serial Name of i Extent of Constituency number 
No. Constituency of 
seats Castes Tribes 
I 2 3 4 S 6 
------ ---
26 Junagadh Junagadh talukaj] and. Nil Nil 
I Dungar forest range. 
t;j i r.' ~ ... 
27 Visavadar . Visavadar taluka~.; and_ I Nil Nil 
Bhesan and Mendarda 
mahals; and Visavadar 
forest range. 
28 Una Una taluka; and Sasan, Nil Nil 
Jamvala and Jasadhar 
forest ranges of Sorath 
district ; and such of 
the villages in Kodinar 
taluka as are specified 
in item (I) of the 
Appendix, of Arnr eli 
district. 
GOHILWAD DISTRICT 
29 Amrcli Amreli taluka; and Dhari I 
taluka [excluding the J Nil Nil 
villages specified in 
item (2) of the 
Appendix] of Amreli 
district. i 
i 
30 Rajula Rajula-Dedan and Jafra- I 
bad-Babariawad mahals' I 
Nil Nil 
of Gobi! wad district ; 
and Khamba rnahal 
and such of the 
villages in Dhari taluka I 
as are specified in item 
(2) of the Appendix, of 
Amreli district. 
31 Kundla Kundla taluka. J Nil Nil 
32 Lathi Lathi and Lilia rnahals; Nil Nil 
Dhola circle in 
Umrala peta rnahal of 
Gohilwad district ; 

81 
--- .-- .. _--_._--- ._----- ------.------
, 
I
I ,: Total 
Serial Name of I Extent of Constituency number 
No. Constituency I I of 
Seats reserved for 
Sche-
duled 
Castes 
Sche-
duled 
Tribes I I seats 
,I--I-----~--- --
2 3 1 4 __ :.. ___ ~_ 
33 Botad 
34 Bhavnagar 
35 Vallabhipur 
36 Palitana 
37 Mahuva 
38 Talaja 
and Damnagar mahal I 
[excluding the villages 
specified in item (3) of I 
the Appendix] of Amreli 
district. i 
I , 
I Botad-Paliad taluka; II 
Gadhada mahal ; and 
I Umrala circle in, 
. Umrala peta mahal. ! 
i 
Bhavnagar municipality .,1 
and areas included in 
Dock Estates of Old , 
and New Ports and I 
Bhavnagar Para. 1 
Vallabhipur mahal j Si-I 
hor-Songadh taluka; 
and Bhavnagar Daseroi I 
taluka (excluding I 
Bhavnagar munici- i 
pality and areas includ-
ed in Dock Estates of 
Old and New Ports and 
Bhavnagar Para, and 
Kaliak circle) of Gohil-
wad district; and such 
of the villages in 
Damnagar mah,,} as are 
specified in item (3) 
of the Appendix, of 
Amreli district. 
i Palitana-Chok taluka j and 
Gariadhar mahal. 
Mahuva taluka. 
Talaja- Datha taluka j Ka-
Hak circle in Bhavnagar 
Da.'lcroi taluka of 
Gohilwad district 
Nil Nil 
Nil Nil 
Nil Nil 
Nil Nil 
Nil Nil 
Nil Nil 

Serial 
No. 
39 
43 
44 
45 
I 
82 
- -
Name of Extent of Constituency 
Constituency I 
I 
-
2 3 
and Ghogho mahal of 
~nnrelidistrict. 
B~N~SKANTH~ DISTRICT 
Tharad Tharad and Wav taluka!>. 
Kankrej Kankrej (Sihori) and 
Deodar talukas. 
Deesa Deesa and Dhanera ta-
lukas; and such of the 
villages in Palanpur 
taluka as are specified 
in item (4) of the 
Appendix. 
Palanpur Danta taluka; Vadgpm. 
mahal; and Palanpur 
taluka [excluding the 
vil1a~es specified in 
item (4) of the 
: ~ppendix]. 
SABARKANTH~ DISTRICT 
Bhiloda I Bhiloda, Khedbrahma 
and Meghraj talukas ; 
. Vijaynagar mahal; and 
Modasa taluka [ex-
cluding the villages 
specified in item (5) 
of the ~ppendix]. 
Idar Idar Imd Himatnagar 
taiukas; and such of 
I the villages in Modasa 
I taluka as are specified 
in item (5) of the 
~ppendix. 
Bayad Bayad taluka j and Malpur 
mahal. 
I Seats reserved for 
Total 
number Sche- Sche-
of duled duled 
seats Castes Tribes 
4 c; 6 
~ 
--
I Nil Nil 
I Nil Nil 
2 I Nil 
2 Nil I 
I 
2 Nil I 
I 
I Nil 2 I 
I Nil Nil 

83 
-- ._--
Total 
I Seats reserved for 
S erial Name of Extent of Constituency number Sche- Sche-
No. Constituency of duled duled 
seats Castes Tribes 
.-
J 2 3 4 S 6 
-
46 Prantij Prantij taluka. I Nil Nil 
MEHSANA DISTRICT I 
I 
47 Vijapur Vijapur taluka [excluding J Nil Nil 
North the villages specified in 
item (6) of the Appen-
dix.] I 
48 Vijapur Such of the villl;'ges in I Nil Nil 
South Vijapur taluka as are 
I specified in item (6) of 
the Appendix; and 
such of the villages in 
Kalal taluka as are 
specified in item (7) 
of the Appendix. 
49 Kalol Kalal taluka [excluding 
the villages specified in 
I Nil Nil 
item (7) of the Appen-
dix.] 
50 Kadi Kadi taluka. I Nil Nil 
51 Mehsana Mehsana taluka [exclu~l I Nil Nil 
ing the villages specifie 
in item (8) of the 
Appendix]. 
52 Visnagar Visnagar tsluka ; and I Nil· Nil 
such of the villages in 
Mehsana taluka as are I 
specified in item (8) 
of the Appendix: 
53 Kheralu Kheralu taluka [excluding I Nil Nil 
the villages specified in 
item (9) of the 
Appendix]. 
54 Sidhpur Sidhpll' taluk (exclud- I Nil Nil 
ing the villagt's speci-
fied in item ~IO) of the I .--.------ . __ .... _ ......... --.-- .. _--

-----.-- .. _-_.- ------ ---,-------- ----
i 
Serial Name of i Extent of Constituency 
No. Constituencyi 
·---1 
I o2! 3 
---1---
I 
ss Petan 
56 Radhanpw 
57 Chanasma 
Appenclix] ; and such of 
the villages in' Kheralu 
taluka as at e specified in 
item ~9) of the Appen-
dix. 
Pstan tsluka; Harij mr 
hal; pnd such of the vil-
lages in Sidhpur taluka 
ss 81 e specified in item 
(10) of the Appendix. 
Radhanpul and Santalpur 
tl.~lukas; and Sami 
mahal 
Chanasma taluka 
AHMEDABAD DISTRICT 
S8 Dbandhuka Dhandhuka taluka 
S9 Dholka Dholka taluka. 
60 Viramgam Viramgam taluka [exclu-
ding the villages spe-
cified in item (II ) 
of the Appendix]. 
61 Sanand Sanand maha!; and such 
of the villages in Vi-
ramgam t~luka as are 
Tetal 
number 
of 
seats 
Seats reserved 
for 
! 
Sche- ! Sche-
duled I duled 
: I Castes' I Tribes 
I 1--
1_4_1_~ __ 1~_ 
2 I 
I 
I 
Nil 
I I Nil Nil 
I Nil Nil 
Nil Nil 
Nil Nil 
Nil Nil 
Nil Nil 
specified in item (I I) ! 
of the Appendix. 
62 Dehgam I Dehgam taluka. 
63 Dukroi I Daskroi taluka [excluding 
I the villages specified 
in item (12) of the 
Appendix]. 
Nil Nil 
Nil Nil 
I ----- ~.----

-------~------------.r_--'."-----
Serial Name of Extent of Constituency 
No. Constituency 
1 3 
Total 
number 
of 
seats 
4 
Seats, reserved 
for 
Sche-
duled 
Castes 
5 
Sche-
duled 
Tribes 
6 
---I·---------r-----------------~-----~-------I------
64 Ahmedabad Ahmedabad City taluka 
[excluding Ahmedabad 
municipal corporation, 
Ahmedabad canton-
ment and the villages 
specified in items (13) 
and (14) of the Ap-
pendix]; and such of 
the villages in Daskroi 
taluka as are specified 
in item (I2) of the 
Appendix. 
65 Ellis Bridge Ellis Bridge (New limit), 
Ellis Bridge (Old 
limit), Shahpur I and 
Shahpur II wards of 
Ahmedabad municipal I 
corporation; and such 
of the villages in 
Ahmedabad City taluka 
as are specified in item 
(13) of the Appendix. 
66 Diriapur-
Kazipur 
,67 Kalupur 
2113 (B) LS-12. 
Dariapur-Kazipur (para. 
I), Jahangirpura and 
Shahibag wards of 
Ahmedabad municipal 
corporation j Ahmeda-
bad cantonment; and 
such of the villages 
in Ahmedabad city 
taluka as are specified 
in item (14) of the 
Appendix. 
Kalupur II, Kalupur III, 
Dariapur r and Da-
riapur II wards of 
Ahmedabad municipal I 
corporation. I 
Nil Nil 
Nil Nil 
Nil Nil 
I Nil Nil 

,. 
Seats reserved 
Total for Serial Name of' Extent of ConatituCUcy Dumber ---------No. Constituency of Schc .. Sche-
SeatS duled duled 
c.stes Tribes 
--- ------------------ ---- ---- ----I .[2 3 4 S 6 --- ------------------ ---- ---- ----
68 Khadia Khadia I, Khadia II, Nil Nil Khadia III, Kalupur I 
and Railwaybaura wards' 
of Ahmeda d muni-
cipal corpor ation . 
69 Jamalpur Jamalpur I, Jamalpur II, Nil Nil 
Raikhad and Behram-
pur wards of Ahme-
dabad municipal cor-
poration. 
70 Gomtipur Gomtipur, Rajpur-Hir- 2 I Nil pur, Maninagar, Kho-
khra-~ehmedabad-
Mithipur, Rakhial, 
Para 4A and 4B, Sher-
kotda, Saraspur, Asar-
wa and Chamanpura 
wards of Ahmedabad 
municipal corporation. 
KAlRA DISTRICT 
71 Cambay Cambay taIuka. Nil Nil 
72 Borsad Borsad taluka [exclu- I Nn NU South ding Borsad munici-
paIit>.: and the villages 
specdied in item (15) 
of the Appendix] 
73 Borsad Borsad municipalitvaDd I Nil Nil 
North such of the villages 
in Borsad-taIuka as are 
specified in item (15) of 
the Appendix. 
74 Anand Anand municipality and I NU Nil 
South such of the villages In 
Anand taluka .. are 

87 
Seats reserved 
for 
Total ---- ----
SeriI1 Name of Extent of CODltituency number Sche- Sche-
No. Constituency of duled duled· . 
seats Castes Tribes 
--. ---.--- _._-,--------- ---- ---- ----
I 2 3 4 5 6 
-- ------ ------------ ---- ---- ----
specified in item (16) 
of the Appendix. 
75 Anand Anand taluka [excluding 1 Nil Nil 
North Anand municipality 
and the villages spe-
cified in item (16) 
of the Appendix]. 
76 Petlad Petlad taluka [excluding 1 Nil Nil 
the villages specified in 
item (17) ofthe App-
endix]. 
77 Matar Matar taluka; and such I Nil Nil 
of the villages in Pet-
lad taluka as are 
specified in item (17) 
of the Appendix. 
78 Kaira Mehemdabad taluka I Nil Nil 
79 Nadiad Nadiad municipality and I Nil Nil 
South such of the villages 
in Nadiad taluka as are 
specified in item (18) 
of the Appendix. 
80 Nadiad Nadiad taluka [excluding I Nil Nil 
North Nadiad mWlicipality 
and the villages spe-
cified in item (18) 
ofthe Appendix]. 
81 Kapadwanj Kapadwanj taluka [ex- t Nil Nil 
eluding the villages 
specified in item (19) of 
the Appendix]. 
82 Thasra Thasra and Balasinor 2 r Nil 
talukas ; and such 
()f the villages in 

Serial 
N o. 
.-
8 3 
8 4 
8 5 
8 6 
87 
I 
I 
I 
I 
i 
I 
88 
.-
Name of 
Constituency 
Extent of Constituency 
2 3 
Kapadwanj taluka as 
I 
are specified in item 
(19) of the Appendix. 
PANCHMAHALS DISTRICTS 
Sanuampur Santrampur taluka [ex-
eluding the villages 
specified in item 
of the Appendix]. 
(20) 
Lunawada Lunawada taluka ; and 
such of the villages in 
Santrampur wuka 
88 are srci1ied in 
item (20 of the 
Appendix. 
Shehra Shehra taluka ; and 
Godhra taluka [exclu-
ding the villages 
specified in item (21) 
of the Appendix]. 
Godbra Kalol taluka [excluding 
the villages specified in 
item (22) of the 
Afpendix 1; and such 
o the villages in 
Godhra ta1uka as are 
specified in item (21) 
of the Appendix. 
Halol Halol wuka [excluding 
the villages specified in 
item (2~) of the 
Appendix ; and such of 
the villages in Kelol 
talub as are specifled 
in item (22) of the 
Appendix. 
Scats reserved . for 
TOtal 
nwnber Sche- Sclle-
of duled duled 
seats Castes Tribes 
4 5 6 
I Nil 1 
I Nil Nil 
I 
I 
I Nil Nil 
I Nil Nil 
I Nil Nil 

--
Seats reserved 
for 
Total 
Serial Name of Enent of Constituency number Sche- Sche-
No. Constituency of du1cd duled 
seats Castes Tribes 
-
1 2 3 4 S 6 
-
88 Daria Daria taluka [excluding I Nil Nil 
the villages specified 
in item (24) of the 
Appendix]; Jam-
bughoda mahal; and 
such of the villages in 
Halol taluka as are 
specified in item (23) 
of the Appendix. 
89 Limkheda Limkheda taluka; and I Nil I 
such of the villages 
in Daria taluka as are 
specified in item (24) 
of the Appendix. 
90 Jhalod Jhalod taluka; and I Nil I 
such of the villages in 
Dohad taluka as are 
specified in item (25) 
of the Appendix. 
91 Dohad Dohad taluka [excluding 
the villages specified 
in item (25) of the 
I Nil I 
Appendix]. 
BARODA DISTRICT 
92 Chhota Chhota Udepur and 2 Nil I 
Udepur Jabugam talukas ; and 
such of the villages in 
Sankheda taluka as 
are specified in item 
(25) of the Appendix. 
93 Naswadi Naswadi taluka; and 1 Nil I 
Sankheda taluka 
[excluding the vill»les 
specified in item (26) 
ofthe Appendix]. I 

90 
Seats reserved 
for 
Total --Sertal Name of Extent of Constituency number Sche- Sche-
No. Constituency of duled duled. 
seats Castes Tribes 
_.-....... - ,-
I 2 3 4 5 6 
-- --~-- .- -
94 Karjan Karjan taluka ; Sinor J Nil Nil 
mahal; and such of the 
villages in Dabhoi 
taluka as are specified 
in item (27) of the 
Appendix. 
95 Dabhoi Waghodia taluka ; and I Nil Nil 
Dabhoi taluka [exclud-
ing the villages speci-
fied in item (27) of the 
Appendix]. 
96 Savli Savli tBluka; and Baroda 2 I Nil 
taluka [excluding Baro-
da municipality and 
the villages specified 
in item (28) of the 
Appendix]. 
97 Baroda City Fetepura City and I Nil Nil 
Bast Wadi wards of Baroda 
municipality; and such 
of the villages in 
Baroda taluka as are 
specified in item (28) 
of the Appendix. 
98 Baroda City Bab3jipura, Raopura I Nil Nil 
West and Sayajiganj wards 
of Barods municipality. 
99 Padra Padra taluka. I 
I Nil Nil 
BROACH DISTRICT' 
100 Jambusar Jilmbusar talub; and I Nil Nil··' 
such of the villages in 
Amod mahal as are 
I 
specified in item (29) 
of the Appendix. 

• 
Seats reserved 
for 
Total --------
Serial Name of Extent of Constituency number Selle- Sche-
No. Constituency of duled duled 
seats Castes Tribes 
--'--7------ ----------r- --- ------
I 2 3 4 5 6. 
---~~---------~-
101 Vagra Vasta taluka j Amod . I Nil Nil 
mahal [excluding the 
102 Broach 
103 Nandod 
104 ]hagadia 
105 Ankleshwar 
villages specified in 
item (29) of the 
Appendix]; and such of 
the villages in Broach 
talub as are specified 
in item (30) of the 
Appendix. 
Broach taluka [excluding 
the villages specified 
in item (30) of the 
Appendix]. 
Nandod taluka; Sagbara 
mahal, and such 
of the villages in 
Dediapada taluka. as 
are specified in item 
(3 I) ofthe Appendix. 
Jhagadia talukaj Dedia-
pada taluka [excluding 
the vil~8 specified in 
item _~3~) of the 
AppendIX]; and Valia 
mahal [excluding the 
villages Srcified in 
item (32 of the 
AppendiX]. 
Ankleshwar taluka; 
Hansot mahal; and 
sUCh of 'thl. \'illages 
in Valia mahal as are 
specified in item (32) 
of the Ap~ix. . 
SURAT DISTRICT· 
106 Surat City Wards Nos. ~ to 7 
East of Surat muniCipality. 
107 Surat City surat municipality 
Weat (excluding Ward5 Nos. 
3 to 7)· 
I I Nil Nil 
I 
I 
1 
I 
I 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 
I 
L 
I 
I 
Nil Nil 
Nil \. Nil 

• 
Seats reserved 
for 
Total --------S ;eria! Name of Extent of Constituency nmnber Schc-- Schc--No. Constituency of duled duled 
seats Castes Tribes 
-- ------ -----'-- - 1--- ---1 2' 3 4 5 6 .- --
~ 
--- -+-
108 Chorasi Charasi taluka (exclud- I Nil Nil ing Surat municipality). 
109 NaVllBri Navsari and 
~ukas. 
Mahuwa 2 Nil I 
no Bardoli Bardoll taluka; 
PaJsana mahal. 
and I Nil Nil 
III Mangrol Mlngrol and 
talubs. 
Olpad I Nil Nil 
112 Kamrcj Kamrej and Mandvi I Nil I 
talukaa. 
113 Songadh Songadh tahlka; Valod I Nil I 
mahal; and such of the 
villages in Vyara taluka 
as are specified in item 
(33) of the Appendix. 
1I4 Bansda BanScla taluka; and I Nil I 
Vyara taluka [exclud-
i~ the villages spCo-
c' ed in item (33) 
of the Appendix]. 
lIS Dharamput Dharamput taluka. I Nil I 
I16 Chikhli Chikhli taluka. I Nil I 
I17 Bulsar Bulsar taluka; and 2 I Nil 
Gandevi mabel. 
I liS Pardi Pardi taluka. I Nil I 
·GRBATBR BOMBAY DISTRICT 
119 Colaba I Census warda Nos. 1 and I Nil Nil 
2, and electoral areas 
A-S and A-6 of Census 
I I ward NO·3, of Greater 
Bombay. , 
·NOTBS I.-The names of the 77 Census wards of Greater Bombay 
are set out in item <34) of the AppendIX. 
2.-The fuller description of each of the Asiembly conStituencies Nos. 
119 to 1.3~ of this part in terms of roads, streets and other thoroughfares 
lad ofVilJala is given in item (35) of the Appendix to this part. 

.' Se als r e&ex vu1 
for 
Total • 
Serial Name of Extent of Constituency' number Sche- Sche-
No. Constituency .. of duled duled 
seats Castes Tribes 
1 2 3 4 5 6 
120 Mandvi Census wards Nos. 4 and I Nil Nil 
6 of Greater Bombay. 
121 Oongri' Census wards Nos. 5 and I Nil Nil 
7 of Greater Bombay . 
122 Kumbhar-' . Census wards Nos. 8 and I Nil Nil 
wada 9, and electoral area 
D- I of Census ward 
No. 13, of Greater 
Bombay. 
123 Dhobi Talao Census ward No. 10, and I Nil Nil 
Census ward NO·3 
I 
(excluding electoral 
areas A-5 and A-6), of 
Greater Bombay. 
124: Girgaum Census wards Nos. I I and I Nil Nil 
12 of Greater Bombay. 
12S Walkeshwar Census ward No. 14, and 
Census ward No. 13 
I Nil Nil 
(excluding electoral 
area 0-1), of Greater 
Bombay. 
126 Mahalaxmi· Census ward No. 16, and I Nil Nil 
Census ward No. IS 
(excluding electoral 
area 0-20) of Greater 
Bombay. 
127 Bycu1la Census wards Nos. 20,31 
and 29, and electoral 
.3 1 Nil 
area 0-20 of Census 
ward No. 15, of Greater 
Bombay. 
128 Nagpada Census wards Nos. 17 I Nil Nil 
and 18 of Greater 
Bombay. 
129 Mazgaon Census wards Nos. 19 I Nil Nil 
and 22 of Greater 
Bombay. 
-2113 (B) LS-13. 

..;..;.m. 
Seats reserved 
for 
Total 
s erial Name of Extent of Constituency number Sche- Sche-
No. Constituency of duled duled 
seats Castes Tribes 
1 2 3 4 , 6 
130 Sewree Census wards Nos. 23 I Nil Nil 
and 24 of Greater 
Bombay. 
131 Parel Census wards Nos. 25 I Nil Nil 
and 30 of Greater 
Bombay. 
132 Matunga Census wards Nos. 26. 
27 and 28 of Greater 
2 I Nil 
Bombay. 
133 Wodi Census ward No. 31. I Nil Nil 
and Census ward No. 
32 (excluding electoral 
areas G. IS and G. 20), 
of Greater Bombay. 
134 Dadar Census ward No. 33. and I Nil Nil 
electoral areas G. 18 
and G. 20 of Census 
ward No. 32 of Greater 
Bombay. 
13' Mahim Census ward No. 34 of J Nil Nil 
Greater Bombay. 
136 Parle-' Census wards Nos. 36, I Nil Nil 
Andheri 37, 54, 65 and 75 of 
Greater Bombay. 
137 Bandra Census ward NO·3' I Nil Nil 
(excluding electoral 
areas of Bandra I ward 
and Kalina) of Greater 
Bombay. 
138 Kurla Census Wards Nos. 39, 
41, 42, 45, 46, 4 8, 52, 
1 Nil Nil 
53, 56, 60, 62, 63, 66 
to 71, 73 and n, 
and electoral areas of 
Bandra I Ward and 
Kalina of Census ward 
No. 3S of Greater 
I Bombay. 

Serial Name of 
No. Constitumc 
-I 2 
-
139 Ch<-mbur 
140 Borivli 
141 Base in 
142 Palghar 
1,.3 Dahenu 
144 Jawahar 
14,S Bhiwandi 
91 
Extent of Coostituency 
y 
- _._--_. __ ._--
Total 
Seats reaened 
for 
I 
numbr::r 
of 
-,-----3------1 ~U, 
Sche-
duled 
Castes 
Sche-
duled 
Tribes 
6 
-r----------------I------~------I------
Clnsus wards Nos. 38, 
40 , 43, 44, 47, 49 to 
51, 55, 57 to 59, 61, 
64, 72, 74 and 76 of 
Greater Bombay; and 
Muh.:nd town in Thana 
taluka of Thana distriCt. 
THANA DISTRICT 
Boriv Ii taluka. 
Bassc.in taluka. 
I
I Palghar taluka [excluding 
the \-ilIages specified 
in item (36) of the 
Appendix]. 
Dahenu and Umbergaon 
talukas; and such of 
the \-~l1ages in Palf.har 
taluka as are specified 
in item (36) of the 
Appendix. 
JaWlbar and Wada 
talukas. 
Bhiwandi and Shahpur 
talukas; and Mokhada 
peta. 
Murbad tsluka ; and 
Kalyan taluka [exclud-
ing Kalyan municipali-
ty, Ambarnath village 
panchayat and the \-i1-
lages specified in items 
(37) and (38) of the 
Appendix]. 
I Nil Nil 
I Nil Nil 
I Nil Nil 
I Nil Nil 
2 Nil I 
• 
r Nil 
Nil I 
I Nil Nil 
I 
I _ ........ _ .. _. ~ .. -.------"------...!--.-----.-.-.---

·98 
Seats reser"ed 
for 
Ser 
Total ia1 Name of Extent of Constiruency number Sche- Sche-No. Ccmstitucncy of duhd duled 
seats Castes Tribes 
I 2 3 4 5 6 
147 Kalym KaIyan municipality I Nil Nil 
and such ofthev.iIlages 
in Kalyan taluka .as 
are spr.cified in item 
(37) of the Appendix. 
148 Ul1asnapr Ambamath "illage pan_ t Nil I 
Nit 
chaY8t and such of the 
"illages in KaIYan talu- i 
I 
ka as are specifir.d in I 
I 
itr.m (38) of the 
Appendix. 
149 Thana Thana taluka (excluding 
Mulund town). 
I Nil Nil 
KOLABA DISTRICT 
ISO Panvel Panvel taluka ; Matheran t Nil Nil 
town ; and such of the 
Villages in Uran mahaI 
as are specified in item 
(9) of the. Appendix . 
lSI Pen • Pen, KhaIapur and Kar- Nil 2 I 
jar taIukas; Sudhagad 
maha.l; and Vran mahal 
[excluding the villages 
specified in item (39) 
of the Appendix). 
152 Alibis Alibag taluka. I Nil Nil 
IS3 Roba Roha taluka; and Murud 
mahal. 
I Nil Nil 
IS .. Ma:ogaon . Mangaon 
Mhasla 
talu.ka ; 
and Shriwar-
2 I Nil 
I 
dhan mahaIs; and such 
of the "illagcs in 
Mahad taluka as are , speci1k.d in item (40) 
I 
of the Appendix. 

-f," ~ '. Seats reservrd 
for 
Total ----- ---
Serial Name of Extent of Constituency number Sche- Sche-
No. Constituericy of duled dulcd 
seats Castes Tribes 
I 2 3 4 5 6 
-
ISS Mahad I Poladpur mahal; and 1 Nil Nil 
i Mahad 1 taluka [exclu-I 
· ding the villages shci-
tied in item (40) 0 the 
Appendix]. 
I - . 
POONA DISTRICT I 
· IS6 Shukrawar Shukrawar peth, Guruvar I Nil Nil 
peth (Veta!) peth, Ghorpade 
I I 
peth, Ganj peth, Bha-
wani peth and Nana 
" 
I I peth wards of Poona 
corporation. 
157 Kasba peth Kasba peth, Mangal war I Nil Nil 
peth, Somwar peth, 
Rasta peth, Nage~h 
.. peth, Raviwar peth, 
Ganesh peth and 
· Budhwar peth wards of 
Poona corporation. 
I 
. 
ISS Shivajinagar Shivajinagar, B~burda; 
Yerandavana, Sadashiv 
I Nil Nil 
peth, Narayan peth and 
Shanwar peth wards 
ofPoona corporation. 
159 Poona Poona cantonment, I Nil Nil 
Cantonment Poona suburban area, 
I 
Yeravda, Ghorpuri, 
Mundhava, Wanowari, 
Gultekdi, Bibewadi 
and Parvati wards of 
Poona corporation. 
160 Haveli Haveli taluka; and Kirkee 
cantonment, Aundh 
2 I Nil 
and Bopodi wards . of 
Poona corporation. 
161 Indapur Indapur taluka. I Nil Nil 
'- -- ._------....;..-'""".,.,....,....,.-----------------

Serial 
No. 
I 
162 
166 
168 
I Scau l'CIerVeCI 
for 
I 
Total -Name of Extent of Constituency Number Sche- Scbe-
Constituency of duled duled 
seats Castes Tribes 
2 3 4 5 6 
Baramati Baramati and Dhond 2 I Nil 
talulw. 
Sirur Sirur taluka. I Nil Nil 
Junnar Junnar taluka [excluding I Nil Nil 
the v~ specified in 
i item 41) of the 
. Appendix]. I 
Ambegaon' I Ambegaon talub; and I Nil Nil 
I 
such of the villages in 
\ Junnar taluka as are 
specified in item (41) 
! of the Appendix. , 
! 
Khed Khed taluka. 
i 
Nil Nil I 
Maval Maval taluka; and such I Nil Nil 
, of the villages in Mulshi 
taluka as are specified 
I 
in . item (42) of the 
I Appendix. 
Bhor Bhortaluka; Velhe mahal; I Nil Nil 
and Mulshi talu.ka 
[excluding the villages 
specified in item (42) 
of the Appendix). 
Purandhar I Purandhar taluka. I Nil 'Nil 
RATNAGIRI DISTRICT 
I Khed Khed taluka. I Nil Nil 
Dapoli Mandangad taluka and I Nil t Nil 
Dapoli taluka [exclud- I 
ing the villages specified 1 
in item (3) of the I Appendix.] 
\ 
, 
--------------_.-- ... __ ._-----

) 
Seats reserved 
for 
Total ---- --s erial Name of Extent of Constituency number Sche- Sche-
No. Constituency of duled duled 
seats Castes Tribes 
-1 a 3 4 oS 6 
-
I~ Guhagar Guhagar taluka [excluding I Nil Nil 
the villages specified 
in item (44) of the 
Arpendix] ; and such 
o the villages in 
Dapoli taluka as are 
specifiea jn item (43) of 
the Appendix. 
173 Cblplun Chirun taluka; and such 2. I Nil 
o the villases in Guha-
gar and Sangameshwar 
talukas as are specified 
in item (44) and (45) 
respectively of the 
Appendix. 
174 Sanl'Ullesh- Sangameshwar taluka [ex- I Nil Nil 
war clucting the villages 
specified in item (45) 
of the Appendix]; and 
the v1lages in Ratnagiri 
taluka as are specified 
in item (46) of the 
Appendix. 
I" 
Ratnagiri Ratnagiri taluka [exclu- I Nil Nil 
ding the villages 
specified in item t46) 
of the Appendix]. 
176 Lan; a Lan;a mahal j and such I Nil Nil 
o. the villages in Raja-
pur taluka as are speci-
fied in item (46) of the 
Appendix. 
117 Rajapur Rajapur taluka [excluding I Nil Nil 
the vi~ specified in 
item (47 of the Appen-
dix]. I 
178 Ma1wan Malwan taluka. 1 Nil 
I 
Nil 

iOo 
r- -
Seats reserved 
for 
s 'erial Name of Extent of Constituency Total --- --No. Constituency number Sche- Sche-
of dUled duled 
seats Castes Tribet 
------- ----------- -- --
I 2- 3 4 5 6 
179 Deogad Deogad taluka; and such 1 Nil Nil 
of the villages in Kan-
kavli mahal as are speci-
fied in item (48) of 
the Appendix. 
180 Kankavli Kankavli mahal [exclud- I Nil Nil 
inA the vi~es speci-
fied in item 48) of the 
I Appendix]; and Kudal 
mahal [excluding the 
villages specified in 
item (49) of the 
Appendix]. 
181 Vengurla Vengurla mahal; and such I Nil Nil 
of the villages in 
Kudal mahal as are 
specified in item (49) of 
the Appendix. 
182- Sawantwadi Sawantwadi taluka. I Nil Nil 
KOLHAPUR DISTRICT 
I S3 Chandgad Chandgad taluka; and I Nil Nil 
Ajra mahal [excluding 
the villages specified in 
item (so) of the 
Appendix.] 
184 Gadhinglaj Gadhinglaj taluka ; and 
luch of the villages in 
I Nil . Nil 
Ajra mahal as are speci-
fied in item (so) ofthe 
Appendix. 
ISS Kagal Kagal taluka. I Nil . Nil 
J86 Bhudargad Bhudargad talukaj and I Nil Nil 
such of the villages 
in Radhanagari taluka 
as are specified in item , . , ~ 
(51) of the Appendix. 

Serial Name of 
No. Constituency 
101 
Extent of Constituency 
Scats reserved 
for 
Total - - - - - - - -
number Schc- Sche-
of duled duled 
seata Castes Tribes 
--- ------ ------------ ---- ---- ----
I 2 3 4 s 6 
._- - - - - - -- - -- - - -.. - - -- - - - - - - - - - -- - - - - - - -
188 
RadhaDlgari Radh8Dapr1 taluka [ex-
cluding the viUages 
: specified in item (51) of 
the Appendix]; and 
such of the villages in 
Karvir taluka as arc 
specified in hem (s2) 
ofthc Appendix. 
Panha1a Bawda mahal; and Pan-
hala mahal [excluding 
the villages specified in 
item (53) of the 
Appendix). 
189 I Shahuwadi ShahuWldi taluka; and 
. such of the villages in I 
PanhaJa mahal as are 
specified in item (53) 
of the Appeadix. 
190 Kolhapur Kolhapur municipality. 
191 Hatkanangale Hatkanange taluka; 
and rvir talub 
[excluding Kolhapur 
municiplllity and the I 
villages 8~cd in 
I item (s2 of the 
Shiro} 
., Appendix]. 
192 I Shirol talulca. 
SOUTH SATARA DISTRICT 
193 Jath lath taluka; and such I 
of the villages in Mirai I 
taluka as arc specified ' 
in item (54) of the 
Appendix. 
2113(B) LS-14. 
Nil Nil 
I Nil Nil 
Nil Nil 
Nil Nil 
:1 I Nil 
Nil Nil 
I Nil Nil 

102 
Seats reserved 
for 
Serial Name of Extent ~ of Constituency Total ---- ----No. Constituency umber Sche- Sche-
of duled duled 
seats Castes Tribes 
--- ------ ------------ ---- ---- ----.. 
1 2 -- ';OC-3 . 4 S 6 -' . ' .... 
--- ------ ------------ ---- ---- ----..... UQ'l'J-Jq·~ 
194 Mira; Mira; taluka [excluding 1 . Nil Nil 
Sangli municipality and 
the villages specified 
in items (54) and (s5) 
of the Appendix] ..... : 
II( NIt.,).~I<" .,.,., -. " t 
195 Sangli Sangli municipality and 
such of the villages in 
I Nil Nil 
Mira; taluka as are 
specified in item (s5) 
of the Appendix. 
196 Tugaon Tugaon'l taluka'" [ex- I Nil Nil 
eluding the villages 
specified in item (56) 
of the Appendix]. 
• .A"~·'-",_ • .... 
197 Vita . Khanapur taluka; and I Nil 
such of the villages in 
Tasgaon tatulea as are 
specified in item (S6) 
of the Appendix. 
. . 
198 Walva Walva taluka [excluding I Nil Nil 
the villages specified in 
item (r) of the Ap-
pendix . 
199 Shirala Shirala mahal j and 1 Nil Nil 
such of the villages in 
Walva taluka as are 
specified in item (57) 
of the Appendix . 
't"'.q • -oj .., "',. 
!. 
NORTH SATARA DISTRICT 
200 Karad Such of the villages in 1 
\ 
Nil ~ Norch Karad talub as are 
specified in item ($8) 
of the Appendix. 

S erial Name of 
No. Constituency 
-
J 2 
-
201 Karad 
South 
202 Patan 
(Satara) 
203 Jaoli 
204 Wai 
205 Satara 
206 Koregaon 
207 Khatav 
208 Phaltan 
209 Malsiras 
J03 
Extent of Constituency 
3 
Karad taluka [excluding 
the villages specified in 
item (58) of the Appen-
dix]; and such of the 
villages in Patan taluka 
as are specified in item 
(59) of the Appendix. 
Patan taluka [excluding 
the villages specified 
in items (59) and (60) 
of the Appendix]. 
Jaoli taluka ; Maha-
baleshwar mahal ; and 
such of the villages 
in Patan taluka as are 
specified in item (60) 
of the Appendix. 
Wai taluka; and such of 
the villages in Satara 
taluka as are specified 
in item (61) of the 
Appendix. 
Satara taluka [excluding 
the villages specified 
in item (61) of the 
Appendix]. 
Koregaon taluka.· 
Khatav taluka. 
Phaltan and Man talukas; 
and Khandala mahal. 
SHOLAPUR DISTRICT 
Malsiras taluka. 
2JO Pandharpur' Pandharpur taluka. 
Total 
number 
of 
seats 
4 
1 
1 
1 
1 
I 
1 
I 
.2 
J 
I 
Seats reserved 
for 
Sche-
duled 
Castes 
5 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 
1 
Nil 
Nil 
Sche-
duled 
Tribes 
6 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 
-------.:...------------- .. ------.---.-

I 
I 
rial Name of Extent of Constituency Total Se 
N o. Constituency number 
, 
I 
- I I 2 3 
2 II Sangola Sangola and Mangal-
wedha talukas ; and 
I 
i Mohol talub (exclud-1 
I ing the villages spea-I I 
I tied in item (62) oftlse 
I 
I Appendix]. . 
I 
212 , Akalkot I 
I Akalkot taluka [exclud-
I ing the villages specified I 
I i in item (63) of the 
I Appendix]. I 
2 13 South ~ South Sholapur taluka; I 
Sholapur and such of the villages 
in Akalkot taluka as I 
arc specified in item 
(63) of the Appendix. 
214 Sholapur Wards Nos. 2 to 9 of 
City North Sholapur municipality. 
2 15 Sholapur Sholapur municipality 
City South (excluding Wards Nos. 
2 to 9). 
216 North North Sholapur taluka 
Sholapur [excluding Sholapur 
municipality); andsucll 
of the vilJases in Barai 
taluka as are specltled 
in item (64) of the 
Appendix]. 
2 17 Barsi Barsi talultas [excluding 
the villages specified 
in item (64) of the 
Appendix.] 
218 Madha Madha ~d K.armala 
talukas; and such of 
the villagea in Mobol 
tsluka as are specified 
in item (62) of the 
Appendix. 
of 
seats 
4 
2 
I 
2 
Seats reserved 
for 
Selle- Sche~ 
duled duled 
Castes Tribes 
I S I 
6 
Nil 
I 
I 
I 
I I 
I Nil Nil 
I 1 
I 
Nil Nil 
Nil Nil 
Nil Nil 
Nil Nil 
Nil Nil 
Nn 

Serial Name of 
No. Constituency 
-
1 2 
219 Shrigonda 
220 Pathardi 
I I , 
I 
i 
! 
, 
221 Sheogaon . 
222 Ahmcdnagar 
North 
223 Alunednagar 
South 
324 Parner 
lOS 
Extent of Constituency 
3 
AHMFD NAGAR 
DISTRr~T 
, 
i 
Shrigon da and Ker,at 
talum .. ; and Jamkhed 
mahal. 
Pathardi taluka; and 
such of the villages in 
Sheogaon taluks as .... I 
specified in item (6c;) of 
t~e Appendix. 
Shcogaon taluka [ex-
eluding the villages 
specified in ;tem (6<) I 
of the App~dix]; and I 
Newasa taluka [exclud-
ing the "illllJCs speci-
fied in item (66) of the 
Appendix]. 
I 
Ahmednagar taluka [cx- I 
cludin~ Ahm'!dnagar 
munic1pality, Ahmed-
nagar cantonment and 
the villages specined in 
itelT' (67) ofthe Apfen-
dix]; and such 0 the 
villages in Newasa 
taluka as are specified 
in item (66) of the 
Appendix. 
Ahrnednagar Municipality, 
Ahmednagar canton-
m'.:nt and such of the 
villages in Aluno::dnagar 
taluka as are specified 
in item (67) of the ap-
pendix. 
Pam er taluka 
.--
Seats reser\.ed 
Total for 
number ---- ----of Sche- Schc-
seats duled duled 
Castes Tribes 
04 S 6 
-
I 
I 
2 I I l"il 
I Nil Nil 
I Nil Nil 
Nil Nil 
I Nil Nil 
I Nil Nil 

Serial Name of 
No. Constituency 
106 
Extent of Constituency 
Seats reserved 
for 
Total ----/-----
numb'!r Sche-
of duled 
seats Castes 
Sche· 
duled 
Tribes 
--I------I------------------i------r----~-----1 2 3 4 S 6 
------1----------1----1----1----
I Rahuri taluka i and 1 Nil 
. such of the "illages in 
225 Rahuri 
226 Shirdi 
: Shrirampu r taluka as 
i are specified in item 
(68) of the Appendix. 
Kopargaon taluka; and 
Shrirampur taluka 
[excluding the villages 
specified in item (68) 
of the Appendix]. 
227 Sangamner Sangamner and Altola 
talukas. 
NASIK AND DANGS DISTRICTS 
228 Igatpuri 
229 Nasik 
230 Dindori 
231 Dangs 
232 Niphad 
233 Sinnar 
234 Yeola 
Igatpuri taluka; and 
such of the \illages in 
Nasik taluka as are 
specified in item (69) 
of the Appendix 
Nasik taluka [excluding 
the "illages specificd in 
item (69) of the 
Appendix1 
Dindori and Chandor 
talukas; and Peint and 
Surgana mahalas. 
Dangs district; and 
Kalwan taluka of Nasik 
"istrict. 
Niphad taluka 
Sinnartaluka 
Yeola taluka; and such of 
tbe \illages in Nand-
gaon taluka as II1fe spe-
cified in item (70) of 
tbe Appendix. 
2 
2 Nil 
I Nil 
I 
Nil 
I Nil 
I Nil 
I Nil 
I Nil 
Nil 
Nil 
I 
Nil 
Nil 
1 
I 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 

107 
Seats reserved 
for 
Serial Name of Extent of Comtituen"" Total -
No. Constituency number Sche- Sche-
cf duled duled 
seats Castes Tribes 
- : 
1 2 3 4 5 6 
---
235 Nandgaon Nandgaon taluka [ex- I Nil Nil 
eluding the \-mages 
specified in item t70) 
of the Appendix]; and 
such of the "mages in 
Malegaon taluka as 
are sp~cified in item 
(71) of the Appendix. 
236 Malegaon Malcgaon taluka [exclud- I Nil Nil , 
ing the "illages fp~ci- , 
fi~d in item (71) of the I Appendix.] 
I 
231 Baglan Baglan taluka I Nil Nil 
WEsr KHANDESH DISTRICT 
238 Sakri Sakri taluka ; and 2 Nil 
Nandurbar taluka [ex-
cluding the villages 
sp~cified in item (72) 
of the Appendix]. 
239 Nawapur . Nawapur taluka; and 
such of the "illagl!s in 
I Nil 
Nandurbar taluka as 
are sp'!cifi~d in item 
(72) of the Appendix. 
240 Taloda Taloda and Akkalkuwa Nil 
talukas. 
241 Shahada Shirpur and Shahada 2 Nil 
talukas ; and Akrani 
mahal. 
242 Sindkheda Sindkheda taluka Nil Nil 
243 Dhulia Dhulia mUI'icipality Nil Nil 
South and such of the "mages 
in Dhulia taluka as are 
specified in item (73) 
of the Appendix. 

Serial Name of 
No. Constituency 
loS 
Extent of Constituency 
Seats reserved 
for 
Total ---- 0:----
number 
of 
seats 
Sche-
duled 
Castes 
Sche-
duled 
Tribes -·-1-------1------------ ---- --- __ _ 
I 2 3 4 6 5 ---1---1----- .---- __ . _______ _ 
244 Dhulia Dhulia taluka [excluding 
North Dhulia municipality 
and the villa~ speci-
fied in item (73) of the 
Appendix). 
EAST KHANDESH DISTRICT 
i 
245 I Amalner 
246 I Parola 
247 Chalisgaon 
249 Jamner 
250 Brandol 
251 Jalgaon 
252 Bhusawal. 
Amalner and Chopda 
• talukas. 
, . , 
Parola taJuka; and 
Bhadgaon pets.·r ~ 
Chalisgaon taluka - [ex-, 
I eluding the villages 
\
1 specified in item (74) 
of the Appendix]. I 
I Pachora' taluka ..,.~. and; I 
I such of the ~ villages 
in Chalisgaon taluka ,. , 
as are specified in item 
(74) ofthe.Appendix. 
_ . .• '';!It> .... , 
Jamner taluka J ~ 
Brandol taluka 
Jalgaon taluka [excluding 
the villages specified 
in item (75) of the Ap-
pendix). ~ 
Bhusawal municipality 
and such of the villages 
in Bhusawal taluka 
as are specified in item 
(76) of the Appendix ; 
and such of the 
villages in Jalgaon 
taluka as are specified 
in item (75) of the Ap-
pendix. 
J 
I 
J 
J 
I. 
I Nil 
\ 
( 
I 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 
NiJ 
Nil 
I 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 

109 
-------------------------------------.~------~~ 
Seats reserved for 
Serial Name of 
No. Constituency 
Extent of Constituency 
Total 
number 
of 
seata 
Sche-
duled 
Castes 
Sche-
duled 
Tribes 
--- -----·1-----·_------- ____ _ 
I 2 3 4 5 6 
------1-------------------
253 Yawal 
254 Raver 
Yawsl talulca. 
Raver taluka j Edlabad 
peta and Bhusawal 
taluka [excluding Bhu-
sawal municipality and 
the vilJa8es specified 
in item (76) of the Ap-
pendix]. 
BULDANA DISTRICT 
255 Chikhli 
256 Buldana. 
257 Malkapur 
259 Khamgaon 
260 Mehkar • 
Chikhli tahsil (exclud-
ing Buldana and Amda-
pur R.I.es.). 
Buldana R.I.e. in Chikhli 
tahsil j and Dhaman-
gaon and Borakhedi 
tahsil. 
Wadner, Malkapur and 
Nandura R.I.Cs. in 
Malkapur tahsil. 
Jalgaon tablil; and Jalamb 
R.I.C. and pIltwari cir-
cles Nos. 42 to 45, 
56, 57 and 58 in She-
gaon R.I.e. in Kham-
gaon tahsil. 
Khamgaon Wlsil (ex-
eluding lalam.b R.I.C. 
and patwari circles 
Nos. 42- to 45, ~6, j7 
and 58 in Shegaon 
R.e.I.). 
Mehkar tahsil; and 
Amdapur R.I.C. in 
Chikhli tahsil. 
AKOLA DISTRICT 
261 Washim 
2113 (B) LS-15. 
Washim tahsil j and Barshi 
Takli R.I.C. in Akola 
tahsil. 
1 Nil 
2 I 
I Nil 
I Nil 
I Nil 
I Nil 
I Nil 
2 I 
1 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 

110 
---.----.----.---- ------------_._--,----,-::---------. Seats reserved 
Serial Name of 
No, constituency 
Extent of Constituency 
Total 
number 
of 
seats 
for 
--1----
Sche- Sche-
duled duled 
Castes Tribes 
--- ----- -,..--_._------- ---- ----- ~-
1 2 3 4 5 6 - __ "'--____ --------. ___ -- ____ 1..-..---__ _ 
262 Mangrulpir Mangrulpir tahsil. 
263 Murtajapur Murtajapur tahsil; Akola 
tahsil (excluding Akola 
and Barshi Takli 
R.I,Cs.); and Jaulka 
R.I,C. in Akot tahsil. 
264 Akola 
2.65 Balapur 
266 Akot 
Akola RoLC. in Akola 
tah~il. 
Balapur tahsil. 
Akot tahsil (excluding! 
Jaulka R.I.C.), : 
AMRAVATI DISTRICT 
2.67 Daryapur, IfDaryapur tahsil; and 
Kholapur, Ashti and 
268 Melghat 
269 Amravati 
271 Chandur 
272 Achalpur 
I Mahuli R.I.Cs. in 
Amravati tahsil. 
i 
T - elghat tahsil; and Parat- I 
wada and Shirasgaon ~ 
R.I.Cs. in Achalpur~ 
tahsil. 
Amravati R.I.C. in 
Amravati tahsil, 
Ii Badners, Dhawalsari'-and 
Nandgaon Khandesh-
II war R.I.Cs. in Amra-
vati tahsil; and Tale-
gaon R.I.C. in Chandur 
tahsil. 
Chandur tahsil (excluding 
Talegaon R.I.C.), 
Achalpur and Chandur 
Bazar R.I.Cs. in Achal-
pur tahsil; and Rithpur 
R ,I.C.in MOrBi tahsil. 
Nil Nil 
2 Nil 
I Nil I Nil 
I Nil Nil 
I Nil Nil 
2 I Nil 
Nil 
I Nil Nil 
Nil Nil 
I Nil Nil 
J Nil Nn 

III 
Total Seats reserved fOr Serial Name of Extent of Constituency number 
N o. Constituency of Sche- Sche-
seats duled I duled 
Castes Tribes 
1 2 3 4 5 6 
-273 Morsi Morsi tahsil ~xcluding I Nil Nil 
Rithpur RI. ). 
NAGPUR DISTRICT 
274 Katol . Katol tahsil (excluding I Nil Nil 
Kondhali RI.C.). 
275 KaIamesh- K.alameshwar RI.C. in I Nil Nil 
war Saoner tahsil ; Kond-
bali R I. C. in Katol 
tahsil; and Bod and I Hingna R. I. es. in 
Nagpur tahsil. i 
I 
276 Saoner Saoner tahsil (excluding I I Nil Nil 
Kalameshwar R.I.C.) ; 
and Parseoni R.I.C. in 
Ramtek tahsil. 
277 Ramtek Ramtek tahsil (excluding I Nil Nil 
Parseoni R.I.C.). 
278 Nagpur I. Wards Nos. I to 6, 15 to I Nil Nil 
17,27 to 30 and 37 of 
Nagpur Corporation. 
279 Nagpur II Wards Nos. 9, 10, I2 I Nil Nil 
to 14, 18 to 21, 23, 
25 and 26 of 
Nagpur CorpOration. 
280 Nagpur Nagpur RI.e. (excluding 
wards Nos. I to 6, 9, 
2 I Nil 
10, U to 21, 23, 
25 to 30 and 37 of 
Nagpur Corporation). 
281 Umrer Umrer tahsil; and Kamp-
tee and Pardi R.I.Cs. 
2 I Nil 
in Nagpur tahsil. 
BHANDARA DISTRICT 
282 Bhandara . Bhandara tahsil (excluding 
Tumsar R.I.C. and pat-
2 I Nil 
wad circles Nos. 30 to 
35 in Mohali R.I. C.). 

-
Ser 
N 
ial 
o. 
I 
283 
~4 
285 
286 
287 
288 
289 
290 
Name of 
Constituency 
2 
Tumsar 
Tirora 
Gondia 
Goregaon 
Amgaon 
SWli 
Bhadrawati 
Brahmapuri 
Extent of Constituency 
3 
Tumsar RLC. and pat-
wari circles Nos. 30 to 
35 in Mohali R.'l.C. 
in Bhandara tahsil. 
Tirora R.I.C. in Gondia 
tahsil. 
Gondia R.LC. (exclud-
in'S patwari circles No. 
38 to 41) in Gondis 
tahsil. 
Goregaon R.I.C. and 
patwari circles Nos. 38 
to 41 in Gondia RI.C. 
in Gondia tahsil. 
Amgaon R.I.C. in Gondis 
tahsil ; Deori RLC. 
and patwari circles 
Nos. 50 and 51 
in Sadak-ArjWli RI.C. 
in Sakoli tahsil. 
Sakoli tahsil (ex1cuding 
Deori RLC. and pat-
wari circles Nos. SO 
and 5 I in Sadak-Arjuni 
R.I.C.). 
CHANDA DISTRICT 
Bhadrawati, Shegaon and 
Warora R.I.Cs. in 
Warora tahsil. 
Brahmapuri tahsil (ex-
clUdin~ R.I.C.); 
and S ur and 
Chimur RLCs. in 
Warora tahsil. 
Seats reserved 
Total for 
number 
of . 
seats Sche- Sche-
duled duled 
Castes Tribes 
4 5 6 
I Nil Nil 
I Nil Nil 
1 Nil Nil 
I Nil Nil 
1 Nil Nil 
2 1 Nil 
I Nil Nil 
2 I Nil 

II3 
Seats reserved 
Total for 
Serial NlIme of Extent of Constituency number 
No. Constituency of 
seats Sche- Sche-
duled duled 
Castes Tribes-
- --- --- ---
1 2 3 .. 5 6 
291 Armori Annori and Gadhachiroli I Nil Nil 
R.LCs. in Gadhachi-
roli tahsil j patwaricir-
cles Nos. 26, 46 and 47 
in Pathri R.I.C. in 
Barhmapuri tahsil. 
292 Sironcha Sironcha tahsil ; Gadha- 2 Nil I 
chirOli tahsil (excluding 
Armori and Gadha-
chiroli R.LCs.). 
293 Saoli Saoli R.I.C. and patwari I Nil Nil 
circles Nos. IS to 
20 in Mul R.I.C. 
in Chanda tahsil ; 
and Patmi RI.C. (ex-
cluding patwari circles 
Nos. 26, 46 and 47) in 
Brahmapuri tahsil. 
294 Rajura Rajura taluk of Nanded I Nil Nil 
district ; and Kothari 
R.LC. in Chanda tahsil 
in Chanda district. 
295 Chanda Chanda RI.C. and Mul J Nil Nil 
RI.C. (excluding pat-
wari ciJcles Nos. IS to 
20) in Chanda tahsil. 
WARDHA DISTRICT 
296 Hinganghat Hinganghat tahsil. I Nil Nil 
297 Wardha Wardha tahsil. 2 I Nil 
298 Arvi Arvi tahsil. I Nil Nil 

--
Seats reserved 
Total for 
--
Serial Name of Extent of Constituency number 
N o. Constituency of Scbe- Scbe-
seats duled duled 
Castes Tribes 
I 2 3 4 S 6 
YBOTMAL DISTRICT 
299 Wani Wani tahsil ; Ralegaon 
and Wadki R.I.Cs. in 
2 Nil I 
Kelapur tahsil ; and 
Kalamb and Yelabara 
R.I.Cs. in Yeotmal 
tahsil. 
300 Kelapur Kelapur tahsil (excluding 
Wadki and Ralegaon 
I Nil Nil 
R.I.Cs.). 
301 Yeotmal Yeotmal, Sawar and I Nil Nil 
Babulgaon R. I. Cs. in I 
Yeotmal tahsil. 
30 2 Darwha Darwha, Lohi, Ner and I Nil Nil 
Ladkhed R.I.Cs. in 
Darwha tahsil. 
30 3 Digras Digras, Mahagaon (Kasba) I Nil Nil 
and Ami R.I.Cs. in 
Darwha tahsil; and Hi-
wari R.I.C. in Yeounal 
tahsil. 
30 4 Pusad Pusad tahsil. 2 I Nil 
NANDED DISTRICT 
30S Kinwat Kinwat taluk ;. and J Nil Nil 
Himayatnagar circle in 
Hadgaon taluk. 
306 Hadgaon Hadgaon taluk (exclud- J Nil Nil 
ing Himayatnagar 
circle) ; and Bhokar 
mahal (excluding 
Pethumri circle). 
307 Nan:ded Nanded taluk (excluding 
Mudkhed circle). 
I Nil Nil 

Serial 
No. 
-
1 
308 
310 
312 
i 
I 
I 
I 
I 
Name of 
Constituency 
2 
Dharmabad 
Biloli 
Khandhar 
Ahmadpur 
Nilanga 
Latur 
Awsa 
Omerga 
Tuljapur 
I 
ItS 
Total 
Extent of Constituency number 
of 
seats 
3 4 
Dharmabad circle in I 
Biloli taluk ; Pethumri 
circle in Bhokar mahal; 
Osmann,:&ar circle 
in Khan at' taluk; and 
Mudkhed circle in 
Nanded taluk. 
Biloli taluk (excluding 2 
Dharmabad circle); and 
Deglur Mukhcd taluks. 
Khandhar taluk (exclud- I I 
ing Osmannagar circle) 
OSMANABAD DISTRICT 
Ahmadpur taluk ; and 2 
Udgir taluk (excluding 
Walandi circle). 
Nilanga taluk (excluding 
Kasar Sirsi circle); and 
I 
Walandi circle in 
Udgir taluk. 
Latur taluk. I 
Awsa taluk ; and Kasar J 
Sirsi circle in Nilanga 
taluk. 
Omerga and Murum : I 
circles, and Lohara 
circle (excluding the 
villages specified in 
item (77) of the Appen-
dix], of Omerga taluk. 
Tuljapur taluk ; and such I 
of the villages in Lohara 
circle as are specified in 
item (77) of the Appen- I 
dix, of Omerga taluk. 
Seats reserved 
for 
Sche- Sche-
duled duled 
Castes Tribes 
5 6 
Nil Nil 
I Nil 
Nil I Nil 
J Nil 
I Nil ! Nil 
I 
Nil Nil 
Nil Nil 
Nil Nil 
Nil Nil 
I 

ia1 Ser 
N o. 
-
I 
-
317 
318 
319 
320 
321 
322 
323 
324 
32 5 
p6 
Name of 
Constituency 
2 
Osmanabad 
Kalam 
Ashti 
Bhir 
Georai 
Manjlegaon 
Kaij 
Renapur 
Gangakhed 
Parbhani 
116 
Extent of Constituency 
3 
Osman-bad taluk 
Kalam and 'Parenda taluks 
and Bhoom mahal. 
BHIR DISTRICT 
Ashti taluk ; and Patoda 
circle in Patoda mahal. 
Bhir taluk (excluding 
Chauaala circle) ; and 
Padali circle in Patoda 
mahal. 
Georai taluk 
Manjlepon taluk. 
Kaij taluk ; Chausala cir-
cle in Bhir taluk ; and 
Mominabad circle in 
Mominabad taluk. 
Mominabad taluk (exclud-
ing Mominabad circle). 
PARBHANI DISTRICI' 
Gangakhed taluk ; Pathri 
and Manwath circles in 
Pathri taluk ; and such 
of the vru.es in 
Puma circle of 
Parbhani taluk as 
are specified in item 
(78) of the Appendix. 
Parbhani taluk [excluding 
the villages inPurna 
circle 88 are specified 
in item (18) of the 
Appendix]. 
Seats reserved 
Total for 
number --of Sche- Sche-
seats duled duled 
Castes Tribes 
4 5 6 
-
I Nil Nil 
2 I Nil 
I Nil Nil 
I Nil Nil 
I Nil Nil 
I Nil Nil 
2 I Nil 
I Nil Nil 
2 I Nil 
I Nil Nil 

117 
---------------~---------------------------~-----------Seats reserved 
Serial Name of Extent of Constituency 
No. Constituency 
Total 
number 
of 
seats 
for 
Sche-
duled 
Castes 
Sche-
duled 
Tribes 
--1·---------1--------------1---- ---- ---
I 
32 7 Basmath 
32 8 Hingoli 
Partur 
330 Jintur 
3 
Basmath taluk 
Hingoli and Kalamnuri 
taluks. 
Partur tal uk; and such 
of the villages in Sailu 
circle as are specified in 
item (79) of the 
Appendix of Pathri 
tal uk. 
Jintur taluk; and Sailu 
circle [excluding the 
villages specified in item 
(79) of the Appendix] 
of Pathri tal uk. 
AURANGABAD DISTRICT 
331 Ambad 
332 Jalna 
Ambad tal uk (excluding 
Rani Unchegaon circle). 
Jalna taluk; and Rani 
Unchegaon circle in 
Ambad taluk. 
333 Bhokardhan Bhokardhan taluk and 
J affarad maha!. 
334 Aura.ngabad Aurangabad and Phulmari 
circles in Aurangabad 
taluk. 
335 Paithan 
336 Gangapur 
337 Vaijapur 
2113(B) LS-16. 
Paithan taluk (excluding 
Lohogaon circle) ; and 
Pimpri and Karmad 
circles in Aurangabad 
taluk. 
Gangapur taluk; and 
Lohogaon circle in 
Paithan taluk. 
Vaijapur taluk; and 
Devagaon circle in 
Kannad taluk. 
4 5 
I Nil 
r 
I Nil 
I Nil 
I Nil 
2 I 
I Nil 
I Nil 
I Nil 
r Nil 
I Nil 
6 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 

Serial Name Qf 
No. Constituency 
I 
118 
------.----------.,-----. ----.-,..----- seaiSi-liervc<f 
I Total for 
Extent of Constituency . number --------
of Sche-· Sche-
seats duled duled 
Castes Tribes 
i------i----------- ------------
I 2 3 4 5 6 
----
Kannad taluk (excluding I Nil Nil 
Devasaon circle) ; 
338 Kannad 
Khuldabad mahal; and 
Banoti circle in Soegaon 
mahal. 
Sillod taluk; and soegaonj I Nil Nil 
circle in Soegaon' maha!. 
I 
339 Sillod 
I 
NOTE : - The names of the villages in Banoti and Soegaon cricles referred 
to in Assembly Constituencies Nos. 338 and 339 respectively are 
set out in the Annexure to this part . 
• • • • • 
THE DELIMITATION OF COUNCIL CONSTITUENCIES 
(BOMBAY) ORDER, I9SJ 
In pursuance of section I I of the Representation of the People Act, 
1950 (43 of 1950), the President is pleased to make the following order, 
namely.:-
1. This Order may be called the Delimitation of Council Constit uen 
cies (Bombay) Order, I9SJ. 
2. The. conslituencies into which the State of Bombay shall be divided 
for the 'purpose of elections to the Legislative Council of the St9te from 
(a) the graduates' constituencies, (b) the teachers' constituencies, and (c) 
the, local allthprities' constituencies in the said State, the extent of each 
8uchconstituency and the number of seats allotted to each such constituency 
shall be as shown in the following Table :-
TABLE 
--- ------------- -----_._-----.- ... _-
Name of constituency Extent of constituency 
2 
Graduates' Constituencies 
Number 
of 
~ats 
3 
Greater Bombay (Graduates). Greater Bombay :z 
Gujarat (Graduates) Kutch, Halar, Sorath, Gohilwad. Madhva 
Saurasht.a, Z"plawad, Amreli, Ahmeda-
bad, Mehsana, Danaskantha, Sabarkantha, 
Kaira, Panch Mahals, Boroda, Broach and 
Surat districts .. " 2 ------_.-._._- .~.--.----- _._--. __ ._ .. _---

Name of constituency 
I 
Maharashtra (Graduates) 
Vidarbha (Graduates) 
119 
Extent of constituency 
2 
Thana, Kolaba, Ratnagiri.tKo1hapur. South 
I 
Satara, North Slitafa, ;:,holapur, Poona, 
Ahmednagar, Nasik, Dangs, Weat 
Khandesh, East Khandesh, Aurangabad, 
Parbhani, Bhir, Osmanabad and Nanded 
districts 
Buldana, Akola, Amravati, Yeotmal. Wardha, 
Nagpur, Bhandara and Chanda districts. 
T eaclurs' Constituencies 
Oujarat (Teachers) 
Greater Bombay-cum-Maha-
rashtra (Teachers) 
Vidarbha (Teachers) 
Kutch, Halar, Sorath, Gohilwad, Madhya 
Saurashtra, Zalawad, AmreIi, Ahmedabad, 
Mehsana, Banaskantha, Sabarkantha. 
Kaira, Panch Mahals, Baroda, Broach 
and Surat districts 
Greater Bombay, Thana, Kolaba, Ratna-
giri, Kolhapur, South Satra, North 
Satars, Sholapur, Poona, Ahmednapr, 
Nasik, Dangs, West Khandesh and I;ast 
Khandesh districts . . . • 
Buldana, Akola, Amravati, Yeotmal, 
Wardha, Nagpur, Bhandara, Chanda, 
Nanded, Osmanabad, Bhir, Parbhani and 
Auranpbad district. 
Local Authorities' Constituencies 
Saurashtra (Local Authorities) 
Gujarat North (Local Authori-
ties) 
Gularat South (Local Authori-
ties) 
Greater Bombay-cum-Maha-
rashtra West (Local Authori-
ties) 
Maharashtra South (Local 
Authorities). 
Maharashtra North 
Authorities). 
(Local 
Vidarbha (Local Authorities) 
Halar, Sorsth, Gohilwad, Madhya Saurash-
tra, Zalawad and Amreli districts 
Ahmedabad, Mehsana, Banaskantha, 
Sabarkantha and Kutch district' . 
Surst, Broach, Baroda, Kaira and Panch 
Mahal! districts . 
Greater Bombay, Thana, Kolaba, Ramagiri 
and Kolhapur districts. 
Poona, North Satara, South Satara and 
Sholapur districts. 
Ahmednagar, Nasik, Dangs, West Khan-
desh and East Khandesh districts . . 
Buldana, Akola, Amravati, Yeotmal, 
Wardha, Nagpur, Bhandara and Chanda 
districts 
Maratbwada (Local Authorities) Aurangabad, Bhir, Parbhani, Nanded and 
Olmanabad districts. 
Number 
of 
seat. 
3 
3 
2 
3 
s 
5 
5 
, 
s 

%20 
E!xTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION (ScHEDULED CASTFS) ORDER, 1950 
In exercise of the powers conferred by clause (1) of article 341 
of the Conlltitution of India, the President, after consultation with 
the Governors and Rajpramukhs of the States concerned, is pleased 
to make the following Order, namely:-
1. This Order may be called the Constitution (Scheduled Cal:ltes) 
Order, 1950. 
2. Subject to the provisions of this Order, the castes, races or 
tribes or parts of, or groups within, castes or tribes, specified in 
Parts I to XIII of the Schedule to this Order shall, in relation to the 
States to which those Parts respectively relate, be deemed to be 
Scheduled Castes so far as regards members thereof resident in the 
localities specified in relation to them in those Parts of that Schedule. 
3. Notwithstanding anything contained in paragraph 2, no person 
who professes a religion different from the Hindu or the Sikh reli-
gion shall be deemed to be a member of a Schedule Caste. 
4. Any reference in this Order to a State or to a district or other 
territorial division thereof shall be construed as reference to the 
State, district or other territorial division, cunstituted as from tht! 
1st day of November, 1956. 
THE SCHEDULE 
• • • • • • 
PART IV.-Bombay 
1. Throughout the State except the district of Buldana, Akola, 
Amravati, Yeotmal, Wardha, Nagpur, Bhandara, Chanda, Auranga-
bad, Parbhani, Nanded, Bhir, Osmannbad, Halar, Madhya Saurashtra, 
Zalawad, Gohilwad, Sorath and Kutch:-
1. Ager 
2. Bakad or Bant 
3. Bhambi, Bhambhi, Asadaru, Asodi, Chamadia, Chamar, 
Chambhar, Cham gal', Haralayya, HaraH, Khalpa, Machi-
gar, Mochigar, Madar, Madig, Telegu Mochi, Kamati 
Mochi, Ranigar, Rohidas, Rohit or Samgar. 
4. Bhangi, Mehtar, Olgana, Rukhi, M&lkana, llalalkhor, Lal-
begi, Balmiki, Korar or Zadmalli 
5. Chalvadi or Channayya. 
6. Chenna Dasar or Holaya Dasar 

121 
't Dhor, Kakkayya or Kankayya 
8. Garoda or Garo 
9. Halleer 
10. Halsar, Haslar, Hulasvar or Halasvar 
11. Holar or Valhar 
12. Holaya or Haler 
13. Lingader 
14. Mahar, Taral or Dhegu Megu 
15. Mahayavanshi. Dhed, Vankar or Maru Vankar 
16. Mang, Matang or Minimadig h 
17. Mang-Garudi 
18. Meghval or Menghvar 
19. Mukri 
20. Nadia or Hadi 
21. Pasi 
22. Shenva, Chenva, Sedma or Ravat 
23. Tirgax or Tirbanda 
24. Turi 
2. In the districts of Greater Bombay, West Khandesh, East Khan· 
desh, Dang~, Nasik, Ahmednagar, Poona, Satara North, Satara South, 
Kolhapur, Sholapur, Thana, Kolaba and Ratnagiri:-
Mochi. 
3. In the district of Buldana, Akola, Amravati, Yeotmal, Wardha, 
Nagpur, Bhandara and Chanda:-
1. Bahna or Bahana 
2. Balahi or Balai 
3. Basor, Burud, Bansor or Bansodi 
4. Chamar, Chamari, Mochi, Nona, Rohidas, Ramnami. Sat-
nami, Surjyabanshi or Surjyaramnaml 
5. Dam or Dumar 
6. Dohor 
7. Ganda or Gandi 
8. Ghasi or Ghasia 
9. Kaikadi 
10. Katia or Patharia 
11. Khatik, Chikwa or Chikvi 

12. Madgi 
13. Mahar or Mehra 
14. Mang, Dankhni-Mang, Mang Mahashi, Mang QjU"udi, :dadari, 
Garudi or Radhe-Mang . . - , '. '. 
15. Mehtar or Bhangi 
16. Sansi. 
4. In the districts of Akola, Amravati and Buldana:-
Bedar .-
5. In the cijitrict of Bhan,d~M:-
1. Chadar 
2. Holiya 
6. In the districts of Bhandara and Buldana:-
Khanger, Kanera or Mirdha 
7. In the districts of Amravati, Bhandaraand Buldana:-
Kon 
8. In the districts of .Auraniabad, Parbhani, Nanded, Bhir and 
Osmanabad.: -
1. Anamuk 
2. Aray (Mala) 
3. A+wa Mala 
4. Beda (Budga) .Jangam .. 
5. Bindla 
6. Byagara 
7. Chalvadi 
8. Chambhar 
9. Dakkal (Dokkalwar) 
10. Dhox 
11. Ellam,alwar (Yellammalawandlu) 
12. Holeya 
13. Holeya Dasari 
14. Kolupulvandlu 
15. Madiga 
16. Mahar 
17. Mala 
18. Mala Dasari 
19. Mala Hanna! 

123 
20. Malajangam 
21. Mala Mast! 
22. Mala Sale (N etkanf) 
23. Mala Sanyasi 
24. Mang 
25. Mang Garodi 
26. Manne 
27. Mashti 
28. Mehtar 
29. Mitha Ayyalvar 
30. Machi 
31. Samagara 
32. Slndhollu (Chiridollu) 
9. In the districts of Halar, Madhya Sauritshtra, Zal~wad, Gobil-
wad and Sorath:-
1. Bawa (Dhedh) or Dedh-Sadhu 
2. Bhangi or Rukhi 
3. Chamadia 
4. Chamar Nalia, or Rohit 
5. Dangashia 
6. Gaxoda 
7. Garmatang 
8. Hadi 
9. Meghwa! 
10. Senva 
11. Shemalia 
12. Thari 
13. Turi 
14. TUri-Barot or Dhedh-Barot 
15. Vankar, Dhedh or AntyBj 
10. In the district of Kutch:-
1. Bhangi 
2. Chamar 
3. Garoda 
4. Meghwal 

124 
5. Turi 
6. Turi-Barot . 
• • • • • • 
EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION (SCHEDULED TRIBES) ORDER, 1950 
In exercise of the powers conferred by clause (1) of article 342 
of the Constitution of India, the President, after consultation with 
the Governors and Rajpramukhs of the States concerned, is pleased 
to make the following Order, namely:-
1. This Order may be called the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) 
Order, 1950. 
2. The tribes or tribal communities, W' parts of, or groups within, 
tribes or tribal communities, specified in Parts I to XII of the 
Schedule to this Order shall, in relation to the States to which those 
Parts respectively relate, be deemed to be Scheduled Tribes so far 
as regards members thereof resident in the localities specified in 
relation to them respectively in those Parts of that Schedule. 
3. Any reference in this Order to a State or to a district or other 
territorial division thereof shall be construed as a reference to the 
State, district or other territorial division constituted frem the 
1st day of November, 1956. 
THE SCHEDULE 
• • • • 
PART IV. -Bombay~ 
.... ~ 
I. Throughout the State except the district 
Amravati, Yeotmal, Wardha, Nagpur Bhandara, 
Parvhani, Nanded, Bhir, Osmanabad, HaIar, 
Zalawad, Gohilwad, Sorath and Kutch :-
I. Barda 
2. Bavacha or Bamcha 
• 
of Buldana, Akola, 
Chanda, Aurangabad 
Madhya Saurashtra, 
3. Bhil, including Bhil Garasia, Dholi Bhil, Dungri Bhil, Dungri 
Garasia, Mewasi Bhil, Rawal Bhil, Tadvi Bhil, Bhagalia, 
Bhilala, Pawra, Vasava and Vasave. 
4. Chodhara 
S. Dhanka, including Tadvi, Tetaria and Valvi 
6. Dhodia 
7. DubIa, including Talavia or Halpati 
8. Gamit or Gamta or Gavit, including Mavchi, Padvi, Vasa va, 
Vasave and Valvi. 
9. Gond or Rajgond 

12~ 
10. Kathodi or Katkari, including Dhor Kathodi or Dhor Katkari and 
Son Kathodi or Son Katkari 
I J. Kokna, Kokni, Kukna 
12. Koli Dhor, Tokre Koli, Kolcha or Kolgha 
13. Naikdo or Nayaka, including Cholivala Nayaka, Kapadia Nayaka. 
Nota Nayaka and Nana Nayaka 
14. Pardhi, including Ad.ichJttCh~ and Phaftae Pard.hi 
IS. Patella 
16. Pomla 
17. Rathawa 
18. Varli 
19. Vitolia, Kotwalia or Barodia 
2. In Dangs district·:-
Kumbi ' 
3. In Surat district:-
Chaudhri 
4. In Thana district :-
Koli Malhar 
s·(a) In Ahmecinagar district: - 1 
Akola, Rahuri and Sangamner 
talukas. 
(b) In Kolaha district ~.-
Karjat, Khalapur, Alibagh, Mahad 
and Sudhagad talukas. 
(c) In Nasik district:-
Nasik, Niphad, Sinnar, Chal1dor, 
Baglan. Igatpuri, Dindori and 
Kalvan talukas and Surgana 
and Peint Mahals 
(4) In Poona district :-
Ambegaon, ]unnar, Khed, Mawal 
and Mulshi talukas.tt Velhe 
Mahal. 
(,) In Thana district:-
Thana, Murbad, Bhivandi, Bassein, 
Wads, Shahapur, Dahanu Pal~ 
ghar, Umbergaon, Iawhar and 
Mokhada talukas. 
2113 (B) LS-17. 
I 
I 
t Koli Mabldev 
or . 
I Dangar I(,oli 

126 
6. (a) In Ahmednagar diatrict :- I I Altola, Rahuri and 
talukas. 
(b) In Kolaba district:--
Sangamner I 
I 
Karjat, Khalapur, Pen, Panvel and I 
Sudhagad talukas and Matheran I 
Thakur or 
(c) In Nuik district: -- I Thakar including 
f ~=~:: 19aturi, Nasik and Sinner tamkas. 
Ma Thakur 
(d) In Poona district : -- and Ma TIlakar 
Ambedgaon, Junnar, Khed and 1 
Mawal talukas. I 
(_) In Thana dmrlct : - 1 
Thana, Kalyan, Murbad, Bhivandi J Bassein, Wada, Shahapur, Palghar, 
Jawhar and Mokhada talukas. 
7. In (x) Melghat tahsil of the Amravati district, 
(2) Gadchiroli and Sironcha tllhsils of the Chanda district, 
(3) Kelapur, Wani and Yeotmal tamils of the Yeotmal district:-
I. Andh 
2. Baiga 
3. Bhaina 
4. Bharia-Bhumia or Bhuinhar-Bhumia including Pando 
S. Bbattra 
6. Bhit 
7. Bhunjia 
8. Binjhwar 
9. Birhul or Birhor 
10. Dhanwar 
11. Gadaba or Gadba 
12. Gond, including:-
Ankh or Arrakh 
Agar1a 
Asur 
Bad! Maria or Bada Marla 
Bhatola 
Bbfmma 
Bhuta, Koilabhuta or Koilabhut.i 
Bhar 
Bisonhom Marl" 
Chota Mar1a 
Dandamf Marla 

Dhuru or Dhurwa 
Dhoba 
Dhulla 
Dorla 
Galki 
Gatta or Gatti 
Gaita 
Gonci Gowari 
Hill Maria 
Kandra 
Kalanga 
Khatola 
Ko1tar 
Kaya 
Khirwar or Khirwara 
Kucha Maria 
Kuchaki Maria 
Madia (Maria) 
Mana 
Mannewer 
127 
Moghya or Mogia or Monghya 
Mudia (Murla) 
Nagarcb1 
Nagwanshl 
Ojh21 
Raj 
Sonjhari Jhareka 
Thatia or Thotya 
Wade Maria or Vade Maria 
13. Halba or Halhi 
14. Kamar 
15. Kawar. Kanwar, Kaur, Cberwa, Rathia Tauwar or Chattd 
16. Khairwar 
17. Kharia 
18. Kondh or Khond or Kandh 
19. Kol 
20. Kolarn 

Ial 
21. Korku, including Bopchi, Mouui, Ni •• lof,)qMulmd;Bondhi 
or Bondeya 
22. Korwa, including Kodaku 
23. Majhwlll' 
24.Munda 
25. Nagesla or Nagasia 
26. Nihal 
27. Oraon, including Dhanka and Dhangad 
28. Pardhan, Pathart and Saroti 
29. Pardhi, including Bahelia or Bahellia, Chita Pardhi, Langolt 
Pardhl, Phans Pardh1, Shikari, Takankar and Tak!a. 
30. Parja 
31. Saonta or Saunta 
32. Sawar or Sawara 
8. In the districts of Aurangabad, Parbhani, N:anded, . Bhir and 
Osmanabad:-
1. Andh 
2.BhU 
3, Gond (including Naikpod and Rajgond) 
4. Kolam (including Mannervarlu) 
5. Koya (including Bhine Koya and Rajkoya) 
6. Pardhan 
7. Thot! 
9. In the districts of Halar, Madhya Saurashtra, Zalawad, Gohl1· 
wad and Sorath:-
SiddJ 
10. In Nesses area tn the forests of Aleeh, Gir and Barada:-
1. Bharwad 
2. Charan 
3. Rabarai 
U. 1n Zalawad district:-
Padhar 
12. In Kutch distrlct:-
1. Bh1l 
2. Dhodia 

).·.11 
4. Paradht 
.5,.V.,tui 
.. .. .. .. .. .. 
EXTRACTS FROM THE UNION DUTIES OF EXCISE (DISTRIBUTION) ACT, 1957 
(No. 55 OF 1957) 
.. .. .. .. .. .. 
3, During each financial year commencing on and ~ter the ft.rat 9.~rfbutioh 
day ofAprU,' 1957, there shall be paid out of the Consolidated Fund fl'e1tt::'"' 
of India to each of the States specified. in column 1 'of the Table dull. ef 
below such percentage of the distributable Union duties of exctae exciM . tb4I 
as is set out against it in column 2: - s::.ar .' 
TABLE 
1 2 
State Percentage 
.. .. .. .. .. .. 
Bombay 12'17 
.. .. .. .. .. .. 
EXTRACTS FROM THE ESTATE DuTY AND TAX ON RAILWAY PAS8ENGERS 
FARES (DISTRIBUTION) ACT, 1957. 
(No. 57 m' 1957) 
.. • .. .. .. .. 
3. (1) During each financial year commencing on and after the Dlattibution 
1st day of April, 1957, the net proceeds of the estate duty levied and of net pro-
collected during that financial year shall, after deducting therefrom a ~~::e ~~ty 
sum equal to one per cent. of the said proceeds as being attributable .'llgl'ed to 
to Union territories, be distributed among the States in accordance the State •. 
with the provisions of sub-section (2). 
(2) Out of the total amount falling to be distributed in any 
ftnancial year under sub-aection (1),-
(a) the amount attributable to immovable property shall be 
distributed among the States in proportion to the gross value of 
the immovable property situated in the respective States as 
determined in respect of that financial year: 

Diatribution 
of Det pro-
occdloCthe 
taxOn 
raHway 
paUCI'Ff 
fares uu.n-
eel to the 
Statel, 
130 
(b) the balance shall be distributed among the States as 
follows:-
State Percentage 
.. .. .. .. .. 
Bombay 13'52 
.. .. .. • .. • 
• • .. .. • 
5. During each financial year commencing on and after the 1st 
day of April, 1957, the net proceeds of the tax on railway passenger 
fares levied and collected during that financial year shall, after 
deducting therefrom a sum equal to one quarter per cent. of the said 
proceeds as being attributable to Union territories, be distributed 
among the States as follows:-
State 
.. 
Bombay 
• 
.. .. 
• .. 
.. .. 
• • 
Percentage 
• 
16'28 
EXTRACTS FROM THE ADDmONAL DUTIES OF EXCISE (GooDS OF SPECIAl. 
IMPORTANCE) ACT, 1957. 
(No. 58 OF 1957) 
• • • • • • 
Diltribv:tion •. During each financial year, there shall be paid out of the Con-
~~di=~ solidated Fund of India to the States in accordance with the 
Statee. provisions of the Second Schedule such sums, representing a part 
of the net proceeds of the additional duties levied and collected 
during that financial year, as are specified in that Schedule. 
• .. • .. 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE 
(See section 4) 
PART I 
• 
Distribution of additional duties on sugar 
1. In this Part,-
• 
(4) "net proceeds", as respects any financial year, means the 
net proceeds of the additional duties in respect of sugar leviE"CI 
and collected during that financial year; 

I~t 
(b) "Table" means the 'l'9ble at the end of this :Part. 
2. During each of the financial years commencing on or after the 
1st April, 1958, there shall be paid-
(a) to the State of Jammu and Kashmir a sum equal to 
l' 25 per cent. of the net proceeds; and 
(b) to each of the States specified in the first column of the 
'l'9ble--
(i) a sum equal to such percentage of one-fourth of the 
net proceeds as is specified against that State in the second 
column of the Table; 
(ii) a sum equal to the difference between the sum 
specified against that State in third column of the Table and 
the sum paygble to that State under sub-clause (i); and 
(iii) if the total of' the sums payable to all the States 
under the preceding provisions of this paragraph is less than 
99 per cent. of the net proceeds by any amount, a further 
sum equal to such percentage of that amount as is specified 
against that State in the fourth column of the Table: 
Provided that if during that financial year, there is levied and 
collected in any State specified in the Table a tax on the sale or 
purchase of sugar by or under any law of that State, no sums shall 
be payable to that State under sub-clause (ii) or sub-clause (iii) of 
clause (b) in respect of that financial year, unless the Central Gov-
ernment by special order otherwise directs. 
3. In respect of the financial year ending on the 31st March, 1958, 
the provisions of paragraph 2 (excluding the proviso) shall apply for 
the distribution of a part of the J;let proceeds, subject to the modifica-
tion that each of the sums 6pecifiea in the third column of the Table 
shall be deemed to have been replaced by one-fourth of that sum. 
TABLE 
_. ,--- ._._---
I 2- 3 4 
(Rupees in lakhs) 
'" '" '" '" '" '" Bombay I2. '17 2.4S 2 0 '17 
'" '" '" '" '" '" 

l~ 
PAItT n 
Distribution of additicmal duties on. tobacco 
4. The provisions of pamgraphs2 and 3 shall apply for the distri-
bution of a part of the net proceeds 'of the additional duties on 
tobacco levied and collected during each financial year as they apply 
for the distribution of a part of the net proceeds of the additional 
duties on sugar, subject to the modification thet the references therein 
to the Table shall be constn:ledas references to the Table below. 
TABLE 
I 
... ... ... ... 
Bombay 
... ... ... 
PART 01 
2 
• 
12.17 
... 
3 4 
(Rupees in lakhs) 
... 
liS 17·41 
... 
Distribution of additicmaZ duties on te:rltle.'1 
5. In this Part.-
(4) "net proceeds", as respects any financial year, means the 
net proceeds of the additional duties in respect of cotton fabrics, 
rtiyon or artificial silk fabrics and woollen fabrics levied and 
collected during that financial year; 
(b) "Table" means the Table at the end of this Pan. 
6. Durlng each of the financial years commencing on or after the 
1St April, 1958, there shall be paid-
(a) to the State of Jammu and Kashmir a sum equal to 1·25 
par cant. of the net proceeds; 
(b) to each of the States specified in the first column of the 
Table-
(i) IUch sum as is specified against that State in the 
second column of the Table; and 
(ii) if the total of the sums payable to all the States under 
the l'receding provisions of this paragraph is less than 99 per 
cent. of the net proceeds by any amount, a further sum equal 
to such percentage of that amount QS is specified against that 
State in the third column of the Table: 
Provided that if during that financial year, there is levied and 
collected in .any State specified in the . Table a tax on the sale or 
purehase of cotton fabrics, reyOll or arWlclal silk fabriCi or woolltn 

133 
fabrics by or under any law of that State, no swns shall be payable 
to that State under clause (b) in respect of that financial year, unless 
the Central Government by special order otherwise directs. 
7. In respect of the financial year ending on the 31st March, 1958, 
the provisions of paragraph 2 (excluding the proviso) shall apply fol' 
the distribution of a part of the net proceeds, subject to the modifica-
tion that each of the sums specified in the second column of the Table 
shall be deemed to have been replaced by one-fourth of that sum. 
• 
Bombay 
• 
• 
• 
TABLE 
• 
• 
2 3 
(Rupees in lakhs) 
• 
6::>0 
• 
• 
• 
EXTRAC'l'S FROM THE CONSTITUTION (DISTRIBUTION OF REVENUES) No.2 
ORDER, 1957 
In exercise of the powers conferred by articles 270, 273 and 275 of 
the Constitution and of all other powers enabling him in that behalf, 
the President, after having considered the recommendations of the 
Finance Commission, hereby makes the following Order, namely:-
1. This Order may be called the Constitution (Distribution of 
Revenues) No.2 Order, 1957. 
2. The General Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of 1897) applies for the inter-
pretation of this Order as it applies for the interpretation of a Central 
Act. 
3. (1) For the purposes of clause (2) of article 270, one per cent. 
of so much of the net proceeds of taxes on income as does not repre-
sent the net proceeds of taxes payable in respect of Union emolument!> 
shall represent the proceeds attributable to the Union territories fOl' 
each financial year commencing on and after the first day of April, 
1957. 
(2) The percentage of the net proceeds of the taxes on incom~, 
except in so far as those proceeds represent proceeds attributable to 
Union territories or to taxes payable in respect of Union emoluments, 
which is to be assigned to the States under the said clause in each of 
the financial years commencing on and after the first day of April. 
2113 (B) LS-18. 

Special 
pl'OvilioD for 
ieconatltu-
don or 
diIIOlution 
ofccrtaiD 
COrPora-tiona. 
134 
1957, shall be sixty per cent.; and the total amount to be so ~isned: 
shall be distributed among the States as follows: - . 
"_. __ .- .--_._--_ ... _--------_ ... _--
State Percentage 
• 
Bombay 
• • • • 
• • • • • • 
_ .. __ .--_ .. ---_ .. _- ---_._--_._-_ .. _-_ .. _-----
EXTRACTS FROM THE ROAD TRANSPORT CORPORATIONS AI:r, 1950 
(No. 64 OF 1950) 
• • • • • • 
47A. (1) Where on account of the reorganisation of States 
under the States Reorganisation Act, 1956, the whole or any J1 of 19$6-
part of a State in respect of wl1ich a Corporation was, immediate-
ly before the 1st day of November, 1956, functioning and operat-
ing, is transferred on that day to another State and by reason of 
such transfer, it appears to the State Government necessary or 
expedient toot the Corporation should be reconstituted or reorga-
nised in any manner whatsoever or that it should be dissolved, 
the State Government may frame a sc:heme for the reconstitution, 
reorganisation or dissolution of the Corporation including proposals 
regarding the formation of new Corporations the amalgamation 
of the Corpomtion with any other Corporation, body corporate or 
a commercial undertaking of another St&te Government, the 
transfer of the assets, rights and liabilities of the Corporation in 
whole or in part to any other Corporation, body corporate or a 
commercial undertaking of another Sta~e Government, .-nd the 
transfer or re-employment of any wor~en of the Corpor~ti~~ 
and the State Government may forward the sc:heme to the Central 
aovernment for approval. 
ExplClMticm.-For the purpose of framing any scheme under 
this sub-section, "State Government",- . 
(i) in relation to the :pompay State Road Transport 
Corporation, the Kutch State Road Transport Corporation 
and the ~urashtnl State Road Transport Corporation, shall 
mean the Gov~nment of the State of Bombay, as formed 
under the States Reorganisation Act, 1956; and 
• • • • • 
(3) Any order made under sub-section (2) may pro\fide for 
all or any of the following matters, namely:-': 
• • • • • 
(f) tqe tr~~sfer or re-employment of any workmen of 
the CorpomtiQn to, or by, any such transferee, and, ~bject 
to the provisions of section 111 of the States ReorgaQ.iIa~ioq 

135 
Act, 1956, the terms and conditions of service applicable to 
such workmen after such transfer or re-employment; " 
• • • • • 
EXTRACTS FROM THE INDIAN BAR COUNCILS ACT, 1926 
(No. 38 or 1926) 
• • • • • 
4. (1) 
• • • • • • 
(2) Of the eleCted members of every Bar Council not less 
than 1iv~ shall be persons who have for not less than ten years 
been entitled as of right to practise in the High Court for which 
the Bar Council has been constituted. 
• • • • • • 
(4) There shall be Q Chairman aQd Vice-Chairman pf each 
Bar Council elected by the Council in such manner as may be 
prescribed: 
Provided that the Advocates-General of West Bengal, Madras 
and Bombay shall ~e Chairmen ex-officio, respectively, of the Bar 
Councils constituted for the High Courts of Judicature at Fort 
William in Bengal, at Madras and at Bombay. 
• • • • • • 
EXTRACTS FROM THE INTfR-STATE CpRPORATION~ ACT, 1957 
(No. 38 OF 1957) 
• • • • • • 
[20th ~eptember, 1957] 
An Act to provide for the reorganisation of certain corporations 
function:ng in two or more States by virtue of sectipn 109 of 
the States Recognisarion Act, 1956, and for matters 
coonected therewith. ' 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Eighth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
CompOlitioD 
ofBarCoa .. 
t:ilt. 
1. This Act may be called the Inter-State Corporations Act, 1957. Short title. 
2. In this Act, "inter-State Corporation" means any body corporate Definition. 
constituted under any of the Acts specified in the Schedule and func-
tioning in two or more States by virtue of section 109 of the States 
Reorganisation Act, 1956 . 
• • • • • 

~ donor 4. (1) • • • • • • 
~ ~ (2) An order made under 8ub-section (1) may provide for aH 
ratioaL or any of the following matters, namely:-
• • • • • 
(f) the transfer or re-employment of any employees of the 
inter-State corporation to, or by, any such transferee and sub-
ject to the provisions of section 111 of the States Reorganisation 
Act, 1956, the terms QIld conditions of service applicable to such 37 of 19''-
employees after such transfer or re-employment; 
• • • • • 
Power of 5. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
=tGo~- Gazette, specify in the Schedule any Act under which a body corporate 
add to the constituted for a State is functioning in two or more States by virtue f 
Sc:bedule. of section 109 of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956, and on the issue 370 1956• 
of such notification, the Schedule shall be deemed to be amended by 
the inclusion of the said Act therein. 
EXTRACTS FROM THE STATES REORGANISATION ACT, 1956 
(No. 37 OF 1956) 
'" • • • • 
PART III 
ZoNES AND ZoNAL COUNCILS 
• • • • • • 
:a.t.bUlb- 15. As from the appointed d.ay, there shall be a Zonal Council for 
~ 0&.,. each of the following five zones, namely:-
cIIL • • • • • • 
(d) the Western Zone, comprising the States of Bombay and 
Mysore; and 
(e) the Southern Zone, comprising the States of Andhra 
Pradesh, Madras Bnd Kerala 
• • • • • • 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the reorganisation of the State of Bombay and 
for matters connected therewith. 
The President has, in pursuance of anicle 3, clauses (1) and 
(3) of article II 7 and clause (1) of article 274 of the Constitution 
of India, recommended to Lok Sabha the introduction and con-
siaeration of the Bill. 
M. N. KAUL, 
Secretary. 
(Shri GO'Oind &llabh Pam, Minister of Home Affairs.) 