BiIlHo. 18 01 ~ 
'THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 1953 
(As INTRODUCED IN THE HOUSB OF THE PEOPLE.) 
A 
BILL 
Jvrthet;.to amMd the Repre8entation of the People Act, 1950, elM .. 
. Represlmta.tion of. the People Act, 1951, and to make cer.tain .... 
8equ.ntial amendment8 in HIe Governmetlt of Part 0 State8 Aot, 1951,.-. 
BE it enacted by Parliament as follows:-
. PART I.-PRELIMINARY 
1. Short title and commencement.-(l) This Act may be called the 
lReprt'sentation of the People (Amendment) Act, 1953. . .... 
(2) It shall come into force on such date or dates as the Central 
.Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, 8Bd 
different dates may be nppoiuted for different provisions of the Act. 
PART H.-AMENDMENTS OF THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE ACT, 1950. 
2. Substitution of new section for section 14 in Act XLIII ot 1960.-For 
~tion 14 of the· Representation of the People Act, 1950 (hereafter in 
. this Part referred to as the principal Act), the following section Sh'll1 be 
kubstituted, namely:-
'14. Definiti01M.-In tliis Part, unless the context othm'wise 
f'equires,-
(a) "constitueney" means Q,O Assembly constituency or a 
Council of States constituency; 
(b) "qualifying date" means, ill the case of every ell'otorai 
roll first prepal"ed under this Part, the first da.y of March. 1950, 
lond in the case of every roil subsequently prepared or r(~vised, 
the first day of Maroh of the year in which it is so prepnrf'd or 
revised. '. 
S. Substltution 01 new section for section 19 in Act XLIU of 191Kl.-For 
section 19 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, 
namely:-
"19. COtidition8 oj registration.-Bubjeot to the foregoing pro-
visions of this Part, every person who, on ~he qualifying date..-
(a) is not less than 21 years of age, and 
• 
16 
• 

• 
• 
• 
2 
(b) is ordinarily resident in a constituency. 
ahall be entitled to be registered in the electoral roll for that· 
coDStituency. ' , • 
t. Amendment of section 20, Act XLIII of 196O.-In section 20 of til. 
prinoipal Act, for Bub·section (3), the following 8ub-sectic:l shall be sub-
atuted, namely:-
.. (3) A member of the Armed Forces of the Union shall be 
deemed to be ordinarily resident on any dl1t~ in the constituency in 
which, but for his service in the Armed Forces, he would hav~ beeD 
ordinarily resident on that date.'·. 
Ii. BubiUtution of neW' JectioD for aection 21 In Act XLIII or 1950.-
.For section 21 of the principal Act, the following sect·ion shall be substitu .. 
te4, namely:-
·'21. Chief El"ctoral Uffi;ceTB.-(l) There shall be for each Stat& 
• Chief Electoral Officer who shall be such officer of the State Govern-
Dlent as may be a})pointed by the Election Commission in consult&-
'ion with that Government.. 
(2) Subject to the superintendence, direction and control of the-
l<':lection Commission, the Chief Electoral Officer shall supervise the-. 
preparation !lnd revision of all electoral rolls in the State under thia 
Act .. ". 
:. •. Substitution of neW' sections for Itct10Da 23, M and 26 In Act XLlD 
of It50.-(l) .For slwtions 23. 24 Ilud 25 of the principal Act, the follow.icg 
.-stions shall be substituted, namely:..!-
"23. Revision 0/ electoral roll.-It shall be the duty of th& 
Electoral Hegistration Officer to revise the electoral roll for each con-
stituency every year in the prescribed munner with reference to the 
~u&lifying date: 
Provided thllt if for any reason the electoral roll for any con-
stituency is r.ot revised, or thEl revision of the ele0toral roll iN nny 
constituency is not completed, in any year, the validity or continued 
operation of the electoral roll shall not thereby be affed.ed: 
Provided further thllt the Election Commission may at any tim& 
lor reasollsto be recorded in writing direct 8 further revision of the 
electoral roll for any constituency or part of a constituency in suoh 
manner as it may think fit. . 
24. COT1'ection of entrie8 in electoral rollR .-The Electoral 
Registration Officer for a constituency, on application made to him 
lor the COlTeetion of an existing entry in the electoral roll of th& 
aoDliituenoy, shall. jf he is. satisfied after such enquiry as he thinks. 
fit. that the entry relates to the applicant and is erroneous or defedive· 
in any partie-ulal', amend the entry accordingly. 
25. Inclu.ion of name8 in electoral rollB.-(l) Any person whoS8' 
name is not included in the electoral roll of a constituency may apply, 
in the manner hereinafter provided for the inclusion of his name iD 
·that roll. 
(S) Where an application under sub·section (1) is made at an,; 
time after the issue ,of a notifica.tion calling upon the constituenoy in 
elect a member or members and before the completion of that eleO-
tion, it shall be mnde to the Election Commission; and iu Rny othel' 
mt.ate. it ·shall be made to the Electoral Registration Officer of the-
OODItituency . 
• 

B 
• (,3) The Election Commission or, as the case may be, tha Elea-
toral Registration Officer flthall, if satisfied that the a.pplicant is entitled 
to be registered in the electoral roll, direct his name to be inc:uded 
therein: 
Provided that if the applicant is registered in the electo.ral roll of If 
any other constituency in the same State, the Election Commission 
or, as the cuse may be, the Electoral Registration Officer, shall inform 
the Electorul Registration Officer of that constituency, and that Officer 
shall, on receipt of the infonnation, strike off the applicant's name 
from that electoral rolL Io. 
(4) Where an Electoral Registration Officer .rejects an application 
made under this stdion, Iln appenl shall lie to the Election Commis-
sion within such time l\I1d in such munner as may be prescribed. 
(5) Every applicntion andnppenl \lllIler this section shall be ac-
com pained by the prescribed fee whioh shall in no case be refunded.... I$: 
(.9) For the avoidance of doubt it is hereby declared that sub-rule 
(S) of rule 20 of the Represelltlltion of the People (Preparation of ElectorB~ 
-·l.loUa) Rules, HMO, shall be d'~emo(l to have always heen as valid 118 if ita 
J~visiolls had been eIlllCted in, and had fonned part of, section ~;; of the 
principal Ad. 20 
Y. In8ertton of new section is in Part m, and omislion of existina 
_ctIoD 26 in Part IV in Act XLIU of 1960.-(1) In Part III of the principal 
Act, the fol.!owillg section shall be inserted at the end, namely:-
"26. fJlertoral TollB for Parlia.mentary Constituencies .-(1) The 
electoral roll for every Parliamentary constituency other than the U 
Pal'liamelltary constituency of the State of BilQspur shall consist of 
the electoral rolls of all the Assembly constituencies or Council of 
States constituellcies, 8S the case may be, comprised within that 
ParliamtlntllrY constituency; and it 8hall not be necessary to prepare 
or r{l\'ifle 1!cpnrntely the electoral roll for any such Parliamentary 30 
constituency. 
(2) The provisions of sections 14 to 25 (excluding the definition of 
"constituency" in section 14) shall apply in relation to the Parlia-
mentary constituency of the State of Bi!aspur as they apply in rela-
tion to Assembly constituencies. ". 35 
•. (S) Seetion 26 in Part IV of the principal Act shaH be omitted. 
8. wertion of new section ,28A. in Act XLIII of 1960.-After section 
28 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:-
"2AA. Staff of local authoritieB to be available.-Every local 
authority in ,R State shall, when so requested by the Election Com- ~ 
mission or the Chief Electoral Officer of the State, make available to 
~ any Electoral Regil;tration Officer such staff I\~, may be necessary for 
the prrformnnce of any duties in connection with the prepa.!'ation 
and revision of electoral rolls.". 
PART m.-AMENDMENTS OF THE REPRESENTATION OF THE P;EOPLE ACT, 1951 4S 
9. Amendment of I8ctiOD 8, Act SLUt Of 19&1.-In sub·section (1) of 
section 8 of the Representa,tion of the People Act, 191H (hereafter in 
this Part referred to as the principal Act), for clause (b), the following 
elauSQ shall be substituted, nam.ely:--
"(b) a disqualification under clause (c) of thati ~ection shall tiake 5& 
effect from the date on which the Election Commission decides that 

10 
40 
4 
the return of election expenses has not been lodged within the mn. 
and in the manner required by or under this Act;". 
10. IDsertion of new section 19A In Act XLIII of 1951.-After sectioB 19 
of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely ;-
"H)A. General dltt.ie8 of Chief Electoral OfficeT8.-Subject to the 
superintendence, direction and control of the Election CommiaaioD, 
the Chief Electoral Ofiic,er of each State shall supervise the oonduo' 
of all elections in the State under this Act.". 
11. Amendment or section 22, Act XLIII of 19151.-1n section 92 of 
the principal Act, in the proviso to sub-section (2), the words "or to ~he 
counting of votes" shall b.e omitted. 
12. Amendment of section 26, Act XLIII of 1961.-1n section 26 of 
the principal Act, to sub-section (1), the following further proviso shaU be 
added, namely:-
.. Provided further that nothing in this sub-section shall prevent 
the Rt'lturnillg Officer from appointing the same person to be the 
presiding officer for more than one polling station in the lame 
locality. ". 
13. Amendment of section 33, Act XLIII oJ 1961.- In section 88 of the 
p~incip81 Act, for sub-section (3), the following sub-sectiona shall be 
e u bstituted, namely:-
"(3) In a const.ituency where any seat is reserved for the Sche-
duled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes, a (l6ndidnte shall be deemed 
to be qualified to be chosen to fill that seat only if his .nomination 
paper is accompanied by a declaration verified in the prescribed man-
ner that the candidate is a member of the Scheduled Castes or of the 
Scheduled Tribes for which the seat is 90 reserved and the declaration 
specifies .. the particular caste 0«' tribe of which the candidate is • 
member und also the area in relation to which such· caste or tribe ia 
one of the Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes, as the case may 
be. 
(3A) In a constituency where any seat is reserved for an au. 
nomous district of Assam other than the constituency comprising the 
cantonment and municipality of Shillong, a candidate shall be deemed 
to be qualified to be chosen to fill that ",eat only if thel nomination 
paper iS8Ccompnnied by a declaration verified in the prescribed man-
Jl<'r that the candidate is a member of any of the Scheduled Tribe" 
of that district and the declaration specifies the particular tribe oi' 
which the candida.te i~ u member. 
(3B) \Vhere a candidate for a seat referred to in sub-section (3) 
or sub-section (3A) is nominated by more than one nominated paper, 
it sha.ll he sufficient if only one nomination paper is 8ccompnined by 
the declaration rpferred to in that sub-section; and in such a cl\se 
the rejection of the nomination paper accompanied by such declara-
tion shall not render the deolaration invalid and it shall be available 
for any other nomination paper found to be in order. 
(9C) Where the candidate is a person who, having held any offioe 
referred to in clause '(f) of section 7, has been dismissed and 8 period 
of five years has Dot elapsed since the dismissal, such person sball 
not be deemed to be duly nominated I\S a candidate \1nless his nomi-
nation paper. is accompanied by 8 certificate issued in the prescribed 
manner by the, Election Commission to the effect that he has ~ 
been. dismissed for corruption or disloyalty to the Srate.·'. 

ts 
Ii. Amendment of section 86, Act XLUl of 19~1.-Ill seation 36 of 
.the principal Act,-
(a) for clause (a) of sub-section (7'), the following clause shall be 
8ubstituted, namely:-
"(a) a certified copy of an entry :in the electoral roll of a 5 
constituency for the time being in force shall be conclusive evi!-
dence of the fact that the person referred to in that entry is an 
elector for that constituency unless it is proved that he is sub-
ject to a disqualificali.on mentioned in section 16 of the Hepre-
s.entation of the People Act, 1950 (XLIII of 1950);"; and Ie) 
(b) afte.r sub-section (7), the following E<ub-section shall be in-
aerted, namely:-
"(8) Immediately after all the nomination papers have been 
scrutinised and deoisions accepting or rejecting the same have 
been recorded, the Returning Officer shall prepare a list of validly 15-
Dominated candidates, that is to say, candidates whose nomina-
tions have been found valid, and aftU ~t to his notice board.". 
. ,II. ruertloIl of DeW llcUcm au. In .Act ZLIII of 1911.-After section 
~ at the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:-
./ 
"86A. Appeals 1'0m deci.ion. of Returning Oflice".-(l) An to 
appeal shall lie to a judge as herdn provided from any deoision of a 
Beturning Officer accepting or rejecting a nomination paper. • 
(2) For the purpose of hearing such appeals from the deoisions of 
Returning Officers in every State, the Election Commis8ion sCali, in 
consultation with the Chief Justice of the High Court of that State, 25-
Dominate one or more judges of that High Court. 
(3) Where only one judge is so nominated for a State, all appeals 
from the decision of Returning Officers from within the State shall 
be presented to, and disposed of by, that judge. 
(4) Where more judges than one Bre so nominated for a State, ~ 
the Election Commiss~on Bhall divSde the State into aB many regions 
88 tbere are judges and assign to each judge one such region; and all 
appeals from the decisions of Returning Officers within that region 
shall be presented to, and disposed of by, that judge. 
(5) Any candidate aggrieved by a decision of the Returning Officer 3:} 
• accepting or rejecting a nomination paper may present an appeal 
therefrom to the judge within a period of Slwen days from tbe dat.., 
of publication of the list of validly nominated candidates under sub-
seotion (8) of secHon SIb . 
Provided that such candidate htlR, not later- than 3 o'clock in 40 
the afternoon of the dny next following the said date, given the 
Returning Officer a notice in writing of his intention to appea.l under 
this BPction . 
(6) If one or more notices has or have been received in accord-
ance with tbe proviso to sub-section (5), the Returning Officer shall, 45 
immediately nfter the expiry of the time mentioned in thllt proviso,--
(a) publish the notices by Ilffixing to his Ilotice board one 
copy of each of the notices, together with an intimation in the 
prescribed forIn that the hearing of the appeals, if any, pre-
sented in pursuance of those notices wiU commence bdore the 5() 
judge on the tenth day after the date of such publieation; and 

10 
16 
~o 
,30 
40 
o 
(b) • send to ~he. jud.ie havin~juris~iction a copy of each.of. 
the notIces, the mtnno:tlon referred to m clause (a) and the liai 
of validly nominated candidates published under Bub-section (8} 
of section 86. 
(7) Th,e Returning Officer shall, on applicution made by or OD 
behalf of eo candidate, supply forthwith to the applicant a copy of the 
decision accepting or rejecting a nomination paper together with the 
statement of reasons, if any, recorded by him under sub-section (6) 
ot section 86. 
(8) In every appeal under this section, the appellant shall join 88 
respondents aU the candidates (other thon himself) whose Domina-
tiolls have been accepted by the Returning Officer. 
(9) The intimation affixed to the notice board of the Ueturning 
Officer uudt:r olause (a) of sub-section (6) shall be deemed to be 
sufficient notice, both of the presentation of an appeal under this 
section and of the date on which the hearing thereof shall commence 
before the judge, and it slutJl not be necessary to give any other notice 
to the appellants or the respondents and the appenl or appeals shall 
be deemed to have been, fixl,ld for peremptory hearing on tite laid 
date." .',. 
(10) Every appeal WId$" this section shall be heard de die in 
diem Ilnd disposed of by the judge as expeditiouslJ as possible, and 
hiM decision shall be communicated forthwith to the Returning 
Officer. 
(11) Where one or more notices of intention to appeal haa or 
have been given to the Ueturning Officer. but no appeal is presented 
within the period' specified in sub-section (5), tJle judge shall im-
mediately intimate that fact to the Returning Officer in the pres-
cribed form. 
- (12) In every case where one or more notices of intention to 
appeal has or have been given to the Returning Officer, he shaU, 
upon receipt of the communications 9£ the judge referred to in sub-
sections (.10) aud (11), republish b:.' affixing to his notice board the 
list of validly 110miusted candidates after revising it, if necessary, 
in conformity with the decisions of th~ judge. 
(13) 'l'he decision of the judge on nppeul under t.hiR seotion, and 
subject only to such decision, the d~cision of the Iteturning Offioer 
Hilder Redion 36, accepting or rejecting the nomination of a. candi--\ 
,iate shall be final and cOllclusi\'e u.nd shall !loi be oalled in ques-
tion in lilly court or tribunnl, ineilldiug on election tribunaL". 
16, Amendment of section 37, Act XLIU Of 1951.-In se{ltion 87 of 
the principal Act,-
(a) in Rub-Rection (1), for the words "011 the day fixed under 
clause «(~) of f\('ctioJl 30" the word8 "of the last day for such with· 
45 dmwnl" Hhull he sub"titutect, IUHI the proviso shall be omitted; and 
(b) after sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be in-
SBl'tt:d, numely;-
"(lA) 'l'he lust day for the withdrawal of candidatures 
under thi:l sectiun shall be-
(a) where no notice of appeal has been given in 80-
cordonce with the proviso to sub-section (5) of section 8M. 

'1 
~be '£nira aay a.fter 6e ~ on wl\ieh the list of vaHdb .. 
. mmated candidates is published under sub-section (8) of 
.gection .S6.;aud 
(b) where sueb 
'third day sfter the 
natedcandidates is 
section ·OOA : 
notice of appeal has been giv~, the 
date on which the list of validlY Domi- 6 
republished under sub-section' (IS) of 
Provided that if the said third day ref/3rred to in clause (c) 
()r ill clause (h) is Q public holiday within tbe meaning of eectlon 
:25 of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 (XXVI of 1881), or 1, 
hfls been notified by the St.ate Government as a day ~o be ob-
served atl 11 holiday in Governrnent offices in the State, the nen 
succeeding day which is neither such It public holiday IIOr • 
duy 110 notified shall be the last day for the withdrawal of can-
didatures. " 
1f. 8Ub1tiUuUoD. of DeW l8etlen for aectbl 18 III Act XIm or 111,1.-
For lection 8A of the principal Act, the following Rectiion shall be Bubsti-
. tuted, nSUlely:-
~ "S8. Publication of li8t of contesting candidates.-(l) Immedia~ 
. .,. after t.he expiry ~~,~he pedAd ~'ithill ~bic~ c~,ndidat~e~ Dlqy be with-
drawn under sectIon '97, theLR~llrning :Ofihler'shllll prepare and pubJig 
in such fOl'ln RlId manner RS may be prescribed II Jist of cundida~i 
who wet'(> jncluded in the fin/\I list of valid Iv nominated candidates 
and who have not withdruwn their candidatures within the said period 
(hereafter in this Act referred to as 'the contesting candidates '). 
(2) 'I'll(' foIaid list shl\lI contain the nAtne~ in nlphflbeti('al order and 
the addrefol;;pf.; of t,he ('ontt'sting CAndidates M given ill the nomination 
papel'R, together with sucb other particulars us may be. prescribed. ' •. 
llt Substitution of new seetlon for section 40 in Act. XLO! of 1961.-
For section 40 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substi- 30 
iuted, namely:-
"40, Election agMtts.-(l) There shall be an election agen. for 
ev~ry candidate at an e!ection. 
(2) A clllldidate shalt be deemed to have appointed himself to be 
hi;; elpction agent until and unless he appoints another person to be 35 
• his election agent. 
(3) Every I1ppointment of an eJection agent shall be made in the 
pres('rihed form, signed by the l'flndidate alld the election p,gent, and 
lodg!l(l with the Hl·t,ul'lling Oflieer; and it Bh(\ld be effective. enly from 
the date Oll which it is so lodged.". 40 
19. Substitution Of new sections for seCtions 48 and 47 iii Act XLID of 
1951.-For seetiOllS 40 und 47 of the prillCip(~l Act, the following sections 
shull be substituted, Illlmely:-
"46. Appointment of polling agents,-A contesting candidate or 
his election IlgPl1t may appoint in the preseribed manuer such number 45 
of agents and relief agents as may be preseribl'd to act as potting agPl1ta 
of Buch cundidate at each polling station 'provided under section 25 or 
at the pluee fixed under Rub-section (1) of section 29 for the poll, and 
when ony Buch appointment is made. notice of the appointment shall be 
,:given in the prescribed manner to such officer as may b~ prescribed. 58 

18 
)I 
• 
16 
• 
o 
'7. Appointment of counting agent •. -A contesting candidate 
or his election agent may, before the commencement of the countinc 
of the votes, appoint in the prescribed manner one or more l>ersona, , 
but not exceeding such number as may be prescribed. to be present _ 
hie counting agent or agents at the counting of votes, and when any 
.uGh appointment is made notice of the appointment shall be given in 
the prescribed manner to the ;Returning Officer .... 
10. IDIerUon of DeW IICtion 67 A. in Ohapter V ill Act xtm of 1111.-
Ia Chapter V of the principal Act, after section 67, the following sectioD 
...... be inserted, namely:-
"67A. Date of election of a candidate.-Every candidate wllo .. 
declared by the Returning Officer under the provisions of sectiou 68, 
Bection 54 or section 66 to be elected to a House of Parliament or of 
~he Legislature of 8 Stnte or to an electoral college for a acbeduled 
Part C State shall, n~ from the date of such declaration, or if the 
Beat in respect of which the election is held has not then beL'Ome vacan', 
~_ from the date on which it becomes vacant, be deemed to be • 
member of that House or electoral college, as the case may be, ana 
references in this Act to the date of election of a member or a candi-
date shall be construed as references to the date of 8ueh declaration, 
or a8 the case inay be, the date on which the seat beconles vacAnt:'~ 
st. I.en." or 8ICtiIoD ... Act ZL1D of INl.-In aectioo 68 of 
.. principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (I), for the words "within ten days from the 
date of publication in the (}azette of India of the declarations that he 
has been so chosen or, if such publications have been made on differenl 
dates within ten days from the later of such dates, intimote" ... 
words "within ten days from the date, or the later of the dRtes, OD 
which he is 80 chosen, intimate" shall be Bubstituted; and 
(b) the following sub-section shall be added at the end, n8mely:-
, "(4) }<'or the purposes of this section and of section 69, the 
date on which 8 person is chosen to be B member of either House 
of llarliament shall be, in the case of on elected member, the date 
of his election Bnd in the case of a. nominated member, tbe date 
of first publication in the Gazette of India of his nc.l1lination. ", 
D • .l.mendment of section 69, Act XLIII of 1951.-1n section 69 of 
the principal Act,- . 
(n) in Rub-section (1), for Lhe words "on the pUblication in the 
Gazette of India of the declaration that hc has been so chosen" the 
words "on the date on which he ill 1:10 ehosen" sh~ll be substituted; and 
(b) ill sub-section (2), for the words "on the publication in the 
Gazette of India of the declaration thot he has been 80 chosen" the 
words "on the dote on which he is 80 chosen" shall be substituted, 
D. SubltitutlOll. of new section for lection 76 in Act XLIII of 1951.-
45 For section 76 of the principal Act, the followirlg section shall be substl~ 
loW, namely:-
"76, Return of election expenReB.-(l) Within the prescribed 
time after every elec~ion there shall be lodged with the Returning 
Offieer in respect of each contesting candidate Q return of election 
expenses signed by the candidate, and where the candidate has an-
other person as bis election agE'nt, also by the election agent: 
• 

Provided that where owing ,to absence from India a candida~e is 
unable to sign and lodge within the prescribed time the return of 
election expenses and has another person as his election agent, iti 
shall be signed and lodged by the election agent only, but in any 
luch case the candidRt,e shall, within 14 days of his return to India &~ 
sign and lodge with the Heturning Officer a declaration in the prescrib-
ed form. 
(2) Every return of election expenses shall be in such form and 
contain such particulars 8S may be prescribed.". 
2'. SubiUtuUoll of DeW section for section 18 in .Act XLIII of 1961.- II)-
I'or lection 78 of the principal Act, the following seotion shall be 8ubstitut • 
... namely:-
"78. Application 01 Chapter.-This Chapter lhall apply ooly to 
the following elections, namel,.:-
(I) elections to the House of the People; 1ft. 
(il) primary elections; 
(iiI) elections to the Legislative A8sembly of a State; and 
(if') elections to the Legislative Counoil of a State from a 
Council constituency .... 
U. Amendment of lection 81, .Act XLIII of 1961.-In secHon 81 of 20"' 
the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the words and figures "in such' 
form and within slIch time but not earlier than the date of publication of 
the name or names of the returned candidate or candidates at suoh election 
under section 67, as may be prescribed" the words "within two months 
from, but not eRrlier than, the date of election of the returned candidate, 2f): 
or if 'there are more than one candidate at the election and the dates of 
~eir election are different. the later of those two dates" shall be substitute 
ed. 
28. Substitution of new lection for section 82 in Act XLIII of 1951.-
For section 82 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substitute 30:' 
eel. namely:-
"82. Parties to the petition.-A petitioner shall join as 
respondents t<? his petition,-
(a) where the petitioner claims a declaration under dnuse 
(b) of section 84, alJ the contesting candidates other than the 35 
petitioner, !lnd in any other euse, all the other returnod candidates 
wbose election is called in question by the petitioll; 
(/I) any other eandidllt,P, against ",!JOlll n.llegatiolls of allY 
corrupt or illegal pradic(~ am made ill the petition; and 
(r:) where the petitioner complains 
Rolunting OfliCOl', (llso thnt officer. ". 
of the conduct of the 
ff1. Substitution of new section for section 83 in Act XLIII of 1951.-
For section 83 of tho jJriIlcipul Aet. tlw following APction shall be substi-
.uted, nnmel',y :-
40 
"S.'3, Contents of petitioll.-(1) An election petition- 45;. 
(a) shall contain a concise statement of the material faete 
on which the petitioner relies, 

-10 
'lIS 
35 
10 
( b) shall set forth full partioulars of any corrupt or Ulepl 
practice that the petitioner alleges, including fiS full a ltatemeu\ 
as possible of the names of the partiel alle~d to have commit-
ted such corrupt or illegal practice and the date and place of the 
commission of each suc:h pra(~tit~~, and 
(v) shall be signed by the petitioner and vermes! in the 
muuner laid down in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Act V 
of 19(8) for the verification of pleadings. 
(2) Any schedule or annexure to the petition shall also be ligned 
by the petitioner Bnd verified in the SBme manner as the petit~.". 
21. SubltitutloD of i1.w aecttOD for eectlon 86 In Act XLU Of 1911.-
For section 85 of tile principnl Act, the following section shall be substi-
tuted, namely :-
"85. Procedure on receiving petition.-(l) If the provisions of 
section 81 or section 117 have not been complied with, the ElectioD 
Commission shall dismiss the petition. 
(2) If the PEltition i~ not dismissed under sub-sed ion (1) the 
Election Commission I;hal1 CRllse II copy thereof to be published in the 
Official Gazette, and shall also cuuse a copy to be served b~' post on 
each respondent. 
(.1) The cost of suclb-pub,lication and ~ervice, flS certified by the 
Election Commission, shall be paid by the petitioner at the . office of 
the Election Commission within such. time as may be fixed by it~ and 
the Election Commission may, in its diseretion, dismiss the petition 
for default in making such payment. 
(4) Costs paid under sub-section (3) shall form purt of the Cos ..... 
oftha petition .... , 
29 • .Amendment of section 86, Act XLtU of 19lil.-In "ection 86 of· 
the principal Act, for sub-section (4), the following sub-section!' shall be 
substituted, ~amel'y;-
"( 4) If during the ('(1\Irse of the trial, the office of the Cha.irman 
or any other memher of n Tribunlll fullR Va('Hut owing to de~th. 
resignation or otherwise, the Elt:!ction Commission shall, as soon 
as prncticablfl., nppoint a pel'Roll to fill the VUC8IH''y in accordance with 
the provisions of sub-section (.3) and upon such person joining the 
Tribunal the trial shall be ('ontinllcd liS if he had been on the Tribunal 
from the commencement of the trial; • 
Provided that the Tribllnal mlty, if it thiukf; tit, re-call and re-
examine any of the witnesses already examined . 
. 4(, (4A) The TribUllll1 Rhflll have power t,o ad 110twith8tunding the 
CfHHllli abflence of not more than one member; and no nct or pro-
ceeding of the Tribunal shall be invalid 01' ealJed ill guestion on the 
ground merely of such cafluul absence. ". 
80. IDIertion of new aectaOJl 87 A In Act XLIII of 1951.-After section 
45 87 of the principal Act, the following section shull be inserted, llamely:-
"S7A. Power of Elecf1ioll Commission to witlldra'W and tranit/tJr 
peti~i'onH .-'rhe ~lection Comt,ni~siou wny at any s~age wi~hdraw 
any petition pend1l1g b~fore u. Trlbuual and tr~nsfer It fol' .t~181 to 
another Tribunal constituted 111 fl,c(~ordnnce \nth the provl!!lons of 
60 section A6; and upon such transfer, that ~ribuna.l shall proceed with 
the trial from the point at which it was withdrawn; 
.l 

Ii 
Provided that it may, if it thinks fit, re-call and re-examine any 
'of t.he witllesses already examined.". 
81. Amendment cd section 90, Act XLIU of 1961.-1n section 90 01. 
&e principal Act,-
(a) sub-section (1) shall be omitted, aud sub-sections (.e). (3) 5 
and (4) shall be re-numbered as liub·sections (1), (2) ulld (3) respective-
ly; Bnd 
(b) after sub-section (3) as so re-numbered, the following sub-
.. ections shan he inserted, lIamely :-
"(4) Ally candidate not already a respondent shall, upon ap_ Ie 
rplieation mRde to the' Tribullul within fourteell day" of the ap-
l>ointment of a Chairman and subject to the provisions of section 
119, be entitled to be joined 8s a respondent. 
(5) The 'fribullal may, upon such terms as to costs and oflfler-
wise as it may direct, allow the petition to be amended in suob 15 
:manuer 8S may, ill itA opiuilm, be pecesssry for the pufP08e of 
-ensuring 8 fuir und effedi\'etriul of the petition. ". '. 
"32. AmeDdmu.t cd section 100, Act XLUI cd 1961.-Jn section 100 of 
the principal Ad,~ 
" (a) ill sUb-section (1), the word "or" occurring at the end of Jet 
clnus( (/,) 1\11(1 elHUt;c «(.) shull be omitted; 
(II) ill Rub-spction (2), after clause (II), the following ClaUlfl shall 
.be inserted, namely:-
"(hI)) that 011 tht' datp of hi;; ell'ctioll Il rctuJ'I1t.!d eundidllte 
WIlS not qUlllified, or Will; di8qualified to be chosen to fill the seat; 25 
\lnd!']' til(' ('on;;tit'lItioll ot' this Act 01' IIlIuer the Government of 
Part C ~tate8 Ad, 1951 (XLIX of HI5!). liS the caSe may be .... 
33. Amendment of section 123, Act XLlII of 19151_~rn section 123 of 
the pl'ill('ipul Ad, in elalHw (h) of the Explanation to clause (8), for the 
~ordH "hllt "h:lll Hot illciudp II p:'t'SOIl (oUw]' than un;" snch village offiC.lr 3G 
lUI ui'ot'efolllic!) who hm; been dpclatl'(l by the State Government to be 110 
'person to whom the pr()\'i~iolls of this clause shall not npply" t.he following 
oShall be substituted, llllllwly:-
"hut shrill !lot include-
('i") ItIl.Y l'pl'~(\n (other than such village officl'r as aforesaid) 3& 
who hur.: bC(~11 declart:'(l by the Htate Government, to be a person 
to wholn tI\l' 111'o\'i;;iolls ot this duwll' 8111\11 not apply; and 
(ii) UIl,\' Sl1('h villngl' offbet· as Ilf(m~snid who iR a (~llndid8te 
fot' p\pdioll to l"lrlianH'nt, ot' the Lpgisl:ltlll'l' of the Stato and 
iH not, di;;<lllalifit'(1 fo], beillg ,.hoseu 'I.S H IIlcmber of l~a.rliament 40 
or, as the CIlS(~ rna,)' be, of the Legislature of the ~tate.". 
34. Amendment of section 125, Act XLIn of 1951.-To section 125 of 
the pritJeiplll Ad, the following clause shnll be added at the end, name-
ay:-
. "(4) The failure to loclgf' a retl1rn of election expenses within the 45 
time ana ill the mannE'r l't'eHC'l'ihed by or under thiA Act .... 
35. Insertion of new section 135A in Act XLIII of 1951.-After section 
1a5 of the ]Jl'irwiplll Ad, thl' following sedion SllllU be insert,ed, numely:-
"la~A, M ahing faTHe declaration8,-If a. person makes in, or in 
C'onneetioll with, all,Y nomination of a candidate for elcntion or any 5() 
return of election expenses, a stutement or declaration in writing which 

12 
Is false and which he either knows or believ~ to be fal;;e or does not. 
believe to be true he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a tertD 
which may extend to ORe yeaf, or with fine, Of with both. " . 
.. Amendment of section 139, Act XLUI of 1951.-1n section 189 of. 
.. the principal Act, in cla.use (b) of sub-section (1), after. the word 1L1Ict. 
figuree "section 135" the words, figures and letter "or section 185A" shall. 
be inserted. 
81. AmeDdment of aectloD uo, Act XLUI of . 1951.-In section l40t 
of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for clause (b), the following claUS8' 
Ie shall be substituted, uamely:-
"(b) illegal practices specified in clauses (1), (2) and (8) of sectioDo 
125_".' . 
... 'mendment of .-cUon 1'1. Act XLDI of 1961.-In section 141 of 
the principal Act, in clause (a), after the word and figures "section 135''-
U tbe words, figures and letter "or ilection 135A" shall be inserted . 
.. 'm,ndmat c111CUoD It1, .&at XLIII of 1911.-In section 142 01-
the piDcipal Actl. after the words •. illegal practice" the words. bracke» 
and a,urel !'specifted in clause (I), (9) or (3) of eection 12l)" ahR!1 beJ 
inaerbed. . 
• to. aa.ntal 01 .. ., .etton lor 8ICUoA 141 In .&at XLID 011.1.--
It'or section 143 of the principal Act, the following section allall be sub ... ti--
tuted, r.amely:-
"143. Duqualijication arilfing out of failur. to lodg. NtU", ., 
election "pen ... . -If 8 candidate or hi, election agent, being req1Jlrd 
• by this Act to lodge a return of election expenRt's or declaration fails 
to do so within the time and in the manuer required by or under thi .. 
Act, the candidate or the election agent, as the C88& may he, shall. 
be disqualified for voting at any election for the period during which .. 
under the provisions of clause (c) of section 7 Rlld chmse (1,) of snb-
20, IJOOtion (1) of section 8, he is diRqualified for being ehosen l\K It. member-
01 either House of Parliament.". 
PART IV.-CONSEQUENTIAL AND MINOR AMENDMENTS 
.1. OcmIequentlal aDd minor amendments In Act. XIm of 1950. XLIII: 
oJ 1961 and XLIX of 1951.-Tbe further Rmendments specified in the-
36 Schedule, being amendments consequel1tiaE IIpon the foregoing provisions-
of this Act or relating to matters of minor detllil, shall be mRde in the-
Representation of the People Act, 1950, the Representation of the People, 
AofI. 1951 and the Government of Port C States Act, Hliil. 
THE SCHEDULE 
40 (See section 41) 
L-AMENDMENTS OF THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE ACT, 1950 
1. In section ~,~ 
(a) br clause (b), the following clause shull be substituted ... 
namely:-
"(b) 'Assembly ponstituellcy' means a constttuency provide<l. 
O;F order mRde under section 9 of this Act or under sub-sect ion-
(2) of 81'ction .4 of the Government of Part C States Act, 1051 
(XLIX of 1951) for the purpose of election to t1he Legisilltiv,," 
Assembly of s Sta.te_"" 

13 
(b) after olause (It), the following clause shall be added a* ~ 
..end, namely:-
.. 6i) • State Government', in relation to a Part C State, means 
the Lieutenant·Governor or Chief Commissioner thereof. " • 
. 2. In seotion 3A, sub·section (2) shall ue omitted. 
3. In section 8. for the words "8 I.Jtlgisintive Assembby" the warda "the 
eid Legislative Assemblies" shall be substituted. 
4. In section 9, in clause (a), after the words "each State" the word'J 
1.'specified in the Second Schedule" shall be inserted. 
5. }'or the heading of Part III, the heading "ELEOTORAL RoLLS 1'0. As- II 
:8BMBLY, COUNCIL OF STATES AND PARLIAMENTARY CONSTITUENCIES" shall be 
substituted. .. 
6. In section 17, after the word "constituency" the words "in the tune 
f3tate" shall be inserted. 
7. In section 20.-
(a) in sub-section (4), the words "during any period or" and .... e 
words "during that period or" shall be omitted; 
(b) in sub-section (D), the words "during any period or" ahall be 
.omitted; 
l5 
(0) in sub-section (6), the words "during any period" and the words 28 
·"that period" shall be omittea; and 
(d) sub-section (7) shall be omitted. 
ti, In section 22,-
(a) in sub-section (1), after the wordf.! "shall be prepared" the 
words "and revised" shall be inserted; and • 
(b) in sub-section (2), after the words "the preparation" the worda 
•. and revision" shall be inserted. 
9. Section 22A shall be omitted. 
10. For the heading of Part IV, the heading "ELECTORAL BOLL ... 
4CoUNCIL CONSTITUENCIES" shall be substitllted. • 
11. In section 27,-
(a) for Bub-section (4), the folIo~ng sub-section shall be IUbll\i-
tuted, namely:-
"(4) The provisions of sections 15, 16, 18, 20, 21:-22, 28, 24 and 
~5 shal! apply in relation to Council constituencies as theI aPPly • 
III relatIOn to Assembly ('onstituencies"; 
(11) to flub-section (6), the words "or revised" shall be added at 
~he end. 
12. Section 27F shall be omitted. 
13. In section 28, in sub-section (2), for clause (h), the following oIauae .jO 
Mall be substituted, namely:-
" ( h) the annual revision of electoral rolls;". 
14. The Sixth and Seventh Schedules shall be omitted_ 

10 
11 
• 
14 
B.-AJoNDJlBNTS OP TBB REPRESENTATION OP THB PEOPLE AOT, 19l51 
.~ In section 2,-. 
(4) in 8ub-section (1),-
(i) after clause {b)i the following clause shall be insert8cr~ 
Damely:-
"(bb) 'Chief Electoral Officer' means the officer' 
appointed under seotion 21 of the Representation of ~ 
Peoplf" Act, 1950 (XLIII of 1950)."; 
(ii) for clause (e), the following clause shall be flubstituted;. 
namely:-. 
"(e) 'elector' in relation to a constituency, means IaI 
person whose name is entered in the electoral roll of than 
constituency for the time being in force snd who is not sub~ 
ject to any of the di~quaJ.ifications mentioned in section 16 or 
the Representation of the Peopi!e Act, 1950."; 
(iii) clause {i} shall be omitted; 
(iv) clauses (j) and (h) ~hall be re-Iettered as clauses (i) and' 
. (j) and after clause (i) as so re-lettered, the following cluuse shall 
be inserted, namely:~ 
"(k) 'State Government' in relation to a Part C State • 
means the IJieutenant-Governor or Chief Commisakmer-
thereof. ' , ; 
(b) sub-sections (5) and (7) shall be omitted. 
16. In section 8, in sub-section (1), clause (g) shall be omitted. 
!II 17. In ~otion 16, for sub-section (1), th~ following sub-section shall 
·1Pe IlUbstituted, namely:-
• 
"(1) A general election shull be held for the purpose of constitut~· 
iDg in due time the Legislative Assembly of each Sta~ under the-
Constitution or under the Government of Part C States Act, 195. 
(XLIX of 1951), as the case Illay he. ". 
18. In section 17,-
• (4) the words "under the Constitution in due timQ ori , shall b~ 
emitted; 
(b) for the words "Oovernor or Rajpramukh" the words. 
l"Gqvernor, Rajpramukh, Lieutenant-Governor or Chief Commissioner'" 
uau be substituted. 
119. In section 80,-
(4) at the end of clause (a), the word .. and" shall be inserted;; 
(b) olauses (0) and (cl) shall be omit.ted; Rnd 
(c) the following shall be added at the end:-. 
"and by another noWioation in the Official Gazette appoink 
in due course the date or dates on which 11 poll shall, if necessaryp-
be taken, whtch or the first of which, shall be a. date not earlicl' 
than the t·hirtieth day after the date for the scrutiny of nomina-
tions. ". 

It) 
20. In section 31, for the w()l'ds ;. a notification" the words "the firsti-. 
DOtificBtion" shall be substituted. 
21. To section 82, the words, letter, brackets and figures "or under the 
provisions of the Government of Part C States Act, 1951 (XLIX of 1951), 8B 
the 088e may be" shall be added at the end. ' 
22. In section 36, in sub-section (2), in clauses (a) and (b), after the 
words "this Act." the JVords, letter, brackets and figures "or the Govern-
ment of Part C States Act, 1951 (XLIX of 1951)" shall be inserted. 
23. In section 39,-
(a) in' sub~section (2), at the end of clause (a), the word "and" 
shall be inserted, clauses (c) and (d) shall be omitted and ~t the end 
of the sub-section, the following shall be added:-
"und by another notification in the Official Gazette appoint "in 
due course the date on which a poll shall. if necessary, be taken 
which Flhl1ll be a date not earlier than the tenth day after the 
date for the scrutiny of nominations"; 
(b) in emb-section (8), for the words "s, notification" the words 
,"the first notification" shall be substituted; aud 
(c) in sub-section (4), for the brackets and figure "(3)" the brackets, 
fignre and letter "(8C)" J;jhall be suhstit\l~ed. 
24. in section 53, for -sub-section (1), t.h~ following sub-section flhall 
be substituted, namely:-... 
"(1) If the number of contesting candida(es exceeds the number 
of seats to he filled, 0. poll shall be tal{en. ". 
l~ 
IS. 
25. In section 54, for sub-section (6), the following sub-section shall De !5 . 
• ubstituted, namely :-
•• (6) In this section all references to candidates shall be con-
.trued 8S references to the contesting candidates.". 
26. To section 55, the words, letter ond and figures "or under the Govern-
!Dent of Part C States Act, 1951 (Xl.IX of 1951), os the case may he" 3()1. 
Uuill be added at the end. 
27. In section 58,-
«(%I) in sub-section (1), the proviso shall be omitted; 
(b) in sub-section (2),-
(.) the words "or at any polling booth" shall ,be omitted; 
(ii) the words "or in such !Solling booth, a8 the elise may be'~ 3", 
shall be omitted. ' 
(0) in sub-section (3), the words "or in such polling booth" shall be umitted. 
28. In section 07,-
If (a) in the proviso to sub-section (1), for the words and figures 
. fro.m the date of the pUblication of the election petition under 
8ectlOn 00" the words "from the date of appointment of the Chair-
man" shaH be substituted; 
(b) in sub-section (2), for the words "and list of" the words 
~'together with the" shall be substituted. 

16 
29. In section 119, for the words, brackets and figure "sub-section (1)'· 
the word, brackets and figure "sub-section (4)" shall be substituted. 
80. In section 158, in sub-section (2), for the words "or Rajpramukh 
of the State'" the words "Ra.jpramukli, Lieutenant-Governo.r or Chief 
.. Commissioner of the State" shall be substituted. 
III.-AMENDMEXT8 OF TUB GoVERNMENT OF PART C STATES ACT, 1951, 
31. In section 2, Bub-section (2) shall be omitted. 
82. Section 6 shall be omitted .. 
sa. In sectiori 7,-
l1.0 (a) the word "and" shall be a~ded at the end of clause (a); and 
(b) the word "and" at the end of clause (b), the whole of claU18 
• (r-) Bnd the Explanation shall be omitted. 
84. Section 8 shall be omitted. 
85. The First and Second Schedules shall be omitted. 

IiTATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The proposals in this Bill for the amendment of the Representetion of 
the People Acts of 1950 and 1951 have been formulated in the light of the 
expt'rience gained by the Election Commission, as well .as the Government, 
during and H.fter the general elections. Parts II and III of the Dill eontain 
the more important Rmendments proposed in these two Acts. Certain 
consequential nnd minor amendments to these Acts and to the election 
provisions of the Government of Part C States Act, 1951 are listed in the 
Schedule. 
1. THE HEPRESENTATlON OF THE PEOP!,E ACT, 1950 
(1) Parts III nnd IV of this Act contain provisions for the preparation 
of electoral rolls in nil the States. The scheme is that in every State there 
are separate roBs for Pa.rliamentary constituencies and for Assembly 
constituencics despite the fact that each Parliamentary constituency cvllsists 
of 8n integral number of Assembly constituencies. An Electoral RegistrBti.)n 
Officer bas to be appointed for each Parliamentary constituency sa well as 
for each of the Assembly constituenoies comprised in that Pa.rliamentary 
constituency. The electoral roms have to be formally published, both at 
the time of preliminary publication and at the time of final publica.tion for 
each one of these Parliament8l'Y and Assembly constituencies aeparately. 
All this leads to unnecessary dupl~cation of work and expenditUl'e which 
eould be easily avoided by making the electoral roll for an Assembly 
eonstituency the unit and providing that the electoral roa for 8. Parlia-
mentary constituency shall consist of the appropriate number of ('om-
ponent units merely put together. 
In the three Part C States of Kutch, Uauipur and Tripura where 
there are no Legisla.tive Assemblies there are what are known as DounaU 
of States constituencies for the purpose of electing 80 members to an 
electoral college. Each of these three States has at present two Parlia-
mentary constituencies each of which comprises 15 Council of States 
constituencies. In these States the electoral roll for a Council oC States 
constituency should be the unit and the eleotoral roll for' a Parliamentary 
constituency should consist of 15 of these component electoral rolla put 
together. , 
It is accordingly proposed in cl8use~ 2 and 7 of the l3ill-
(i) to modify the definition of constitueney in section 14 to read : 
" 'constituency' means an Assembly constituency or 8 Council 
of States constituency", and 
(ii) to insert a section at the end of Part III to the effect that "the 
electoral roll for every Parliamentary oonstituency other 
than the Parliamentary Com!tituency of the State of Bilaspur 
shall consist of the rolls for all .the Assembly constituencies, 
or as the case may be, the Council of States constituencies. 
comprised within that PsJiamentlll'Y constituency; and it 
shall not be necessary to prepare or revise separately the 
electoral roll for any such Parliamentary constituency.". 
17 

18 • 
(2) Section 19 of the Act lays down two conditions for registration ill 
any constituency, namely, (a) the perRon should have been oruinarily 
resident in the constituency for not less than 180 doys during the preceding 
calendar year, and (b) he should not have been less than 21 years af ege-
on the 1st of March of the year in which the ro:l is prepared or r~\'ised. 
In practice, however, owing to the paucity of stuff at our disposnl it hAS 
not been possible to make anything like a thorough inquiry on til\) first. 
point, and the lIuthorities responsible for the annual revision of the dle('toral 
rolls have mostl~ been oontent with ascertaining whether the dector 
ordinarily resides in the constituency at the time of revision. There seems 
no grea.t advllJltage in finding out whether an elector has been H'sidcnt 
in a constituency for any particular per:od. It is therefore pro]Josed in 
clause 30f the Bill that the law should be simplified by relating "ordinary 
residence" to the "qualifying date" rather than to any .. qualifying period". 
(3) Sub-section (8) of section 20 of the Act distingui!ihes between 
members of the Armed Forces who live in "a barrack, building or place 
belonging to or provided by the Government" and those who are permitted 
to live in private quarters. These latter are comparatively very few. It 
is desirable to have a uniform rule for all members of the A rmed Forces 
in.order to avoid any discrimination and also to facilitate the administrntivG 
work which this provision throws on the - various Headquarters. It i& 
therefore proposed that the sub-section should· be simplified as in .!h.use4 
of the Bill. . 
(4) Section 28 requires that the electoral roU for each cOll!ltituenc1 
shal be "prepared" every year in the prescribed manner wit,h rtlft'l'ence 
to the qualifying date. In view of the enormous size of the rolls and the-
expense already incurred in the preparation of the first electoral roils the-
Election Commission has decided not to attempt anything like a compldely 
fresh prepa.ration of the rolls except in a few localities. A house to house 
inquiry and a re-writing of the rolls every year will be unduly expensive 
and almost impracticable. All tha. is feasible is an annual revision, rather 
than an actual preparation, of the rolls, and it is proposed that section 23 
should be amended accordingly. The rolls which are now under preparation 
in. all the States and likely to be finalised by the end of the year wiII be. 
revised annually from next year onwards, and subject to such revision. 
will continue to. be in force permanently. 
(5) At present the Act itself does not contain any special pl'ovision 
for the inclusion of names in the electoral rolls, but rule 20(2) of th& 
Preparation of Elect/:lral Roll Rules, H150, contains the necessary provision. 
Sinee doubts have arisen as to validity of the rule. and the provit;ion is. 
important enough to find a place in the Act itself, it is proposed in clause (). 
of the Bill that a new section 25 should be inserted for this purpose, and 
the rule also validated. Except when an elect!on has been announced in 
the constituency, application for inclusion in the electoral roll will li& 
to the Electoral Hegiatration Officer. The section also provides for an 
appe~l to t!le Election Commission froIp an order of that Officer rejecting 
an application. During the period when an election is in progress the 
application will lie only to ~he Election Commission. 
(6) Another new provision has been proposed in the Bill (vido clause 5). 
in order to give statutory recognition to Chief Electoral Officers of States. 
who have been found in practice to be an essential part of the electoral 
machinery. While these. officers have to be officers of the State Govern-
ment, it is proposed that; they should be appointed by the Election 

19 
Commission in consultation with the State Government, and subject to 
the superintendence, direction and control of the Election Commission, 
they should supervise the preparation and revis:on of all electoral rolls 
within their respective States. 
(7) It is desirable that the staff of local authorWes should be made 
available to Electoral Registration Officers for work in connection with the 
IJreparation und revision of electoral rolls as they are now made availBble 
to Returning Officers under section 159 of the 1~51 Act for work in COll-
nection witr dections. }<'or this purpose a new section is proposed in 
clause A of the Em. 
II. THE REPlIESENTATION OF Tn..: PEOPloE ACT, 1951 
(1) Under section 7(c) u person is disqualified for membership of 
Parliament or of a Stllte Legislature if he hRs failed to lodge 11 retul'n of 
election expenses as required by or under the Act, und under seetion Bll)(b) 
the disqualification takes effect on the expiration of two months from the 
last date for lodging that return or of such longer period as the Election 
CommissiOll may in any particula.r case alXlw. '.Phe experience of the lust 
general elections has shown that this period of two months fl'om the last 
date for lodging the return is quite insufficient for scrutinizing literally 
thousands of such returns and deciding whether they have been hnged 
within the time o.n,d in the manner required by la.w. It is therefore p'-'Oposed 
that clause (b) of section 8(1) should be amended so that the disqualification 
does not. br('ome operative uutil the Election Commission h808 decided the 
point under the rules. . 
(2) Under the proviso to sub·section (2) of section 22, ARsistnnt 
Returning Officers are debarred from performing any of the functiolH flf 
the 1l.eturning Officer which relate to the counting of votes uniesil he is 
unavoidoblS prevt'nted from performing those functions. In a large 
oonstituency it sometimes becomes necessary to oount votes I.~t different 
pisces, but since Assistant Returning Officers are not permitted to do this, 
the Returning Officer himself has to go from one place to the other. This 
entails R good deal of avoidable delay. It is therefore proposed to omit 
the words "or to the oounting of votes" from the said proviso. 
(3) Sertion 25 requires that for each constituency there shall be provided 
a sufficient number of polling stations and that there shall be publishod 
a list showing the po:!J.ing stations Rnd the polling areas for whit'h they 
have respectively been provided. In practice, we have more than one 
polling booth at many polling stations, some times 8S many 3S four or five. 
Since .all records ha.ve to be kert separately for each po1Iing booth. these 
are given seria~ numbers for purposes of identification. It would be 
administratively more oonvenient to trt!at polling stations as indivisible 
units Ilnd allot definite polling areas to each of them IlS contemplo ted by 
section 25, and where necessary, groups of e:lectors with reference to the 
electoral roll even where two or more polling stations are located in the 
same building. In other words, it is des.irable that the Aet and the Ru!.es 
should refer .only to polling stations "11U all references to polling booths 
should be elimina.ted. In fact, the on:ty sect:on in which reference is made 
to polling booths is section 58, as amended by Act LXVII of 1951. It is 
proposed that the references to polling booths shou:d bo eliminukd fJ'om 
section 58 and section 26(1) should be amenqed enab~ing the IIppointmellt 
of the same person to be the presiding officer for more than one polling 
station in the Rame locality. 

20 
(4) Sub-section (8) of section 88 in its present form has been a fruilifu} 
aourl!e of election petitions on the gorund of unlawful rejection of nomi-
nation papers. Its main provision is that along with every Domi· 
nation paper there should be a dectaration by the candidate 
that he has appointed either himself or another specified person as 
his election agent. The great majority of candidates appoint 
themselves as their own election agent!!. According to section 43 
when the candidate revokes the appointment of an election agent 
without making another appointment he is deemed to have a.ppointed 
himself to be his election agent. There is no reason why this principle 
should not be extended also to first appointments, it being provided (vide 
revised sedion 40 in c:tiuse 18 of the Bill) that [l candidate shall be deemed 
to have appointed himself u.s his election agent until and unless he appoints 
another person to be his ell:!ction ngent. It is desirable that the nomiust'ol1 
paper should be made as simple as possible by doing away with all unneces-
sary declarations. In particular, it need Dot contain any decillrlltion as to 
the appointment of an election agent. In clause 13 of the Bill it is aecOl·d-
ingly proposed to revise sub-section (3) of sedion 33, by omitting the 
opening paragraph, converting the three provisos into sub·sections, and 
addiug a new provision the effect of which is to render unnecessary the 
filing of more than one declaration as to the candidate belm~ing to a par-
ticuhlr scheduled CBste or scheduled tribe. 
(5) The rule of evidence contained in clause (a) of sub-section (7) of 
aection :16 is not properly worded. The certified COPY of an 
entry in the electoral roll of a constituency could only be evi· 
dem'e of the fact that the individual referred to in the pntry is 
for the time being registe1"ed as an elector in the constituenoy, 
and the conclusive nature of 'this piece of evidence shoulq aho 
be confined to this fact. The right of the individual to stand £01" election 
or to subscribe a nomination paper as proposer or B8 aeconder accrues from 
the relevant provisions of the Act which have to be properly applied, and 
the mere production of a .certified copy of an entry in the electoral rell cau-
lIot be takeR 811 conclusive evidence of any of these rights. It is according-
Jy proposed in clause 14 of the Bill to revise clause (a) of sub-section (7) 
.,f se(~tion 86. It is also proposed to insert a new suD-section (8) in this 
section requiring every Returning Officer to prepare a list of validly 
nominated candidates immediately after the scrutiny of nomination papers 
is over. 
(6) Under the present law the Returning Officer's decision accepting or 
rejecting a nomination ptllJer can not 'be qupstioned eXCR.pt by an eleetlon 
petWon after the election is over. Recent experience has shown that by 
far the majority of ,the e!:ections which hRve been set uRide by FJel'tioll 
Tribunals have been set aside on the ground of improper rejection of. 
nominat.ion pa.pers. A good deal of harassment and anxiety to candidates 
and of public inconvenience and expenditure can be avoided if suitable 
provisions are made for appeals before the holding of elections against the 
decisions ot Returning qfficera IK'cepting or rejecting nomination papers 
and making the decisions of the appellate authority final. It. is accordingly 
proposed in clause ,15 of the Bill to insert a new section 86A providin, for 
an appeal to a judge of the High Court against the decision of the Retum-
ing Officer accepting or rejecting a nomina.tion paper. The section has 
been 80 drafted as to enable a qllick decision being obtained audnot to 
bold up polling unnecesaarily. 

21 
(1) Section 46 provfc1el for the appointment,~f polling agent. ".t leaaf 
three daYI belore the commencement or the poll . Many caadidate. at the 
general election. found it impossible to comply with this time limit and m.-
order to avoid hardlhip the Returning Officen and Presiding Officers had to 
accept polling Mente appointed later. It is proposed in. clause 19 of the Bill 
to remove this time limit which appe81'1 to be unneoeHary. 
(8) Section 47 at present restricts the number of counting agents of 
every candidate to one. 10 that at the time of counting only the candidate, 
his election agent, if any, and the counting agent are entitled to be present 
and watch the proceedings. It is almost imposlible for a single counting 
agent to watch with any degree of care and thoroughness when a number 
of counting partie I are doing the counting. It is therefore proposed ("id. 
clause 19) that seotion 47 should be amended 80 as to allow the appoint-
ment of a number of counting agents subject to the prescribed maximum. 
Provision could be made in the rules for restricting the number of counting 
agents in such manner as might be considered suitable for the particular 
election in progress. 
(9) QucFltions often arise as to when exactly an elected candidate be-
comes 1\ member of the House to which he is elected and what is the date 
of his election. There is usually an interval between the date of declar-
ation of a result und,er sections 53, 54 or 66 and the date on which that de-
claration is published in the Official Gazette under section 67. The de-
claration is reproduced ,verbatim in the Gazette and contains the date on-
which it has actually been made by the ;Returning Officer. 'fhe date of 
notification in the Gazette is therefore not material and there appears to bel 
no real justification for regarding the latter date as the date on which an 
elected C'Blldidate becomes a member of a particuiBr House. M;oreover, while 
the e)ec~d C'Bndidate is immediately aware of the declaration made by the 
Returning Officer and its date, he hilS to keep a close watch on the Offieial 
Gazettes in order to know the date on which the declaration is notified in 
the Gazette. and this. from the point of view of the candidate is neither 
easy nor convenient. In clause 20 of the Bill, it is accordingly proposed to 
insert a new section defining the date of election of a candidate. 
(10) The requirement relating to the submission of returns of election 
~xpenses under section 76 applies primarily ,to all elections to-
(.) the House of the People; 
(ii) a State Legislative Assembly; 
(iii) the Electoral Colleges of Kutch, Manipur and Tripura; 
(iv) a State Legislative Council from-
(a) tlie local authorities' constituencies, 
(b) the graduates" constituencies, 
(c) the teachers' constituencies. 
Section 78 provides that, except 10 far as may be prescribed, sec-
tions 76 and 77 shall not apply to the o,ther elections, namely:-
(v) elections by tbe members of a state Legislatil'8 Assembly 
or Electoral College to the Council of Statel, and 
(VI) elections by the members of a State Leplative Assembly 
to the State Legislative Council. 

2~ 
A.. rule however has been p.rescrib~d making the seotions applicable to these 
latter elections as well, with the result that returns are required to be lodg-
ed in respect of all electioI1s, whether primary or secondary, and whether 
direct or indirect. . 
. Section 76 requires a retorn to be lodged in respeot of each person 
who has been nominated as 8 candidate. In view of the distinctiou 
~e.de in the Act between "nominated" and "duly nominated", it appears 
that every person who puts in B nomination paper at the election, 
whether the 'domination was rejected at the time of scrutiny and whether 
he himself *ithdrew his candidature in 'time, has to file 8 return of 
election expenses. There have been literally hundreds of CRses in which 
such candi4atee were under the erronedus impression that they were 
not required to file returns, and consequently incurr,:,d disqualifications 
with reference to sections 7(c) aud 148. Since these non-contesting 
candidates could not possibly have incurred an~ appreciable exp(lnses 
and no one could be interested in their returns, it seems quite unnecessary 
to require them to file returns. 
In clAuses 23 and 24 of the Bill, it is proposed to modify the law 
relating to returns of election expenses so that--
(a) sections 76 and 77 do not apply at all to the classes of eleo-
tions mentioned in section 78; 
(b) in other elections. returns are required only of contesting 
candidates: -. 
(0) where the candidate is his own election agent, the return 
need not be signed. twice by the oandidate; and 
(d) the return itself contains the prescribed declaration ai"f~ 
correctness, but this need not be sworn before a magistrate.' ,: , 
(11) Under sub-section (1) of section 81, the period of Jj'mitation fbr 
presenting ,an election petition is left to be _ prescribed by rules w!lich ~ 
not very satisfactory. It is proposed to specify this period in the section 
itself. 45 d~y8 are allowed for lodging the return of election expenses 
and, adding 15 days to it, the period of limitation for presenting an. elec-
tion petition may be two months from the date of the election of the 
returned candidate, or if there' Rre more than Dne returned candidate 
at the election and the dates of their elections are diftierent, two months 
from the later of those dates. 
(12) Seetion 82 provides that all the duly nominatpd eandillates shall 
be joined as respondents to an election petition.' Even in the case of 
elections to the Housa of the People' or a State Legislative A.ssembly, 
particularly in plural member constituencies. the number of duly nomi-
nated candidates has been very large, with the result that the service of 
notices on· them takes, Q very long time . Bnd ,holds up the trial of the 
election petition. Naturally. it is only the returned candidate who takes 
flny interest in contesting the election petition. Moreover there is a 
provision in aection 90(1) which enables any other candidate "to join as 
a respond&nt within 14 days of the publication of t)e' notioe in the Official 
Gazette". On the other h~lid, there is no. prOTision for joining the Return-
ing Officer as. a respondent in cases where the petition complains of his 
conduct. It is accordingly proposed in clause 26 qf the Bill.that section 82 
should be revised so' 'that it ;i8 necessary to join ns res.pondents only those 
ca.nd~dateil who. are, ~nterested ~rima laci. i.R.. the outcome of the petition, 
and also the RetumlDg Officer 1f any 81le8at)()~ ,~e made. against him. 

0' 
23 
(13) Where the petition alleges any corrUpt or illegal practice, sub· 
section (2) of section 88 requires ,separate list setting forth full parti-
culars of the practices alleged, and also as full a statement as possible 
8S to the names of tbe parties alleged t.o have committed those practices 
at the date and place of commission of those practices. This provision is 
often not fully understood by petitioners, or even where it is under-
stood, there is great deal of repetition 'as between the petition proper 
and the list.. It would be simpler from all points of view to have a com-
plete and self-contained petition. It is proposed that section 83 should 
be revised formally from this point of view. 
(14) Under section 85, the Election Commission is required to dismiss 
any petition if sections 81, 83 and 117 are not complied with, but it may 
condone a failure to present a petition within the prescribed period if it 
is satisfied that there was sufficient cause. This oondonation is not, bow-
ever, final and the issue may be re-opened before the Election Tribunal 
under section 00. In view of the special nature of election petitions and 
the desirahility of reaching finality in 1'egard to aU election matters, it 
is proposed that the provision for condoning delay should be omitted and 
that the power to dismiss a petition for non-compliance with section 83 
should be exclusively with the Election Tribunal under section 90. 
SecOlldl;r, whet'e a petition is not dismissed under section 85, the 
present procedure is for the Election Commission to constitute 1\ Tribu-
nal, which in practice takes some little time, and then to'refer the peti-
tion to it for trial. The Chairman who is appointed first proceeds to 
cause a oOPY of the petition to be served on each respondent· and also 
,to be published in the Official Gazette under section 90(1). It would be 
easy, economical and expeditious for the Election Commission to attend to 
these preliminaries, _80 that· the Tribunal, when appointed, may proc,eed 
without delay to the actual trial of the petition. It is accordingly pro-
posed in clause 28 that section 85 should be amended and amplifiAd to 
coYer these two points. 
(15) At· present there is no provision in the Act enabling an Election 
Tribunal to perform its functions in spite of the casual absence of one 
of its members. There is also no provision empowering the Election Com-
mission to withdraw aD election petition ttom one Tribunal lind transfer 
it to another for disposal. It is accordingly proposed in clauses 29 and 30 
to iDsert the necessary provisions in and after section 6'6 of the Act. 
(16) Consequent upon the proposal mentioned in paragraph (6) above, 
it is necessary to amend sub-sections (1) and (2) of section 100. Clause 
(c) of sub-section (1) which enables an. Election Tribunal to set aside 
the election as a whole on the ground of improper acceptance or rejection 
of a nomination is proposed to be deleted. If this is done, it is cleurly 
necessary that the Tribunal should be able to set aside the election of a 
returned candidate if it is proved that on the date of his election, he was 
not qualified, or was disqualified to be chosen to fill that particular seat. 
It is proposed to add a clause to this effect in sub-section (2) of section 100. 
It may be mentioned in this connection that under the election law as it 
,dood before HJ50, an election could be set aside on the ground that any 
person nominated was not qualified or was disqualified for election. 
(17) Under Ezplanation (b) below section 123(8) of the Act, a State 
(~overnment is debarred from exempting village officers from the opera-
tIOn of section 128(8), with the result that no village officer can oanvass 
at a~ election for any candidate. In some of the States, however (e.g. 
PunJab), special legislation has been passed enabling certain classes of 
village officers to stand for elections although they may be holding offices 

u 
o~ profi_ ~der tM GQvel'JllXWl\. Th~ L\ is pouibl~ for a ltmbardar 
in Puniab to stand tor au. .lectiou. bu~ it iI ~ major corrupt practice for 
apy oandidate to obtain the aqist,onee of any lambardar. inoluding one 
who ie himself a c&ndicle.~. at ~n electioD. Tl:Ua is obviously anomalous. 
A\ the se.me ftime the relUlons fQr excluding v.illage officers from the pur-
view of the eX.eIJlpting power given to S~e Governments are obvioul. 
It is. therefore. proposed in clause 88 of the ~ill to amend the explana-
tion so that those villSie officers only who actually stand for eleotion are 
no\ hit by the prohibition. • 
(18) Failure to lodge a return of election expenses within the time and 
in the manner required by law is at preaent neither a corrupt praotice nor 
an illegal practioe. The first part of section 148. however. disqualifies 
a candidate as well &I his e1eotion agent (if any) for such failure from 
voting at any election for a period of 5 years. Inasmuch as this is nei-
ther a. corrupt practioe nor· an illegal p::actioe under the Act. it is argu-
able that this provision in section 143 li not quite consistent with arti-
cle 826 of the Constitution and eeetion 16(1) (c) of the 1950 Act. It is 
accordingly proposed that this should be made an illegal practioe by aD 
amendment of section 125. 
(19) In the revised section 76. it is proposed that the candidate need 
no~ mak.e a separate sworn declaration in regard to his return of election ex-
penses. A declaration as to the correctness of the return would, however, 
be included in the prescribed form of the return. The revised section S8-
also provides for certain declarations to be filed along with the nomina-
tions. In all such· cases it should be a punishable offence for any person 
to make a false deolMation, and Ii new section is proposed for thi. pur-
pose in clause 35 of the Bill. Consequently, a reference to this Offence 
is proposed to be included in seotions 189(1) (b) and 141(a). 
NEW DELHI; 
The 26th February, 1958. 
} o. C. B.ISWAS. 

-Nou. on OlCJUf'. 
014U'6 2.-See P~t I (1) of the Statement: of Objecta'and Reesona 
(hereinafter referred to as "S.O.R. "). -
ClaU.6 3.-S,ee Part I (2~, S.O.R. 
ClaU86 4.-See Part I (8), S.O.R. 
Clau86 5.-See Part I (6), S.O.R. 
ClaU8e 6.-See Part I (4) and (5), S.O.R. 
Clau81l ,7.-See Part I (1), S.O.R. Special provision is made for the 
State of Bilaspur in sub-section (2) of the new section 26, since it consti· 
tutes a single. member Parliamentary conlltituency and has neither a 
Legislative Assembly nor an electoral college. 
Clausil 8 . .....,.8.ee Part I (7), S.O.R. 
ClaU8/l 9.-See Part II (I), S.O.R. 
Clau./l 10.-The new section 19A gives statutory recognition to the 
Chief Electoral Officers of 8tates for purposes of the Act of 1951. They 
have in·fact be.en supervising the conduct of elections. 
ClaUS/l 11.-See Part n (2), S.O.R. 
Claus/l 12.-8ee Part II (8), S.O.R. 
Clau'/l 13.-8ee Part II (4), S.O.R. 
ClaU8/l 14.-See Part II (5), S.O.R. 
Cla1l88 15.-See Part II (6), 8.0.R. 
Clause 16.-1n view of the provision for Bpp.eals from the returning 
officers' orders, it will not be possible for the competent authority or the 
Election Commission to fix before-hand a definite date for the with· 
drawal of candidatures under section 80. This date has to be in the 
alternative, depending on whether any appeal is lodged or not. The 
proposed' amendment of section 87 provides for this. Clause (0) of 
section SO is proposed to be d,eleted: vide item 19 of the Schedule to 
the Bill. 
Clause 17.-The Aot at present· draws a distinction, not readily in· 
telligible, ,between duly nominated candidates and validly nominated can-
didate,. Candidates may have be~n "duly nommated" although their 
nomination papers are rejected on scrutiny by the Returning Officers. 
The Act 8190 has no short desiption for the candidates whose nomina-
tions have been finally aoc.epted and who have not withdrawn their oan-
didature within the prescribed time. It is proposed j;o call these the 
contesting candidates and refer to them 88 such in the subsequent pro· 
visions of th,e Aot. 
Clause 18.-See Part II (4), S.O.R. The revised section 40 simpli. 
fies th~ existing provision relating to eleo~ion agents. 
t5 • 

26 
Clause 19.-8ee Part II (7) and (8), S.O.n. 
Clau8e 20.-8ee Part II (9), B.O.R. 
Clau8e8 21 and 22.-These amendments of sections 68 and 69 of the 
Act are consequential on the new provision in aectioQ. 67A defining the 
date of election' of a candidate. 
Clauses 23 and ,24.-See Part II (10), B.O.R. 
Clau8e 25.-Bee Part II (11), S.O.n. 
Clause 26.-See Part II (12), S.O.B. 
Clause 27.-See Part II (18), S.O.R. 
Clause 28.-See Part II (14), S.O.n. 
Clau8e8 29 and 30.-See Part II (15), S.O.a.. 
Clause 31.-The amendments of section 90 proposed in this clause 
are formal and consequential. In view of sub·section (2) of revised 
8ection 85, the first part of section 00(1) becomes unnece86ary. The 
last part of that sub-section iA transposed by sub·section (4). Sub· 
section (5) is a new provi~ion. 
Clause 32.-See Part II (16), S.O.H. 
Olau8e 33.-See Part II (17), S.O.H. 
Clause 34.-8ee Part II (18), S.O.R. 
Clau8es 35, 36 and 38.-See Part II (19), S.O.R. 
Cla,u8es 87 and 39.-The amendments proposed in sections 14O(1} (b) 
«od 142 are formal. The illegal practice of faU,url} to lodge a r,eturn of 
election expenses is excluded from the scope ot 'these two sections, since 
it is sufficiently provided for in section 143 as revised by clause 40 .. 
Clause 40.-Section 14~ is revised by this clause so as to bring it, 
into conformity with sec,tions 7(c) and 8(1) (b). 
>, 
The Sched1l1t: 
Item I.-As it is proposed to integrate the election provisions of the 
Government of Part C Sta~s Act with the provisions of the Rep~.en'. 
tarion of the People Acts, the definiti9n of .. Assembly constituency" is 
revised iO as to include Assembly constituenoies in Part C States. 
The new definition of "StatJ3 Government" is intended to faCilitate 
the administration ~f' the Act in Part eStates. ,. 
Hem 2.-In view of the amendments 'tOade In 'articles 341 and 342 
of the Constitution .last year, sub-section' (2) ofaection SA of th,EI: Act 
of 1950 apd the ~ixth and Beyenth Sohedules to that Act are super-
l1uous. The Scheduled Castes 'and Scheduled Tribes in relation to eacb 
of the Part C States have already been listed by Orders of the President. 
Item8 ,3, and 4.~Th4t ,proposed amendments are consequential upon 
~he proposed integrnti9n., of the election proviSions of the Government 
of Part C Statee..Act with the provisions of the Representation of the People 
Acts. • 

27 , 
It,m 5.-The amendment pJ'Oposed is consequential upon the change 
ill the definition of "constituency"; vide clause 2 of the Bill. 
Item 6.-T,he amendment 'proposed is a clarifioatoryone. 
Item 7.-'-TThe amendments pr9posed in sub-clauses (a), (b) and (c) 
are consequential upon the proposed omissio-n ,of all references to "the 
~ualifying period" in relation to "ordinary residence". Sub-clause "(7) 
of section 20 is now spent. It is therefore proposed to omit it by sub-
olause (d). 
Item B.-The amendments propo~d are clarificatory. 
Item 9.-As secti9n 22A is now spent, it is proposed to repeal it. 
ItemB 10 and ll.-Provisions relating to Assembly constituencies 
haviug been included in Part III of the Act ,of 1950 consequent upon 
the proposed revision of the definition of "constituency", Part IV of 
that Act will now deal with only Council oonstituencies. The heading 
of this Part is, therefore, proposed to be revised as in item 10. Section 
26 in this Part being unnecessary has already been proposed to be 
om~tted (vide clause 7 of the Bill); and as the electoral rolls of an As-
sembly constituency will now form the unit, Bub-section (4) of section 
27 is proposed to be amended by SUbstituting for the reference to 'Par-
liamentary constituencies' the reference to 'Assembly constituencies'. 'fhe 
amendment proposed in sub-section (6) of section 27 is a clarificatory one. 
_ Item 12.-As it is proposed to include in Part III of the Act of 1950 
provisions relating to electoral rolls of Council of States constituencies, -
section 27F will not be necessary. Hence it is proposed to omit this 
section. 
Item 13.-The amendment proposed is conseq-uential upon the proposed 
amendment of section 23 providing for the annual revision, instead of 
annual preparation, of electoral rolls. 
Item 14.- Vide item 2 above. 
Item 15.-As statutory recognition is proposed to be given to the 
Chief Electoral Officers of States for the purposes of the Act of 1951 
(vide clause 10 of the Bill), the Chief Electoral Officer is proposed to be 
defined in this item. The present definition of .. elector" is a bit defec-
tive. _ Hence the definition of "elector" i~ proposed to be amended. 
Clause (i) of seotion 2 of the Act of 1951 is proposed to be omitted be-
cause the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in relation to 
Par~ C States have already been listed by Orders of the President under 
articles 841 and 342 of the Constitution. Sub-sections (5) lind (7) of 
section 2 of that Act are proposed to be omitted 8S the rules of construc-
tion contained therein are now obsolete. 
Item 16.-As clause (g) of sub-section (1) of section 8 of the Act 
of 1951 is now spent, it is pr~posed to be omitted. -
ltem.9 17, 18. 21, 22, 136 and 30.-The amendments proposed in these 
items are consequential upon the proposal to integrate the election pro-
visions of the Government of Part C States Act, 1951 with the provisions 
of the Representation of the People Acts~ 
Items 19, 20 and .ea.-The amendments proposed in sections 30, 31 and 
89 of the Act of 1951 are consequential upon. the proposed insertion of 
section S6A. As ther,e may be appeals from the Returning Officers' 

!8 
orders. it will DOt, be possible for the appropriate lIMtbority or the Elec-
tion Commission to fix beforehand the last date for the wilhdrawtl of 
candidatures Ql' the da4e 01" dates OR wJHoh. a. poll shall be taken. Th~ 
amendments proposed in sections SO and 89 provide for the fixation of 
• date or date. on which a pon shall be taken. Regarding ~he d&te of 
withdrawal of candidatures "ide clause 16 of the Bill. 
Item. 24 Gnd i5.--The amendments proposed are oonaequential upon ~e 
proposed revision of section 88. 
ltem 27.-The amendments proposed in aeotion 58 are consequ~tial 
upon the proposal to treat every polling booth as a polling station and 
to eliminate the referenoes to polling boo~s from the Act of 1951. 
Item 28.-The amendments proposed in section 97 are consequential 
upon the proposed amendments of sections 88 and 85 respectively. 
It.m 29.-The propoeed amendment is consequential upon the amend-
ment proposed in section 00. 
Item. 31 and 35.-Suh·section (2) of section 2 of the Government of 
Part C States Act, 1951, and the First and . Second Schedules thereto are 
unnecessary in view of the Orders issued by the President under articles 
.841 Bnd 842 of the Constitution lUld ar~ accordingly proposed to be omit-
~ed. 
Items 32, 33 and 34.-The proposed omissions and amendments are 
consequential upon the proposal to integrate the election provisions of 
the Government of Part C States Act, 1951 with th,e provisions of the 
Representation of the People Acts. 

ANNEXURE 
EX'1'RACTS ;l¥lOM THE REPRESENTATION 01' THB PEOPLE AOT, 195Q 
• • • 
Section 14 
14. Definition.-In this Part, "constituen8y" means a Parliamentary 
constituency. 
• • • • 
Section 19 
19. Conditions of registration.-Subject to the foregoing provisions of 
this Part, every person wh(J-
(a) has been ordinarily resident in a constituency for not less than 
180 days during the qualifying peried, and 
(b) was not less than 21 ;years of age on the qualifying date, 
shall be entitled to be registered in the electoral roll for that constituency . 
• * * 
Section 20 (8) 
~(). Meaning of "Ordinarily resident."-
* * 
• • * • • 
• (3) A member of tille Armed Forces of the Unioo while living in any 
barrack, building or place belonging to, or provided by. the Government 
.hall not be deemed to be ordinarily resident in the constituency within 
which such barrack. building or place is situate, but shall be deemed to be 
ordinarily resident during any period or on any date in the constituency in 
which, but for his service in the Armed Forces, he would have been orcH-
narily resident during that period or on that date . 
• • • 
Section 21 
21. Meaning of "qualifying date" and "quaJitying period".-For the 
purpose of this Part, the qualifying date and the qualifying period,-
(a) in the C8se of electoral rolls first prepared under this Act, shall 
be the 1st day of March, 1950, and tlhe period beg:nning on the 1st day 
of April, 1947 and ending on the'S1st day of December, 1949, respeo. 
tively; and 
(b) in the case of every electoral roll subsequently prepared under 
tilis Act, shall be thE'l 1st day of March of the year in whioh it is pre-
pared, and the year immediately preceding that year, respectively. 
• ... . ' . 
Sections 28, 24 and 25 
23. Ann.ual preparation of electoral, reU.-The electoral roll for each 
constituency shall be prepared every year in the prescl'ibed manner by re-
ference to the qualifying date: 
Provided that it shall not be necessary ~ prepare any roll during the 
year 1951. 
29 

30 
24. Period of operation 0/ electoral rollB.-(l) Subject to the other pro-
visions of this Act, the electoral roll for any constituency first prepared under 
this Act shall come into force immediately upon its final publioation in 
accordance with tbe rules made under this Act and sball remain in fOrce 
until the 30th day of September, 1952; and every electoral roll subsequently 
prepared under this Act shall come into force on t.he 1st day' of October 
next after the qualifying djte by reference to which that roll is prepared 
and shall remain in force until the 80th day of Septemb~r next following. 
(2) If for any reason, the electoral roll for any constituency or part ot 
a constituency is in uny yeur not finally published, in the prescribed manner 
before the 1st day of October, then, If'lltil the day on which it is so publish-
ed, the electoral roll in force immediately before the said 1st day of October 
shall continue in force us the electorul roll for thut constituency or, as the 
case may be, that part of the constituency. 
25. Revi8ion or correction 0/ electoral 10118 in special ca.8eB ,-Notwit,h-
standing anything contained in sections 28 nnd 24-
(a) the Election Commission may at any time, for reasons to be 
recorded in writing, direct the revision in th~ prescribed manner of the 
electoral roll of any constituency or part of a constituency, and when 
a list containing any additions to. omissions from or alterations in, the 
electoral roll 88 a result of such re,:ision has been, finally published 
in the prescribed manner, the electoral roll shall be deemed to have 
been revised accordingly; 
(b) the Electoral &gistration Officer for 8 constituency, on appli-
cation, m~e to him for ,the correction of an existing entry in the elec-
toral roll of the constituency for the time being in force shall, if he is 
satisfied after such inquiry as he thinks fit that the entry relates to 
the applicant and is erroneous or defec~ve in any particular, amend, 
or cause the roll to be amended. accordingly. 
Section 26 
26. Preparation 0/ electoral, ro1l8 lor Assembly conBtituencies.-The pro-
visions of 'sections 15 to 25 (including the special provisions contained in 
section 22A), shall apply in relation to Assembly constituencies as they 
apply in relation to Parliamentary constituencies. . . . ~ 
EXTRACTS FROM TJI'E REPRESENTATION OF THEPEOPLB ACT, 1951 
(XLIII OP' 1951) 
• * • 
Section 8(1) (b) 
6. SafJing •. -(l) Notwithstanding anything in section 7-
• * * * * 
(b) a disqualification under clause (c) of that section shall not take 
Affect until the expira~ion of two months from the date by whioh the 
retvrn of election expenses ought {IO have been lodged or of such longer 
period as the Election Commission may in any particular case allow; 
'. *. • * Section 22(2) 
22. A,,;.tant Retu.rning OjffcerB.-
• *.. * 
(2) Every Assistant· Returning Officer shall, subject. to the control 
of the Returning Officer, be competent to peform all or any of the func-
tions of the Returning Officer:1 

.. . .' 31 
Provid.ed that no Assistant Returning Officer shall perform any of the 
functiolls of the Returning Officer which relate to the acceptance of a nomi-
nation paper or to the scrutiny of- nomitlations or to the counting of votes 
unless the Returning Officer is unavoidably prevented from performing the 
said function. 
• • • • • 
Section 38(1) (2) and (3) 
83. Prc8cntation of nominatIOn paper and requirements for a valid no-
tnination.-(l) On or before the date appointed under clau!!f' (a} of section 
80 each candidate shall, either in person or by his proposer or seconder, 
between the hours of eleven o'clock in the forenoon and three o'clock in the 
after-noon deliver to the Returning Offioer s.t the place specified in this 
behalf in the notice issued under section 31 a nomination paper C'ompleted in 
the prescribed form snd subscribed by the candidate himself I\S assenting to 
the nomination and by two persons referred to _ in sub-section (2) as pro-
poser and seconder. 
(2) Any person whose name is registered in the electOral roll of the 
constituency and who is not suBject to any disqualification mentioned in 
section 16 of the Representation of the People Act, 1950 (XLIII of 1950) 
mbY subscribe as proposer or seconder as many nomination papers as there 
are vacancies to be tilled butl no more: 
Provided that if the name of 8 person is entered more than once in the 
electoral roll of 0. oonstituency or is included in the electoral roll of two or 
more oonstituencies of the same class, such person shall not be entitled to 
subscribe as proposer or seconder more than one nomination paper for each 
\"Bcancy to be filled in that constituency, or in not more than one of such 
constituencies of the same class. 
(3) Every nomination paper delivered under sub-seotion (1) shall be ac-
companied by a declaration in writing subscribed by the candidate that the 
candida.lle has appointed as his t;lection agent for the election either him-
self or another person who is not disqualified under this Act for the ap-
pointment and who shall be named in the declaration, and by such other 
declarations, if any, as may be prescribed; and no candidate shall he deemed 
to be duly nominated unless such declaration is, or all such declarations 
are, delivered along with the nomination paper: 
Provided tiliat in a constituency where any seat is reserved for the Sche-
duled Castes or for the Scheduled 'fribes, no candidate shall be deemed fib. 
be qualified to be chosen to fill that seat unless his nomination paper is 
accompanied by a declaration verified,in the prescribed manner that the 
candidate is a member of the Scht-duled Castes Or of the Scheduled Tribes. 
for which tlbe seat has been so reser\'ed and the declaration specifies the 
particular caste or tribe of which the candidate is a member and also the 
area in relation to which such caste or tribe is one of the Scheduled Castes. 
or Scheduled Tribes, as the case may be: 
Provided further that in a r..onstitllency where !lny seat is reserved for 
an auilonomous district of Assa.m other than the constituency comprising 
the cantonment and municipality of ShiIlong, no candidate shall be deemed 
~o be duly nominated for the seat so reserved unless the nomfnation paper 
IS accompanied by a declaration verified in the prescribed manner that the 
candidate is a member of any of the Scheduled Tribes of that district and 
the declaration specifies the particular tribe of which the candidate is a 
member: 
. Provided also tha.t where any person having held any offioe referred to. 
In 01aus6 (f) of- section 7 has been dillmissed and the period of five years. 

32 
from the date of !luchdismi8aal hail not expired or the ~ualification, if 
any, under that olause has not been removed by the Eleotion COIDll1iasion 
under clause (g) of sub-section (1) of section 8, such person shall not be 
deemed to be duly nominated as a candidate unless his nomination paper 
is accompanied by a certificate issued in tlhe prescribed manner by the Elec-
tion Commission to the effect. that he has not been dismissed for oorrup-
tion or disloyalty to the State. 
• • • t 
Bection 86(7) 
36. Sorutiny of nominations.-
* * * • * (7) For Ube purposes of this section-
(a) the produotion of any certified copy of an entry made in the 
_p.lectoral roll of any constituency shall be conclusive evidence of the 
right of any elector named in that entry to stand for election or to 
subscribe a nomination paper. 6S the case may be. unless it is proved 
that the candidate is disqualified under the Constitution or this Act. 
or that the proposer Ol' seconder, 88 the case may be, is disqualified 
under Bub-section (2) of section 88; 
(b) where a person has subscribed. whether a8 proposer or seconder, 
a larger number of nomination papers than there are vacancies to be 
filled. those of the papers 80 subscribed which have been first received, 
up to the number of vacancies to be filled. shall be deemed to be 
valid. I 
• • • • 
Section 87(1) 
87. Withdrawal of candidatuTe.-(1) Any candidate may withdraw bis 
~andidaturt' by a notice in writing which shall contain such particula1'S as 
may be prescribed aoo shull be subscribed by him and delivered before three 
. .o'clock in the afternoon on the day fixed under clause (c) of sect.ion 80 to 
tha Returning Officer either by slIch oandidate in person or by his proposer, 
tJeConder or election agent who has been authorised in this behtdf in writing 
by such candidate: 
Provided that if that day is a public holiday within the meaning of 
il8Ction 25 of the Negotiable Instnlments Act, 18t:11 (XXVI of 1881) or haa 
been notified by the Stat.e Government as a day to be observed as a holiday 
in Government offioes in the St&ie, tbe notice of withdrawal of candidat·uTe 
ehaJl be considered &8 baving been delivered in due time if it is delivered 
before three 0 'olock in the afternoon on the next suoceeding day which ii 
noither such a pub:ic holiday nor H rlny 80 notified. 
• • • • • 
Section 88 
38. Publication of nomination •• -The Returning Officer shall, imme-
odiately sfter the expiry of the period within which candidatures may be 
withdr~wn under sub-section (1) of section 37. prepare and publish 8 list 
()f valid nominatnons in such manner as may be presoribed. 
• • • • 
Section 40 
40. Appointment of election agentB.-(l) Every person nominated as 
8 oandidate at an election shall before the delivery ol his nomination paper 
und~r sub-saotion (1) of section 88 or under that sub-section read with sub-
.. ection (4) of section 39, as the case may be. appoint in writing either 
himself or soDle one other person to. be bis ·election agent. 

3'3 
(2) Wheu a candidllte appomts SOrne penon other than himself to be 
bis election agent he shall Qbtain in writing the acceptance by such person 
IOf the office of such electioo li'gcnt. . 
• * • 
Sections 46 and 47 
46. Appointment 01 polling l1gentB.-A candidate who hB'il been duly 
nominated under this Acil snd who has not withdrawn his candidature in 
the manner and within the time specified in sub·section (1) of section 87, 
'Or in that sub·section read with sub·section (4) ()f section 39, as the MSe 
may be, or his election agent may, tit leasQ three days before the COmmence. 
ment of the poll, a.ppoint in the prescribed manner such number of agents 
-and relief agents ss may be prescribed to act as poIling agents of such can-
<Hdate at ee.ch polling station provided under section 25 or at the plne'e 
'fixed under sub·section (1) of section 29 for the poll. and when any such 
-appointment is made, notice of the appointment shall be given in the 
prescribed manner to such officer as may be prescribed. 
47. Appointmrnt of counting agenta.-Any such candidate as is men· 
tioned in seetion 46 or his election agent may, before the commencement 
'of the counting of votes, appoint in the prescribed manner one agent and 
no more to be present 8S his counting agent at tbe counting of votes, and 
when sny such e.ppointment is made, notice of the appointment shall be 
:given in the prescribed manner to the Returning Officer. 
• * • 
Sedion 68(1) 
68. Vacation 01 Bcats when elected to both Hou8es 01 Parliament.-
{l) Any person who. is choaen a member of both the House of the 
People and t.he Council of States and who ha.s not te.ken his seat in either 
House ms~, by notice in writing signed by him and delivered to the Sec· 
retary to the Election Commission within ten da.ys from the date of pubJi. 
CA.tiOll in the Gazette of India. of the declarations that he has been so 
<lhosen or, if such publica.tions have been made on different dstes. within 
ten days from the later of such dates, intimate in whioh of the Houses he 
wishes to serve, and thereupon, his sea.t in the House in which he does 
not wish to serve shall become vacant. 
• * .* • 
Section 69(1 rand (2) 
69. Vacation 01 seats by perRon8 a~ready members 01 one Ho·u.~e on 
.election to other HouBe of Parliament.-(l) If a person who is a.lready a 
membe:' of the House of the People and hft'S taken his seat in such HOllse 
is. chosen a member of the Council of States, his seat in the HOllse of the 
People shall, on the publication in the Gazette of India of the declaration 
that he has been so ohosen, become vacant. 
(2) If a. person who is already a. member of the Council of States and 
hUll taken IIill seat in such Council is chollen 8 member of the House of the 
"People, his seat in the Council of States shall. on the publica.tuon in the 
Oazette of India of the declaration that be haa been so chosen, become 
vacant. 
• * .. • 

~ 
SBctio,. 76 
76. Return of eleotion ezp6n.eB.-(1) Wiihin the· pr'elCl'ibed time after 
.every elec~on there shall be lodged with the ReturDin, Ofticer in relpectlt 
of each person who has been nominated as 8 canditlate, 8 return of the-
election expenses of that person signed by him And :bis election agent. 
(2) Every such return shall be in such form and shall contain sucb-
particulsl'll os may be prescribed, nnd shall be accompanied by declarations. 
in the prescribed form by the candidate and hi, election agent! made OOt 
. oath or solemn affirmation before Q magistrate. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything in this section, where owing to absence' 
from India a candidate is unable to sign the return of eJection expellses Bnd 
to make the required declaration, the ret.um shall be signed a.nd lodged' 
by the election agent only and shall be accompanied by a deola.ration by 
the election agent only, and the eandidate shaU, within fourteen days: 
after his return to Innia, caURe to be lodged with the Returning Officer & 
declnration mnde on olLth or HoJemn affirmation before a. magis£ra.~ in sucht 
form 88 J/lay be prescribf'd. 
• • • • 
Section 78 
7ft. Applioation. of this Ohapter to oertain election,.-Except 110 far a. 
may ue prellcribed, this Chapter shall not apply to an election (other thalli 
a primnT'y election) to fill a seat or seats in the Council of Sta.Ws or to 81lI 
election by the mAmbel'R of the Legisla.tlive Assembly of 0. State to fill (II 
seat or sellts in the Legislative CouIIcii of that Stnte. 
• * • • 
Section 81(1) 
81. Preuntation of Petitions.-(l) An election petition calling in quee:.. 
, tion any eleetion mny be presented on one or more of the grounds specified' 
in sub-sections (1) and (9) of section 100 a.nd section 101 to the Election 
Commission by any candida.te &tl such election or any elector in such fol'Jll! 
a.nd within such tilDe but not earlier tha.n the date of publiootion of the-
name OJ' names of the returned candidate Or candidates at such electioIll 
under section 67, 88 may be prescribed. 
• * ... • 
Section 82 
82. Partie8 .to the Petition .-A petitioner shall ]Olll as respondents too 
his petition all the candicilltes who were duly nominated at the election 
othpr thall himself if he WilR 80 nominated. 
Section 88 
88. ContfllltR of petition.-(l) An election petition shall contain a con-
cise lltatement of the material facts on which the petitioner relies (Iond sh~l'· 
be signed by the petitlioner and verified in the manner la.id down in the-
Code of Civil Procedure, 1~ (Act V of 10(8) for the verification of plea_. 
dings. 
(2) The petition IIh811 be apcompanied .by a list signed and verified ill' 
like manner setting forth full particulars of any corrupt or illega.l pI'actic&' 
which the petitioner aUeges, including BS full fl st6tement as possible 8$. 
to the Dames of the parties alleged to have committed Buch corrupt or 
illega.l practice and the date and place of the commission o.f each suola 
practice. 

33 
(8) The Tribunal may, upon such term. as to costs and otherwise 81 
" may direot tJI any time, allow the particulars included in the said lis, 
Coo be amended or order such further. and better particulars in regard to 
~y matter referred ~ therein to be furnished as may in its opinion be 
DeCe6Sal"y fOft the purpose of ensuring a fair and e~ctual trial of the peti. 
&ion. I 
• • • • . Section 81S 
85. Petition when to be dismi88ed.-If the provisions of section 81, seC. 
tion 88 or section 117 are no't complied with, the Election Commission 
ahall dismise the petition: 
Prov;ded that if a person making the petition satisfies the Election Com-
missioll that sufficientl cause existed for his failure to present the petition 
within the period prescribed therefor, the Election Commission may in 
its discretion condone such failure. 
• • • • 
Section 86(4) 
86. Appointment of Election Tribunal.-
• • * • • 
(4) If during the course of the trial, any member of a Tribunal is for any 
reason unable to pedorm his functions or has to relinqui8h his member-
ship, the Election Commission shall appoint another member in accord-
aooe with the provision. of sub·section (8), and upon his joining the Tri· 
bunal the trial shaU be continued &I if he had been 011 the Tribunal from 
the commencement of the trial:1 
Provided that the Tribunal may, if it thinks fit, recall and re-examine 
any of the witnesses already examined. 
• • * • '" Section 00(1) 
00. Procedure before the Tribunal.-(lt) The Tribunal shall, as soon as 
may be, cause a copy of the petition together with a copy of thp. listt of 
purticuiafs referred to in sub-section (2) of section 88 to b~ Nerved on e&GA 
respondent and to be published in the Official Gazette, and at any time 
within fourteen days o.fter such publication, any other eandidate shall. 
subject to t.he provisiolls of section 119, be entitled in be joined 6S arE's· 
pondent. 
• • * • Sectiofl, 100(1) (0) 
100. Grounds for declaring elect40n to be void.-(l) If the Tribunal 
is o~ opinion-
• • • • 
(c) that the result of the election has been materially affected by 
the improper acceptllnce or rejection of any nomina,tion. 
the Tribunal shall declare t,hs election to be wholly void. 
· . .. . 
Section. 128(8) 
128. Major corrupt practices.-
• • * * • 
(8) The obtaining or procuring or abetting or attempting to obtain 01' 
procure by a oandidate or his agent or, by any other person with the 000-
nivanoe of a oandidate or his agent, fmy assistance for the furtherance of 
the prospects of the candidate's election from 8J1Y person serving under tbe 
Government of India or the Government of any State other than the givilll 
At vote by such person" 

36 
Ereplanation.-For the purposes of this olause-
(a) a. person serving under the Government of India shall not 
include any person who has been declared bl the Central Government 
.to be a person to whom the provisions of thIs clause shall not appl'y; 
(b) a person serving under the Gov~rnment of any State shall. 
include a p.twRri, chauWdar, dafednr" zaildar, shA.,llbagh, karnflm, 
ttllati, tRlari, patil, village munsif, village headman or any other viI-
large officer, by whatever name he is oalled, employed in that State, 
whether the office he holds is a whole-time office or not, but shall not 
include a.ny person (other than any such village officer as aforesaid) who 
haa been declared by the State Government to be a person to whom 
the provisions of this clause sha.ll not a.pply. 
Section 189(1)(b) 
189. OffenceB, entailing di8qualiflcatron.-(1) The following offences shall 
entail disqualification for membership of Parliament. and of the Legislature 
of eveJ'y State, namely:-
• • • • 
(b) offences punishable under section ISS or olause (a) of sub-
section (2) of section 136 of this Act. 
• • .. • 
Section 140(l()(b) 
140. Corrupt and illegal praotioe8 entailing disqualifioa.tion.-(l) The 
following corrupt or illegnl practices relating to electliollS shall enta.i.l dis-' 
qualification for membership of Parliament and of the Legislature of every 
8tate,namely:-
• * • • 
(b) iUeg'al practices specified in section 125. 
• * • * Section 141 (a) 
141. Disqualijica.tionarising out of cont/lction and corrupt prQ,diOflB.-I1 
anL,person after the commencemenb of this Act-
(a) is convicted of an offence TlIlnishahle with imprisonment under 
s('ction 171-E or ~ecti()Il 171-F of the Indian Penal Code (Act XLV of 
lR60), or of an offenoe punishable under 86ct;on 1~5 or clause (a) of 
sub-section (2) of section 1136 of this Act. or . 
• • • • 
Section 142 
142. Disqualification arising out of t1lsgal prar.tice.-If, in relation to 
any election, any pel'FIDn is. upon the trial of an election petition under 
Part \'1, found guilty of Hny illegal pructice, he shall be disqualified for 
voting at allY election for a period of four yeal'R from thr. da.te on which 
such finding t1Rkes effect.. 
Section. 148 
143. Di8qualifioation ariBing out of faa1ure to loifgf! return of election 
fl:rpeflllo3.-If default is mride in making the return of the election ex-
penses of any person who hns been nominated as f\. clIJlciidate at an election 
to which the provisions oLChapttll' VIII of PUri V apply, or if such a 
return·is found, either upon the trial of an election petit:on under Part VI 
or by any court ina judicial proceeding, to be falHe in any materia] pan 
cular, the oandidate and hi8 election agent shall be disqualified for voting 
ail any eleotion for a period of five yeat's from the date by which ratum 
was required to be lodged. . 
• * .. • 

THE SCHEDULE 
(See section 85) 
EXTRACTS FROM THE REPRESENTATION m' THE P&OPLE ACT, 1950 
(XLIII OF 1950) 
• • • • • 
Section 2(b) 
2. DefonitionB.-In this Act, unless the oontext otherwise requires,-
• • • • • 
(b) .. Assembly constituency" means a. constituency provided by 
order made under section 9 for the purpose of elections to the Legis-
lative Assembly of a State; 
• • • • • 
Section '3A(2) 
3A. ReS6T'Oation of seats in the House of the People fOT Bchedule4 
cadcB ana Rched1llea tribes in certain Part C StateB.-
• • • -• • 
(2) l"or the purposes of this Aot, the castes specified in the Sixth 
Schedule shall be the soheduled castes in relation to the Part C State 
under whioh they are so specified, and the tribes specified in the Seventh 
Schedule shall be the scheduled tribes in relation to the Pad eState 
under whioh they are so speoified. 
• • • • • 
Bection 8 
8. ABlembly conBtiwenoiu.-For the purpose of elections to a Legis-
lative Assembly, there shall be the constituenoies provided by order under 
seation 9, and no other oODstituencies. 
Section 9(a) 
9. Delimitation of Assembly oonstituenoieB.-As soon as may be after 
the commencement of this Act, the President shall, by order, determine-
(a) the constituencies into wllioh each State shall be divided for 
the purpose of elections to the Legislative Assembly of that St&te,~ 
• • • * * 
PART m 
BIIOI8TBATION OF PARLIAMENTARY ELBOToaa 
• • • • • 
Section 17 
17. No peTson to be Tegi,teTed in mOTe than one oonatitueno!l._No, 
person &hall be entitled to be registered in the eleotoral roll for more than 
One oonstituenoy. 
• • • • • 
37 

38 
Section 20(4), (5), (6) and (7) 
:10. M ea.ning 0/ .. ordina.rily re.ide"t".:-
... • • • • 
(4) Any person holding any office in India declared by the President in 
consultation with the Election Commission to be an office to which the 
provisions of this sub· section apply, or any per!;on who is employed under 
the Government of India in a post outside India, shall be deemed to be 
ordinarilyresidellt during any period or on any date in the constituency in 
which, but for the holding of any such office or employment, he would have 
been ordinarily resident during that period or on that date. 
(5) The statement of any sucb person as is referred to in sub-section (3) 
or sub-section (4) made it;! the prescribed form and verified in the prescribed 
manner, that but for his service in the Armed Forces or but for his holding 
any such office or being employed in any Much post al:l is referred to in 
sub·section (4) he would have been ordinarily resident in a specified plaoe 
during any period or on any date, shall, in the absence of evidenoe to tire 
contrary, be conclusive evidence of that fact. 
(6) 'fhe wife of Bny suoh person as is referred to in sub-section (3) or 
sub· section (4) shall, if she be ordinarily residing with such person during 
any period, be deemed to be ordinarily resident during that period in the 
constituency specified by such person under sub-seotion (5). . 
(7) }'or the purpose of the electoral rolls first prepQ.l'ed under this Aot. 
a person who is a citizen of India and has migrated from the territory of 
Pakistan into the territory of Indin before the 25th da.y of July, 1949, on 
ac!lount of disturbances or fear of disturbances in his former place of 
relJidence shall be deemed to ha.ve been ordinarily resident during any period 
or on any date in the constituency in which he was resident on the said 
day or, if any other constituency is specified by him in this behalf in tbe 
'p.rescribed form and manner, in' that other constituency . 
• • • • • 
Section 22(1) and (.9) 
22. Eleotora.l Registration Officers.-(1) The electoral roll for eaoh 
constituency shall be prepared by an Eleotoral Registra.tion Officer, woo 
shall be such officer of Government. or of a local authority as the Election 
Commission mav. in consultation with the Government of the State in 
which the constituency is situated, designate or nominate in this behalf. 
~ (2) An Electoral Registration Officer may, subject to any prescribed 
restrictions, employ such persons as he thinks fit in t.he preparation of the 
electoral roll for the constituency. 
Section .99A 
22A. Sp6Clia.l provision. with regard to electoral 1OZ18 .first pre,pared under 
th, Act.'!"'-(1) Notwithatanding anything contained in the foregoing provi. 
sions of this Part the firat electoral rolls under this Aot shall be prepared 
in relation to such areas (referred to in this Act as 'electoral units') in 
e&ck 8 ....... EJ.ecnioD COauni.ion may. in OOD8ultatioD with the 
Govemment of till. a.., .ur.o.. . 
(2) An eleotoral roll prepared under sub-seotion (1) shall be publialted fa 
, such madDer and at sdeh places aa1llay be presoribed by refe~noe to the 
electoral unit! for whioh the roll has been prepared for the purpose of 
inviting olaima for inolusion ln, or objection to, auoh roU. 

39 
(3) }'or the ,puljpoae ,of.the preparation of eleotor.t rolla under aub· 
.action (1) and the claims .and .objections referred to in sub-section (2), the 
provisions of sections 15, 1.7., 18, 19, 20 and 22 shall have effect as if for 
any reference to a oonstituencJ' in the said sections there were substituted 
.a referenoe to an electoral .unit. 
(4) After the constituencies ill & State have been determined under 
.Part 11 and after the 1l1aWlii and objections in respect of the electoral rolls 
jor all the electoral u~ Glr paris thereof comprised in a OODstituenoy 10 
.determined have been disposed of in accordanoe with the rules DloIide in 
that behalf under section 2B and such' electoral rolls have been .ttered in 
acoordauce with the dc.cisionFl given on such claims and objections, the 
.electoral rolls jor .all such' el.t.~ctoral units and parts thereof so altered shall 
be republished in .the nuumer pl't!lIcribed as the electoral roll for such 
.constituency and shall, OIl such republication, be deemed to be the electoral 
.roll prepared under this Act for that Constituency. 
• • • • • 
PART IV 
HSOISTRATION OF ELillCTORS FOR STA~ LBOI8LATUU8 
• • • • • 
Section 27(4) and (6) 
27. Preparation of electoral rolls for Council con8tituenciea.-
• • • • • 
(4) The provisions of sections 15, 16, 18, 20, 22, 23 (excluding \he 
:proviso), 24 and 25 shall apply in relation to Council constituenoies as they 
:apply in r(jlation to Parliamentary constituencies. 
• • • • • 
(6) j<'or the purpose of this seotion, the qualifying date in the case of 
.every electoral roll shall be the 1st day of April of tae year in which the 
:roll is prepared . 
• • • • .. 
. Section 27F 
27F. Electoral rolis fOT Council 0/ States cons.tituencies.-(1) For the 
·PtJrp.o~e o.f electi.on of members to t,~e electoral college for any State • • • 
:specified m the first. column of the Fifth Schedule there shall. be an electoral 
.roll for every Counoil of States constituenoy in that State • '. • ., 
(2) Bo much of the roll or rolls for sny Parliamentary oonstituency or 
-constituencies for the time being in force under Part III as relate to the 
:areas comprised witlrin a. Council of States oonstituenoy shall be deemed to 
.be the electoral roll for tha.t Counoil of Sta.tes constituenoy. 
* • • 
Section 28(2)(h) 
~. Power 1.-1) tr 0\'. ",168.-
• • 
* • • • • 
. (2) In particular and without prejudioe to the generality of the fore-
'gomg power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, mamely:_ 
• • • • • 
(h) the revision or correction of an electoral roll under seotion 2lS ani 
Ithe fint.l publioation of the list referred to in that seotion; 
• • • • • 

4iO' , 
The .Sixth aM; Sev8nth Schedule. 
"SIXTH SCllEDULE 
[Se" section SA(2).] 
(Soheduled Ca8te8 in c8rtuin Part 0 8tate8~ 
Delhi. 
1. Adi-Dharmi: 
~. Agria. 
3. Aheria. 
4. Balai. 
o. RaDjara. 
6. Bawaria. 
7. Bazigar. 
8. Hhangi. 
9. Bhi!. 
10. Chamar. 
11. Chanwar Uh&mar. 
12. Ubohra (Sweeper). 
13. Uhuhra (Balmiki). 
14. Dlmnak or Dhanuk. 
15. Dhobi. 
16. Dom. 
17. Uharrami. 
18 .• Jatya or Jo.tav Chamar. 
19. Julaha (Weaver). 
20. Kabirpanthi. 
21. Ka.chbandha. 
1. Ad-dharmi. 
2. Balmiki or Uhura or Bbangi 
or Sweeper. 
S. BangaU. 
4. Banjara. 
6. Barar. 
6. Bawaria. 
7. Bazigar. 
fl. Bhanjra. 
9. Uhamar. 
10. Uhane.!. 
11. Dagi. 
12. Daole. 
18. Dhaki or '1'oori. 
14. Doom or Doomua. 
15. lieei. 
22. Kanjat'. 
23. ·Khatik. 
U. Koli. 
25. Le.!begi. 
26. Madari. 
27.· Mallah. 
2~. Mazhabi .. 
~. Megwal. 
80. Mochi. 
31. Nat (Raua) .. 
32. Pasi. 
88. Perna. 
M. !tam Dasia. 
35. Ravidasi or Raidasi. 
36. Hehgarh or Raigar. 
37. SQDsi. 
38. Sapera. 
39. liikligar. 
40. liingiwala or Ke.!belia. 
41. 8irkiband. 
16. Kabirpal1thi or Julaha or Keel"'_ 
17. Koli. 
18. Mazhabl. 
19. Moohi. 
20. Nat. 
21. Od. 
:lA. Pasi. 
28. Pbrera. 
24. !tamdasi or Ravidaai. 
25. !tamdasia. 
26. Rehar. 
27. Sanai. 
28. liapela. 
~. liikligar. 
30. t3irkiband. 
l!'iftdAyCl P,tJd"h 
1. B880r (Bansphor). 
2. Uhamar. 
8. Dalrait. 
4. Dharkar. 
ii. Dher. 
6. Dom. 
7. Domar or Doris. 
8. Kuohbandhia. 
9. Meht&r or Bhangi or DhanuJt~ 
10. Moo)rl. . 
" 

41 
t;BVENTlI SCHEDULE 
(See section 3A(2).] 
(Schad/lIed Tribe8 in oertain Part (J State&) 
ManipuT 
1. Any Kuki tribe. 
:l. Anv Lushai tribe. 
o. Any Naga tribe. 
1. Agariya. 
2. Baiga. 
3. Bedia. 
4. Bhil. 
5. Bhumiya. 
6. Biar (Biyar). 
7. Gond. 
Vi"d1lya Praue," 
8. Kamar. 
Do Kha.irwnr. 
10. Majhi. 
11. MQwasi. 
12. Panika. 
13. Pao. 
14. Sonr. 
EXTRACTS FROM THE RBPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE AOT, 1951 (XLIIF 
OF 1951). 
• • • • • 
Section !l(l) , (5) and (7) 
2. lnterpretation.-(l) In this Act, unless the context otherwise' 
requires,_ 
• • • • • 
(e) "elector", in relation to & oonstituency, means a person whose' 
name is tor the time being entered in the electoral roll of that consti-
tuency; 
• • • * * 
(I) "Scheduled Castes" and "Scheduled Tribes" in relation ~ Q' 
Part C State, mean respectively the oastes specified in the Sixth 
Schedule and the tribes specified in the Seventh Schedule to the Re-
presentation of the People Aot, 1950 (XLIII of 1.950) in relation to-
that State; , 
• • • • • 
(6) Any reference in this Act to a law which is not in force in a Part B· 
State shall, in relation to that State, be construed as a reference to the-
oorresponding law, if any, in force in ~hat State. 
• • • • • 
(7) \ Any reference.in this Act to the Legislative Council of a State shall"' 
be cClnstrued as not inol uding a reference to the Coorg Legislative Council. 
• • • • • 
S.otion 8(1)(g) 
8. 8a"ing,.--(1) Notwithstanding anything in seotion 7-
• • * • •. 
(g) a disqualification under olause (j) of that seotion may. in tl).e-: 
case of any of the candidates for the first eleotions under this Act, be~ 
removed by the Election Commission for reasons to be recorded by itj 
in writing. 
• • • • • 

'2 
Section. 16(1) 
16. Gen.eral election. to LegillZative A8Iemblie •• -{l) A. general eleotioD 
,shall be held for the purpose of oonstituting ~e Lgislative Assembly o! 
.e~ch State under the Constitution in due time .. 
• • • * • 
Section 17 
17. Notification lOT elf-ction to State LegiBlat;1J6 ASBemblieB.-For the 
purpose of constituting the Legislutive Assembly of 8 State under the 
'Constitution in due time or on the expiration of the duration of an Assembly 
-or on its di86ol-ution, the Governor or ;Rajpramukh, as the ello!!e may be, of 
the State shall, by one or more notification!! published ill the Official 
Gazette on such date or dates as may be recommended by the Eleetion 
. Commission, call upon all the Assembly constituencies to elect members 
in accordance with the provisions of this Act and of the rules and orders 
made thereunder before such date or dates as ma.y be appointed in this 
behalf by the Election Commission and specified in the notification or lIoti-
.D.cations: 
Provided that for the purpose of constituting the Legislative Assembly 
-of a State on the expiration uf its durutioD, no such notification shaH be 
issued at any time earlier than four months prior to the date on which the 
,duration of the Legislative Assembly of the State would expire in the ordi-
.nary course of events. 
• .. .. * .. 
Section 30(c) and (d) 
~O. Appointment III dateB lor nominatIOns, etc.-As soon as the noti-
:D.cation calling upon a constituency to elect a member or members is issued 
nndel this Act, the appropriate authority in the case where such notifica-
-.tion hIlS been issued under the provisions of Part III or of this Part, and 
the Election Commission in the case where such notifioation hilS been 
'issued under the provisions of Part IX, shall, by notification in th~ Official 
.Gazette, r.ppoint-
* * * .. * 
(c) the ISl:It date for the withdrawal of oandida.turas, which shall 
b~ the third day after the date for the scrutiny of nominations i and 
(d) the date or dates on which a. poll shall, if necessary, be taken 
which or the first of which shall be r.: date not earlier than the thirtieth 
.day after the 188t date for the withdrawal of candidatures 
• * * '" * 
Section 31 
81. Publio notice of eledion.--On the issue of a notifioation under 
,seotiOlJ 80, .the Returning Officer for the oonstituency shall give publio 
notice of the intended election in .such fonn and manner as may be pres-
.cribed, inviting nominations of candidates for such election and specifying 
·tibe place a' which the nom.ination pa.~rs Bre to be delivered. 
Seotion ~ 
u:.l. NomiftGtion of OlJ.ndidatell fOT tJlection.-Any person mr..y be Domina-
'ted 8S a candidate far election to flll 8 se8t in aDY constituel}cy if he is 

1.8 
.qualified to be chosen to fill that seat under the provisions. of the Consti-
Itution and this Act. 
• • • 
Section 36(9) and (3) 
36. Scrutiny of notnirtation •. -
• • • 
• • 
* • 
(2) The Returning Officer shall then examine the nomination pupe1'& 
.and shall decide aU objections which may be made to any nomination, .nd 
.may, either on such objection or on his own motion, after Buch summIV1 
.inquiry, if any, 8ti he thinks necessary, refuse any nomination on any l,f the 
j"Uowing graunds:-
(a) that the candidate is not qualified to he chosen to fill, the se.' 
under the Constitution or this Act; or 
(b) that the oandidate is disqualified for being chosen to fill the sC'ut 
under the Constitution or this Act; or 
(0) that a proposer or seconder is diRqunlified from subscribing a 
nomination paper under sub-section (2) of section 33; or 
• • • * * 
(3) Nothing contained in clause (0), clause (d) or clause (e) of Bub-section 
.(2) shall be deemed to authorize the refusaL of the nomination of any cl\ndi-
,{).ate on the ground of any irregularity in r'espect of a nomination paper, if 
;the ca.ndidate has beeu duly nominated by means of another nomination 
J)aper in respect' of which no irregularity has been committed. 
• • • * • 
Section 39(2), (3) and (4) 
39. Nomination of candidat8B at other e18otiona.-
• • • • 
(2) As soon us the notification calling upon the elected members or the 
~members of the Legislr.tive Assembly of a State or the memhers of the 
.electoral. college for a Pnrt C State or group of such States to elect a 
;mernher or memhers is issupd under this Act, the appropria.te authority 
; in the case where such notificat,ion hoa been issued under section 12 or 
section 18 or ullder any of the provisio!ls of this- part, and the Election 
{Jommissioll in the caS6 wherp. such noilification has been issued under ser.-
,tion 147 or section 151, shall by notification in the Offici&ll Gazette, appoin' 
.for such election- . 
* • * • * 
(0) the last dRt-e for the withdrawal of candidatures which shall 
be the third day aftel' the da.te for the scrutiny of nominations; 
(d) the date on which (\ poll shall, if neoessN'Y, be taken whioh 
.. hall be & dr.te not earlier than the seventh day after the l&st date for 
the withdrawal of oandidatures. ' 
(3) On the issue of a notification under sub-section (B), the Returning 
IOfticer for the election shall gi~e publio notioe of the intended eleotion in 
'8uch form and manner as may be prescribed inviting BOIl1ination. of oandi-
·dates for such election Bnd specifying the place at which the nomination 
,propers are to be delivered. 

44 
(4) 'fhe provisions of sub-sections (1), (8), (4), .(6) Bud (7) of RectioI) 
38 and sections 34 to 88 shall apply in relation to nominations of oandi-
dates, dellosits to be made on stich nominutions and withdrawal of candi· 
datures at any such election us they Ilpply in relation to nominatioDs of 
candidates, deposits to be mnde on such nominations aDd withdrawnl of 
candid&tures at elections in any constituency other than a Council of 
States constituenoy: 
J'rovided that any person who is entitled to vote at any such election 8& 
is referred to in sub-section (1) shall be qualified to subscribe as propORer or 
sflC'onrler as many nomination pallers at that election SR there are vacancie. 
to be filled but no more: . 
Provided further that at the time of the presentation of the nominHtion 
puper, the Returning Officer may· require the person presenting the same 
to produce either a copy of the electoral roll in which the name of the-
candidate is included or a. certified copy of the relevant entries in such roll: 
Provided also that any references in the said provisions-
* • • * * 
(b) to section 30, to section 81 and to sub·section (2) of section 8S-
shall be construed as references to sub-section (2) of this section, to-
sub-section (8) of this section and to the first proviso to this sub-
section respective!y . 
* • * * 
Sflotion 63(1) 
53. PTDMldurfJ in contested and uncontuted election8.-(J) If the number 
of ca.ndidates who were duly nominated and who have not withdrawn their 
candidatures, in the manner and within the time specified in sub-section-
(1) of section 87, or in that subo-seotion read with sub-section (4) of section. 
39, 8S the case may be, exceeds the number of seats to be filled, the ;Return-
ing Officer shall forthwith pub1ieh in suoh form and manner as may be 
prescribed a list containing the names in alphabetical order and addressee.. 
of candidates as given in the nomin&tion papers, t,ogether with suob other-
particulars as may be prescribed, and a poll shall be taken. 
* • * * * 
Seotion 54(6) 
54. Speoial procedIL,e at eleotions in oonstituencifJ8 where uat, a".. 
rel61't1ed jor Scheduled Oa8tes or S,,1,edulea Tribu.-
* • • * * 
(6) In this section, references to oandidates shall be oonstrued as re--
feren08s to candidates who were duly nominated and who have not with· 
draWD their candidatures in the manner and within the time specified in. 
sub-section (1) of seotion 87. 
* • • * * 
Seotion 55 
55. Eligibility oj metnbBrs of Soheduled Oal/tell or Scheduled Tribe. to-
hold seats not reserved for those oastes or tribB8.-For the avoidance of: 
doubt it is hereby declared that a member of the Scheduled Castel' Qr 
of the Scheduled Tribes shall ndt be disqualified to hold a seat not reservedS 
for members of thole castes ortribee, if he is otherwise qualified to holdl 
such seat under the Constitution and this Aot. 
* • • * • 

46 
Section 58 
t18. Fre.h poll in the qase of destruction etc. of ballot bo:z:e •• -(l) U 
at any election any ballot box or boxes is or are unlawfully taken out of 
the custody of the Returning Officer or of any presiding officer, or is or nre 
in any way tampered with, or is or Me either nooidentli:1 or intentionally· 
destroyed or lost, the election to which such ballob box or boxes relate 
shall be void, but. only in respect of the polling at the polling station or 
stations provided under section 25. or the place fixed under sub-section (1) 
of section 29 for the poll, as the case mny be, at which s\lch ballot box or 
boxes was or were used and no further : 
Provided that where a polling station has more than one polling boot-b 
:and any such ballot box as aforesaid was used at one of such poUing booths, 
the election to whiCh such ballot box relates shall be void only in respect 
.of the polling at the polling boot.h at which such box was used and no 
'further. 
(~) Whenever the polling at any' polliug stution or stations or at the 
pla.ce fixed for the poll or at any polling booth shaH become void under 
1Iub-secbion (I), the Returning Officer shall. as soon as praoticable after 
the act or event causing such voidance bas come to his knowledge, report 
-the matter to the appropriate authority and to the Election Commission 
:and shall, with the previous approval of the Election Commission, appoint 
a day for the taking of a fresh poll in such or every such polling station 
.or in snch place fixed for the poll or in such polling booth as the c&ae may 
be, and fix the hours during which the poll will be taken, and shall no. 
count the votes cast at such election until such fresh poll shall have been 
()()mpleted. 
(3) In every such case as aforesaid the Returning Officer shan tnkp. a 
fresh poll in Buch or every Buch polling station or in such place fixed for 
the poll or in such polling booth AS aforesaid on the ooy so appointed by 
him, and shall notify the day so appointed and the hours of polling so fixed 
by him in snch manner BS the Election Commission may direct, and the 
provisions of this Act and of any rules or orders made thereunder ",hnll 
:apply to every such fresh poll as they Rpply to the original poll. 
tt 
* * * * 
SIJdj()n 97 
97. RecJriminatlon when scat claimBd.--(l) When in an election 
petition a declaration tha.t sny candidate other than the returned ca.ndidste 
has been duly elected is claimed, the returned candidate or any other 
party may give evidence to prove that the election of such candidate would 
have been void if he had been the retmrned l~rmdidate snd a. petition had 
~e8n presented calling in question his election: 
Provided that the returned cBnd;date or such other party as aforesaid 
shall not be entitled to give such evidence unless he h88, within fourteen 
-days from the d"te of the publication of the elect'on petition under section 
-00, given notice to the Tl'lbunal of his iutention to do so and has also given 
the security and the further security referred to in sections 117 and 118 
respectiveJy. 
(2) Every notice referred to in Bub-section (1) shall be a.ccompanied 
oby the statement and list of particulars required by section 88 in the case 
.of an election petition and shall be signed and verified in lilee manner. 
* * * * * 

46. 
Sectio" 119 
119. Security for OOllfs from CI Tellpoftd8"t.-No perIOD shall be entitled' 
to bft joined as a respondent under sub-section (-1) of section 00 unleslI he-
baa given such security for costs as the Tribunal may direct. 
'" • • • • 
Bectio" 1S3(B) 
IliS. E:rt.nBion of time fOT cotnp1.etion of tlection.-
'" • • • • 
(.9) When the time for the completion of any election is 80 extended,. 
the President or the Governor or Rajpramukh of the State or the Electiorr 
Commission, as the case may be, shall by notification in the Official 
Gazette make the necessary amendments in the notification issued ill 
respect of such el~ction under any of the provisions referred to iftl 
Bub-section (1). 
'" * *. • .. 
EXTRAOT FROII TBB GOVUNIIENT 01' PART C S"ATES ACT, 1961 (XLIXi OF 
1951). 
'" '" '" * * 
Section 2(2) 
~. Interpretation.-
.. * '" * '" 
(2) For the purposes of this Act. the castes specified in the First 
Schedule shall be the Scheduled Castes in relation to the Part eState 
lmder which they are 80 specified, and the tribes specified in the Second 
Schedule shaH be the Scheduled Tribes in relation to the Part C Bt .. ,-
under which they are so specified. 
• * • * • 
Sectio" 6 • 
6. Etectoral rolls fOT ASllembly cO?lstituencies.-(l) For the purpose' 
of elections to the Legislative Assembly of a State. there shall b~ Rtr. 
electoral roll for every Assembly constituency, 
(.e) So much of the rolD or rolls for any Parliamentary constituency or' 
constituencies for the time being in force under Part III of the-
Representation of the People Act, 1950 (XLIII of 1950). 88 relute to the-
8I'eaa comprised within an Assembly constituency shall be deemed to be 
the electoral roll for that Alsembly Constituenoy. 
Section " 
7. Qualification for membership of the LegisLative A886mbly.-A per80t» 
shall not be qualified to be chosen to fill a seat in the Legislative Assembly 
of a State unless he--
(a) is a citizen of India; 
(b) is not less than twenty-live years of age; and 
(0) (i) in the case of a seat reserved for the Scheduled CBsteR or the-
Scheduled Tribes of that Sta.te. is a membar of any of those oaste .. 
or tribes as the case may be, a.nd is an elector for rany Assembly 
constituency in that State; 

47 
(ii) in the case of any other seat, is an elector for any Assembly' 
oonstituency in that Stllte. 
Explanation.-In this section, the expr88sion 'elector', in relation to &. 
constituency, means a person whose name is for the time being entered 
in the electoral roll of that constituency. 
Section 8 
8. ElectionB to th6 LegiBla.tive ABsembly.-The provisions of Part I andl 
Parts III to XI of the Rel>resentation of the People Act, 1951 (XLlII of 
1951), and of any rules and orders made thereunder for the time being. 
in force, shall apply in relation to an election to the Legislative Assembly 
of a State, as they apply in relation to an election to the Legisl'ative-
Assembly of a. Part A State, subject to such moc;lifications &s the President. 
may, after collsultation with the Election Commission, by order direct. 
* * * * 
The FiTRt and Second Schedules 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
[Bee sp.ction8 1(2) and 2(2)] 
* 
SCHEDULED CASTES IN CERTAIN PART U STATE6 
1. Aheri 
2. Bagri 
R. Balai 
4. Bambhi 
5. Hansphod 
6. B80ri 
7. Bargi 
8. BazigaT 
9. Bhungi 
10. Bidakia 
11. Chammar 
12. Dabgar 
13. Dhanak 
14. Dhed 
15. Dhobi 
16. Dholi 
17. Dom 
18. Oaroda 
19. Gancha 
20. Jatava 
1. lialahi 
2. Basar 
8. Bedia 
4. Heldar 
5. Uhamar 
fl. Chitar 
7. Dhanuk 
8. Dome 
Ajmer 
Bhopal 
~1. Kalbelia 
22. KanjaT 
~. Kbangar 
:U . .Khatik 
25. Koll 
26. Koria 
'J.7. Kuchband 
28. Mahar 
'1.9. Meghwal 
SO. Mochi 
81. Nat 
82. Pasi 
88. Raigar 
84. Rawal 
85. Sarbhangi 
86. Sargara 
87. Satia 
38. 'I'hori 
39. 'l'irgar 
40. Sansi 
9. Kanjar 
10. Khatik 
11.. Koli 
1'J.. Mehtar, Bhangi. 
18. MahRl' 
14. Mang 
Hi. Nut 
16. Silawafi 

1. Adi 1>ruvida 
2. Adi Karnataka 
:J. Adiya 
4. Balagai 
5. Holeya 
·6. Madiga 
1. Adi-Dharmi 
'2. Agria 
,8. Aberia 
4. HeJai 
5. Ha.njara 
6. Hawaria 
7. Bazigar 
8. Bhangi 
9. Hhil 
.10. 0hamar 
11. UhanwQr Ubamar 
.12. ChoiIrg (Sweeper) 
13. Chubra (Bnlmikil 
,14. Dhanak or Dhantik 
15. Dhobi 
16. Dom 
17. G harrami 
18. JatJya or Jatav Chamar 
19. Julaha tWeaver) 
. 20. Kabirpsnthi 
: 21. Kuchbandha 
00019. 
7. Mucbi 
8. Mun,da1& 
9. Panohama 
10. Paraya 
11. Poleya. 
12. f::)amagara 
~. Kanjar 
23. Khatik' 
24. Koli 
25. Lalbegi 
26. Madari 
27. Mallah 
28. Mazhabi 
29. Megwal 
80. Moohi 
81. Nat (Ran a) 
82. Pasi 
88. Perna 
84. Ram Dasia 
85. Ravidasi or Raidasi 
86. Rehgarh or Raigar 
87. Mansi 
88. Sapera 
89. Sikligar 
40. Singiwala or Kalbelia 
41. Sirkiband 
Himachal Pradesh 
1. Ad·dharmi 
2. Balmiki or Chura or Bbangi 
or Hweeper 
8. Bangali 
4. BaDjars 
5. Barar 
6. Bawaria 
7. Bazigar 
8. Bp.!li 
9. Bhanjra 
10. Uhamar 
11. "Ohanal 
12. Dagi 
13. Daola 
, 14. Dhaki or Toori ' 
. 15. Doom or Doomna 
16. Kabirpanthi or J ulaha or 
Keer 
17. Koli 
18. Mazhahi 
19. Mochi 
20. Nat 
21. Od 
22. Pasi 
23. Phl'era 
24. Rnmdssi or Ravidaai 
25. RamdBsia 
26. Retror 
27. f::)aDsi 
28. Sapelo. 
29. Sikligar 
SO. Birkiband 

:I.. B.8IlOJ (ll.aD.sphorl 
2. <.JharQar 
. 8. Dahait 
4. pharbr 
6. Pher 
6. Dom 
'9 
Vintlh1J1I PrGll,,/& 
7. Domar o~ Doris 
8. Kuohbandhia 
~i. Mehtar or Bhangi or 
Dhanuk 
10. Moohi 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE 
lHell seotions 1(2) and 2(2)] 
SCHEDULED TRIBES IN CERTAIN PART C STA'rES 
BhopaL 
l.BbiI 
2. Gond 
3. Karku 
4. Keer 
1 . .Korama 
:&. Kudiya 
a. Kuruba 
1. Agariya 
:4. Baiga 
S. Bedia 
4. Bhil 
5. Bhumiya 
6. Biar (Biyar) 
7. Oond 
00019 
5 .. Mogia 
6. Pardhi 
7. Saharis. Sosia or Sor 
4. Mnratha 
6. Medn 
6. Yerava 
VindhYG P1aaesJ, 
8. Kamar 
9. Khairwor 
10. Majhi 
11. Mawasi 
12. !'ani.ka 
HI. Pao 
14. Sonr. 

HOUSE OF THE PEOPLE 
A 
BlLL 
further t·o amend the Representation of the People Aot, 
1950, and the Representation of the People Act, 1951, 
and to make certain consequential amendments in the 
Government of Part eStates AC't, 1951. 
(Sltri O. O. B18waB, 
M iniBtet' for Law) 
o TPD-LAD-1186 P8-S·3-63-J;'I30. 