(As INTRODUCED IN Lol[ 5ABBA 01' 
Bill Ro. 13 ~ tjff 
~ ' .. J • 
THE EXPORT (QUALITY CONTROL AND INSPECTIOH) 
BILL,I963 
A 
BILL 
.- ..... ··1 
.: 
to ".ooide lor the IOUftd development 01 the e:rpor1 trade of 1,.. 
tlwough qutditll control und inspection. und fw matter. COfIMCtecJ 
therewith. 
BB i~ ebacted· by Parliament in the Founeanth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
1. (1) Th'is Act may be called the Export (QUaHty Control ad ata .... ... 
lnIpection) Act, 1963. • ... .. 
•• 8 .. 
J (Z) It extendJ to the whole of India. 
10 
(3.) It shan come into force on such date as the Central Govern-
meni may, by notification in the Ofticial Gazette, appoint. 
I. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requlreS,-
(u) "Council" means the EXport InBpection Council estab-
lished under section 3; 
(l») "export", witi! its grammatical vanatioDS and' ~ 
expressiOns, means taking out of India to a place out8lde incUr, 
(c) "inspection", in relation to a commodity, meana .tmt 
process of determining whether a batch of goodaJ in that com-
IS modity complies with the standard specifications appl1c~ble to 
it or ~ other specifications stipulated In the export cOntract 
generaUy by inspecting either the whole batch or a .-elected 
sample or samples which .purport to represent the whole batCh; 
3207 (B) LSa-l. 

2 
(d) "notified commodity" means any commodity notified 
under clause (a.) of section 6; 
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under 
thia Act; 
(f) "quality control" mean:; any activity having for its 5 
object the determination of the quality of a commodity (whether 
during the process of manufacture or production or subsequent-
ly) in order to ascertain whether it satisfies the standard spe-
ciflcations applicable to it or any o:her specifications stipulated 
in the export contract and whether it may be accepted for pur- 10 
poses of export 
JIIIablitb- 3. (1) The Central Government may, by notiftcation in the 
=-I ... 0IldId GDette, establish, with effect from such date as may Ite 
= speeIIed in the notifi.eation, a Council to be known as the Export 
0IIIdL IaIpeetlon Couneil, which sball consist of- IS 
(a.) a Chairman to be appointed by the Central Government; 
(b) the Director of Inspection and Quality Control 
ex officio. who shall be the Secretary; 
(c) the Honorary Adviser on Standardization to thE' 00\,-
emment of India and Director of Indian Standards Institution. 20 
ex officio; 
(d) the Agricultural Marketing Adviser to the Government 
of India, ex ofJicie; 
(e) the Director-General of Commercial Intelligence and 
Statistics, ex officio; :as 
(f) eleven other members nominated by the Central Gov-
ermnent three of whom shall be persons representing the agen-
cies referred to in section 7. 
(2) The Council shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, 
having .perpetual succession and a common seal, with power to ae- 30 
quire, hold and dispose of property and to contract, and shall by 
the said name sue and be sued. 
(3) The term of otDce of, and the manner of fUling casaal 
.vaeaades amoa" the m,embers of the CouncU referred to in claUlel 
'(4) and (I) of sub-section (1) and the travelling and daUy allow- 3S 
aaces payable to the members of the Council and the procedure to 
be followed in the dJscharge of its functions by! the Council shall Ite 
IIICh as may he prescribed. 
(4) No act or proceeding of the Council shall be invalidated 
merely' by reason of any vacancy ~.n, or any defect in the constltu- 40 
tlon of, the Council. 

LOK 
SABRA 
CORRIGENDA 
to 
. THE 
EXPORT. 
(QUALITY 
CONTROL 
AND 
INSPECTION) 
BILL, 
1963 
(To 
be/As 
introduced 
in 
Lok 
Sabha) 
1. 
Page 
1, 
in 
the 
marginal 
heading 
to 
clause 
2,-
for 
"Definiriions" 
read 
"Definitions" 
-
-
2. 
Page 
2, 
line 
l7,~ 
after 
"Control" 
insert 
3. 
Page 
3, 
line 
8,-
" n 
, 
for 
"to 
be" 
read 
"be 
to" 
4. 
Page 
6, 
line 
39,-
after 
"and" 
insert 
"shall" 
5. 
Correct 
line 
numbers 
on 
pages 
5, 
6 
and 
7. 
NEW 
DEIJII, 
API'il 
I, 
1963 
Cfllllt!'a 
II, 
1885 
(Saka) 

• 
3 
(5) Subject to such rules as may be made by the Ceatral GoT-
emment in this behalf, the Council may appoint such o8leen and 
other employees as it considers necessary for the purpose of discharg-
ing its functions under this Act. 
S 4. The Central Govemment shall appoint a Director of IDapee- DiNc:far. II 
tion and Quality Control to exercise such powers and perform .... ~~ 
duties under this Act as may be prescribed. c:::c.tbL 
5.. (1) The functions of the Council shall generally to be advise PtJDClIOIIIaf 
the Central Government regarding measures for the enforeement of the 0MmcII. 
10 quality control and inspection in relation to commodities intended 
for export and to draw up programmes therefor, to make, with the 
concUl'l'ellee of the Central Govemment, grants-In-aid to the agend. 
estabUshed or recognised under section 7 a .. d to perform such other 
functions as may be assigned to it by or under this Act. 
15 (2) For the purpose of performing its functions, the Council may 
co-opt as members such number of persons as it thinks fit who 
have special knowledge an4 practical experience in matters relating 
to any commcdity or trade therein and any such person shall have 
the right to take part in the discussions of the Council but shall not 
;ao have the right to vote and shall not be a member for any other 
purpose. 
(3) The Council may also constitute specialist committees for 
conducting investigations on special problems connected with its 
functions. 
a5 (4) In the performance of its functions under this Act, the Coun-
cil shan be bound by such directions as the Central GovernmeD.t may 
give to it in writing from time to time. 
•. If the Central Government, after consulting the Council, i. of Powers 01 
opinion that it is necessary or expedient so to do for the developinent ~~= 
30 of'the export trade of India, it may, by order published In the ~ to 
Official Gazette,- . contrOl aod 
3S 
(a) notify commodities which shall be subject to quality Impecdoa. 
control or inspection or both prior to export; 
(b) specify the type of quality control or inspection which 
will be applied to a notified commodity; 
(c) establish, adopt or recognise one or more standard 
specifications for a notified commodity; 
(d) prohibit the export in the course of intemationaltrade 
of It notified commodity unless it is accompanied by a cerWlcate 
i~eq ~nder sectt~1! ! that thE; ~~~~it~ ~tisft8f ~~ ~ .. 
• 

• 
4 
1ioPa rel~ting to quality CQD.trol or inspection, or it ];las ~xed 
Of .wlifJd .~ i\ a mark or seal recognised 'bythe Centr,al (;*9 ... -
~ent ~ ~cating that it conforms to the standard speciJie,a-
tiona applicable to it under clause (c). 
=,~~::::L, T. (1) The Central Government may, ~y noMeaHOD ID the S 
= ~ 'OftIdaI Gazette, estabHsh, or recopise subJect to lMIeh coldlition& as 
. It may' deem at, .. neies for quality control or inspedIOD or beth: 
frQ:vi4~ th.-t if the Central Government is of opinion that any 
. ~~op. eranWd to any agency under this sub-section should, in. 
",e WbIlc interest, be withdrawn, the Central Government ~ay, 10 
~~.r'Ji~g a re~sonable opportunity to that agency to m.a"e re-
~~:QtP,~ion..e in the :ro.atter, withdraw, by like notiftcatl~, the 
recognition aran~. to it. 
~) Any agency referred to in su~ection (1) may, on awlica.,. 
t;fpn. ma~ t,q it or otherwise, hold or cause to be held auch exa.mt- I, 
~ .. it ~ fit relating to quaU-tr coo.trol or msp.ction .of· 
~tIII\ ~~, either at t~e time Qf export. o~ ea.rUer, iD aJlCh 
~; ~ ~ by _h surv:eyo~s Q1' samplerw as are ap~ 'by 
"". ~ ~t in t~ behalf and may cqarse aIlcll fees, 
as may be prescribed for the purpose of such examination. ~ 
(J). " a#er the examination, the asency i. of opinion ~at the 
.~i1/y aaUsftes ij)e ~ard s~ci1icationa laid dpwn ~ re.apect 
of it under section 8 or, as the case may be, any other specM\qa~ 
.ti~ula~d. in the export contract, it may issue a certificate that the 
eomInoctity satiiftes the conditions relating to quality contrel and' . .35 
msp.eticm. .' 
(4) Any person agrleved by the refusal of any apIley referred 
tolD. ...... tiDD (I) to __ a eerti8cate may pna. 811 ...... wlthiD 
... ' ..... may be ~.to S1Ieb &1Itkarity ... e ~i 
aov ....... -,y. by aoti8eatlOD ia the OIIldai 6azeite,eo.ititae 30 
for the PurpoM of bearing appeals. . , ..• 
(i) Subject to the provisioas of sub-sectioo (6~, the decision of 
the agency where no appeal is filed, and t~e decision of the appellate 
~J:it¥ where an appeal t. ftled, shall be ftnaJ. _ thaU not be 
questioned in any court of law. SS 
. (e) TIle Central Government may, at any time, ~ for and 
examine the record of any proceeding relating to any decilioll of an' 
~. or appellate authority under this 5I8Ctian ~. the purpose ofJ 
. ~g itself as to the legality or propriety of 1\1~ ~ and_ 
~. ~ 5\lOII OIW tbemm as it thiPk, At. ~4Q , 
• 

, 
" .. , ~ 
·. s 
.. (1) The Central Government may, by Dotificatioll in the fewer to n-
Oftlcial Gazette, recognise or establish any mark or aeal in relation COI:~shr 
to a n,otifl.ed commodity for the purpose of denoting tha,t such com- :us to de-
modity conforms to a standard specification applicable to it. :~ c:::L0r-
s (2) Any such mark or seal affixed or applied to a noti,fled com- =~ciODl. 
modity or to any covering containing, or label attached \0, such 
commodity shall be deemed to be evidence of the commodity being 
in conformity with the standard specifications applicable to it under 
Ws Act: ' 
10 Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall prevent 8JlY 
officer of customs from examining any consignment of a notified 
commodity lntend~ for export if he has reason to believe that the 
seal 01' ma:rk is not genuine or has been afftxed or applied tr,udu-
lently or if such an 'examination is necessary for the purpose of any 
I S. other law for the time being in force. 
I. The Central Government or any officer or authOrity authorised :~:: I:tor-
by it in this behalf may, by notice published in the Oftici~ Guett.e, matiOD from 
require- ::orten, 
(0 person' manufacturing, dealing in or export~g notified 
ao. comm04ities; anfl 
(ii) such other persons as may be prescribed, 
to. f~ any inforDJ,ation, return or report waich the Central 
Govemment 01' su.ch ·ofticer or authmifiy IDIiY coneid« ~ary for 
~ar;ryiq wt the purposes of this Act. 
25 10. (1) For the purpose of enabling the Co~iI _ ,ieckargEl! its! === and 
fu:netioDS UDder this Act, the Central Government may, att. d_ audit . 
• jpropria~n made by Parliament by •• w in this behalf, pay to the 
CoImeil sum sums of money as that Government, considers ._-; 
sary by way of grants, loans or otherwise. 
30 (2) For the purpose of discharging its functions under this Act, 
tbe Counell may receive grants or dc:matioDS from bodies and i~i­
tutions approved by the Central Government in this bebalf 
(3) The Council shall have its own fund to which shall. bf: credi-
ted the sums of money referred to in suh-sections (1) and (2) and • 
_ the moneys in the fund shall be applied for-
35 ' 
, (a) meetiDg the pay and allowances of the ofIlcers ad other 
employees of the COUACil and other admini$trative ~eIlIIeS of 
the CQuncil; . 
• 

f 
6 
(b) carrying out the functions of the Council under this Act. 
(4) The Council shall prepare, before the commencem.eDt 
of each flnancial year, a statement of programme of its activities dur-
ing that year as well as a financial estimate in respect thereof. 
(5) A statement prepared. under sub-section (4) shall, not later' 
than three months before the commencement of each financial year, 
be submitted for approval to the Central Government. 
(6) The Council shan maintain such accounts and prepare the 
balance-sh.eet in such form as may, in consultation with the Comp-
troller and Auditor-General of India, be prescribed. 10 
(7) The accounts of the Council shall be audited in such !D8llJH!!" 
and at such times as may, in consultation with the Comptroller and 
Auditor-General of India, be prescribed. 
11. (1) If any person contravenes any order under clause (d) 
of section 6, or fraudulently obtains a certificate under section 7, or I, 
fraudulently aftixes or applies any such mark or seal as is referred 
to in sub-section (1) of section 8, he shall, on conviction. be punish-
able-
(i) for the first offence, with imprisonment for 8 term which 
may extend to two years, or with fine which may extend to five 20 
thousand rupees, or with both; 
(ii) for the second or subsequent offence, with imprison-
ment for a term which may extend to two years and also with 
fine which may extend 'to ftve thousand rupees and in the 
absence of special and adequate reasons to be mentioned in the ~, 
judgment of the court, such imprisonment shall not be less than 
three months. 
(2) Any person who attempts to commit or abets the commw-
sion of an offence punishable under sub-section (1) shall be deemed 
to have committed such offence. 30 
(3) If any person contravenes or attempts to contravene or abets 
the contravention of any other provision of this Act or any rules 
or orders made the:t:'eunder, he shall be punishable with flne which 
may extend to one thousand rupees. 
0fFeDae1 by 12. (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by 35 
_pm... a cmnpany, every person who, at the time the offence was commit-
ted, was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for tM, 
ccaduct of the business of the company, as well AS tIM company, shall 
be cIeiemed to be guilty of the offence and ~1? be liable to be pro-
'*Cie4 8Iainst and puni$hect accordingly: 40 
'. • 

7 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub--section shall reDder 
any such person liable to any punishment, if he proves that the 
offence was committed without his knowledge or that he exerci8ed 
all due diligence to prevent the commission of sucb offence. 
S (2) Notwith9tand.ing anything contained in sub-section (1), 
where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company 
and it is proved that the offence bas been committed with the con-
lent or connivance of, or is attributable to any negligence on the 
part of, any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the com-
10 pany, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also 
be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be pr0-
ceeded against and punished accordingly. 
EzpZcmation.-For the purposes of this section-
(a) "company" means a body corporate and includes a firm 
IS or other association of individuals; and 
(b) "director", in relation to a firm, means a partner in the 
ftrm. 
13. The Central Government may, by notification in the Oftlcial ~tioIl 
Gazette, direct that any power exercisable by it under this Act shall, powera. 
ao in relation to such matters and subject to such conditions, if any, 
as may be specift.ed in the direction, be exercisable also by-
(a) the Council; 
(b) such oflicer or aut~.ority subordinate to the Central Gov-
ernment, or such State Government or such oflicer 011.' authority 
subordinate to a State Government as may be specified in the 
direction. 
U. No prosecution for an offence punishable under this Act shall Proceclure 
be instituted except by or with the consent of an officer authorised ~~ 
by the Central Government by general or special order in this be-
30 h8lf. 
15. All officers and employees of the Council or of any agency o~ ... cI 
established or recognised under sub-section (1) of section 7 and all !f...:;'to 
surveyors, samplers and employees of testing houses, referred to in == 
sub-4ection (2) of that section shall, while acting or. purporting to . 
act in pursuance of the provisions of thi's Act or any rule or order 
3' made thereunder, be deemed to be public servants within the mean 
ing of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code. 
18. (1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie PIot~OD 
against the Council or any offi.cer or employee of the Gov-:: 
40 emment or the Councilor any agency referred to in sub-lect.ioD· (1) aoocI faith. 
• 

Pow_to 
lllike rules. 
01. eeetlon 7 for anything which is in good faith done or intended to 
be clone in pursuance of this Act or any rule or order made there-
1.IIldw. 
(2) No suitor other legal proceeding shall lie against the Goftrn-
meat for any damage caused or likely to be caused by anything , 
which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of 
this Act or any rule or order made thereunder. 
17. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the om-
cia! Gazette, make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act. 
(2) In particw.a.r and without prejudice to the generality of the 10 
foregoing power, such rules may provide for-
(a) the travel1ins and daily allowancea payable to members 
of the Council, persons co-opted under sub-section (2) of sec-
tioh 5, aDd members of specialist committees referred! to in sub-
section (3) of that section; IS 
(b) the functions of the Council and the procedure to be 
follOWed by it; 
(c) the appomtment of officers and other employees of the 
COU11ctl; 
(d) the procedure to be followed for various types of qualit.y 20 
control and inspection; 
(e) the conditions which a testing house, surveyor or samp-
ler should satisfy for purposes of approval by the CenUal Gov'; 
~nt; 
(t) the fees chargeable for purposes of examination and 25 
illSue of certificates under section 7; 
(9) the 1l1ing of appeals under section 7 and the f~8 pay-
able therefor; 
(h) the manner in which the accounts of the Council shall 
be maintained and audited: 30 
(i) any. other matter which is required to be, or maybe, 
pn!8C1'ibed 
(3) J!:very rule made by the Central Government Ul'lder thla 
seetioo shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made before each 
HoUSe of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty 3$ 
days which may be comprised in one session or in two or mote 
IJUijcessive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session in wtrich 
1t :Ill 80 laid or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree 
III making any modiftcation in the rule or both Houses 
• 

9 
agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have 
effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may 
be; so however that any such modification or annulment shall be 
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under 
S that rule. 
18. AIJ from the date on which a commodity is notified under ~ct to ovcr-
clause (4) of section 6, the provisions of this Act or anything done ~~::~B. 
or any action taken thereunder shall have effect in relation to that 
commodlity notwithstandi~g any provisions (relating to quality con-
10 trol and inspection prior to the export of such commodity) contained 
in any en,actment other than this Act or in any instrument havln. 
etrect by virtue of any enactment other than this Act. 
3207 (B) Lt-2. 

" 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Government of India appoillited an ad hoc Comml!ttee on 
Quality Control Ilnd Pre-shipment Inspection to examine the ques-
tion of enforcing quality control and inspection on various goods 
exported from India. The Committee, after reviewing the existing 
statutory provisions relating to the export of goods, recommended 
tbat aeparate legislation should be undertaken covering all aspects 
of quality control in respect of export commodities. The pr-esent Bill 
seeks to give effect to this recommendation of the Committee which 
has been accepted by the Gove:nment. 
2. The Bill provides for the establishment of an Export Inspection 
Council with a Chairman and 15 members to advise the Govern-
ment regardmg the measures to be adopted for the enforcement of 
quality control and inspection in relation to commodities intended 
for export and to draw up programmes therefor. 
3. Under the Bm, the Government will be empowered to notify 
commodities which shall be subject to quality control or inspection 
prior to export, specify the type of quality control and inspection 
to be appiied to the commodities so notified, establish, adopt or 
recognise standard specifications for such notified commocUties, and 
prohibit the export in the course of international trade of a notified 
commodity unless it is accompanied by a certificate issued by an 
agency, established or recognised by the Government for this 
purpose, that the commodity statisfies the cOBditions relating to 
quality control and inspection. 
4. The Bill also provides for appropriate penalties for contraven-
tion of the provlaions of the Bill. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 16th March, 1963. 
MANUBHAI SHAH. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 4 of the Blll provides for the appointment of a Director of 
Inspection and Quality Control. The expenditure on. the pay and 
allowances for the Director is estimated to be of the order of 
Rs. 30,000 per annum.. 
Clause 7 (1) of the Bill provides for the establiahmant of agencies 
by the Central Government for quality control or inspection or both 
and clause 7 (4) provides for the constitution of authorities for hear-
ing appeals. It would not be possible to estimate exactly the expen-
ditU!l'e that may have to be incurred under these provisions at this 
stage, since this would depend upon the requirements of the various 
commodities that may be notified from time to time. It i8, however, 
anticipated that a substantial portion of the recurring expenditure 
that may be incurred on such agencies and authorities will be re--
couped by the fees charged under clause 7 (2) and the rules made 
under clause 17. 
3. Clause 10 of the Bill provtdes for the Central Government mak-
ing grants to the Council after due appropriation made by Parlia-
ment by law in this behalf. So far as can be foreseen for the present 
the total grant will be in the region. of Rs. 5 lakhs. These grants will 
be utilised by the Council for the following purposes:-
(a) for the payment of travelling and daily allowances to 
the members of the Export Inspection Council as provided in 
clause 3 (3) and the expenditure required for travelling and 
daily allowances payable to co-opted members and members of 
specialist committees in terms of the rules to be made under 
clause 17; 
(b) for the payment of salary, etc., of the staff which the 
Council may appoint as it thinks fit tOl enable it to discharge its 
functions as provided in clause 3 (5) ; 
(c) for making grants-in-aid. as provided in clause 5(1) to 
agencies established or recognised under clause 7; 
(d) for any other administrative expenditure. 
II 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 6 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to notify 
commodities which shall be subject to quality control or inspection 
or both. prior to export; to specify the type of quelity control or 
inspection which will be applied to a notified commodity; to estab-
lish, adopt or recognise one or more standard specifications for a 
notified commodity; and to prohibit the export in the course of 
international trade of a notified commodity unless it is accompanied 
by ap. appropriate certificate that the commodity satisfies the condi-
tions relating to quality control or inspection, or it has affixed. to it 
a mark recognised by the Central Government as indicating that it 
conforms to the standard specifications applicable to it. The orders 
made by the Central Government under this provision will be 
based on the requirements of the different commodities which may 
be notified from time to time. 
2. Clause 17 enables the Government to make rules to carry out 
the pW'}tOSes of the Bill. The matters in respect of which rules may 
be made relate, among others, to the procedure to be followed for 
quality control and inspection, the fees chargeable for purposes 01 
quality control and inspection, the travening and deily allowances 
payaple to members, and other matters of a procedural and adnUnls-
trative nature. 
3. The delegation of powers is thus of a normal character. 
12 

LOl{ sABltA 
taw 
A 
Bll..L 
to provide for the sound developm:Qt of the export trade or 
India through quality control and inspect:on and fur 
mauers coQqCCted therewith. 
(Shrl Manubhai Shah, 
Ministlr of Intemation4l 
Trade In the Mi"lstry of 
Commerce aNd Industry.) 