     AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
                                                              Bill No. 13 of 2023
THE EMIGRA TION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2023
By
DR. KALANIDHI VEERASW AMY, M.P.
A
BILL
to amend the Emigration Act, 1983.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of
India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Emigration (Amendment) Act, 2023.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. After section 8 of the Emigration Act, 1983 (hereinafter referred to as the
principal Act), the following Chapter and sections thereunder shall be inserted,
namely:—
“CHAPTER IIA
WELFARE OF EMIGRANTS
8A. The Central Government shall undertake or cause to be  undertaken, specially
in the countries where there are substantial number of emigrants, with a view to assess
Short title and
commencement.
5
10
Insertion of new
Chapter IIA.
Central
Government to
access the details
of emigrants.
31 of 1983.

2
the following in regard to emigrants:—
(a) access to basic human rights;
(b) access to healthcare facilities including emergency service;
(c) access to social protection schemes of the destination country;
(d) access to legal support services in cases of despite resolution with the
recruiting agent; and
(e) access to timely grievance redressal.
8B. The Central Government shall prepare and maintain a register of
records containing the details of emigrants and their dependent in such manner
as may be prescribed.
8C. (1) The Central Government shall formulate and implement welfare schemes
for emigrants in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing procession, such schemes
shall provide for,—
    (a) old age protection;
    (b) life insurance;
    (c) disability coverage;
    (d) skill upgradation; and
    (e) such other measures as the Central Government may consider necessary.
8D. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the official gazette,
constitute a Fund to be known as the Emigrants Welfare Fund for carrying out
the purposes of this Act.
(2) The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by
Parliament by law in this behalf grants such sums of money to the Fund as the
Central Government may think fit for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(3) The Fund shall be utilized for the purposes of implementation of welfare
schemes formulated under section 8D.’’.
3. In section 24 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the words “two years
and with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees”, the words “twenty five
years and with fine which may extend to rupees five lakh” shall be substituted.
Formulation of
Welfare
Schemes for
Emigration.
Register of
Records of
Emigrants.
5
10
15
20
25
Constitution of
Emigrants
Welfare Fund.
Amendment of
section 24.
30

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Indians have a long history of migration to many parts of the world like
Australia, Canada, UAE, United Kingdom and the USA. Post-Independence,
migrants have taken up jobs in almost all professions ranging from semi-skilled
work in the construction industry to highly skilled jobs as doctors and engineers.
Today, India has the world’s largest diaspora community. Data suggest that India’s
diaspora communities are in as many as 110 countries where they have not just
secured jobs but are as successful as to become CEOs of companies and start-ups
such as Google LLC & Alphabet Inc, Microsoft and Adobe. These emigrants have
contributed to not only the economic development of their host countries but have
equally benefited India. In 2021, India received U.S. $87 billion in official
remittances which was the world’s largest such flow, amounting to nearly fifteen
per cent of all global transfers to low and middle-income countries, as noted by the
World Bank.
But the growing number of Indian migrants overseas has proportionately
heightened the number of issues faced by them. The highly skilled population from
India as per Government data migrates to countries like the UK, USA and Canada,
where they have time and again faced racially motivated attacks. Indians moving for
tech-based jobs have been exploited with low wages, long working hours and
sometimes lawsuits for quitting the job. As per an independent report, Indian workers
in the US are also being sued for quitting their jobs.
Many Indian migrants comprising semi-skilled and unskilled workers migrated
to Gulf countries to work in construction and oil factories. These emigrants under
Emigrant Check Required (ECR) migrate for a considerable number of years under
contract. They are particularly vulnerable due to their socio-economic and occupational
status. Over years Ministry of External Affairs has received many complaints from
emigrants for pending wages, absence of any social support, language barriers,
discrimination for being foreign, and poor living conditions.
While the Ministry of External Affairs has been looking after the emigrants’
affairs as directed in the Emigration Act of 1983. However, the core issues of safety
and welfare of emigrants  is still to be addressed majorly because the Ministry does
not maintain data on Indian citizens going abroad for migration. Without proper data,
effective address of the issues of such a large Indian diaspora spread across countries
is not possible. Further, it has attained limited success in regulating the agents who
deceive migrants by overpricing visas and incomplete information about the contract
period, salary, overtime and related details. The Indian Government has so far not
institutionalized any permanent mechanism and resources with host countries to
evacuate its workers in case of emergency. The evacuation of 1-2 million workers in
a limited time becomes not only tough but also a security challenge.
This Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Emigration Act, 1983 with a view to
address the emigrants’ issues pertaining to social security and healthcare and also
prioritize maintaining robust data of all the Indian emigrants for better-informed
decisions and fastening their grievance redressal mechanism. It also provides for
constitution of an Emigrant Welfare Fund for the welfare of emigrants.
Hence this Bill.
    NEW DELHI;         KALANIDHI VEERASWAMY
November 24, 2022.
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill vide proposed section 8B provides for the Central
Government to prepare and maintain a register of records containing the details of
emigrants and their dependants. It further vide proposed section 8D provides for the
constitution of Emigrants Welfare Fund. It also provides for the Central Government
to provide sums to the Fund. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of
about rupees one hundred crore will be involved per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees fifty crores is also likely to be
involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.
4

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE EMIGRA TION ACT, 1983
[ACT NO. 31 OF1983]
* * * * *
24. (1) Whoever—
(a) except in conformity with the provisions of this Act emigrates; or
(b) contravenes the provisions of section 10 or section 16; or
(c) by intentionally furnishing any false information or suppressing any
material information obtains a certificate or a permit or an emigration clearance
under this Act; or
(d) without lawful authority makes or causes to be made any alteration in any
certificate or permit or in any document or endorsement by way of emigration
clearance issued or made under this Act; or
(e) disobeys or neglects to comply with any order of the Protector of Emigrants
under this Act; or
(f) collects from an emigrant any charges in excess of the limits prescribed
under this Act; or
(g) cheats any emigrant; shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term
which may extend to two years and with fine which may extend to two thousand
rupees:
Provided that in the absence of any special and adequate reasons to the contrary
to be mentioned in the judgment of the court, such imprisonment shall not be less
than six months and such fine shall not be less than one thousand rupees.
* * * * *
5
Offences and
penalties.

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
 to amend the Emigration Act, 1983.
————
(Dr. Kalanidhi Veeraswamy, M.P .)