109 nom

As INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

Bill No. 13 of 2004

THE COMPULSORY VOTING BILL, 2004
by
‘Suri Bact SinGu Rawat, M.P.
a
BILL

to provide for compulsory voting by the electorate in the country and for matters
connected therewith

Br: it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Compulsory Voting Act, 2004.
(2) Itextends to the whole of India.

(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by

| in the official Gazette, appoint.

2. (/) It shall be compulsory for every voter who is eligible to vote at an election to

exercise his right to vote when called for by the Election Commission:

Provided that a voter may be exempted from exercising his right to vote—

(a) if he is physically incapacitated from an illness of a serious nature and
produces a medical certificate from a registered medical practitioner certifying. such
incapacity; or

Short title.

extent 800

commence-
ment

Compulsory
Noting


Punishment

Incentives for
voting

Power to
make rules.

क्र

(6) ifthe Election Commission or such other authority as may be empowered by
the Election Commission. on receipt ofa request either before or after the poll, from the
Voter. is satisfied that there are genuine and bona fide grounds for such exemption.

3. Any person. who fails to cast his vote shall be liable to—

(/)a fine of rupees one hundred, or one day's imprisonment or both in case of
deliberate avoidance, or

(ii) forfeiture of his ration card: and
(iii) be rendered ineligible for contesting any election for a per'od of six years
from the date of his conviction:

Provided that if such person is an employee of the Union Government or any public
sector undertaking owned or controlled by Union Government, such person shall also be
punished with—

(a) forfeiture of four days, salary; and
(0) delay in promotion for a period of one year.

4. Any person who despite of his illness or physical incapacity has exercised his right
to vote at an election or any person who has exercised his right to vote at all elections held
during a period of twenty years preceding the commencement of this Act without any break
shall be—

(i) given preference in jobs in the services under the Central Government;

ii) given preference in admission of not more than two children dependent
upon him to the institutions of higher technical education: and

(iii) given such other incentives, as the Central Government may by rules
prescribe,

5. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act

5

15

20

25

|


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

A very sad feature of our democracy that is revealed at all elections is that the number
| voters who actually cast their votes is far less than those eligible. The average number of
votes polled is around 50 per cent. It is a glaring commentary on the responsibility of citizens
that the fate of the country’s democratic institutions has been left to be decided by about 50
per cent of the electorate. Since the trend of voting from time to time does not show any
appreciable increase in the number of those who exercise their franchise, time has come to
ensure that all the citizens exercise their sovereign right to choose their representatives, so
that the elections may reflect the will of the whole electorate and not merely that of a part of
it. The general elections to last few Lok Sabhas reveal that in a number of States the voting
was less than 40 per cent and in a number of cases people had boycotted elections and thus
did not vote deliberately.

With a view to increasing the voting percentage, the present Bill proposes to make it
compulsory for every eligible voter to vote and to provide for exemption only in cases where
the voter is physically incapacitated due to illness of serious nature or the voter has
bona fide grounds to do so.

Since the provision is being made compulsory, punishment is also sought to be given
to those who do not vote at elections. However, incentives are also proposed to be given to
those persons who vote at elections despite illness or without any break at successive
elections.

Hence this Bill.

New Deut; BACHI SINGH RAWAT
June 21,2004.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 4 provides for incentives to those persons who cast their votes despite
their incapacity or without break in all elections without break for a period of 20 years.
This will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. A recurring
expenditure of about rupees one crore is likely to be involved.

A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees two cores is also likely to be
involved.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 5 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for Carrying
out the purposes of the Bill which will relate to matters of detail only. The delegation of
legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.



LOK SABHA.

A

BILL

to provide for compulsory voting by the electorat
connected therewith.

in the country and for matters

(Shri Bachi Singh Rawat, M.P)

MGIPMRNO—813LS—26.06.2004.