1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017
By
SHRIMATI MEENAKASHI LEKHI, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2017.
2. After article 220 of the Constitution of India, the following shall be inserted, namely:—
"220A The Chief Justice or any other judge of a High Court shall not be eligible
for further office either under the Government of India or under the Government of any
State or in any Public Sector Undertaking after he has ceased to hold office.
Bill No.  13 of  2017
Short title.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Insertion of
new article
220A
Prohibition as
to the holding
of office by
the Chief
Justice of a
High Court or
a Judge on
cessation of
office.
5

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Independence of judiciary is an essential attribute of rule of law, which is a basic
feature of the Constitution. Judiciary must be free from all pressures including the pressures
from executive as well as psychological pressure on the judges related to their future after
retirement. The judges are required to ensure the independence and impartiality of judiciary
by keeping themselves free from any allurement of employment under the Government after
their retirement.
The Constitution of India, specifically prohibits the Chairman of Union Public Service
Commission and its Members, Chairman of State Public Service Commission and its Members
for further employment either under the Government of India or under the Government of any
State. The Constitution of India, on the other hand nowhere restricts or prohibits retired
Chief Justice and Judges of the High Courts to hold further employment either under the
Government of India or under any of the State Governments.
Article 148(4) provides that the Comptroller and Auditor General shall not be eligible
for further office either under the Government of India or under the Government of any State
after he has ceased  to hold his office.
The Chief Justice and Judges of the various High Courts, Comptroller and Auditor
General of India, Chairman of Union Public Service Commission, Chairman of the State Public
Service Commission and the Members of these Commissions are constitutional functionaries
and they should be kept free from all kinds of allurement of employment under the Government
after cessation of their office. It is presumed that reappointment of Judges would have effect
of undermining the independence and fairness of judiciary.
The Constitution of India prohibits the Comptroller and Auditor General of India and
the Chairman, Public Service Commission and its members from getting employment after
cessation of their office. However, no such bar is there with regard to the Chief Justice and
other Judges of the High Courts.
In the present scenario, the Chief Justice and Judges are getting handsome salary,
other amenities, perks and post retirement benefits. The Chief Justice and Judges of the High
Courts are adjudicating rights of citizens which have been jeopardized by the Government.
The Judges are coming in contact with the Government on every step. As such need of the
moment is to introduce a provision in the Constitution of India for prohibition to hold any
office/employment by retired Chief Justice and Judges of the High Courts under the
Government of India or under the Government of State.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; MEENAKASHI LEKHI
November 22, 2016.
2

GMGIPMRND—3981LS(S3)—27.01.2017.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shrimati Meenakashi Lekhi, M.P.)