AS rmopuceD IN 1.06 Sapna

४0 ner १०००

Bill No, 13 of 2000
00

THE BACKWARD AREAS DE ‘VELOPMENT BOARD BILL, 2000
By
Suri 5080फ Moutre, M.-P.
A

BILL
"0 provide for the establishment of an autonomous Board for all-sded development of all
economically backward areas of the country.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as
follows:

1. This Act may be called the Backward Areas Development Board Act, 2000,

2. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare
the areas of the country which in the opinion of the Central Government are economically
backward.

(2) Till such time the Central Government by notification declares, the following areas
shall be treated as backward areas:—

(0 Vidarbha region of State of Maharashtra;

(ii) Telengana region of State of Andhra Pradesh;

(iii) Southern districts of State of Tamilnadu;

(iv) Northern Bihar;

(v) Tribal areas of States of Orissa and Madhya Pradesh;

Short title.

Identification
of Backward
areas,


2
(vi) Hilly regions of State of Uttar Pradesh;
(vii) State of Himachal Pradesh;
(viii) North-eastern States.

Backward 3. (1) There shall be established by the Central Government by notification in the

ser Official Gazette, a Board to be called the Backward Areas Development Board.
velopment

Board, (2) The Board shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual

succession and a common seal, with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both
movable and immovable, and to contract, and shall by the said name sue and be sued.

(3) The head office of the Board shall be at New Delhi and Board may, with the
previous approval of the Central Government, establish offices at other places in the country.

‘Composition 4. The Board shall consist of the following members, namely:—
f Board.
“ (a) a Chairman, who shall be the Vice-Chairman of the Planning Commission,
ex-officio;

(b) a Vice-Chairman to be appointed by the Central Government;

(c) six Members of Parliament of whom four shall be from Lok Sabha and two
from Rajya Sabha to be elected by the Members of the respective Houses, who belong
to the backward areas, from amongst themselves;

(d) nine members to be appointed by the Central Government to represent
respectively:—

(i) the Planning Commission (other than the Chairman of the Board);

(ii) the Ministry of the Central Government dealing with Agriculture;

(iii) the Ministry of the Central Government dealing with Industrial
Development;

(iv) the Ministry of the Central Government dealing with Finance;

(०) the Ministry of the Central Government dealing with Railways;

(vi) the Ministry of the Central Government dealing with Communications;

(vii) The Ministry of the Central Government dealing with Education;

(viii) the Ministry of the Central Government dealing with Health and
Family Welfare;

(éx) the Ministry of the Central Government dealing with Irrigation;

(७) not more than five members to be appointed by the Central Government, by
rotation in alphabetical order, to represent the Governments of the States having the
backward areas;

() four members to be appointed by the Central Government, who, in the opinion
of that Government, are experts in various fields of economic development.

Development 5. (/) It shall be the duty of the Board to promote, by such measures as it thinks fit, the
of Backward

ali sided development, under the control of the Central Government, of the backward areas

Los of the country.

(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-section (1), the Board
shall take measures for development, particularly, of railways, roads, posts and telegraphs
and other means of communications, agriculture and irrigation, industries; banking, drinking
water and water power, forests, live-stock, health and family welfare, education, vocational
training and tourism.

20

25

30

35


3
(3) The Central Government shall set up such industries in backward areas as it may
determine.

6. The Central Government shall provide from time to time, after due
appropriation made by Parliament by law, adequate funds for—

(a) development works undertaken by the Board;
(6) admi

7. The Board shall have a fund to be called the Development Fund to which shall be
credited all receipts from the Central Government for the purposes of development and all
payments by the Board towards development expenditure shall be made therefrom,

istrative expenses of the Board;

8. The Board shall also have a fund to be called the Administration Fund to which
shall be credited all receipts from the Central Government for the purposes of administration
of the Board and all administrative expenses shall be met therefrom,

9. The Vice-Chairman of the Board shall be entitled to such salary and allowances
as may be prescribed by the Central Government.

10. The Central Government shall appoint a Secretary to the Board to exercise
such powers and perform such duties as may be prescribed and as may be delegated to
him by the Chairman and the Vice-Chairman.

11, The Board may appoint such officers and employees as may be necessary for
the efficient performance of the functions of the Board.

12, (1) The Board shall submit every year a report, in such form as may be prescribed,
of its development activities to the Prime Minister.

(2) The Prime Minister shall cause the report to be laid before both Houses of
Parliament as soon as may be after each such report received by him.

13. (1) The Central Government may make rules for carrying out the purposes of this
Act.

(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while itis in session, fora total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of
no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.

Appropriation
of fund

Development
fund

Administration
fund.

Salary of Vice-
Chairman .

Secretary to
the Board,

Appointment
of officers and
staff.

‘Annual Report.

Power to make
rules.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND. REASONS

The need for levelling down economic disparities between different regions of the
country was accepted as soon as the nation launched upon planned economic development.
Accelerated development of backward areas, with a view to reducing regional disparities,
was one of the important national objectives. But, even after 52 years of independence, the
economic disparities among regions have not only persisted but have also increased. Required
attention has not been paid to develop the backward areas.

For the development of the backward areas of the country and to bring them up ina
short time to the level of the rest of the country, the strategy should be to evolve a fully
integrated development programme for identified backward areas to ensure their all round
progress. For drought-prone areas which have a predominance of small and marginal farmers,
area based programmes which envisage a flow of the necessary inputs in the form of a
package to enable accelerated economic development should be implemented. In addition,
a programme of giving incentives to enable accelerated industrialisation of identified
backward areas should also be implemented. It shouid be ensured that infrastructural facilities
like power, water supply and transport are steadily devleoped and made available to areas
which are at present lagging behind industrially or where there is a greater need for providing
opportunities for employment. In order to achieve these objectives, an autonomous body,
though under the overall control of the Central Government, should be established which
would be responsible for planning and implementation of area based package programmes
in coordination with the Planning Commission and the State Governments.

The Bill seeks to achieve the above objective.

New Deu;
February 3, 2000. SUBODH MOHITE


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM.

Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of the Backward Areas
Development Board. Clause 9 provides for payment of salary to Vice-Chairman. Clauses
1Oand 11 provide for appointment of a Secretary to the Board and other necessary staf¥ for
Performance of the functions of the Board. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, is likely to involve
a recurring expenditure of about rupees fifteen lakhs from the Consolidated Fund of India
on account of administrative expenses. So far as the development expenditure (Clause 6) is
concemed, that will form part ofthe annual expenditure on development plans of the country
288 a whole, and the development funds shall be made available to the Board after due
appropriation by Parliament, An estimate of such expenditure is not possible at this stage.
Nevertheless a sum of rupees ten thousand crore may be recurred per annum,

Anon-recurring expenditure of about rupees Fifty crore is also likely to be incurred.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 13 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to frame rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will provide for matters of detail only, the delega-
tion of legislative power is of a normal character.


LOK SABHA.

A
BILL

‘0 provide for the establishment of an autonomous Board for all-sided development of all
economically backward areas of the country.

(Shri Subodh Mohite, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—3456LS—9-2-2000,