THE  WOMEN  WELFARE  BILL,  2018
By
DR. RAMESH POKHRIYAL ‘NISHANK’,  M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for welfare of women by providing fund and creating employment
opportunities and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of  the  Republic of  India as
follows:—
1.  (1)  This Act may be called the Women Welfare Act, 2018.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force at once.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State, in all other cases the Central Government;
(b) "Fund" means Women Welfare Fund set up under Section 3;
(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
Bill No. 13 of 2018
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
5
Definitions.
10
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
Women
Welfare Fund.
Reservation
of jobs in
Central
Government.
Central
Government
to ensure loan
to women.
5
10
15
20
25
Power to
make rules.
3. (1) The Central Government shall by notification in the Official Gazette set up a
Fund to be known as Women Welfare Fund for the purpose of taking welfare measures for
Women.
(2) The Fund shall consist of contributions by Central Government and State
Governments in such ratio as may be prescribed and donations received from organisations
and individuals.
4. The Central Government shall reserve at least thirty-three per cent of jobs for women
in all Central Government Services and organisations under its control.
5. The appropriate Government shall,—
(i) set up such number of women employment centres in every district as may be
prescribed to provide assistance to women for employment or self employment;
(ii) reserve land or housing sites for women;
(iii) provide free health care facilities and maternity benefits upto first two
children;
(iv) set up women hostels wherein all facilities shall be provided free of cost;
(v) pay sustenance allowance or old age pension to women who are destitute or
widows and having no source of regular income;
(vi) provide free training to women for taking up employment or self employment;
(vii) provide scholarships to girl students; and
(viii) reserve at least thirty per cent of seats for women in all educational
institutions including higher professional and technical institutions.
6. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf,  provide funds to the State Governments for setting up of special courts for
women in every district.
7. The Central Government shall ensure that every commercial bank, including private
and foreign banks provide loans to women at the rate of five per cent simple interest for
setting up self employment units.
8. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of  Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions, aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Appropriate
Government
to undertake
Welfare
Measures for
Women.
Central
Government
to provide
funds for
special
Courts.
30
35

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Women constitute fifty per cent of the population in the country. Though  seventy
years have passed since independence, yet there has been no improvement in the condition
of women. Several efforts taken by the Government have yielded some results, yet much has
to be done to improve their lot. The women do not have ample access to schools or employment
opportunities. Only a concrete reservation system in educational institutions or Government
jobs or special employment or self employment opportunities will help them. Crimes against
women are increasing and it takes very long for disposal of cases. Special courts can only
help quick disposal of cases.
There is no social security for women in distress. The Government should make some
provision for them. Therefore, it is proposed to bring a comprehensive legislation for women
welfare.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RAMESH POKHRIYAL ‘NISHANK’
January 2, 2018.
3

4
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for setting up of Women Welfare Fund consisting of
contributions by Central Government and other sources. Clause 5 provides for setting up of
employment centres, reservation of land or housing sites and providing hostels, pensions,
scholarships, etc. to women by the appropriate Government. Clause 6 of the Bill contains the
provision for Central Government to provide funds to State Governments for setting up of
special courts in every district. The Bill, therefore by the Central Government, if enacted
would involve expenditure from the consolidated Fund of India. It is likely to involve a
recurring expenditure of about rupees ten thousand crore per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees two thousand crore is also likely to be involved.

5
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for welfare of women by providing fund and creating employment
opportunities and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto
————
(Dr. Ramesh Pokhriyal ‘Nishank’, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—3646LS(S3)—20-01-2018.