1
THE PREVENTION OF INFLUX OF FOREIGN NATIONALS INTO
THE COUNTRY BILL, 2015
By
DR. RAMESH POKHRIYAL 'NISHANK', M.P .
A
BILL
to check unauthorised entry of  foreign nationals into the country and for their
deportation and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic  of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Prevention of  Influx of Foreign Nationals into the
Country Act, 2015.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "dependent" includes wife and children of an unauthorised foreign national;
(b) "document" includes a valid passport, visa or a travel permit;
Short title and
extent.
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 13 of  2015
Definitions.5

2
(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(d) "unauthorised foreign national" means a person who has entered or sneaked
into the country without a valid document.
3. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force, the Central Government shall, as soon as may be, after the commencement of this
Act, undertake a survey to identify all unauthorised foreign nationals living in the country.
(2) The information so collected shall be made public forthwith  through notification
in the Official Gazette.
4. (1) The Central Government shall, soon after the survey is over,  prepare a list of
unauthorized foreign  nationals in the country and prepare a phased programme for their
deportation to the countries of their origin.
(2) No unauthorized foreign national shall be allowed to stay in the country on the
ground of his long and continuous stay or his having acquired immovable property in the
country.
(3) No  educational facilities, financial assistance or such other assistance, as may be
prescribed, shall be provided  to an unauthorized  foreign national in the country.
5. Whoever knowingly gives shelter to an unauthorized foreign national or conceals
the identity of such person shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to
three years and shall also be  liable to fine.
6. The Central Government shall take the following steps to prevent entry of
unauthorized foreign nationals into the country:—
(a) proper fencing of the international borders and establishment of adequate
number of check points, as may be required, along the international borders of the
country; and
(b) putting in place a proper mechanism of monitoring the international borders
including sea coasts.
7. (1) The Central Government shall prepare and maintain a National Register
containing names and such other particulars, as may be prescribed, of all the citizens who
are usually residents of the country since 15th day of August, 1947 and descendants of such
persons and citizens of the country as defined in the Citizenship Act, 1955.
(2)  The Central Government shall, before the name of a citizen is entered in the register,
ascertain the bonafides of that person or his parents.
(3) The names of unauthorized foreign nationals or their dependents or descendents
shall not be entered in the register.
8. Every citizen of the country shall be issued an identity card duly signed by the
District Magistrate or any other  Officer, of the Central Government or the State Government,
as the case may be, who may be authorised in this behalf by the Central Government.
9. The Central Government shall take necessary steps to—
(a) detect and deport foreign nationals who came to India on the basis of valid
documents but did not leave the country on the expiry of the time limit specified in their
documents;
(b) publish list of foreign nationals who have over-stayed in the country; and
(c) trace such persons and deport them to the countries of their origin.
Survey to
identify
unauthorized
foreign
nationals.
Deportation
of
unauthorized
foreign
nationals.
Punishment
for giving
shelter to
unauthorized
foreign
nationals.
Measures to
prevent entry
of
unauthorized
foreign
nationals.
Maintenance
of National
Register.
Identity cards
to citizens.
Deportation
of persons
overstaying in
the country.
57 of 1955.
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5

3
10. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or the Citizenship Act, 1955, the
Central Government may, on an application made in the prescribed form, grant civil, political
and citizenship rights to the nationals from Pakistan or Bangladesh who were or are compelled
to migrate to India due to religious persecution, discrimination, victimisation or intimidation.
11. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of the
Foreigners Act, 1946 or any other law for the time being in force.
12. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Assistance to
foreign
nationals
compelled to
migrate to
India.
Application of
other laws not
barred.
Power to make
rules.
15
10
5
57 of 1955.
31 of 1946.

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS  AND REASONS
There has been a large scale influx of unauthorised foreign nationals into our country
since 1947. The States of Assam and West Bengal are the worst affected by this unchecked
influx of foreign nationals. This has put a heavy burden on the country which is already
affected by over population. The presence of unauthorised foreign nationals in the country
has also been a source of threat to the National security and integrity of the country.
It is necessary to detect all such unauthorised foreign nationals and deport them to the
countries of their origin. There is also a need to maintain a National Register of all the citizens
and to issue identity cards to them.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; RAMESH POKHRIYAL 'NISHANK'
December 23, 2014.
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for conducting survey of unauthorised foreign nationals
in the country. Clause 4 provides for a phased programme of deportation of unauthorised
foreign nationals to the countries of their origin. Clause 6 provides for measures to prevent
entry of unauthorised foreign nationals. Clause 7 provides for maintenance of a National
Register of citizens. Clause 8 provides for issuing of identity cards to all citizens of the
country. The Bill, therefore if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India. It is likely to involve a recurring expenditure of rupees one hundred crore per
annum.
A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees fifty crore is also likely to be
incurred.
5

6
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 12 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the  delegation of
legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to check unauthorised entry of foreign nationals into the country and for their
deportation and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Dr. Ramesh Pokhriyal 'Nishank', M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—4327LS(S3)—09.02.2015.