|
As inrrobucen is Lox Sapua ij |
|

Bill No. 13 of 2002 \

THE PROTECTION FROM DOMESTIC VIOLENCE BILL, 2002

A
BILL il

to protect the rights of women who are victims of violence of any kind occurring within
the family and to provide for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto,

Br it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-third Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTERI

PRELIMINARY . on
1. (0 This Act may be called the Protection from Domestic Violence Act, 2002. Short title,
extent and
3 (2 It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir, commence-

(3) Itshall'come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint. i

|
|
|
|
|
:
|
|
|
|



Definitions.

Act not in
derogation of
any other Jaw.

Domestic
violencs.

Appointment
of Protection
Officer.

2

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requises,—

(a) “aggrieved person” means-any woman who is or has been a relative of the
respondent and who alleges to have been subjected to act of domestic violence by the
respondent:

(७) “domestic -yiolence” hes the same meaning assigned to # बड़ in scotion 4;

{o)"Magistraie” rasans the Judicial Magistrate af the first class or the Metropolitan
Magistrate, as the case may be, exercising furisdiction under the Cade of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 in the area where the aggrieved person resides;

{& “monetary relief” means compensation which a Magistrate may orderatany
stage during the hearing of application seeking a protection onder, fo meet dhe expenses
jncurred and losses suffered by the aggrieved person 88 4 result of the domestic
violence;

(2) ‘notification means 8 notification published in the Official Gazette;

té3) “prascribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Ack

{g} “Protection Officer” means an officer appointed by the State Government
under section 5;

(0) “protection order” means an order made under section, 14;

(0) “relative” inchides any person related by blood, marriage or adoption and
living with the respondent;

(6) “sespondent” means any person who is or bas been a telative of the aggrieved
person and against whom the aggtieved person pas sought monetary relief or has
made an application for protection order to the Magistrate orto the Protection Officer,
as the case may be; and .

(10 “service provider” means any voluatary association registered under the
Companies Act, 1956 or any other law for the time being in force with the objective of
protecting the rights and interests of women by any means including legal aid, medical,
financial or other assistance.

3. The provisions of this ‘Act shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of the
provisions of any other law, for the time being in force.
CHAPTERD
Domestic VIOLENCE
4, (1) For the purposes of this Act, any conduct of the respondent shall constitute
domestic violence if he,—

(2) habitually assaults or makes the life of the aggrieved person miserable by
cruelty of conduct even if such conduct does not. amount to physical il-treatment; or

(8) forces the aggrieved person to jead an immoral life; or
(0 otherwise injures or harms the aggrieved person.

(2) Nothing contained in clause (०) of: ‘sub-section (J) shalt amount to domestic violence
if the pursuit of course of ‘conduct by the respondent was reasonable for his own protection

or for the protection of his or another’s property.

CHAPTER HI
Proraction OFFICER

5, (2) The State Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint such
jpumber of Protection Officers inveach district as it may consider necessary and shall notify
the area or areas within which Protection Officer shall exercise his powers and perform his
duties under this Act.

Zot 1974, 2

ig

25

1 of 1956, :



Fo ‘The terms and conditions of service of the Protection Officer and other officers
and employees shall be such as may be preseribed.

3
(2) The Protection Officer shall possess such qualifications 88 may be prescribed,
।
|
|

5. (1) Where the Protection Officer, after enquiry, believes either sua mois cronthe Duties of
5 basis of information received from any person under sub-section (7) of section है that action Frotection
should be taken, it shall be his duty to— Officer.

(a) inform the aggrieved person of right to apply for protection order under
section 9;

(8) inform about a service provider in the area where the aggrieved person
10 resides so that she may seek suppert and help from such service provider; i

(0) inform the aggrieved person of her entitlement to legal services under the
" Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987;

(व) perform such ather duties as may be prescribed or as may be ordered to be
performed by the Magistrate.

15 (2) it shall also be the duty of the Protection Officer to entertain any request or
application made or presented to him under the provisions of this Act by the aggrieved
person or by any other person on behalf of the aggrieved person.

(3) The Protection Officer on receipt of an application under sub-section (2) shall, i

where so desired by the aggrieved person, endeavour to assist the aggrieved person and the :

20 respondent in an independent and impartial manner to reach an amicable settlernent of the H
grievance under this Act.

(4 Ifno such settlement as stated in sub-section (3) is arrived at, the Protection Officer
shall file an application to the Magistrate under this Act if so desired by the aggrieved
person.

|

25 - 7. (4) A Protection Officer within the local limits for which he is appointed shall Powers of
exercise,such powers as may be conferred on him by or under this Act. Protection
icer.

(2)A Protection Officer may take assistance of any person while exercising his powers
or discharging his duties under this Act.

(3) A Protection Officer authorised to discharge functions under this Act shail be
30 deemed to be a Civil Court for the purposes of holding enquiries under this Act. |

8. (1) Any person who has redson to believe that an act of domestic violence has _ Information

been, is being, or is likely to be committed, may give information to the Protection Officer. ~ omen |
icer ant :

(2) No liability, civil or criminal, shall be ingurred by any. person for information given exclusion of
in good faith for the purpose of sub-section (1), Hability. - |

35 . CHAPTERIV

PROCEDURE FOR OBTAINING PROTECTION ORDER.

9, (1) The aggrieved person who is a victim of domestic violence, or any other person — Application
on her behalf, or the Protection Officer, méay‘present ari application to the Magistrate for te Magistrate.
seeking relief under section 14. पु

40 (2 The application under sub-section (4) may contain particulars in such form as may
be prescribed or as near thereto as possible. हु

(3) The Magistrate shall fix first date of hearing which shall not exceed fifteen days
from the date of the receipt of the application by the Magistrate for consideration of the
application.



Service of
notice,

Counselling.

Assistance of
welfare
expert.

Proceedings
to be held in
camera,
Passing of
protection
order,

Duration and
alteration of
protection
ordez.

18, (7) Notice of the date fixed under section 9 shalt be given by the Magistrate to the
Protection Officer, who shall get it served by such means as may be prescribed on the
respondent, and on any other person, 88 directed by the Magistrate.

{2 A declaration in suck form as may be prescribed, of the Protection Officer regarding
service of notice shall be the proof that such mutice was served upon the respandent and on
any other person as directed by the Magistrate unless the contrary is proved.

11, (7) The Magistrate at any stage of the proceedings ender this Act may direct the
respondent or the aggrieved person, either singly or jointly, to undergo mandatary
counselling with any service provider.

(2) Where the Magistrate has issued any direction under sub-section (1), he shall fix
the next date of hearing of the case within a period not exceeding two months.

12, In any proceedings under this Act, the Magistrate may secure the services of such
person, preferably a woman where available, whether related to parties or not, including a
person engaged in promoting femily welfare as hs ihinks fit, for the purpose of assisting
him in discharging bis functions.

13. The proceedings may be held ia camera, if the Magistrate considers that the
circumstances of the case so warvant, and shall be 59 held if either party so desires,

14, (1) The Magistrate, after giving opportunity of being heard to the parties to the
application, and after being satisfied that the aggrieved person. is being subjected to domestic
violence,— हे

{a) may pass the protection order by directing ‘ithe respondent to,—

(i refrain from committing any act of domestic viclence; or
Gi pay such monetary relief 2s the Magisirate deems just, and specify the
period in the protection order within which the amount of such monetary relief is to

‘be paid by the respondent to the person aggrieved; or

(8) pass such other direction as may be considered necessary.

(2) Subject to section 11, every endeavour shall be made by the Magistrate heariag
the application under this Act to dispose it of ‘within three months from the date of filing of
the application.

(3) All evidence in any proceeding under this Act shat] be taken in the presence of the
respondent, or, when a personal attendance of the respondent is dispensed with, in the
presence of his pleader, and shall be recorded in the manner prescribed for summons-cases
in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973:

Provided that if the Magistrate is satisfied that the respondent is wilfully avoiding
service of notice, or wilfully neglecting to attend the Court, the Magistrate may proceed to
hear and determine the case ex parte,

(4) A copy of the protection order shail be forwarded to the Protection Officer and
parties to the application.

{3) Where the Magistrate is satisfied that circumstances stated in the application
presented under section 9 are such so as 70 justify the immediate intervention of the
Magistrate fo restrain the respondent from committing domestic violence, the Magistrate
may issue an interim protection order directing the respondent te restrain from engaging 10
any act of domestic violence, and the Magistrate may further require the respondent to
show cause as to why he should not be ordered to execute a bond, with or without sureties,
for maintaining domestic peace for such period as the Magistrate thinks fit,

15, (1) Aprotection order made under section 14 shalt be in force in the first instance
for such period as the Magistrate may fix but not exceeding two years,

(2 The protection order, forreasons to be recorded in writing, may be altered, modified,
varied or revoked, on an application either by the aggrieved person or the respondent
provided that the Magistrate js satisfied that there is a change in the circurnstances that
requires such alteration, modification, variation or revocation, as the case may be.

35

2 of 1974.



5

CHAPTER V
MISCELLANBOUS:

16, There shall fie an appeal to the Court of Session within thirty days from the dale Appeal.
on which the order made by the Magistrate is served on the aggrieved person er ihe
5 respondent, as the case may be.

|W. Bvery Protection Officer, when acting or purporting $0 act under this Act, shall Protection

be deemed 10 be a public servant within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Officer wo be
Cade. public servant,

18, Abreach of protection order, of of the interim protection ender, by the respoudent Penaby for
tp shall be an offence and shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for aterm breach of
which may extend to one year, or with fine which may extend to supses twenty thousand, ar कस the

with bork. respondent,

19, Hany Protection Officer fails or refiases to discharge his duties as divected by the Penay for
Magistrate in the protection order without any sufficient cause, he shail be punished with 10! discharg-
15. imprisonment of either description for term which may extend to one ysar, or with fine ad See on
which may extend 10 mpeas twenty thousand, or with both. Othe. हर

90. Mo prosecution or other legal proceeding shall tie against the Protection Officer Cognizance af

unless a complaint is filed with the previeus sanction of the State Government of an officer offence ae
committed by

authorised by it in this behali. Protection
Offices.
20 21, No suit, prosecation or other legal proceedings shall fie againat the Protection Protection

of action taken

Officer for any damage caused or likely fo be caused by anything which is in good faith vn faith
dong or intended to be donc under this Act or any mule made thereunder, im good fib,

22. (D The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make Power to
rules for carrying sut the purposes of this Act. make rules.

25 (2) छा particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, aemely:—

{a) qualifications, terms and conditions of service for the appointment of
Protection Officers, other officers and employees and their duties under section 5;

(B) duties of the Protection Officer under section 6;

36 (o preseribing the form in which the application may be presented under sub-
section (2) of section 9;

(9) the form and manner in which notice may be served on the respondent and
other persons by the Protection Officer under section 10, and

(के any other matter in connection with or in relation to this Act.

35 (3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree im making any modification in the mule or both Houses agres that the rule

40 shouldnet be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of
no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be

without prejudice to the validity of anything previcusly done under that rule.



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND: REASONS

Domestic violence ts undoubtediy a human rights issue and serious defarreat io
development, The Vienna Accord of 1994 and the Beijing Platform of Action (1995) both
have acknowledged this. The United Mations Committes on CRDAW (Comveation on
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women) in its general recommendation
No, XH (1989) has recommended that State Parties should act to protect women against
violence of any kind especially that occurring within the family.

2. The phenomenon of domestic violence is widely prevalent but hes remained largely
invisible in the public domain, Presently, where a woman is visited with emelty by her
husband or his relatives is an offence under section 498A of the Indian Penal Code, 1260.
The civil law dees not address this phenomeasn in its entirety.

3. With a view to providing aremedy under the civil law which is intended to preserve
the family and at the same time provide protection to victims of domestic violence, legislation
is being proposed. The main features as contained in the Bill are as follows:-—

{i} it is being provided that any conduct of relative of the victim, which subjects
her to habitual assault, or makes her life miserable, or injures or harms, or forces her to
lead an immoral life would constitute domestic violence;

Gi) the Judicial Magistrate of the first class or the Metropolitan Magistrate may
take the cognizance of domestic violence and pass a protection order requizting the
Telative of the woman to refrain from committing an act of domestic violence, or pay
‘monetary relief which is deemed fit in the circumstances or pass any other direction as
the Magistrate may consider just;

(iii) the Magistrate may even require as an interim and ‘urgent measure from the
relative of the woman to execute a bond, with or without sureties, for maintaining
domestic peace;

(iv) the violation by the relative of the order made by the Magistrate would
constituie an offence punishable with imprisonment up to one year, or with fine, or
with both;

(v) it is being proposed to set up an institution of Protection Officer to help the
victim of domestic violence in making application to the Magistrate and in availing of
her other legal rights;

(vi} a provision is being made for the appointment of Protection Officers by State है

Governments and they shall possess such qualifications as may be prescribed by the
Central Government; and

(vii) Protection Officer shall be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning
of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code, 1360, and if he fails or refuses to discharge the
duties as directed by the Magistrate, his act shall amount to an offence punishable
with imprisonment up to one year, or with fine, or with both.

4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.

New Dewar; हर MURLI MANOHAR JOSHI
The 14th February, 2002. हि



MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Sub-clauses (2) and (3) of clause 5 seek to confer power on the Central Government to
make rules for jrescribiag qualification, terms and conditions of service of the Protection
Officer and other officers swbordinate to him. Clause 6 prescribes duties of Protection CMficer
in addition to the duties which the Central Government can impose om them by virtue of
powers conferred by sub-clause (1) of the said clause. Sub-clause (2) of clause 9 confers
power on the Central Government to make rules for prescribing the form in which the
application may be presented by the aggrieved person to the Magistrate. Sub-clauses (1)
and (2) of clause 10, confer power on the Central Governritent to make rules regarding service.
of notice on respondent, Clause 22, inter alia, confers power on the Central Government to
make rules for carrying out the purposes of the Bill, and for any other matter in connection or
in relation to the Bill,

2. The matter in respect of which provision may be made in the rules are generally
matters of procedure and detail, The delegation of legisiative power, is therefors, of a normal
character,



FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

The provisions vf the Protection from Domestic Violexce Bill, 2062 will be enforced
theough the existing machinery of the States and the Union territories. It is not efvisaged bo
‘ create any wew post at any level. Therefore, no expenditure is involved from the Conselidated

Fund of india.



A

BELL

to protect the rights of women who are victims of violence of any kind ocowring within the
family and to provide for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.

(Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi, Minister of Human Resource Development}

MGI? (PLU)MPND—5238LS—01-03-2002,