1
THE INDECENT OR SURROGA TE ADVERTISEMENTS AND
REMIX SONGS (PROHIBITION) BILL, 2013
By
DR. MAHENDRASINH P. CHAUHAN, M.P.
A
BILL
to prohibit publication or telecast of indecent or surrogate advertisements and remix
songs which contain vulgarity and nudity that adversely affect the minds of
the children and younger generation with a view to protect the culture
and values of the society and for matters connected therewith
or incidental thereto
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fourth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Indecent or Surrogate Advertisements and Remix
Songs (Prohibition) Act, 2013.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
Bill No. 13  of  2013
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title
and extent.

2
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "advertisement" includes any pamphlet, writing, drawing, painting,
photograph, bill, circular, notice, label, poster hoarding, banner or other document and
also includes any visible representation made through radio, television, cassettes,
slides by means of any light sound, smoke or gas and publication in print media such
as newspapers, magazines and books;
(b)  "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(c) "indecent advertisement" means advertisement depicting in any manner, a
horror or vulgar scene or figure form or body of a male or female, whether nude or semi-
nude, or any part thereof, which may have the effect of being indecent or derogatory
to or denigrating men or women or any religion or is likely to deprave, corrupt or injure
public morality or which may induce a person to commit any crime or which may cause
road accident;
(d) "indecent remix song" means a remix song depicting in any manner, vulgar
scene or figure form or body of a male or female, whether nude or semi-nude, or any
part thereof, which may have the effect of being indecent or derogatory to or denigrating
men or women or any religion or is likely to deprave, corrupt or injure public morality or
which may induce a person to commit any crime;
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(f) "remix song" means a song that has been edited or altered to sound or appear
different from the original version; and
(g) "surrogate advertisement" means an advertisement which shows a substitute
product in the guise of the real one which otherwise cannot be legally advertised
through the print and electronic media.
(2) Words and expressions used but not defined in the Act but defined in the
Cinematograph Act, 1952 and the Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Act, 1995 shall
have the same meanings respectively assigned to them in those Acts.
3. (1) No person shall—
(a) publish or telecast or cause to be published or telecast or arrange to take part
in the publication, telecast or exhibition of or sticking, writing or painting any indecent
advertisement or surrogate advertisement; and
(b) produce or cause to be produced, depict, circulate, distribute, broadcast or
telecast any indecent remix song in any manner.
(2) Any person who contravenes the provisions of sub-section ( 1) shall be guilty of
an offence under this Act.
4. The appropriate Government shall designate such agencies as it may consider
appropriate for the purposes of implementation of the provisions of this Act.
5. Any person who contravenes the provisions of section 3 shall be punished with
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than five years but which may extend upto
ten years and with fine which shall not be less than three lakh rupees but which may extend
upto seven lakh rupees.
6. Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company, firm or other
association of individuals, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was in-
charge of, and was responsible to the company, firm or association for the conduct of the
Definitions.
Prohibition of
indecent or
surrogate
advertisements
and indecent
remix songs.
Appropriate
Government
to designate
agencies for
the purposes
of the Act.
Penalty.
Offences by
Companies,
firms and
other
associations.
37 of 1952.
7 of 1995.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
business of the company, firm or association, as the case may be, shall be deemed to be
guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
7.  Notwithstanding anything contained in the  Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, an
offence punishable under this Act shall be cognizable and non-bailable.
8. The provision of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force regulating any of the matters dealt with in this Act.
9. (1) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the provisions of this Act
shall not apply to advertisements which are aimed at educating the general public or a
particular group.
(2) For the purpose of deciding the aim of advertisements under sub-section (1), the
Central Government shall designate such number of officers, not below the rank of Joint
Secretary, as it may deem fit.
10. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Offence to be
cognizable
and non-
bailable.
Savings.
Act not to
apply to
certain
advertisements.
Power to
make rules.
2 of 1974.
5
10
15
20

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
These days the newspapers and magazines are full of advertisements of various
products. Most of these advertisements carry  the pictures of scantily clad girls and women
depicted in a vulgar manner. In most cases, the display of nude, topless or semi-nude
photographs of women in the advertisements have nothing to do with the product. The
television channels also telecast advertisements exhibiting semi-nude or nude girls and
women. The models in such advertisements move and act in a vulgar manner. One feels
ashamed to watch these advertisements along with family, particularly with children.
As per the Government policy, the advertisements of liquor and tobacco products are
not allowed in print and electronic media. But manufacturers of these harmful products still
promote their products through surrogate advertisements. Particular brands of liquor are
advertised in the garb of mineral water or soda, etc. These advertisements also carry vulgar
movements of female models.
Of late, the television channels are showing remix songs. The popular songs of old
Hindi movies are being shown by television channels. These remix songs have crossed all
limits of vulgarity, nudity and obscenity. Unfortunately, there is no check on the albums and
cassettes of such remix songs.
The exposure of the society to the obscenity, nudity and vulgarity is crossing limits of
decency and damaging our culture. Besides, indecent  advertisements and remix songs also
affect the minds of teenagers adversely. Their poisonous effect is visible in the society in the
form of increasing cases of rape, eve teasing, murder and other crimes against women. The
time has come to put a complete ban on such advertisements and remix songs in the larger
interest of the society and to protect the culture and values of decency of this great country.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; MAHENDRASINH P. CHAUHAN
November 7, 2012.
4

5
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 10 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of detail only.
The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
to prohibit publication or telecast of indecent or surrogate advertisements and remix
songs which contain vulgarity and nudity that adversely affect the minds of
the children and younger generation with a view to protect the culture
and values of the society and for matters connected therewith
or incidental thereto.
—————
(Dr. Mahendrasinh P . Chauhan, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—4687LS(S4)—13.02.2013.