THE NATIONAL INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY COMMISSION
BILL, 2007
By
SHRI ADHALRAO SHIV AJI PA TIL, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the setting up of a National Information Technology Commission and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  ( 1) This Act may be called the National Information Technology Commission
 Act, 2007.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(i) ‘‘appropriate  Government’’  means  the  State  Government  or  the
Central Government, as the case may be;
(ii) ‘‘Commission’’ means the National Information Technology Commission
set up under section 3 of this Act; and
(iii) ‘‘prescribed’’ means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
Short title
and Extent.
Definitions.
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 13 of  2007
5
10

2
3.  The Central Government shall set up a Commission to be known as the National
Information Technology Commission to regulate and expedite growth of information
technology in the country.
4.  (1) The Commission shall consist of a Chairman and four other members to be
appointed by the Central Government having such qualifications as may be prescribed.
(2) The conditions of service, salaries and allowances of Chairman and other
members of the Commission shall be such as may be prescribed.
(3) The Commission shall have such number of officers and staff as may be required
for the efficient functioning of the Commission.
5. The Commission shall perform the following functions:—
(i) take appropriate steps to set up information technology parks in cities with
population of more than one million and in cities having potential for development of
information technology;
(ii) recommend to the Central Government regarding concessions/incentives to
be given for the promotion of export of hardware and software; and
(iii) such other functions as may be assigned to it by the Central Government.
6. For the purpose of clause (i) of section 5, the appropriate Government shall afford
to the Commission all assistance in making available land free of cost and infrastructural
facilities such as electricity, water and roads.
7. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as possible, but in no case later than six
months from the commencement of this Act, through notification in the official Gazette,
formulate a national policy on information technology.
(2) The policy formulated under sub-section ( 1) shall be reviewed at least once in
every three years, or earlier, if such review is deemed necessary by the Central Government.
8. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of the Act.
National
Information
Technology
Commission.
Composition
of the
Commission.
Functions of
the
Commission.
Appropriate
Government
to extend all
help to the
Commission.
National
policy on
information
technology.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Information technology industry is one of the fastest growing industries of the Country.
But  even now there is tremendous potential for further growth. What is needed is the
formulation of a proper policy and assistance from the Government. If these are put in place,
there is no doubt that our country will rank number one in terms of export of software and
hardware.
At present, there is no clear cut policy for the development of information technology
in the Country. The Government does not give any assistance to the companies working in
this field. Several foreign companies are willing to set up their offices in our Country but due
to lack of required infrastructure they prefer to stay away. As a result these companies go to
other countries which offer better infrastructure. This industry can prove to be a major
source of revenue for the Government and also provide immense employment opportunities
to our people but so far the Government has not done much to tap the huge growth potential
of Information Technology industry.
Therefore, it is proposed that a National Commission on Information Technology be
set up to regulate and promote the development of information technology industry in the
country. It is also proposed that a national policy on information technology be formulated.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objective.
N
EW DELHI; ADHALRAO  SHIVAJI  PATIL
November  8, 2006.
3

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the setting up of a National Commission on Information
Technology. Clause 4 provides for the composition of the Commission and salaries and
allowances of the Chairman and members of the Commission. Clause 5 provides that the
Commission shall set up information technology parks in cities with population of one
million or more. Clause 6 provides that the appropriate Government shall provide all assistance
to the Commission in setting up of information technology parks. The expenditure relating to
States shall be borne out of the Consolidated Funds of the respective States. However, the
expenditure in respect of Union territories shall be borne out of the Consolidated Fund of
India. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund
of India. It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees ten thousand
crores will be involved.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five thousand crores  is also likely to be
involved.
4

5
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the setting up of a National Information Technology Commission and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—195LS(S-5)—08-02-2007.