Bill No. 140-F of 2025 
THE MANIPUR GOODS AND SERVICES TAX 
(SECOND AMENDMENT) BILL, 2025 
(AS PASSED BY THE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT— 
  LOK SABHA ON 1ST DECEMBER, 2025 
 RAJYA SABHA ON 2ND DECEMBER, 2025) 

Bill No. 140-F of 2025
THE MANIPUR GOODS AND SERVICES TAX
(SECOND AMENDMENT) BILL, 2025 
(AS PASSED BY THE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT)
A
BILL 
further to amend the Manipur Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of India 
as follows:— 
1. ( 1) This Act may be called the Manipur Goods and Services Tax (Second
Amendment) Act, 2025. 
(2) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, sections 2 to 5, 7 to 13 and 15
shall come into force on such date as the State Government may, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, appoint. 
Short title and 
commencement. 

2 
Amendment of 
section 2. 
Amendment of 
section 12. 
Amendment of 
section 13. 
Amendment of 
section 17. 
2. In the Manipur Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017 (hereinafter referred to
as the principal Act), in section 2,— 
(a) in clause ( 61), after the word and figure “section 9 ”, the words,
brackets and figures “of this Act or under sub-section (3) or sub-section (4) of 
section 5 of the Integrated Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017 ” shall be 
inserted and shall be deemed to have been inserted with effect from the 
1st day of April, 2025; 
(b) in clause (69),—
(i) in sub-clause (c), for the words “management of a municipal or
local fund;”, the words “management of a local fund or municipal fund.” 
shall be substituted; 
(ii) after sub -clause ( c), the following Explanation shall be
inserted, namely:— 
‘Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-clause,— 
(a) “local fund” means any fund under the control or
management of an authority of a local self -government 
established for discharging civic functions in relation to a 
Panchayat area and vested by law with the powers to levy, 
collect and appropriate any tax, duty, toll, c ess or fee, by 
whatever name called; 
(b) “municipal fund” means any fund under the control
or management of an authority of a local self -government 
established for discharging civic functions in relation to a 
Metropolitan area or Municipal area and vested by law with 
the powers to levy, collect and appropriate any tax, duty, toll, 
cess or fee, by whatever name called;’; 
(c) after clause ( 116), the following clause shall be inserted,
namely:— 
‘(116A) “unique identification marking ” means the uni que 
identification marking referred to in  clause ( b) of sub -section ( 2) of 
section 148A and includes a digital stamp, digital mark or any other 
similar marking, which is unique, secure and non-removable;’. 
3. In section 12 of the principal Act,—
(a) sub-section (4) shall be omitted;
(b) in sub -section ( 5), for the words, brackets and figures
“, sub-section ( 3) or sub -section ( 4),” the words, brackets and figure 
“or sub-section (3)” shall be substituted. 
4. In section 13 of the principal Act,—
(a) sub-section (4) shall be omitted;
(b) in sub -section ( 5), for the words, brackets and figures
“, sub -section ( 3) or  sub-section ( 4),” the words, brackets and figure 
“or sub-section (3)” shall be substituted. 
5. In section 17 of the principal Act, in sub-section (5), in clause (d),—
(a) for the words “plant or machinery”, the words “plant and machinery”
shall be substituted and shall be deemed to have been substituted with effect 
from the 1st day of July, 2017; 
(b) the Explanation shall be numbered as Explanation 1 thereof, and
after Explanation 1 as so numbered, the following Explanation shall be 
inserted, namely:— 
Manipur Act 3 
of 2017. 
13 of 2017. 

3 
13 of 2017. 
13 of 2017. 
‘Explanation 2.—For the purposes of clause ( d), it is hereby 
clarified that notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any 
judgment, decree or order of any court, tribunal, or other authority, any 
reference to “plant or machinery” shall be construed and shall always be 
deemed to have been construed as a reference to “plant and machinery”;’. 
6. In section 20 of the principal Act, with effect from the 1st day of
April, 2025,— 
(a) in sub-section (1), after the word and figure “section 9”, the words,
brackets and figures “of this Act or under sub-section (3) or sub-section (4) of 
section 5 of the Integrated Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017 ” shall be 
inserted and shall be deemed to have been inserted; 
(b) in sub-section (2), after the word and figure “section 9”, the words,
brackets and figures “of this Act or under sub-section (3) or sub-section (4) of 
section 5 of the Integrated Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017, ” shall be 
inserted and shall be deemed to have been inserted. 
7. In section 34  of the principal Act, in sub -section (2), for the proviso, the
following proviso shall be substituted, namely:— 
“Provided that no reduction in output tax liability of the supplier shall be 
permitted, if the— 
(i) input tax credit as is attributable to such a credit note, if availed,
has not been reversed by the recipient, where such recipient is a 
registered person; or 
(ii) incidence of tax on such supply has been passed on to any other
person, in other cases.”. 
8. In section 38 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words “an auto-generated statement”, the
words “a statement” shall be substituted; 
(b) in sub-section (2),—
(i) for the words “auto-generated statement under ”, the words
“statement referred in” shall be substituted; 
(ii) in clause (a), the word “and” shall be omitted;
(iii) in clause ( b), after the words “by the recipient, ”, the word
“including” shall be inserted; 
(iv) after clause ( b), the following clause shall be inserted,
namely:— 
“(c) such other details, as may be prescribed.”. 
9. In section 39 of the principal Act, in sub -section (1), for the words “and
within such time”, the words “within such time, and subject to such conditions and 
restrictions” shall be substituted. 
10. In section 107 of the principal Act, in sub-section (6), for the proviso, the
following proviso shall be substituted, namely:— 
“Provided that in case of any order demanding penalty without involving 
demand of any tax, no appeal shall be filed against such order unless a sum equal to 
ten per cent. of the said penalty has been paid by the appellant.”. 
Amendment of 
section 20. 
Amendment of 
section 34. 
Amendment of 
section 38. 
Amendment of 
section 39. 
Amendment of 
section 107. 

4 
Amendment of 
section 112. 
Insertion of new 
section 122B. 
Penalty for 
failure to comply 
with track and 
trace 
mechanism. 
Insertion of new 
section 148A. 
Track and trace 
mechanism for 
certain goods. 
Amendment of 
Schedule III. 
11. In section 112 of the principal Act, in sub -section ( 8), the following
proviso shall be inserted, namely:— 
“Provided that in case of any order demanding penalty without involving 
demand of any tax, no appeal shall be filed against such order unless a sum 
equal to ten per cent. of the said penalty, in addition to the amount payable 
under the proviso to sub -section ( 6) of section 107 has been paid by the 
appellant.”. 
12. After section 122A of the principal Act, the following section shall be
inserted, namely:— 
“122B. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, where any 
person referred to in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) of section 148A acts in 
contravention of the provisions of the said section, he shall, in addition to any 
penalty under Chapter XV or the provisions of this Chapter, be liable to pay a 
penalty equal to an amount of one lakh rupees or ten per cent. of the tax 
payable on such goods, whichever is higher.”. 
13. After section 148 of the principal Act, the following section shall be
inserted, namely:— 
“148A. (1) The Government may, on the recommendations of the 
Council, by notification, specify— 
(a) the goods;
(b) persons or class of persons who are in possession or deal with
such goods, 
to which the provisions of this section shall apply. 
(2) The Government may, in respect of the goods referred to in
clause (a) of sub-section (1),— 
(a) provide a system for enabling affixation of unique
identification marking and for electronic storage and access of 
information contained therein, through such persons, as may be 
prescribed; and 
(b) prescribe the unique identification marking for such goods,
including the information to be recorded therein. 
(3) The persons referred to in sub-section (1) shall—
(a) affix on the said goods or packages thereof, a unique
identification marking, containing such information and in such manner; 
(b) furnish such information and details within such time and
maintain such records or documents, in such form and manner; 
(c) furnish details of the machinery installed in the place of
business of manufacture of such goods, including the identification, 
capacity, duration of operation and such other details or information, 
within such time and in such form and manner; 
(d) pay such amount in relation to the system referred to in
sub-section (2), 
as may be prescribed.”. 
14. In Schedule III to the principal Act, with effect from the 1st day of
July, 2017,— 
(i) in paragraph 8, after clause (a), the following clause shall be inserted
and shall be deemed to have been inserted, namely:— 

5 
28 of 2005. 
Ord. 2 of 2025. 
“(aa) supply of goods warehoused in a Special Economic Zone or 
in a Free Trade Warehousing Zone to any person before clearance for 
exports or to the Domestic Tariff Area;”; 
(ii) in Explanation 2, after the words “For the purposes of”, the words,
brackets and letter “clause (a) of” shall be inserted and shall be deemed to 
have been inserted; 
(iii) after Explanation 2, the following Explanation shall be inserted and
shall be deemed to have been inserted, namely:— 
‘Explanation 3.—For the purposes of clause (aa), the expressions 
“Special Economic Zone ”, “Free Trade Warehousing Zone ” and 
“Domestic Tariff Area ” shall have the same meanings as respectively 
assigned to them in section 2 of the Special Economic Zones Act, 2005.’. 
15. No refund shall be made of all such tax which has been collected, but
which would not have been so collected, had section 14 been in force at all material 
times. 
16. ( 1) The Manipur Goods and Services Tax (Second Amendment)
Ordinance, 2025 is hereby repealed. 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the
said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding 
provisions of this Act. 
No refund of tax 
collected.  
Repeal and 
savings. 

A 
BILL 
       further to amend the Manipur Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017. 
———— 
(As passed by the Houses of Parliament)