1
THE UNIVERSAL HEALTH COVERAGE (MEDICAL  AND FINANCIAL
ASSISTANCE) BILL, 2017
By
SHRIMATI SUPRIYA SULE, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide health insurance and healthcare services to all citizens of the country and for
matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as fol-
lows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Universal Health Coverage (Medical and Financial
Assistance) Act, 2017.
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No. 140 of  2017
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in case the State and Union Territory with
Legislative Assembly, the State Government and the Government of the Union
Territory respectively; in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "ASHA" refers to Accredited Social Health Activist employed under the
National Rural Health Mission;
(c) "health care services" refers to all types of medical services including
preventive, promotive, palliative, curative and rehabilitative healthcare services;
(d) "local authority" means the Municipal Corporation or Municipal Council or
Nagar Panchayat or Zilla Parishad or any Urban Local Body;
(e) "Notification" means notification as published by the Official Gazette; and
(f) "prescribed" means as prescribed by the rules under this Act.
3. The Central Government shall ensure availability of affordable healthcare serv-
ices for every person in such manner as may be prescribed.
4. The appropriate Government shall provide healthcare facilities free of cost
including primary, secondary or tertiary in all the public hospitals.
5. Every citizen shall, upon paying an annual health insurance premium as decided by
the Committee under section 6, be eligible to free healthcare services provided under this
Act:
Provided that in the case of persons living below poverty line, the Central
Government shall pay the premium of insurance, to the insurer for providing
healthcare services.
6. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification constitute a Committee to decide
on the health insurance premiums to be paid by all citizens for availing the healthcare
services.
(2) The Committee shall consist of:—
(a) the Union Minister of Health and Family Welfare, Chairman ex-officio; and
(b) such number of eminent economists to be appointed by the Central Govern-
ment in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) The Salaries and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service
of the members of the Committee, shall be such as may be prescribed.
(4) The premium decided under sub-section ( 1) shall be proportional to the annual
income of every citizen.
(5) The premium prescribed by the Committee under sub-section (1) shall be valid for
a period of five years.
7. The Central Government shall provide the necessary infrastructure to the States
in improving the secondary and tertiary healthcare services at all public hospitals.
Definitions.
Central
Government
to ensure
availability of
affordable
healthcare
services.
Appropriate
Government
to provide
free of cost
healthcare
facilities in
public
hospitals.
Annual
Health
Insurance
premium.
Committee to
decide the
premium.
Central
Government
to provide
necessary
infrastructure
to public
hospitals.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

3
8. The appropriate Government shall appoint adequate number of doctors in the pub-
lic hospitals to maintain the doctor patient ratio to at least 1:40.
9. The appropriate Government shall ensure that the medicines required for treat-
ment are made available free of cost to all the patients at the public health centres.
10.  The Central Government shall, in order to ensure availability of healthcare services,
make provisions for permitting final year medical students to intern at the public hospitals.
11. The local authority shall employ and conduct skill development training
programmes for ASHA and other women healthcare workers and sensitize them about the
different preventive healthcare measures including the primary healthcare.
12. The appropriate Government shall ensure that the mid day meal and other
nutritional schemes meant for children and pregnant women are effectively implemented
under its jurisdiction.
13. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by
law in this behalf, provide such sums of money to the State Governments as it thinks
necessary for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
14. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any
other law for the time being in force.
15. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Appointment
of doctors.
Appropriate
Government
to provide
free of cost
medicines.
Medical
students to
augment the
strength at
public
hospitals.
Skill
development
programme
to sensitize
the women
healthcare
workers.
Appropriate
Government
to ensure
effective
implementa-
tion of mid
day meal and
other
nutritional
schemes.
Central
Government
to provide
necessary
funds.
Act not in
derogation of
other laws.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25

4
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
According to the World Health Organization (WHO), Universal Health coverage
(UHC) refers to the provision of effective medical services to all for the betterment of their
health. Access to the qualitative medical services must also be at an affordable price so as
to prevent the less affluent sections of the society from experiencing significant financial
hardships. The primary objective of the UHC is to deliver basic health care services to as
much population as possible, while aiming for universal coverage.
In India, there is much variation in the income of the rich and the poor households.
This unequal distribution of income makes it unfair to the households with low incomes by
leaving them to buy medical services as per their abilities. In addition to this problem of
inequality for access to affordable health care services, there also exists the problem of
inefficiency. In the market for health care services, the patient has less information about his
illness, its prognosis and the best course of treatment plan. The practitioners can exploit the
information he has on the patient's health status. This case of asymmetric information
makes the markets for health care services uncompetitive and necessitates Government
intervention. This market for health care insurance also faces similar problem as the insurance
providers have less information about the health status of the individuals.
Because of this lack of information about the health care services, households tends
to postpone the treatment for easily curable disease until the disease progresses and
inpatient expensive treatment is necessary. The treatment of preventable disease tends to
get delayed when people are asked to pay for the medical services as per their abilities.
Hence providing health insurance will help in lowering the incidence of preventable disease,
empirical evidence from countries like Thailand suggests that with extensive availability of
preventive health care, the need for inpatient treatment and expensive surgeries reduces
sharply. Hence in the absence of affordable primary health care services, illnesses tend to
become much harder and expensive to treat.
India can pay for the health insurance by investing in the low cost health care workers
available. By focusing on the primary health care, much health gains can be achieved. It is
important for the Government to focus on the health of its citizens. Health advancement
improves the productivity of the labour force and is thus complementary to economic
progress.
India, in its National Health Policy did envisage Universal health coverage, but it is
not binding on the Government to implement its provisions.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SUPRIYA  SULE
June 28, 2017.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for ensuring availability of afforable healthcare services
for every person. Clause 4 of the Bill provides for free of cost healthcare facilities in public
hospitals. Clause 5 of the Bill provides for free healthcare services on payment of annual
health insurance premium. Clause 6 of the Bill provides constitution of a Committee to
decide health insurance premium. Clause 7 of the Bill provides for providing necessary
infrastructure to public hospitals. Clause 8 of the Bill provides for appointment of doctors
in public hospitals. Clause 9 of the Bill provides for free of cost medicines in public health
centres. Clause 11 of the Bill provides for skill development programmes to sensitize women
healthcare workers. Clause 13 of the Bill provides for necessary funds for State Governments.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India.
It is estimated that a sum of rupees six thousand crore would be involved as recurring
expenditure per annum from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees hundred crore is also likely to be involved.
5

6
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 15 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the provisions of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide health insurance and health care services to all citizens of the country and for
matters connected therewith.
————
(Shrimati Supriya Sule, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—1019LS(S3)—21-07-2017.