1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010
By
SHRI MANISH TEWARI, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first Y ear of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2010.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. After Part III of the Constitution, the following Part shall be inserted, namely:—
“Part IIIA
INCULCATING IDEALS ENSHRINED IN THE CONSTITUTION IN CITIZENS
35A. Every citizen, who has completed the age of eighteen years or upon completing
the age of eighteen years, shall make and subscribe an oath or affirmation according
to the form set out for the purpose in the Third Schedule, before such person and in
such manner as the State may, by law, determine.
Short title and
commence-
ment.
Bill No.  140  of  2010
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Insertion of
new Part IIIA.
Oath or
affirmation
by citizens.
5
10

2
Explanation —In this article, citizen includes a person who has acquired the Indian
citizenship by  registration or naturalization  under the Citizenship Act, 1955.
35B. The State shall take steps to ensure that the ideals, principles and provisions of
this Constitution are taught to all children from the age of six till eighteen years in
such manner as the State may, by law, determine.”.
3. In the Third Schedule to the Constitution, after Form VIII, the following  Form shall
be inserted, namely:—
“IX
Form of oath or affirmation to be made by citizens of India:—
“I,A. B., do swear in the name of God  that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the
      solemnly affirm
Constitution of India as by law established; that I will uphold and respect the Constitution
of India and shall endeavour to further the ideals, principles and provisions contained
therein; that I will commit myself to the idea of a SOVEREIGN SOCIALIST SECULAR
DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC of India; that I will strive to secure, by Constitutional means, to
all my fellow citizens Justice—social, economic and political, Liberty of thought, expression,
belief, faith and worship, Equality of status and of opportunity, and to promote among them
all Fraternity assuring the dignity of the individual and the unity and integrity of the nation;
and that I will faithfully observe the laws of India and fulfil my duties as a citizen of India.”.
Compulsory
teaching of
Constitution
to children.
Amendment
of the Third
Schedule.
57 of 1955.
5
10
15

3
S-3 \ E \ BILL2010 \ LS \ 5332LS
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Indian Constitution is not a mere parchment of paper; it is a way of life.
Unfortunately, the study of the Constitution and its provisions is largely limited to
practitioners of law and academicians. The common man's interaction with constitutional
ideals is restricted to a very basic study of civics and political science if at all they opt to do
so. It is necessary that for a sensitive and conscious citizenry to emerge in India, the
Constitutional principles, ideals and provisions must become a national habit. For this
purpose, it is proposed to suitably amend the Constitution by inserting Part IIIA, namely,
'Inculcating Ideals enshrined in the Constitution in citizens'.
The Constitution is the very thread of our Indianness, which weaves diversity into
the fabric of nationhood, exhorting us, to cast away the blinkers of parochial cravings for
the larger interests of “We, the People”. Its provisions lay down the duties and obligations
of citizens toward one another and towards the larger idea of India. Until now, only members
of the Union and State legislature, executive, judiciary and those who occupy or seek to
occupy public office are required to take oath of allegiance or affirmation to the Indian
Constitution. But the truth is that in the light of various constitutional provisions and the
higher moral precept of  ‘Nation First’, a duty of fidelity is levied on every citizen of India.
In order to recognize and realize this, it is proposed to amend the Constitution by inserting
articles 35A and 35B which shall require every citizen of India, having completed the age of
eighteen years, to take an oath of allegiance or affirmation to the Indian Constitution in the
form proposed to be made to the Third Schedule to the Constitution by inclusion of
Form IX.
On the one hand, the Constitution lays emphasis on the creation of a social order
characterized by the ancient slogan of 'Bahujan Hitaya, Bahujan Sukhaya' or the Welfare
State ideal of  ‘achieving the greatest good for the greatest number’. Yet, in the same breath,
it serves as a sacrosanct contract that the Indian State has entered into with every citizen of
India, committing itself eternally to the Rule of Law, free and fair democratic traditions,
secularism and Fundamental Rights enunciated in Part III of the Constitution. It is the very
touchstone of justice, fairness and reasonableness, to be employed for testing every action
of the State, in order to protect every individual from the excesses and abuse of governmental
power. But the mere presence of words in a document alone will serve as no guarantee
against tyranny. As it has been rightly stated, ‘Eternal vigilance is the price of Liberty’.  To
achieve this, it is proposed to amend the Constitution to make its study compulsory for all
children between the ages of six to eighteen by insertion of article 35B, so that we may
create a citizenry, which is as wedded to the idea of freedom, justice, democracy and multi-
culture pluralism as the founding fathers had, while laying down their lives in the struggle
for liberation.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
N
EW DELHI; MANISH TEWARI
November 1, 2010.

GMGIPMRND—5332LS(S3)—26-11-2010.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Manish Tewari, M.P .)