1
THE  PREVENTION  OF  INSULTS  TO  NATIONAL  HONOUR
(AMENDMENT)  BILL,  2019
By
SHRI PARVESH SAHIB SINGH, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Prevention of Insults to National Honour Act, 1971.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Prevention of Insults to National Honour (Amendment)
Act, 2019.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the Prevention of Insults to National Honour Act, 1971, for section 3, the following
section shall be substituted, namely:—
“3. Whoever intentionally prevents the singing of the Indian National Anthem or
causes disturbance to any assembly engaged in such singing or intentionally causes
disrespect to the National Anthem, shall be punished with imprisonment for a term,
which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, the word “disrespect” shall include
any person refusing to stand for or recite the National Anthem except when such person is
suffering from any physical disability in that regard.”
Bill  No. 140 of  2019
Short title and
commencement.
Substitution of
new section
for  section 3.
Prevention of
singing of
National
Anthem.
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
69 of 1971.
5
10

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
National honour is embodied in various symbolic elements like National Flag, National
Anthem and national symbols. Respecting them is a fundamental duty of every citizen.
National Anthem of any nation has a unique significance of its own. In the case of
India, our National Anthem is not only the symbol of our national honour but it is also a
memory and a tribute for our freedom struggle. Written by Shri Rabindranath Tagore, it
contains flavour of unity and integrity of our nation. It keeps up reminding of our rich
cultural, natural and political diversity. Thus any kind of disrespect or insult to our National
Anthem is an insult to the integrity and unity of our country.
The Prevention of insults to National Honour (Amendment) Bill, 2018 is an effort to
ensure full respect and honour for our National Anthem. The Bill seeks from all persons to
stand and recite the National Anthem whenever it is played or sung in an assembly of people.
The aim is not only to provide respect and honour for our National Anthem but also to
inculcate among our citizens a feeling of belongingness for our National Anthem.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; PARVESH  SAHIB SINGH
June 17, 2019.
2

3
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE PREVENTION OF  INSULTS TO NATIONAL HONOUR ACT, 1971
(69 OF 1971)
* * * * *
3. Whoever intentionally prevents the singing of  the Indian National Anthem or
causes disturbances to any assembly engaged in such singing shall be punished with
imprisonment for a term, which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.
* * * * *
Prevention of
singing of
National
Anthem.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Prevention of Insults to National Honour Act, 1971.
————
(Shri Parvesh Sahib Singh, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—995LS(S3)—04-07-2019.