 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
18 of 1969. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
                                                                                    AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bill No. 140 of 2026 
 
THE REGISTRATION OF BIRTHS AND DEATHS (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 2026 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Registration of Births and Deaths Act, 1969. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy -seventh Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:— 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Registration of Births and Deaths 
(Amendment) Act, 2026. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
2. In the Registration of Births and Deaths Act, 1969, in section 13, for           
sub-section (3), the following sub-sections shall be substituted, namely:— 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Short title and 
commencement. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of 
section 13. 

2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
‘(3) Any birth or death of which delayed information is given to the 
Registrar after one year but within two years of its occurrence, shall be 
registered only on an order made by a District Magistrate or Sub -Divisional 
Magistrate or by an Executive Magistrate authorised by the District 
Magistrate, having jurisdiction over the area where the birth or death has taken 
place, after verifying the correctness of the birth or death and on payment of 
such fee as may be prescribed. 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub -section, t he expression 
“Executive Magistrate” means the Executive Magistrate appointed under    
sub-section (1) of section 14 of the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023. 
(3A) Any birth or death of which delayed information is given to the 
Registrar after two years of its occurrence, shall be registered only on an order 
made by a Judicial Magistrate of the first class, having jurisdiction over the 
area where the birth or death has taken place, after verifying the correctness 
of the birth or death and on payment of such fee as may be prescribed.’. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
46 of 2023. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Registration of Births and Deaths Act, 1969 (18 of 1969) (the Act) was 
enacted to provide for regulation of registration of births and deaths and for matters 
connected therewith.  
2. The registration of births and deaths is mandatory under the Act and the 
certificate issued under the Act provides legal identity to an individual. A certificate 
of birth or death is admissible in evidence for the purpose of proving the birth or 
death of a person. The Act was amended in 2023 and the provisions of the amended 
Act came into force with effect from 1st October, 2023. Based on the consultations 
held with the State Governments/UTs and other stakeholders, it is proposed to 
amend sub -section ( 3) of section 13 of the Act in form of a Bill, namely the 
Registration of Births and Deaths (Amendment) Bill, 2026 in order to make 
provisions of delayed registration more stringent. This will encourage timely 
reporting of event of birth and death. 
3. Further, the Registration of Births and Deaths (Amendment) Bil l, 2026 
provides for the following, namely:— 
(i) any birth or death of which delayed information is given to the 
Registrar after one year but within two years of its occurrence, shall be 
registered only on an order made by a District Magistrate or Sub -Divisional 
Magistrate or by an Executive Magistrate authorised by the District 
Magistrate, after verifying the correctness of the birth or death;  
(ii) any birth or death of which delayed information is given to the 
Registrar after two years of its occurrence, shall be registered only on an order 
made by a Judicial Magistrate of the first class, after verifying the correctness 
of the birth or death. 
4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                                                                              AMIT SHAH.  
The 24th July, 2026.    
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 

4 
 
  FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
The Registration of Births and Deaths (Amendment) Bill, 2026, if enacted 
would not involve any expenditure either recurring or non -recurring from and out 
of the Consolidated Fund of India. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
4 

5 
 
  MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to amend sub -section ( 3) of section 13 of the 
Registration of Births and Deaths Act, 1969 and involves matters for which rules 
may be made. The State Government is empowered under section 30 to make rules 
under the existing provisions of the Act for carrying out the purposes of the said 
section.  
2. The matters in respect of which rules may be made under the aforesaid 
provisions are matters of detail and it is not practicable to provide them in the Bill 
itself.  The delegation of legislative powers is, therefore, of a normal character. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 
 

6 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Delayed 
registration of 
births and 
deaths. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 ANNEXURE 
EXTRACT FROM THE REGISTRATION OF BIRTHS AND DEATHS ACT, 1969 
(18 OF 1969) 
*   *   *   *   * 
13. (1) *   *   *   *   * 
(3) Any birth or death of which delayed information is given to the Registrar 
after one year of its occurrence, shall be registered only on an order made by a 
District Magistrate or Sub -Divisional Magistrate or by an Executive Magistrate  
authorised by the District Magistrate, having jurisdiction over the area where the 
birth or death has taken place, after verifying the correctness of the birth or death 
and on payment of such fee as may be prescribed. 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, the expression “Executive 
Magistrate” means the Executive Magistrate appointed under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 20 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973. 
*   *   *   *   * 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 of 1974. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6 
 

7 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

8 
 
  LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
———— 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Registration of Births and Deaths Act, 1969. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
———— 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Shri Amit Shah, Minister of Home Affairs and Cooperation) 
 
 
 
  
 
 