• 
tv 
TLE F nE'vEIT Iv.J v f CKUELTf Tv i,:~H.hL' ..A E.JL~ E,n) 
::JILL, l'bl 
L-T!:!-.P£'}' s in.tru9~.c~.d .i.n. ~~_LS..a!).hU 
'1. Page 5, line 14,-
~. Page 12, in the m.:arsinal he aci~n~ tv sectivn 
i2-r tlcruelyll 'y_as;J. "ciue lly" 
. 3. Page 13 •.. 
fvr 14ast line ~.s9 ----
" 32. {I) * 
~ 
* * *" 
4. 1 n the ...,;ucket ~age " in last line , __ 
:- U.Lt \ t 1 .... -, 
. fo; "~i viI ~u .. ply" re a.d "Civil Supplies" 
NE~j .... ELfU, 
November 26 1')81 
M·r-ah~aY-arta- t;·"173·11-alta; 
11.-

- . 
As mTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA ott 
J G :; J \t \~ U l 
);7 
BUI' No: 1. at 1t81 
• 
THE PREVENTION OF CRUELTY TO ANiMALS (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 1981 
It. 
BILL 
to amend the Prevention e>f Cru.elty to Anim.als Act, 1960. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-eecond Ye. fIl. the-
Republic of India as follows:-
:t TlDs Act" may be called the Prevention' ot cruelty to Anima]s Short" 
(Amendinent) Act, 1981. title. 
" of 11160. 5 Z; _ In seetion 2. of the -Preve.o.ti.on of C1'Uelty to Anjmals Act, 1910 Amend· 
mentof 
section 
2. 
(hereinafter referred to as the pri.nci~ Act), for clauae (b) . ., the follow-
ilia clause shall be substituted, name1y:-
'(b) "Board" means the Board established under section 4, and 
as reconstituted. from time to time under section 5A;'. 
Subltitu-
i 0 3. III the principal Act, in Chapter il, for- the heading, 
following hea~g shall be substituted, namely:-
the tion of new 
headin, 
"ANIMAL WELFARE BOAlID OF INDIA". 
fOr head-
ing ell. 
Chap-
ter II. 
4. In section 4 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the words Amend-
ClAnim.al Welfare Board", the words "Animal Welfare Board of India" ment of 
15 shall be sUbstituted. .ection 4. 

Amend-
mentof 
section 
5. 
Insertion 
of new. 
section 
5A. 
RecODSti-
tution 
of the 
Board. 
I 
S. in section 5 of the principal Act,-
.(a) in sub-section ,(1),-
(i) after clause .(b), the following clauses shall be 
inserted, namely;-
"(ba) two persona to represent respectively the MiDis- .5 
tries of the Central Gov'e.mllleDt dee1ing with home aJlairs 
and education, to be appoiDted by the Central Go~8I'IlIIIeJ1t; 
('bb) one penon to repreeent the j.ndiMl Board for Wlld 
Life, to be appointed by the Central Government; 
(be) three persons who, in the opinion of the .Central 10 
Govenunent. are or have been actively eDPIed in animal 
welfare work and are wei-known humanitarians, to be 
nominated by the Central Gov8l'DlD8Dti"; 
(ii) for clause (e), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:- 15 
"(e) one person to represent each of such two municipal 
corporations as in the opinion of the Central Government 
oapt to be represented on the Board, to be elected by each 
of the said corporations in the prescribed lJl8DJ1er ;"j 
(b) in sub-section (2), for the word, brackets and letter "clause 2Q 
(b) ", the words, brackets and letters "clause (b) or clause (ba) or 
dause (bb)" shall be substituted; 
(c) for sub-section (3), the followini sub-section shall be 
substituted, namely:-
"(3) The Central Government shall nominate one of the 2S 
members of the Board to be its Chairman and another member 
of the Board to be its Vice-Chairman.". 
6. After section 5 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
inBerted, namely: - i 
. "M.. (1) In order that the Chairman and other members of. 30 
the Board hold office till the same date and that their terms of 
office come to an end on the same date, the· Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, reconstitute, as soon as 
may be after the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (Amendment) 
Act, 1981 comes into force, the Board. 
(2) The Board as reconstituted under sub-section (1) shall be 
reconstituted from time to time on the expiration of every third year 
from the date of its reconstitution under sub-section (1). 
35 
(3) There shall be included amongst the members of the Board 
reconstituted under suh-section (1), all persons who immediately 40 
before the date on which such reconstitution is to take effect, are 
members of the Board but such persons shall hold office only for the 
unexpired port· on of the term for which they would have held oftlce 
if such reconstitution had not been made and the vacancies arising 
as a result of their ceasing to b, m~mbers of the Board shall be 45 , 

8 
filled up as casual vacanciel for the remaining period of the term of 
the Board as so reconstituted: 
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall apply in relation 
to any person who ceases to be a member of the BOard by virtue 
5 of the amendment made in sub-section (1) of section 5 by sub-clause 
(ii) of clause (a) of section 5 of the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals 
(Amendment) Act, 1981.". 
10 
. ~o 
•.... 
30 
35 
7. For section 6 of the principal Act, the following section shall be Substitu-
substituted, namely: - tion cit 
new ... 
tion tor 
section 6. 
"6. (1) The term for which the Board may be reconstituted 
under section 5A shall be three years from the date of the reconStI-
tution and the Chairman and other members of the Board as so 
reconstituted shall hold office till the expiry of the term for which 
the Board has been so reconstituted. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) ,-
(a) the term of office at an ex offick> member shall continue 
so long as he holds the ofBce by virtue of which he is such a 
member; 
(b) the term of office of a member elected or· chosen under 
clause (c), clause (e), clause (f), clause (g), clause (h) or clause 
(i) of section 5 to represent any body of persons ~hall come to an 
end as soon as he ceases to be a member of the body which elected 
him or in respect of which he was chosen; 
(e) the term of ofRce of a member appointed, nominated, 
elected or chosen to fUl a casual vacancy shall continue for the 
remainder of the term df office of the member in whose place he 
is appointed, nominated, elected or chosen; 
(d) the Central Government may, at any time, remove for 
reasons to be recorded in writing a member from ofRce after 
giving him a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against 
the proposed removal and any vacancy caused by such removal 
shall be treated as casual vacancy for the purpose of clause (c). 
(3) The members of the Board shalI receive such allowances, 
if any, as the Board may, sUbject to the previous approval of the 
Central Government, provide by regulations made in ·this behalf, 
(4) No act done or procieding taken by the Board shall be 
questioned on the ground merely of the existence of any vacancy in, 
or defect in the constitution of, the Board and in particular, and 
without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing, during the 
period intervening between the expiry of the term for which the 
Board has been reconstituted under section 5A and its further 
reconstitution under that section, the ex otJicio members of the 
Board shall discharge all the powers and fUnctions of the Board.". 
Termot 
office and 
condi-
tions of 
service ot 
members 
of the 
Board. 
8. In section. 7 of the principal Act, in, sub-sectton (1). the· words 
45 "one of its officers to be" shall be omitted. 
Amend-
mentof 
lection 
'(. 

·t ; .... 
""II, " 
'M)... '.,. 
'.~< 
Amend-
mentof 
section 
9. 
4 
,t. In ,section 9 of the principal Act,-
(a) in clause (d), for the wordg"ameliorating thecon&tion of 
,beasts ofburden u , the words "amelioration -of animals" shall be 
substituted; 
(0) in elause (g), for the words "the formation ofpilljrapo,les, 5 
1IDIetuat'tw Imd thetlke", the words '":t\e forJDatioll or .eltatiU'1uMIlt 
of pinjrapoles, rescue homes, animal shelters, SMlctuaries anct the 
lJke" s1W1 be substituted. 
10. In section 11 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1) ,-
.(i) .in clause ,(.c), for the ,words "any domestic prcapttve 
_animal", at bot.h the places where they occur, the w0D4s "any 
,al,l,bnal" ,shall be substituted; 
(ii) in clause (h), for ,the words "any captive animal", the 
10 
~ '~ -animAl" shall be substituted; 15 
(iii) for clause (l), the fd!lowing clause shall be substituted, 
llamely:-
"(l) Jllutilates any animal or kills any animal '(fnc}Ud-
ing stray dogs) by using .the method of strychnine- fnjec- 110 
flons fn the heart or in any other unnecessarily cruel manner; 
~. I , 
(i1') for clause (m), the following clause shall be substi-
tuted, namely:-. 
"(mt solely with a view to pl'O\'Iid1ng ,.tet"tment-
(i) confines or causes to be confined any animal ~5 
(-i&a1udingtying of 8!l animates a 'batt tin a tiger or 
other sanctuary) so as totmda! dt an object of prey for 
any other animal; or I 
(ii) incites any animal to fight or baJ.t.any other 
animal; or"; 30 
.(1') in ~ (~), ,the worc1s "for tlae JPUrpose& at his ·bust. 
_~~," shall be omitted; 
-{m) for the portion beginning with the words "in the case 
of a flrst offence" and ending with the words ·'or -w::lth both.", 
ocetJtII'ing at the end, the follow4ng shall be SUbstituted, namely:- 35 
"in the case of a first offence, with fine which shall not 
be less than ten rupees but wh~ch may extend to fifty 
rupees, and in t11e case of B second or subsequent ot!.n~ 
committed within three years 01 the previous o1i'ence, with 
fine which shall not be less than twenty-five rupees but 40 
which may ext:ef!.d to one hundred rupees or with imprbon. 
ment for a term which may extend to three months, or wtth 
both.";, ; 1· 
,~ , 

.5 
itb) lnS'Ub-section :(9), in clause .(b), 'for 'the words ''by other 
lDIethods 'l\Yttba mtnimmn ·df 'suffering", .the 'WfJPts Ifby such other 
methods as may be prescribed" shall be substituted. 
11. In section 12 of the principal Act, for the words ttdoom devil, the 
5 words and brackets "doom. dev or any other operation (illc1uding injac-
,..,of -any :substance) :to improve laotatlon 'which is injurious to the 
lhaaltb ,tJf "tbeanimli}" 'shall be stiblltttuted. 
12. In section 13 of the principal Act, in stib-;seetiOh (3), ~he words 
"in such manner as may be .prescribed~ ,shaH -be ,in8erie4·at tke end. 
JO 11.:kIter '18ctton 15 of the principal Act,the :followtng Mbbio, shall 
be inserted, namely:-
"15A. (1) The Committee may constitute as many su~oinmittees 
as it thinks !fit for exercising any power or dischlll'ging any duty of 
the 'Committee for i:nquiring into or rreportingand a~g on 
J 5 'any matter wbich the Committee may refer. 
(2) A sub-committee shall consist exclusively of the members of 
'fhe Committee:". 
Amend-
mentof 
section 
1~ 
Amend-
mentof 
8I!Ctlon 
13. 
~ 
of....., 
.eotMIl 
1M. 
tl. Tn section 1'7 of the principal Act, after sub~ion (1), the 'fOllow- Amelld-
ing 'sUb-section shall be tnserted, namely: - ment of 
20 
section 
"(1Ao)' In .particular, &Ad. without pre;witce to.t}ae .Ml'8lity 1'1. 
of the f.oreg<ling power, St:1ch rules may J'l'f;'Mde f6r ~ .feJI1)wing 
.utattel$, namely:-
(0) t'he registratten bf persbns ()t' fnstitu&ns ~ on 
experiments on anl'Mals;' 
(b) the reports and other infOl'Rlation which shall..Be IGr-
warded to the Committee by persons and institutions ~ CN'I 
elq)eI'iments on animals.". ' 
fl. In section S2 of the principal Act, in sub-section ~), for "the words 
~ ~, the words and figures ICdoom dev or any ot'bet opf!1"IltiOl'l 0'1. 
30 the nature referred to in s.ection 12" shall be S'Ubstituted. 
18. In section 38 of the principal Act,-
(a) In sub-section (2),-
(i) in clause (a), the words "terms and" shall be om!tted; 
(ii) after clause (a), the following clause shall be inserted, 
35 namely:-
" (aa) the manner in which the persons to represent 
municipal corporations are to be elected under clause (e) 
of S'Ilb-section (1) or" section 5;1'; 
(iii) after clause (e), the following clauses shall be inserted, 
namely:- ! 
/I (ea) the other methods of destruction of stray dogs 
referred to in clause (b) of sub-section (3) of section 11; 
AznellI.. 
meritfl't .1It!'C!ftM 
st. 
-.--
mentof 
section 
38. 

lnaertion 
of new" 
seetiOn 
38A. ' 
-RUles and , 
regu1atlclM 
to be laid 
before 
Parlia-
ment. 
Change of 
name of 
Animal 
Welfare 
Board 
not tq 
aftectany 
rightlor 
oblJa· 
tiODll, etc. 
6 
(eb) the methods by which any animal which cannot 
be removed without cruelty may be destroyed under sub-
section (3) of section 13;"; 
(iv) after clause (;). the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:-
"(ja) the fees which may be charged. by the Committee 
constituted under section 15 for the registration of persons or 
institutions carrying on experiments on animals or for any 
other purpose;"; 
(b) sub-eection (4) shall be omitted. 
17. After section 38 of the principal Act, the following section shan 
be inserted, namely:-
"38A. Every rule made by the Central Government or by the 
Committee constitu~ed under section 15 and every regulation made 
5 
10 
by the Board shall be bid, as soon as may be after it is made, before 15 
each Howre of Parliament. while it is in session, 'for a total period 
of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or 
more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session im-
" mediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation, 20 
as the case may be, or both Houses agree that the rule or regulation, 
as the case may be, should not be made, the rule or regulation shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no eft'ect, 
as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the val;dity of anything 25 
previously done under that rule or regulation. J'. 
'18. The change of name of the Animal WelfHe Board by section 4 shall 
. riot affect any rights and obligations of that Board or render defective 
any legal proceedings by or against it and any legal proceedings which 
might have been continued or commenced by or aga;nst that Board by 30 
. ita former name may be continued or comm!!nced by or against it by' its 
new name. 

STATEMENT OF OB.iECTS AND REAsonS 
The Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960 was enacted !in 1960 
to prevent the infliction of unnecessary pain or suffering on anjmals and 
for that purpose to amend and codify all laws relating to the Prevention 
of Cruelty to Animals. Keeping in view the experienoce iained in the 
working of the Act for the last twenty years, it is considered. necessary 
to amend the Act so . as to better achieve the purposes thereof. 
2. The more important amendments which are pro~ to be made 
are the following:-
(a) The name of the board is proposed. to be changed 88 the 
Animal Welfare Board. of India to reflect the national character of 
the Board (vide clause 4). 
(b) The compositi~n of the Board is being altered for giving re-
presentation to well known humanitarians engaged in animal welfare 
work and to the Ministries of Home Affairs and Education and the 
Indian Board for Wild Life. At the same time the number of mem-
bers representing municipal corporations is being reduced from 
five to two. As a result of these changes the Board. will have 28 
members instead of 25 members as at present. In order to ensure 
that the same team continues for a period of three years, pro-
vision is being made for the reconstitution of the Board on. the ex-
piration of every third year (vide clauses 5, 6 and 7). 
(c) The function of the Board under clause (d) of section 9 
which is confined at present to ameliorating the condition of beasts 
of burden is being widened so as to cover amelioration of all anima 
and the function under clause . (g) of the section relating to the grant 
of financial assistance for the formation. of pinjrapole., sanctuariel 
nnd the like is being amplified to cover expressly rescue home. for 
animals and animal shelters (vide clause 9). 
(d) Section 11 relating to punishment for treating animal, 
cruelly is proposed to be modified to cover certain additional cases 
of cruelty and also to provide for a minimum punishment by way 
of fine for treating animals cruelly (vide clause 10). 
(e) Section 12 of the Act provides for penalty for pract.isina 
phook4 or doom ctev upon any cow or other milch animal. Th!iI aec~ 
tion is being amended to make other operations to improve lactation 
(including injection of any substance) which are injurious to the 
health of such animals punishable (vide clause 11). 

8 
(I) With a view to enabling the Committee for control and sU-
pervision of experiments on animals to function more effectively 
a new section :is proposed to be included foc enabling the Committee 
to constitute sub-committees for exercising any of its powers or 
dischargijng aD~ of the duties or for enq¢ring into or mpo1"tini and 
advising on any matters referred. to them by the Committee (vide 
clause 13). 
(I'). seanoR 3& relating to, the power to make rules is ~in,. 
~iMer- alia· to provide fOr the fees which may be chari1K\ br 
the· ¢ommi4ltae for control and supervision of experiments on ani-
DUWa Jk tl\e registration of institutions for which such expedmeota 
are carAed; on (tnde clause 16). 
. 3i 'Jhe.·Bmseeks to achieve the above objects, 
RAe BIRENDltA SINGH • 
.... ~; ..... 
The 4th N01Jember, 1981. 
P.asIDBNTt'SRECOMMENDATION UNDERARTICLE 117 OF 
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
U;::op;:: of 14tter: No. F. 14-6180~LD.I, dated the 20th November, 1981 !tom 
RaQ..l3irendra. Singh, . MinisterJ of Agriculture and· Rural Reconstruction 
ancL.lrri~ aJ;ld. Mini$ter of Civil Supplies to the secretary, IAk 
Sabha.] 
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the Bill 
further to amend the Prevention of Cruelty to Animali Aot, 1980' (59 of 
1968) recommends. under article 117(3') of the Constitution of India. the 
consideration of' the Bill by Lok Sabha. 

FINANCIAL MtMORAN1>uM 
, Clause 5 of the Bill seeks·to amend &eCUon 5·01 the PD4WeJltaou. 01 ~ 
tit Animals Act, 1966, increasiDg the ~'11 ,_hip of ".:a..ci from » .i 28i No salary or aaiowaac. exeapt.iag ~ A.Be .•.• 0It 1114 B.u, 
tilowa~ is paid by ~ B.n to- u-. .. ~ .... bMfeo 
Clause 9 of the Bill ameHe seatiIn 96g) at __ Alit, w..... tht 
Board will be incurring expenditure by way of grant of financial assls-
taftce. fOr tiw establ:itbment Qf ~ ho-. and .ilDAl ....... At 
presmi, the quantum of actual MllliU ... ) exp&dttwe ~ to bee .. 
dtlt!fed CIIl account Gf t.ftese- provWeas c.-ot be antici..... Howe_. 
the additiOllatl expenditun ctf ~. or lIOI1-~ Mtue will lie 
l'Iiet withiR the -.iBtiag Grat ... ·,. ~ to the· Aairtl WeUan JioatII 
CIft·aAIlual basis by' tJae.'0eUra1·~t. ..... ~0Iru.. 
1'8eUI'rir1g ax.penditw7e is infthed. 
r ' 
9 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 14 of the Bill seeks to insert a new sub-section (IA) in aecUoD 17 
of the principal Act, to empower the Committee for control and IUper-
vision of experiments on animals to make rules with respect to the re-
gistration of persons or institutions carrying on experiments on animals, 
and the reports and other information which shall be forwarded to the 
Committee by such persons and institutions. 
2. Clause 16 of the Bill seeks to amend section 38 of the principal Act 
for empowering the Central Government to make rules in respect of 
matters specified in that clause. They relate to the manner in which 
the persons to represent municipal corporations are to be elected under 
clause (e) of sub-section (1) of section 5; the other methods of destruc-
tion of stray dogs referred to in clause (d) of sub-section (3) of section 
11; the methods by which any animal which cannot 'be removed. with-
out cruelty may be destroyed under sub-section (3) of section 13 and 
the fee which may be charged by the Committee constituted under IfJC-
don 15 for the registration of persons or institutions carrying on ex-
perimenta on animals or for any other purpose. 
3. The matters with respect to which rule! may be made are matters 
of procedure or detail. The delegation of legislative power iI, thenlon, 
of a normal eharacter. 

ANNEXURE 
ExTRACTS FROM THE PREVENnoN OF CRUELTY '1'0 ANIMALS Ar:s:, 1980 
(59 01' 1960) 
• • • • • 
CHAPI'ER I 
Paa..lMI.NARY 
• • • • • 
Z. In thil Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
• • • • • 
(b) "Board" means the Animal Welfare Board established under 
aection 4; 
• • • • • 
CHAPTER II 
ANIMAL WELFARE BOARD 
,. (1) For the promotion of animal welfare generally and for the 
purpose of protecting animals from being subjected to unnecessary pain 
or suffering, in particular, there shall be established by the Central 
Government, as soon as may be after the commencement of this Act, a 
Board to be called the Animal Welfare Board. 
• • • • • 
5. (1) The Board shall consist of the following persons, name1y:-
• • • • • 
(e) one person to represent each of the municipal corporations 
of Bombay, Calcutta, Delhi and Madras, and one person to represent 
any other mUnicipal corporation as, in the opinion of the Central 
Government, ought to be represented on the Board, to be elected by 
each of the said corporations in the prescribed manner: 
• • • • • 
(2) Any of the persons referred to in clause (a) or clause (b) of sub· 
section (1) may depute any other person to attend any of the meetings 
of the Board. 
(3) One of the members of the Board shall be nominated by the 
Central Government to be its Chairman. 
6. (1) Save as otherwise provilied in this section, the term of oftlce of 
a member o'f the Board shall be three years. 
(2) Subject to the provi'sione contained in sub-section (4), the term of 
otBce of the member elected to represent any municipal corporation 
(other than the corporations of Bombay, Calcutta, Delhi and Madras) 
lball be one year from the date on which such member assumes offtce. 
II 
DeflDt.. 
tlon8. 
Eatabllsh. 
nien~ot ., 
Animal 
Wellare 
Board. 
Constitu. 
tion 
of the 
Board. 
Term of 
oftlee and 
conditions 
otservlee 
ofmem· 
ben of 
the Board. 

Secre-
taQ'and 
other 
em.pJo-
yeeloi 
theBoucl. 
pullin. • 01_ 
Boaft\. 
Iii 
(3) The tenn of of!ce of an ez otfi.cio member shall continue so lon, 
as he holds the office by virtue of which he is such a member. 
(4) The term of oiBce of a member elected or chosen under clause 
(c), clause (e), clause (f), clause (g) or clause (i) of section 5 to 
represent any body df persons ltbaU-came jo an end as soon as he ceases 
to be a member of the body which elected him or in respect of which 
he was chosen. 1 
(5) The ~rm of oftioe of a mem.er nominated, elected or chosen to 
fUl a casual vacancy shall continue for the remainder of the tenn of 
oftlce of the member in whose -plaee be 'is nominated, elected Ot' chosen. 
(6) The members of th~ B0'8t'6. shaH. 'reCeive such allowances, if any, 
-as the Board may, sub~t to the previous approval of the Central 
Government, provide by regulations made by it in this behalf. -
(7) No aet done or pJOceeding tallen by the Beard shall be questioned 
on the ground merely of the existence of any vacancy in, or defect in 
tid! i:t;utttftat1on -dr, 'the -Board. 
7. (1) Tlte Central Government shall appoint,one of its officers to be 
the Secretary of the Board. 
• • • • • 
• • • • • 
(d) to take all such .s~ as the Board may think fit for amelio-
rating the condition of bea.s1I of bUPdeI1 by encouraging, or providing 
for, the construction of sheds, water-troughs and the like and by 
providing for veterinary assistance to animals; 
• • • • • 
(g) to encourage, by the grant of financial assistance or other-
Wise, the formation of pin;ra.poZes, sanctuaries and the like where 
abimals and birds may 1\nd a ,shelter when they have become old 
and useless orW'hen they need protection; 
• .. • • 
<miAIPTER tHI 
CRtJia.TY TO ANIMALs GENERALLY' 
• • • • • 
(c) Wilfully and unreasonably administers any injurious drug or 
irtturioua ~ee tb 'my doIftesttc or captive animal or wfltully 
and unreasonably causes or ~~s to cause any such drug or 
suDstance .to be.taken .~ anyd.,.tic or .captive animal; or 
• • • • 
(h) being ihe owner:of any ~pUveammal, tails to provide such 
.animal with ·S'Uftlcient .food, -d.ri.ukor shelter; or 
• -. • • 
(t) ,....u8lf1y ·muttlates -any atUma1-or 1dlls any anima11D at1 
'QDnecelsarilv ~l manner' or .-" s: ' , 

1,3 
(~ -~ or -c~ ~_ be ,~_d-,~ ,8Jl.imal in such a 
'.. "r.asm make it .an 'o\:tject of ~ey I.~r ,~y other _ animal 
aoitiy \\'!itb.a vi~ to ,p~viQing e~t fQr o,tQer perSODS; or 
(71) 'for the purposes of 'hisbustness, organises, keeps, uses or 
ads in "'the manllgemerrt of, any plaee 'for anilll8'l 'fighting or for the 
purpose o'f btrtting '8nyanimal 'tit -permits or offers any place to be 
80 used or receives money for 'the admiseton of any -other person to 
any plate kept or used for any -such purpo.eSj or 
• • • • • 
be shall be punishable, in the case of a first offence, with fine which may 
... do Jif1i¥ ,r~, /Uld,in. the o~ ctf .a\.-.con~.pr aUPeequent offence 
.... t ... ~ .tbree y.e&l"S ·at the ~ ~., Writh fine which 
may extend to one hundred .l'Upee6,or ;wit,h ~illlP1Wn.ment for a, term 
which may extend to three months, or with both. 
• '" • • • 
(3) Nothing in this section shall apply to-
• • • • • 
.(b) the destruction of stray dogs in lethal c1).ambers or by other 
methods with a minimum of suffering; or 
• • • • • 
41. "1f -any -persen performs upon any i:OW 'or other milch animal the 
~km. caBedphooka or doom dev or permits such operation being 
performed upon any sueh animal in his po8leSSion 01' under his control, 
lie shell-be'p1:t!lish'able with fine which may extend"to one thousand rupees, 
or wfthimp!*l98llment far a term which may extend ,to two years, or with 
1IIiOl, end the animal on which the operation was performed shall be 
forfeited to the Government. 
13. (1) • • • • 
(3) Any police officer above the rank of a constable or any person 
authorised by the State Government in _ this behalf who finds any animal 
SO diseased or so severely injured or in such a physical condition that 
in his opinion it cannot be removed without cruelty, may, if the owner 
is absent or refuses his consent to the destruction of the animal, forth-
with summon the veterinary officer in charge of the area in which the 
animal is found, and if the veterinary officer certifies that the animal is 
mortally injured or so severely injured or in such a physical condition 
that it would be cruel to keep it alive, the police oftlcer or the person 
authorised, as the caSe may be, may, after obtaining orders from a 
magistrate, destroy the animal injured or cause it to be destroyed . 
• • 
• • 
• • 
• 
.cHAPTER VI 
MISCELLANEOUS' 
• • 
• • 
• • 
• • 
Penalty 
forprac-
tisin, 
phooka. or 
doom 
dev. 
Destruc-
tion of 
suffering 
animais. 
Powers 
ofllNrch 
and 
~ 

"- ,. 
.I"',I~, ~ .. ; 
I " 
(2) If a police oftlcer Dot below the rank of sub-iDapector, or any 
persclD authorised by the State Government in this behaU, has reuon to 
believe that phook4 or doom dBv has just been, or is being, performed 
on any animal within the limits of his jurisdiction, he may enter any 
plHCe in which he has reason to believe such animal to be, and may seize 
the animal and produce it for examination by the veterinary oftlcer in 
charge of the area in which the animal is seized . 
• • • • • 
38. (1) • • • • • 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the f0re-
going power, the. Central Government may make rules providi.nl for all 
or any of the following mat\ers, namely:-
(4) the terms and conditions of service of members of the Board, 
the allowances payable to them and the manner in which they may 
exercise their powers and discharie their functions; 
• • • • • 
(4) Every rule made by the Central Government under thia lection 
shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made, befo~ each House of 
Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two successive seaiOM, and if, 
before the expiry of the session in which jt is 80 laid or the seuiOD 
immedi&tely following, both Houses agree in making any modHlcation in 
the rule, or both HO'USes agree that the rule should not be made, the 
rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be Qf no 
effect, as the case may be; so however that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything' 
previously done under that rule . 
• • • • 

LoKSABHA 
, 
BILL 
-. 
' ... 
. 1 
to amend the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960 . 
• 
(llao Birendra Sifl{11i, 
Min.i8ter of Agriculture 4nd lural 
~ 1lecbnnruction. cmd I~ end 
Jfmuter of awn Suppl,r). 