Short title and 
commencement.
Aඌ Iඇඍඋඈൽඎർൾൽ ංඇ Lඈ඄ Sൺൻඁൺ
Bill No. 140 of 2022.
THE INDIAN PENAL CODE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022
By
Sඁඋං V .K. Sඋൾൾ඄ൺඇൽൺඇ, M.P.
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
Bൾ it enacted  by Parliament in the Seventy-third year of the Republic of India as 
follows:–
1. (1) This Act may be called the Indian Penal Code (Amendment) Act, 2022.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.

Omission of 
section 124A.
2. Section 124A of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (hereafter referred to as the Code) shall 
be omitted.
3. In section 153B of the Code, in sub-section (1), after clause (c), the following clause 
shall be inserted, namely,–
“ (d) brings or attempts to bring into hatred or contempt or excites or attempts to excite 
disaffection towards the State, and such acts if cause or is likely to cause serious law and 
order problems.”. 
Amendment of 
section 153B.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Section 124A is a part of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (IPC) a colonial law. The 
police at the behest of their masters  have been using the broad definition of sedition to book 
anyone who criticized the govemment in strong and strident language. There are about 
13,000 persons languishing in jails booked under section of 124A of the IPC. Last year the 
Chief Justice of India himself voiced “what could be an unprecedentcd judicial criticism of 
the way the sedition law was being used by the government to crush liberties, sedition or 
section 124A of the Indian Penal Code was prone to misuse by the government”. A panel 
of experts constitutcd by the government has recommended amendments to the sedition 
law. The panel was largely of the view that if sedition could be dropped and included as a 
subset in a wider range of crimes committed against the State; a person cannot be made to 
languish in jail for writing a newspaper article. It has to be seen if that article led to serious 
law and order problems, mere presumption is not sufficient. The Hon’ble Supreme Court 
very recently has suspended pending criminal trials and court proceedings under section 
124A of IPC. This order of the Hon’ble Supreme Court would act as a powerful message 
against the rampant misuse of the sedition law by governments to silence dissent and violate 
personal liberty. 
The Bill, therefore, seeks to omit section 124A of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 with a 
view to prevent the misuse of it.
Hence this Bill.       
Nൾඐ Dൾඅඁං;                            V .K. SREEKANDAN
July 5, 2022

ANNEXURE
Eඑඍඋൺർඍඌ ൿඋඈආ ඍඁൾ Iඇൽංൺඇ Pൾඇൺඅ Cඈൽൾ, 1860
(45 Oൿ 1860)
*  *  *  *  *                   *
124A. Whoever by words, either spoken or written, or by signs, or by visible 
representation, or otherwise, brings or attempts to bring into hatred or contempt, or excites 
or attempts to excite disaffection towards, the Government established by law in India, shall 
be punished with imprisonment for life to which fine may be added, or with imprisonment 
which may extend to three years, to which fine may be added, or with fine. 
Explanation 1.—The expression “disaffection” includes disloyalty and all feelings of 
enmity. 
Explanation 2.—Comments expressing disapprobation of the measures of the 
Government with a view to obtain their alteration by lawful means, without exciting or at-
tempting to excite hatred, contempt or disaffection, do not constitute an offence under this 
section. 
Explanation 3.—Comments expressing disapprobation of the administrative or 
other action of the Government without exciting or attempting to excite hatred, contempt or 
disaffection, do not constitute an offence under this section.
*  *  *  *  *                   *
153B. (1) Whoever, by words either spoken or written or by signs or by visible rep-
resentations or otherwise,— 
(a) makes or publishes any imputation that any class of persons cannot, by reason 
of their being members of any religious, racial, language or regional group or caste or 
community, bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law estab-
lished or uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India, or 
(b) asserts, counsels, advises, propagates or publishes that any class of persons 
shall, by reason of their being members of any religious, racial, language or regional 
group or caste or community, be denied, or deprived of their rights as citizens of India, 
or 
(c) makes or publishes and assertion, counsel, plea or appeal concerning the 
obligation of any class of persons, by reason of their being members of any religious, 
racial, language or regional group or caste or community, and such assertion, counsel, 
plea or appeal causes or is likely to cause disharmony or feelings of enmity or hatred or 
ill-will between such members and other persons, shall be punished with imprisonment 
which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both. 
(2) Whoever commits an offence specified in sub-section (1) in any place of worship or 
in any assembly engaged in the performance of religious worship or religious ceremonies, 
shall be punished with imprisonment which may extend to five years and shall also be liable 
to fine.
*  *  *  *  *                   *
Sedition.
Imputations, 
assertions preju-
dicial to national 
integration.

LOK  SABHA
_______ 
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
_______
(Shri V .K. Sreekandan,  M.P.)