Short title,
extent and
commencement.
THE SPECIAL FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO THE VICTIMS OF
TERROR ATTACKS BILL, 2016
By
SHRI  MAHEISH GIRRI,  M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for special financial assistance to the victims of terror attacks in the
country and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Special Financial Assistance to the Victims of Terror
Attacks, 2016.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(i) "dependent" includes spouse, children and aged parents, who are dependent
on the deceased victim of terror attack;
Bill  No. 140  of  2016
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5
10
Definitions.

(ii) "terror attack" means an attack by a terrorist group operating within or from
outside the country; and
(iii) "victim of terror attack" means a person who dies or gets injured in a terror
attack.
3. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
the Central Government shall grant special financial assistance to the victims of terror
attack in the following manner:—
(i) in case of loss of life, an ex gratia grant to the dependent of victim which
shall not be less than rupees five lakh;
(ii) in case of serious injury leading to incapacitation, an ex gratia payment to
the victim which shall not be less than rupees three lakh;
(iii) in case of minor injury, an ex gratia grant to the victim which shall not be
less than rupees one lakh;
(iv) in case of damage of dwelling unit of victim due to terror attack, cost of
repair of dwelling unit; and
(v) preference in Central Government jobs to the victim or his dependent, as the
case may be.
4. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
5. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force.
6. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days, which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before
the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses
agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under
that rule.
Special
Financial
Assistance to
the victims of
terror attack.
Overriding
effect of the
Act.
Act not in
derogation of
any other law
for the time
being in force.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
2

3
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Our country has witnessed many terror attacks in the recent past. It has been observed
that terrorist attack leads to huge loss of lives as well as properties. Life of victims who meet
death in these terror attacks is priceless. It is the duty of the Government to ensure that
families of the victims lead a dignified life after loss of lives of their beloved ones.
The Present Bill seeks to provide for special financial assistance to the families of
deceased victim and to the victims who get injured. The Bill also seeks to provide for repair
cost of premises damaged in terror attacks.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; MAHEISH GIRRI
April 11, 2016.

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for special financial assistance to the victims of terrorist
attacks and their dependant family member. It also provides for payment of repairing cost of
dwelling units damaged in terror attack.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of
India. It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees one thousand
crore will be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.

5
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLA TION
Clause 6 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK SABHA
A
BILL
to provide for special financial assistance to the victims of terror attacks in the
country and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Maheish Girri, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—249LS(S3)—02-07-2016.
————