AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 140 of 2024
THE CENTRAL INSTITUTE FOR CANCER DETECTION AND
PREVENTION BILL, 2024
By
DR. BYREDDY SHABARI, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of Central Institute for Cancer
Detection and Prevention ( CICDP) with headquarters at Nandyal
in the State of Andhra Pradesh and with centres at all districts
across India and to create and spread awareness for early
detection of cancer and to make cancer screening,
detection and prevention at affordable costs
and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic
of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Central Institute for Cancer
Detection and Prevention Act, 2024.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
5

(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may,
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government” means, in the case of a State, the
Government of that State, and in all other cases, the
Central Government;
(b) “Institute” means the Central Institute for Cancer Detection
and Prevention established under section 3; and
(c)  “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may,
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, there shall be
established, for carrying out the purposes of this Act, an Institute to
be called the Central Institute for Cancer Detection and Prevention.
(2) The headquarters of the Institute shall be at Nandyal in the
State of Andhra Pradesh.
(3) The Institute shall have centers across all the districts of the
country.
(4) The Institute shall be a body corporate with perpetual
succession and a common seal, with the power to acquire, hold, and
dispose of property, both movable and immovable, and to contract,
and shall by the said name sue and be sued.
4. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the official
Gazette, establish a thirty-five-member Central Governing Council
for the management of the Institute.
(2) The Central Governing Council shall consist of,–
(a) the Prime Minister of India — ex-Officio Chairperson;
(b) the Chief Minister of the State of Andhra Pradesh — ex-Officio
Vice Chairperson;
(c)  the Chief Ministers of four States and Union territories
in-rotation — ex-Officio as Vice Chairperson to be nominated by the
Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed;
(d) the Union Minister of Health and Family Welfare — ex-Officio
member;
(e) the Health Minister of the State of Andhra Pradesh —
ex-Officio member;
(f)  the Director General of Health Services—ex-Officio
member;
(g) the Secretary of the Union Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare —ex-Officio member;
(h) the Secretary of the Ministry of Health, State of
Andhra Pradesh — ex-Officio member;
(i) five Members of Parliament of the House of the People to be
nominated by the Speaker of House of the People;
5
10
2
Definitions.
Establishment
of Central
Institute for
Cancer
Detection and
Prevention.
20
15
Establishment
of Central
Governing
Council.
25
30
35
40

(j) five Members of the Legislative Assembly of the State of
Andhra Pradesh to be nominated by the Speaker of State Legislature
of Andhra Pradesh;
(k) three Health Ministers from the States and Union territories in
rotation to be nominated by the Central Government in such manner
as may be prescribed;
(l) five representatives from the institutions of local
Self-government institutions to be nominated by the Central
Government in such manner as may be prescribed;
(m) three members to be nominated by the National Medical
Commission constituted under National Medical Commission Act,
2019;
(n) three members having experience in finance,
administration or accounts to be nominated by the Central
Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
5. (1) The term of office of a member of the Central Governing
Council under clause (n) of sub-section (2) of section 4 shall be five years
from the date of nomination or election, unless otherwise provided in this
Act.
(2) The term of office of an ex-officio member shall continue as long
as they hold the office by virtue of which they are members.
(3) The term of office of a member nominated or elected to fill a casual
vacancy shall continue for the remainder of the term of the member in
whose place they are nominated or elected.
(4) An outgoing member shall, unless the Central Government otherwise
directs, continue in office until another person is nominated or elected in
their place.
(5) An outgoing member shall be eligible for re-nomination or
re-election.
(6) A member may resign by writing under their hand addressed to the
Central Government, but they shall continue in office until their resignation
is accepted by the Government.
(7) The manner of filling vacancies among members shall be such as
may be prescribed.
6. (1) The appropriate Government may, in consultation with the
Central Governing Council, establish Regional Councils in States
and Union Territories.
(2) The Central Governing Council may entrust the work of regional
councils to its own governing body, which shall undertake all its activities
until such Regional Councils are established.
7. (1) There shall be a President of the Institute to be nominated
by the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed
who shall be a distinguished scholar with expertise in cancer studies.
(2) The President shall exercise such powers and discharge such
functions as laid down under this Act or as may be prescribed.
Terms of
Members of
Central
Governing
Council.
3
Formation of
Regional
Governing
Councils.
President of
the Institute.
15
20
25
30
35
40
5
10

(3) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and
conditions of the service of the President shall be such as may be
prescribed.
8. (1) There shall be a Governing Body for the Institute,
constituted by the Central Government, in such manner as may be
prescribed.
(2) The Governing Body shall be the executive committee of the Institute
and shall exercise such powers and discharge such functions as may be
prescribed.
(3) The President of the Institute shall be the Chairman of the
Governing Body.
(4)  The procedure for exercising powers and discharging functions by
the Governing Body shall be such as may be prescribed.
(5)  Subject to control and restrictions prescribed by rules, the Institute
may constitute standing committees and ad hoc committees for exercising
any power or discharging any functions of the Institute or for inquiring into or
advising upon any matter referred to them.
9. (1) There shall be a Director of the Institute, who shall also
be the Chief Executive Officer to be appointed by the Central
Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The Central Government shall appoint such number of staff as
required for the efficient functioning of the Institute in such manner
as may be prescribed.
(3) The Director shall be the administrative head of the Institute.
10. The functions of the Institute shall be to,—
(i) emerge as the dedicated institute for the study of cancer in India and
being one of  the leading cancer research centers globally;
(ii) establish and operate dedicated cancer detection and prevention
centers in all districts of the country;
(iii) provide affordable biopsy and other detection procedures and cancer
treatment at affordable cost;
(iv) provide cancer treatment available free of cost to eligible beneficiaries
determined by the appropriate Government; and
(v) provide for facilities for research in the field of cancer detection and
prevention.
11. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made
by Parliament by law in this behalf, pay to the Institute such sums
of money as it may deem necessary for the exercise of its powers
and discharge of functions under this Act.
12. (1) The Institute shall maintain a fund to which shall be credited,—
(a) all moneys provided by the Central Government;
(b) all fees and other charges received by the Institute; and
4
Governing
Body of the
Institute.
Director and
Staff of the
Institute.
Functions of
the Institute.
Payment to
the Institute.
Funds of the
Institute.
5
15
25
30
40
20
10
35

(c) all moneys received by the Institute by way of grants, gifts,
donations, benefactions, bequests or transfers.
(2) All moneys credited to the Fund shall be deposited in such banks or
invested in such manner as the Institute may, with the approval of the
Central Government, decide.
(3) The fund shall be utilised towards meeting the expenses of the Institute
incurred in the exercise of its powers and functions under this Act.
13. The Institute shall, in such form and at such time every year as maybe prescribed, prepare a budget showing the estimated receipts and expenditurefor the next financial year and forward it to the Central Government.
14. (1) The Institute shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant
records and prepare an annual statement  of  accounts  including  the
balance-sheet in such form as may be prescribed in consultation with the
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
(2) The accounts shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-General
of India, and the expenditure incurred in connection with such audit shall be
borne by the Institute.
(3) The accounts, as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of
India, shall be forwarded annually to the Central Government, which shall
cause the same to be laid before both Houses of Parliament.
15. The Institute shall prepare an annual report of its activities and
submit it to the Central Government, which shall cause the same to be laid
before both Houses of Parliament.
16. The Institute shall carry out such directions as may be issued to itfrom time to time by the Central Government for the efficient administrationof this Act.
17. (1)  The Central Government, after consultation with the Institute,
shall by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the
purposes of this Act.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing
provision, such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely,–
(a) the manner of nomination of members;
(b) the conditions of service, the procedure to be followed by, and the
manner of filling vacancies among members;
(c) the powers and functions of the President of the Institute;
(d) the manner of election of the Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson
of the Governing Body;
(e) the salary and allowances and other conditions of service of the
Director and other officers and employees of the Institute;
(f) the maintenance of the Fund and the submission of the budget;
(g) the form and manner in which the accounts of the Institute shall
be maintained and the annual statement of accounts shall be prepared;
5
Budget of the
Institute.
Accounts of
the Institute.
Annual
Report.
Control by the
Central
Government.
Power to make
rules.
5
15
25
35
30
20
10
40

 (h) the manner and interval s at which the accounts of  the Institute
shall be audited; and
 (i) any other matter which has to be, or may be, prescribed.
18. (1) The Institute may, with the previous approval of the Central
Government, make regulations consistent with this Act and the rules to
carry out the purposes of this Act.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to anything contained in
sub-section (1) such regulations may provide for;—
(a) the summoning and holding of meetings of the Governing Body
and the quorum for such meetings;
(b) the conduct of business by the Governing Body and the standing
or ad hoc committees;
(c) the manner in which elections and nominations of members of the
Governing Body shall be made;
(d) the procedure to be followed by the Governing Body in exercising
its powers and discharging its functions;
(e) the procedure to be followed by the standing or ad hoc committees
in exercising their powers and discharging their functions;
(f) the allowances payable to the Chairperson and members of the
Governing Body and the Chairperson and members of the standing or
ad hoc committees;
(g) the management of the properties of the Institute;
(h) the maintenance of the Fund;
(i) the procedure and terms and conditions for the borrowing of moneys;
(j) the form and manner in which contracts shall be made on behalf
of the Institute; and
(k) any other matter which has to be, or may be, prescribed.
19. Every rule and every regulation made under this Act shall be laid,
as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while
it is in session, for a total period of thirty days, which may be comprised
in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive
sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule
or regulation or both Houses agree that the rule or regulation should not be
made, the rule or regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any
such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of
anything previously done under that rule or regulation.
Power to
make
Regulations.
6
5
25
10
20
35
30
15
Rules or
Regulations to
be laid before
Parliament.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
According to the World Health Organization, cancer ranks as the second
leading cause of death worldwide. Among men, lung, prostate, colorectal,
stomach, and liver cancer are the most prevalent types, while breast, colorectal,
lung, cervical, and thyroid cancer are the most common among women. The
global burden of cancer continues to increase, placing significant physical,
mental, emotional, and financial strain on individuals, families, and communities.
This burden also takes a toll on a nation’s most valuable human resources.
Unfortunately, a large number of patients lack access to early cancer detection.
Early detection has been proven to prevent the disease from progressing and
save lives. However, the rising costs associated with detection and treatment
has made it increasingly unaffordable for the average person.
     A recent study has shown that approximately sixty three percent of all
deaths in India are caused by non-communicable diseases. By 2030, these
diseases are estimated to result in a loss of USD 3.55 trillion in economic
output for India. Cancer is expected to be the leading cause of death among
these diseases. The projected number of cancer cases in India is set to increase
from 1.39 million in 2020 to 1.57 million by 2025, representing a thirteen percent
growth over five years. Cancer screening rates in India are notably lower
compared to many other countries worldwide. Indians are now at risk of
developing cancer at younger ages than individuals in Western countries.
Therefore, there is a pressing need to establish specialized cancer detection,
screening, and prevention institutes in all districts of India.
Hence this Bill.
    NEW DELHI;          BYREDDY SHABARI
 July 23, 2024
7

8
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for establishment of the Central Institute for
Cancer Detection and Prevention by the Central Government in the state of
Andhra Pradesh. Clause 4 provides for constitution of Central Governing Council
by the Central Government for the management of the Institute. Clause 6
stipulates that the appropriate Government may, in consultation with the Central
Governing Council, establish Regional Councils in States and Union Territories.
Clause 7 provides for nomination of the President of the Institute by the
Central Government. Clause 8 provides for constitution of the Governing Body
for the Institute by the Central Government. Clause 9 provides for appointment
of the Director of the Institute by the Central Government. Clause 11 stipulates
that the Central Government shall, after appropriation made by Parliament by
law in this behalf, pay to the Institute such sums of money as may be necessary
for the exercise of its powers and discharge of its functions. The Bill, if enacted,
would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely to
involve a recurring expenditure of about rupees thousand crore per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five hundred crore is also
likely to be involved.

9
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 17 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules
for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of
detail only, the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK SABHA
—————
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of Central institute for Cancer
Detection and Prevention ( CICDP) with headquarters at Nandyal
in the State of Andhra Pradesh and with centres at all districts
across India and to create and spread awareness for early
detection of cancer and to make cancer screening,
detection and prevention at affordable costs
and for matters connected therewith.
—————
(Dr. Byreddy Shabari, M.P.)