1
Short title
and
commencement.
Bill No. 140 of  2015
THE  PRIV ATE DRIVERS (WELFARE) BILL, 2015
By
SHRI MAHEISH GIRRI, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the welfare of private drivers by constituting a Fund to be known as the
Private Drivers Welfare Fund and for matters connected therewith.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Private Drivers (Welfare) Act, 2015.
(2)  It shall come in to force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
Definitions.5
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
Entitlement
of minimum
wages to
private
drivers.
Regulation of
working
hours.
Constitution
of the Private
Drivers
Welfare Fund.
Functions of
the Board.
(b) "private driver" means a person who is skilled as a driver and possesses a
valid driving license issued by an authority of the appropriate Government and who
offers his service as a driver to any person for personal use or for commercial purpose
but does not include a person who is enrolled on the payroll of a company registered
under the Companies Act, 2013.
(c) "employer" means a person  who takes the services of a private driver either
for personal use or for his commercial vehicle.
(d) "Fund" means Private Drivers Welfare Fund constituted under section 3;
and
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
 3. (1) The Central Government shall constitute a Fund to be known as the Private
Drivers Welfare Fund.
(2) The Fund shall consist of contributions from the Central Government, the State
Governments and the employers.
(3) The Fund shall be administered by a Board consisting of,—
(a) a Chairperson to be appointed  by the Central Government;
(b) one member  representing each of the State Government and the Union
Territory Administrator, who shall be nominated by the respective State Government
or the Union Territory Administration, as the case may be;
(c) two members representing the private drivers; and
(d) one officer not below the rank of Joint Secretary in the Union Ministry of
Social Justice and Empowerment.
(4) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of the
service of Chairperson and members of the Board shall be such as may be prescribed.
4. (1) The Board shall determine the purposes for which the Fund shall be utilized.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provision of sub-section ( 1), the Fund
shall be utilized for the following purposes, namely:—
(a) payment of old-age pension at the rate of rupees five thousand per month to
private drivers who have attained the age of sixty years;
(b) healthcare facilities at subsidized rate to private drivers and their dependent
family members at the designated Government and private hospitals;
(c) free health insurance;
(d) free education facilities including supply of books, uniform, writing materials,
transport to and from school, for the children of private drivers;
(e) free insurance cover; and
(f) housing facilities at subsidised cost.
5. Every private driver shall be entitled to get assured minimum wage as such rate,
as may be determined from time to time, by appropriate Government.
6. (1) No private driver shall, except the time taken for meals and leisures, be required
to work for more than—
(i) eleven hours in a day;
(ii)  fifty five hours in a week; and
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
Central
Government
to provide
adequate
funds.
Act not to be
in derogation
of other law.
(iii) five consecutive hours in a day or eight consecutive hours during night.
(2) Every private driver shall be entitled to—
(i)  one hour of rest after every five hours of consecutive work;
(ii)  one holiday per week; and
(iii)  holidays  on such occasions, as may be specified by the Central Government.
7. Any employer who fails to contribute to the Fund in accordance with the provision
of section 3 or who contravenes the provisions of section 5 shall be punished with a fine
which may extend up to rupees one lakh or an amount equal to one year's assured minimum
wage, whichever is higher.
8. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the Board for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
9. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force.
10. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying the purpose of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act, shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modifications both the Houses agree that the rules should
not be made, the rules shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no
effect as the case may be; so, however that any such modification or annulment shall be
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under the rule.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
Penalty.

4
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Private drivers perform intensive work which involves element of risk. During the
course of their employment, private drivers do all sorts of jobs assigned by employers and
are overburdened with work. However, the salary paid is not proportionate to the actual work
done by them. They carry work stress, which is a major cause of accidents. Private drivers
come from poorest section of the society and do not enjoy any security of job. Majority of
private drivers are not able to afford the cost of education of their children due to their
meager income and lack of resources. Therefore, the State should come forward to ensure the
safety and well being of this unrecognized labour force.
The Bill seeks to provide for constitution of a Private Drivers Welfare Fund and a
Board to take some Welfare measures for private drivers and their family members so that
they can lead a decent life.
Hence, this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; MAHEISH GIRRI
March 15, 2015.

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the constitution of a Private Drivers Welfare Fund for
the private drivers. It further provides for constitution of a Board to administrator the Fund.
Clause 8 provides that the Central Government shall provide adequate funds to the Board for
carrying out the purposes of the Bill. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of India.
It is estimated that a sum of rupees one thousand crore will be involved as recurring
expenditure per annum from the consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about one hundred crore will also be involved.

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. Since the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
6

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the welfare of private drivers by constitute a Fund to be known as the
Private Drivers Welfare Fund and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Maheish Girri, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—73LS(S3)—30-04-2015.