Ord.fo! 
1810. 
As INTRODUCED IN LoR: SABHA ON' 
• 
t. j ~\lG \990 
Bill No, 14:0 of 1190 
THE PREVENTION OF ILLICIT TRAFFIC IN NARCOTIC DRUGS AND 
PSYCHOTROPIC SUBSTANCES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1990 
A 
BILL 
further to a.mend the Prevention of Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and 
Psychotropic Substances Act, 1988. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-first Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Prevention of Illicit Traflic in Short 
Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances (Amendment) Act, 1990. title 1%14 com. 
5 (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 30th day of mance-
me'rlt,' July, 1990. 
2. In the Prevention of Illicit Tramc in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotro-
pic SubStances Act, 1988 (hereinafter referred to as the prinCipal Act), in 
section 10, in sub-section (1), for the figures, letters and words "31st day of 
10 July, 1990", the figures, letters and words "31st day of July, 1993" shall 
be substituted. 
, ; 
Amend. 
ment of 
section 10 
of Act 
46 ot 1988. 
3. (1) The Prevention of Dlicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psycho- Repeal 
tropic Substances (Amendment) Ordinance, 1990, is hereby repealed.. ~. 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken 
15 under the principal Act, as amended by the said Ordinance, shall be 
deemed to have been don~ or t~~~ ~nder the prmcipal Act as amended by 
thfa Act. I t. : .J _t • 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Prevention of Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic 
Substances Act, 1988 provides for the preventive detention of persons in 
certain cases for the purpose of preventing them from engaging in the 
illicit traffic in narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances. 
2. Sub-section (1) of section 10 of the Act provides that any person 
in respect of whom an order of detention is made any time before the 
31st day of July, 1990, may be detained without obtaining the opinion of 
an Advisory Board for a lon'ger period than three months but not exceed-
ing six months from the date of his detention, However, a comparative 
analysis of the figures in regard to seizures o'f narcotic drugs and psycho-
tropic substances effected in the highly vulnerable areas during the last 
two years shows that the menace of illicit traffic in narcotic drugs and 
psychotropic substances has not abated in any way in the said areas. 
Since the maximum damage to the society is caused by the drug traffi-
ckers operating in the highly vulnerable areas, the longer period of deten-
tion from one year to two years under section 11 of the Act, of the traffi-
ckers, their associates and the links, is a necessary deterrent. It WR!I, there-
fore, considered necessary to continue the provisions of se::tion 10 in res-
pect of detention orders which may be passed even after 31-7-1990. 
3, Accordingly, the Prevention of Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and 
Psyohotropic Substances (Amendment) Ordinance, 1990' (Ord .• of 1990) 
was promulgated by the President on the 30th July, 1990 to continue the 
provisions of section 10 of the Act for a period of three years beyond 31st 
July, 1990. 
4. This Bill seeks to replace the aforesaid Ordinance, 
NEW DzLm; MADHU DANDAV~T!;, 
~e ~h Augun, 1990. 

ANNEXURE 
ExTRAcT FROM THE PREvENTION OF ILLICIT TRAFnC IN N ABCOTlC 
DRUGS AND PSYCHOTROPIC SUBSTANCES ACT, 1988 
(46 OF 1988) 
• • • • • 
10. (1) No~withstanding anything contained in this Act. any person 
(including a foreigner) in respect of whom an order of detention is made 
under this Act at any time before the 31st day 0'1 July, 1990, may be 
detained without obtaining, in accordance with ~he provisions of sub-
clause (a) of clause (4) of article 22 of the Constitution. the opinion of 
an Advisory Board for a period longer than three months bu~ not exceed-
ing six months from the date of his detention, where the order of deten-
tion has been made against such person with a view to preven~ng him 
from engaging in traffic in narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances, 
and the Central Government or any officer o'f the Central Government, 
nO"; below the rank of an Additional Secretary to that Government. 
specially empowered for the purposes of this section by that Government. 
is satisfied that such person engages or is likely to engage in illicit traftie 
in narcotic drugs and psychotropic subs"".ances into. out of, through or 
within any area highly vulnerable to such illicit traffic and makes a 
declaration to that effect within five weeks of the deten'tion of such 
person. 
Explanation 1.-1n this sub-section. "area highly vulnerable to such 
illicit traffic" means-
(i) 'the Indian customs waters; 
(ii) the customs airports; 
(iii) the metropolitan ci~ies of Bombay. Calcutta, Delhi, Madras 
and the city of Varanasi; 
(iv) the inland area one hundred kilometres in width from the 
coast of India falling within the territories of 'the States of Andhra 
Pradesh, Goa, Gujarat, Karnataka. Kerala, M~harashtra, Orlaaa. 
Tamil Nadu ed West Beftgal and 'he UntOft territories of Damd 
ed Diu and Pondicherry; 
(v) the inland area one hundred kilometres in wi<:r.h from-
(a) the India-Pakistan border in the States of Gujarat, 
Punjab and Rajasthan; 
'(b) the India-Nepal border in the States of Bihar, SikJdm, 
Ut7ir Pradesh and West Bengal; 
(c) the India-Burma border in the States of Arunachal 
fradesh. Manipur, Mizoram and Nagalandj 
l 
Case8in 
which 
and 
circum. 
stance. 
under 
which 
persona 
may be 
detained 
for 
periods 
lon,er 
than 
three 
mantha 
without 
obtainin, 
the 
opinion 
of 
Advisory 
Board. 

4 
(d) the India-Bangladesh border in the States of Assam, 
Meghalaya, Tripura and West Bengali 
(e) the India-Bhutan border in the Sta~ of Arunachal 
Pradesh, Assam, Sikkim and West Bengal, 
(vi) such other area or customs station, as the Central Govern-
ment may, having regard to the vulnerabili'ty of web area '01' eustoma 
station, as the case may be, to illicit traffic, by notification in tb. 
Official Gazette, specify in ~s behalf. 
E11>Ianation 2.-For the purposes of Explanation 1, "customs station" 
has the same meaning as in clause (13) of section 2 of the Custome Act, 
1962. G20tl~ . , . 
• .. •• • 
' . 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Prevention of Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and 
Psychotropic Substances Act, 1988. 
tprof. Madhu Dandavate. 
Minuter of Finance.) 