AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 140 of 2021
THE  INSURANCE COVERAGE FOR AYURVEDIC
TREA TMENT BILL, 2021
By
SHRI GIRISH BHALCHANDRA BAPAT, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide healthcare insurance coverage to all citizens for availing
ayurvedic treatment and for matters connected therewith.
 BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-second Year of the Republic of India
as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Insurance Coverage for Ayurvedic Treatment
Act, 2021.
(2)  It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
 (a) “appropriate Government” means, in the case of a State, the Government of
that State, and in all other cases, the Central Government;
Short title,
extent and
commencement.5
10
Definitions.

 (b) “ayurvedic treatment” means consultation, prescription, any investigation
leading to diagnose and treatment of disease through the use of ayurvedic herbs and
medicines, Pancha Karma treatment, Kshar Sutra treatment or such other treatment as
may be prescribed in Ayurveda; and
 (c) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
 3. The Central Government shall ensure universal access to ayurvedic treatment
for every citizen through health insurance in such manner as may be prescribed:
       Provided that the citizens who are covered under any existing health insurance
scheme or such other healthcare services as may be notified, shall not be excluded
from the purview of this Act:
        Provided further that no citizen shall be denied access to ayurvedic treatment
under this Act on the ground that he suffers from any  pre-existing disease.
4. The appropriate Government shall pay an annual health insurance     premium
for ayurvedic treatment to all citizens.
5.  (1) The Central Government shall, by notification, constitute a Committee to
determine the amount of annual health insurance premium  for ayurvedic treatment
to citizens.
      (2) The Committee shall consist of :—
(a) Secretary, Union AYUSH Ministry, Chairperson ex-officio;
(b)The Principal Secretaries in-charge of the Department of Health and
Family Welfare in the State Governments or such other officer as may be
nominated by the State Government ex-officio Members; and
(c) such number of professional members to be appointed in such
manner as may be prescribed, having experience in the field of insurance,
actuarial science and ayurvedic medicine.
(3) The salaries and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of
service of the Members of the committee, shall be such as may be prescribed.
(4) The Committee shall, while determining the amount of annual health
insurance premium for any class of citizens, shall take into consideration the health
status, addictions and such other conditions as may be prescribed.
6. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force, every citizen shall be entitled to avail aurvedic treatment free of cost from all
such ayurvedic hospitals and clinics, as may be given accreditation by the appropriate
Government, from time to time under sub-section (1) of section 7.
7.  The appropriate Government shall accredite ayurvedic clinics and hospitals
under its jurisdiction for the purpose of this Act in accordance with such accreditation
norms, rules and process as may be prescribed.
8. The Central Government shall after due appropriation made by Parliament by
law in this behalf provide adequate funds to the State Governments for carrying out
the purposes of this Act.
9. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything
inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
10. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the
Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such
provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as appear to it to be
necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty:
2
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Accreditation
of Clinics and
hospitals.
Central
Government to
provide funds
to the State
Governments.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Free
Ayurvedic
treatment.
Annual Health
Insurance
Premium.
Committee to
decide health
insurance
premium.
Healthcare
Insurance for
all Ayurvedic
Treatments
and Services.
45
Removal of
difficulties.

Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of a
period of two years from the commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after
it is made, before each House of Parliament.
 11. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is
made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of
thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session
or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification
in the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may
be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice
to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
5
10
15
Power to make
rules.
3

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Ayurveda is an Indian traditional system of medicine since 4000 years. Majority
of Indians prefer and believe in taking Ayurvedic treatments for their health problems.
Ayurveda has proved to be better treatment in many critical diseases like fistula,
arthritis, etc. Ayurvedic treatment has no side effects. Ayurveda has been accepted
all over world to cure diseases.
There is a need to promote this traditional medicine system.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to provide that the appropriate Government shall ensure
universal access to ayurvedic treatment to every citizen through health insurance
coverage.
Hence  this Bill.
    NEW DELHI;        GIRISH BHALCHANDRA BAPA T
July 29,  2021.
4

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the Central Government to ensure access to
ayurvedic treatment for every citizen through health insurance. Clause 4 provides for
the appropriate Government to pay an annual health insurance premium in respect of
all citizens covered under this Act.  Clause 5  provides for constitution of a Committee
to decide on the health insurance premium to be paid in respect of citizens covered
under this Act. It also provides for appointment of professional to the Committee.
Clause 6 provides or free ayurvedic treatment to all citizens. Clause 8 provides for the
payment of adequate funds by the Central Government to the State Governments.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund
of India.  It is likely to involve a recurring expenditure of about rupees fifty crore per
annum from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees ten crore is also likely to be involved.

6
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGA TED LEGISLA TION
Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the
delegation of legislative powers is of a normal character.

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
to provide healthcare insurance  coverage to all citizens for availing ayurvedic
treatment and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Girish Bhalchandra Bapat, M.P.)