OORR. I GEN D\. 
to 
• THE BRE1\JTFORD ELEGIRIC (HmIA.) LIMITED (ACQUISITI'")N AND TRANSFER 
Q F UNDERTA.KINGS) BILL, ,1983 
(To be/As introduced in 10k Sa-.Il'a) 
1 • page 2,-
a~~inst line 13 insert the marginal citation,-
" 
"1 of 1'?'~" 
2 • . Fa ge 2, lin e 21.-
.!QI. "prescribed" ~ ''notifica tion" ' 
3. Pa ge 3, line ,)0,-
?-rt~r "vest" insert "in" 
4,. page~, line 31,-
.fQ.t. "unlertakings" ~ "undertakings" 
", 
5'. Page 5, line ",-' 
,'. I!::u: "sub- secti,:)n" ~ "suh- sectionS" 
,. Page 7.-
against line 2 insert tb~ marginal citation,-
"lh of 1947." 
7. page 14, line 24,-
after "to" insert "the" 
8. page 15, line 30.-
!or. "a" ~ "t') " 
9. page 1'~' line 8,-
~ "1qT~'" ~ "19~'3" 
O ·In the docket pac e ,-1 • 
• t t " "'~aA "management of" ~ "managemen 0 ~ 
NEW DELHI-
, '" .. 
• 
.-

As lln'aODtTCED IN Los: SABRA ON 
BW. No. 141 of 1.83 
THE BRENTFORD ELECTRIC (INDIA) LIMITED (ACQUISITION 
AND TRANSFER OF UNDERTAKINGS) BILL, 1983 
CLAUSF.s 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
1. Short title and commencement. 
2. Definitions. 
CHAPTER II 
ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF THE COM:PANY 
3. Transfer to, and vesting in, the Central Government of the 
undertakings of the Company. 
4. General effect of vesting. 
S. Company to be liable for certain prior liabilities. 
6. Power of Central Government to direct vesting of the under-
takings of the Company in Andrew. Yule. 
CHAPTER III 
PAYMENT OF AMOUNTS 
7. Payment of amount. 
8. Payment of further amounts. 
CHAPTER IV 
MANAGEMENT, ETC., OF mE UNDERTAKINGS 0 .. THE COMPANY 
9. Management, etc., of the undertakings of the Ccxnpany. 
10. Duty of persons in charge of management of the undertakinp 
of the Company to deliver all assets, etc. 
11. Duty of persons to account for assets, etc., in their possession. 
CHAPTER V • 1 
PROVISIONS RELATING ro THE EMPLQYEES OF mE COMPAlfY 
12. Continuance of employees. 
13. Provident fund and other funds. 
CHAPTER VI 
COMMISSIONER OF PAYMENTS 
14. Appointment of Commissioner of Payments. 
15. Payment by the Central Government to the Commissioner. 

ii 
CLAus. 
16. Certain po\Yers of the Central Government or Andrew Yule. 
17. Claims to be made to the Commillioner. 
18. PriOrity of claims. 
19. Examination of claims. 
20. Admission ~r rejection of claims. 
21. Disbursement of money by the Commissioner to claimant.. 
22. Disbursement of amounts to ~ Company. 
23. Undisbursed or unclaimed amount to be deposited to the 
general revenue account 
CHAPTER VII 
MISCIU.A!OOUS 
24. Act to have overriding etJect. 
25. Contracts to cease to have effect unless ratifled by the Central 
Government or Andrew Yule. 
26. Penalties. 
?:T. Offences by companies. 
28. Protection of action taken in good faith. 
29. Delegation. of powers. 
30. Power to make rules. 
31. Power to remove ditfteul tt •. 
THE SCHEDULE. 

lIIot 1.1. 
850t lilt 
• Bill No. 141 of 1183 
TU BRENTFORD ELECTRIC .(INDIA) LIMITED (ACQUISITION 
AND TRANSFER OF UNDERTAKINGS) BILL, 1983 
A 
BILL 
to provide jOf' the acquisition and transfer of the u7lldert41oing6 0'/ tIM 
Brentford Electric (India) Limited, with a view to 9Bcuri~ the JWO-
per management of such undertakings so as to subserve the ,ntereltl 
Of the general. public by ensuring the continued ma.nufact;u.re ClAd 
production uf electrical equipments which are essential to the ncecb 
oj the economy of the country and fOT mcztters connected ~h 
or iRCidental thereto. . 
WHIUAs the Brentford Electric (India) Limited had been eDpI8d in 
the manufacture and production of articles mentioned in the First Sch~ 
dule to the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951, namely, 
electrical equipments; 
AND WHBREAs the management of the undertakings of the Brentford 
Electric (India) Limited was taken over by the Central Govermaent 
under section 18AA of the Industries (Development and Regulation) Aet, 
1.1; 
AND WHBREAS it is necessary to acquire 1tle undertakings of the Brent-
10 ford Electric (India) Limited to ensure that the interests of the general 
public are served by the continuance, by the undertakings of the Com-
pany, of the manufacture and production of the aforesaid articles, which 
are ellllential to the needs of the economy of the country; 

DefiDitioDs. 
TruIIfmo 
to, ad. 
vsiIDI In. 
the Cell-
traJ. GoY-
emmII\t 
of the 
UDdertIk-
lnpoftbe 
Compan,. 
GIeneral 
effect 
of 
ve~tilll. 
2 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-tourth Year of the ~bUc: 
of India as follOWI:-
CHAPTER I 
Paa.TMJNARY 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Brentford Electric (India) Limited S 
(Acquisition and Transfer ot Undertakings) Act, 1983. 
(2) The provisions of sections 26 and 27 shall come into force at once 
and ,the remaining provisions of this Act shall be deenled to have come 
into force on the 1st day of April, 1982. 
I. In this Act, unless the context otherwise require8,- 10 
(0) "Andrew YUle" means Andrew Yule- and Company Limited, 
Calcutta, a company formed and registered under the Companies 
Act, 1956; 
(b) "appointed day" means the 1st day of April, 1982; 
(e) "Commissioner" means the Commissioner of Paymegtll'S 
appointed under section 14; . 
(d) "Company" means the Brentford Electric (India) LimIted, 
being a company within the meaning of the Companies Act, 1-. aDd J of .'56. 
having its registered office at 8, Clive Row, Calcutta, in the State 
of West Bengal; iO 
(e) "prescribed" means a notification published in, the Ofticlal 
Gazette; 
(f) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this 
Act; 
(g) "specified date", in relation to any provision of thiI Ad, 125 
means such date as the Central Government mny, by notiftcaUon, 
specify for the purposes of that provision and dit!erent dates may be 
specified for difterent provisions of this Act; 
(h) words and expressions used herein and not deftned but 
defined in the Companies Act, 1956, shall have the meaningl respec:- 30 lei 1-. 
tively assigned to them in that Act. 
CHAPrER n 
~ AD 'ftWiISJ'D or 'lID UlCDDTAKIRQI '" TIm OaIatAJIY 
3. O:a the appoiDted day, the underiakinlJ of the Com .... )', all. the 
riPat, title and bderest of the Company in relation to ita uadertakiBp. 35 
shaJ1, by virtue of thifl Ad, stand transferrecl to, and vest in, the Cea. 
tra! Gcwemment. 
C. (1) The undertakings of the Company shall be deemed to Include 
all suets, rights, lease-holds, powers, authorities and privileges, and aU 
property, movable and immovable, including lands, bUildings, wQl'k- 40 
shops, stores, lnatrumenta, machinery and eqUipment, cash balances, cub 
on hand, cheques, demand drafts, reserve funds, investments, book debts, 
and all other rights and interests in, or arising out of, luch property U 
were immediately before the appointeU day in .the ownership, poSle9Sion, 

3 
power or control oitha Company, w.hether within or outside India, aDd 
all boob of account, reptera, recorda aDd all other documenta of whU-
ever nature relating thereto. 
(2) All propertiea as aforesaid which have vested in the Central 
I Government under section 3 shall, by force of such vesting, be freed and 
dischiU"8ed from any trust, oblijation, mortgaae, charge. lien and all 
"Ll:ler incumbrances dectine t.bem, and any attachment, injunction, 
decree or order of any court, tribunal or other authority restrictin& the 
use of such properties in any manner shall be deem'ed. to have beaD 
10 withdrawn. . . 
(3) Every mort8agee of any property which baa vested under this Act 
in the Central Government aDd every person holding any charge, lien or 
other interest in, or in relation to, any such property, shall give, within 
such time and in such manner as may be prescribed, an intimation to the 
15 Commissioner of such mortgage, charge, lien or other interest. 
(4) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the mort-
pgee of any property referred to in sub-section (3) or any other person 
holding any charge, lien or other interest in, or in relation to. any i\ldl 
property shall be entiUed to claim, in accordance with his rights and 
110 interests, payment of the mortgage money or other dues, in whole or in 
part, out of the amount specified in section 7 and also out of the amounts 
determined under section 8, but no such mortgage, charge, lien or other 
Interest shall be enforceable aiainst any property which has vested in 
the Central Government. 
as (5) Any licence or other instrument granted to the Company in relation 
to any unuertak.ini which has vested in the Central Government under 
section 3 at any time before the appointed day and in force immediately 
before that day shall continue to be in force on and after such day in 
accordance with its tenor in relation to and for the purposes of such 
SO undertaking. and on and from the date of vesting of such undertaking 
under section 6, in Andrew Yule, that company shall be deemed to be 
substituted in such licence or other instrument as if such licence or 
other instrument had been granted to Andrew Yule and that company 
shall hold it for the remainder of the period for which the Company 
35 would have held it under the tenns thereof. . 
(6) If, on the appointed day, any suit, appeal, or other p~ 
of whatever nature in relation to any property WhICh has vested m the 
Central Government under section 3, instituted or preferred by or against 
the Company is pending, the same shall not abate, be discontinued or be, 
in any way, prejudicially affected by reason of the transfer of the under,,: 
40 takiniC' of the Company or of anything contained in this Act, but the 
suit, appeal or other proceeding may be continued, prosecuted ~r enforced 
by or against the Central Guvernment or where the undertaktngs of the 
Company are directed. under section 6, to vest in Andrew Yule, by or 
f$ against that company. 
5 (1) Every liability of the Company, other than the liabili~ies speci· 
fled in sub-section (2), in respect of any period prior to the appolDte~ da~, 
shall be the liability of the Company and shall be enfor~eable agallllt It 
and not against the Central GOvernment, or, where tlle undertakings 
10 of the Company are directed, under section 6, to vest Andrew Yule, 
against that company. 
Company. 
to be liable 
for certain 
prior 
UabUltiea. 

POWII' ef 
CDtral 
GowrIl-
ment to 
dlrect 
ftIrtinI of 
the UDder-
takiao of 
the Com-
~ .. 
Andnow 
Yule. 
4 
(2) Any"liab1li.ty &tiling in respect of advances made to the CompaDY 
for the supply of articles, or in respect of materials supplied to the Com-
pany, after the management of the undertakings of the Company had 
been taken over by the Central Go~ment Shall, on and from the 
appojnted day, be the liability of the Central Government or of Andrew 5 
Yule, a& the case may be, and shall be diecbarg.ed by that Govemment 
or Andrew Yule, as ad when payment for such advances or supplies 
becomes due and ,payable. 
(3) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that,-
(a) save as otherwise expressly provided in this section or in 10 
any othE:r provision of this Act, no liabilit.y of the Company, in 
re~pe<'t of any period prior to the appointed day, shall be enforce-
able against the Central Government. or where the undertakings 
of the Company are directed,' under section 6, to vest in Andrew 
Yule, against that company i 15 
(b) DO award, decree or order of any court, tribunal or oUlar 
authority in relation to the undertakings of the Company, puled 
after the appointed day in respect of any matter, claim or dispute, 
which arose before that day, shall be enforceable against the Central 
Government or where the UDdertakinll of the Compoy are directed. 20 
under section 6, to vest in Andrew Yule, against thatcompany; 
(c) no liability incurred by the Company bef.ore the appointed 
day for the contravention of any provision of law for the time being 
in force shall be enf~rceable against the Central Government or 
where the undertakings of the Company are directed, under section 6. 25 
to vest in Andrew Yule. against that company. 
6. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in sectiOll8 3 and 4, the 
Ce*al Government may. subject to such terms and conditions as it 
may think fit to impose, direct, by notifieation. that the undertakings of 
the Company, and the right, title and interest of the Company in relation 30 
to its unlertakings, which have vested in the Central Government under 
section 3, shall, instead of continuing to vest. in the Central Gowrnment, 
vest in Andrew Yule, either on the date of the noWieatWn or on such 
earlier or later date (not being a date earlier than the appointed day) 
as may be specified in the notifteation. 35 
(2) Where the right, title and interest, and the liabilities referred to 
in su~tion (2) of section 5, of the Company in relation to ita under-
takings vest in Andrew Yule under Bub-section (1), Andrew Yule shall, 
'on and from the date of such vesting, be deemed to have become the 
owner in relation to 'such undertakings and all the rights and liabilities 
of the Central Government in relation to such undertakings shall, on and 40 
from the date of such vesting be deemed to have become the rights and 
liabilities, respectively, of Andrew Yule. 
CHAPTER flI 
45 
Papa.et., OZ. For the tnnafer to, and yestlng in. tbe Central Govel'DlIlent, under 
Ulount. .action 3. of the andertaldnp 0( the Compoy, and the rlrht, title aad 
batena of the Company in relation to itl und8l'tJdd'IiP, there .... U he 

pald by the Central Government to the Company in cuh, aDd in the 
maDDer specifteci in Chapter VI, an amount of rupees thirty-eight lakha 
and sixty-ftve thousand. 
8. (1) For the deprivation of the Company of the management of its 5 _._..1 tak' h' Payment u.uuer mgs, t ere shall be paid by the Central Government to the . of further 
eo.pany in cash, an amount caleulated at the rate of five thousand amount-. 
ra.pees per annum for the period commencing on the date on which 
tbe management of the undertakings of the Company was taken over 
in lMIl'lUance of the order made by the Central Government under sec-
.5 of 1951. 10 don IBM oftbe Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951, 
IIIId eD~Jig on the appointed day. 
(2) In consideration of the retrospective operation of the provisions 
of sections 3, 4 and 5.. there shall also be paid by the Centr,al Govern-
ment to the Company in cash, an amount calculated at the l'ate of five 
15 thousanrl rupees per annum for the period commencing on the appointed 
day and ending on the date on which this Act receives the a';sc.:.t of the 
President. 
(3) TIle ......... spedftecI iD aectioD 7, ... die a....... cIefermhled III 
accordance with the provisions of sub-section (1) and (2), shall carry 
110 simple interest at the rate of fow: per cent. per annum for the period 
commencing on the appointed day and ending on the date on which pay-
IDent of saeh amounts is made by the Central Government to the Com-
..... oner. 
(4) The amounts determined in accordance with the provisions of 
25 sub-sections (1). (2) and (3) shall be paid. by the Central Government 
to the Company In uddition to the amouat speciied. in section 7. .", 
(5) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the liabilities 
of the Com.pany in .relation to its undertakings which have vested in the 
Central Govern~ent under section 3, shall be discharged from the amount 
30 referred to in section 7, and also from the amounts determined under 
sub-sections (1), (2) and (3), in accordance with the rights and interests 
of the creditors of the Company. 
CHAPTER IV 
MANAGEMENT, ETC., OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF THE CQlI.IPANY 
9. The general superintendence, direction, control and management 
35 of the· affairs and business of the undertakings of the .Company, t~~ 
r' ght title and interest in relation to which have vested m the Centr 
~ov~rnment under section 3, shall, where a direction has ~n6 mad~ "7 
the Central Government under, sub-section (1) of S~CtJOIl ,vesct n 
40 Andrew Yule, and thereupon Andrew Yule sh~l1~:tl= ~o e~~r ~ 
to the exclusion of all other pehrs~nsd' ~ ::rCi: and do in relation to 
things as the Company was aut arise 
ita undertakings. 
Mana.e-
ment,etc., 
of the 
under-
takinpof 
the Com-
pany. 

Duty of 
persons in 
char,e ol 
manace-
ment of 
the under-
takinpof 
the Com-
panyto 
deliver all 
asseta, etc. 
Duty Of 
penons to 
ac:eount 
for assets. 
etc .• fa 
their 
possession. 
to. (1) On the vestiag of the management ot the underta1dnp of. the 
Company in Andrew Yule, all peI1IODS in charge of the management of 
the undertakings of the Company immediate I y before auch vesUDg aball 
be bound to deliver to Andrew Yule all assets, books of account, regi8ters 
or other documents in their custody relating to the undertakings of the 5 
Company. 
(2) The Central Govemment may issue such directions as it may 
deem desirable in the circumstances of the case to Andrew Yule u to 
its powers and duti1!s and Andrew Yule may also, if it so destres, apply 
to the Central Government at any time for instructions as to the manner 10 
in which the management of the undertaldDIB of the Company aball be 
conducted by it or in ~lation to any ·other matter arising in the coune 
of such management. 
lL (1) Any per80Il who has, on the appointed day, in his possession 
or under bis eon~ any usets, books, documents or otber papers rela~ 15 
ing to any undertaking owned by the Company, whicb have vested In the 
Central Government or in Andrew Yule under this Act and which belong 
to the Company or would have so belonged, if the undertakings owned by 
the Company had not vested in the Central Government or Andrew Yule. 
shall be liable to aceount for the said aneb, books. documents and other lIO 
papers to the Central Government or Andrew Yule and ahel! deUver them 
to the Cl!ntnl Government or Andrew Yule or to such penon or persons 
as the Central Go\remment or A"drew Yule may specify in tbis behalf. 
(2) The Central Government or Andrew Yule may take or ean. to 
be taken all necessary step!; for securing pouession of the underta1dnll of 25 
the Company which have vested In the Central Government or ABdrew 
Yule under this Act. 
(3) The Company shall. wtthin such period 8S the Central Government 
may allow in this behalf. fumlsh to that Govemm~nt a com-ptetP. fnwn-
tOry of all its p,roperties and assets,' as on the appointed day. pertaining 30 
to the undertakings which have vested in t~ Central Government under 
section 3 an·~ for this purpose. the Central Govemment or Andre\V Yule 
sh~n afford to the Compan,' An reasonable facmtt~s. 
CHAPTER V 
PRoVISIONS UI.ATrNn TO 'I'RF. 1'!M1'lDf"ftS OF "fII COMVAN'T 35 
Conti· 12. (1) Every person who has been. immediately befOI"e the appointed 
nuance of day. ~m-ployed In any underta1dng!! of th~ Company c;hall bet'ome.-
em-
ployeea. (4) on and from the appointed day, an employee of the Central 
Government, and 
(b) where the undertakln~ of the C"'.ompllnv IIr~ dfrected unrlp,. 40 
sub-section (1) of secron 6 to vest In Andrew Yule. an employee of 
Andrew Yul-e on nnd from the date of 'SUch ""ting: 
and shall hold offtce or service under the Central GOV'El'J'nmenf OT Andrew 
Yule. as the ealle may be, with the same rfgftts and "rfvll.s al to 
pension. ~atuftv anri other matters 8B would have be~ adm1.tb1e to 4~ 
him if ttiere had been no such vesting and Rha11 continue to do ~o unleRR 
and until his P.mployment under the Central Gove!'Dment OJ' Andr<!w 
Yule, as the ease may be. fs duly term'nated or until htl remuneration 
and other conditions of servicp. 81-(' duly altered )),. the Central r.~. 
ment o.r Andrew Yule, 8S the case may be 50 

7 
(2) Notwi~tanding anything contained in the Industrial ~is}>utes 
Act, I1N7, or 1n any other law for ,~ tiJ;ne being in force the transfer 
of the services of any officer or other person employed in ~ny undertak-
Ing of the Company, to the Central Government or Andrew Yule shall 
5 riot entitle such offi(''er or other employee to claim any compensation under 
this Act or under any other law for the time being in force and no such 
claim shall be entertained by any court, tribunal or other authority. 
13. (1) Where the Company has established a provident fund, super-
annuation fund, welfare fund or any other fund for the benefit of the 
10 persons employed in any of its undertakings, the moneys relatable to the 
officers or other employees, whose services have become transferred by 
or under this Act to the Central Government or Andrew YUle sh8ll, 
out of the moneys standing, on the appointed day, to the credit' of such 
provident fund, superannuation fund, W1!lfare fund or other fund, stand 
15 ,tr~d to, and ve.st in, the Central GoverJ:Unent or Anq.rew YUle, as 
the case may be. - ~ 
(2) The ~¥ys which stand transferred under sub-section (1) to me 
Central Government or Andrew Yule, as the case may be, shall be 
dealt with by that Government or that company in' such manner, as 
ao may be prescribed. 
15 
CHAPTER VI 
COMMISSIONER OF PAY~S 
160(1) The Central, Government sbaU, for the purpose of c1isbursiDg 
tile ......... payMle UDder sedioas 7 IUd I to the CoIIt*Y, by ..... 
caUoD. appomt a Commissioner of Payments. 
(2) The Central Govcrtn,J:lent may appoint sucbot~er ~~~~ ,as it 
• , ~ink fit to assUit ,the C~issioner and thereUpon ~e CO~OJler 
r.., ...a.oriseoae' Or more of such pe~ ,also ~ ~rcue • ,or ~·utI 
the powers exercisable by him under tids Act and dillerent persons may 
.- IMIIIaCIIiMd to exercise .diIeMIt powers. '. t\ ., 
'S0·-
. (3) Any ~rson authorised by th~ ~o~onel' to. ~x:erci~e ~y ot 
the powers exercisable by the ComIDls~loner may e~e~~1Se ~po~:: 
in. the same manner and with the same effect as if they ave . 
;~erred on that person. direc~lr by t.l$, A<;tan(i not by way of aut~o~~-~, 
35 satlon, 
. d allow~t;es of .theCo~ssioner~d ,~ther ~er-
;(4)~h~ ... J.a~~_~1.~~ lion shaUbe d~frayed out of .tbe Consobda-
'8ODS apDA~t.ecI "wa~ .".~ sec .. . 
.... F~fI of .:~~iL 
, ·15. (1) The Central Government shall,. ~ithin ~irty dar;n~o: :: 
40' specified date, pay, in cash, to the CommiSSIoner, or paym ~ 
co~pany,- u 1 to the amount specified in seCtion 7; and 
(a) an amount eq a 
h ts payable to the Com-(I>,) fUJ;ther amount equal tot e amoun . . 
under section 8. pany C tr 1 Government t hall be opened by the en a 45 J~) .1\ depo$it acco,un. si in the Public Account of India, and 
. in ~avour of th~ Comnl1s~~:Act to the Commissioner shall be d~pasi~ 
every amount paid under th aid deposit account and the said depoSlt 
by him to the credit 0:00 ~ys the Commissioner. 
account shall be opera ' 
Provident 
fUnd and 
otber 
funds. 
Appoint-
ment of 
Commis-
sioner of 
Pay:. 
ments . 
Payment 
by the 
Central 
Govern-
ment to 
the Com-
missioner. 

Certaill 
powers 
of the 
Central 
Govem-
ment or 
Andrew 
YuJe. 
Clahna 
to be 
made to 
the Com-
au.ioner. 
Priority 
of clalmI. 
Examina-
tion of 
clabu. 
8 
(3) Recorda shall be maintained by the CommilSioner in respect of 
tile UDdertaldnp of the Company in relation to which payments have 
beaD made to him under this Act. 
(4) Intezeat accruing on ,the amounts standing to the credit of the 
deposit account .referred. to in sub-Bection (2) &hall enure to the beneO.t 5 
of tile Company. 
11. (1) The Central Govermnent or Andrew Yule, as the case ma1, 
be, aball be entWed to IeCeive up to the specified date, to the exclusion 
of all other per8OD8, any mODe)' due to tbe Company, in relation to it.' 
undertakinp which have vested in the Central Government or Andrew .10 
Yule, and realised after the appointed day not.withstanding that the 
realisation pertains to a period prior to the appointed day. 
(2) The Central liovernment or Andrew Yule, as the case may' be, 
may make a claim to the Com.allssioner with regard ,to every payment 
made by that Government or Andrew Yule, after the appointed day, for 15 
discbarging any liability of the Company, not bems aDy' liability spec:ified. 
in sub-sectiOn (2) 01 section 5, in relation to aDy period prior to t.be 
appointed day; and every such claim shall have priority in accorclaDc:e 
with the priorities attaching. under this &:1, to the matter in relation 
to which such liability has been discharged by the Central Government or 20 
Andrew Yule. 
(3) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the liabilities of the 
Company, in respect 01 aoy traosactiOll FlOr to tile awointed day .. 
w~h have DOt been di.ou-harged on or before the specifteci date.. &ball 
be the liabilities of the Company. ....,. 
17. Every pe,rson having a claim against the Company with re~ to'·' 
any of the matters specified in t.be Schedule, ~tainiDi to any' of it. 
undertakings, sball prefer such claim before the CommiMioner within 
tbJrty days from the specified date: 
Provided that if the Commissioner is aatia6ed that the claimant .... 
prevented by aufticient cause from preferriDa the claim within the aald 30 
period of tbil1y days, he may. entertain the claim \\': t h:n a further period 
of t.b.irty days, but not thereafter. . • 
18. '.rhe claims made under section 17 aball have' prloritiea in ac:cQt'-
dance witb the following principles, namely:- S5 
(4) Category I shall bave precedence over all other eatepria 
and Category 11 shall have precedence over Category UI, 8D4 10 OIl: 
(b) the claims speclfied in each of the cate&'Gries Iha!l' 1'IDk 
equally and be paid in full, but, if the amount is insuJBcient to meet 
8UCh claims in full, they ahall abate in equal proportions and be pald. 40 
accordingly; and 
(c) the question of discharging any lJability with regard to a 
matter specified in a lower category shall arhJe only it a surplus • 
ldt after meeting all the liabilities apecifted in the immediately 
hIgher catego,ry. 
19. (1) On receipt of the claims made under aection 17, tbe Commla-
sioner shall arrange the claims in the order of priorities specifted in the 
Schedule and examine the same in accordance with such order of 
priorities. 
,5 

5 
9 
(2) If, on an examinati.on of the claims, the Commissioner is of 
opinion that ,th~. amount. paid to him under this Act is not suftlclent to 
meet the liabilItIes speclf\ed in any lower category, he shall not be re-
quired to examine the claims in respect of such lower category. 
ZOo (1) After examining the claims with reference to the prio.ritie&l 
set out in the Schedule, the Commissioner shall fix a certain date on or 
before which every claimant 'Shall file the proof of his claim. 
(2) Not less than fourteen days' notice of the date so ftx~ shall be 
given by advertisement in one issue of any daily newspaper in the 
10 English language having ci.rculation in the major part of the cotmtry and. 
one. issue of any daily newspaper in such regional language as the Com-
missioner may consider suitable, and every such notice shall call upon 
the claimant to flle the proof of his claim with the Commissioner within 
the period specified in the advertisement. 
15 (3) Every claimant who fails to file the proof of his claim within the 
period specified by the Commissioner shall be excluded from the dis-
bursements made by the Commissioner. 
(4) The Commissioner shall, after such investigation as may in his 
opinion, be necessary and after giving the Company an opportunity of 
!'olO refuting the claim and after giving the claimant a reasonable oppor-
tunity of being heard, by o.rder in writing, admit or reject the claim in 
whole or in part. 
(5) The CommiS'Sioner shall have the power to regulate his own 
proeedure in all matters arising out of the discharge of his functions, 
is including the place or places at which he may hold his sittings and shall, 
for the pu.rpose of making an investigation under this Act, haVe the same 
powers as are vested in a civil (ourt under the Code of Civil Procedure, 
1908, while trying a suit, in respect of the following matters, namely:-
(a) the summon;ng and enforcing the attendance of any witness 
30 and examining him on oath; 
(b) the discovery and production of any document o.r other 
material object producible af; evidence: 
(e) the reception of evidence on affidavits; 
(d) the issuing of any commission for the examination of wit-
35 nesses. 
(6) Any investigation before the Commissioner shall be deemed 
t be a judicial proceeding within the meaning Of. sect;ons 193 and 228 of 
: 1860. t~ Indian Penal Code and the Commissioner s11a11 be deemed to be a 
ct~l court for the purposes of section 195, and Chapter XXVI, of the Code 
19'7" of Criminal Procedure, 1973. 
40 1 A claimant who ;s dissatisfied with the decision of the Commis-
,. 
• 
. () refer an a peal against such decision to the principal civil 
SIOner, ma~ ~ 1 . rlsdi~iOn within the local limits of whose juriadlctlon 
court of orlgma ]U .'. 
the gistered offi.ce of the Company IS situated . 
re whO is a Judge of a High Court is 
Admis-
sion or 
rejection 
olelaim •. 
45 Provided that where a1 p~r~~ the appeal shall lie to the High Court 
. ted t be the Comm sg10n , btl appom 0 I shall be heard and disposed of y no ess • 
at Calcutta and such appea 
c· 
• f th t Higfi Court. than two Judges 0 a . 
~~;s, 

Disbur-
aement 
of money 
by the 
Commis-
sloner 
to 
claimants. 
Dlaburse-
ment of 
amounts 
to the 
Company. 
Undis-
bursed or 
unclaimed 
amount 
to be de-
posttedto 
the 
,eneral 
revenue 
account. 
Act to 
have 
overrid-
ing effect. 
Contracts 
toceaae 
to have 
eJfect 
unless 
ratJ1led 
by the 
Central 
Govern-
ment or 
. Andrew 
Yule. 
11) 
11. Afteractmittine a claim under this A'et, the amount dUe in respeet 
of' sueb etalin shall ~ paid by the Commissioner to the person Or person. 
to Whom sUch amount is due and on such payment, the UabilUy oltbe 
Company ill respect of such claim shall stand discharged, 
22. (1) If, out of the moneys paid to him in relation to the undel'taJdngs 5 
of the Company, there is a balance left after meeting the liabUities 
speeifted in the Schedule. the Commissioner shall disburae sueh balance 
to the Company. 
(Z) Where the posse8sion of any machinery. equipment OJ' other pro-
~y has vested in the Central GoVernment or Andrew Yule under this 10 
ACt, bUt sum machmery, equipment or other property doeS not 'helmsg 
to the Company, it ·shall be lawful for the Central Government or 
Andrew Yule, to continue to poJIIeU such machinery Or equipment or 
other property on the same terms and conditions under which they 
were possessed by the Company immediately before the appointed day. 15 
%3. Any money paid to the Commissioner which remams undisbursed 
or unclaimed on the date immediately preceding the date on which the 
ofllce of the Commissioner is finally wound up, shall be transferred by 
the Commissioner, before his ofBce is ftnally wound up, to the pneral 
revenue account of the Central Government; but a claim to any money liIO 
so transferred may be preferred to the Central Government by the 
per'SOn entttlt!d to 'SUch payment and shall be dealt with as If such 
trapSfer had not been made, and the OJ'der, if any, for payment of o.e 
claim, befng treated as an order for the refund of revenue. 
CHAPTER V11 
M18CIU.AlROUS 
II. The provtJions of thfs Act shalt have effect notwithstanding any-
thing inr.onsistent therewith contained in any other law toT' th~ tfme being 
in force 0.1' in anv in!ltrument having effect by virtue of Rny law, other 
than this Act. or in any decree or order of any court, trtbunal or other 30 
authority. 
25. Every contract ente.red into by the Company in relation to tta 
undertakings which has vested in the Central Government under 'SeCtion. 
3, for any service. sale or SUPPly and in force immedfatel v before the 
8lJP(Jfnted day. s'hal1. on and 'from the t'xptry of a l)t":riod of one tnmdred 95 
md . eliPrtv days from the date on Which this Aet reeelve!4 the assent of 
the PreSident, cease tI) have effect unlelS such contract I!;. before tbe 
"eXpiry of that' period. ra~fted. In writinJl(. by the Central Govemment 
O.t" Andrew Yule in which "uch undertakinl{S have been vested tmdet' 
this Act, and in ratifying such contract. the- Central Government or 40 
Andrew Yule m~y make sueh alteration or modification thereIn as It 
may think fit: . 
Provided that the Central Government or Ancll'ew. Yule shan not omit 
to ratify a contract and shall not make any RJteratfon or modification In 
a c01rtract- 45 
Ca) unless it is 'Sattsfied that slJch contract 1S undulv onerous or 
• has been entered into in bad faith or i!'l detrimental to the fnteretts 
of the Central Government or Andrew Yule, artd 

5 
II 
(b) except after giving to the parties to the contract a reason-
able opportunity of being heard and except after recording in writing 
its reasons for refusal to ratify the contract or for making any altera-
tion or modification therein, 
26, Any person who,-
(0) having in his possession, custody or control any property 
forming part of the undertakings of the Company, wrongfully with-
holds such property from the Central Government or Andrew Yule; 
or 
10 (b) wrongfully obtains possession of, or retains, any p:roperty 
forming part of the undertakings of the Company; or 
(e' wilfully withholds or fails to furnish to the Central Govern-
ment or Andrew Yule 'ar any person or body of persons specified by 
that Government or Andrew Yule,as the case may be. any dOl'Ument 
relating to the undertakings, which may be in bis possession, 
custody or control; or 
(d) fails to delhrer to the Central Government o.r Andrew Yule 
or any person or body of persons specified by that Gov~mment or 
Andrew Yule, as the case may be, any assets, books of account, 
registers or other documents in his possession, custody or control 
relating to the undertakings of the Company; or 
(p.) wrongfully removes or destroys any· property forming part 
of the undertakings of the Company or prefers any claim under this 
Act which he knows or has reasonable cause to believe to be false 
25 or Ftl'ossly inaccurate, 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
two years or with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees, or 
with both. 
n. (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed bv a 
30 . who l'lt the time the offence wascommitteo. com'P8nv every pet'!':on ,. d t 
; char~e 'of and was responsible to. the companv. for tbe con uc 
was n . he company as well as the company. shall be 
of thed l)"Llt Sibnes:u~~ t of the otfe~c~ and !':hall be liable to be proceeded deeme 0 e ..... .. 
a~ainst and punished accordingly: 
, t I' e.3 l'n this sub-section shall render any P vid d that nothm~ con a n u • 
35 ro e, . h . t 'f he proves that the oft'ence was I, bl to anvpunls men , 1 , 11 d such -person la e. th t he had exercIsed a ue mmltted without bis knowledge or a , . 
CO t the commission of such offence. diligence to preven 
. , thin contairted in sub.section (1), where 
(2) Notwithstandm~ any g, 'tted bv a Company and it is . "'-i A· t has been eornml . .. i 
40 any offence under tn s . c ... 'ttecl with the consent or conn v-. h ff has been comml ' __ ..lI-
proved that teo ence 1 ct on the part of, any dlr~c~or. 
ance of or is attributable to anvmn,~g eof the company, such director. , . other 0 cer . f th t man"/ler, ~cretary or hall be deemed to be guilty ° a 
manager, secretary or other o!cer seeededagainst and punished accord-
45 offence and shall be liable to pro 
ingly, 
Penalties 
Offences 
by com-
panies. 

Protec-
tion of 
action 
taken 
in good 
faith. 
Delega-
tion of 
powers. 
Power 
toma~e 
rules. 
I~ 
Explanation.-For the pu,rposes of this section,-
(a) "company" ~ans any body corporate and includes a firm 
or other association of individuals; and 
(b) "director", in relation to a firm, means a partner in the 
firm. 
28. (1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against 
the Central Government or any officer of that Government Or Andrew 
Yule or other person authorised by that Government or Andrew Yule 
for anything which is in good faith done Or intended to be done under 
5 
this Act. 10 
(2) No suit or other legal proceeding shall lle against the Central 
Gove.rnment or any officer of that GowrnmeM or Andrew Yule or other 
person authorised by that Government or Andrew Yule for any damage 
caused or likely to be caused by anything which is in good faith done 
or intended to be done under this Act. 
29. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, direct that 
all or any of the powers exercisable by it under this Act, other than the 
powers conferred by this section and sections 30 and 31, may also be 
exercised by such person or persons as may be specified in the notification. 
(2) Whenever any delegation of power . is made under sub-section 20 
(1), the person to whom such power has been delegated shan act under 
the direction, control and supervision of the Central Government. 
30. (1) The Central Gove,Tnment may. by notification, make rules 
for carrying out the provisions of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 25 
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following 
matters, namely:-
(a) the time within which, and the manner in whi'ch. an inti-
mation referred to in sub-section (3) of section 4 shall be given; 
(b) the manner in which the moneys in any provident fund or 30 
other fund, referred to in section 13 shall be dealt with; 
(c) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, pres-
cribed. 
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act 
~hal1 be laid, RS soon as may be after it is made, before each House of 35 
Parliament, while it ;s in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, 
and if, before tho expiry of the session "immediately following the 
session or the $uccessive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the 40 
nIle should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in 
such modified form or be of no effect, a.~ the case may be; so, however, 
that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to 
the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 

31. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the prOVISIOns of this 
Act, the Central Government may, by order, not inconsistent with the 
provisions of this Act, remove the difficulty: 
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a 
5 period of two years from the date on which this Act receives the assent 
of the President. 
10 
Category 1--
THE SCHEDULE 
[See sections 17, 19(1),20(1) and 22(1)] 
ORDER OF PRIORITIES 
Post-take-over management period 
(a) Wages, salaries and other dues payable to the employees of the 
Company. ._ ... 
15 (b) Deductions made from the salaries and wages of the '1mployees 
20 
of the Company for provident fund, the Employees' State Insurance 
Fund, premium relating to the Life Insurance Corporation of India or 
for any other purpose. 
Category JI-
Principal amount of loans advanced by-
(i) the Central GQvernmentj 
(ii) a State Government; 
(iii) banks and financial institUtions; 
(iv) any other source. 
25 Category III-
(a) Arrears in relation to contributions to be made by the Company 
to provident fund, the Employees' State Insurance Fund or under any 
other law for the time being in force providing for S'llch contributions. 
(b) Any credits availed of by the Company for the purpose of carry-
go ing on any trading or manufacturing operations, other than those speci-
fied in sUb-section (2) of section S. . 
(c) Any dues of State Electricity Boards or other Government or 
semi-GovE-rnment institutions against supply of goods or services, other 
than those specified in sub-section (2) of section 5. 
35 (d) Arrears of interest on loans and advances. 
4° 
Category IV-
(a) Revenue, taxes, cesses, rates or other dues to the Central Gov-
ernment, a State Government or any local authority. 
(b) Any other dues. 
Pre-take-over management period 
Category V-
(a) Wages, salaries and ?ther dues payable to the employees of the 
Ccmpany. c. 
Power to 
remove 
difficul· 
ties. 

• .6 
(b) Dedudions made from the salaries and wages of the employees 
of the Company for provident fund, the Employees' State Insurance 
Fund, premium relating to the Life Insurance Corporation of India or 
for any other purpose. 
CategOTy VI-
(a) Principal amount of secured loans advanced by-
(i) the Central Government; 
(ii) a State Government; 
(iii) banks and financial institutions. 
5 
(b) Arrears in relation to contributions to be made by the Company 10 
to provident fund, the Employees' State Insurance Fund or under any 
other law for the time being in force providing for such contributions. 
Category VIl-
Princ~pal amount of unsecured loans advanced by-
(i) the Central Government; 
(ii) a State Government; 
(iii) banks and financial institutions. 
Category VIII-
(a) Any credits availed of by the Company far the . purpose of 
carrying on any trading or manufactUring operations. 20 
(h) Any dues of State Electricity Boards or other Government or 
semi-Government institutions against supply of goods or services. 
(c) Arrears of interest on loans and advances. 
(d) Revenue, taxes, cesses, rates or other du~ to Central Govern-
ment, a State Government or any local authority. 25 
(e) Any other loans or duee. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The. Brentford Electric (India) Limited, Calcutta (BElL)· established 
in 1964, has been in existence for about 18 years and has ~en engaged 
in the manufacture of regulators upto fmd above 500 KVA rectifiers 
special transformers. distribution transformers etc. The p;oducts of 
the company are of high quality and are required for defence establish-
ments, State Electricity Boards and atomic energy establishments. The 
company is at present t>mploying about 200 persons. 
2. BElL started incurring losses from 1975 and ran into serious lin an-
cial difficulties in 1976. The management of the company was taken over 
by the Certral Government under section 18AA of the Industries (De-
velopment and Regulation) Act, 1951. and Andrew Yule and Company 
Limited, a Government company, was appointed as the 'authorise1 person' 
for managing its affairs. The period of ta~over of the management of 
BElL was extended from time to time and is presently up to 25th 
May, 1984. At the time of take-over, the accumulated losses of BElL 
were Rs. 90.37 lakhs and its liabilities to third ps.rties aggregated to 
Rs. 87.33 lakhs. However, -the sales turnover of the company has 
improved conSiderably in the post-take-over period and it has been able 
to turn the corner by 1979-80, thus establishing that its operations are 
technically and commercially viable. During 1979-80 and 1980-81, the 
company made net profits (after interest on pre-take-over liabilities) of 
Rs. 1.85 lakhs and Rs. 5.1 lakhs respectively. 
3. ConsidE'ring the fact that the company had heavy losses on the 
.date of take-over, it is evident that it would never be able. to service its 
old liabilities, though its current operations, without the drag of the pre-
take-over liabilities, are viable. The company cannot at the same time be 
run for an indefinite period under the provisions of the Industries (De-
velopmen~ and Regulation) Act, 1951. 
4. Studies made a determine the future set-up of the company re-
vealed that the undertakings of the company should be nationalised in 
order to consolidate the gains of management and to ensure uninterrupted 
l.-lupply of critical items required by defence establishments, etc. In view 
of the importance and high demand of the products manuf~ctured by thE" 
eompany and the lOllS of employment to about 200 persons, \f the company 
were to be closed down, it is considered necessary to take over. the under-
takings of the company. 
r: Th Bill seeks to achieve the aforesaid object. Apart from pro-
;). e th d rtaki gs of the com· "iding for the acquisition flnd transfer of e un e n h i {-
the Bm provides for the payment of an amaunt for sue acqu s pany, h' Andrew Yule a t· n vesting of the undertakings of t e comp~~ m f P , t 
10 , <I ointment of a Commissioner 0 aymen s 
Government compfa;Js'b~~rng the amount payable to the company and ior the purpose 0 • 
h . l·dental and consequential matters. fur ot er IDe 
NEW D£LHl; 
The 24th Not,ember. 1983. 
NARAYAN DATT TIWARI. 
1S 

PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF THE 
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. 5!14!78-L.R., dated the 30th November, 1983 from 
Shri Narayan Datt Tiwari, Minister of Industry to the Secretary, Lok 
Sabba] . 
• 
The President having been informed of the subject matter of the 
Brentford Electric (India) Limited (Acquisition and Transfer ot Under-
takings) Bill, 1973, recommends under clauses (1) and (3) of article 111 
of the Constitution, the introduction of the said Bill in and its considera-
tion by Lok Sabha. 
16 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
, Clause .. 3 of the Bin pl'ovides for the transfer to, and vesting in, the 
Central Government of the undertakings of the Brentford Electric 
~India) Ltd., Calcutta. Clanse 7 provides for the payment in cash and 
1n the manner specified in Chapter VI of the Bill, of an amO'Wlt of 
Its. 38,65,000 for the transfer to,.and vesting in the Central Government 
the right, title aud interest cf the company in relation to its undertakings~ 
2. Sub-clause (1) of clause 8 of the Bill provides for payment of a 
further amount in cash, in consideration of the deprivation of the com-
p:tny of the management of its undertakings, calculated at the rate of 
rupees five thousand per annum, for the period commencing on the 
date on which the man2tgement of the undertakings of the company 
was taken over by the Centra] Government and ending on the 1st April, 
11*82, the appointed day. It is estimated that this amount will be of the 
order of Rs. 15,500. 
3. Sub-:clause (2) of claUSe 8 of the Bill provides for payment of a 
further amount to the company in cash, in consideration of the re-
trospective operation of the provisions 01 clau~es 3, 4 and 5, calculated 
at the rate of rupees five thousand per annum, for the period commen-
cing on the appointed day and ending on the date on which the Bill 
receives the assent of the President. It is estimated tbat this amount 
will be of the order of Rs. 10,000. 
4. Sub-clause (3) of clause 8 of the Bill provides for payment of 
simple interest at the rate of fou~ per cent. per annum in respect ot 
amounts payable under clause 7 and S'ub-clauses (1) and (2) of clause 8, 
for the pertod commencing on the· appointed day and ending on the 
date on which payment of such amounts is made by the Central Gov-
ernment to the Commissioner of Payments. It is estimated tbat this 
amount is likely to be of the order of Rs. 13,000 per month. 
5. Clause 14 of the Bill provides for the appointment of a Commis-
sioner of Payments by the Central Government with adequate staff to 
assist him for the purpose of disbursing the amounts payable to 
the company. Sub-clauae (4) of this clause provides that the salaries and 
allowances of the Commil8ioner of Payments and the other persons to 
assist him will be defrayed out of the CoDSOlidated Fund of 1Ddia. The 
estimated expenditure on this account is likely to be of the mer of 
Rs. 10,000 per month. 
6. The BIll, if enacted, if, not likely to invol:ve any other recurring 
or non-recurring expenditure. 
1'1 . 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Cla'wse 30 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make 
rules to carry out the provisions of the Bill. The matters in respect of 
which rules may be made, inteT alia, relate to the time within which, 
'and the manner in which, intimation regarding any 1Il0rtgage, charge, 
lien, etc., on the properties which have vested in the Centrill Govern-
ment may be given to the Commissioner of Payments 'nd the manner 
in which the moneys in any provident fund, superannuation, welfare or 
other fund maintained by the £ompany shall be dealt with by the Cen-
tral Government or the Andrew Yule and Company. 
2. The matters in respect of which rules may be made are matters of 
procedure and administrative detail. The delegation of legislative 
,power is thus of a normal character. 
, -
" , 
;." 
... ; 
13 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to prov~e for the acquisition and transfer of the undertakings of the 
But1tford Electric (India) Limited, with a view to securing the pro-
per management to such undertakings bO as to subaerve the interests 
of the general public by ensuring the continued manufacture and 
production of electrical equipments which are essential to the needs 
~f the economy of the country and for matters connected therewith 
or incidental thereto. 
• 
(Sh.ri Narayan Dart Tiwari, 
Minister of Industry.) 