10K SABHA 
CORRIGENDA 
tr) 
TEE MULTI-STA1E CO-OPERATIVE" SOCIE'1'IES BILL, 1977 
L'f:o bew introduced in 10k Sabha. 7 
1. Page 11, line 10,-
after "the" insert "Central" • 
2. Pa.ge 17, line 7,-
, 
for t10hairman ofn ma&1 ".na1r~ or It, 
• 
3. l'age 17, l~ 34,-
~ "su~a~4:u!. 'I sec tion" 
4. rage 21 . .t._.l.ine 4,-
t2l:. na7'.d .. t.~ "or" 
,. ~a~ 21, line 7,-
~ "socdety O~" D.Ai ~tyl ~~,~.(.~)", ." 
,. Pa&e .21, . ·line 9,-
for "49 or if t~" l'e&d "49; or (d) a" 
:. ... 'r-. rage 21, line 12,-
ll. 
after "tho.se tt.. insert ''ha~, or~ 
• • Pa~e 25, line ~.:. 
for "or any'" tw:Id "~f aTlY" 
" fI 
Page 34, aga:l.nst' elause ~7, insert the .following 
marginal heading,-
-"Execu tion of crders "r 11qu1da~r." 
10. Page 34, against clause 88, 1nsert _.the .fo~l.owing 
marg:l.nal he ad:l.ng , -
"Attachment before award." 
11. Page 40, against line 7,-
for marginal citation "6 of 942" 
read "6 of 1942" , 
P. T.O. 

... 2 -
12. Page 40, line 17,-
before "cancelling", insert "made" 
13. Page 40, line's 17"and 18,-
~. "made und6r.tho::said -APt'~ 
14. Page 45, line 17,-
before 
NEW DELHI· ~ 
"National " 
Agraha,yatla 1; 1899 ( Saka) 
insert 
( 
." 
"4. " 
." 
• - • I. 
. . --' .,.. .. 
• - ...... _ ........ _ 'w 
..... -. • 
\' 
" .. 

As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA ON 
: 8 DEC 1971 
BIll Ne. 141 of 1m 
THE MULTI-STATE CO-OPERATIVE SOCIETIES BILL, 1977 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
CLAUSES 
1. Short title, extent and commencement. 
2. Application. 
3. Definitions. 
CHAPTER II 
CENTRAL REGIsTRAR AND REGISTRATION OF SOCIETIES 
4. Central Registrar; 
5. Multi-state co-operative societies which may be registered. 
6. Application for registration. 
7. Registration. 
8. Registration certificate. 
9. Amendment of bye-laws of a multi-state co-operative society. 
10. When amendment of bye-laws comes into force. 
11. Change of name. 
12. Change of address. 
13. Liability. 
14. Amalgamation, transfer of assets and liabilities, or division, of 
multi-state co-operative societies. 
15. Power to direct amalgamation or reorganisation in public in-
terest, etc. 
16. Central Registrar to prepare scheme of amalgamation or reorga-
nisation of cO!-Operative bank in certain cases. 
17. Liability of a co-operative bank to the Deposit Insurance Cor-
poration. 
18. Cancellation of registration certificate of multi-stater.o-operative 
societies in certain cases. 
19. Conversion of co-operative society into multi-state eo-operative 
society. 
CHAPI'ER III 
MEMBERS OF MULTI-STATE CO-OPERATIVE SOCIETIES AN'/) THJ:IB RIGHTS AlfD 
LIABILITIES 
20. Persons who may become members. 
21. Nominal members. 

(11) 
CLAUSES 
. 22: Member not to exercise rights till due payment made. 
23. Expulsion of members. 
24. Votes of members. 
25. Manner of exercising vote. 
26. RestrictiQlls on holding of shares. 
27. Restrictions on transfer of shares or interest. 
28. Redemption of shares. 
29. Transfer of interest on death of members. 
30. Liability of past member and estate of deceased member. 
CHAPTER IV 
D:mEcTION AND MANAGEMENT OF MULTI-STATE CO-OPERATIVE SOCIETIES 
.'" . 
31. General body, constitution, powers and functions. 
32. Annual general meeting of the general body. 
33. Special general meeting of the general body. 
34. Board of Directors. 
35. Representation of workers on the board of a multi-state co-
operative society. 
36. Disqualification for a member 01 a board. 
37. Election of members of board. 
38. Holding of office in co-operative 'Society. 
39. Restrictions on holding of office. 
40. Payment of honorarium. 
41. Removal of ele.!ted members by general body. 
42. Remo,val of member by Central Registrar. 
43. Nominee o£ Central Government or State Government on 
the board' of multi-state co-operative societies. 
44. Powers of the board of multi-state co-operative societies. 
45. Meetings of the board. 
46. Chief Executive. 
47. Powers and functions of Chief Executive. 
48. Committee of the board. 
49. Supersession of board. 
50. Securing possession of reco.rds, etc. 
51. Constitution of body of persons for preparation of list, etc. 
52. Acts of multi-state co-operative societies not to be invalidated 
by certain defects. 
CHAPI'ER V 
P1uvu.EGES OF Ml1LTI-STATE CO-OPERATIVE SOCIETIrs 
53. Multi-state co-operative society to be body corporate. 
54. Charge and set-off in respect of share or contribution or interest 
of members. 

CLAUSES 
55. Share or contribution or interest not liable to attachment 
56. Register of members. 
57. Admissibility of copy Oif entry as evidence. 
58. Exemption from compulsory registration of instruments. 
59. Deduction from salary to meet multi-state co-operative society', 
claim in certain cases. 
60. Government aid to multi-state co-operative societies. 
CHAPTER VI 
PROPERTIES AND FUNDS OF MULTI-STATE CO-OPERATIVE SOCIETI1!'B 
61. Funds not to be divided by way of profit. 
62. Disposal of net profits. 
63. Investment of funds. 
64. Restrictions on loans. 
65. Restrictions on borrowing. 
66. Restrictions on other transactions with non-members. 
67. Contributory provident fund. 
CHAPTER VII 
AUDIT, INQUIRY, INSPECTION AND SURCHARGE 
68. Audit. 
69. Inspection of multi-state co-operative societies. 
70. Inquiry by Central Registrar. 
71. Inspection of books of indebted multi-state co-operative 
societies. 
72. Costs of inquiry and inspection. " ... 
73. Recovery of costs. 
74. Surcharge. 
CHAPTER VIll 
SZ'l'TLEMENT OF DISPtJTB8 I ) 
75. Disputes. 
76. Limitation. 
77. Settlement of disputes. 
CHAPTER IX 
WINDING UP OF MULTI-STATE CO-OPERATIVE SOCIETIES 
78. Winding up of multi-state co-operative societies. 
79. Winding up of co-operative banks at the direction of Reserve 
Bank. 
80. Reimbursement to the Deposit Insurance 
liquidator. 
81. Liquidator. 
Corporation by 
J • 

(I\r) 
82. Powers of liquidator. 
83. Disposal of surplus assets. 
84. Priority of contributions assessed by liquidator. 
85. Power of Central Registrar to cancel registration of a multi-state 
co;-operative society. 
CHAPl'ER X 
ExECUTION OF DECREES, ORDERS AND DECISlIONS 
86. Execution of decisions, etc. 
87. Execution of orders of liquidator. 
88. Attacbment before award. 
89. Central Registrar or the person authorised by him to be civil 
court for certain purposes. 
90. Recovery <d sums due to Government. 
CHAPrER XI 
APPEALS AND REVISION 
91. Appeals. 
92. No appeal or revision in certain cases. 
93. Revision. 
94. Review. 
95. Interlocutory orders. 
CHAPTER XII 
SocrETIES WIDCH BECOME MULTI-STATE O<>-OPERATIVE SOC1I:TIES CONSEQUENT 
ON REORGANISATION 01' STATDJ 
96. Co-operative societies functioning immediately before reorgani-
sation of States. 
f11. Offences. 
CHAPTER XIII 
OFFENCES AND PEN'ALTIBS 
98. Cognizance ~ offence. 
CHAPTER XIV 
MIscl:LLA.NEOUS 
99. Copy of Act, rules, and bye-laws, ete., to be open to iAspeeUon. 
100. Power to exempt multi-state co-operative societies from condi-
tions as to registration. 
101. Liquidator to be public servant. 
102. Notice necessary in suits. 
103. Companies Act not to apply. 
104. SaVing of existing multi-state co-operative societies. 
105. Power to amend Second Schedule. 
106. Bar of jurisdiction of courts. 

CLAuSES 
107. Powers of civil court. 
108. Indemnity. 
109. Opening of branches. 
110. Power to make rules. 
111. Repeal. 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE. 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE. 

S 
As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABRA ON 
Bill No. 141 of lIt1' 
THE MULTI-STATE CO-OPERATIVE SOCIETIES B~, 1977 
A 
BILL 
to consolidate a.nd amend the law 1'ela.ting to co-ope1'ative societies with 
ob;ects not confined to one State and se1'Ving the interests of mem-
be1's in m01'e than one State. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-eighth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMJNARY 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Multi-state Co-operative Societies Short 
Act, 1977. title, 
extent 
(2) It extends to the whole of India. and 
com-
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government men.ce-
may, by notiftcation in the Official Gazette, appoint. ment. 
10 Z. The provisions of .this Act shall apply to-
2 of 1912. 
6 of 1942. IS 
20 
(a) societies which were incorporated before the commencement Appll-
of this Act, under the Co-operative Societies Act, 1912, or any other cation. 
law relating to co-operative societies in force in any State with 
objects not confined to that State or in pursuance of the provisions 
of the Multi-unit Co-operative Societies Act, 1942, and the registra-
tion of which has not been cancelled before such commencement; 
and ' 
(b) multi-state co-operative societies to be incorporated after the 
commencement of this Act. 
3. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requlres,-
(a) IIboard" means the board of directors or the governing body 
of a multi-state co-operati"V'e society, by whatever name called, to 
which the direction and control of the man,,~p.ment of the affairs of 
the society is entrusted:! 
Deftnl-
tiOlll. 

:a 
(b) "bye-laws" means the registered bye-laws for the time being 
in force and includes registered amendments of such bye-laws; 
(e) "Central Registrar" means a person appointed under sub-
section (1) of section 4 to perform the functions of the Central Re-
gistrar of Co-operative Societies under this Act and includes any S 
officer empowered to exeI'cise the powers of the Central Registrar 
under sub-section (2) of that section; 
(d) "Chief Executive" means a Chief Executive of a multi-state 
co-operative society appointed under section 46; 
(e) "co-operative bank" means a multi-state co-operative society 10 
undertaking banking business; 
(n "co-operative principles" means the principles specified in 
the First Schedule; 
(g) "co-operative srociety" means a society registered or deemed 
to be registered under any law relating to co-operative societies in 15 
force in any State; 
(h) ICco-operative year", in relation to any multi-state co-opera-
tive society or class of such societies, means the year ending on 
the 30th day of June and where the accounts of such society or class 
of societies are, with the previous sanction of the Central Registrar, :ao 
balanced on any other day, the year ending on such day; 
(i) "Deposit Insurance Corporation" means the Deposit Insur-
ance CorpOl'ation established under section 3 of the Deposit Insurance 47 of 1961_ 
Corporation Act, 1961; 
(;) IImember" means a person joining in the application fol' the 25 
registration of a multi-state co-operative society and Ii person admit-
ted to membership after such registl'ation in accordance with the pro-
visions of this Act, the rules and the bye--laws and includes a nominal 
member; 
(k) "multi-state co-operative society" means a society registered 30 
or deemed to be registered under this Act and includes a national co-
operative society; 
(1) IImulti-state co-operative society with limited liability" 
means a society havin{{ the liability crt its members limited by its bye-
laws to the amount, if any, unpaid on the shares respectively, held 35 
by them or to such amount as they may, respectively, thereby under-
take to contribute ta the assets of the society, in the event of its being 
wound up; 
(m) "national co-operative society" means a multi-state co-
operative society listed in the Second Schedule; 40 
(n) "nominal member" means a member who possesses only 
such privileges and rights of a member, anr{ who is subject only to 
such liabilities of a member, as may be specified in the bye-laws; 
(0) Ifnotiftcation" means a notification published in the Official 
Gazette; 45 
(p) I'officer" means a president, vice-president, chairman, vice-
chairman, managing director, secretary, manager, member of a board, 
treasurer, liquidator, an administrator and includes any other per-
son empowered under this Act OT' the rules or the bye-laws to give 
directions in regard to the business nf a multi-state co-operative 50 
society; 

20f 193" 
S 
3 
(q) . "prescribed"' means prescribed by rules; 
(r) "Reserve Bank" means the Reserve Bank of India constitut-
ed by the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934; , . 
(8) "rules" means the rules made under this Act. 
CHAPTER II 
CENTRAL REGISTRAR AND REGISTRATION' OF SOCIETIES I 
4. (1) The Central Government may appoint a person to be the Central 
Beglstrar of Co-operative SoeietieslUld may appoint o&her penons 
to assist ,bim. 
10 (2) The Ceiltral Government may, by notification, direct that any 
power exercisable ,by the Central Registrar under this Act (pther than 
the power of registration of a multi-state co-operativa society)' shall, in 
relation to such society, and 'such matters, as may be sp ~gified in the 
notification be exercisable also by any other officer of the Central Gov-
IS ernment or of .. State Government,'Jlubject to such conditions"s9'may be 
specified therein: 
Provided that no officer of a State GoVternment shall be empowered 
to exercise any power in relation to a national co-operative society: 
Pro'vided further that no .officer of a S~te Govern~ent below the 
20 rank of the Registrar of Co-operative Soc:cties shan be empowere.:l to 
exercise any power exercisable by the Central Registrar under section 88, 
5. (1) No multi-state co-operative society shall be registered .under 
this Act, unless the main aim of the society is such as to render it neces-
sary to serve the interests of members in more than one State. 
2S (2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (1), a multi-state co-
operative society, which has as its aims the promotion of the economic 
and social betterment of its members through mutual aid in accordance 
,with the co-operative prinCiples or a multi-state co-operative, soci&!ty 
established with the object of facilitating the operations of other such 
30 societies or of co-operative societies or of both may be registered under 
this Act. 
(3) The word "Limited" or its equivalent ih any Indian language shall 
be su1fl.xed to the name of every multi-state co-operative society reglstet-
ed under this Act with limited liability. 
35 6, (1) For the purposes of registration of a multi-state co-operative 
lociety. under this Act, an application sha'l be made to the Central Re'gls-
trar in such form ~d with such partlculal'S as may be prescribed. 
40 
50 
:(2) The application shall be signe1-
(a) in the case o.f a multi-state co-operative society of which an 
the members are individuals, by at least ftfty persons; 
(b) in the case of a multi-state co-operative society pf which 
the members are co-operative societies, by duly authorised persons,OII 
behalf of at least two such societies as are situated in more than o~e 
State; and 
(c) . in the ease of a multi-state co-operative society of 'Which 
another multi-state co-operative aoclety and' other cOoo~atift 
societies are members, by authorised representatives:of each such 
societies: 
Provided that such application shall, in relation to co-operative 
societies, be signed by authorised representatives of not less than 
two co-operative sociaties from two different States. 
.'; ': ,~.: 
Central 
RelistIV. 
Multi-
state 
oo-ope-
r.atwe 
SOCieties 
whidl 
maybe 
re,i-
teredo 
Applica-
ttonfor 
ree.:"'· 
tratil&: ' 
• ,~,!'."~ 
.: Jfl!1ll • 
, :'" ·.r: 
I.: 'I ~fr 
J •. 
-ll 'v,.., , 
.r", ~'Jl' '. 
!, If J.f~ • ... !7;e 
"or;'. 

...... 
traUoD. 
1Amea4-
meMo! 
bJe-laWI 
oh 
multl-
ltateco-
aperatlve 
1Dclet7'. 
4 
(3) The application slulll be accom~ by a copy Of ,the proposed 
bye-laws of the multi-state co-operative society and the persons by whom 
or on' whose behalf such, application is' made shall furnish such infor-
mation in regard to the society as the Central Registrar may require. 
, , 
7. (1) If the Central Registrar is satWied- , 
(a) that the application cqp1plies with the provisions of this Act 
and the rules;' 
(b) that the' proposed maltilstate' co.:.operafive 'Society satisftes 
the basic criterion that its aim is such as to render ft !ieeeSsaTy to 
aerve the interests of members in' more than ODe State; 
(c) that the majority of the individual members do not reside 
in one State; 
(d) that there is no other multi-state co-operative 'lOc:iety 
having aimilaI" area of operation and identical objectives; 
10 
(e) that the proposed bye-laws are not contrary to the provi- 15 
siems of this Act and the rules; and 
(I> that the proposed multi-state co-operative SOCiety nas rea-
sonable prospects of becoming a viable unit; 
he may register the multi-state co-operative society and its bye-laws. 
(2) Where the Central Registrar refuses to register a multi-state 20 
co-operative society, he shall communicate the order of refusal together 
with the reasons therefor, to such of the applicants as may be pres-
cribed. 
(3) The application for registration shall be disposed of by the 
Central Registrar within a pertOC!l of six months from the date of receipt 25 
thereof by him: 
Provided that if the Central Registrar is unable to dispose of the 
ap~lication within the period aforesaid, he shall make a report to the 
Centl'al Government 'Stating thE:r,ein the reasoris for his inability to do so, 
and the Central Government may allow him such further period or 30 
periods as is considered necessary to dispose of such application. 
8. Where a multi-state co-operative society is registered under this 
Act, the Central Registrar shall issue a certificate of registration signed 
by him, which shall be conclusive evi:d~nce that. the society therein 
mentioned is duly registerecl under this Act, unless it is proved that the 3S 
registration of the society has been cancelled. 
t. (1) No amendment of any bye-laws of a multi-state co-operative 
society shall be valid, unless such amen.dment has been registered under 
this Act. 
. (2) Every proposal. for S1lchamendment shall be forwarded to ttie 40 
'0IIItal Registrar and' it the ,Ceatral Registrar is watisfted that ·the pro-
p.ed amendment-
(a) is not contrary to the proviSIOns of this Act or of the rules; -
(b) does not CODIlict with. CQ-Opel.·ative princ;iples; and 

5 
(c) will promote the economic interests of the meJiDbers ot ,tM 
multi-state co-.operative society; 
he may register the amendment within a period of six months from the 
ate of! receipt thereof by him: 
5 Provided that if the Central Registrar is unable to register the 
amendment within the period aforesaid, he shall make a report to the 
c.kal Gov.ernmeJ)t stating .. ther~n the reasons for his inability :to do 
so, and the Central Government may allow . him such further period or 
periods as is considered necessary to register the amendment. 
10 (3) The Central Registrar shall forward to the multi-state co-opera-
tiiVe society a copy of the registered amendment topther w~ a certi-
ficate signed by him and such certificate shall be CODcluaive ·nldeDCe 
that the amendment has been duly registere(i. 
(4) Where the Central Registrar refuses to register an amendment 
15 of the bye-laws of a multi-state co-operative society, he shall commu-
nicate the order of refusal together with the reasons' therefor to the 
society' in the manner preScribed withip seven aaysfrom' the date of 
such refusal. 
10. An amendment of the bye-laws of a multi~state cD--ope.t:a.tive 
20 society shall, unle&s it is expressed to, come into operation on a partJ .. 
cular day, come into f<>rce on the day on which it is registereci. 
11. (1) A multi-state co-operative society may, by an amendment 
of 'its bye-laws, change its name but such change shaU not affect any 
right or obligation of the multi-state co-operative society or of any of 
25 its members or pas.t members, ancl any l~al proceedings which mi'ght 
have been continued or commenced by or against the multi-state co-
operative society by its former name may be contlhued or CODlmeaeed 
by its new name. 
(Z) Where a multi-state co-operative society changes 'its name, the 
30 Centr'al Registrar shall enter the; new name on the regtster of multl-
state co-operative societies in place of' the former name and shan amend 
thei certificate of regi'StrationaecDrdingly. . 
It. Every multi-state eo-operativesoclety shall have a principal ~. 
of business and an address registered in the manner prescribed to wtHeh 
35 all notices and communications may be seQt and any change in the prin-
cipal place of business of a multi-state co-operative society sban be 
made with the previous approval of the Central Registrar. 
13.(1) No multi-state co-operative society with unlimited )iabfllty 
shall be registered afte1." the. cotnmencmten't o~ this Aet~ 
40 Provi<{ed that wQel'e amult.i.-sta~; co-operativ.e .IOCi~y wHb UDlimlte4 
liability fuaetilims before the . eom,rnencement of . .this Act, such socIeti1 
. sh.u e.x.ercise the ,option wi1lb.ina. period cd one year from such COJll-
mencement either to continue to function as such or to convert itaeIf 
Into a multi-state co-operative society with liRNted lialj)ility byfollowla, 
45 the procedure specified in sUlb sections (2) to (4). 
• , ,,'". I' 
(2) Subject to thepwvisions of ~ Act and thenlel, a mw.u..tate 
ell-operative society may, by an amendment of its b~ws, c~&e uae 
extent of its liability. 
w-. ........ __ of· 
,."...-
eo.. 
iAIe 
bee. 
Ch-re 
of· 
name. 
Chan,e of 
addr .... 
LlablUt)'. 

Amal~a­
ma ..... 
tNnIf., 
01,: ..... 
.dU&-
biliti_. ' 
01' diYI-: 
sion"ot 
m.ul~i " 
state CB-, 
opel'af,ive 
societle8. 
6 
(3) When a multi-state co-operative society has passed a resolution 
ilochange the extent of its liability. it shall give notice thereof in wll'it-
ing to aU its members and creditors. and. notwithstanding anything 'Con-
tain"" in th,e bye-laws or contract to the contrary, any member or cre-
ditor shall, during the period of one month from the date of service of S 
t~e notice upon him. have the option of withdrawing his shares, deposits 
e~ loans, as the case ma~ be. 
(4) Any member or creditor who does not exercise his optiOn withtn 
the period specified in sub-section (3) shall be deemed to have assented 
to the change. 10 
(5) An amendment of a bye-law of a multi-state co-operativ~ society 
changing ,the extent of its liability shall not be registered or shall not 
take ,eftect until either-
(a) the assent thereto of' all members and creditors has been 
obtained; or IS 
(b) all claims of members and creditors who exarcise the option 
referred '"to in ~ub-section (3) within the period' spe~ifted therei~ 
have been met in full or otherwise satisfied. 
14. (1) A multi-state co-operative society may, with the prior con-
sUltati'on of the Central Registrar and 'by a resolution passed by a majo- 20 
rttyof not less"than two-thirds of the members present and voting at a 
general meeitlng: of the society,-
r: 
.• j'" 
(4) transfer its assets and liabilities in whole or in part to any 
other multi-state co-operative society or a co-operative SOCiety; 
(b) divide itself into two or more multi-state co-operative 2S 
socie\ies; I ' , 
(c) divide itself into two or more co-opentive societies . 
v {~~ Any two or more multi-state co-operative 'Societies may, with 
the prior consultation of the Central Registrar and by a resolQ.tion 
passed by a majority (j,f not less than two-thirds of the members present 30 
and voting at a general meeting of ~ach such society, amalgamate them-
selves and term a new multi-state co-operative society. ' 
(3) The resolution of a multi-sbte co-operative society under tub-
1() ': ,(, sectioD (1) CJr sub-section (2) shall contain all particulars of the transfJ!r 
I, " or division or amalgamation, as the caSe may be: 35 
Provided that in the caSe of a co-operative bank, the Central Regis-
trar shall not accord approval to any such resolution without the previ-
ous sanction in writing of the Reserve Bank. ' 
, 
(4) When a multi-state co-operative, society has passed a resolution 
under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), it shall give notice thereof in 40 
writing to aU the members and creditors and, .notwithitandin'g anything 
contained in the bye-laws or contract to the ,~ontrary, any member or 
ereditor shall, during the periOO of one month of the date of service 'of, 
the 'notice upon him, have the option of withdrawing his sures, deposits 
ot' loans, as the case may be, 4S 
(5) Any member or creditor Whd does not exercise his option within ?,' 
the period Specifted in"sub-sectton (4) shall be deemed to have assented 
to the pfaposals contained in the resolution. 

7 
(6) (a) A resolution passed by a multi-state co-operative society 
under this section shall not take effect until the assent thereto of all 
the members and creditors has been obtained. 
(b) The multi-stat~ co-operative society shall make arrangements for 
5 meeting in full or otherwise satisfying all claims of the members and 
creditors who exercise the option within the period specified in sub-
section (4). 
(7) On receipt of an application for the registration of new societies 
formed by division in accordance with the resolution passed under sub-
Io.section (1) or of a new society formed by amalgamation in accordance 
with the resolution passed under sl.lb-section (2), the Central Registrar, 
on being satisfied that the resolution has become effective under sub-
section (6) shall, unless for reasons to be recorded in writing he thinks 
fit to refuse so to do. register the new societies or society. as the case 
IS may be, and the bye-laws thereof. 
(8) On the iSiSue of an order under sub-section (7), the provisions 
of section 18 shall, so far as may be, apply to the multi-state co-operati.ve 
'Society so divided or the multi-state co-operative societies so amal-
gamated. 
20 (9) Where a resolution passed by a multi-state co-operative society 
under this section involves the transfer of any assets and liabilities, the 
resolution shall, notwithstanding anything contained in any law for' 
the time being in force, be a suffiCient conveyance to vest the aasets and 
liabilities in the transferee without any further assurance. 
2S 15. (1) Where the Central Registrar is satisfied that it is essential 
in the public interest, or in the interest of the co-operative movement, 
or for the purpose of securing the proper management of any multi-
state co-operative society that two Or more multi-state co-operative 
societies should be amalgamated or reorganised, then, notwithstanding 
30 anything contained in section 14,' but subject to the provisions 01 this 
section, the Central Registrar may, by order, provide for the amalgama-
tion or reorganisation of these societies into a single society or into 
societies with such constitution, property rights, interests and autho-
rities and such liabilities, duties and obligations, as may be specified 
35 in the order: 
Provided that no such order of amalgamation, or reorganisation in 
respect of a co-operative bank shall be made without the previous 
sanction ~n writing of the Reserve Bank. 
(2) No order shall be made under this section. unless,-
40 (a) a copy of the proposed order has been sent in draft to the 
45 
mUlti-state co-operative SOCiety or each of the societies concerned; 
and 
(b) the Central Registrar has considered and made such modi-
fications in the draft order as may seem to him desirable in the 
light of any suggestions and objections which may be received by 
him within such period (not being less than three months from 
the date on which a copy of the order aforesaid is received by the 
·society or societies, as the case may be), as the Central Registrar 
may fix in that behalf, either from the SOCiety or from any of the 
'":' 
, • I 
Power~ 
direct 
amalla-
ma~ 
or reor", 
pnisatlon 
in public 
interest, 
etc. 
-; 

Central 
Belistrar 
to pre-
pare 
scheme 
of amal-
gamation 
or re-
orpniJa-
tion of 
co-opera. 
tlve 
banklD 
certaia' 
e .... 
Liatiijl~ 
of • 
co-opera-
tive'baDk 
to the 
Deposit 
lnauranee 
Corpora-
tion. 
CaneeDI-
tion at 
reliatrl-
tiOD 
certift-
Cite of 
multi-
stlte co-
operative 
lOCietles 
In certalD 
e .... 
,; 
8 
societies 'concerned or from any member or class of members 
thereof or from any creditor or class of creditors thereof. 
(3) The order referred to in sub-section (1) may contain such inci-
deIltal, COMequefttiat' and supplemental provisions as may, in the opinion 
of the Central Registrar, be necessary to give effe.ct to the ama~gamati()n, S 
or reorganisation, as the case may be. 
(4) Every member or creditor of each of the multi-state co-operative 
s~s to be amalgamated, or reorganised, who has objected to the 
sebelne of amalgamation, or reorganisation, within the period speeiftecl, 
shatt be entitled to receive, on the issue of the order of amalgamation, 10 
or reorg81'lisation, his share or interetrt, if he be a member, M'ld the 
amount in satisfaetion of his dues, if he- be a creditor. 
,~~) On the issue of an ord~ unde~) sub-section (1), the provisions 
of sub-sections (2), (3) and (4) of section 18 shall apply to the multi-
state co-operative societies so amalgamated, or reorganised, as if the IS 
amalgamation, or reorganisation, had been made under section 14. 
M. When an ;order of moratorium bas been made by the Central 
Governmen:t under sub-section (2) of section 45 of the Banking Regu.la-
tion Act, 1949, in respect of a co·operative bank, the Central Registrar, 10 of 1949. 
w.~th the previous approval of the Reserve Bank in writing, may, during 20 
the period of· moratorium, prepare a scheme-
(6) fO!' the amalgamation of the co..operative bank with any 
other co-operati\"e 1!oank; or 
(b) fOl' ,the reorganisation of the co-operative bank. 
11. Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 14 and 15 or any 25 
other provision ·of this Act, where a co-operative bank, being an insured 
bank within the meaning of the Deposit Insurance Corporation Act, 
198!, :is amalgamated or reorganised and the Deposit Insurance Corpo- 47 of 1961. 
ration has become liable to pay to the depositors of the insured bank 
u~der sub-section (2) of section 16 of that Act, the bank with which 30 
such insured bank is amalgamated, or the new co-operative bank formed 
after such amalgamation, or as the case may be, the insured bank or 
transferee bank shan be under an obligation to repay to the Deposit 
Insurance Corporation in the circumstances, to the extent and in the 
manner referred to in section 21 of the Deposit Insurance Corporation 35 
Act, 1961. 
11. (l) Where the whole of the assets and liabilities of a multi-
state co-operative society are transferred to another multi-state ,C0-
operative society or to a co-operative society in accordance with the provi-
sions of section 14 or section 15, the reg'istration of the first-mentioned 40 
multi-"State ~operative society shall stand caneelled and the soc:iety 
shall be det!med to 'have Dt!en dissolved and shall cease to exist u a 
co~rate bOdy~ 
(2) Where, two or· more multi-et8te co-operative societies are amal-
aamated into a new multt4tate· co-operati-ve society in accCJrdaliCe with 45 

9 
the provisions of section 14 or SecijOD 15, the registration of .each of the 
amalgamating 'Societies shaU stand cancelled on the registration of the 
.aew society, and each society ~hall be deemed to have been dissolved 
and shall cease to exist as a corporate body. 
5 (3) Where a multi .. state co-operative society divides itself into two 
or more multi .. state co-operativesocieties or two or more eo-operative 
l'Iocwties in accordance with the pmvisions of section 14, theregiatration 
of that society shall stand cancelled on the registration of the new 
societies, and that society shall be deemed to have been dissolved and 
10 shall cease to exist as a corporate body. 
(4) The amalgamation and splitting of multi-state ce-operative 
societies shall not in any manner whatsoever affect any right or obli-
gation of the resulting multi-state co-operative society or societies or 
rellder defective any legal prcx:~dings by or against the multi-state co-
IS operative society or societies, and any legal Proceedings that might have 
been continued or commenced by ·or against the multi-state co~perative 
society or societies, as the case may be, before the amalgamation or spUt-
ting may be continued or commenced by or against the resulting multi-
state co-operative society or societies. 
30 (5) Where a multi-state co..:operative society has not commenced 
business within a period of three months of the date of its registration 
or such extended period as the Central Regi'.drar may allow in this 
behalf or has ceased to function or if the Central Registrar is satisfted, 
after making such inquiry a'S he thinks fit, that the society no longer 
2S has genuinely as its aim one or more of the objects specified in seetion 5 
and that its registration ought in the interest of the general public be 
(,Ilncelled, he shall make an order cancelling the registration of the multi-
state co-operative s'ociety and the multi-state co-operative society shall, 
from the date of such order of cancellation, be deemed to be dissolved 
30 and shall cease to exist as a corporate body. 
19. (1) A co-operative society may, by an amendment of its bye-laws, 
extend its jurisdiction and convert itself into a multi-state O(MJperative 
society and no such amendment of bye-laws of a co-operative lOCiety 
&hall be valid unless it has been registared by the Central Registrar. 
35 (2) (a) Every proposal for -such amendment shall be forwarded to 
the Central Registrar. 
(b) If the Central Registrar, after consulting the Registrar of Co-
operative Societies of the State concerned, has satisfied himself of 
the need for such amendment under sub-seCtion (2) of section 9, he may 
40 register the amendment within a period of six months from the date of 
receipt thereof by him: 
Provided that if the Central Registrar is· unable to register the 
amendment within the period aforesaid, he shall maka a .report to the 
Central Government stating therein the reasons for his inability to do so, 
45 and the Central Government may· allow him such further period or pl!rlods 
as is considered necessary to register· the amendment. 
(3) The Central Registrar sh'lllforward to: the co-operatfve· society 
a copy of the registered amendment together with a certi~ate signed by 
him and such certificate shall beconrlusive evidence that the amend-
so mat bas been registered. 
t :.~ '. 
., 
Conver-
8ion of 
co-opera-
tive 
society 
iI,to 
multi-
state 
co-opera· 
tive 
society. 

Persons 
who 
... 
become 
members. 
10 
(4) Where the Central Registrar refuses to register an amendmeht 
of the bye-laws of a co:operative society, he shall communicate the order 
cf refusal together with the reasons therefor to the society in the 
manner prescribed within seven days £rom the date of refusal. . 
(5) . (a) Once the amendment of bye-laws has been registered by the' 5 
'Central Registrar, the co-operative sociaty shall, as from the date of 
registration of amendment, become a multi-state co-Operative society. 
(b) The Central Registrar shall forward to the co-operative society a 
certificate signed by him to the effect that such society has been registered ,\1 
as a multi-Sltate co-operative society under this Act and also forward a 10 
copy of the same to the Registrar of Co-operative Societies of the State 
concerned. 
(e) The Registrar of Co-operative Societies referred to in clause (b) 
shall thereupon make an order directing that the society had, as from 
the date of registration by the Central Registrar, ceased to be a society IS 
under the law relating to co-operative societies in force in that State. 
CHAPTER III 
MEMBERS OF MULTI-STATE CO-oPERA'lIVE SOCIETIES AND 'l'He:IR 
RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES 
20. (1) No person shall be admitted as member of a multi-state co- 20 
operative society except the following, namely:-
(a) an individual competent to contract under section 11 of the 
Indian Contract Act, 1872; 9 of 1872, 
(b) any multi-state co-operative society or any co-operative 
society; 
(c) the Central Government; 
(d) a State Government; 
(e) the National Co-operative Development Corporation estab-
lished under the National Co-operative Development Corporation 
Act, 1962; 30 26 of 1962. 
(f) any other corporation owned or controlled by Government; 
(g) any Government company as defined in section 617 of the 
Companies Act, 1956; 
(h) such class or classes of per'sons or association of persons as 
may be permitted by the Central Registrar having regard to the 35 
nature and activities of a multi-state co-operative society. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), no indi-
vidual shall be eligible for admission as a member of any national co-
operative society: 
Provided that such number of individutis possessing such qualifica- 40 
t.ions as may be prescribed may be admitted as members of the National 
Co-operative Union of India Limited. 
(3) Any person eligible for membership in a multi-state cOl'"operative 
society may, on application, be admitt£-d as a member by such society. 
of 1956 

II 
(4) Every application for admission as a member of a multi-state 
co-operative society shall be disposed of hy such society within a period 
of six months from the date of receipt of the application, and the decision 
of such society On the application shall be communicated to the applicant 
S within fifteen days from the date of such decision: 
Provided that if the decision is not communicated within a period of 
six months from the date of receipt of the application, the multi-state 
co-operative society shall be rleemed to have made a decision. on the date 
of expiry of such period, refusing admission to the applicant. 
10 (5) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, the Govern-
ment may, having regard to the fact that the interest of any person or 
cIaSlS of persons conflicts or is likely to conflict with the objects of any 
multi-state co-operative society or class of multi-state co-operative 
societies. by general or special order published in the Official Gazette, 
IS declare that any person or class of persons engaged in or carrying on any 
profession, bus8.ness or employment shall be disqualified from being 
arbnitted, or for continuing, as members or shall be eli'gJbIe for member-
ship only to a limited extent of any specified multi-state co-oper'ltive 
society or class of multi-state co-operative societies, so long as such 
20 person or persons is or are engaged in or carrying on that profession, 
business or employment, as the case may be. 
21. (1) NotWithstanding anything contained in clause (e) or clau'Se (I) 
or clause (g) of sub-section (1) of section 20, a multi-state co-operative 
society may admit any person as a nominal member in accordance with 
2S in: bye-laws. 
(2) A nominal member shall not be entitled to any share in any 
form whatsoever in the assets or profits of the multi-state co-operative 
society. 
(3) Save as otherwise provided in this section, a nominal member 
30 shall have such privileges and ri'ghts of a member, and be subject to such 
liabilities of a member, as m~y be specified in the bye-laws of a multi-
state co-operative society. 
22. No member of a multi-state co-operative society shall exercise 
the rights of a member, unless he has made such payments to the society 
3S in respect of membership. or has acquired such interest j'l the society. as 
may be specified in the bye-laws. 
Members 
not to 
exerclle 
rilbta 
un 
due 
payment 
made. 
23. (1) A multi-state co-operative society may, by resolution passed Expul-
by a majority of not less than two-thirds of the members present and ~~~=ra 
voting at a general meeting of members held for the purpose, expel a • 
40 member for acts which are detrimental to the proper working of the 
lociety: 
Provided that the member concerned shall not be expelled unless he 
bAS been given an opportunity of making representation in the matter. 
(2) No member of a multi-state co-operative society who has been 
45 expelled under sub-section (1) shall be eligible for re-admission as a 
member of that society, or for admission as a member of any other multi-
.tatE' co-operative society for a period of two years from the date ot such 
expuJ.1on: 

VoW 
of 
memben. 
Manner 
ofexer-
cil1D8 
vote. 
RNtrlo-
tiona on 
holdinl 
ofahlr-. 
ReJtrlo. 
tiona on 
tra.!e 
of IhareI 
or m-
terelt. 
12 
Provi4ed that the Central Registrar may, on application of • mulU-
state co-operative society and in special circumstances, sanction the re-
admission or admission within the said period, of any such member U, 
,a member of the said society or of any other multi-state co-operative 
foeiety, as the case may be. S 
14. Every member of a multi-state co-operative' society, tncludtnl a 
a :member who is an employee of such society, shall have one vote in the 
affairs of the society: 
Provided that-
(a) a member who is an employee of such society shall not be 10 
entitled to voie-
(i) at an election of a member of the board of such society, 
other than an election referred to in section 35; 
(ii) in any general meeting convened for framing the bye-
laws of such society or any am('ndments thereto; IS 
(b) in the ca'Se of an equality of votes, the chairman shall have 
a second or casting vote; 
(e) a nominal member shall not have the Tight to vote; 
(d) where any of the authorities referred to in clauses (c) to 
(g) of sub-section (1) of section 2(.) is a member of a multi-ltate :ao 
co-operative society, each person nominated by such authority, on 
the board of directors, in accordance with the provisions contained 
in this Act and the rules shall have one vote; 
(e) a multi-state co-operative society, the members of which 
include co-operative societies or other multi-state co-operative so- 25 
cieties, may provide for an equitable system of voting. 
25. (1) Every member of a multi-state co-operative society shall 
exercise his vote in person and no member shall be permitted to vote 
by proxy. 
(2) NotWithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), a multi- 30 
state co-operative society or a co-operative society which is a member of 
another multi-state eo-operative society, may, subject to the rules, 
appoint one of its members to 'Vote on its behalf in the affairs of that 
other society . 
•. No member, other than any of the authorities referred to in cla- 35 
useR (c) to (g) of sub-section (1) of section 20 or a multi-state co-opera-
tive society or a co-operative society shall,-
Ca) hold more than such portion of the total share capital of the 
society (in no caSe exceeding one-fifth thereof) as may be prescribed, 
or 
(b) have or claim any interest in the shares of the society exceetl-
ing ten thousand rupees: 
Provided that the Central Government may, by notification, specify 
in respect of any class of societies a higher or lower maximum than 
one-fifth of the share capital or. as the eaSe may be, a higher or lower 45 
amount than ten thousand rupees. 
2'1. The transfer of the share or interest of a member in the caJrltal 
of a multi-state co-operative society shall be subject to such conditions 
as to maximum, holdin~ as are speCified in section 26. " 

· 13 
.21 •. ~hQl'e& held in a multi-state co-operative society by any of the 
authorities r~ferred to in clauses (c) to (g) of sUb-section (1) of section 
20 shall be redeemable in accordance with the bye-laws of such multi~ 
state co-operative society and in a case where the bye-laws do not con~ 
S tain any provision in this regard, in such manner as may be agreed upon 
between a multi-state co-operative society and such authority. 
29. (1) On the death of a member. a multi-state co-operative society 
may transfer the share or interest of the deceased member to the person 
nominated in accordance with the rules made in this behalf. or, if there 
10 is no person so nominated, to such person as may appear to the board to 
be the heir or legal representative of the deceased m(Wber, or pay to 
such nominee, heir or legal representative, as the case may be, a sum 
representing the value of such member's share or interest as ascertained 
in accordance with the rules: 
15 Providecf. that no such transfer or payment shall be made except 
with the consent of the nominee, heir or legal representative, so; the 
case may be. 
(2) A multi-state co-operative society shall, unless within six months 
of the death of the member prevented by an order of a competent court, 
20 pay to such nominee, heir or legal representative, as the case may be, 
all other moneys due to the deceased member from the sodety. 
(3) All transfers and payments made by a multi-state co-operative 
society in accordance wi~h the provisions of this section shall be valid 
and effectual against any demand made upon the society by any other 
25 person. 
30. (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), the liabWty ot 
a past member or of the estate of a deceased member of a multi-state 
co-operative society for the debts of the SOCiety as they eXisted,-:-
(0) in the case o~ a past member, on the date on which he 
30 ceased to be a member; 
(b) in the case of a deceased member, on the date of his death, 
shall continue for a period of two years from such date. 
(2) Where a multi-state co-operative society is ordered to be wound 
up under section 78, the liability of a past member who ceas8d to be a 
35 member or of the estate of a deceased member who died within two 
years immediately preceding the date of the order of winding up, shall 
continue until the entire liquidation proceedings are completed, but such 
liability' shall extend only to the debts of the society as they existed on· 
the date of cessation of membership or death, as the case may be. 
CHAPTER IV 
Tran_ 
ofint..-
on death of 
membera. 
Liabll1ty 
of put 
member 
and 
estate 
of de-
cealed 
membet. 
DDu!:cTION AND MANAGEMENT OF MULTI-STATE CO-OPERATIVE SOCIETDS 
31. (1) The general body of a multi-state co-operative society shall 
consist of all the members ot such soCiety: 
Provided that where. the· bye-laws of a multi-atate co-operative society 
.. , provide for the constitution of a smaller body consisting of delegates of 
memberl of the society elected or selected in accordance with such bye-
laWI, the small body shall exercise such powers of the general body al 
.. ,. ~ prescribed or as may be specified in the bye-laws of the society. 
Genen1 
body, 
conatitu .. 
tion. '. 
POWerI 
and 
tunetioM. 

Annual 
pneral 
meeting 
of the 
general 
body. 
Specia1 
general 
meetln, 
of tire 
general 
body. 
(2) Where in any meeting of the general body or the board of • 
multi-state co-operative society, a c(H)perative society or another multi-
state co-operative society is to be represented, such co-operative society 
or other multi-state co-operative society shall be represented in such 
meeting only through the chairman or the Chief Executive of such co- 5 
operative society or other multi-state co-operative society, as the case 
may be, and where there is no board of such co-operative society or 
other multi-state co-operative society. for whatever reasons, through 
the administrator, by whatever name called, of such co-operative society 
or other multi-state co-operative society. 
(3) The general body of a mUlti-state co~perative SOCiety shall have 
the following powers, namely:-
(a) consideration of the audit report and annual report; 
(b) disposal of net profits; 
10 
(c) approval of the programme of activities for the ensuing year; IS 
(d) amendment of bye-laws; 
(e) elecLion, if any, of the members of the board, other than 
nominated members, subject to the prov.isions of section 37. 
32. (1) Every multi-state co-operative society shall, within a period 
of nine months after the close of the year, call a general meeting of its 20 
members in the manner prescribed: 
Provided that the Central Registrar may, by general or special order, 
extend the period for holding such meeting for a further period not ex-
ceeding three months: 
Provided fur1;her that if in the opinion of the Central Registrar no 25 
such extension is necessary or such meeting is not called by the multi-
state co-operative society within the extended period, if any, granted by 
him, the Central Registrar or any person authorised by him in this behalf 
may call such meeting in the manner prescribed, and that meeting shall 
be deemed to be a general meeting duly called by the SOCiety and the 30 
Central Registrar may order that the expenditure incurred. in calling such 
a meeting shall be paiC\ out of the funds of the society or by such person 
or persons who, in the opinion of the Central Registrar, was or were res-
ponsible for the refusal or failure to convene the general meeting. 
(2) At every annual general meeting of: a multi-state co-operative 35 
society the boa~d shall lay before the society a statement showing the 
details of the loans or goods on credit, if any, given to any of the mem-
bers of tIle board or to the spoUse or a son or daughter of a member 
of the board during the preceding year or outstanding against him or 
against such spouse or son or daughter of the member of the board. 40 
33. (1) The Chief Executive of a mUlti-state co-operative society. by 
whatever designation called, may, at any time, on the direction of the 
board, call a special general meeting of the society and shall call . such 
meeting within one month after the receipt of a requisition in writing 
from the Central Registrar or from such number of members or a pro- 45 
portion of the total number of members, as may be provided in the bye-
law •• 

15 
(2) If a special general meeting of a multi-state co-operativ8 society 
is Dot called in accordance with the requisition referred to in sub-section 
(1), the Central Registrar or any person authorised by him in this be-
half shall have the power to call such meeting and that meeting shall be 
5 deemed to be a meeting called by the Chief Executive in accordance 
with the provisions of that SUb-section and the Central Registrar may 
order that ilie expenditure incurred in calling such meeting shall be 
paid out of the funds of the society or by such person or persons Who, 
in the opinion 'of the Central Re(istrar, was or were responsible lor the 
10 refusal or failure to convene the special general meeting. 
34. Subject to the provis.ions of this Act and the rules, there shall be 
a board of directors for every multi-state co-operative society consisting 
of such number of members as may be provided for under the bye-laws. 
35. (1) «(I) There shall be reserved in such class of multi-state co-
IS operative societies, as may be prescribed, such number of seats as are 
mentioned in SUb-section (2) to represent the employees of a multi-state 
co-operative society on the boal'd of such society. 
(b) In prescribin'g the class of multi-state co-operative societies under 
clause (a), the Central Government shall have due regard to-
20 (i) the nature and actiVIties of a multi-state co-operative society; 
(ii) the number of persons employed by such society; and 
(iii) any other relevant factor. 
(2) The number of seats to be reserved under sub..section (1) shall 
be- • ,I ... ,., I. 
(a) if the number of members of the board of a multi-state co-
operative society is eleven or less-one seat; and 
(b) if the number 01 such members is twelve or more--one ad-
ditional seat for every ten members over and above the first eleven 
members: 
30 Provided that the maximum number of seats reserved under this 
sub-section shall not exceed two. 
(3) The seats reserved under this ~tion shall be filled by election 
from amongst employees of a multi-state co-operative society. 
36. No member of any multi-state co-operative society or nominee 
35 of a member-society on a national co-operative society shall be eligible 
for being chosen as, or for being, a member of the board of directors 01 
luch multi-state co-operative society or national co-operative society or 
of any other co-operative SOCiety to which the mUlti-state co-operative 
society is affiliated, if such member-
45 
So 
«(I) is a minor or has been adjudged by a competent court to be 
illiolvent or of unsound mind; , 
(b) is concerned or participates in the profifa of any contract 
with the society: 
(c) has been convicted for an otlence involving moral turpitude. 
(d) holds any o1Jice or place of profit under the society: 
Provided that the Chief Executive, by whatever desipation 
called, or a person who is in full time employ of a multi-ltate c0-
operative society and holding such office as may be notified by the 
CeJ:ltral Government in the Official Gazette from time to time or a 
person elected by the employees of such society to represent ~m 
on the board of such society shall not be deemed to bold otIlce or 
place of proAt under sw:h society; 
&ard of 
directors, 
R'epre-
sentation 
of wor-
ker. on 
the board 
of a 
multi-
.tate 
co-ope_ 
rative 
society, 
Disquali. 
fication 
fora 
member 
of a 
board, 

ie 
(e) has been a member of the society for less than twe1~ 
months immediately preceding the date of such election or appoint-
ment; 
(1) has interest in any business of the kind carried on by the 
society of which he is a member; S 
(g) who has taken loan or goods on credit from the society of 
which he is a member, or is otherwise indebted to such society and 
after the receipt of a notice of default issued to him by such society, 
has defaulted-
(i) in repayment of such loan or debt or in payment of the 10 
price of the goods taken on credit, as the case may be, within 
the date fixed for such repayment or payment or where such 
date is extended, which in no cas~ shall exceed six months 
within the date so extended, or 
(ii) when such loan or debt or the price of goods taken on 15 
credit is to be paid in instalments, in payment of any instal-
ment, and the amount in default or any part thereof has re,;-
mained unpaid on the expiry of six months on and from the 
date of such default: 
Provided that a member of the board who has ceased to hold 20 
office as such urder this clause shall not be eligible, for a period 
of one year from the date on which he ceased to hold office, for re-
election as a member of the board of the multi-state co-operative 
SOCiety of which he was a member or for election to the board of 
any other multi-state co-operative society; 25 
(h) is a person against whom any amount due under a decree, 
decision or order is pending recovery under this Act; 
(i) is employed as a legal practitioner on behalf of or against the 
multi-state co-operative society, or on behalf of or against any other 
multi-state co-operative society which is a member of. the former 30 
SOCiety. 
Ezplan4tiOn.-For the purposes of this clause, "legal practitioner" 
has the same meaning as in clause (i) of sub-section (1) o~ section 
2 of "the Advocates Act, 1961; H elll1l. 
(;) is a nominal member; 35 
(k) bas been sentenced for any offence under this Act. 
17. (1) The superintendence, direction and control of the prepuatioa 
Of dl8 eledoraI rOlls fo:, aDd the conduct of, elections of the member. of 
the board of such JDulti •• tate co-operatlv,u societies or class of IbWU-state 
~tive soCIeties a. the Central Government may. by geaeral or 40 
spedal order, notify, shall be vested. in such returning otBcers as may 
be appobded by the Central Reeistru hi this behalf. 
(2) The vote at sueh elections shall be by lecret ballot. 
(S) The term of oftice of the elected members of the board shall be 
.u.ch, not exceeding thirty-six months from the date of election, as may 4S 
be iJpeeifted in the bye-laws ofi a multi-state co-operative SOCiety: 
·hovid8cl that the elected members shall continue to hold o.tBce till 
~.·,~Cellor. are 81ec:ted' or nominated under the proviSions 'of thiI 
Aft or the rul.. or the bye-laws. 

17 
(4)& peraon Ihall be eligible to be elected. .... ,&Mm- ,"0&" ,he 
_d of a multi-state co-operativAt society UDle .. he 11 a m.-n~at ~ 
pural body of tbat soc~ety. 
(5) The G:>vernment may make rules generally to provide for or to 
~ regulate matters in respect of elections of members of the board. 
88. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, no person ahall 
be eligble to hold office of a president, vice-president, chairman of 
vice-chairman, or such other office, as may be prescribed, on the board 
of more than one national co-operative society, other than the N.tio~ 
10 Co-operative Union of India Limited: 
Provided that any person holding, at the commencement of this Act, 
the otIice of a president, vice-president, chairman, or vice..c:bairmaD, 
or such other office, as may be prescribed, in more than one 
national co-operative society shall, within three months from such com-
IS mencement by notice in writing signed by him, intimate the name of 
the national co-operative society in which he wishes to serve 
and thereupon his office in the other national co-operative societie:o in 
which he does not wish to serve shall become vacant: 
Provided further that in default of such intimation within tbe period 
20 referred to in the preceding proviso, his offices in all the national co-ope-
rative societies shall, at the expiration of the period aforesaid, become 
vacant.-
39. No person shall be eligible to hold the office of a president, 
vice-president, chairman, or vice-chairman or such other office, as may 
~S be prescribed, on the board of a multi-state co-operative society, after he 
has held all or any of the offices as aforesaid during two consecutive terms, 
whether full or part: 
Provided that a person who has ceas~d to hold all or any of the offices 
as aforesaid continuously for one full te,'m of three years shall again be 
30 eligible for election to any of the offices aforesaid. 
Explanat'ion.-Where any person holding any of the offices as afore-
said at the commencement of this Act is again elected to that ofBce 01' any 
other office as aforesaid after such commencement, he shall fior the pur-
pose of this sub-section, be deemed to have held office for one term before 
35 such election. 
40. Honorarium may be paid to the elected chairman or president 
of the board of directors out of the profits of the multi-state co-operative 
society in respect of specific services rendered by him, subject to such 
restrictions and conditions as may be prescribed. 
,1.1. An elected member of a board who has acted adversely to the 
40 interests of a multi-state co-operative society may, on the basis of a 
report from the Central Registrar or otherwise, be removed from the board 
upon a resolution of the general body passed at its meeting by a majority 
of not ley than two-thirds of the members present and voting at the 
4S~' ,;' .. 
·-:"0"'" 
Holdlal 
ofollce 
in co-
operative 
IOclet7. 
Restric-
tions on 
holdinlor 
office. 
Pa,...t 
of h0no-
rarium. 
Removal 
Of 
elected 
membera 
by ,-enera! 
body, 
-. 

JltIuval 
at maD-
ber bY 
Central 
Regiatrar. 
Nominee 
ol 
Central 
Govem-
mentor 
State 
Govern-
ment on 
the board 
of multi-
state co-
operative 
lOCieties. 
Power. 
of the 
board of 
multi-
"tate eo-
operative 
lOCietlee. 
11 
d: Iffn ipite of cessation of olftce under cireumstanees mentioned 
in .dion 38 or section 38 or section 39 or section 41 a member of the 
board refuses to vacate his office, the Central Registrar shall, by order 
in writing, remove him from such oftice. 
43. (1) Where the Central Government or a State Government has 5 
subscribed to the share capital of a multi-state co-operative Eociety to 
the' extent of not less than one-third but not more than two-thirds 
thereof or has guaranteed the repayment of principal and payment of 
interest 011 debentures issued by a multi-state co-operative society or 
has guaranteed the repayment of prinCipal and payment of interest on 10 
loans and advances to a multi-state co~operative society, the Central 
Government or the State Government, as the case may be, or any 
person authorised by the Central Government or the State Government in 
this behalf shall have the right 'to nominate on the board such number 
of persons not exceeding three, or one-third oil the total number of mem .. 15 
bers thereof, whichever is less, as the Central C':rOvernment or the State 
Government may determine. 
(2) Where the Central Government or a State Government has 
subscribed to t'-le share capital of a multi-state co-operative society 
In excess of two-thirds of the total share capital of the multi-!;tate co- 20 
,operative society, the Central Government. or the State Government, 
as the case may be, or any person authorised by the Central Government 
or the State Government in this behalf shall have the right to nominate 
up to one-half of the total number of members of the board, or five, 
whichever is less. ' 25 
(3) The bye-laws of a multi-state co-operative society may provide 
for the nomination of persons in excess of the limits indicated in sub-
section (1) or sub-section (2). 
(4) A person nominated under this section shall hold office during 
the pleasure of the Central Government or the State Government, as the 30 
case may be. 
if. The board of directors of a multi-state co-operative society shall 
have the following powers, namely:-
(a.) to admit members; 
(b) to interpret the organisational objectives and set up speci- 35 
fic goals to be achieved towards these objectives; 
(c) to make required changes in the long-term objectives and 
plans; 
(d)' to make periodic appraisal of operations; 
(e) to appoint a Chief Executive and such other employees of 40 
the society as are not required to be appointed by the Chief Execu-
tive; . 
(/) to make rl,lles regulating the appointment of employees of 
the multi-state co~oPerative society and the scaleR of pay, allowances 
and other conditions of service of such employees; 4S 
(9) to constitute 'Such committees as are required from time to 
time, su.bjeot ttl the pnMsioD& of section 48. 

19 
45. (1) The Chief Executive shall convene the meetings of the board 
at the instance of the chairman or president of the multi-state co-
• ')perative society. 
(2) The board shall meet once in every quarter, provided that the 
S total number ot meeting>; of the board shall not exceed six in a year. 
(3) The meetings of the board of the multi-state co-operativE' I'lociety 
shall ordinarily be held at the registered office of such society. 
46. (1) There shall be a Chief Executive, by whatever designation 
callen, of every multi-state co-operative society, to be appointed by the 
10 board of directors and he shall be a full-time employee of such multi-
state co-operative society. 
(2) The Chief Executive shal1 be a member of the board of directors 
and of the Executive Committee and such other committees or sub-
committees as may be constituted under sub-section (1) of section 48. 
IS 47. The Chief Executive shall exercise the powers and discharge 
the funct:ons, specified below, namely:-
(a) day-to-day management. of the business of the multi-state 
co-operative society; 
(b) operating the accounts of the multi-state co-operativ<:? society 
20 and be responsIble for making arrangements for safe custody of 
cash; 
(or) signing on the documents for and .on behalf of the multi-state 
co-operative society; 
(d) making arrangements for the proper maintenance of 
25 various books and records of the multi-state co operatlve SOCiety and 
for the correct preparation, timely submission of pcr,iodical statements 
and returns in accordance with the provisions of this Act. ~hc rules 
and the bye-laws; 
(e) convening meetings of the general bodY. the hoard of 
30 directors and the Executive Committee and other committees 
or sub-committees constituted under sub-section (1) of section 48 
and maintaining proper records for such meetings; 
(f> making appointments to posts in the multi-state co-operative 
society in accordance with the rules made under .clause (f) of section 
35 44 except the posts in relation to which the power of appointment 
vests in the board under clause (e) of that section; 
(g) assisting the board in the formulation of policies and 
objectives and planning; 
(h) furnishing to the board periodical information necessary 
40 for appraising the operations and functions of the multi-state co-
operative SOCiety; 
(i) performing such other duties, and exercising such other 
powers, as may be prescribed or as may be specified in the bye-laws 
of the multi-state co-operative society. 
4S 48. (1) The board of a. multi-state co-operative society may consti-
tute an Executive Committee and other committees or sub-committ~es, as 
may be ~:msidered necessary: 
Provided th:lt the number of such other committees or 5ulJ-;Qmmitteell 
constituted under this sub-section sh~~ n'?~ ~!C;~~g two. 
Meetings 
of the 
board • 
Chief 
Executive 
Powers 
and func-
tions of 
Chief 
Executive. 
Committee 
of the 
board. 

Super .. • 
aion of 
board 
20 
(2) The Executive Committee or other committee or sub-comnuttee 
referred to in sub-section (1) shall perform such functions as are assigned 
to it in accordance with the bye-laws oil the multi-state co-operative society .. 
49. (1) If in the opinion of the Central Registrar the board of any 
multi-state co-operative society persistently makes default or is negli- S 
gent in the performance of the duties imposed on it by this Act or the 
rules or the bye-laws or commits any act which is prejudicial to the 
interest of the society or its members. or that there is a stalemate in 
-the constitution or functioning of the board, the Central Registrar may, 
after giving the board an opportunity to state its objection'S, if any. 10 
and considering the objections if received, by order in writing. remove 
the board and appoint one or more administrators, who need not be 
members of the society, to manage the affairs of the society for such period 
not exceeding one year, as may be specified in the order, which period 
may, at the discretion of the Central Registrar, be extended from time IS 
to time, so, howev~r, that the aggregate period does not exc,"ed two years. 
(2) The Central Registrar may fix such remuneration for the 
administrator, as he may think .fit and the remuneration shall be paid 
out of the funds of the multi-state co-operative society. 
(3) The administrator shall, subject to the control of the Central 20 
Registrar and to such instruction'S as he may from time to time give, 
have power to exercise all or any of the functions of the board or of 
any officer of the multi-state co-operative society and take all such 
actions as may be required in the interest of the society. 
(4) The administrator shall, before the expiry of his term of office, 25 
arrange for the constitution of a new board in aceordance with the 
bye-laws of the multi-state co-operative society. 
(5) If at any time during the period the administrator is in office, 
the Central Registrar considers it necessary or expedient so to do, he 
may, by order in writing giving reason'S therefor, direct the adminis- 30 
trator to arrange for the constitution of a new board for such multi-
state co-operative society in accordance with the bye-laws of sucb 
society and immediately on the constitution of such board, the adminis-
trator shall hand over the management of such society to such newly 
constituted board and cease to function. 35 
(6) Where a multi-state co-operative SOCiety is indebted to any nnanc-
ing institution, the Central Registrar shall. before taking any action 
under sub-section (1) in respect of that society. consult the financing 
institution. 
(7) NotWithstanding anything containe:! in this Act, the Central 40 
Registrar shall, in the case of a co-operative bank, if so required in 
writing by the Reserve Bank in the public interest or for preventlng 
the aftairs of the co-operative bank being' conducted in a manner detri-
mental to the interests of the depositors or for securing the proper 
management of a co-operative bank, pass an order for the supersession 4S 
of the board of that co-operative bank and for the appoinlment of an 
administrator therefor for such period or periods not exceedinj;( five 
years in the aggregate. as may f-rom time to time be specifl ~d by the 
Reserve Bank. 

s 
10 
21 
50.(1) If-
(a) the recoMs (including registers and books of accounts) of 
a multi-state co-operative sociaty are likely to be tampered with or 
destroyed and the funds or other property of such society are likely 
to be misappropriated or misapplied; or 
(b) the board of a multi-state co-operative society is reconstituted 
at a general meeting of the society or the board of a multi-state co-
operative society is removed by the Cantral Registrar under sub-
section (1) of section 49 or if the multi-state co-operative society is 
ordered to be wound up under section 78 and the outgoing members 
of the board refuse to hand over charge ot the records and property 
of the society to those entit~ed to raceive such charge. 
the Central Registrar may apply to the magistrate within whose 
jurisdiction the multi-state co-operative society functions for securing 
I S the records and property of the society. 
(2) On receipt of an application under sub-section (1), the magis-
trate may. by a warrant, authorise any police officer not below the 
rank o~ a sub-inspector to enter and search any place where such recor~s 
~md property are kept or are believed to be kept and to seize such 
20 records and property; and the records and property so seized shall be 
handed over to the new board or· administrator of the multi-state co-
operative society or the liqUidator, as the case may be. 
30 
51. The Government shall-
(a) constitute a body of persons in the manner prescribed for 
the preparation of a list of persons eligible for appointment to the 
posts of Chief Executives and other management posts in national 
co-operative societies, the maximum pay-scale of which exceeds 
such amount as may be prescribed; 
(b) make rules for regulating the recruitment. remuneration, 
al~owances and other conditions of, service of officers and other 
employees of national co-operative societies. 
52. No act of a multi-state co-operative society or of any board or 
of any officer of the society shall be deemed to be invalid by reason only 
of the existence of any defect in. the procedure or in the constitution of 
3S the society or of the board or in the appointment or election of an officer 
or on the ground that such officer was disqualified for his oftice. 
CilAPTER V 
PIu:VILEGES OF MULTI-STA.TE CO-OPERATIVE sOCIE'l'IJ!'S 
53. The registration of a multi-'State co-operative society shall 
40 render it a body corpora~e by the name under which it is registered 
having perpetual succession aDd a common seal, and with power to hold 
property, enter into contract, instit~~ and defend suits and other legal 
proceedings and to do all things necessary for the purposes for which 
it is constituted. 
45 54. A multi-state co-operative, society shall have a charge on the 
share or contribution or interest in the capital and on the deposits of 
a member or past member or deceased member and on any dividend, 
Securln, 
poasea-
sion of 
record .. 
etc. 
Constitu-
tion of 
body of 
person. 
for pre-
parationot 
list, etc. 
Act. of 
multi-
state cO-
operative 
I.ocielie. 
not to be 
invalidat-
ed by·cer_ 
tain de-
fecta. 
Multi-
state co-
operative 
society til 
be body 
corporate. : 
Char •• 
and set-of! 

in respect 
of share or 
contribu- . 
twn or 
interest of 
members. 
Share or 
contribu-
tion Or 
interest 
Dot liable 
to attach-
ment. 
Register 
of 
members. 
Admisai-
bility of 
copy of 
entry as 
evidence. 
Exemp_ 
tion from 
compul-
sory re-
,istration 
of instru-
ments. 
22 
bcnus or profits payable to a member ox: past member or the estate of 
a deceased member in respect of any debt due from such member or 
past member or the estate of such deceased member to 'he society, and 
may set-off any sum credited or payable to a member or put member 
or the estate of deceaserl. member in or towards payment of any such S 
debt. 
55. (1) Subject to the provisions of section 54, the share or contribu-
tion of· interest of a member or past member or deceased member in the 
capital of a multi-state co-operative society shall not be liable to 
attachment or sale under any decree or order of any court in respect of 10 
any debt or liability incurred by such member, and an official assignee 
or a receiver under any law relating to insolvency shall not be entitled 
to or have any claim on such share or contribution or interest. 
. (2) The reserve fund, or the bad debt reserves, or the provident fund 
of the emp10yees, of a multi-state co-operative society invested by such IS 
society in accordance with the prOVisions of this Act and the rules shall 
not be liable to attachment under any decree or order of a court'in res-
pect of any debt or liability incurred by the society. 
56. Any register or list of members or shares kept by any multi-
state co-operative society shall be p1'ima facie evidence of any of the 20 
following particulars entered therein, namely:-
(a) the date on which any person entered in such register or 
list became a member; 
(b) the date on which any such person ceased to be a member. 
57. (1) A copy of any entry in a book of a multi-state co-operative 25 
society regularly kept in the course of its business shall, if certified in 
!ouch manner as may be prescribed, be received in any suit or legal pro-
ceedin~ as prima f·acte evidence of t:te (.xistence of such entry and 
shall be admitted as evidence of the matters, transactions and accounts 
therein recorded in every case where, and to the same extent as, the 30 
)riginal entry itself is admissible. 
(2) No officer of a multi-state co-operative society and no officer 
in whose office the books of a multi-state co-operative society are 
deposited dter liquidation shall, in any legal proceedings to which the 
society or the liqUidator is not a party, be compelled to produce any 3S 
of the society's books or documents the contents of which can be 
proved under this section, or to appear as a witness to prove the 
matters, transaction'S and accounts therein recorded, except under an 
order of a court or an arbitrator made for a spacial cause. 
58. Nothing in clauses (b) and (e) of sub-section (1) of section 17 40 
of the Registration Act, 1908, shall apply t~ 18 at 1108. 
(tI) any instrument relating to shares in a multi-state co-
operative society notwithstanding that the assets of the society 
C!onsist in whole or in part of immovable property; or 
(b) any debenture issued by any such society and not creating, 4S 
declaring, assigning, limiting or extinguishing any right, title or 
interest to or in immovable property, except in so tar as it entitles 

23 
the holder thereof to the security afforded by a regrstered instru-
ment whereby the society has mortgaged, conveyed, or otherwise 
transferred the whole or part of its immovable property or any 
interest therein to trustees upon trust for the benefit of the holders 
5 of such debentures; or 
. 11:) an endorsement upon or transfer of any debenture issued 
by'ny such society. 
59. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time 
being in force, a member of a multi-state co-operative society may 
10 execute an agreement in favour of that society providing that his 
employer disbursing his sala'ry or wages shall be competent to deduct 
every month from the salary or wages payab!e to him, such amount as 
may be specified in the agreement and to pay the amount so deducted 
to the society in satisfaction of any debt or other demand owing by the 
15 member to the society. 
(2) On the execution of such agreement, the employer disbursing the 
salary or wages of· the members shall, if so required by the multi-state 
co-operative society by a requisition in writing and so long as the socie,y 
does not intimate that the whole of such debt or other demand has been 
20 paid, make the deduction in accordance with the agreement and pay the 
amount so deducted to the society, as if it were a part of the salary or 
wages payable on the day as required under the Payment of Wages Act, 
, of 1936. 1936 and such payment shall be valid discharge of the employer for his 
liability to pay the amount deducted. 
25 (3) If after the receipt of a requisition made under sub-section 
(2) the employer disbursing the salary or wages of the member at any 
time fails to deduct the amount speCified in the requisition from the 
salary or wages payable to the member concerned or makes default in 
remitting the amount deducted to the multi-state co-operative society, 
30 the society shall be entitled to recover any such amount from such em. 
ployer as arrears of land revenue and the amount so due from such 
employer shall rank in priority in respect of the liability of such 
employer equal to that of the salary or wages in arrears. 
60. Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being 
in force, the Central Government or a State Government may, with a 
35 view to promoting co-operative movement:-
45 
(i) subscribe to the share capital of a multi-state eo-operative 
society; 
(ii) give loans or make advances to a mUlti-state eo-operative 
soeiety; 
(iii) guarantee the repayment of principal and payment of inte-
rest on debentures issued by a multi-state co-operative soeiety; 
(iv) guarantee the repayment of share capital of a multi-state 
eo-operative society aDd dividends thereon at such rates as may be 
specified by the Central Government or the State Govel'llltl8nt; 
Deduction 
from 
salary to 
meet 
multi-
IItateco_ 
operative 
socIety's 
claim in 
certain 
cases, 
Govern-
ment aid 
to multi-
state c0-
operative 
socletlea 

Funds not 
to be 
divided 
byway of 
pro&. 
Disposal 
Of net 
profits. 
Inveat-
ment of 
funds. 
24 
(u) g1IU'Ilntee the repaymeat of principal and payment ot 
mieNst en loans and advances to a multi-state co-operative society; 
(vi) give finaaeial assiltance in any other form, including 
subsidies, to any multi-state co-operative society. 
CHAPTER VI 
PROPERTIES AND FUNDS OF MULTI.STATE CO-oPERATIVE SOCIETIES 
61. No part 0.£ the funds, other than net profits, of a multi-state co-
aperative society shall be divided by way of bonus or divici.end or 
otherwise distributed among its members. 
S 
62. (1) A mUlti-state co-operative society shall, out of its net profits 10 
in any year-
(a) transfer an amount not less than twenty-five per cent. to 
the reserve fund; and 
(b) credit such portion, as may be prescribed, to the c0-
operative education fund maintained by the National Co-operative IS 
Union of India Limited. 
(2) Subject to such conditions as may be prescribed, the balance of 
the net profits may be utilised for all or any of the following purposes, 
namely:-
(a) payment of dividend to members on their paid-Up share 20 
capital at a rate not exceeding the prescribed limit; 
(b) constitution of, or contribution to, such special funds includ-
ing education funds, as may be specified in the bye-laws; 
(c) donation of amounts not exceeding five per cent. of the net 
profits for any purpose connected with the development of co- 2S 
operative movement or charitable purposes as defined in section 2 of 
the Charitable Endowments Act, 189()j and 8 of 1890. 
(d) payment of ex gratia amount to employees of the 
multi-state co-operative society to the extent and in the manner 
specifted in the bye-laws. 
(3) The funds of a multi-state co-operative society shall not be 30 
utUilied for any political purpose. 
63. A muIti-st~te co-operative society may invest or deposit its funds-
(a) in the post office savings bankj or 
(b) in a co-operative bank, State co-operative bank, co- 35 
operative land mortgage bank, co-operative land deve:opment bank 
or Central co-operative bank; or 
(c) in any of the securities specified in section 20 of the Indian 
Trusts Act, 1882; or 2 of 1_ 
(4) in the shares or securities of any other multi-state co-opera- 40 
tive society Qr anyco.operative society; or 

5 
10 of 1949. 
Z3 of 19~5. 
25 
(e) in the shares, ~ecurlti.s or assets of any other institution, 
with the previous approval of the Central Registrar; or 
(f) with any bank. 
Explanation.-In this clause, "bank" means any banking com-
pany as defined in clause (c) of section 5 of the Banking Regulation 
Act, 1949, and includes,-
(a) the State Bank of India constituteti under the Statt 
Bank of India Act, 1955; 
38ol1958. 10 
(b) a subSidiary bank as defined in the State Bank of India 
(Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1959; 
6 of 1970. 
(c) a corre<;ponding new bank constituted under section 3 
of the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Under-
takings) Act, 1970; or 
(g) in any other mode permitted by the rules. 
15 64. (1) A multi-state co-operative societv. other than a co-operative 
bank, shall not make a 108n-
(a) to a member on the security of his share or on the 
security of a non-member; or 
(b) to a non-member: 
30 Provided that with the general or special sanction of the Central 
Registrar 0 multi-state co-operative society may make loans to another 
multi-state co-operative society. 
(2) NotWithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), a multi-
state co-operative society may make a loan to a depositor on the securitv 
25 of his deposit. 
65. A multi-state co-operative society shall receive deposits and 
JORns only to such extent and under such conditions as may be specifted 
in the bye-laws: 
Provided that a co-operative bank shall be governed by the pro-
10 of 1949. 30 visions of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949. 
66. Save as provided in sections 64 and 65, the transaction of 8 multl-
state co-operative society with any person other than 8 member shall be 
subject to such prohibitions and restrictions, if any, as may be prescribed. 
6'1. (1) A multi-state cO-Qpel'ative society ,having such number or 
35 class of employees as may be prescribed may establish 8 contributory 
pro\rtdent fund for the benefit of such employees to which shall be 
credited all contributions made by the employees and the SOCiety in 
arrordance with the bye-laws of the society. 
(2) Contributory provident fund established by a multi-state co-
40 operative society under sub-se~tion (1) shall not-
(a) be used in the bU8in~s of the society; 
(b) form part of the assets of the society; 
(c) be liable to attachment or be subject to any other proeea 
fill' uy court or other authority. 
Restric_ 
tion. On 
loans. 
Restric-
tion, on 
borrow-
in,. 
R'estric-
tiona OIl 
other 
transac-
tions with 
non-mem-
bua. 
Contrl1na-
tOry pro-
vident 
fund. 

Audit. 
Inapec-
tion of 
mulU-
state co-
operative 
societies. 
. " 
28 
CHAPl'ER VII 
AUDIT. DlQUIRY. INSPECTION AND SURCHARGE 
68. (1) The Central Registrar shall audit, or caus~ to be audited by a 
person authorised by him by general or special order in writing in this 
behalf, the accounts of every multi-state co-operative society at least once S 
in each year. 
(2) The audit under sub-section (1) shall include an examination of 
overdue debts, if any. the verification of the cash balance and securities, 
and a valuation of the assets and liabilities of the multi-state co-opcrative 
society. 
(3) The person auditing the accounts of a multi-state co-operative 
society shall have free acce"s to the books, accounts, papers, vouchers, 
stock and other property of such society and shaH be allowed to verify its 
cash balance and securities. 
10 
(4) The directors, managers, administrators and other officers of the IS 
multi-state co-operative society shall furnish to the person auditing the 
accounts of the society all such information as to its transactions and 
working as such person may require. 
(5) The Central Registrar or the person authorised by him under sub-
seo::tion (1) to audit the accounts of the multi-state co-operative society 20 
shall have power, where necessary-
(a) to summon at the time of his audit any officer, agent, ser-
vant or member of the society, past or present, who, he has reason to 
believe. can give valuable information in Il"ep,'ard to transactions of 
the society or the management of its affairs; and 2S 
(b) to require the production of any book or document re;ating 
to the affairs of, or any cash or securities belonging to, the society 
by any officer, agent, servant. or member of the society in possession 
of such books, documents, cash or securities and h the event of 
serious irregularities discovered during audit, tn take them into 30 
custody. 
(6) If at the time of audit the aCCollntc:; of a multi-state co-operative 
society are not complete, the Cen~ral Registrar or the person authoriseci. 
by him under sub-section (1) to audit may cause the accounts to be 
written up at the expense of the society. 3S 
(7) Audit fee, if any, due from any' multi-state co-operative society 
shall be determined by the Central Registrar and shan be recoverable in 
the same manner as is provided in section 90. 
69. (1) The Central Registrar. or any person authorised by him by 
general or special order in writing in this behalf. mRy ins,ect a multi- 40 
state co-operative society. 
(2) (0) For the purpose of inspection under sub..section (1). the Cen-
tral Registrar or the person authorised by him under that sub-section 
shall at all times have access to all books, accounts, papern, vouchers. se-
curities, stock and other property of that society and may, in the event of 45 
serious irregularities discovered durin!:! inspection. take them into custody 
and shall have power to verify the c1:::h balance of the sodcty and subjeci 
to the general or special order of the Central Registrar to call & board 
meeting and a general meeting. 

2'L· 
~b) ···,EveI)'. oIioer or member of the multi-state co-operative society 
. sbail fW'llish such information with reprdta the working of the society 
as the Central Registrar or the person making such inspection may 
require. 
. . 
ST •. (1) The Central Registrar may, of his own motion or on the appli-
cation of a majority of the members of the board or of not less than one-
third of the members, hold an inquiry or direct some person authorised 
by.·hiza by order in writiQg in this behalf .to bold an inquiry into th~con­
stitution f working and financial condition of. a multi-state co-operative 
10 society~ 
20 
(2) ·'the Central' Registrar· or' the pers6n authorised by him under 
sub-seCtion (1) shall have the following powers, namely:-
(4) he shall at all reasoaable times have free access to the 
books, accounts, r\ocuments, securities, cash and other propert1el 
belonging to or in the custody of the multi-state co-operative society 
8D4 may· summon any pel'son· in possession .or responsible for the 
· -CUStody of any such books; accounts, documents, securities, cash (\r 
other properties to produ(!e the same, at any place specified by him: 
(b) he may, notWithstanding any rule or bye-law specifying the 
period of notice for a general meeting of the multi-state co-operative 
society, require the officers of the society to call a ~Emeral meeting 
at lucbtime and place .. at the headquarters of th.e SOCiety to consider 
· sueh matters, as may b~ directed by him; and where the oftlcers Q1 
.the .society .refuse or fail to·call.such a meeting, he shall·have poweI 
· to.call it himself; 
(c) he may summon '~ny person who is reasonably believed by 
him to have any knowledge of the atlaill'S of the multi-state co-opera-
tive society to appear before hlm at any p~ace at the headquarters of 
the society or any branch thereof and may examine such person on 
30 . oath. . . 
. (3) Any meeting called under elause (b) of sub-section (2) shall 
hav~ . art the pOwers of a general n;ieeting called under the bye-laws of 
the.~oCiety and its proceedings shall be regulated by ~uch bye-laws. 
:(4) The Central Registrar shall corrimunicate a briet summary of the 
3S repOrt of the· inqUiry to the multi-state eo.operative society, the financing 
iMtttuttonS, if any, to which the society· is aftlliated, and to the persoll or 
authority, if any. at whose instance the inquiry is made . 
. '. 7.1; (:l)The Central Registrar. shall. on ~ application of a creditor 
of a.inulti-state co-operative society, inspect, or direct some . person autho-
-40 rised by hini by order in writing in this behaa to inspect, the books of 
the society: 
Inquiry 
by 
Central 
Reglstrw. 
Inspec. 
tion of 
boob of 
indebted 
multi-......... ,:.. .'" . ." .:. state co-
'~PJ~~ _that nq~ sucb ins~OJl. shall .be made. unless the applic!lll~, ... opentlve 
("ot. '.. . • .' . .. • sodetles. 
-I: .. -(cal .. tilfies the Central · .. trar that the debt· is ~ sum then 
-... ; ... ·tmit be-has dalnaDded p8\YuteJrt:tllenm and hu ndt r~eiyed . 
-4S satisfaction within a reasonable tinli;::I8I1d;:'! :. .. ': .. : :.l. 

Coate of 
inquiry 
and ina-
paction. 
Recovery 
of eost •. 
Surchal'le. 
2t 
" , 
(b) deposits with the Central Registrar such sum as .ecurtt.r 
for the costs of the propoSed inspection as the Central Registrar mQ 
require. 
(2) The Central Registrar shall communicate the result of any sucb 
inspection to the creditor. 5 
72. Where an inquiry is helt\ under section 70 or an inspection is made 
under section 71, the Central Registrar may apportion the costs, or sucb 
part of the costs, as he may think fit between the mUlti-state eo-opera-
tive society, the members or creditor demanding an inquiry or inspeetlon, 
and' the officers or former officers and the members or past members ot 10 
that society: 
Provided that-
(CI) no order of apportionment of the costs shall be made lADder 
this section unless the society or the person liable to pay the ~oats 
thereunder has had a reasonable opportunity of being heard; IS 
(b) the Central Registrar shall state in writing under his own 
hand the grounds on which the costs are apportioned. 
'13. Any sum awarded by way of costs under section 72 may be re-
covered, on application to a magistrate having jurisdiction in the place 
where the person, from whom the money is claimable, actually and vol- :ao 
untarily resides or carries on business, and such magistrate shall recover 
the same as if it were a fine imposed by himself. 
'14. (1) If in the course of an audit. inquiry, inspection or the wind-
ing up of a multi-'State co-operative society. It is found that any person, 
who is or was entrusted with the organisation or management of IRleh 25 
society or who is or has at any time been an oftlcer or an employee of the 
society. has made any payment contrary to this Act, the rules or the bye-
laws or bas caused any deftciency in the assets of the society by breach 
of trust or wilful negligence or has misappropriated or fraudulently 
retained any money or other property belonging to such society, the Ceo· 30 
tral Registrar may. of his own motion or on the application of the board, 
liqUidator or any creditor. inquire himself or direct any person authori· 
seU by him, by an order in writing in this behalf, to inquire into the 
conduct of such person: 
Provided that no such inquiry shall be commenced after the eac:pir:r 3S 
of six years from the date of any llet or omission referrt!d to in thtl sub-
section. 
(2) Where an inquiry is made under sub-section (1), the Central 
RegIstrar may, after giving the person concerned an opportunity of ·belnC 
heard. make an order requiring him to repay or restore the money or • 
property or any part thereof. with interest at such rate, 01' to pay con-
tribution antt costs or compenaatioD to such eXtent, at the Central .... 
irar may C.lOnalder just and equl1ab1 •. . , 

IhUN? 
It 
CIWTBR VIU 
SB'l"I'1.BMENT OF DISPU'nI 
75. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time 
being In force, if any dispute (other than a dispute regarding discipliDary 
S action taken by a multi-state co-operative society against Its paid 
employee or an int\usUial diapute as defined in clause (k) of seetlou 2 
of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947) touching the constitution, manage-
ment or business of a multi-state co-operative society ariaes-
(4) among membera, past members and perlOns claiming through 
10 members, past members and deceaseti members. or 
(b) between a member. past member or person claiming through 
a member, past member or deceased member and the multi-state 
co-operative society. its board or any oftlcer, agent or employee of 
the multi-state co-operative society ot' liquidator, past or present. or 
15 (e) between the multi-state co-operative society or its board 
and any pa~t board, any officer. agent or employee, or any past 
offtcer, past agent or past employee or the nominee, heirs or leaal 
representatives of any deceased ofticer. deceased agent, or deceased 
employee of the multi..tate co-operative sOetety, or 
20 (d) between the multi-state co-operative society and any other 
multi-state co-operative 8OC!lety, between a multi-state co-operative 
society and liquidator of another multi-state cQIoOperative society or 
between the liquidator of one multl-state co-operattve society and the 
liquidator of another multi-state co-operative society, 
as such dispute shall be referred to the Central Registrar for decision and 
no court shalJ have jurisdiction to entertain any suit or other proceed. 
ings tn respect of such dispute: . 
ProviC'ted that all .disputes in which a national co-operative &Ociety 
is a party ,;hall be referred to the Centnl Registrar appointed under sub-
)0 section (1) of section 4 . 
(2) For the purposes of .ub-aec:tion (1), the following shall be deemed 
to be disputes touchfn~ the constitution, management or the bustness of a 
multi-state co-operative society, namely:-
(4) a claim by the multt-atate co-operative society for any debt 
)5 nr demand due to it from a member or the nominee, heirs or legal 
repre&entatlves of a dec-eaaed member, whether such debt or demand 
be acbnltted or not; 
(b) a claim by a surety against the princi1)a1 debtor where the 
.. 0 multi-state co-operative society has recovered from the surety any 
amount in respect ot any debt ot' demand due to it from the princlpal 
debtor as a result of the default of the princlnal debtor. whether 
IUch debt or demand is admitted or !lOt; 
(el. any dispute arisln~ in connection with the election of any 
niBcer of a multfoo!ltAte l'o-opet'at.h'e society. 

Settle. 
IDtDt of 
dllputel, 
~·30 
(3) If any question arises whether '8' dispute referred to the Central 
Registrar is or is not,.a dispute touching the constItution, management 
or business of a multi-state co-operative· society, the decision thereon of 
the Central Registrar shall be final and shall not be called in question S 
in 'any court. 
78, (1) Notwithstanding anything containE;!d in the Limitation Act, 
1963, but subject to the specific provisions· made in this Act, the, p8i1.od 
of limitation in the case of a dispute referred 'to· the Centr~ R~strar 
shalI-· . 
(i) when th~ dispute relates to the r~covery of any sUm including 10 
interest thereon due to a ·inulti-statee·oooOperative society by Ii 
member thereof, be computed from the date on which such member 
dies or ceases to be a member .of the s~iety; . . 
(ii) save as otherwise provided . in clause (iii), when the 
dispute relates to any act or omission on the part of any of the parties IS 
referred to in clause (b) or clause '(c) of sub-section (1) of section 
75, be six years from ijle date on which the act or omission with 
reference to which the dispute arose took place; , 
36 of 1881, :. ~; ',!t." 
(iii) when the dispute rela* to·a multi-state co-operative 
society which baa been ordered to·be wound up UDder section 78 or ~o 
In respect of which an administratol' has been appoilIted under 
section 49, be six years from the date of the order issued under section 
78 or section 49, as the case may be; 
(iv) when the dispute ill in 'Mpect of ali· election of'·an, officer 
of a multi-state co-operatl"e aoeiety, be Ofte1nonth' from the· date of 2S 
the declaration of the l'e!IIult" of the election, ' 
(2) The period of limitation in the case of an" other dispute except 
those mentioned. inlluQ-section (ll. which are required to be ,refel"l'ed ~ 
the Central Re~stt'81." .sh,n. be re.rulated bv the pmvisions of the. Limf: 
tation Act. 1963. as if the dispute was a sl,lit and tqe Central· Registrar 30 18 of llMll. 
a civil court, . 
(3) Notwfthilta";iiin~ Aj'1Vthfn~:(!ontained in sub-Sections (n and (2), 
the Central ReaistraJ" may admit a disrmte· a1ter tbfl! expiry. 0' the l'eiiod 
of limitation. jf the applicant lIatisfip.II the Centr,.f Re.nirtrar that'iie . had 
sufficient cause for not referrinR the di/;pute within such perion and the 3.5 
, . dispute '50 a~mittt>d "lIall be'a dfsDut,e whfch ql;nn oot be ·barred on the 
-P,Tonndthitt the perlod (If limitAtion hRC! e;fpfrei:l. . . ",: 
'17. (1) The Central Registrar may. on receipt of the reference ('If 
~ispute under section '15-:-
(6) eleet to decide' the di.pute himaelf; or - .~ 40 
(b) transfer it for dfBoosaT to anvnthPl"ner!'nn who ha5 been 
invested by the Central Government with power~;n thRt behalf. 
(2) The Central Relristrar rnav withdraw Rnv reference . transferred 
under clause (1)). of· sub-:3ection (1) and decide it himself .01' 'refP.r th~ 
, Ifame for decisicm .to .anv· otheroel'son ,who .. hal'; .bcen ,invested...b,v the 1'4.5 
Cantral GovermneJlt with ~wers in-.that behalf,- '.', " 
(3) The Central Resnst""' or an'V ether ·"p"s(ni to whorl; ·8 '~I~utp. Is 
referre{l for ~ecision llnder thf~ sectinn mRV, pp'"d;ntJ the ciecisfon of the 
fttsPut,.. ma-k;,. !lucb fn1:'@rlncl1tnry ·ord~~s ·~S he. mAv·.~~m n~~s9r~ in the 
int,:,rE'~t of ,ustiC'P, '.. . .. . - $0 

47., 1961. 
47.f 1961. 
81 
CHAPTER IX 
WINDINC lIP 01' MULTt-8!fATE CO-OPERATIVE SOCIJC1'lBS 
''l8. (l) If the Central Registrar. after an inquiry has been held und.:r 
section 70 or an inspection has been made under section 71, or on receipt 
$ of an applicaUon made by not less than three-fow-ths of the members of 
a multi-state co-operative society. is of -opinion tilat, the society ought to 
be wound uP. be may, alter giving the society an opportunity of making 
ita representations, by order, direct it to be wound up. 
(2) The Central Registrar may, of 'his cwn motion and after giving 
10 the multi-state co-operative soc:ety an opportunity of ml:lking its repre-
sentations, make an order directing the winding up of the multi-state co-
operative society-
IS 
(tI) where it is a condition of the, l't:gistration' of the society that 
the society shall consist ,of at least fifty members and the number of 
members has been reduced. to less than fifty; or 
(b) where the multi-state co-operative society has not com-
menced working or has ceased to function in accordance with co-
operative principles. 
(3) The Central Registrar may cancel an order for the winding up of 
30 a multi-lState co-operative SOCiety, at any time, 'in any case where,ln his 
opinion, the society should continue to exist. 
(4) A copy of such order shall be communicated by registered post 
to the society and to the 'financing institutions, if any, of· which the 
.aciet.y is a member. 
25 (5) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, no co-operative 
. bank shall be wound up except with the previous sanction in writing of 
the Reserve Bank. 
TI. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Act. 
the Central Registrar shall make an order for winding up of a co-opera-
30 tive bank, if so required by the Reserve Bank in the circumstances men-
tioned in section 13D of the Deposit Insurance Corpolation Act, 1961. 
RO. Where a co-operative bank. bein~ an in!lurerl bank within the 
meaning of the Deposit Insurance Corporation Act. 1961. is wound up. or 
taken into liquidation. and the Deposit Insurance Corporation has become 
3S liable to the depoSitors of the insured hank undE!r sub-section (1) of 
section 16 of that Act. the Depoait Insurance Corporation shall be reim-
bursed by the liquidator or such other person in' the circumstances. to the 
extent and in the manner provided in section 21 of the Deposit Insurance 
Corporation Act. 1961. 
81. (1) Where the Central Registrar has made an order under l'Iection 
40 78 for the winding up of a multl-state co-op':!rative society. the Central 
Registrar may appoint a liquidetor for tftepurpose and fix his 'l'emunera-
tion. 
(2) A liquidator shall. on appointmen~. take into his custody or un-
der his control all the property, effect!! and actionable claims to which the 
4 S multi-state co-operative society is or appears to be entitled and shall take 
such steps as he may deem necessary or expedient to prevent loss or 
deterioratiOn of, or damage to, such property. effects and claims and he 
may carry on the business of the multi-state CQ-operat!ve ~ocjety so' far as 
,. ~8V hp neceasw:v with the previous approval of'the Central Hegistrar. 
Windiq 
up of 
multi-
state co-
operative 
societies. 
Windin, 
up of 
Coopera-
tive bank! 
at the 
direction 
of Reserve 
Bank. 
Relm_ 
bUl'Ie-
mentto 
theDepo-
lilt Insur-
ance Cor-
poration' 
b,. 
liquidator. 
Liquida-
tor. 

Powers of 
lIquld.-
lor. 
·12 
'II .... ,... 
'I 
(3) Where an appeal is preferred under clauae (1) of sub-sectlOll (1) 
of section 91, an order for the wfnding up of a multi-state co-operative 
society made under section 78 shall not operate thereafter until the order 
is confirmed in appeal: 
Provided that the liquidator ahall continue to have custody or control S 
of the l>roperty, effects and actionable claims mentioned in sub-aec:tlon 
(2) and have authority to take the steps referred to in that sub-section. 
(4) Where an order for the winding up of a multi-state co-operative 
society is set aside in appeal, the property, effects and actionable claims 
of the society shall re-vest tn the society. ' 10 
82. (1) Subject to any rules mane in this behalf, the whole of the 
assets of a multi-state co-operative society in respect of which an oreter 
for winding up has been made, shall vest in the liquidator appointed 
under section 81 from the date on which the order takes effect and the 
liquidator shall have power to realise such assets by sale or otherwise. 15 
(I) Such liquidator shall also have power, subject to the control of 
th!! Central Registrar-
(a) to institute and defend suits and other legal proceedings on 
behalf of the mUlti-state co-operative society by the name of hla 
~~; ~ 
(b) to determine from time to time the eontributloD (incluc\ing 
debts due and costs of liquidation) to be made or Tel'Ilaining to be 
made by the members or past members or by the estates or noml-
nees, heirs OT legal representatives of deceaad members or by any 
oIIcers f1It former officer a, to the assets of the multi-state co-oper~ 2S 
tive society; 
(c) to investigate all claims against the multi-state co-operative 
society and subject to the provisions of this Act. to decide questions 
of priority arising between claimants; 
(d) to pay claims against the multi-state co-operative society. 30 
including interest up to the date of winding up according to their 
respective priorities. if any, in full or rateably, as the assets of the 
society may permit; the surplus. if any, remaining after payment of 
the claims being applil"d in payment of interest from the (\ate of such 
order f)f winding up at a rate fbrpd by him hut not exceeding the 3S 
contract rate in any case; 
(e) to determine by what persons and in what proportions the 
costs of the liquidation are to be borne; 
(f) to c1etermine whether any person isn member, past member 
or nominee of a deceased member; 40 
(g) to -give such directions In regard to the collection and distri-
bution of the assets of the society as may appear to him to be necess-
ary for winding up the affairs of the multi-state co-operative sodety; 
(h) to carry on the bUSiness of the multi-state co-operative socie-
ty so far 81!11 may be necessary for the beneficial winding up of the 45 
same; 
(i) to make any compromise or arrangement with creditors or 
persons claiming to be creditors or having or alleging to have, any 
claim. present or future, whereby the multi~!:tate co-operative socie-
ty may be rendered liable: SO 

· .. 33 
(;) to make any compromise or arrangement with any persOn 
between whom and the multi-state co-operative society there exilts 
any dispute and to refer any such dispute for decision; 
(k) after consulting the members of the multi-state co-opera-
5 tive society, to dispose of the surplus, if any, remaining after paying 
the claims against the society, in such manner as may be prescribed.; 
(l) to compromise all calls or liabilities to calls and debts and 
liabilities capable of resulting in debts, anet all claims, present or 
future, certain or contingent, subsisting or alleged to subSist, bet-
10 ween the multi-state co-operative society and a contributory or alleg-
ed contributory or other debtor or person apprehending liability to 
the multi-state co-operative society anet all questions in any way 
relating to or affecting the assets or the winding up of the society 
on such terms as may be agreed and take any security for the dis-
IS charge of any such call, liability, debt or claim and give a complete 
discharge in respect thereof. 
(3) When the affairs of a multi-state co-operative SOCiety have been 
wound up, the liquidator shall make a report to the Central Registr,ar 
anet deposit the records of the society in such place as the Central Regis-
20 trar may direct. 
83. The surplus assets, as shown in the report of a liquidator of a 
multi-state co-operative society which is wound up,-
(a) may, if the bye-laws of the multi-state co-operative society 
specify the purpose for which surplus shall be utilised. be utilised 
.25 by the Central Registrar for the said purpose, and 
(b) if the bye-laws aforesaid do not specify the purpose, be 
diviried by the Central Registrar, with the previous sanction of the 
Central Government, amongst the members of such multi'iOtatc co-
operative society in such manner as may be prescribed. 
30 84. Notwithstanding anything contained in any law relating to 
insolvency, the contribution assessed by a liquidatoT shall rank next 
to debts due to the Central Government or a State Government or a 
local authority in order of priority in insolvency proceedings. 
35 85. (1) The Central Registrar may, after 'Contlidering the report of 
the liqUidator made to him under sub-section (3) of section 82, order the 
. registration of the multi-state co-operative society to be caneelled. 
(Z) An order passed under sub-section (1) shall be communicated by 
reaistered post to the president of the multi-state co-operative socIety 
and to the finanCing institutions, if any, of which the SOCiety was a mem-
40 ber. 
CHAPTER X 
EXECUTION OF DIlCREES, ORDERS AND DECISIon 
•. Every decision or order dUly made under section 32, section 
33. section 74. section 77. section 91, section 93 or section 94 shall, if not 
45 carried out,-
(a) on a certificate signed by the Central Registrar or any per-
~n authorised by bim in writiOi in this behalf, be deemed to be a 
decree of a civil court and shall be executed in the same" miriner as a 
decree of such court, or 
DisPllSal 
of surplu. 
aSlletl. 
Priority 
of con-
tributions 
asses~ 
by Uqui-
dator. 
Power of 
Central 
Registrar 
to cancel 
registra_ 
tion Of I 
multi-
state co-
operative 
society. 
Execu-
tion at. 
decision •. 
pte. 

Central 
ReIisWt·· 
or the 
person 
authorised 
by him 
to be 
civil 
court 
for cer-
tain pur. 
poses. 
Recovery 
of aumt 
due to· 
Govern· 
ment. 
~ 
(b) where the deCision or order prO\l'ides for the recovvy of 
·'tIIODey, be execu~ according to the law for the tim. being In fo.-te 
for the recovery of arrears of land revenue: 
Provided that any application for the recovery in such manner S 
of any sum shall be made-
(i) to the Collector and shall be accompanied by a certificate 
signed by the Central Registrar Or by any person authorised by 
him in writing in tl'is behalf; 
(ii) withi~ twelve years from the date fixer! In the decision 
o·r order and if no such date is fixed, from the date of the 10 
decision or order, as the case may be; or 
(c) be executed by the Central Registrar or any person authori-
se:! by him in writing. in this behalf. by attachment and sale or sale 
without attachment of any property of the person or a multi.-etate 
co-operative society against whom the decision or order has been 15 
made. 
87. Every order made by the liquidator under section 82 shall be exe-
cuted according to the law for the time being in force for the recovery 
of arrears of land revenue. 
88. (1) Where the Central Registrar appointed under sub-section 20 
(1) of section 4, or any officer invested with powers under the second 
proviSO to sub-section (2) of that section, is satisfied that a party to any 
reference made to him under section 75 with intent to defeat or delay the 
execution of any decision that may be passed thereon is about to-
(a) dispose of the whole or any part of the property; or 15 
(b) remove the whole or any part of the proPerty from its exist· 
ing preCincts, 
the Central Registrar may, unless adequate security is furnished. direct 
conditional attachment of the said property or such part thereof as he 
thinks necessary. 30 
(2) The attachment unner sub-section (1) shall be executed bya 
civil court having jurisdiction in the same way as an attachment order 
passed by itself and shall haVe the same effect as such order. 
88. The Central Registrar or any person authorised by him in writiDS 
in this behalf shall be deemed, when exerclsing any pow~rs under this M 
Act for the recovery of any amount by the attachment and sale or by sale 
without attachment of any property, or when passing any orders on any 
application made to him for such recovery or for taking a step..in-aid of 
weh recovery, to be a civil court for the purposes of article 1.16 of the 
Schedule to the Limitation Act, 1963. 40 Hafl" 
10. (1) All sums duefromamulti.-state co-operative society, or from 
an officer or member or past member of a mulU-etate co-operative society 
as such, to the Central Government or a State Government, including -.DIY 
cost awarded to the Central Government or the State Government, .. the 
ease-may be, under any provision of this Act, may, on a certiftcate ilsued 4~ 
by thie Centra!' Registrar' in this behalf. be recc,vered in the same ft'IIft .. 
nel' as arrms of land revenue. . 

35 
(2) Sums due from a multi-state co-operative society to the Central 
Government or a State Government and recoverable under sub-section 
(1) may be recovered firstly from the property of the society and second-
ly from the members, past members or the estates of deceased members 
S subject to the limit of their liabllity: • 
Provided that the liability of past members and the estate of deceased 
members shall in all cases be subject to the provisions of section 30. 
CHAPTER XI 
APPE.u.s AND RIlVISION 
10 91. (1) Subject to the provisions of section 92, an appeal shall lie Appeals. 
under this section against-
(a) an order made by the Centrlll Registrar unr\er sub-section 
(2) of section 7 refusing to register a multi-state co-operative society; 
(b) an oTder made by the Central Registrar under sub-section 
IS (4) of section 9 refusing to register an amendmenl of the bye-laws 
of a multi-state co-operative society; 
(c) an order made by the Central Registrar under sub-section 
(1) of section 15; 
(d) a decision of a mutti-state co-operative society refusing to 
20 admit any person as a mem}ler of the society who is otherwise dulv 
Qualified for membership· under the bye-laws of the society; 
(e) a decision of a multi-state co-operative society expelling any 
of its members; 
(f) a decision of a multI-state co-npel'ative society l'emovlng 8ft 
2S elected member of a bonrd under section 41; 
3S 
(g) an order made by the Central Registrar under section 42; 
(h) an order made by the Central Registrar under section 49 
superseding the board Of directors of a multi-state co-operative s0-
ciety; 
(i) an order made by the Central Registrar under section 72 
apportioning the costs of an inquiry held under section 70 or an 
Inspection made under section· 71; 
(;) an order of, surcharge under section 74; 
(k) a decision (IiI' order made under section 77; 
(lr an order made by the Cfmtral ~lPstrar under section 78 
directing the winding up of a multi-state co",operati.ve SOCiety; 
(m) an order made by the liquidator of a mult4-state co-op era-
tive society under section 82; 
(n) an order under section 88 directing attachment· of propert, 
before award. 

No 
appeal 
or re-
YIIion In 
certain 
e ..... 
36 
(2) An appeal against any deciaion or order under sub-section (J) 
shall be made within sixty days from the date of such decision or order-
(4) if the decision or order was mac\e by the Central Registrar, 
to the prescribed authority; 
(b) if the decision was made by a multi-s'tate co-operative S 
society (other than a national cO-operative society), or a liquidator of 
such society, to the Registrar of Co-operative Societies of the State 
in which the society has its registered office and who is empowered 
to exercise the powers of the Central Registrar under sub-section 
(2) of section 4i or 
(c) if the decision was made by a national co-operative society 
ar a liquidator of such society, to the Central Registrar appointed 
under sub-section (1) of section 4. 
10 
~) In disposing of an appeal under this section, the appellate autho-
rity may, after giving the parties an opportunity of making their repre- IS 
sentations, pass such order thereon as that authority may deem fit. 
(14) The decision or order of the appellate authority on appeal shall 
be final. 
9Z. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, where with the 
previous sanction in writing of, or on requisition by, the Reserve Bank- 20 
(i) a co-operative bank is being wound UPi or 
(ii) in respect of which a scheme of amalgamation or reorgani-
sation is given effect tOi or 
(iii) in respect of which an order for the supersession of the 
board and the appointment of an administrator therefor has been 2S 
made, 
no appeal, revision or review thereagainst shall lie or be permissible, and 
the sanction or requisition of the Reserve Bank shall not be liable to be 
called in question. 
93. (1) Subject to the provisions of section 92, the Central Govern- 30 
ment may, of its own motion or on an application, call for and examine 
the records of any proceedings in which no appeal lies to the appellate 
authOrity under section 91 f<)r the purpose of satisfying itself Il'S to the 
legality or propriety of any decision or order made under this Act and if 
in any case it shall appear to the Central Government that any such?S 
decision or order snould be modified, annulled or revised or remitted for 
reconsideration, the Central Government may, after giving the party to 
be affected thereby an opportunity of being heard, pass such order there-
on as it may deem fit: 
: Provided that the application to the Central Government for the exer- 40 
dse of the power under this section shall be preferred within ninety 

37 of 1956. 
87 
\ 
days from the djate on which the decision or order to which the appUca-
tion relates was communicated to the applicant. 
(2) The Central Government may suspend the execution of the deci-
sion or order pending the exercise of its power under sub-section (1) in 
5 respect thereof. 
(3) The Central Government may award costs in proceedings under 
this section to be paid out of the funds of the multi-state co-operative 
society concerned or by such party to the application for revision as the 
Central Government may deem fit. 
10 M. (1) The appellate authority under section 91 may. on the appli- Review. 
cation of any party interested. review its own order in any case and pass 
in reference thereto such order as it thinks fit: 
PrOtvided that no such application shall be entertainedllnless the 
appellate authority is satisfied that there has been a discovery of new and 
IS important matter or evidence which after exercise of due diligence was 
not within the knowledge of the applicant or could not be produced by 
him at the time when the order was made or that there has been some 
mistake or errOtr apparent on the face of the record or for any other suffi-
cient reason: 
20 Provided further that no such order shall be made under this sub-
section unless notice has been given to all interested parties and they 
have been afforded a reasonable opportunity of being heard. 
25 
(2) An application for review under SUb-section (1) by any party 
shall be made within thirty days from the date Otf communication of the 
order of the appellate authority sought to be revieWed. 
95. Where an appeal is made under section 91 or where the Central Interlo-
Government calls for the records of a case under section 93. the appellate cutory 
authority or the Central Government, as the case may be, may, in arder order .. 
to prevent the ends of justice being defeated, make such interlocutory 
orders, including an order of stay, pending the decision of the appeal or 
30 revision as such authority or the Central Government may deem fit. 
CHAPTER XII 
SOCDTIES WlDCH BECOME :MtJLTI-sTATE CD-OPBRATIVE SOCIBTIBs COHSr.Ql1EN'r 
ON REORGANISATION OF STATES 
35 96. (l) Where by virtue of the provisions of Part II of the States Re-
organisation Act, 1956, or any other enactment relating to reorganisation 
of States, any co-operative society which immediately before the day on 
which the reorganisation takes place, had its objects confined to one 
State becomes, as from that day, a multi-state co-operative society, it 
40 shall be deemed to be a multi-state co-operative society registered under 
the corresponding provisions of, this Act and the bye-laws of such society, 
shall, in so far as they are not inconsistent with the provi'Sions of this Act, 
continue to be in force until altered or rescinded . 
........ 
(2) If it appears to the Central Registrar or any officer authorised in 
this behalf by the Central Government (hereafter in this section re-
45 ferred ta as the authorised offtcer) that it is necessary or expedient to 
reconstitute or reorganise any SOCiety referred to in sub-section (1), the 
Central Registrar or the authorised officer, as the case may be, may, wiua 
Co-opera. 
tive 
societtea 
function-
ingimme-
diately 
before 
reorgani-
sation of 
Statel. 

"98 
the previoUs approval of the Central Government, place before a meetinj 
of the general body of that society, held in such manner as may be pres-
cribed,' a scheme for the reconstitution or .reorganisation, including pro-
posals regarding--
(a) the formation of new multi-state co-operative societies and S 
the transfer thereto, in whole or in part, of the assets and liabilities 
of that society, or 
(b) the transfer, in whole or in part, of the assets and liabilities 
cd that society to any other multi-state co-operative society in exist-
ence immediately before the date of that meeting of the general body. 10 
(3) If the scheme is sanctioned by a resolution passed by a majority 
of the members' present at the said meeting, either without modifications 
or with modifications to which the Central Registrar or the authorised 
officer agrees, he shall certify the scheme and upon such certification, the 
scheme shall, notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any IS 
law, regulation or bye-118m for the time being in forcc, be binding on all 
the societies affected by the scheme, as well as the shareholders and 
creditors of all such societies. 
(4) If the scheme is not sancticllled under sub-section (3), the Central 
Registrar or the authorised officer may refer the scheme to such judge of 20 
the appropriate High Court, as may be nominated in this behalf by the 
Chief Justice thereof, and the decision of that Judge in regard to the 
£Cheme shall be final and shall be binding on all the societies affected by 
the scheme as well as the shareholders and creditors of all such societies. 
Expalanation.-In this sub-section, "appropriate High Court" means the 2S 
High Court within whose jurisdiction the principal place of business of 
the multi-state co-operative society is situated. 
(5) NotWithstanding anything contained in this section, where a 
scheme under sub-section (2) inc!udes any proposal regarding the trans-
fer of the assets and liabilities of any multi-state co-operative society re- 30 
farred to in claUSe (b) thereof, the scheme shall not be bindlng on the 
existing multi-st~te co-operative society or the shareholders and creditors 
thereof, unless the proposal regarding such transfer is accepted by the 
existing multi-ita~ co-operative SOCiety by a resolution passed b'y a ma-
jority of the members present at a meeting of its general body. 3S 
CHAPTER XIII 
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES 
ofteocea. 97. (1) A multi-state co-operative society or an officer or member 
thereof wilfully making a false return or furnishing false information, or 
any person wilfully or without any reasonable excuse disobeying any 40 
summons, requiF!tion or lawful written order issued under the provisions 
of this Act, or wilfully not furnishing any information required from him 
by a person :mtborised in this behalf under the provisions of this Act, 
shall be punishable with fine which may extend to two hundred rupees. 
(2) Any employer who,. without sufficient cause, fails to pay to a multi- 4S 
state co-operative society the amount deducted by him under section 59 
within a period of fourteen days from the date on which such dqductiOD 
is made, shall, without prQcjuciice to any action that may be taken against 
him under any law for the time being in force, be punishable with fine 
which may extend to five hundred rupees. ,0 

(3) Any oftlcer or custodian who wilfully fails to hand over eustody. 
of books, accounts, documents, records, 'cash, security and other property 
belonging to a multi-state co-operative society of which he is an officer or 
custodian, to a person entitled under section 50, section 68, section 69, 
5 section 70 or section 81 shall be punishable with fine which may extend 
to two hundred rupees and in the case of a continuing breach, with a 
further fine which may extend to five hundred rupees for every day 
during which the breach is continued after conviction f()r the first such 
breach 
10 98. (1) No court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a 
Judicial Magistrate of the first class shall try any offence under this Act. 
(2) No prosecution shall be instituted under this Act without the pre-
vious sanction of the Central Registrar and such sanction shall not be 
given without giving to the person concerned a reasonable opportunity to 
15 represent his ca~e. 
CHAPTER XIV 
MISCELLAlODUS 
99. Every multi-state co-operative society shall keep a copy of this 
Act, the rules and its bye-laws and also a list of its mem~rs, open to 
20 inspection free of charge at all reasonable times at the registered address 
of the society. 
100. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the Central 
Government JnflY, by general or special order, for !reasons to be recorded 
therein, and subject to such conditions, if any, as may be specified there-
25 in, exempt any multi-state co-operative society or class of such societies 
from any of the requirements of this Act relating to registration. 
(2) (4) The Central Government may, by general or special order 
and for ;reasons 1:01 be recorded therein,-
(i) exempt any multi«ate co-operative society or any class of 
30 such societies from any ot the provisions of this Act or of the rulesj or 
(ii) direct that such provisions shall apply to such soci.e1iY or 
class at societies with such modifications not affecting the substance 
thereof as may be specified in the order: 
Provided that no order under sub-clause (14) shall be made so as to 
35 prejudice the interests of such society or class of such societies without 
an opportunity being given to make representation in the matter. 
(b) Every order made under clause (4) shall be published in the 
Official Gazette. 
IGI. Any person appointed as liquidator under the provisions of this 
40 Act shall be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of section 
45 of 1860. 21 of the Indian Penal Code. i.i 
'j02.No suit shall be" instituted against a "multi-state co-operative so-
~iety or any of its officers in respect of any act touching the constitution, 
management or the business of the 80ciety until the expiration of ninety 
45 days next aiter notice in writing has been delivered to the Central Regis-
trar or left at his office, stating the cause of action, the name, description 
and place of residence of the plaint;ff and the relief which he claims, and 
the plaint shall contain a statement that such notice has been so delivered 
or left. 
Cogni-
zanceof 
offence. 
Copy of 
Act, 
rules, and 
bye-laws, 
etc., to be 
open to 
inspection. 
Power to 
exempt 
multi-
state 
co-opera-
tive 
societies 
from con-
ditions as 
to regis-
tration. 
Liquida-
tor to be 
public 
servant. 
Notice 
necessary 
in suill. 

· " 
Companies 
Act not to 
apply. 
Savingot 
f!xistinl 
mUlti 
state 
Co-opera-
tive 
societies. 
Power to 
amend 
Second 
Schedule. 
Bar of jur-
isdicUon 
of courts. 
,. 
103. The provisions of the Companies Act, 1956 shall not apply to 
multi-state co-operative societies. 
1M. (1) Every multi-state co-operative society existing immediately 
before the commencement of this Act which has been registered under 
S the Co-operative Societies Act, 1912. or under any other Act relating "to 
co-operative societies in force in any State or in pursuance of the" provi-
sions of the Multi-unit Cb-operative Societies Act, 1942, shall be deemed 
to be registered under the corresponding provisions of this Act, ana the 
bye-laws of such society shall, in 'So far as they are not inconsistenl witH 
10 the p'rovisions of this Act or the rules, continue, to be in force until altered 
or rescinded. 
(2) All appointments, rules and orders made, all notifications and 
notices issued and all suits and ot.her proceedings instituted under any of 
the Acts ref-erred to in sub-section (1) shall, in so far as they are not in-
15 consistent with the provisions of this Act, be deemed to have been res-
pectively made, issued and instituted under this Act, save that an order 
cancelling the registration of a multi-state co-operative society made 
under the said Act shall be deemed, unless the society has already been 
finally liquidated, to be an order made under section 78 for its being 
20 wound up. 
105. (1) If the Central Government is satisfied that any multi-state co-
operative society should be designated as a national co-operative society 
or any national co-operative society listed in the Second Schedule should 
be omitted from the said Schedule, it may, by notification, amend the 
2S said Schedule so as to include therein such multi-state co-operative soc-
aety or exclude therefrom such national co-operative society, and there-
upon the said Schedule shall be deemed to have been amended according-
ly. 
(2) A copy of every notification issued under sub-section (1) shall be 
30 laid before each House of Parliament as soon as may be, after it is issued. 
3S 
106. (1) Save as opterwise provided in this Act, no court shall have 
any jurisdiction in respect of-
(a) the registration of a multi-state co-operative society or its 
bye-laws or of an amendment of the bye-laws; 
(b) the removal of board of directors; 
(.c) any dispute required under section 75 to be referred to the 
Central Regist.rari and 
(d) any matter concerning the winding up and the dissolution of 
a multi-state co-operative society. 
40 (2) While. a multi-state co-operative society is being wound up, no suit 
or other legal proceedings relating to the business of such society shall 
be proceeded with or instituted against the liquinator as such or against 
the society or any member thereof, except by leave of the Central Re-
gistrar and subject to such terms and conditions as be may impose. 
4S (3) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, Il()I decision or order made 
under this Act shall be· .questioned in any court on any ground what-
soever. 
," ..... ----- . 107. (1) In exercising the functions conferred on him by or under 
this Act, the Central Registrar, or any other person deciding a dispute 
under section 77 and the liqUidator of a mUlti-state co-operative society 
So and a pel'lOJ1 entitled to audit, inspect or hold 'an inquiry unr\er this Act, 
Powers of 
civil 
court. 
1 of 1 •. 
2 of 1912. 
6 of 942. 

'011908. 
S 
41 
shall have all the powers of a civil court, while trying a suit, under the 
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, in respect of the following matters, 
namely:-
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and 
examining him on oath; 
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document; 
(c) proof of facts by affidavits; and 
(d) issuing commissions for examination of witnesses. 
10 (2) In the case of an affidavit, any officer appointed by the Central 
"Registrar, or any other person deciding a dispute or the liquidator, 
as the case may be, may administer the oath to the deponent. 
108. No suit, prose.:ution or other legal proceedings shalll;e against Il.dcmnit)'. 
the Central Registrar or any person subordinate to him or acting 
IS on his authority in respect o£ anything in good faith done or purporting 
to have been done under this Act. 
109. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained to the contrary in any Opening of 
law relating to co-operative societies in force in a State, a multi-state co- branch_ 
operative society, not being a co-operative bank, may open branches or 
20 places of business in any place in India. 
(2) Where a multi-state co-operative society opens branches or places 
of business under sub-section (1), such branches Or places of business 
shall not be within the jurisdiction of the Registrar of Co-operative 
Societies of the State concerned and shall not be requilfed to submit 
2S returns and information to such Registrar. 
110. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules to 
carry out the purposes of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the fore-
going power. such rules may provide for all or any of the following 
30 matters, namely:-
3S 
4' 
(i) the form to be used" and the conditions to be complied 
with in the making of applications under section 6 for the registration 
of a multi-state co-operative society and the procedure in the matter 
of such applications; 
(ii) the procedure and conditions for change in the extent of • the liability of a multi-state co-operative society under section 13; 
(iii) the matters in respect of which a multi-state co-operative 
society m9.y or shall make bye-laws and the procedure to be 
followed in making. altering and abrogating bye-laws under section 
9 or section 19 and the conditions to be satisfted prior to such making, 
","' 
alteration or abrogation; 
(iv) the conditions to be complied with under section 20, by 
persons applying for admission or admitted as members. for the 
election and admission of members and the Tlllvment to be made and 
the interest to be acquired before the exercise of the right of mem-
bership; 
(1') the number of individuals who may be admitted as mem-
bers of the National Co-operative Union of India Limited, as requirel! 
by section 20 and their qualifications; 
Power to 
make 
rules. 

... 
(~i) the votes of members, as required by section 24; 
(vii) the maximum number of shares or portion of the capital 
of a multi-state co-operative society which may, subject to the pro-
visions o£ 'Section 26, be held by a member; 
(viii) the constitution and powers of a representative general S 
body under section 31; . 
(iz) general meetings of the members under section 32 and the 
procedure at such meetings and the powers to be exercised by such 
meetings; 
(x) the proportion of individuals and multi.state co-operative 10 
societies in the constitution of the board c;.lf directors and '{he general 
body; 
(:ri) the election of members of the boards under section 35 or 
section 37 and nomination of members to such boards, the appoint-
ment or election of officers and the suspension and removal of the IS 
members and other officers, and the powers to be exercised and the 
duties to be performed by the boards and other officars; 
(xii) the designation of any office which a person may hold in a 
multi-state co-operative society for the purposes of 'Section 38 or sec-
~~ ~ 
(xiii) the restrictions and conditions subject to wJiicFi honora-
rium may be paid under section 40 to the elected chairman or presi-
dent of the board ofi directors for services rendered; 
(xiv) the appointment and regulation of work entrusted to 
person or persons replacing the board in pursuance of section 49; 2S 
(xv) the constitution of a body of persons under section 51 for 
the preparation of a list of persons eligible for appointment to the 
posts of Chief Executives and other management posts in naiionaT 
co-operative societies and the amount of the maximum pay-scale 
applicable to such posts; , " .30 
(xvi) the recruitment, remuneration. allowances and other con-
ditions of service of officers and other employees o~ national co-
operative societies under section 51; 
(xvii) prohibiting a multi-state co-operative society from elect-
ing a defaulting member, or a representative of defaulting member- 3S 
society, on its board; 
, (:wiii) the returns to be submitted by a multi-state co-operative 
society to the Central RegfBtrar, the persons by whom and. the form 
in which such returns !?hall be submitted and in case of failure to 
submit any such returns, the levy of expenses of preparing it; 40 
(=) 'the persons by whom and the form in which copies 01 
entries in books of mUlti-state oo-operative societies may be 
certified under section 57 and the charges to be le\9iIed for the suppfy 
of such copies; 
(xx) the appointment of persons for settlement of disputes; 4S 
(z:ri) the proced,\lre to be followed in proceedings before the 
Central Registrar or other persons decidinJl! disputes including the 
appointment of a guardian for a party to the dispute who is a 
minor or who, 'by reason. of unsoundnes-; of mind or mental inftr- SO 
mity, is incapable Olf Pt'otect;nJl! his interests, and the levy of 
p'\.-penser :rp\ating to such proceed.ing$; 

s 
10 
15 
30 
35 
45 
43 
(z3:U) ,the withdrawal and expulsion of members and the 
payments, if any, to be made to members who withdraw or are 
eXpelled and the liability of past members or the estates of deceased 
members; 
(zziii) the mode in which 'the value of a deceased member's 
share or interest shall be ascertained and the nomination of a person 
to whom such share or interest may be paid or transferred; 
(zziv) the payments to be made and conditions to be COlllt-
plied with by members applying for loans, the period for which 
any loans may be made and the maximum amount which may be 
lent to any member: 
(zzv) the terms and conditions on which the Central Gov-
ernment may make share-capital contribution or give financial or 
other aaristance to multi-state co-operative societies under secti'lll 
60 and the terms and condiotions on which the Central Government 
may guarantee the payment of the prinCipal or interest on debentures 
issued by multi-state co-operative societies or loans or deposits 
raised by them; 
(xm) the formation and maintenance of reserve funds an.! 
other funds under section 62 and the objects to which such fI.m4I 
may be applied, and the investment of any funds under the control 
of a murti-state co-operattve society under section 63; 
(zzvii) the conditions under which proftts may be distributed 
under section 62 to the members of a multi-state co-operattve s0-
ciety and the maximum rate of dividend which may be paid by 
muilti-state co-opera'tive societies; 
(zzviii) the prohibitions and restrictions subject to which 
multi-6tate co-operative societies may, under section 66, transadt 
butriness with persons who are ndt members; 
(xrl-.:) the accounts and booko; to be kept by a multi-state cO-
operative society 'and the audit of such accounts, and the, charges, if 
any, to be made for such audit under section 68, and the periodical 
publica'tion of a balance-sheet showing the assets and Jiabilities of 
a multi-state co-operative society; 
(xxx) the calculation and writing off of bad debts by multi ... 
state co-operative societies; 
(xxxi) the procedure to be followed by a liquidator appointed 
under section 81 in respect of provisions of section 82; 
(~zzii) the procedure for execution of decisions under section 
86; 
(z:rziii) the procedure to be followed in presenting and dispos-
ing of appeals under section 91; 
(xxxiv) the issue and service of processes and for proof of ser-
vice thereof; 
(xxzvr) the manner of effecting a1.tachmen.t; 
(xzzvi) the ClUStody, preservation and sale of property under 
attachment; 
(xx-rvii) the investigation of. claims by penons other than the 
defaulter to any right or inte1"eSt in the attached property, and 
,'the poStponement of sale pending such investigation; 

<zzmii) the immediate sale of perishable articles; 
(zz:t"b:) the inspection of documents in the office of the Central 
Registrar or of any other officer or authority and the levy of fees for 
'granting certified copies of the same; 
(rl) the manner in which funds may be raised by a multt- . S 
state Clo-operative society. or a class of multi-state co-operattve 
societies by means of shares or debentures or otherwise and the 
auantum of funds so raised; 
(rli) the procedure under section 96 for reconstitution and re-' 
organisation of societies which become multi-state co-operative so- 10 
i' cietfes consequent on reorganisation of a S't8lte; 
(zUi) the method of communicating or publishing any decision 
or order required to be communicated or published under this Act 
or the rules; 
(xliii) all other matters expresRly required or allowed by this IS 
Act. to be prescribed by rules. 
(3) Every rule made under this 'Section shall be laid. as soon as may 
he after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in 
session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one 
seufon or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry 20 
0' the session immediately following the session or the successive 
sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in makine: any monification in the 
rule or both Houses asn-ee that the rule should not be made. thE' rule 
shall thereafter have effect onlv in s1lch modified form ar be of no 
effect. as the case may be; so. however, that any such mod'iflcation or 2S 
annulment shall be without prejurlice to the validity of anything previ-
ously done under that rule. 
111. The Multi-unit Co-operative Societies Act, 1942, is hereby re- 8 of IH1. 
pealed. 
THE FmST SCHEDULE 30 
[See section 3 (t) ] 
CO-OPhATIVE PRmctPLES 
1. Membership of a multi-state co-olX'rative societv (hereafter in 
Ithill Schedule referred to a.c; the societv) should be voluntary and open. 
without any socjal. polftical. or religious discrimination, to all persODl 3S 
who can make use of its services. 
2. In a society other than that with insti-tutional mernbershll) , indivi-
dual members should enjoy equal rights of voting-one memlber, one 
vote. . 
3. Surplus or savings. if any. arfsing out of the operations of the 40 
society be1onl!' to the soCietv as a whole. and no individual member has 
a claim to the surplus. The surplus should be utilised for all or any 
of the following purposes. namely:-
(11) providing for t\evelopment of the business of the society; 

. ", 
(b) providing services for the common enjoyment of mem:bera. 
(c) distribution among the members in proportion to thejr 
transactions with the society. 
4. The sGeiety should undertake education of its members, omc. 
5 bearers and employees and the general public regarding the principles 
and practice of co-operation. 
10 
5. The society should activply co-operate in every practical way with 
other co-operative societies at local, national or international levels. 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE 
[Sp.e sections 3 (m) and 105] 
LIST OF NATIONAL CO-OPERATIVE SocIETIES 
1. National Co-operative Land Development Banks F~tion 
Limited, Hyderabad, Andhra Pradesh. 
2. All India State Co-operative Banks' Federation Limited, Bombay, 
IS Maharashtra. 
3. National Co-operative Union of India Limited, New Delhi. 
. National Agricultural Co-operative Marketing Federation of India 
Limited, New Delhi. 
5. National Co-operative Consumers' Federation Limited, New Delhi. 
20 6. National Federation of Co-operative Sugar Factories Limited, New 
Delhi 
7. N ationa! Federation of Industrlal Co-operatives lJmited, New 
Delhi. 
25 
8. National Co-opera~ve Housing Federation lJmited, New Delhi. 
9. Indian Farmers' Fertilizer Co'-Operative Limited, New Delhi. 
10. All Inaia Federation of Co-operative Spinning Mills Limited, 
Bombay. 
11. All India Industrial Co-operative Banks' Federation Limited, 
Bangalore. 
12. National Co-operative Dairy Federation of India lJmited, New 
30 Delhi. 
13. PetrofUs Co-operative Limited, New Delhi. 
14. National Heavy Engineering Co-operative Limiten, New Delhi. 
15. The All India Handloom Fabrics Marketing Co-operative Society 
35 Limited, Bombay. 
16. The Nationa.l Federation of Urban Co-operative Banks and Credit 
Societies Umited, New Delhi. , . 
'. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Co-operative societies with objects extending beyond one State and 
serving the interest of members in more than one State are at present 
governed by the proVisions of the Multi-unit Co-operative Societies Act, 
1942-a Central Act. This is only an enabling legislation facilitating the in-
corporation, regulation and winding up of multi-unit (state) co-operative 
societies under the provisions of the C~oper8ltive Societies Act of the' 
State where ·the principal place of business of any such society is located. 
As a result, different multi-unit co-operaltive societies are governed. by 
different c~opera'ti\'e laws in the country. 
2. Since 1942, far-reaching changes have occurred in the organisational 
structure, overall size and operations, etc., of multi-unit c~operative socie-
~ies. A number of national level c~operative societies and federations, 
promoted by c~operatives in the country, have come up with the asatst.. 
anee of the Central and State Governments. These federations and socie-
ties are engaged in diverse spheres of co-operative activity. The provi-
sions in the co-operative laws in different States governing ·these multi-
state societies tend. to vary from. one another. Thus the lack of uniformitY' 
~d the inadequacies in the existing arrangements have rendered it ne-
cessary 'to replace the existing legislative framework of such co-open.-
tives by a common comprehensive Central legislation and proViding for a 
Centr8il Authority to be responsible for 'their registration, supervision 
8!lld control. The present Multi-state Co-operaltive Societies Bill, framed 
in the light of the recommendations of the Expert Commiftee on Multi-
State Co-operative Societies Legislation and in consultation with the 
State Governments, seeks to achieve this objective and is intended to 
facilitate the further development and more effective functioning of 
multi-state co-operative societies. 
3. The proP'Osed law will extend to the whole of India including Jammu 
and Kashmir. The present Multi-unit Co-operative Societies Act, 1942, 
does not eX!tend to Jammu and Kashmir. 
4. The scope of the Bill is divided into several parts on the usualliDeS 
of co-operative legislation in the Sta'tes, proViding, among other thingi', 
for the appointment of Central Registrar, registration of multi-statec~ 
operative societies, members' rights and liabilities, management at. c0-
operatives, privilleges of multi-state co-operativ~, their ~ies and 
funds audit, inquiry, inspection, settlement of dIsputes, wmding up and 
canceilation of registration of multi-state co-operative societies, etc. 
5. Employees of certain categories of. DWlti-sta.te co-operatives are 
being made eligible to become members of these co-operati~es; represen-
tation of the workers on the boards of directors of the SOCletles bas also 
been provided for. 
NEW DELHI; MOHAN DHARIA; 
The 20th October, 1977. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
~ Multi-state Co-operative Societies Bill, 1977,seeka ~ ...,...the 
existing Multi-WIlt Co-operative Societies Act, 1942. Except for some 
additioDal expenctiture that may arise under·clauses t and l3!1 of the B~'Ilo 
I)ther new expenditure is envisaged by reason of the passing of the BiU. 
2. Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the appointment of Central Registrar 
of Co-operative Societies. This appointment will not now entail: any addl .. ,·. 
tional expenditUl'e since one of the officers in the Ministry has· already 
been designated as Central Registrar in an Q-ofJicio capacity.. Some 
additional supporting std will, however, be needed to assist the Central 
Registrar in the discharge of his statutory functions under the varioUS 
provisions of this Bill. To begin with. the following posts have been 
created involving a recuI'ring additional expenditure of Dot exceeding 
Rs. 1,00,000 in a year. 
Posts Number of posts Scale of pav 
--------_. __ ._--_._------------
Gazetted category 
Deputy Director 
Section OfRcer 
NO'Tl--Gazetted category 
Senior Technical Assistant 
Assistant/Junior Technical Assistant 
Stenographer Grade III 
L.D.C. 
one 
one 
one 
one 
one 
one 
Rs. 1100-]600 
Rs. 65~1200 
Rs. 55O-AOO 
Rs. ~O 
Rs. 330-560 
RB. 260-400 
3. Clause 37 of the Bill lays down that the election of the members of 
the board of directors of such multi-state co-operative societies ar class of 
multi-state co-operative societies as may be noWled in a general or special 
order, shall be held under the superintendence, direction and control of 
such returning officers as may be appOinted by the Central Registrar. The 
exact amount of expenditure that might be involved on this cannot be 
assessed at this stage. The additional expenditure may be around 
Rs. 10,000 in a year. 
4. Clause 60 of the BUI provides for financ:lal assistance to muttl-state 
co-operll'tlive societies in the form of share-capital, loans and advances, sub 
sidies and guarantees. The system envisaged in this proviSion is already 
in vogue and DO additional expenditure to the Government 1s envisaged. 
5. The development of multi-state co-operative societies is an approved 
plan scheme. An amount of Rs. 1 lakh has been included in the budget 
of the Ministry tor the CUlTent financial year in respect ot this scheme. 
The expenditure involved and referred to in the preceding paragra~ 
will ibe accommodated within the budget allocation for the year. Suit-
able provision wi1l1 also be made for the subsequent years~ 
6. The Bill does not involve any non-recurring expenditure. 
47 
~ . 
L ;0 

- MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 110 of-the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules 
to carry out the purposes of the Bill in respect of matters falling within the 
purview of this clause. 
These matters relate to procedure and administrative detail and it is 
not practicable to provide them in the Bill itself. The delegation of legis-
lative power is, therefore, of a normal character. 

(I' 
LOK SABHA 
A 
Bn.L 
" 
Of 
\ 
" 
'to consolidate and amend the law relating to co-operative societies with 
objects Dot confined to one St8lte and serving the interests oif m,eID-
bers in more than one State, 
(8h.ri Mohan Dharia, Minister of Commerce aftd Civil Supplies and 
Co-operatiOft.) 