As intropucrp 1x Lox Sapaa

20. AUG 199?

Bitl No. 141 of 1992
अमन सर अलकप पान,

THE SALARY, ALLOWANCES AND PENSION OF MEMBERS
OF PARLIAMENT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1992
A
BILL

further to amend the Salary, Allowances @nd Pensions of Members of
Parliament Act, 1954,

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-third Year of the Republic
of India as follows:—

1, This Act may be called the Salary, Allowances and Pension of
Members of Parliament (Amendment) Act, 1992.

5 2, In section 5 of the Salary, Allowances and Pension of Members
~ of Parliament Act, 1954,—

(a) in sub-section (2),—

( after the words “periormed by him”, the words‘, either
alone or alongwith companion or spouse,” shail be inserted;

10 () in the proviso, for the word “sixteen,” the word “twenty-eight” siiall
be substituted;

(0) after Explanation IZ, the following Explanation shall be in-
serted, namely: —

“Eaplanation II—For the purposes of sub-section (2), any

15 journey performed by the companion or the spouse shall be
added in computing the limit of twenty-eight journeys specified
in the proviso to that sub-section.”.

Short
title.

Amend-
ment of
section
5 of Act
30 of
1954.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS,

The Joint Committee on Salaries and Allowances of Members of
Parliament has made several recommendations for increasing the e:
ing facilities, allowances and pension of Members of Parliament and

ex-Members of Parliament. It is proposed to implement the following

(@) The number of single air journeys from any place in India
to any other place in India for Members of Parliament be raised
from 16 to 28 per annum;

(६) Unavailed air journeys out of those admissible for Members
of Parliament may be utilised for taking -companion or spouse in an
air journeys: -

2. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects,

New Deuir; GHULAM NABI AZAD.
The 19th August, 1992,


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to amend section 5 of the Act, to provide
for increase in the number of single ar journcy from any place in India
to any other place in India for Members of Parliament from 16 to 28
per annum.

xpenditure from

2, The above provision would involve a recurring ९:
144 crores per

the Consolidated Fund of India to the extent of Rs.
annum approximately.

3. The provisions of the Bill will not involve any other expenditure

either recurring or non-recurring.


Travei-
Ung al-
lowane-
es tor
interme-
diate

journeys,

प्र ANNEXURE

Ex?RacT FROM THE Sarary, ALLOWANCES AND PENSION oF
Members oF Paruramenr Acr, 1954

(30 oF 1954)
रू + * * रू
5. () 5 * * 2

in section 4 or the second proviso to sub-section (1) of this section or
section 6C) performed by him from any place in India to any other
Place in India during his term of office as such member:

Provided that no member shall be entitled to any payment under
this sub-section in respect of any journeys in excess of sixteen perform-
ed by him during any year,

Explanation I—The provisions of clause (c) of sub-section (1) and
of sub-section (2) of section 4 shall, so far as may be. apply to travelling
allowances payable under this section as they apply to travelling allow-
ances payable under that section,

Explanation IT.—For the purposes of this section, “year” means,—

(४) in the case of a person who is a member at the commence-
ment of the Salary, Allowances and Pension of Members of Parlia-
ment (Amendment) Act, 1985, the year beginning with such com-
mencement and each of the subsequent years;

(६) in the case of a person who becomes a member after such
commencement, the year beginning with the date on which, his
term of office as such member commences and each of the subse-
quent years,

* * * * *



LOK SABHA

He RY

A
BILL

further to amend the Salary, Allowances and

Pension of Members of
Parliament Aat, 1954,