Aඌ ංඇඍඋඈൽඎർൾൽ ංඇ Lඈ඄ Sൺൻඁൺ
Bill No. 141 of 2024
THE MAHARASHTRA CENTRAL SPORTS 
UNIVERSITY BILL, 2024
By 
Dඋ. Hൾආൺඇඍ Vංඌඁඇඎ Sൺ ඏ ൺඋൺ,  M.P.
Aඋඋൺඇ඀ൾආൾඇඍ ඈൿ Cඅൺඎඌൾඌ
Cඅൺඎඌൾඌ
1. Short title, extent and commencement.
2. Definitions.                          
3. Establishment of University.
4. Objects of University.
5. Powers and functions of University.
6. University to be open to all castes, creed, race or class.
7. Central Government to review work and progress of University.
8. Officers of the University.
9. Chancellor.
10. Vice-Chancellor.
11. Deans of Schools.
12. Registrar.
13. Finance Officer.
14. Controller of Examinations.
15. Librarian.
16. Other officers.
17. Authorities of University.
18. The Court.
19. Executive Council 
20. Academic and Activity Council.
21. Board of Sports Studies.
22. Finance Committee.
23. Other authorities of University.
24. Power to make Statutes.
25. Power to make Ordinances.
26. Regulations.
27. Annual Report.                               
28. Fund of University.
29. Returns and information.

Cඅൺඎඌൾඌ
30. Power to remove difficulties.
31. Statutes, Ordinances and Regulations to be published in the Official Gazette   
     and to be laid before Parliament.
                   
(ii)

Aඌ ංඇඍඋඈൽඎർൾൽ ංඇ Lඈ඄ Sൺൻඁൺ
Bill No. 141 of 2024
THE MAHARASHTRA CENTRAL SPORTS 
UNIVERSITY BILL, 2024
By 
Dඋ. Hൾආൺඇඍ Vංඌඁඇඎ Sൺ ඏ ൺඋൺ,  M.P.
ൺ
BILL
to establish and incorporate a Sports University in the State of Maharashtra, 
a specialised University first of its kind, to promote sports education in the 
areas of sports sciences, sports technology, sports management and 
sports coaching besides functioning as the national training 
centre for select sports disciplines by adopting best 
international practices and for matters 
connected therewith or 
incidental thereto.
 B ൾ it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic  of India 
as follows:–
 1. (1) This Act may be called the Maharashtra Central Sports University Act, 
2024. 
Short title, 
extent and 
commencement.

  ( 2) It extends to the whole of India. 
  ( 3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 
(a) “Academic and Activity Council” means the Academic and Activity 
Council of the University;
(b) “academic staff” means such categories of staff as are designated as 
academic staff by the Ordinances; 
(c) “Board of Sports Studies” means the Board of Sports Studies of a 
Department of the University;
(d) “Chancellor” means the Chancellor of the University;
(e) “College” means a college or other academic institution established or 
maintained by, or admitted to the privileges of, the University;
(f) “Court” means the Court of the University;
(g) “Department” means a Department of Studies and includes a Centre of 
Studies;
(h) “employee” means any person appointed by the University and includes 
teachers and other staff of the University;
(i) “Executive Council” means the Executive Council of the University;
(j) “Finance Committee” means the Finance Committee of the University;
(k) “Fund” means the University Fund referred to in section 28;
(l) “Hall” means a unit of residence or of corporate life for the students 
of the University, or of an Outlying Campus or of a College or an Institution, 
maintained by the University;
(m) “Head of the Department” means the head of any teaching department 
of the University;
(n) “Institution” means an academic institution, not being a College, 
maintained by, or admitted to the privileges of, the University;
(o) “Outlying Campus” means the campus of the University as may be 
established by it at any place within or outside India;
(p) “Principal” means the Head of a College or an Institution maintained by 
the University and includes, where there is no Principal, the person for the time 
being duly appointed to act as Principal, and in the absence of the Principal, or 
the acting Principal, a Vice-Principal duly appointed as such;
(q) “Regional Centre” means a centre established or maintained by the 
University for the purpose of coordinating and supervising the work of Study 
Centres in any region and for performing such other functions as may be 
conferred on such centre by the Executive Council;
(r) “Regulations” means the regulations made by any authority of the 
University under this Act for the time being in force;
(s) “School” means a School of Studies of the University;
(t) “section” means the section of this Act;
Definitions.
2

(u) “State” includes a Union territory;
(v) “Statutes” and “Ordinances” mean, respectively, the Statutes and the 
Ordinances of the University for the time being in force;
(w) “Study Centre” means a centre established, maintained or recognised by 
the University for the purpose of advising, counselling, training or for rendering 
any other assistance required by the students;
(x) “teachers of the University” means Professors, Associate Professors, 
Assistant Professors and such other persons as may be appointed for imparting 
instructions, training or conducting research in the University or in any 
Outlying Campus, College or Institution or Regional Centres and Study Centres 
maintained by the University and are designated as teachers by the Ordinances;
(y) “University” means the National Sports University established and 
incorporated as a University under this Act;
(z) “Vice-Chancellor” means the Vice-Chancellor of the University. 
3. (1) There shall be established a University by the name of “Maharashtra 
Central Sports University”.
  ( 2) The headquarters of the University shall be in the State of Maharashtra 
and it may establish or maintain Outlying Campuses, Colleges, Regional Centres 
and Study Centres at such other places in India as it may deem fit:
    Provided that the University may, with the prior approval of the 
  Central Government, also establish Outlying Campuses and Study Centres 
  outside India.
  ( 3) The first Chancellor, the first Vice-Chancellor and the first members of 
the Court, the Executive Council and the Academic and Activity Council, and all 
such persons who may hereafter become such officers or members, so long as they 
continue to hold such office or membership, are hereby constituted a body corporate 
by the name of “Maharashtra Central Sports University”.
  ( 4) The University shall have perpetual succession and a common seal, and 
shall sue and be sued by the said name.
 4. The objects of the University shall be–
(i) to evolve as an institute of advanced study in the field of physical 
education and sports sciences;
(ii) to provide for research and development and dissemination of   
knowledge in physical education and sports sciences by providing specially 
designed academic and training programmes in various areas of physical 
education and sports sciences and training in advanced technologies of sports;
(iii) to strengthen physical education and sports training programmes to 
promote sports including traditional and tribal sports and games;
(iv) to establish centres and institutions of excellence for imparting state of 
the art educational training and research in the fields of physical education and 
sports sciences, sports technology and high performance training for all sports 
and games;
(v) to provide professional and academic leadership to other institutions in 
the field of physical education and sports sciences;
Establishment 
of University.
Objects of 
University.
3

(vi) to provide vocational guidance and placement services in physical 
education, sports sciences, sports medicine, sports technology and other related 
fields;
(vii) to generate capabilities for the development of knowledge, skills and 
competences at various levels in the fields of physical education and sports 
sciences, sports technology and high performance training for all sports and 
games;
(viii) to generate capabilities to provide infrastructure of international 
standard for education, training and research in the areas related to physical 
education and sports sciences, sports technology and high performance training 
for all sports and games;
(ix) to prepare highly qualified professionals in the fields of physical 
education and sports sciences, sports technology and high performance training 
for all sports and games;
(x) to serve as a Centre of Excellence for the elite and other talented 
sportspersons of all sports and games and innovation in physical education and 
sports sciences and to carry out, endorse and propagate research;
(xi) to function as a leading resource centre for knowledge and development 
in the areas of physical education and sports sciences, sports technology and 
high performance training for all sports and games;
(xii) to provide international collaboration in the fields of physical education 
and sports sciences, sports technology and high performance training for all 
sports and games;
(xiii) to establish close linkage with sports academies, schools, colleges, 
sports and recreation clubs, sports associations and international federations for 
the purpose of teaching, training and research in physical education and sports 
sciences, sports technology and high performance training for all sports and 
games;
(xiv) to train talented athletes so as to help them to evolve into elite athletes 
of international level;
(xv) to make India especially the State of Maharashtra become a sporting 
power;
(xvi) such other objects, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, 
which the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
specify in this behalf.  
 5. (1) The University shall have the following powers and functions, namely:–
(i) to plan, design, develop and prescribe courses of study and conduct 
appropriate academic and training programmes in physical education and 
sports sciences including sports technology and to provide for instruction and 
training in such branches of learning as the University may, from time to time, 
determine and to make provisions for research and for the advancement and 
dissemination of knowledge;
(ii) to grant, subject to such conditions as the University may determine 
confer degrees, diplomas or certificates or other academic distinctions on, 
persons, on the basis of examinations, evaluation or any method of testing, 
and to withdraw any such certificates, diplomas, degrees or other academic 
distinctions for good and sufficient cause;
Powers and 
functions of 
University.
4

(iii) to provide opportunities to the students of the University to participate 
in the sports tournaments and competitions in co-ordination with established 
International Sports Federations, National Sports Federations, Indian Olympic 
Association and Association of Indian Universities;
(iv) to have liaison or membership with various international professional 
organisations or bodies;
(v) to establish and maintain, with the prior approval of the 
Central Government, such Outlying Campuses, Regional Centres, specialised 
laboratories or other units for research, instruction and training as are, in the 
opinion of the University, necessary for the furtherance of its objects;
(vi) to establish, maintain or recognise Study Centres in the manner laid 
down by the Statutes;
(vii) to establish and maintain Colleges, Institutions and Halls;
(viii) to confer honorary degrees or other distinctions in the manner 
prescribed by the Statutes;
(ix) to institute Principalships, Professorships, Associate Professorships, 
Assistant Professorships and other teaching or academic positions, required by 
the University and to appoint persons to such Principalships, Professorships, 
Associate Professorships, Assistant Professorships or other teaching or 
academic positions;
(x) to appoint persons working in any University or academic institution, 
including those located outside the country, as teachers of the University for 
a specified period;
(xi) to create administrative, ministerial and other posts and to make 
appointments thereto;
(xii) to co-operate or collaborate or associate with any other University 
or authority or institution of higher learning, including those located outside 
the country, in such manner and for such purposes as the University, may 
determine;
(xiii) to provide facilities through the distance education system to such 
persons and in such manner as may be prescribed by the Statutes;
(xiv) to institute and award fellowships, scholarships, studentship, medals 
and prizes for raising academic standards and research;
(xv) to organise and to undertake extramural studies, training and 
extension services;
(xvi) to make provision for research and advisory services and for that 
purpose, to enter into such arrangements with other institutions, industrial or 
other organisations, as the University may deem necessary;
(xvii) to organise and conduct refresher courses, workshops, seminars and 
other programmes for teachers, evaluators, other academic staff and students;
(xviii) to appoint on contract or otherwise visiting Professors, Emeritus 
Professors, Consultants and such other persons who may contribute to the 
advancement of the objects of the University;
(xix) to determine standards of admission to the University, which may 
include examination, evaluation or any other method of testing;
5

(xx) to demand and receive payment of fees and other charges;
(xxi) to supervise the residences of the students of the University and to 
make arrangements for promoting their health and general welfare; 
(xxii) to lay down conditions of service of all categories of employees, 
including their code of conduct;
(xxiii) to regulate and enforce discipline among the students and the 
employees, and to take such disciplinary measures in this regard as may be 
deemed by the University to be necessary;
(xxiv) to make arrangements for promoting the health and general welfare 
of the employees;
(xxv) to receive benefactions, donations and gifts and to acquire, hold 
and manage, and to dispose of, with the previous approval of the Central 
Government, any property, movable or immovable, including trust and 
endowment properties, for the purposes of the University;
(xxvi) to borrow, with the previous approval of the Central Government, 
on the security of the property of the University, money for the purposes of 
the University;
(xxvii) to conduct innovative experiments and promote new methods 
and technologies in the fields of physical education, sports sciences, sports 
medicine, sports technology, sports management and other related fields;
(xxviii) to purchase or to take on lease any land or building or sports 
complex or sports infrastructure and scientific sports research equipment 
or indoor stadium or works which may be necessary or convenient for the 
purposes of the University, on such terms and conditions as it may think fit 
and proper and to construct, alter and maintain any such building or work;
(xxix) to start any new allied course or research programme or diploma 
or training programme and discontinue any course or training programme;
(xxx) to invest the funds of the University in or upon such securities and 
transpose any investment from time to time in such manner as it may deem fit 
in the interest of the University;
(xxxi) to execute conveyances regarding transfers, mortgages, leases, 
licenses, agreements and other conveyances in respect of the property, 
movable or immovable, including Government securities, belonging to the 
University or to be acquired for the purposes of the University, after taking 
prior permission of the Central Government;
(xxxii) to act as a technical advisory body to Government of India 
and other National Organisations, State Governments and National Sports 
Federations on all matters related to sports;
(xxxiii) to provide training, coaching and other back up to high level 
sportspersons for achieving success in different national and international 
sports competitions;
(xxxiv) to give effect to the procedures and standards provided under the 
Khelo India Scheme or the National Sports Talent Search and Identification 
Scheme;
(xxxv) to confer autonomous status on a College or an Institution in the 
manner laid down by the Statutes;
6

(xxxvi) to admit to its privileges any College or Institution in or outside 
India subject to such conditions as may be laid down by the Statutes:
  Provided that no College or Institution shall be so admitted except 
  with the prior approval of the Central Government;
(xxxvii) to provide for the preparation of instructional and training 
materials, including films, cassettes, tapes, video cassettes and other software;
(xxxviii) to recognise persons for imparting instructions in any College or 
Institution admitted to the privileges of the University; and
(xxxix) to do all such other acts and things as may be necessary, incidental 
or conducive to the attainment of all or any of its objects.
  ( 2) The University shall in the exercise of its powers have jurisdiction over 
the whole of India and to the Outlying Campuses and Study Centres outside India.
  ( 3) In exercising its powers referred to in sub-section (1), it shall be the 
endeavour of the University to maintain an all-India character and high standards 
of teaching, training and research, and the University shall, among other measures 
which may be necessary for the said purpose, take, in particular, the following 
measures, namely:—
(i) admissions of students and recruitment of faculty shall be made on 
all-India basis through appropriate procedures approved by the Executive 
Council of the University;
(ii) foreign students shall be admitted by the University to various courses 
and programmes as per the policy and schemes of the Government of India 
and the procedure approved by the Executive Council of the National Sports 
University;
(iii) inter-University mobility of faculty with portable pension scheme 
benefits, if any, and protection of seniority shall be encouraged;
(iv) semester system, continuous evaluation and choice-based credit 
system shall be introduced and the University shall enter into agreement 
with other Universities and academic institutions for credit transfer and joint 
degree programmes;
(v) innovative courses and programmes of studies shall be introduced 
with a provision for periodic review and restructuring;
(vi) active participation of students shall be ensured in all academic 
activities of the University, including evaluation of teachers;
(vii) accreditation shall be obtained from the National Assessment and 
Accreditation Council or any other accrediting agency at the national level; 
and
(viii) e-governance shall be introduced with effective management 
information. 
 6. The University shall be open to persons of any sex and of whatever caste, 
creed, race or class, and it shall not be lawful for the University to adopt or impose 
on any person, any test whatsoever of religious belief or profession in order to 
entitle such person to be appointed as a teacher of the University or to hold any 
other office therein or to be admitted as a student in the University or to graduate 
there at or to enjoy or exercise any privilege thereof:
   Provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent the 
 University from making special provisions for the employment or admission of 
7
University to 
be open to all 
castes, creed, 
race or class.

 women, persons with disabilities or of persons belonging to the weaker sections 
 of the society and, in particular, of the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes 
 and the other socially and educationally backward classes of citizens:
   Provided further that no such special provision shall be made on the ground 
 of domicile.
 7. (1) The Central Government may, from time to time, appoint one or more 
persons to review the work and progress of the University, including Outlying 
Campuses, Colleges, Institutions, Regional Centres and Study Centres maintained 
by it, and to submit a report thereon; and upon receipt of that report, the Central 
Government may, after obtaining the views of the Executive Council thereon 
through the Vice-Chancellor, take such action and issue such directions, as it 
considers necessary, in respect of any of the matters dealt with in the report and the 
University shall abide by such action and be bound to comply with such directions.
  ( 2) The Central Government shall have the right to cause an inspection to be 
made by such person or persons, as it may direct, of the University, its buildings, 
sports complexes, libraries, laboratories and equipment, and of any Outlying 
Campus or College or Institution or Regional Centres or Study Centres maintained 
by the University; and also of the examinations, teaching and other work conducted 
or done by the University and to cause an inquiry to be made in like manner in 
respect of any matter connected with the administration or finances of the University, 
Colleges or Institutions or Regional Centres or Study Centres.
  ( 3) The Central Government shall, in every matter referred to in 
sub-section (2), give notice of its intention to cause an inspection or inquiry to 
be made, to the University, and the University shall have the right to make such 
representations to the Central Government, as it may consider necessary.
  ( 4) After considering the representations, if any, made by the University, the 
Central Government may cause to be made such inspection or inquiry as is referred 
to in sub-section (3).
  ( 5) Where any inspection or inquiry has been caused to be made by the 
Central Government, the University shall be entitled to appoint a representative, 
who shall have the right to be present and be heard at such inspection or inquiry.
  ( 6) The Central Government may, if the inspection or inquiry is made 
in respect of the University or any Outlying Campus or College or Institution 
or Regional Centre or Study Centre established or maintained by it, address the 
Vice-Chancellor with reference to the result of such inspection or inquiry together 
with such views and advice with regard to the action to be taken thereon, as the 
Central Government may be pleased to offer, and on receipt of address made 
by the Central Government, the Vice-Chancellor shall communicate to the 
Executive Council the views of the Central Government with such advice as the 
Central Government may offer upon the action to be taken thereon.
  ( 7) The Executive Council shall communicate through the Vice-Chancellor to 
the Central Government such action, if any, as it proposes to take or has been taken 
upon the result of such inspection or inquiry.
  ( 8) Where, the Executive Council does not, within a reasonable time, take 
action to the satisfaction of the Central Government, it may, after considering any 
explanation furnished or representation made by the Executive Council, issue such 
directions, as it may think fit, and the Executive Council shall comply with such 
directions.
Central 
Government to 
review work 
and progress 
of University.
8

  ( 9) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this section, the 
Central Government may, by order in writing, annul any proceeding of the 
University which is not in conformity with the provisions of this Act or the Statutes 
or the Ordinances:
    Provided that before making any such order, the Central Government 
  shall call upon the Vice-Chancellor to show cause why such an order should 
  not be made, and, if any cause is shown within a reasonable time, it shall 
  consider the same.
  ( 10) The Central Government shall have such other powers, in respect of the 
affairs of the University, as may be prescribed by the Statutes.
8. The following shall be the officers of the University, namely:–
   ( a) the Chancellor;
   ( b) the Vice-Chancellor;
   ( c) the Deans of Schools;
   ( d) the Registrar;
   ( e) the Finance Officer;
   ( f) the Controller of Examinations;
   ( g) the Librarian; and
   ( h) such other officers as may be declared by the Statutes to be the officers 
      of the University.   
 9. ( 1) The Chancellor shall be appointed by the Central Government in 
such manner as may be prescribed by the Statutes.
  ( 2) The Chancellor shall, by virtue of his office, be the head of the University 
and shall, if present, preside at the Convocations of the University held for conferring 
degrees and other ceremonial functions and also the meetings of the Court.
 10.(1) The Vice-Chancellor shall be appointed by the Central Government 
in such manner as may be prescribed by the Statutes.
  ( 2) The Vice-Chancellor shall be the principal executive and academic 
officer of the University and shall exercise general supervision and control over the 
affairs of the University and give effect to the decisions of all the authorities of the 
University.
  ( 3) The Vice-Chancellor may, if he is of the opinion that immediate action 
is necessary on any matter, exercise any power conferred on any authority of the 
University by or under this Act and shall apprise such authority at its next meeting 
the action taken by him on such matter:
    Provided that if the authority concerned is of the opinion that such action 
  ought not to have been taken, it may refer the matter to the Central Government 
  whose decision thereon shall be final:
    Provided further that any person in the service of the University who is 
  aggrieved by the action taken by the Vice-Chancellor under this sub-section 
  shall have the right to represent against such action to the Executive Council 
  within three months from the date on which decision on such action is 
  communicated to him and thereupon the Executive Council may confirm, 
  modify or reverse the action taken by the Vice-Chancellor.
Officers of 
University.
Chancellor.
Vice-Chancellor.
9

  ( 4) Where the Vice-Chancellor is of the opinion that any decision taken by 
any authority of the University is beyond the powers of the authority conferred 
under the provisions of this Act or the Statutes or the Ordinances, or that any 
decision taken by the authority is not in the interest of the University, he may ask the 
authority concerned to review its decision within sixty days of such decision and if 
the authority refuses to review the decision either in whole or in part or no decision 
is taken by it within the said period of sixty days, the matter shall be referred to the 
Central Government whose decision thereon shall be final.
  ( 5) The Vice-Chancellor shall exercise such other powers and perform such 
other duties as may be prescribed by the Statutes or the Ordinances.
 11. Every Dean of School shall be appointed in such manner, and on such terms 
and conditions of service, and shall exercise such powers and perform such duties, 
as may be prescribed by the Statutes.
 12. (1) The Registrar shall be appointed in such manner, and on such terms and 
conditions of service, as may be prescribed by the Statutes.
  ( 2) The Registrar shall have the power to enter into agreements, sign 
documents and authenticate records on behalf of the University, and shall exercise 
such powers and perform such duties, as may be prescribed by the Statutes.
 13. The Finance Officer shall be appointed in such manner, and shall exercise 
such powers and perform such duties, as may be prescribed by the Statutes.
 14. The Controller of Examinations shall be appointed in such manner and shall 
exercise such powers and perform such duties, as may be prescribed by the Statutes.
 15. The Librarian shall be appointed in such manner and on such terms and 
conditions of service, and shall exercise such powers and perform such duties, as 
may be prescribed by the Statutes.
 16. The manner of appointment and powers and duties of other officers of the 
University shall be prescribed by the Statutes. 
 17. The following shall be the authorities of the University, namely:–
(a) the Court;
(b) the Executive Council;
(c) the Academic and Activity Council;
(d) the Board of Sports Studies;
(e) the Finance Committee;
(f) such other authorities as may be declared by the Statutes to be the     
   authorities of the University.  
 18.(1) The constitution of the Court and the term of office of its members shall 
be prescribed by the Statutes.
  ( 2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Court shall have the following 
powers and functions, namely:–
    (a) to review, from time to time, the broad policies and programmes of the 
  University, and to suggest measures for the improvement and development of 
  the University;
    ( b) to consider and pass resolutions on the annual report and the annual 
  accounts of the University and the audit report on such accounts;
Deans of 
Schools.
Registrar.
Finance 
Officer.
Controller of 
Examinations.
Librarian.
Authorities of 
University.
Other officers.
The Court.
10

    ( c) to advise the Central Government in respect of any matter which may 
  be referred to it for advice; and
    ( d) to perform such other functions as may be prescribed by the Statutes.
19. (1) The Executive Council shall be the principal executive body of the 
University.
  ( 2) The constitution of the Executive Council, the term of office of its members 
and its powers and functions shall be prescribed by the Statutes.  
 20.(1) The Academic and Activity Council shall be the principal academic body 
of the University and shall, subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes and 
the Ordinances, co-ordinate and exercise general supervision over the academic 
policies of the University.
  ( 2) The constitution of the Academic and Activity Council, the term of office 
of its members and its powers and functions shall be prescribed by the Statutes:
    Provided that the Academic and Activity Council shall have sports 
  persons who have achieved distinction in Olympics or world 
  championships.
 21. The constitution, powers and functions of the Board of Sports Studies shall 
be prescribed by the Statutes.
 22. The constitution, powers and functions of the Finance Committee shall be 
prescribed by the Statutes.
 23. The constitution, powers and functions of other authorities, as may be 
declared by the Statutes to be the authorities of the University, shall be prescribed 
by the Statutes.
 24. Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes may provide for all or any 
of the following matters, namely:–
(a) the constitution, powers and functions of authorities and other bodies of 
the University, as may be constituted from time to time;
(b) the appointment and continuance in office of the members of the said 
authorities and bodies, the filling up of vacancies of members, and all other 
matters relating to those authorities and other bodies for which it may be 
necessary or desirable to provide;
(c) the appointment, powers and duties of the officers of the University and 
their emoluments;
(d) the appointment of teachers, academic staff and other employees of the 
University, the emoluments and conditions of service;
(e) the appointment of teachers and academic staff working in any other 
University or organisation for a specific period for undertaking a joint project;
(f) the conditions of service of employees including provisions for pension, 
insurance, provident fund, the manner of termination of service and disciplinary 
action;
(g) the principles governing the seniority of service of the employees of the 
University;
(h) the procedure for arbitration in cases of dispute between employees or 
students and the University;
Executive 
Council.
11
Academic 
and Activity 
Council.
Board of 
Sports Studies.
Finance 
Committee.
Other 
authorities of 
University.
Power to make 
Statutes.

(i) the procedure for appeal to the Executive Council by any employee or 
student against the action of any officer or authority of the University;
(j) the conferment of autonomous status on a College or an Institution or a 
Department;
(k) the establishment and abolition of Schools, Departments, Centres, Halls, 
Colleges, Institutions, Regional Centres and Study Centres;
(l) the conferment of honorary degrees;
(m) the conferment and withdrawal of degrees, diplomas, certificates and 
other academic distinctions;
(n) the management of Colleges, Institutions, Regional Centres and Study 
Centres established and maintained by the University;
(o) the delegation of powers vested in the authorities or officers of the 
University;
(p) the maintenance of discipline among the employees and students; and
(q) all other matters which by this Act are to be, or may be, provided for by 
the Statutes.
25. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the Statutes, the Ordinances 
may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:–
(a) admission of students to the University and their enrolment as such;
(b) the courses of study and their duration for all degrees, diplomas and 
certificates courses of the University;
(c) the medium of instruction and examination;
(d) the award of degrees, diplomas, certificates and other academic 
distinctions, the qualifications for the same and the means to be taken relating 
to the granting and obtaining of the same;
(e) the fees to be charged for courses of study in the University and for 
admission to examinations, degrees and diplomas of the University;
(f) the conditions for award of fellowships, scholarships, studentships, 
medals and prizes;
(g) the conduct of examinations, including the term of office and manner 
of appointment and the duties of examining bodies, examiners and moderators;
(h) the conditions of residence of the students of the University;
(i) the special arrangements, if any, which may be made for the residence 
and teaching of women students and the prescribing of special courses of 
studies for them;
(j) the establishment of Centres of Studies, Board of Studies, Specialised 
Laboratories and other Committees;
(k) the manner of co-operation and collaboration with other Universities, 
institutions and other agencies including learned bodies or associations;
(l) the creation, composition and functions of any other body which is 
considered necessary for improving the academic life of the University;
(m) the institution of fellowships, scholarships, studentships, medals and 
prizes;
12
Power to make 
Ordinances.

(n) the setting up of a machinery for redressal of grievances of employees 
and students; and
(o) any other matter which, by this Act or the Statutes, is to be or may be, 
provided for by the Ordinances.
  ( 2) The first Ordinances shall be made by the Vice-Chancellor with previous 
approval of the Executive Council and the Ordinances so made may also be amended 
or repealed at any time by the Executive Council in the manner prescribed by the 
Statutes. 
 26. The authorities of the University may make Regulations, consistent with 
this Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances, for the conduct of their own business and 
that of the Committees, if any, appointed by them and not provided for by this Act, 
the Statutes or the Ordinances, in the manner prescribed by the Statutes.
 27. (1) The annual report of the University shall be prepared under the directions 
of Executive Council, which shall include, among other matters, the steps taken by 
the University towards the fulfilment of its objects and shall be submitted to the 
Court on or before such date as may be prescribed by the Statutes and the Court 
shall consider the report in its annual meeting.
  ( 2) The Court shall submit the annual report to the Central Government along 
with its comments, if any.
  ( 3) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, cause a copy of the 
annual report to be laid before both the Houses of Parliament. 
 28. (1) There shall be a University Fund which shall include––
(a) any contribution or grant made by the University Grants 
Commission or the Central Government;
(b) any contribution or grant made by the State Government;
(c) any contribution made by Government, semi-Government or 
autonomous bodies;
(d) any loans, gifts, bequests, donations, endowments or other grants, if 
any;
(e) income received by the University from fees and charges;
(f) the moneys received by the University from the collaborating industries 
in terms of the provisions of the Memorandum of Understanding entered 
between the University and the industry for the establishment of sponsored 
chairs, fellowships or infrastructure facilities of the University; and
(g) amounts received in any other manner from any other source.
  ( 2) All funds of the University shall be deposited in such banks or invested 
in such manner as the Board may decide on the recommendation of the Finance 
Committee.
  ( 3) The funds of the University shall be applied towards the expenses of the 
University including expenses incurred in the exercise of its powers and discharge 
of its functions by or under this Act.
 29. The University shall furnish to the Central Government such returns or 
other information with respect to its property or activities, within such period, as 
the Central Government may, from time to time, require.
13
Regulations.
Annual report.
Fund of 
University.
Returns and 
information.

 30. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the 
Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such 
provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appears to it to be 
necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty:
  Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the 
expiry of three years from the commencement of this Act.
  ( 2) Every order made under sub-section (1) shall be laid, as soon as may be 
after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total 
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more 
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following 
the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both the Houses agree in making 
any modification in the order or both the Houses agree that the order should not be 
made, the order shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no 
effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment 
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that 
order. 
 31. (1) Every Statute, Ordinance or Regulation made under this Act shall be 
published in the Official Gazette.
  ( 2) Every Statute, Ordinance or Regulation made under this Act, shall be laid, 
as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in 
session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session 
or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session 
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both the 
Houses agree in making any modification in the Statute, Ordinances or Regulations 
or both the Houses agree that the Statute, Ordinances or Regulations should not 
be made, the Statutes, Ordinances or Regulations shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of 
anything previously done under the Statutes, Ordinances or Regulations.
 ( 3) The power to make Statutes, Ordinances or Regulations shall include 
the power to give retrospective effect, from a date not earlier than the date of 
commencement of this Act, to the Statutes, Ordinances or Regulations or any 
of them but no retrospective effect shall be given to any Statutes, Ordinances or 
Regulations so as to prejudicially affect the interests of any person to whom such 
Statutes, Ordinances or Regulations may be applicable.  
 
14
Power to 
remove 
difficulties.
Statutes, 
Ordinances and 
Regulations to 
be published 
in the Official 
Gazette and to 
be laid before 
Parliament.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
 In the wake of the Indian economy and the country’s young demography, 
the sports sector in India is undergoing a phase of transformation. But barring a 
few sports like cricket and shooting, the growing interest in sports in India is not 
necessarily translating into better performance in the entire sports sector.
 With the opening of Sports University, talented and emerging sportspersons 
of the country including Maharashtra will be able to get international level sports 
facilities. Presently, various types of international level sports facilities are available 
in the big cities. But, with the opening of Sports University, sports facilities shall 
be available in all the cities of international standards so that sportspersons can get 
quality training and inputs. 
 Sports is not just a word here, nor is it taken merely as a game. It is an aspect 
connected to the emotions of people. But, despite our so much love and affection to 
sports, the condition of sports in our country, instead of improving, is deteriorating.
 However, there came a time when the proverbs started changing and people 
started saying, ‘Mere studies will make you dull; sports will make you shine and 
excel.’ But now it seems that this changed proverb may just remain confined to the 
pages of the books.
 Sports have been a part of our life.  Because, since ancient time, sports has 
been teaching us discipline and brought continuity in our work. It is one of the best 
sources of entertainment. Sports increase the level of our concentration and fill our 
mind with positivity.
 Indians have immense interest in sports and are working hard to bring medals 
and glory to the country. Nowadays, rural people are also getting opportunities and 
in order to highlight the importance of sports they are performing optimally in their 
specific sports.
 Several sports talents viz. Milkha Singh, famous as Flying Sikh, P.T. Usha, 
famous as Flying Queen, Sachin Tendulkar, famous as Master Blaster and Major 
Dhyanchand, famous as Hockey Wizard, have taken birth in India. 
 After independence, India has achieved progress in every field. There has been 
improvement in every field and sports is one of them. The process of reform in 
sports got started after independence. But, still it requires further reforms. Though a 
lot has been done in the past, still plenty more is required to be done.
 The opening of Maharashtra Central Sports University is one such step in this 
direction. It should be implemented as soon as possible, so that the sportspersons of 
Maharashtra and the country can be imparted training in sports.
 Hence this Bill.    
    Nൾඐ Dൾඅඁං;                                   HEMANT VISHNU SA V ARA
July 30, 2024
15

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
 Clause 3 of the Bill provides for establishment of Maharashtra Central Sports 
University. Clause 9 provides for appointment of the Chancellor by the Central 
Government. Similarly, clause 10 makes provisions for appointment of the 
Vice-Chancellor by the Central Government. Clause 28 provides for contribution by 
the Central Government or University Grants Commission to the University Fund. 
Therefore, if enacted, the Bill shall involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund 
of India. It is likely to involve a recurring expenditure of about rupees two hundred 
crore per annum.
 A non incurring expenditure of about rupees fifty crore is also likely to be 
incurred.
16

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGA TED LEGISLATION
 Clause 31 of the Bill provides for formulation of Statute, Ordinance or 
Regulation for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. As the rule will relate to 
matters of details only, the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.
17

LOK  SABHA
ൺ
BILL
to establish and incorporate a Sports University in the State of Maharashtra, 
a specialised University first of its kind, to promote sports education in the 
areas of sports sciences, sports technology, sports management and 
sports coaching besides functioning as the national training 
centre for select sports disciplines by adopting best 
international practices and for matters 
connected therewith or 
incidental thereto.
(Dr. Hemant Vishnu Savara,  M.P .)