Aඌ  ංඇඍඋඈൽඎർൾൽ ංඇ Lඈ඄ Sൺൻඁൺ
                   
                                                       
          
Bill No. 141  of  2022
THE MAHATMA GANDHI NATIONAL RURAL EMPLOYMENT 
GUARANTEE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022
By
Sඁඋං  V. K. Sඋൾൾ඄ൺඇൽൺඇ,  M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act, 2005.
Bൾ it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third  Year of the Republic  of India as 
follows:— 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment 
Guarantee (Amendment) Act, 2022.
 (2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and commencement.

   2. In Schedule I of the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee 
Act, 2005, in para 4, in sub-para (1), after entry (viii) under the heading 'IV Category D 
RURAL INFRASTRUCTURE', the following entry shall be inserted, namely:—
 ''(viiia) work relating care of the elderly persons in rural areas;''.
   
Amendment of 
schedule I.

STATEMENT  OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
 The Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act, 2005 has been 
helping to uplift the rural economy and the scheme is very popular in every nook and corner 
of the country. 
 The country has been witnessing an increase in the number of our senior citizens 
and many of them are finding and facing difficulties to pull on their remaining part of life 
due to many reasons. In many of the cases, it is the desertion by their daughters or sons 
and in many cases their daughters or sons were working abroad or staying far away from 
them. In many cases their daughters or sons are not able to look after them due to pathetic 
economic conditions. It is a regular phenomenon that we see a lot of elderly people camping 
in front of religious places or on the main street of towns without any help and depending 
upon the mercy of the people who come across them. 
 There are many aged people in the country who are infirm owing to illness. There 
is no mechanism to care for them or address their problems. 
 Various demands have been raised that care of the elderly people should be included 
in the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act as this problem can be 
addressed to an extent if elderly care were to be included in it. 
 The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural 
Employment Guarantee Act, 2005, with a view to provide elderly care in the rural areas.
 Hence this Bill.
       Nൾඐ Dൾඅඁං;                                  V . K. SREEKANDAN
      5 July,  2022

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
 Clause 2 of the Bill provides for covering work relating to care of elderly persons 
in rural areas under the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act, 2005. 
The Bill, therefore, if enacted would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of 
India. It is estimated that recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore per 
annum is likely to be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.
 No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.

 
ANNEXURE 
Eඑඍඋൺർඍ ൿඋඈආ ඍඁൾ Mൺඁൺඍආൺ  Gൺඇൽඁං Nൺඍංඈඇൺඅ  Rඎඋൺඅ Eආඉඅඈඒආൾඇඍ 
Gඎൺඋൺඇඍൾൾ Aർඍ, 2005
(Aർඍ Nඈ. 42 ඈൿ 2005)
Schedule  I
See section 4(3)
Mංඇංආඎආ ൿൾൺඍඎඋൾඌ ඈൿ ൺ Rඎඋൺඅ Eආඉඅඈඒආൾඇඍ Gඎൺඋൺඇඍൾൾ Sർඁൾආൾ
*                         *                            *          *
 4. (1)The focus of the Scheme shall be on the following works as categorised below:
*                         *                            *          *
 IV . Category D: RURAL INFRASTRUCTURE
*                         *                            *          *
 ( viii) Maintenance of rural public assets created under the Act; and  
*                         *                            *          *
                               

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act, 2005.
————
(Shri  V . K. Sreekandan, M.P .)