~r;7 
As INTRODUCIiD IN LoIC SABHA' ON 
Bill No. 141 of 1981 
THE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT FUND BUL, 1981 
A 
BILL 
to im.plement the African Developm.ettt· Fund Agreemen.t and for m.atter., 
connected therewith. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-second Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the African Development Fund Act, 1981. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India. 
Short 
title, 
extent 
and 
.5 (9) It shall come into force on such elate as the Central Government com-
msy, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. mence-
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "Agreement" means the African Development Fund Agree-
ment; 
10 (b) "Fund" means the Mrican Development Fund establfshed 
under the Agreement. 
3. (1) There shall he paid out of the Con!lolidated Fund of India. after 
due appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, all sueh 
sums as may, from t!me to time. be required for the purpose of paying.-
15 (a) the 8ubseription payable by the Central Government to the 
Fund under Articles 6, 7, 8 and 9 of the Agreement; 
(b) any sums pavable hy the Central Government to the Fund 
\ under Artie1e 13 of the Agreement. 
_\ It!, ."'IT rbare'M Davahl .. bv t~~tral Government to the Fund 
ment. 
De1I-
nitiODII. 
Pay-
mentsto 
Fund. 

• ." ... >I.t 
./ . '~',\ 
\ \ .... ' 
Relerve 
Bank 
to be 
depoai-
tory for 
Fund. 
Confer-
ibent of 
status 
and 
certain 
immuni-
ties, 
exemp-
tions 
and 
privi-
legeeon 
Fund 
and 
COD-
tennent 
of 
certain 
immuni-
ties, 
exemp-
tions 
and 
privi-
leges On 
its 
offtcera 
and 
em-
ployees. 
Power 
tomab. 
rules. 
Notifi-
cations 
issued 
under 
section 5 
and 
rules 
made 
under 
section 6 
to be 
laid 
before 
Parlia-
ment. 
(2) The Central Government may, if it thinks fit so to do, create ad 
Issue to the Fund, in \sucb form as it thinks fit, any such nOD-Interest 
bearing and DOD-negotiable note or other obligations as are provided for 
by Article 9 of the Agreement. 
" The Reserve Bank of India shall be the depository of the ladian 5 
currency holdings of the Fund. 
5. (1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any other 
law, the provisions of the Agreement set out in the Schedule shall have 
the force of law in India: 
Providen that nothing in Article 49 ot the Agreement shall be cons- 10 
trued as-
(a) entitling the Fund to import into India goods free of any 
duty of customs without any restriction or their subsequent sale 
therein; or 
(b) conferring on the Fund any exemption from duties or taxes 15 
which form part of the price of goods sold; or 
(c) conferring on the Fund any exemption from duties'or taxes 
which are in fad no more than.charges for services rendered. 
(2) The Can-kat Govemm~t mflX,· by. noWlc~i.on. in tU, Oft\cialr 
Gazette amend the Schedule in· conformity with any amendments, SlO 
duly made and adopted, of the provisions of the A~ement set out th4!1'eln. 
t. The Central Government may, by notification in the Ofticlal Gazette, 
make rules for. carrying out the purpose. of this Act. 
7. Every notification issued under sub-section (2) of. section. 5· and 
ever.y. ruJ,e made. under. SCitCtion 6 sballbe laid, as soon, 8$. may, be after 25, 
it is issued or made, before each House of Panliament,. w~ it: ia in 
session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one 
session or.. iD.~ two or more suCDellil1e sessions, and if, before. the, azpbw 
of the session. immediately foUowJng., t~,sesaion or the succeMiv," ~D4-
aforesaid,. both . .House$ agt'ee. in.. making,.any,. modification .in the. notiftoa.t,SO 
tion or, as the case may be. in the rule or both Houses agree tbat the 
notification or rule should not be issued or made, the notification or rule 
shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form o~ be of no effect, 
as,the .. .casa. may be; so, ho"{,ever, that any such modification or aIUlulment 
shall be without prejudice to the vrJicUty of. anything.. pravl~l~ ~ 
under that notification or rule. . ~ ; 

5 
" !i 
THE'SCHEDUL'E 
(See section 5) 
PROVISI()NS OF THE AGREEMENT WHICH SHALL· HAVE FORCE 
OF L'AW 
CHAPTER VIII 
'S'tATUS, 'IM'MUNITIES,'ExEMPTIONsAND PRIvn..KdEs 
ARTICLE 41 
PtmPOSE OF CHAPTER 
To -enable the Fund effectively to fulfil its purpose and carry out'the 
10 functions entrusted to it, the status, immunities, exemptions andprivtle-
ges set forth in this Chapter shall be accorded to the Fund in the territory 
of each' State participant, and each State participant·shall inform the 
Fund of the specific action Which it has taken for such purpose. 
5 
20 
ARTICLE 42 
STATUS 
'the Fund shall possess full judicial personality and, in 'par~ular, ·fUll 
capacity: 
(i) to contract; 
(ii) to acqUire, and dispose of, immovable and movable property; 
and 
(iii) to institute legal proceedings. 
ARTICLE 43 
LEGAL PROCESS 
1. The Fund shall enjoy iminunity from 'every 'fotm -cif 1eg811>rOcess, 
2 5 except in cases arising O'I1t of orin 'connectiOn. with·the exercise 'Of its 
power to receive loans in . aacordance with Attiele8, in which case 
actions may be brought against the Fund in a court of competent juri&-
diction in the territory of a country in which the Fund has its office, 01' has 
appointed an agent for the purpose of accepting service or notice of 
~o process, or ~bas -atherwise 'a~reea 'to ·be sued. 
~, N6twtthstanding· the provisions of paragraph 1, no action shall 'be 
broughfagmnst -the Fund by any participant, or by any agency or instru-
mentality of a .participant, or 'by any entity or person directly or indirectly 
, acting for or deriving claims 'from·a participant or from any agency or 
. \~ instrumentality of a participant. Participants shall have recourse to 
'suc!h special proce~ures for the settlement of disputes between the 
t·md and ttsparticlpants as may be prescribed in this Aareement. in 
" bye-liwa end regUlations of the Fund, or incoutnctl __ 14 into 
the Tuad. 
\ 

(t\O 
0-,.' 
4 
3. The Fund shall also make provision for appropriate modes 0f 
settlement of disputes in cases which do not come within the provisions 
of paragraph 2 and of Articles 52 and 53 andwhi.ch are subject to the 
immunity of the Fund by virtue of paragraph (1) of this Article. 
4. Where by virtue of any of the provisions of this Agreement the 5 
Fund does not enjoy immunity from legal process, the Fund, and its 
property and assets wherever located and by whomsoever held, shall 
nevertheless be immune from all forms of seizure, attachment or 
eXEcution before the delivery of final judgment against the Fund. 
ARTICLE 44 10 
IMMUNI~~ OF ASSETS 
Property and assets of the Fund, wherever located and by whomso-
ever held, shall be immune from search, requisition, confiscation, 
expropriation or any other form of taking or foreclosure by executive 
or legislative action. 15 
ARTICLE 45 
IMMUNITY OF ARCHIVES 
'fhe archives of the Fund, and, in general, all documents belonging 
to it Or held by it, shall be inviolable, wherever located. 
ARTICLE 46 
FREEDOM OF ASSETS FROM REsTRllCTION 
To the extent necessary to carry out the purpose and function of 
the Fund, and subject to the provisions of this Agreement, all property 
and other assets of the Fund shall be free from- restriction by financial 
!l0 
controls, regulations, or moratoria of any lQnd. !l5 .• 
ARTICLE 47 
~LEGE FOR CO~NlCATlONS 
Official communications of the Fund shall be accorded by each State 
participant the same treatment as it accords to the oftlcial commUDica-
tions of other international financial institutions of wldch it is a member. 3<> 
ARTICLE 48 
IMMuNITIES AND PRIVILEGES OF OFnClALS AND PERsoNNBL 
.r:ul governors and directors, and their alternates, the President ana 
personnel, induding experts performing missions for the Fund: 
(i) shall be immune from legal process with respect to acts 35 
performed by them in their official capacity; 
(ii) when they are not local nationals, shall be accorded no less 
favourable immunities from immigration restrictions, alien rep· 
tration requirements and national service obUgatioDS, and no J' 
favourable facUlties as regards exchaDge retWatlona than' 
• 1f 

r: 11 e., / l 
lccorded by the State paorticipant concerned to the' representatives. 
officials and employees of comparable rank 01 any other inter-
national financial institution of which it is a member; and 
(iii) shall be granted no less favourable treatment in ~spect of 
5 travelling facilities than is accorded by the State participant CO~ 
cerned to representatives, officials and employees of comparable 
rank C?f any other international financial institution of which it is 
a member. 
10 
ARTICLE 49 
EXEMPTION J'ROM TAXATION 
1. The Fund, its assets, property, income, operations and transactions, 
shall be exempt from aU direct taxation, and from all customs duties, or 
taxes having equivalent effect, on goods imported or exported for iu. 
official use. The Fund shall also be exempt from any obligation for 
15 the payment, withholding or collection of any tax or duty. 
2. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragrap,h l,the Fund shall 
not claim exemption from taxes which are no more than charges for 
services rendered. 
3. Articles imported under an exemption provided for by paragraph 
.20 1 shall not be sold in the territory of the State participant which granted 
the exemption except under conditions agreed with that participant. 
4. No tax shall be levied on or in respect of salaries and euwlu-
"'lents paid by the Fund to the President and personnel including ex-
" .. per'forming missions for it. 
ARTICLE 50 
W AIVEIt BY THE FuND 
immunities, exemptions and privileges provided in this 
",re granted in the interests of the Fund. The Board of Direc-
69 ..... ~ may waive, to such extent and upon such conditions as it may 
So determine, the immunities, exemptions and privileges provided in this 
Chapter in cases where its action would in its opinion further the 
interests of the Fund. 
2. Regardless of the provisions of paragraph I, the President shall 
have the right and the duty to waive the immunity of any of the 
35 personnel, including experts performing missions for the Fund, in cases 
where, in his opinion, the immunity would impede the course of justice 
and can be waived without prejudice to the interests of the Fund . 
.. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND R~ASONS 
India has become a member of the African -Development Fund by 
acceding to the Agreement establishing the African Development Fund, 
on the 11th May, 1981. Chapter VIII of the Articles of Agreement 
provides for granting to the Fund, its officials and other personnel 
certain status, immunities, exemptions and privileges in the territory of 
each State parUcipant. ArtiCle ~i of the Agreement stipulates that to 
enable the Fund to effectively fulfil its purpose and to carry out the 
functions entrusted to It, the status, -immunities, exemptions and 
priVileges set forth in Chapter VIn shall be accorded to the· Fund in the 
territory of each State participant and each State participant sha 1 
inform the Fund of the specific action which it has taken for such pur-
pose. 
The Bill seeks to give effect to the provisions of the said Chapter VIII 
of' the Agreement. Provision has also been made in the 'Bill to empower 
the Central Government to make -. payments to the Fund towards subs-
criptions and other cJ:1arges and for matters connected therewith. 
NEW DELHI; R. VENKATARAMAN. 
The 28tfJ. OCtober, 1981. 
PR£SIDEN'rS 1U!lCOMMENDATION -UNDER ARTICLl!lS 11'1 AND 274 
OF THE -CONSTITUTION -OF iINDIA 
JrCopydf!letter ·'No. V12/81-:ADB, dated the 23rd November, 1991frtJin 
Shri R.VerlkataramDn, Minigterof -Finance to the £ecretary,::t.dk SSbba.,] 
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the 
prqposed· Bill to implement the African Development Fund Agreement 'in 
80 'far as it relates to the status, immunities, exemptions arid priVileges 
of· the African Development :Fund, and for matters- connectea therewith, 
recommends the introduction of the Bill in Lok Sabhaunder articles 
117 (1) and 274 (t) of the Constitution of India and also consideration of 
the Bill by Lok Sabha under article 117 ~3) of the Constitution. 
6_ 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Sub-clause (1) of dause 3 of the Bill makes provision for payments of 
the nature mentioned therein to the Fund after due approprIation made 
by Parliament by law. Sub-clause (2), of the same clause envisages the 
creation and issuing to the Fund by the Central Government, if it thinks 
fit so to do, of certain non-interest bearing and non~negoti8ble Notes or 
other. obligatiOll.l. It is not possible to make at this stage a. precise est!. 
mate of the expenditure that would be involved On. account of these pro-
visions. However, it may, be mentioned that in accordance with the 
Resolution passed by, the Board of Governors of the African 
Development Fund in terms of Article 3(3) of the Agreement 
India's initial subscription to the African Development Fund will 
be six million Fund Unit of Account (one F'und Unit of Account being 
equal to US. $1.11111), On~third of the amount (FUA two million) 
will have to be paid all the first instalment, within thirty days after 
deposit of the Instrument of Ratifioation. The other two instalments 
(FUA two million each) will have to be paid respectively one year after 
the first instalment and one year after the second· instalment. India will 
also have to pay as her contribution towards the second replenishment 
which will be about three million FUA. Accordingly, the total amount 
involved on account of these payments would be as under: 
(Million FUA) 
11)81 1982 1983 Total 
Initial 
subscription 2 2 2 6 
Second 
repleni'lhment 3 3 
(antic:pated) 
Total 5 2 2 q* 
All the above payments will have to be made in free foreign exchange. 
.Because of the variation of exchange rates, the actual amount to 
be paid may be somewhat more or less than $ 10 million. 
Article 6 of the Agreement also provides that the Fund shall, at such 
time as it deems appropriate, at appropriate intervals, review the 
adequacy of its resources and if it deems it desirable,. i~ may authorise 
a general increase in the subscription of State. partIcIpants on such 
terms and conditions as the Fund shall determme. If and when such 
a review leads to an increase in the Funds subscription each member 
shal1 be given an opportunity to subscribe to a proportion of the increase 
in the Funds subscription. Any payments that may have to be made by 
India on account of such an increase, cannot be foreseen at this stage 
and will in any case he at her own option. 
..... I 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 5 (2). of the Bill confers power on the Central Government to 
amend the Schedule in conformity with any amendments, duly made 
and adopted, of the provisions of the Agreement set out therein. 
2. Clause 6 of the Bill confers power upon the Central Government 
to make rules for carrying out purposes of the Act. The immunities, exemp-
tions and 'privileges of the African Development Fund and its officials 
and employees have been specified in the Schedule to the Bill, occasions 
for making rules, if any; will be few and far between. Even if S'UCh aD 
occasion arises, as the immunities, exemptions and privileges have been 
specified· in the Bill, it is clear that rules, if any, will be confined to 
matters of procedure and other matters of minor detail relating to the 
enjoyment of those immunities, exemptions and privileges and their 
waiver. For instance, if the Fund decides to waive any of the immuni-
ties, exemptions or privileges, a rule may be necessary prescribing the 
manner in which and the officer of the Government to whom such 
waiver should be communicated. 
3. The delegation of legislative power is thus of a normal character. 

LOK SABRA 
A 
BILL 
to implement the African Development Fund Agreement and for matters 
connected therewith. 
~ . 
(Shri R. VenkCJta1'am~n, Minister 9f Finane •. ) 