1
THE RAILWAYS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016
By
SHRI SHIV AJI ADHALRAO PA TIL, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Railways Act, 1989.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Railways (Amendment) Act, 2016.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central  Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title
and
commencement.
Bill No. 141 of  2016
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In section 126 of the Railways Act, 1989, (hereinafter referred to as the principal
Act), in sub-section (1), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
"Provided that where a person, who has sustained the injury or suffered any
loss, or the dependant of the deceased, as the case may be, is not in a position to make
an application for interim relief, the Railway Administration shall, after verifying
the facts, declare an interim relief of rupees five lakh in case of death; rupees one
lakh in case of grievous injury and rupees twenty five thousand in case of minor
injury without insisting on application for interim relief.".
3. In section 127 of the principal Act, after sub-section (1), the following proviso shall
be inserted, namely:—
"Provided that in case of death of a passenger, the amount of compensation
shall not be less than rupees ten lakh.".
Amendment of
section 126.
Amendment
of section
127.
24 of 1989.
5
10

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The Railways Act, 1989 was enacted to provide a legal framework for proper
development and regulation of the railway services. Under the provisions of the Act, for
getting an interim relief during accidents, an applicant has to make an application to the
Claims Tribunal. But there may be situations when an applicant may not be in a position to
make an application for interim relief, especially the dependant of the deceased. In such a
situation, it would not be appropriate to insist for filing of application. Moreover, a Railway
Claims Tribunal has been empowered to fix the compensation in case of death or injury in
case of an accident. But no minimum compensation has been provided in the Act.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the parent Act with a view to do away with the
procedural formality of making an application to the Railway Claim Tribunal seeking an
interim relief in situation when the applicant is not in a position to file an application. The
Bill also proposes to fix amount of relief in case of death of deceased to rupees five lakh; in
case of grevious injury to rupees one lakh and for minor injury rupees twenty-five thousand.
Moreover, the Bill intends to fix the minimum amount of compensation in case of death of a
passenger to rupees ten lakh.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SHIVAJI ADHALRAO PA TIL
April 13, 2016.

4
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to provide interim relief of rupees five lakh in case of death;
rupees one lakh in case of grievous injury and rupees twenty five thouand in case of minor
injury. Clause 3 provides that amount of compensation in case of death of a person in an
accident shall not be less than rupees ten lakhs. The Bill, therefore, if enacted would involve
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. However, at this Stage it is not possible to
estimate the expenditure likely to be incurred.

5
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE RAILW AYS ACT, 1989
(ACT NO. 24 OF 1989)
* * * * * * *
126. (1) Where a person who has made an application for compensation under section
125 desires to be paid interim relief, he may apply to the railway administration for payment
of interim relief along with a copy of the application made under that section.
(2)* * * * * *
127. (1) Subject to such rules as may be made, the rates of compensation payable in
respect of any injury shall be determined by the Claims Tribunal.
(2)* * * * * *
* * * * * * *
Interim relief
by railway
administration.
Determination
of
compensation
in respect of
any injury or
loss of goods.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Railways Act, 1989.
————
(Shri Shivaji Adhalrao Patil, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—256LS(S3)—06-05-2016.