15 of 1992.

As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

Bill No. 141 of 2000

THE SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE BOARD OF INDIA
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000
By
Suri Kirt Somatya, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. (7) This Act may be called the Securities and Exchange Board of India
(Amendment) Act, 2000,

(2) It shall come into force at once.
2. After Chapter IV of the Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992, the
following Chapter and section thereunder shall be inserted, namely:—
“CHAPTER IVA
CONTROL OVER THE ACQUISITION OF SHARES IN ANOTHER COMPANY

110. It shall be the duty of the Board to ensure that irrespective of whether or not
there has been any direct or indirect acquisition of shares or voting rights in a company, no
acquirer shall acquire control over the company unless such person or company makes a
public declaration to acquire shares at market rates prevailing on the date of acquisition of
such shares:

Provided that no acquirer shall be deemed to have acquired shares or voting rights
of a company unless he has purchased a minimum of twenty per cent. of shares from open
market at market rates of the company.”.

Short title and
commence-
‘ment.

Insertion of
new Chapter
IVA.

Public
declaration to
acquire shares.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The Securities and Exchange Board was established in 1992 for orderly develop-
ment of stock exchanges and for securing the rights of small depositors. However, it has
been seen that some persons have found loopholes in the Act of 1992 to misuse the provi-
sions, Generally companies have been taken over with less than 15% of the equity. Since
the regulations made under the Act apply only when 20% of shares of a company is
acquired, several cases have come to notice where voting rights have been acquired by
acquiring lower percentage of shares.

‘This type of back door entry and injurious method of acquiring companies have put
small depositors and investors at a loss and the very Purpose of enacting the law has been
defeated.

With a view to acquiring companies in a proper manner and for not depriving the
rights of depositors, it is proposed to amend the Act Suitably.

Hence this Bill.

New Detut; KIRIT SOMAIYA
July 25, 2000


LOK SABHA

BILL

further to amend the Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992.

(Shri Kirit Somaiya, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—2470LS—04-08-2000,