As Ivtaopucrp 15 Lox 5७81५ on

४ 20EC 1586

Bill No, 141 of 1986
THE FACTORIES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1४७

A
BILL ६
further to amend the Factories Act, 1948.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-seventh Year of the
ublic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act tay be called the Factories (Amendment) Act, 1986-
(2) Tt shall come into force on such date as the Central Government
. by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, and different dates
ay be appointed for different provisions of this Act.
_ 2, In section 2 of the Factories Act, 1948 (hereinafter referred to as
principal Act) —
(0 after clause (०), the following clauses shall be inserted,
barmely: —
*(ca) “competent person”, in relation to any provision of this
“Act, means a person or an institution recognised as such by the
Chief Inspector for the purposes of carrying out tests, examina-
tions and inspections referred to be done in 8 factory under the
provisions of this Act having regard to—
(i) the qualifications snd experience of the person and
” facilities available at bis disposal, or

pen

section 2


(ii) the qualifications ond experience ot the persons
employed in such institution and facilities available therein, 4
“ywith regard to the conduct of such tests, examinations and-
“{nspettion, und more than one person or institution can be
recognised as a competent person in relation to a factory; y
(ch) “hazardous process” means any process or activity ine
relation to an industry specified in the First Schedule where,
unless ypecial care is taken, raw materials used therein or the
intermediate or finished products, bye-products, wastes oF
eMuents thereof would— ।।

(i) cause material impairment to the health of the per
sons engaged in or connected therewith, or

(4) result in the pollution of the general environment;
Provided that the State Government may, by notification in

the Official Gazette, arnend the First Schedule by way of |.
addition, omission or variation, any industry specified in the said”
Schedule,’;
(i) in clause (४) .—
(a) the existing Eaplanation shall be numbered as Explans-
tion T and in Saplanation 1 as so numbered, for the words
“different relays” the words “different groups and relays” shall
be substituted:
(b) after Explanation T us so numbered, the following Expla-
netio nshall be inserted, namely: —

“Explanation I—For the purposes of this clause, the
mere fact that an Electronic Data Processing Unit or a Com-~
puter Unit is installed in any premises or part thereof, shall
not be construed to make it a factory if no manufacturing
process is being carried on in such premises or part thereof”;

(ii) in clause (n).— ;
(a) in the opening parsgraph, the portion beginning with the
words “, and where the aaid affairs”, and ending with the word
“oceupier of the factory” shall be omitted;
(९) before the proviso, the following proviso shall be inserted,
namely:—

“Provided that—

(0 in the case of a firm or-other association of in
viduals, any one of the individual partners or mem!
thereof shall be deemed to be the occupier;

(७) in the case of a company, any one of the dire ५
shall be deemed to be the occupier; 7

(iii) in the case of a factory owned or controlled by
the Central Government or any State Government,
any local authority, the person or persons appointed t
muinnge the affairs of the factory by the Central Govern-
ment, the Stste Government or the local authority,
the case may be, shall be deemed to be the occup

(iv) clause (०) shal) be omitted;

(v) in clatise (r), for the word “relay”. the words “group” or ,
“relay” ohall be substituted: F


‘ हि: 3
(c) in the existing proviso,—

(i) for the words “Provided that”, the words “Provided
further that” shall be substituted;

(४) in sub-clause (०) of clause (7), aflor the word and
figure “section 7,”, the words, figures and letfers “section 7A,
section 18," whall be inserted,
3, In seetion 4 of the principal Act—
(०) after the words “The State Government may,”, the words
“on its own motion or” shall be inserted;

19 (0) after the words “in writing”, the words “and subject to
such conditions as it may deem fit” shall be inserted;

(2) the following proviso shall be added, numely:—

“Provided that no order under this section shall be made by
the State Government on its own motion unless on opportunity
15 of belng heard 1s. given to the occupier”,

4. in Chapter [1 of the principal Act, after section 7, the following
sections shall be inserted, namely: —

‘TA. (1) Every occupier shall ensure, so far as is reasonably
practicable, the health, safety and welfare at work of all workers
while they are at work in the factory.

(2) Withou, prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-
section (1), the matters to which such duty extends, shall include—

(व) provision and maintenance of plant and systems of
work In the factory that are safe and without risks to health;

19) arrangements in the factory for ensuring safety and
absence of risks to health in connection with the use, handling,
storage and transport of articles and substances;

(०) the provision of such information, instruction, training
and supervision ss are necessary to ensure the health and safety
of all workers at work;

(d) the maintenance of all plaves of work in the factory in
a condition that is safe and without risks to health and the pro-
vision and maintenance of such means of access to, and egress
from, such places as are safe and without such risks;

(रे the provision, maintenance or monitoring of such work-
ing environment in the factory for the worker that is safe,
without risks to health and adequate as regards facilities and
arrangements for their welfare at work.

(3) Except in such cases as may be prescribed, every occupier
shall prepare, and, as often as may be appropriate, revise, a written
statement of his general policy with respect to the health and safety
of the workers at work and the organisation and arrangements for
the time being’ in force for carrying out that policy, end to bring the

20

Anend
men of
scthoe 4.

Uonot
aew
sections
7A

7B.

Geral
duties of

occupier.


General
duties of
manufac
curere ete.
as Tegards
urticles
and
substances

for use in
factorics.

4

_Attement and any revision thereof to the notice of all the workers
such manner as may be prescribed.

7B. (1) Every person who designs, manufactures, imparts
supplies uny article for use in any factory shall—

(6) ensure, so far as is reasonably practicable, that ॥।
arlicle is so designed and constructed as to be safe and withow
risks to the health of the workers when properly used;

(b) carry out or arrange for the carrying out of such
and examination as may be considered necessary for effect
implementation of the provisions of clause (m2);

{e) take such steps as may be necessary to ensure
adequate information will be available—

(0) in connection with the use of the article in any
factory;

{ii) about the use for which it is designed and t
and

(Hi) about any conditions necessary to ensure that
article, when put’to such use, will be safe, and without
to the health of the workers:

Provided that where an article {$s designed or manufactul
outside 10918, ॥ shall be obligatory on the part of the importer
see—

(७) that the article conforms to the same standards if such
article is manufactured in India, or
(b) ig the standards adopted in the country outside for the
manufacture of such article is above the standards adopted
India, that artiele vonforms to such standards.

(2) Every person who undertakes to design or manufacture
article for use in any factory may carry out or arrange for t
carrying out of necessary research with a view to the discovery al
so far as is reasonably practicable, the elimination or minimisati
of any risks to the health or safety of workers to which the des
or article may give rise.

(3) Nothing contained in sub-sections (1) and (2) shall be con
strued to require @ person to repeat the testing, examination |
research which has been carried out otherwise than by him or —
his instance in so far as it is reasonable for him to rely on the results
thereof for the purposes of these said sub-sections.

(4) Any duty imposed on any person by sub-sections (1) and (2)
shall extend only to things done in the course of business carried
by him and to matters within his control.

(5) Where a person designs, manufactures, imports or supp
sn article on the basis of a written undertaking by the user of
article te take the steps specified in such undertaking to ensure, #०
far as \s reasonably practicable, that the article will be safe an
without risks to the health of the workers when properly used,
undertaking shall have the effect of relieving the person design
manufacturing, inporting or supplying the article from the
imposed by clause (a) of sub-section (1) to such extent as is 1.
able having regard to the terms of the undertaking,



(6) For the purposes of this section, an article ig not to be re-
garded as properly used if 1६ $5 used without regard to any in-
formation or advice relating to its use which has been made available
bs Bane ca who bas designed. manufactured, imported or supplied
the .

ExplanationYor the purposes of this section “article” shal) in-
elude plant and machinery.’

5, In section 9 of the principal Act— ment of
(0) in clause (a), after the words “other public authority,”, the section a
words “or with an expert” shall be inserted,

(४) for clauses (७) and (c), the following clauses shall be sub-
stituted, namely:— |

“(0) make examination of the premises, plant, machinery,
articie or substance;

(०) inquire into any accident or dangerous occurrence,
whether resulting in bodily injury, disability or not, and take
on the spot or otherwise ‘statements of any person which he
may consider necessary for such inquiry;

(d) require the production of any prescribed register or any
ulser document relating to the factory;

(e) svize, or take copies of any register, record or other docu-
meat or any portion thereof, as he may consider necessaty in
sespect of any offence under this Act, which he has reason to
believe has been committed;

(9) direct the occupier that any premises or any part thereof
cr anything lying therein, shall be loft undisturbed (whether
geveraily or in particular respects) for so long as is necessary
for the purpose of any examination under clause (b);

(y) take measurements, and photographs and make such
retording: as he considers necessary for the purpose of any
examination under clause (b), taking with him any necessary
instrument or equipment;

(i) in case of any article or substance found in any premises,
betig an article or substance which appears to him as having
caused or is likely to cause danger to the health or safety of
the workers, direct it to be dismantled or subject it to any pro-
cess or test (but not so as to damage or destroy it unless the
game is, in the circumstances necessary, for carrying out the
purposes of this Act), and take possession of any such article
or substance or a part thertof, and detain it for so long as is
necessary for such examination;

(i) exercise such other powers as may be prescribed.",
6. In section 13 of the principal Act— rene
(a) in sub-section (2), for the portion beginning with the Lecce
words “a thermometer" and ending with the words “as may be
specified.”. the following shall be substituted, namely: —


ie : 6 |
measuring instruments at such places and in
position ws may be specified, shall be provided and such 4
cords, as may be presoribed, shall be maintained,
(७) for sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be substi-
tuted, namely: —
“(3) If it uppears to the Chief Lospector that expressively
high temperatures in any factory can be reduced by the adoption
Of suitable measures, he may, without prejudice 10 the rules made
under sub-section (2), serve on the occupier, an order in writing:
specifying the measures which, in his opinion, should be adopted, .
and requtring them (o be carried out before a specified date,”.

7, In section 16 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),—

a. (०) for the words ‘three hundred and fifty cubic feet", the figures
and words “9.9 cubie metres” shall be substituted;

i]

(0) for the words "1४९ hundred cubic feet", the figures and words ,
“142 cubic metres” shell be substituted;

(०) for the words “fourteen feet", the figures and word “42
metres” shall be substituted,

n 8, In section 18 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), for the words
of “twenty feet of any washing place, urinal or Jatrine", the words “six 2
18 metres of any washing piace, urinal, latrine, spittoon, open drain
carrying sullage or effluent or any other source of contamination”
shall be substituted, t

Aided 9. In section 19 of the prneipal Act, in sub-section (2), in clause (b),
ment of for the words “three feet", the words “ninety centimetres” shall be 9
section 19% substituted. a

10, In section 23 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the words

if

Amend.

ment of = "“shall work”, the words “shail be required or allowed to work” shall be |
section 73. substituted, d

Amend- 11. In section 25 of the principal Act, for the words ‘eighteen inches”, gq

the words “forty-five centimetres” shall be substituted.

12, In section 28 of the principal Act, the following Explanation shall
iment of bo inserted at the end, namely: —

of
25.

[u

section A,

“Explenation—For the purposes of this section, no lifting
machine or appliance shall be deemed to be a hoist or tift unless it 95:
has 2 platform or cage, the direction or movement of which is
restricted by a guide or guides,”

Amend. 1%. In section 29 of the principal Act,—
pr ag (3) in sub-section (1), in clause (c), for the words “twenty feet",

the words “six metres” shall be substituted;
{ii} in the Explanation, for clause (b), the following clause shall
be substituted, namely: —
*(b) “lifting tackle” means any chain sling, rope sling, ‘hook,
shackle, swivel, coupling, socket, clamp. tray or simnilar appliance,


7

whether fixed or movable, used in connection with raising or,
lowering of persona, or loads by use of lifting machines”,

14, In section 30 of the principal Act, in sub-seetlon (1), for the words

“In every room in a factory”, the words "In every factory” shall be

5 substituted,

rr)

tS

20

S»

35

45. In section 3] of the principal Act, for sub-section (1), the follow-

ing sub-section shall be substituted, namely: —

“(1) If in any factory, any plant or machinery or any part there-
of is operated at 4 pressure above atmospheric pressure, effective
measures shal! be taken-to cnsure that the safe working pressure of
Such plant or machinery or part is net exceeded.”

16. In section 32 of the principal Act, for clause (c), the following

stause shall be substituted, namely:—

“(c) when any person has to work at a height from where he
is likely to fall, provision shall be made, so far as is reasonably
practicable, hy fencing or otherwise, to ensure the safety of the
person so working.”.

1%. For section 36 of the principal Act, the following section shall be

substituted, namely: —

“36. (1) No person shall be required or allowed to enter any
chamber. tank, vat, pit. pipe, flue or other confined space in any fac-
tory in which any gas, fume, vapour or dust is likely to be present
to such en extent as to involve risk to persons being overcame there-
by, unless it is provided with a manhole of adequate size or other
effective means of egress

(2) No person shall be required or allowed to enter any confined
space ag 18 referred to in sub-section (J), until all practicable measures
have been taken to remove any gas. fume. vapour or dust, which
may be present, so as to bring its level within the permissible limits
= fo prevent any ingress of such gas. fume. vapour or dust and
anless—

(व) & certificate in writing has been given by « competent
person, based on a test carried out by himself that the space in
reasonably free from dangerous gas, fume, vapour or dust; or

(0) such person Is wearing suituble breathing apparatus
and a belt securely attached to a rope the free end of which is
held by a person outside the confined space,”.


rit

शा

[HF

is
i
Q

eet

=

AL

18, In section 38A of the principal Act. in clause
“or other confined space”, the words “unless adequate safety devices are

provided" shall be inserted.

19. For section 38 of the principal Act, the following section shall be
substituted, namely; — Yi

“38, (1) In every factory, all practicable measures shall be taken
to prevent outbreak of fire and its spread, both internally and ex-
ternally, and to provide and maintaln—

(०) safe means of escape for gll persons in the event of a
fire, and

{b) the necessary equipment and facilities for extinguish-
‘ing fire.

(2) Effective measures shall be taken to ensure that In every

factory all tho workers are familiar with the means of escape in case
of fire and have been adequately trained in the routine to be followed

in stich cases,

(3) The State Government may make rules, in respect of any
factory or class or description of factories, requiring the measures to

@

(३) Notwithstanding anything contained im clause (a) of sub- ।

section (1) or sub-section (2), if the Chief Inspector having regard
to the nature of the work carried on In any factory, the construction
of such factory, special risk to 146 or safety, or any other circum
stances, js of the oninion that the measures provided tn the factory,
whether as prescribed or not, for the purposes of clause (a) of sub-
section (I) or sub-section (2), are inadequate, he may, by order in
writing, require that siich additions] measures as he may consider
Teasonable and necessary, be provided in the factory before such
date as 1s specified in the order."

20, In the principal Act, after Chapter IV_ the following Chapter shall
be inserted, namely;—

“CHAPTER IVA
PROVISIONS RELATING TO HAZARDOUS PROCESSES

418. (1) The State Government may, for purposes of advising it 3

to consider applications for grant of permission for the initial location
of a factory involving a hazardous process or for the expansion of
any such factory, appoint a Site Appraisal Committee consisting of—~

(a) the Chief Inspector of the State who shall be its Chairman,

be adopted to give effect to the provisions of sub-sections (1) and



(9) @ representative of the Central Board for the Prevention
and Control of Water Pollution appainted by the Centra] Govern-
ment under section 3 of the Water (Prevention and Control of
Pollution) Act, 1974;

(c) a representative of the Centra! Board for the Prevention
and Control of Air Pollution referred to in section ३ of the Air
(Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981;

(१) a representative of the State Board dppointed under
section 4 of the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution)
Act, 1074;

(e) a representative of the State Board for the Prevention
and Control of Air Pollution referred to in section 5 of the Air
(Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981;

(0) ४ representative of the Department of Environment in
the State; 5

(9) 4 representative of the Meteorological Department of the
Government of India;

(0) an expert in the field of oveupational health; and

(3) a representative of the Town Planning Department of the
State Government,

and not more than five other memberg who may be co-opted by the
State Government who shal) be—

(i) @ scientist having specialised knowledge of the hazardous
process which will be involved in the factory,

(ii) @ representative of the local authority within whose
jurisdiction the factory is to be established, and

Git) not more than three other persons as deemed fit by
the State Government.

(2) The Site Appraisal Committee shall examine ap dppliva-
tion for the establishment of a factory involving hazardous precess
and make its recommendation to the State Government within a
period of ninety days of the receipt of such application in the pres-
eribed form.

(3) Where any process relates to a factory owned or controled
by the Central Government or to a corporation or a company owned
or controlled by the Central Government, the State Government
shall co-opt in the Site Appraisal Committee a representative nomi-
nated by the Central Government as » member of that Committee.

(4) The Site Appraisal Committee shall have power to call for
any informstion from the person making an application for the
establishment or expansion of 5 factory involving a hazardous
Process,

(5) Where the State Government has granted approval to an
application for the establishment or expansion of a factory involving
@ hazardous process, it shall not be necessary for an applicant to
obtain a further approval from the Central Board or the State Board
established under the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution)


10

Act, 1974 and the Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act,
1981.

41B. (1) The occupier of every factory involving a hazardous:
process shall disclose in the manner prescribed all information re-
garding dangers, including health hazards and the measures to
overcome stich hazards arising from the exposure to or handling
of the materials or substances in the manufacture, transportation, _
storage and other processes, to the workers employed in the factory,
the Chief Inspector, the 1002 authority within whose jurisdiction the —
factory is silts te and the general public in the vicinity.

(2) The veeupier shall, at the time of registering the factory
involving a Lasardous process, lay down a detailed policy with
respect to the health and safety of the workers employed therein and
intimate such policy to the Chief Inspector and the local authority
and, theresfter, at such intervals ४५ may be prescribed, inform the
Chief Inspector and the local authority of any change made in the
snid policy, ‘

2) The information furnished under sub-ostion (1) shall
include accurate information as to the quantity, spectiieation and
other characteristics of wastes and the manner of thelr disposal

(4) Every occupier shall, with the approval of the Chief Inspec-
tor, draw up sn an-site emergency plan and detailed disaster control
messures for his factory and make known to the workers employed
therein and io the general public living im the vicinity of the factory —
the safety measures required to be taken in the event of an accident ?
taking plice. .

(5) Every occupier of a factory shall—

(a) if stich factory engaged in a hazardous process on the
commencement of the Factories (Amendroent) Act, 1906, within
a period of thirty days of such commencement; and

(b) if such factory proposes to engage in a hazardous process
at any time after such commencement, within a period of thirty
days before the commencement of sich process,

inform the Chief Inspector of the nature and details of the process p
such form and in such manner as may be prescribed. न

(6) Where any occupier of a factory contravenes the provisions
of sub-section (5), the licence issued under section 6 to such
shall, notwithstanding any penalty to which the occupier or fac
shall be subjected to under the provisions of this Act, be liable
cancellation,

(7) The occupier of @ factory involving a hazardous process 4]
with the previous epproval of the Chief Inspector, lay down
for the handling, usage, transportation and storage of hazy
substances inside the factory premises and the djsposal of
substances outside the factory premises and publicise them {in
manner prescribed among the workers and the general public Ii
in the vicinity.


wm

15

Be

40

a

41C. Every occupier of a factory involving any hazardous process
shall— .

(a) maintain accurate and up-te-date health records or, as the
case may be, medical records, of the workers in the factory who
are expoved to any chemical, toxic or any other harmful sub-
stances which are manufactured, stored, handled or transported
and such records shall be accessible to the workers subject to such
conditions 4s may be prescribed;

(b) appoint persons who possess qualifications and experience
handiing hazardous substances and are competent to supervise
such handling within the factory and to provide at the working
place all the necessary facilities for protecting the workers {n
the manner prescribed:

Provided that where any question arises as to the qualifica-
tions and experience of 8 person so eppointed, the decision of the
Chief Inspector shall be final;

{c) provided for medical examination of every worker—

(a) before such worker ja assigned to ७ job involving the
handling of, a working with, 4 hazardous substance, and

(b) while continuing in such job, and after he has
ceased to work in such job, at mtervals not exceeding twelve
months, in such monner ag May be prescribed.

41D. (1) The Central Government may, in the eyent of the occur-
rence of an extraordinary situation involving a factory engaged in a
hazardous process, appoint un Inquiry Committee to inquire into the
standards of health and safety observed in the factory with a view
to finding out the causes of any failure or neglect in the adoption of
uny measures ur standards preeerihed for the health and safety of the
workers employed in the factory or the general public affected, or
likely to be affected. due to such failure or neglect and for the pre-
vention and recurrénce of such extraordinary situation« in fiteure in
such factory or elsewhere.

(2) The Committee appointed under sub-section (1) shall consist
of a Chairman and two other members and the terms of reference
of the Committee and the tenure of office of its members shall he
such ss may he determ'ned by the Central Government according
to the requirements of the situation rs

(3) The recommendations of the Committed shall be advisory in
nature.

418, (1) Where the Central Government is satisfied that no stand-
ards of safety have heen prescribed in respect of a hazardous pro-
cess or class of hazardous processes, or where the standards so pres-
cribed are inadequate, it may direct the Director-Goneral of Factory
Advice Service und Labour Invtitates or any institution specialised
in matters relating to standords of safety in hazardous processes, to
lay down emergency standatils for enforcement of suitable standards
In respect of such hazardous processes

Specifie _
ponsibility
of the
occupier
in re-
lotion

proceseus,

Power of
Central
Govern-
ment to

Inquiry

if


(2) The emergency standards laid down under sub-section (1)
shall, until they sre Incorporated {n the rules made under this Act,
be enforceable and have the same effeyt as if they had been incor-

. porated in the rules made under this Act,

Permissi- 41P, (1) The maximum permissible threshold limits of exposure 5

med of chemical and toxte substences it: manufacturing processes (whether

exposure hazardous or otherwise) in omy factory shall be of the value indicated

of chemi- in the Second Schedule,

es (2) The Central Government may, at any time, for the purpose

stances. of giving effect to any selentifie proof obtained from specialised 10
institutions or experts in the field, by notification in the Official
Gazette, make suitable changes in the said Schedule. गये

Workers 41G. (1) ‘The occupier shall, in every factory where a hazardous

Farticl- process tekes place, or where hazardous substances are used or

ghar oh handled, set up » Safety Committee consisting of equal number of |

६२७२३ representatives of workers and management to promote cooperation

ment, between the workers and the management in maintaining proper
safety nnd health at work und to review periodically the measures
taken in that behalf;

Provided that the Stste Government may, by order in writing 20
and for reasons to be recorded, exempt the occupier of any factory
or class of factories from setting up such Committee.

(2) The composition of the Safety Committee, the tenure of
office of its members and their rights and duties shall be such ss may
be prescribed. -

hed 41H. (1) Where the workers employed in any factory engaged in
to warn @ hazardous process have reasonable apprehension that there is a
about Ukelhood of imminent danger to their lives or health due to any
itaminent accident, they may bring the same to the notice of the occupier,
danger. agent, manager or any other person who is in-charge of the factory 30.
or the process concerned directly or through their representatives
in the Safety Committee and simultaneously bring the same to the
notice of the Inspector,

(2) Tt shall be the duty of such occupier, agent, manager or the
person incharge of the factory or process to take immediste remedial 35
action if he {s satisfied about the existence of such imminent danger
and send a report forthwith of the action taken to the nearest
inspector, Ba

(3) If the occupier, agent, manager or the person Incharge
referred to in sub-section (2) is not satisfied about the existence of
any imminent danger as apprehended by the workers, he shall,
nevertheless, refer the matter forthwith to the nearest Inspector
whose decision on the qttestion of the existence of such imminent
danger shall be final”. || ++ |

So 21, In section 64 of the principal Act, in the provigo to gub-section (1), 45
secilels for the words “docs not excecd rupees reven hundred and fifty per month”,
64. the words, brackets and figures “does not exceed the wage limit specified

in sub-section (6) of section 1 of the Payment of Wages Act, 1936, as
amended frem time to time” shall be substituted.


5

1a

ao

95

है]

18 -
22, In section 70 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section (1), the praviso and the Explanation shali be
omitted;
(0) after sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be
inserted, namely: —

“(IA) No female adolescent or a male adolescent who has
not attained the age of seventeen years but who has been grant-
ed a certificate of fitness to work in a factory ss an sdult, shall
be required or allowed to work in any factory except between
6 AM. and 7 PM:

Provided that the State Government may, by notification in
the Official Gazette, in respect of amy factory or group or class
or description of factories,—

(i) very the limits Iaid down in this sub-section so, how-
ever, that no such section shall authorise the employment
of any female adolescent between 10 pat. and 5 aM;

(ii) grant exemption from the provisions of this gub-
section in case of serious emergency where national interest
is involved.”,

23. In section 71 of the principsl Act, after sub-section (4), the follow-

ing sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—

“(5) No female child shall be required or allowed to work in

any factory except between 8.00 A.M. and 7.00 PM”,

24. In section 80 of the principal Act, in sub-section a—
(a) for the words “shall be paid”, the words “shall be entitled to

wages” shall be substituted;
(0) the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
“Provided that in the case of a worker who has not worked

on any day during the calendar month immediately
his leave, he shall be paid at a rate equal Yo the daily average
of his total full time earnings for the days on which he actually
worked during the last calendar month preceding his leave, in
which he actually worked, exclusive of any overtime and bonus
but inclusive of dearness allowance and the cash equivalent of
the advantage accruing through the concessional sale to the
workers of foodgrains and other articles.”.

25. In section $7 of the principal Act, clause (g) shall be omitted.

26, After section 87 of the principal Act, the following section shall

he Inserted, namely; —

“8TA. (1) Where it appears to thé Inspertor that conditions in a
factory or part thereof are such that they may cause serious hazard
by way of injury or death to the persons employed therein or to
the general public in the vicinity. he may, by order in fig Be
the occupier of the factory, state the particulars in respect of
‘he considers the factory or part thereof to be the cause of such
serious hazard and prohibit such occupier from etnploying any
person in the factory or any part thereof other than the minimum

ment of

[


Amend-

section

Amond-
ment of
section

Amend-
ment of
section

918.

Amend-
ment of

ment of
section

4

number of persons necessary to attend to the minimum tasks
. the hazard ia removed.

(2) Any order issued by the Inspector under sub-section (2) |
have effect for a period of three days until extended by the Chief
Inspector by a subsequent order,

(3) Any person aggrieved by an order of the Inspector under
sub-section (1), and Chief Inspector under sub-section (2), shall
have the right to appeal to the High Court.

(4) Any person whose employment has been affected by an order
issued under sub-section (1), shall be entitled to wages and other ™
benefits and it shall be the duty of the occupier fo provide alternative
employment to him wherever possible and in the manner prescribed.

(5) The provisions of sub-section (4) shall be without prejudice
to the rights of the parties under the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.".
27, In section 89 of the principal Act,— 5

fi) for the words “the Schedule", wherever they occurs, the —
words “the Third Schedule” shall be substituted;

Gi) in sub-section (4), for the words “fifty rupees”, the words
“one thousand rupees” shal) be substituted;

(ii) after sub-section (4), the following sub-section shall be
added, namely:— >

“(5) The Central Government may, by notification in the -

Official Gazette, add to or alter the Third Schedule and any such

addition or alteration shall have effect as if it had been made

by this Act.",
28, In section 90 of the principa! Act, in sub-section (1), for the words
“the Schedule”, the words “the Third Schedule” shall be substituted.

29. In section 918 of the principal Act. after sub-section (3), the
following Kxplanarion shal] be inserted, namely; —

“Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, the report, if any,
submitted to the State Government by the person conducting the
survey under sub-section (7) shal] be deemed to be a report submitted _
by an Inspector under this Act”,

30. In section 92 of the principal Act,—

(a) for the words “three months”, the words “two years" shall
be substituted;

(0) for the words “two thousand rupees", the words “one lakh
rupees” shall be substituted;

(c) for the words “seventy-five rupees”, the words “one thousand
rupees” shall be substituted; कण

(व) for the words “one thousand rupees”, the words “twenty-
five thousand rupees” shall be substituted; «|

fe) for the words “five hundred rupees” the words “five
thousand rupees” shalt be substituted.

34. In section 94 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1) — :
(0 for the words “six months”, the words “three years" shall be _
substituted;



15

(i) for the words “two hundred rupees”, wherever they occur,
the words “ten thousand rupees" shall be substituted;
(#) for the words “five thousand rupees”, the words “two lakhs
rupees” shall be substituted;
5 (iv) for the words “two thousand rupees”, the words “thirty-five
thousand rupees’ shall be substituted;

(०) for the words “one thousand rupees”, the words “ten
thousand rupees” shall be substituted,

32. In section 95 of the principal Act, for the words “three months”
and “five hundred rupees”, the words “six months” and “ten thousand
rupees” shall, respectively, be substituted,

33. In section 96 of the principal Act, for the wordy “three months”
and “five hundred rupees", the words “six months’ and “ten thousand
ftupees” shall, respectively, be substituted,

15 34 After section 96 of the principal Act, the following section shal
be inverted, namely: — ‘

968. (1) Whoever fails to comply with or contravenes any of
the provisions of sections 418, 410 or 41H or the rules made there-
under, shall, in respect of such failure or contravention, be punish-

on able with imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years
and with fine which may extend to two lakh rupees, and’in case the
failure or contravention continues, with additional fing which may
extend to five thousand rupees for every day during which such
failure or contravention continues after the conviction for the first
2, such failure or contravention, j
(2) If the failure or contravention referred to in sub-section (1)
continues beyond a period of one year after the date of conviction, the
offender shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may
extend to ten years.”.

35. In section 97 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the words
“twenty rupees”, the words “five hundred rupees” shall be substituted.

36, In section 98 of the principal Act, for the words “one month” and
“fifty rupees”, the words “two months" and “one thousand rupees” shall,
respectively, be substituted.

35 37. In section 99 of the principal Act, for the words “fifty rupees”, the
words “one thousand rupees” shall be substituted.
38, Section 100 of the principal Act shall be omitted,

39. After section 104 of the principal Act, the following section shall
be inserted, namely:—

aus:
ment ot
section
05.
Amend-
mentof
section

Tnsertion
of new
section
9७8.
Penalty
for con-
traven-~
tion of
the pro-
vistons
of sec

hens
41B, 410
and 41H,


164.

Jurisdiction
of a coert

15,

of new

HASTE

section shall be inserted, namely: —

be inserted, namely;—

section (1) thereof, and,—

be inserted, namely:—

8

‘104A. In any proceedings for an offence for the cont
of any provision of this Act or rules made thereunder .
failure to comply with a duty or requirement to do something,
shall be for the person who is alleged to have failed to |]
with such duty or, requirement, to prove that it was not reaso
practicable or, as the case may be, all ~ practicable measures
taken to satisfy the duty or requirement,’,

40. In Chapter X of the principal Act, after section 106, the following

“106A. For the purposes of conferring jurisdiction on any court ,
-in felation to an offence under this Act or the rules made thereunder
in connection with the operation of any plant, the place where th
plant is for the time being situate shall be deemed to be the
where such offence has been committed.”.

41. After section 111 of the principal Act, the following sectiun

“LILA. Every worker shall have the right to— 4

(i) obtain from the occupier, information relating to
workers’ health and safety at work,

(६) get trained within the factory wherever possible, or, to
get himself sponsored by the occupier for getting trained at a
training centre or institute, duly approved by the Chief
Inspector, where training is imparted for workers’ health and
safety at work ‘

(iti) represent to the Inspector directly or through his २
representative in the matter of madequate provision for protec-
tion of his health or safety in the factory.” ही

42 Section 115 of the principal Act shall be renumbered as sub-

(a) in sub-section (2) as so renumbered, for the words “three ३७
months”, the words “forty-five days" shall be substituted;
(0) after sub-section (1) as so re-numbered, the following sub-

section shall be Inserted, namely: —
“(2) Every rule made by the State Government under this

Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before the 35
State Legislature.”
43. After section 118 of the principal Act, the following section shall

“L18A, (7) Every Inspector shall treat as confidential the souree |
of any complaint brought to his notice on the breach of any provision
of this Act,

(2) No inspector shall, while making an inspection under this
Act, disclose to the occupier, manager or his representative that the
inspection is made in pursuance of the receipt of a complaint:


Fe
Frovided that nothing in this sub-section shall apply to aki’ case

in which the person who has made the complaint hee to
disclose his name.”. ‘

44. In section 119 of the principal Act, the words “or ahy other law
5 for the time being in force” shall be inserted at the end,
45. Before the Schedule to the principal Act, the following Schedules
shall be inserted, namely: —

THR FIRST SCHEDULE
[See Kecehun 2 (eb)

[ase oF FyDusTaiES INVOLVING Hazaanous Paocestne

1. Ferrous Metallurgical Industries

~ Integrated Foon and Steel

~ Ferrow-alloys

~Specia! Stoets
15 2. Non-ferroaa Metallurgical Industries

Primary Metalturgical Industries. namely, vine, lead, Copper, manganese and aluminium

3. Foundries (errouy and mon-ferrous)

“mis and forgivgs inchadi 1g cleaning or Smnoothentug/oughening by sand yint shot

10

2०. ** Coal Gncluding eke) industries
~ Coal, Lignite, Coke, ete.
Fuel Gases (including Cont Gas, Producer Gas, Water Gig).
3. Power Generating Industiries,
6 Pulp and paper (incladiog paper products) Industries,

a5 7. Feriitiver Industries
~Nitrogenous,

- Phosphatic
_ Mixed,
है. Cemvnt Industries
qo Portaed C-mene (reluding slug cement, Pureoiona cement and their pesdgct},
9. Petroloun Industries
Oi) Refining
Lubricuting Oils and Creuses.
10. Petro.chemies! Industries,
3) 11. Drags and Pharmaceuticn! Industries
12, Fermentation Industries (Distilerios and Breweries).
13. Rubber (Synthetic) {ndustries.
14. Paints and Pignwnt Industries,
40 13. Leather Tanning industries.
16. Blectro-plating Industries.
17, Chemical fndbastries
“Coke Oven By-peoducts and Coaltar Distillation products

७... SENSE a eee, "क+

ment of

lig,
Insertion
of new


"i
—trdiastrial Carbon
~~ Alkalies and Acids
~Chromates and dichromates
Leads and its compounds

Blectroctremnicals jum and ium, cll perchlorates
Beg ls (reeatlc sodium, pots

~Electrothermal produces (artificial abrasive. calcium carbide)
Nitrogenous corapounds (cyanides, cyanamides, und ocher wiceogonoue 2० 0 xounds}
Phosphorous and its Compounds
~Halogens and Halogenated compounds (Chlorine, Fluorine, Bromine ant Iodine)
Explosives (including indastrial raployives amd detonators und fuses)
18, Invecticides, Fungicides, Herbicides and othor Pusticides Industries
Syathetic Resin and Plastics
Man-made Fibre (Cetlulosic and non-tellulosic) Industry
Manufacture and repair of elecivice! accumulators
‘Glasa and Ceramice
Grinding of glizing of metals
Manufacture, handling and processing of asbestos and iss products
Euraction of oils and fits from vegetable and asimal sources
Manufacture, handling and use of benzene and subslances containing bemene
Manufacturing procesves and operations involving carbon disulphide
28, Dyes and Dyestuff including their intermediates
29. Highly famnuable liquids und gases

SRRESESRERS

»

THE SEGOND SCHEDULE
(Sce section 417)

PERMISSIBLE LEVELS OF GERTAIN CHEMICAL SUBSTNACEE IN
WORK ENVIRONMENT

Permissible limits of exposure

Subst) “Time Weighted ~~ “Short-term
ee average Concentration [ exon 30

(hrs) 15 min)*

Ppm = mg/m ppm mg/m

Asinidebyde - ek, 109 10 1s” 20
#न्कॉग्बिकक ५... ५ ke to 25 15 3

Aomom ew 70 i730 1000 2a75


ppm mgimnt? ppm mgmt?
a I eae
Acrein . 2, 0.1 0-25 0.3 08
Actylonitrile—-Sicin 2 4s wis
Aldrin—Skin * ६ ia 0-25 ५९ 035
5 AllyiChloride . i 1 3 2 6
Amenia . ‘ 02s is as 7
AnilineSkin. शी yy 2 10 5 2»
Anisidine( }—Pisoners) Skin. , o1 os a ia
Arsenic सै: compounds (is As) * ५० ०2 छः es
10 Benno. , 9... .*#॥ ‘ 10 ३0 23 s
Beryitium. ms 3 - 0,002 रह
Boron Trifluoride ५.५५“. Or os मर पु
Bromise. , 2. yy ot 07 o% 2
Or ७ ४ ४ ६ i 80. 1900 a re
19 = Butanon (Mothylethyle Ketone-MEK) 200 590 200 885
N-Butylaccetate =, gS 150 70 200 950
n-Butylaleohal—skin =, co ci 3 si
secHert-Butylacceate 0 9350 250... 19
५१ मम os 1.5 न ««
20 Cadmiumn-dust and silts (बह (8)... 905 te oz
CarbaryiGeviny =... , = 5 रू to
Carbofuran(Fursdan) =... , Pr 0.1 न os
Carbon distlphide—akin 5 10 2” 5 =
25 Carbon monoxide 30 40 400 440
(10७०७ to trachloride—skin m5 30 20 as
Carbonyl Culoride (Phosgene) ५..." oF 0-4 ”
Chlorobenzrne (monochloro-beazene) . 1 aso .
Cloridane— skin os Os ‘ 2
3° Cilorine . न 1 3 3 9
Chloroform = _ wi ce 1 x» 0 225
10८) )/। =. 0001. ००5 न
Chromic acid and chromates (as Cr.) 0-5 Fos
Cheomous Salts(asCr) 2, 0.05 AN
35 Copperfume . . - 2 ‘
Cotton dustyraw : “ 0-3 bated
Cresol,all isomers- skin. 5 2 “3
Cyanides(asCN}—- skin 2, भें 5 22 >
‘Cyanogen . * . ‘ - oO 20 कक
4० DDT (Dichlocow pheny! Trichlopoetivene) 1 . 3


ppm = mgmt pagent

Dinitiobenzeno all isomers—skin » } ls 0.13 1
Dinitrotoluene—skin. - et +* 155
Diopheyl se +$+ + ४०» ०2 1०5
Endogulfan (क्रंपवंअकल्लकोक।...५.** ew . oF
Endin-skin + + + 0) 8 8 - 0.1

Hydroyeo Plouride (Ms) 6 ee

3
1
Hydrogen Sulplide s+ 6 6 + + 10
Gasoline - + ‘ . * . . . 300
lodime . . . . . . . cot
Iron Oxide Fame (Fe,0,) (as Fed - 8

225
Escamy! alcoho! r ioe & & 10 300
Igobuty! aleoho! . + . . . ढ़ » 10
Lead, inorg., fumes and dusts (०७ Bb) ५ a = ae ots
Lindane~ skin . . . + . ’ . OS
Maem iia es ra 10
Manganese pe Dan) dan a eveeoonats . के ons
Mercury (as Hg) —skin Alkyl compounds =» + my
Allformsexceptaikyl vapour + 52 * *+ Ft
‘Aryland inorganic compounds ~ + 5 * +
‘Methytaleohot (methonel)—skiny + + 20
‘Mothy! coliogotve-skia (2 methoxy ethanol) - ५ 5
Meckylisobutyt Ketone—skin ५... 5५ 5 50 205
०० 05



Naphthakne =.
Nickel carbonyl (as Ni)
Nirioutd =. 1 gC,

3 Nitricoxide . ‘
Nitrobenane—skin ५...»
Nitrogen dioxide =. y
Oilmist,minerals =.
Oxone | ‘ . ‘

10 Parathionskin . ५
Phenol—-skin © 6 ey
Phorate (Thimet)- skin
Phosgone (Carbany! Chloride)

£5 Phosphorus (yellow).
Phosphorss pentachloride
‘Phosphorus trichloride =.
Picricacid—skin wk,
Mei OS
20 Silane (silicon tetrahydride)
. Seddiuans hystroxide
Sprene, munowier (phanyle:ylere)
Sulphur dioxide =
Suiphurbexafluoride .
25 Sulpuricacigé sy *५« -
Toluene (fuluoly =. .
.. @Twhidine—skin ,.
Tribatyiphoaphate . 5
Trichlopoethyiene =, gy
Uraniom, natural (as U)
Vinyl chloride.
Weldingfunws, =. , -
Xylene (o-, एन, P-isomers) .
Zironium compounds (as Zr)

३०

C denotes coiling limit.

O14
०३

ol
2

02

OT
ot
19
oo
Od
oe

OL

Vs
OL
1s

q@
2is

as

25
270
O-2
10

“

w

os

*Not more than 4 with interval
times & duy with at least 60 min. jaterval between successive ex-


Substance Permissible time-weighted

(8 hours)
10 Silica
(a) Crystalline
(७) Quartz
(1) Th terms of dust count 10600
.. ४ Qumet | 20 a
(2) In terms of respirable dust 10
a
5६ respirable quartzt-2
(3) In terms of एज dust 10 |
Se ee
% quartz +3
Gi) Cristabalite . « . . Half the limits given against quartz.
(ii) Tridymite . ० ele » Hall the limits given *guinst quarte.
(iv) Silicafused =. . . -. - Sate fimit as for quartz,
(0७) Trippti =. |, Same fimit as in का in item 2 givea against:

46. The existing Schedule to the principal Act shall be re-numl
as the Third Schedule and in the Third Schedule as so re-num!
after entry “22", the following entries shall be inserted, namely: —

“23. Beriyllium poisoning,
24. Carbon monoxide,
25. Coal miners’ pnoumocontosis,
26. Phosgene poisoning ,
2. Occupational cancer,
28. Isocyanates poisoning,
29 Toxic nephritis.”



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The Factories Act, 1948 provides for the health, safety, welfare and
other aspects of Workers in factories. The Act is enforced by the State
Governments through their Factory Inspectorates. The Act also em-
powers the State Governments to frame rules, so that the local condi-

relating to safety and health at work, extending the scope of the defini-
tion of “workers”, providing for statutory health surveys, and requiring
“ppointment of safety officers in large factories.

2 After the last amendment to the Act, there has been substantial
modernisation and innovation in the tudustrial field. Several chemical

_ industries have come up which deal with hazardous and toxic substances,

This has brought in its train problems of industrial safety and occupa-
tional health hazards, It is, therefore, considered necessary that the Act
tnay be appropriately amended, among other things, to provide specifical-
ly for the safeguards to be adopted against use and handling of hazardous
substances by the occupiers of factories and the laying down of emergency
standards and measures. The amendments would also include procedures
for siting of hazardous industries to ensure that hazardous and polluting
industries are not set up in areas where they can cause adverse effects
on the general public. Provision has also been made for the workers’
participation in safety management.

3. Opportunity has been availed of to make the punishments provided
in the Act stricter and certain other amendments found necessary in the
implementation of the Act.

4. The Bill seeks to achieve the shove objects.

New Dewar; PURNO A. SANGMA.
The 24th November, 1966. xr


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

_ New Section 41D inserted under clause 20 of the Bill enabies
Central Government to appoint Enquiry Committees in the event of
occurance and extraordinary situation involving a factory engaged in
hazardous process and new section 41E inserted by that clause em
the Central Government to direct the Director-General, Factory

specified in respect of a hazardous process or in cases of
processes where the standards so specified are inadequate.

These provisions when implemented would involve certain
ture out of the Consolidated Fund of India, However, it is not
to give any specific figures of expenditure, as thst would depend on th
specific nature of enquiry te be instituted, the dimension of the proble
and the amount of werk to be done either by the Director.

tory Advice Service and Labour Tustitute or by the specialised
tion.

‘Tho Bill does not invalve any other expenditure of recurring or t
recurring nature out of the Consolidated Fund of India, ;


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 4 of the Bill seeks to insert two new sections in the Factories
Act, 1948 (hereafter referred 10 as the said Act). The new section +A
lays down the general duties of the occupier of a factory for ensuring
health, safety and welfare at werk of all workers in the factory. Sub-
section (3) of section 7A empowors the State Government to make rules
*pecifying the cases where the occupier shell prepare the statement or
revision of the statement under that sub-section and the manner in
which such statement or revision shall be brought to the notice of the
workers,

2. Clause 6 of the Bill seeks to amend section 13 of the said Act and
empowers the State Government to make rules for the maintenance of
records in relation to measuring instruments in the factory.

3, Clause 19 of the Bill seeks to substitute section 38 of the said Act.
Sub-section (3) of section 88 emrowers the State Government to make
rules in respect of any factory or class of description of factories, requir
ing measures to be adopted for the prevention and contro) of fire in a
factory.

4. Clause 20 of the Bill secks 10 insert 9 new Chapter after Chapter
TV of the said Act. The new Chapter makes provision relating to
hazardous processes. Under that Chapter the State Government is
empowered to make rules for specifying the form in which an application
for the establishment of factory involving hazardous process is to be
made [section 41A(2)], the manner in which the occupler of a factory
involving hazardous processes should disclose the information regarding
the danger, including health hazards and measures to overcome the same
fsectlon 4198 (1) ], the intervals within which the occupier has to inform
the Chief Inspector regarding the changes he has made about the detailed
policy [section 41B(2)], the manner in which the occupier is to publicise
the measures for the handling of usage, transport, storage and disposal of
hazardous substances [41B(7)], the conditions subject to which the
records in « factory shall he made arcessible to the workers by the
eceupier [section 41C(i)], the marner in which the persons with specisl
qualifications and experience appointed te supervise the handling of
hazardous substances within a factory, to be protected [41C(il)] and
the manner in which every worker fs to he subjected to medical exami-
nation while continuine in the ich and after he has ceased to be assigned
that job [section 41C (ifi}].

5. Clause 26 of the Bill seeks to insert n new section 87A which em-
powers Inspectors of the factory to prohibit employment: of persons on
seemint of imminent danger tll the dancer is removed. It empowers
the State Government to make rules snecifving the manner in which
the occupier is to provide alternative employment.

' & All the shove matters are matters of detail or orovedure and, as
such, the delegation ef legislative power Involved is of 9 normal character.

_

9३


ANNEXURE

EXTRACTS FROM THE Facrontes Act, 1948

or 1948
के . . क्र .
Tnterpre- 2. In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the
tation, context,—
. . . ’

(m) “factory” means any premises including the precincts th

(i) whereon ten or more workers are working, or were’
ing on any day of the preceding twelve months, and in any
of which a manufacturing process is being carried on. with th
of power, or is ordinarily so carried on, or

(ii) whereon twenty or more workers are working, or |
working on any day of the preceding twelve months, and in
part of which a manufacturing process is being carried on ४
the aid of power, or is ordinarily so carried an,—

but does not include a mine subject to the operation of the Min
1952, or a mobile unit belonging to the armed forces of the Uni
railway running shed or a hotel, restaurant or eating place,
Explanation.—For computing the number of workers for the pu
poses of this clause all the workers in different relays in a day sh
be taken into account;
(४) “occupier” of a factory means the person who has ultimat
control over the affairs of the factory, and where the said affairs
entrusted to a managing agent, such agent shall be deemed to be
occupier of the factory:
Provided that in the case of a ship which is being repaired,
which maintenance work is being carried out, in a dry dock which |
available for hire—
(1) the owner of the dock shall be deemed to be the occu
for the purposes of sny matter provided for by or under—:
(a) section 6, section 7, section 11 or section 12;
. . . * *. z
(०) “manoging agent" hus the meaning assigned to it in the Indi
Companies Act, 1913;
. . . . .
(०) where work of the some kind Is carried out by two or mare’
sets of workers working during different periois of the day,
each of such sets fs called a “reley” and ७०) of such periods is ed
a “shift”.

. . * .



श्र

4. The State Government may, on an application made in this behalf
by an occupier, direct, by an order in writing, that for all or any of the
purposes of this Act different departments or branches of a factory of the
occupier specified in the application shall be treated as separate factories
or that two or more factories of the vecupier specified in the application
shall be treated as a single factory.

. . . . हा

9. Subject to any rules made in this behalf, an Inspector may, within
the local limits for which ho is appointed —

(०) enter, with such assistants, being persons in the service of the
Government, or any local or other public authority, as he thinks fit,
any place which is used, or which he has reason to believe is used, aa
8 factory;

(0) make examination of the premises, plant and machinery, re-
quire the production of any prescribed register and any vther docu-
ment relating to the factory, and take on the spot or otherwise state-
ments of any persons which he may consider necessary for carrying
out the purposes of this Act;

(c) exercise such other powers as may be prescribed for carrying
out the purposes of this Act:

Provided that no person shsll be compelled under this section to answer
any question or give any evidence tending to incriminate himself.
*

+ . +
13,(1) * ’ . . छः

(2) The State Government may prescribe a standard of adequate
ventilation and reasonable temperature for any factory or class or descrip-
tion of factories or parts thereof and direct that a thermometer shall be
provided and maintained in such place and position ss may be specified.

(3) Ig it appears to the State Government that in any factory or class
or description of factories excessively high temperatures can be reduced by
such methods as whitewashing, spraying or insulating and screening out-
side walls or roofs or windows, or by raising the level of the roof, or by
insulating the roof either by an sir-space and double roof or by the use of
insulating roof materials, or by other methods, it may prescribe such of
these or other methods as shall be adopted in the factory.

. . . . .
36. (1) . * . .

(2) Without prejudice to the generality of sub-section (1), there shall
be in every workroom of a factory in existence on the date of the com-
mencement of th's Act at least three hundred and fifty cubic feet and of a
factory built after the commencement of this Act at least five hundred
cubic feet of space for every worker employed therein, and for the pure

tobea


BRE

~~ 8

poses of this sub-section no account shall be taken of any space
more than fourteen feet above the level of the floor of the प

- * . *

18, (7) . . *

(2) All such points shall be legibly marked “drinking wat
language understood by a majority of the workers employed in the fact
and no such point shall be situated within twenty feet of any wasl
place, urinal or latrine unless » ahorter distanco is approved in w
by the Chief Inspector,

19. (1) ० 2 =
(2) Im every factory wherein more then two hundred and fifty
are ordinarily employeaé—

(७) the fioors and internal walls, up to = height of three fee
the latrines and urinals and the sanitary blocks shail be laid in gli
tiles or otherwise finished to provide a sroovth polished impet
surface;

23. (1) No young person shall work at any machine to which ae
tion spplies, unless he has been fully instructed as to the dangers
in connection with the machine and the precautions to be ‘observed

(०) has received sufficient training in work at the machine, ५

(0) is under adequate supervision by a person who has a th
knowledge and experience of the machine.

. . . *

25. No traversing part of a self-acting machine in any factory
material carried thereon shell, if the space over which it runs is a
over which any person 18 liable to pass, whether in the course of his
ployment or otherwise, be allowed to run on its outward or Inward traven
within a distance of eighteen inches from any fixed structure which is
part of the machine: ‘

Provided that the Chief Inspector may permit the continued
machine installed before the commencement of this Act which does
comply with the requirements of this section on such conditions for
ing safety as he may think fit to impose.

. * . .
28. (1) In every factory—
(a) every hoist end lift shall be—
(0) of good mechanical construction, sound materia] and ad
quate strength; :

(i) properly maintained, and shall be thoroughly exan
by 2 competent person at leart once in every period of six m


Of 99

and & register shall be kept containing the prescribed péfticulars
of every such examination;

(>) every hoistway and liftway shall be sufficiently protected by
an enclosure fitted with gates, and the hoist or lift and every such
enclosure shall be so constructed as to prevent any person or thing
from being trapped between any part of the holst or lift and any fixed

(c) the maximum safe working load shall be Plainly marked on

every hoist or lift, and no losd greater than such load shall be cartied
thereon;

(d) the case of every hoist or lift used for carrying persons shall
he fitted wih » gate on esch side from which access is afforded toa
हि;

(९०) every gate referred ta in clause (0) or clause (०) shall be -

fitted with interlocking or other efficient device to secure that the gate
cannot be opened except when the cage is at the landing and that the
cage cannot he moved unless the gate is closed,

(2) The following additional requirements shal} apply to hoists and
Used for carrying persons and installed or reconstructed in a factory
after the commencement of this Act, namely:—

(@) where the cage is supported by rope or chitin, there shall be at

breakage of the ropes, chains or attachments;

fc) an efficient automatic device shall be provided and maintained
to prevent the cage from over-running,

(3) The Chip? Inspector may permit the continued use of & hoist or lift

in # factory before the commencement Of this Act which does

not fully comply with the Provisions of sub-section (1) upon sueh condi-
tions for ensuring safety as he may think fit to impose,

(4) The State Government may, if in respect of any class or description

* * *. . .

chains,

i.


Revoly-

nery,

it,

getry

ai

x»
Explanation—In this section,—
क्र क्र . .

() “lifting tackle” means chain slings, rope slings, hooks,
and swivels.

30, = ;

speed of every grindstone or abrasive wheel, the speed of the shaft ol
spindle upon which the wheel is mounted, and the diameter of the pulley

31. (1) If in any factory any part of the plant or machinery used in 8.
manufacturing process is operated at a pressure above atmospheric pres
sure effective measures shall be taken to ensure that the safe working
pressure of such part is not exceeded.

32, In every factory—

(०) when any person has to work at a place from where he is
likely to fall a distance exceeding two metres, then, unless the place
is one which provides secure foothold and, where necessary, secure
handhold, provision shall be made, so far as is reasonably practicable,
by fencing or otherwise, to ensure the safety of the person so working.

36. (1) In any factory mo person shall enter or be permitted to enter
any chamber, tank, vat, pit, pipe, flue or other confined space in which
dangerous fumes are likely to be present to such an extent as te involve
risk of persons being overcome thereby, unless it is provided with a man-
hole of adequate size or other effective means of egress.

(3) No person in any factory shall enter or be petmitted to enter any
confined space such as is referred to in sub-section (1) until all practicable
measures have been taken to remove any fumes which may be present
and to prevent any ingress of fumes and unless either—

(a) & certificate in writing has been given by a competent person,
based on 8 test carried out by himself, that the space is free from
dangerous fumes and fit for persons to enter, or

(b) the worker is wearing suitable breathing apparatus and a belt
securely attached to a rope, the free end of which is held by a person
standing outside the confined space.

(4) Suitable breathing apparatus, reviving spparatus and belts गत
Topes shall in every factory be kept ready for instant use beside any such
‘confined space as aforesaid which any person has entered, and sll such ap-
PpSratus shall be periodically examined and certified by a competent person —


or
to be fit for use; and a sufficient number of persons employed in every fac

tory shall be trained and practised In the use of all such apparatus and,

in the method of restoring respiration,

(5) No person shall be permitted to enter in any factory any boiler
furnace, boiler flue, chamber, tanls, vat, pipe or other conflned space for
the purpose of working or making any examination therein until it has
been sufficiently cooled by ventilation or otherwise to be safe for persons
to enter.

(6) The State Government may make rules prescribing the minimum
dimensions of the manholes referred to in sub-section (I), and may by
order in writing exempt, subject to such conditions as it may think fit te
impose, any factory or class or description of factories from compliance
with any of the provisions of this section.

36A_ In any factory—

(a) no portable electric light or any other electric appliance of
voltage exceeding twenty-four volts shall be permitted for use inside
any chamber, tank, vat, pit, pipe, flue or other confined space; and

38 (1) In every factory there shall be provided such means of escape
in case of fire as may be prescribed.

(2) In every factory the doors affording exit from any room shall not
be locked or fastened so that they cannot be easily and immediately open-
ed from the inside while any person is within the mom, and all such doors,
unless they are of the sliding type, shall be constructed to open outwards,

(3) In every factory, every window, door or other exit affording a
means of escape ‘in case of fire, other than the means of exit in ordinary
use, shall be distinctively marked in a language understood by the majority
of the workers and in red letters of adequate size or by some other effec-
tive and clearly understood sign,

(4) There shall be provided in every factory effective and clearly audi-
ble means of giving warning in case of fire to every person employed in
the factory.

(5) A free passage-way giving access to each means of escape in case of
fire shall be majntsined for the use of all workers in every room of 8
factory.

(6) Effective measures shall be taken-to ensure that in every factory—

(०) wherein more than twenty workers are ordinarily emploved
in any place above the ground floor, or
(9) wherein explosive or highly inflammable materials are used
or stored,
all the workers are femiliar with the means of escape in case of fire and
have been adequately trained in the routine to be followed in such case.

(7) The State Government may make rules prescribing, in respect of
any factory or class or description of factories, the means of escape to be
provided in case of fire and the nature and amount of fire-fighting appara-
tus to be provided and maintained,

Hi

case of


Power

to make
exempt-
ing rules,

Effect of
carti-

fieate of
granted

to adole.
scent.

(8) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) or sub-se
tion (7), if the Inspector, having regard to the nature of the work carried
on in the factory, construction of the factory, special rick to life or safety
or any other circumstance, is of the opinion that though such means of
escape as may be prescribed have been provided in the factory, the same.
is not adequate to permit safe, easy or quick exit of the workers in case
of fire, he may, by order in writing, require that such additional means of
escape or other measures as he may consider reasonable and necessary
be provided in the factory before such date ss is specified in the order.

(9) Tf any question arises whether or not the means of escape provided
in the factory is adequate to permit safe, easy or quick exit of the workers
in case of fire, the same shall be referred to the Chief Inspector, who shall,
after giving the persons concerned a reasonable opportunity to represent —
their views, decide the same.

(10) Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Chief Inspector under
sub-section (9) may, before the expiry of thirty deys from the date on
which the decision is communicated to him, prefer an appeal to the State
Government and the State Government sholl after giving the appellant
@ reasonable opportunity to represent his views, make such order in rela-
tion to the appeal as it thinks fit,

7 . . . .

04. (1) The State Government may make rules defining the persons
who hold positions of supervision or management or are employed in a
confidential position In a factory or empowering the Chief Inspector to
declare any person, other than a person defined by such rules, as a person
‘polding position of supervision or management or employed in a confiden-
tial position in a factory if, in the opinion of the Chief Inspector, such pet-
son holds such position or is so emplovee and the provisions of this Chap-
ter, other than the provisions of clause (0) or sub-section (1) of section
66 and of the proviso to that sub-section, shall not apply to any person 50
defined or declared:

Provided that any person so defined or declared shall. where the
ordinary rate of wages of such person does not exceed rupees seven hun-
dred and fifty per month, be entitled to extra wages in respect of overtime
work under section 59.

न . . * + =

70. (1) An adolescent who has been granted a certificate of fitness to r
work in a factory as an adult under clause (b) of sih-section (2) af section
69, and who while at work in a factory carries a token piving reference
to the certificate. shall be deemed to be an adult for all the purposes of

Chapters VI and VII:

Provided that no sich adolescent who hes not atte’ned the spe of
seventeen vears shall be employer or permitted to work in any factory
during night.

Explanstion.—Tor the purpose f this sub-cection “night” shall mean

a period of at least twelve concerntive horns which shall include an inters
val of at least seven consecutive hours falling between 10 pat and 7 AM”
* . ’ कर्क oleh


33

80. (1) For the leave allowed to him under section 78 or section 79,
as the case may be, a worker shall be paid at a rate equal to the daily
average of his total full time earnings for the days on which he actually
worked during the manth immediately preceding his leave, exclusive of
any overtime and bonus but inclusive of dearness allowance and the cash
equivalent of the advantage acerwing through the concessional sale to
the worker of foodgraina and other articles,

. . . . .

87, Where the State Government is of opinion that any manufacturing
Process or operation carried on in a factory exposes any persons employed
an it to a serious risk of bodily injury, poisoning or desease, it may make
rules applicable to any factory or class or description of factories in which
the manufacturing, process or operation it carried on—

. . . . .

(9) providing for issue of orders in writing In the Inspector or the

Chief Inspector to the manager or occupier or both of the factory direct-

ing them to carry out such measures, and within such time, as may be

Specified in such order with a view to rémoving conditions dangerous

to the health of the workers, or to suspend any process, where such

process constitutes, in the opinion of the Inspector or the Chief In-

spector, as the case may be, imminent danger of poisoning or toxicity.
- क्र क्र . > >

89. (7) Where any worker in व factory contracts any disease specified
in the Schedule, the manager of the fartory shall send notice thereof to
such authorities, and in such form and within such time, as may be pres-
cribed.

(2) If any medical practitioner attends on a person who is or has beer
employed in a factory, and who is, or is believed by the medica] pract!-
tioner to be, suffering from any disease specified in the Schedule, the
medical practitioner shall without delay send 8 report in writing to the
office of the Chief Inspector stating—

{a) the name and full postal address of the patient,

(b) the disease from whith he believes the patient to be suffer-
‘ing, and

(c) the name and address of the factory in which the patient is,
or was last, employed.

(3) Where the report under sub-section (2) is confirmed to the satis-
faction of the Chief Inspector, by the certificate of a certifying surgeon
or otherwise, that the person is suffering from a disease specified In the
Schedule. he shall pay to the medical practitioner such fee as may be
prescribed and the fee so paid shall be recoverable as an arrear of land-
revenue from the cecupier of the factory in which the person contracted
the disease.

(4) Lf any medical practitioner fails to comply with the provisions of
sub-section (2), he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to
fifty rupees.

94, (1) The State Government may, if it considera {t expedient so to
do, appoint a competent person to inquire into the causes of any accident
occurring in a factory or into any case where a disease specified in the
Schedule has been, or is suspected to have been, contracted in a factory

क्र . . * *

Notive of
diseases.

Power to
dire) ene
quiry into
cues OF
accident oF
disease.


Satety

cccups-
tional
health

ame

rt]

and may also appoint one or more persons possessing legal or special
knowledge to act as assessors in such inquiry. पु
. . : क्र .
918. (7) . . * * .
(3) Any time spent by a worker for undergoing medical examination
or furnishing information under sub-section (2) shall, for the purpos
of calculating wages and extra wages for overtime work, be deemed to —
be time during which such worker worked in the factory.

CHAPTER X
Penatries anp Procenune

$2. Save as is otherwise expressly provided in this Act and subject
to the provisions of section 93, if in, or in respect of, any factory there
is any contravention of any of the provisions of this Act or of any rules”
made thereunder or of any order in writing given thereunder, the occu-
pier and manager of the factory shall each be guilty of an offence an
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to thn
months or with fine which mey extend to two thousand rupees or with
both, and if the contravention is continued after conviction, with a ful
ther fine which may extend to seventy-five rupees for each day ©
which the contravention is so continued:

Provided that where contravention of any of the provisions of Chap-
ter IV or any rule made thereunder or under section 87 has resulted
an accident causing death or serious bodily injury, the fine shall not
Jess than one thousand rupees in the case of an accident causing death,
and five hundred rupees in the case of an accident causing serious bodily
injury.

Explanction.—In this section and in section 94 “serious bodily injury’
means an injury which involves, or in all probability will involve, the
permanent loss of the use of, or permanent injury to, any limb or |!
permanent less of, or injury to, sight or hearing, or the fracture of
bone, but shall not include, the fracture of bone or joint (not be
fracture of more than one bone or joint) of any phalanges of the hand
foot,

94. (1) If any person who has been convicted of any offence puni
able under section 92 is again guilty of an offence involving a contraven-
tion of the same provision, he shall be punishable on a subsequent con
tion with imprisonment for a term which may extond to six months |
with fine which shall not be less than two hundred rupees but whieh m
extend to five thousand rupees or with both:

Provided that the Court may, for any adequate and special rea:
to be mentioned in the judgment, impose a fine of less than two hund
rupees:

Provided further that where contravention of any of the pro
of Chapter IV or any rule made thereunder or under section 87 bas re
ted fn an accident causing death or serious bodily injury. the fine
not be less than two thousand rupees in the case of an accident cau
death and one thousand rupees in the case of an accident causing $e!
bodily injury.

(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1), no cognizance shall be ts
of any conviction made more than two years before the commission
the offence for which the person is subsequently being convicted,


95. Whoever wilfully obstructs an Inspector in the exercise of any
Power conferred on him by or under this Act, or fails to produce on de-
mand by an Inspector any registers or other documents in his custody
kept in pursuance of this Act or of any rules made thereunder, or con-
ceals or prevents any worker in a factory from appearing before, or
being examined by, an Inspector, shal} be punishable with imprisonment
for a term which may extend to three months or with fine which may
extend to five hundred rupees or with both.

% Whoever, except in so far as it may be necessary for the purposes
of @ prosecution for any offence punishable under this Act, publishes or
discloses to any person the results of an analysis made under section
$1, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may ex-
tend to three months or with fine which may extend to five hundred
rupees or with both,

97. (1) Subject to the provisions of section पा, if any worker employ-
ed in a factory contravenes any provision of this Act or any rules or
orders made thereunder, imposing any duty or liability on workers, he
shall be punishable with fine which may extend to twenty rupees.

. . . . .

98. Whoever knowingly uses or attempts to use, as a certificate of
fitness granted to himself under section 70, @ certificate granted to an-
other pergon under that section, or who, having procured such  certifi-
cate, knowingly allows it to be used, or an attempt to use it to be made,
by another person, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term
which may extend to one month or with fine which may extend to fifty
Tupees or with both,

99. If a child works in a factory on any day on which he has already
been working in another factory, the parent or guardian of the child or
the person having custody of or control over him or obtaining any direct
benefit from his wages, shall be punishable with fine which may extend
to fifty rupees, unless it appears to the Court that the child so worked
without the consent or connivance of such parent, guardian or person.

100. (1) Where the occupier of a factory is a firm or other association
of individuals, any one of the individual partners or members thereof
may be prosecuted and punished under this Chapter for any offence for
which the occupier of the factory is punishable:

Provided that the firm or association may give notice to the Inspector
that it has nominated one of its members, residing within India to be
the occupier of the factory for the purpeses of this Chapter, and such
individual shall, so long as he s resident, be deemed to be the occupier
of the factory for the purposes of this Chapter, until further notice can-
celling his nomination is received by tbe Inspector or until he ceases to
be a partner or member of the firm or assoclation,

(2) Where the occupier of a factory is a company, any one of the direc-
tors thereof, may be prosecuted and punished under this Chapter for any
offence for which the oceupier of the factory is punishable:

Provided that the company may give notice to the Inspector that it has
nominated 8 director, who is resident within India to be the occupier of

ment of

Determi-
nation of
occupier
in certain
cases,


cailon
of rules,

Act to
bave

avtwith-
standing
anything

in Act 37
of 1970,

a |
33 he is so resident, be deemed to be the occupier of the factory for the
purposes of this Chapter, until further notice cancelling his nomination it
recelved by the Inspector ur until he ceases to be a director:

Provided further that in the ease of a factory belonging to the Central
Government or any State Government or any local authority the person or
persons appointed to manage the affairs of the factory shall be deemed to
be the occupier of that factory for the purposes of this Chapter.

(3) Where the owner of any premises or building referred to in section
93 is not an individual, the provisions of this section shall apply to such
owner as they apply to occupiers of factories who are not individuals,

. . रू क्र *

115, All rules made under this Act shall be published in the Official
Gazette, and shall be subject to the condition of previous publication; and
the date to be specified under clause (3) of section 23 of the General
Clauses Act, 1897, shalj be not Jess than three months from the date on
whieh the draft of the proposed rules was published.

. * ° . °
119, The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding any-_

thing inconsistent therewith contained in the Contract Labour (Regulation
and Abolition) Act, 1970.

THE SCHEDULE

(See sections 89 and 90)
Lasr oy Norirtame Diseases

1. Lead poisoning, including poisoning by any preparation or com-
pound of lead or their sequelae,

2. Lead tetra-cthyl poisoning.

3. Phosphorus pelsoning or its sequelae.
4. Mercury poisoning or its sequelae.

5. Manganese poisoning or its sequelae.
6. Arsenic poisoning or its sequelae.

7. Poisoning by nitrous fumes,

8. Carbon bisulphide poisoning

9, Benzene poisoning, including poisoning by any of its homologues,
their nitro or amido derivatives or its sequelae.

10, Chrome ulceration or its sequelac.
i. Anthrax.
12. Silicosis,

13, Poisoning by halogens or halogen derivatives of the hydroc
of the aliphatic series.


7
14 Pathological manifestations due to—
(4) radium or other radio-sctive substances;
(b) X-rays.
15. Primary epitheliomatous cancer of the skin,
16, Toxic ansemia.
17. Toxic jaundice due 10 poisonous substances,

18 Oil cane or dermatitis due to mineral oils and compounds containing
mineral oil base.

19. Byssionosis.
20. Asbestosix

31. Occupational or contract dermatitis caused by direct contact with
chemicals and paints: These are of two types, that is, primary
irritants and allergic sensitizers.

22, Noise induced hearing loss (exposure to high noise levels).