1
THE  ALL INDIA  SERVICES (AMENDMENT) BILL,  2017
By
SHRI RAJEEV SATAV, M.P.
A
BILL
provide further to amend the All India Services Act, 1951.
BE  it enacted by the Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the All India Services (Amendment) Act, 2017.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. After section 3 of the All India Services Act, 1951, the following section shall be
inserted, namely:—
Short title and
commence-
ment.
Bill No. 141 of  2017
Insertion of
new section
3A.
LXI of 1951.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
"3A. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 3, the Central Government
shall, in consultation with the State Government concerned and parent Department or
Ministry, as the case may be, ensure periodic review of officers appointed to the All India
Services on completion of five years of tenure through a procedure to be conducted by the
Union Public Service Commission in such manner as may be prescribed:
Provided that if the periodic review has not been conducted after five years of
service in respect of a member, such review may be conducted at any other time as the
Central Government may deem fit.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, the term "periodic review"
shall mean the review of the entire service record including the Annual Confidential
Report (ACR) of the member of All India Services regarding suitability or otherwise of
such member for further retention in the Service, to be conducted regularly for each
member of such Services.
(2) The Central Government, after consultation with the Union Public Service
Commission and on conclusion of the periodic review of members of the All India Services
as specified under sub-section (1), may recommend for the bottom fifteen per cent. members
from each batch of the All India Services—
(a) the dismissal or pre-mature retirement of five per cent. bottom members of
the All-India Services from each batch; or
(b) administrative training, for the ten per cent. members who have achieved a
higher rank than the bottom five per cent. members, which includes and is not limited
to, sending the members for a compulsory career training program for a period of
at least six months at the Academy concerned in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) The Central Government after consultation with the Government of the State
concerned, Union Public Service Commission and the parent Department or the Ministry, as
the case may be, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for regulating the manner
and procedure for the conduct of periodic review of members of All India Services.
(4) The Central Government after consultation with the Director of Academy concerned
and Union Public Service Commission frame guidelines on the method and evaluation of
administrative training as provided under clause (b) of sub-section (2).".
Periodic
review of
members of
All India
Services.
5
10
15
20
25
30

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
For creating smooth administrative machinery, there is a need of effective
accountability standards. The members of the All India Services are a vital cog in the wheel
of development of India. They are selected through a rigorous method of examination and
are entrusted with the responsibility of development at district, State, national as well as
international level. The need is to weed out the deadwood in order to maintain a high
standard of efficiency and initiative in the All India Services. It is not necessary that a good
officer may continue to be efficient for all times to come. It may be that there may be some
officers who may possess a better initiative and higher standard of efficiency and if given
change the work of the Government might show marked improvement.
There are a number of judicial pronouncements in support of total assessment of the
performance of the members of the All India Services. There have also been observations
that have approved any measure by which the assessment by superiors, with an opportunity
to watch the work and conduct of an officer, is taken into account while deciding about
premature retirement. It is sometimes found that a few members of the All India Services do
tend to become mere passengers in the post or at the level in which a member is placed for
the time being. They become either stale or listless or do not exhibit any creativity or
innovativeness and do not achieve the desired results. In some other cases, information
may be available which casts grave doubt upon the integrity of a members. The need is to
strike a just balance between the termination of the completed career of a tired employee
and maintenance of top efficiency in the diverse activities of administration.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the All India Services Act, 1951 with a view to
provide for periodic review of members of All India Services on completion of five years of
tenure. It also provides for dismissal or pre-mature retirement of bottom five per cent. of
members at the periodic review and compulsory training to the other bottom ten per cent.
members who have achieved a higher rank than the bottom five per cent. members of All
India Services at Academy concerned.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RAJEEV SATA V
July 4, 2017.

4
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 2 of the Bill empowers the Central Government make rules for regulating the
manner and procedure for the conduct of periodic review of members of All India Services.
As the rules will relate to matters of details only, the delegation of legislative power is of a
normal character.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the All India Services Act, 1951.
————
(Shri Rajeev Satav, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—990LS(S3)—21-07-2017.