1
THE WATERW AYS DEVELOPMENT COUNCIL BILL, 2015
By
SHRI M.K. RAGHA V AN, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the development and promotion of waterways as an alternate means of
transportation in the country and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Waterways Development Council Act, 2015.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "council" means the Waterways Development Council constituted under
section 3;
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 141 of 2015
Definitions.
5
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(b) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(c) "waterway" means a river, canal or other body of water serving as a route or
way of travel or transport.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
a Council to be known as the Waterways Development Council for the development and
promotion of waterways in the country.
(2) The Council shall consist of a Chairperson and four members to be appointed by
the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) The headquarter of the Council shall be at Calicut in the State of Kerala.
(4) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service of
Chairperson and members shall be such as may be prescribed.
4. The Council shall carry out studies and make recommendations to the Central
Government on the following matters—
(i) waterways development;
(ii) inter-linking of rivers;
(iii) promotion of waterways as an alternate mode of transportation;
(iv) promotion of sports activities in waterways; and
(v) creation of necessary infrastructure near seas and major rivers.
5. It shall be the duty of the Central Government to implement, in consultation with
the concerned State Government, the recommendations of the Council:
Provided that where it is felt that any recommendation cannot be implemented due to
any reason, the Central Government may, for the reasons to be recorded in writing, inform the
Council accordingly.
6. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force.
7. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Constitution
of a
Waterways
Development
Council.
Recommenda-
tion of the
Council to be
implemented
by the Central
Government.
Functions of
the Council.
Act not in
derogation of
any other law.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

3
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
India has a long coastal line and is still unexplored. Waterways has never been properly
utilised. If waterways are utilised properly many of our problems can be solved easily.
Waterways can be developed and promoted as an alternate mode of transportation. It is
cheap, fuel efficient, easy and pollution free means of traffic and goods transportation,
Moreover, considerable revenue can be generated from proper utilisation of waterways.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to constitute a council for the development and promotion of
waterways as an alternate means of transportation in the country.
N
EW DELHI; M.K. RAGHA VAN
April 8, 2015.

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to constitute a Waterways Development Council for the
development and promotion of waterways. The Bill, therefore, if enacted will involve
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that annual recurring
expenditure of about rupees ten thousand crore is likely to be involved from the Consolidated
Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees fifty thousand crore is also likely to be
involved.

5
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out the
purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the development and promotion of waterways as an alternate means
of transportation in the country and for matters connected therewith or incidental
thereto.
————
(Shri M.K. Raghavan, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—464LS(S3)—30-04-2015.