LOK SABRA 
CORRIGENDA 
to 
THE HOSPITALS AND EDUC.ii:J.'IONAL INSTITUTIONS (CONDITIONS 
OF SERVICE OF EMPLOYEES AND SETTLEMENT OF' EMPLOYMENT 
DISPUTES) BILL, 1978 
I-To be/As introduced jp Lok SabhaJ 
1. Page 3, line 38,-
!Q.r. "Comm ttee" Dta!i "Committee" 
2. Page 8, in the marginal heading to clause 16,-
for "settlement" ~ "settlements" 
3. Page 8, line 27,-
fQl: "Board or" ~ "B::>ard of" 
4. Page 10, line 3,-
m "employees"".Nn:d "employees'" 
5. Page 10, line 17,-
!Q.I. "arbi trators of" ~ "arbitrators or" 
6. Page 10, line 48,-
for "accordingy" ~ "accordingly" 
7. Page 13, line 4,-
!Q.r. "(1)" ~ "(1)" 
8. Page 14, line 7 from bottom,-
fQr "individuals" ~ "individual" 
9. Page. 14, line 2 from bottom,-
1Qr. "Rs.1600" ~ "Rs .1000" 
1 o. Page 17, line 25',-
f9.r. "Grievence" ~ "Grievance" 
NEW DELHI; 
Augu s t 29. 1 9L.l?a5.-...-...--.".. 
Bhadra ~r 190~( Saka) 

BiU NO. 14i Of 191. 
THE HOSPITALS AND EDUCATiONAL INSTITUTIONS (CONDI': 
110NS OF SERVICE OF EMPLOYEES AND SETTLEMEN1' 
OF EMPLOYMENT DISPUTES)' BILL, 1978 
CLAUS1'.8 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CHAPrER I 
PRELIMINARY 
1. Short title, extent, commencement and application. 
2. Definitions. 
CHAPTER II 
AUTHORITIES UNDER THE ACT 
~. Grievance Settlement Committee. 
4. Consultative Council and Local Consultative Council. 
5. Term of office of members of Grievance Settlement Committee, 
t!tc. 
6. Right of recognised association of employees to nominate mem· 
hers of. Grievance Settlement Committee, etc.. representing 
employees. 
7. Allowances payable to a member of Grievance Settlement Com· 
mittee, etc., being employees' representative. 
8. Roster of arbitrators. 
CHAPTER III 
CONDmONS OF SERVICE AND SE'l"l'LZMENT OF DlSPUTIS 
9. Employer to make regulations in regard to certain matters. 
10. Model regulations. 
11. Settlement of individual employment disputes. 
12. Settlement of employment disputes. 
13. Remuneration payable to arbitrator. 
14. Act 10 of 1940 not to apply to arbitration under this Act. 
15. Power to summon witnesses, etc. 
18. Enforceability of awards and settlements. 
17. Persons on whom awards are binding. 
18. Prohibition of strike and lock-out. 
CHAPTER IV 
PENALTIES AND PROCEDURE 
19. Penalties. 
20. Cognizance of offences. 
21. Offences by companies. 

8~~~P~ It .... 11m 
--"2r'1IRt)'O'ety of money due fro~~dgljlo~A P.. 
.ltl Y~:~;j~~~~bMJ~~l ~#:~~&~~k,!~~~:g~ ~iD 
es~;'1i.~~t.'-.1TUqcna T~MYOJqM!!I '10 
24. Protection of action taken under the Act. 
25. Effect of c~t~~...ef ~~~sm~ this Act. 
26. Delegation of powers. ---
27. Act not t9 apply to ~efl!Mlt~]jshments. 
28. P, ower to make rul~L q 
J' IlA HI Ml.I!iR 
SCHEDULE I. 
SCHEDULE II • 
. noits:l'ilqq£ bnn tnsm9!)n9mmO!) ,jn~x9 ,9UiJ .t1od2 .1 
.anoUinll90 .S: 
II H:iT<IAH~ 
T')A SHT R31a~u 2!ITIROHTUA 
.99jjimmo~ .tn9m~JIH9a 9!)nav9i1v .£ 
.Ibnuo:) ,)Vjjcj(u2no~ 1&:>0.1 bnn Iboun') 9vjje,f1u2no~ .f>. 
,99JfimmoJ .tn9m9Ut,ja !},>ol:v9j'JD }o C!1'JdCW){f1 10 ~Y)m() 10 on9T .C 
.!).t~ 
-m9m 9Jsnimon oj 2'J'J'{olqm'J 10 (Joitr.i:)()C!(':r. b9p.inno!)'J1 10 .trl~ijl ,8 
~nitn9291q91 .. ,h ,~9Hicnmo~) lC1~m~,lJb2 !):)n(;v~h;) ,10 ;>,19C.1 
.299,(olqm9 
-cno~ ln~m')UI'l2 <J'HlIN'i;' D '10 'J,)dm')f(J (i nJ ~)ldl;'(I;q C!')')nswoll A ' I 
.9vih:Jn·Jwnq'Yl ·a·)')'(olqfll!.l gni9d ,.!)J') ,99Him 
.210Jc1fid1r. 1o 19ieofl .8 
III H:!I'l'<JAHJ 
.219Usm nish!)!) oj b1r.~'J·1 ni 2nojjGIJJ~~'1 !}Jinm oj 19'!olqm:! .e 
.anoiJsIUll9'1 IsboM .01 
.2sjUq2ib jn')m,!olqm~ Ir:ubivihrti lo ,tnsm!l{U92 .If 
.t::'l.tllqdb JIl'JlfI"(,lllqrll'l III In9N1,}hh2 .~I 
.lOfH1.tid16 OJ 9ldsv.sq noi.ts1:,num9H .&1 
.J'.lA eitH 19hnu noiffnJid'H1 oj '{Jqqs 0,' jon Ol>eI to {II hA .H 
.'.):19 ,P.9?.?.9n.tiw nOmm1lB oj 19woQ .at 
.2:tnsm')W"lp. . bnn P,bl&WS 10 '(JiIld'm~)101n8 .Bl 
.l;inibnid 916 Hb'wwtl morlw no enoa19Q .\'I 
.,tuo"x:x>l bni:> 911h,ta in noi!idid()~ .81 
• 
.DttIan~Q .Ql 
.29'.lnsfin to 9~asi~o~ .0£ 
.Bsinsqmo!) 'id 119'.lns'ftO .n: 

am No. 141 of 1978 
THE JIOSPITALS AND EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS (CONDI-
TIONS OF SERVICE OF EMPLOYEES AND SETTLEMENT OF 
EMPLOYMENT DISPUTES) BILL, 1978 
A 
BILL 
to consolidate and amend the law reUtting to the I~ondttiotis fif'......nee 
of empldyecd employed in hospitals and educational institutions with 
CI mew to securing the welfare of such employees, and fur 'the 
investigation and settlement of disputes between such employees an.d 
thei8- employers, and tOT m,atters connected th.elre~h or indidentall 
thereto. 
li. it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-ninth Year of.the Republic 
of Indi" as follows:-
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
S I: .(J) This Act may be called tM Hospitals and Educational Institu-
tions :(Conditions of Service of Employees 8!ld Settlement of Employ-
ment Disputes) Act" 1978. . 
(2) It extends to the whole of India. 
(3)· It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government 
10 may, by notIfication in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
(4) It shall apply to- n I 
«(I) eyery hospital; and 
(b) every educational institution, 
in which twenty' or more' persons are employed or were employed on 
IS any day of the preceding twelve months: 
Provided that the appropriate Government may, after giving.)J;lOt less 
than two months' notice of its intention so to do, by notification in the 
Short title, 
extent, 
com-
mence-
mentand 
applica-
tion. 

Deftni-
tiona. 
2 
Official Gazette, apply the provisions of this Act to any' hospital or edu· 
cational institution employing such number of persons less than twenty 
as may be specified in the notification. 
... 
a In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(1) "appropriate Government" means,-
(a) in relation to any establishment under the control o~ 
the Central Government or a railway administration, or having 
branches or units or offices in more than one state, the Central 
Government; and 
5 
(b) in relation to any other establishment, the State Gov- 10 
ernment; 
(2) "educational institution" includes-
(a) any University; 
(b) any college, whether or not affiliated to a University; 
(c) any school, whether or not recognised or aided by Gov- 15 
ernment; 
(d) any scientific institution; 
(e) any institution in which research in respect of any 
matter is carried on; 
(f) any other institution in which the activity of imparting .10 
knowledge or training is systematically carried on; 
(3) "employee" means any person (including an apprentice) 
employed in any establishment for hire or reward. whether the terms 
of employment be express or implied, and for the purposes of any 
proceeding under this Act in relation to any employment dispute 2S 
relating to the termination ofemployroent (whether by war, of, 
punishment or otherwise) of an employee, includes anv persnn 
whose employment has been so terminated, but does not include any 
lIuch person-
(4) who is subject to the Air Force Act, 1950, the Army 30 :::~ !::: 
Act, 1950, or the Navy Act, 1957; or 62 of 1967. 
(b) who is employed in the police service or is an offteer 
or other employee of a prison, or is an officer or a member of. the 
Railway Protection Force cOIlStituted under section 3 of the Rail-
way Protection Force Act, 1957, or the Border Security Force 3S 23 of 1957. 
constituted under section 4 of the Border Security Force Act, 47 of 1968. 
1988; or the Central Industrial Security Force constituted, tinder 
section 3 of the Central Industrial 'Security Force Act; 1918; 011 
(c) who is employed mainly in a' managerial or administra-
tive capacity; or 40 
(d) -who draws wages exceeding one thousand rupees per 
mensem: 
(4) "employer" means,-
(a) in relation to an establishment under the Control 'of any 
department of the Central Govel'DUlent ora StafleGowtbment, 45 
the authority prescribed. in tIlis beba1t '~"';"-~!M;<.u~W ';. 
is prescribed, the head Gf.I ~ ~t;:. .' .' ., '" . 
(b) in relation to an establishment under the control of. a 
local authority, the chief ex~utlve officer of that authority; 
50 of 1968. 

3 of 1956. 
3 of 1956. 
(5)' "emplpytneDt dispute" means any displlte or difterellce 
between any employee and his employer in respect of any matter, 
referred to in Schedule I and includes any dispute or difference 
between any employee and his employer in respect of any matter 
S proWGed for in any regulation made under section 9 or section 10, 
as the case may be. or the interpretation of any such regulation; 
(6) "establishment" means any hospital or educational institu-
tion'to which this Act applies; 
(7) "hospital" includes a nursing home, a dispensary or other 
fa institution for the treatment or for the reception and treatment of 
persons requiring medical attention or rehabilitation; 
IS 
zo 
30 
(8) "individual employment dispute" means any dispute or, 
diffsenC8, between any employee and his employer in respect of any, 
matter referred to in Schedule II; 
(9) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this 
Act; 
(10) "regulations" means regulations made under this Act; 
(11) "rules" means rules made under this Act; 
(12) "University" means a University as defined in clause (I) 
o.fi section 20f the University 'Grants CommisSion Act, 19M, and 
includes-
(a.) apy institution of ,higher education, other than a Uni-
versity. d~lared by the Central Government, under section 3 
of the University Grants Commission Act, 1956, as an institution 
deemed to be a University for the purposes of that Act; and 
(b) any other institution which under any Central, Act or 
State Act is empowered to hold examinations and grant degrees, 
, diplomas or ceI"tificates; 
'(1"') all other words and expressions used but not defined in tilis 
Act and defined in the Industrial Relations Act, 1978. shall have the 
me.nings rospectiiVely' assigned to them. in that Act: 
CHAPTER II 
A UTHORITIES UNDER THE ACT 
3. (1) Every employer, in relation to any establishment shall. within· 
35 a period ot six months, from the date on which this A{!t becemes appli-
cable to such establishment, establish a Committee to be ca1Ied the 
Grievance Settlement Committee for such establishment. 
(2) The Grievance Sett.l.ementClomm'ttee shall consist of not leSs 
than four and not mp.re than eight members representing both the 
40 emp!OYef. and. the,employees: 
Provided that the number of members representing the employees 
shaU bee,q\1al to the number m membecs representing the employer . 
. (3) Th«t members of the Grievance Settlement Ctfmmittee represent-
ing-the employer shan be nominatE"d by the employer and the members 
45 of the Grievance Settlement Committee representing the employees 
shall, subject to the provisions of section 6, be chosen by the employees 
in sUch manner as may be prescribed. 
Grieva~ 
Settle-
mentCom-
mittee. 

Consulta-
tive 
Council 
and Local 
Consul-
tative 
Council. 
4 
(4) ORe of' the' members' ~f the' Grievece :Settlement Cdrllmittee 
representing the employet. shall be nominated 'by the emJ)loyet" 'llS the 
Cbairmati '!thereof; ", ' , : i ; 
,(5) ,Subject to the regulations, the Grievance Settlement Committee 
shall have power to regulate its own procedure. 5 
4. (1) Every employer in relation to any estabHshment,shal~, within 
a period of six months from the date on which this Act becomes appli-
cable to such establishment"establish .a Council to be called the Consul-
tative Council for such establishment. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-8e(:tion (1), where a [0 
person is the employer in relation to two or more establishments, where-
inactivities of the same nature are carried on. a Consultative Council 
may be established for all such establishments. 
(3) Where- .-, 
(a) an employer establishes a Consultative Council for two or IS 
more establishmellts 'under sub-section (2); or \ ' 
(b) an establishment has branches, units or offices situated in 
different places, 
the employer 'Shall establish a Council to be caned the Local Consulta-
tive Council- 20 
(i) in the case referred to in clause (a). for each of the two or 
more estabUsbments for which the Consultative Council }las been 
established; or ' 
(ii)jn.tlle ,c~se referred to jI). ,,clausEl, (b.)" for Qach of. the 
b~nqli~,~*~~r p~e~sit~~t~d"indifterellt places. ' 25 
(4) The Consultative Council shall consist of not less than six and not 
more than twe~ve member~ representing both t}le employer and the 
employee.s~ . t! i" 
(5) The Local ConSultative Council shall consist of not less tH~n tour 
and not more than eight memb~s representing both the employer and :¥il 
the employees. 
(6) The number of members of the Consultative Council or Local Con-
-, -$Ultstivf!' Council, as the ~se may be. 'representing the employeessball 
be equal to the number of~uch n'lember~ rel:>l;'pssnting the empiOyer. . . ( ,:,"" ., 
(7) The members of the, Consultative CouncU or ,Local CcmsuUative ~~ 
Council, as the case mav be, representin(1 the employer shall be nominated 
bv the emplo:y@r and the mem berso! t.he' 'Consultative CounMI or Ucal 
Consultative ·Council. as the case mlly be, representing- the employees 
shall. subject to the provisions of section 6. be c.hoSen by the el11ployees in 
such ~anner as may,.~prescribed. 40 
(8) One of the members of the Consultative Council or Locai Consul~ 
tative . Council , .~ the case may be. representing the employer shall 
be nmninated by' the employer as the Chairman of the Consultative COlin-: 
cil or ,Local Consultative Council, as ,the case may be. ' I 
(9) Subject to the rules, the Consultative Council 01" the Lo'fl'l eo.. 45 
sultative Council sha.ll have power to r('~ulate its own procedure. 

S 
: ,. 5. S\l1.:ij4ct to the 1"llks, the term of U1lce of the members. of the Grie-
vance Settlement Committee, Consultative Council and Local Co.nSultli-
tive Council. shall be such terpl, beinS not le~s than ~wo years and not 
more ~hari fiv~, years, as the ~~ploy~r may s~cifY~Y Fei'¥llti~ns. 
:: : 1"-
'J 
5';: '6. (1) 'Where thet'e is any, aSSOciation of , employees, being,~ 8aociation 
which ~at~fies the condition laid down in sub-section (3)', . C;4rrying on 
its J activities for the benefit of the employees of ariy esta&l~¢~t and 
the employer in relation to that establishment, after ascertairiing the 
support of the employees of web establishment for the assooiiltion afore-
10 said in the prescribed manner, is satisfied that the. a~ciati()Jl. has the 
I· ~ilppprt of the inajority of such employees, then, such emplpy~ .shall 
tecog'nisesucli association (hereinafter referred to as the I r~ognised 
. associdtiori) 'for the purpos~s of this section. . . " 
· '[.' .(~>"\Vh~~ there is any r,ecognised association in ~lati~ 'to ·thtt~­
lsplo:rees of; a~y, est~blls~ment, the membE:r, or members, r~pr.esentiqg the 
employees, of the G~evance Settlement C,QIXlmit~, the wcal. Coniulta-
tive Council and the Consultative Council, established for:$uch.esiablish-
ment shall be nominated by such association. . 
(3) No office-bearer of any association referred to in sub-seCtion (1) 
20 shall be a person who is not employed in any establishment. . 
"I. A member of the drievance Settlement Committee, Consul~tive 
Council or Local Consultative Council, being employees' representative, 
"bal. bepahl. b, tbe ,e,mpJoyer. in relatl4)D to any,fundlon dIsc_rred 
by Wm. ai. such member, suob .traveWnI' and,other compensa&ol'y aBoW-
25 aaces as Play be prescribed. 
Temi 
ofo8lce 
ofmem-
bera of 
Grievance 
Settle-
ment 
Commit-
tee, etc. 
Right of 
recognis.-
ed associa-
tionof 
emplo-
yeesto 
nominate 
members 
of Grie-
vance 
Slettle-
ment 
Commit-
tee, etc., 
represen-
ting em-
ployees. 
Allow-
ances 
payable 
to. 
member 
of Grie~ 
vance 
Settle-
ment 
Commit-
tee, etc., 
being em-
ployees' 
repMeel1-
tative., . 
BoSter· ' 
of'lirbr~ t, 
trawrll: , . 
Emplo-
yl!r to 
make 
regula-
tiolVJ in 
regard 
to cer-
tain 
matters. 

Model 
regula-
tions. 
s.w.-
Dl8Ilt 
of!ad1vi-
d1l8lem-
pJoyment 
d1aJ.utes. 
~ 
(d) procedure to be tollowed· by tile Grievanee Settlement Com'; 
-Mittee;· ud 
(e) 'the term of office of the members of the Grievance Settlement 
Committee, Consultative Council and Local Consultative CoUncil. 
(2) Every regulation made under sub-section (1) (including any modi- S 
ftcation thereto) shall be-
(4) registered in the prescribed manner with such oftlcer sa the 
.PWOPrlate Government may, by notification in the" Oftlcial Gazette, 
specify in this behalf (hereinafter referred to as the specified. officer); 
and 10 
(b) notified on the notice board of the establiahment. 
(3) The regulations referred to in sub-section (1) shall be made and 
'rubmitted to 'the specified oftlcer for registration under clause (4) ot 
lub-section (Z) by the employer in relation to an establishment within 
a period of six months from the date on which this Act becomes appli- IS 
cable to lIuch establishment and every modification to sUch regulations 
. shall be subMitted by the employer to the specified officer for registra-
"tion under that clause within a period of six months from the date 
onwhieh sueh modification is made. 
(4) The specified officer shall supply to any employee, on a request 20 
made therefor and on payment of such fees as may be prescribed, a certi-
fied copy of the regulations made by the employer for the establishment 
wherein such employee is employed. 
1.. Notwithstanding anything contained in aectien 9, the' appropriate 
GoveraJDentmay, by notiftcation in the omcial Gazette, make model re- 2S 
gulations in respect of any matter referred to in clause (e), clause (4) 
or clause (e) of sub-section (1) of that section and such regulations shall 
be in f()rce in every establishment in the same manner as the regula-
tions made by the employer in relation to such establishment until the 
regulations made by such employer in regard to that matter are regis- 30 
tered with the specified officer under sub-section (2) of section 9. 
11. (1) Any employee, being a party to an individual employment 
dispute, may, if such dispute is not settled in accordance with the pro-
,tedure.}aid,down by the employer in the regulatiOll8 apply to the Griev-
-... e Sett1ealent Committee.· esta4Dlished . for the esta:bliabment wherein 3S 
·euch employee ... is employed, fOl" the aettlement of the dispute. 
(2) ~ Grievance Settlement Committee shall. after .~.a~ em-
ployee -and his employer a reasonable opportunity of being heard and-after 
making such enquiry as it deems fit, pass :such order in respect of such 
individual employment dispute as- it ~ems to be just and proper and avch 40 
order shall, subject to the other ,pl'Ov~OU of this section, be final. 
(3) The Grievance Settlement ~mD1ittee' shall pass final 'order on an 
..application ,made to' it under SUb-section (l) within a, peried' ,Of two 
months from the date on which such application is made. 
(f) 'Where-
(4) 'the Grievanoe Settlement Committee fails to pass final order 
in n!IIp8Ct of ,any Iildividual, employment dIs~ witltinthe period 
Ispecifiedlttleretor-by- ellbo-seotton (3), any party to 'the mdividual em-
ployment disl¥lte; or 
4S 

1 
(b) any party to the individual employment dispute is aggrieved 
by the order of the Grievance Settlement Committee, such aggrieved 
party, 
may, within such time as may be prescribed, refer such dispute for arbi-
S tration to an arbitrator nominated by both the parties to the dispute: 
Provided that where the partie!;' to 8\.lch dispute fail to agree to nominate 
an arbitrator such dispute shall be referred to an arbitrator nOMinated 
by the appropriate Government on an application made to it in that be-
half by one of the parties to such dispute. 
10 (5) The award of an al'bitrat'or in respect of any individual employment 
dispute referred to him shall be final. . . 
lZ. (1) Where any Local Consultative Council has been eltaliliaAed for 
any establishment or branch, unit or office of any establishment, such 
employment disputes as are prescribed shall in the first instance be I'e-
IS 1lerred by the employee. any recognised association or employer to 
such Lo:-al Consultative Council. 
(2) Any employee, recognised association or employer may refer 
any employment dispute, other than an employment dispute referred to 
in sub-section (1), to the Consultative Council established for any 
20 establishment. 
(3) Where the Lo;,;al Consultative Council fails to settle any employ-
ment dispute referred to it within such time as may be prescribed, it 
shall refer such dispute to the Consultative Coun-cil for settlement. 
(4) Where any employment dispute is referred to a Local Consultative 
lS Council or Consultative Council, as the case may be, it shall make all 
efforts to promote a fair and amicabte settlement of such dispute. 
(5) The settlement referred to in sub-section (4) and arrived at between 
the parties to an employment dispute shall be recorded in the form of a 
memorandum and signed by the parties to the dispute or their authorised 
30 representatives and the member's of the Lo:'al Consultative Council or 
Consultative Council, as the case may be. 
(6) Where the Consultative Council fails to settle any employment di~ 
pute referred to it under sub-section (2) or sub-section (3) within a ,period 
of three months from the date on which such reference is made, it shall 
3S refer the dispute for arbitration to an arbitrator or body of arbitrators 
(not being a body of even number of, arbitrators) agreed to 
by the parties to the dispute or, where the part.es to such dispute 
fail to agree on the arbitrator or body of arbitrators, to a Board 
of Arbitrators constituted by the appropriate Government on a request 
40 made in that behalf by the Consultative Council. 
(7) The Board of Arbitrators referred to in sub-section (6) shall consist 
of an independent pel''son, who shall be the Chairman thereof and two 
members, one representing the employers in relation to the class of esta-
blishments of which the establishment to which the employment disp,ute 
45 relates is one and the other representing the employees employed itl such 
esta blishments .. 
(8) The Board of Arbitrators may, if it so thinks fit, appoint one or 
more petsons having special knowledge of the matter under considera-
tion as assessor or assessors to advise it in the pro::eeding before it· 
50 (9) Where the members of a body of arbitrators or a Board of Arbitra-
tors are divided in their oPlinion, the decision of the majority shan. be 
deemed to be the arbitration award for the purposes of this Act. 
Settle-
ment of 
employ-
ment dis-
putes. 

Remune-
ration 
payable 
to 
arbitrator. 
Act 10 of 
1940 not 
to apply 
to 
arbitra-
tion 
under 
thiaAct. 
Power 
to sum-
mon 
wltne88es, 
etc. 
Enforce_ 
ability of 
awards 
and 
settle-
ment. 
8 
(10) The award of an arbitrator or a body ot arbitrators or a Board of 
Arbitrators in respect of any employment dispute referred to him or it 
under sub-section (6) shall be final. 
13. Tae remuneration payable to-
(a.) any arbitrator or member of a body of arbitraton or a Board 5 
of Arbltraton for arbltratiar any ladlvldual employment dlspate or 
employment dispute referred to them for arbitration; or 
(b) any assea80r appointed under sub-section (8) of section 12, 
shall be such as may be preKribeci and sl1all be,.ad by such of the parties 
to the individual employment dispute or employment dispute, as the cue 10 
lDay be, aad. ia such proportion .. the arbitrator or body of arbitraton or 
• Board of Arbitrators, as the clISe may be, shall determine. 
14. Nothing in the Arbitration Act, 1940, shall apply to any arbitration 
Wlder this Act. 
15. Every arbitrator,. body of arbitrators or a Board of Arbi.trators shall 1<; 
have the same powers as are vested in a Civil Court under the Code of 
Civil Procedure, 1908, when trying a suit, in resped of the followini 
ma,tters, namely:-
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any ~rson and 
examining him on oath; 20 
(b) compelling the production of documents and material objects; 
(c) issuing commissions for the examination of witnessesj and 
(d) any other matter which may be prescribed. 
16. (1) Every order of the Grievance Settlement Committee or award 
of an arbitrator in an individual employment dispute or settlement arriv- 2S 
ed at between the parties to an employment dispute under section 12 or 
award of an arbitrator or a body of arbitrators or a Board or Arbitrators 
in an employmeRt dispute shall come into operation on and from such 
date as may be specified therein, but where no such date is specified, it 
shall come into operati.on on the date of the order or award or settlement, 30 
as the case may be, and shall, subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), 
become enforceable on the date on which such order, award or settlement 
comes into operation. 
(2) Every award of an arbitrator or a body of arbitrators or a Board 
of Arbitrators in an employment dispute shall become enforcea.ble on the 35 
expiry of thirty days from the date of its pronouncement: 
Provided that in the case of an employment dispute to which the ap-
propriate Government is a party, where tha.t Government is of the opinion 
that it will be inexP\E!dient on public grounds affecting national economy 
or social justice to give effect to the whole or any part of such award, the 40 
appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, de-
clare that such award shall not become enforceable on the expiry of the 
said per'iod of thirty days . 
. (3) Where any declaration has been made, under the proviso to sub-
section (2), in relation to an award of an arbitrator or a body of arbitra- 4S 
I.t 1m. 

,. 9 
tors or a Board of Arbitrators in an employment dispute, the appropriate 
GQvernment may, within ninety days from the date of such award, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, make an order rejecting or modifying 
such award and shall on the first available opportunity, lay the award 
S together with a copy of such order (where any such order has been made) 
before the Legislature of a State, if the order has been made by the State 
Government, or before Parliament, if the order has been made by the 
Central Government. 
(4) Where any award referred to in sub-section (3) is rejected by the 
10 appr~priate Government, it shall not be enforceable· 
(5) Where any award referred to in sub-section (3) is modified by an 
order made under that sub-section, such award. as so modified :iJhall be-
come enforceable on the expiry of fifteen days from the date on which the 
order making the modification is published in the Oftlcial Gazette. 
15 (6) Where, in relation to any award referred to in sub-section (3), 
a declaration under the proviso to sub-section (2) has been made but nn 
order is made under sub-section (3), the award shall become enforceable 
on the eXJ>Jiry of the period of ninety days referred to in sub-section (3). 
17. (1) The order of a Grievance Settlement Committee, or of an 
ao arbitrator, in an indi,vidual employment dispute, shall be binding on'-:" 
(a) the parties to the individual employment dispute; and 
(b) where the party referred to in clause (4) is an employer, hiJ 
heirs, successors or assigns in respect of the establishment to which 
the dispute relates. 
2S (2) The settlement referred to in sub-section (4) of section 12, or award 
of an arbitrator or a body of arbitrators or a Board of Arbitrators, in an 
employment dispute shall be binding on-
(a) the parties to the employment dispute; 
(b) where the party referred to in clause (a) is an employer, his 
30 heirs, successors or assigns in respect of the esta blishment to which 
the dispute relates; and 
(c) on all persons who were employees of such establishment 
on the date on which the dispute was referred to the Local Consulta-
tive Councilor, where the dispute was referred to the Consultative 
3S Council in the first instance, to the Consultative Council and all per-
sons who subsequently became employees of such establishment. 
18. (1) No emp~oyee employed in any establishment shall go on strike 
in breach of contract. 
(2) No employer in relation to any establishment shall lock-'Out his 
40 employees. 
4S 
CHAPTER IV 
PENALTIES AND PROCBDtnnC 
. 19. (1) Any employer who-
. . f or faUs to establish a Grievance Settlement Commit-
(a)C re ':tive Council or a Local Consultative Council (in any 
tee or ?IlS uiI'ed to establish such Local Consultative Council) as 
case he IS req h be' required by IeCtion 3 or section 4, as t e case may , or 
PerlOM 
on whom 
aw.r~ 
are 
bindin,. 
Prohibi-
tionof 
strike 
and 
lock-out. 
Penalties . 

Cotni-
unc:e 
of 011-
enc:es. 
Offence! 
by com-
panies. 
10 
(b) refuses or fails to pay to a member of the Grievance Settle-
Jtleht Committee, Consultative Council or Local Consultative Council, 
being employees representative, the travelling and other compensatory 
allowances payable to him under section 7; or 
(c) ~f\lSeS or fails to submit for registl"8tion the regulatioN ret .. - s 
red to in Sllb-eection (1) of section 9 or any modification thereto at 
required by that section; or 
(d) does any act in contravention of-
(i) the regulations referred to in sub-sectron (1) of·section 9; 
or 
(ii) the regulations referred to in section 10 during the period. 
whe!l such regulations are in force in the establishment in rell-
tion to which he is the employer; or 
10 
(e) refuses or fails to c(l]nply with any order of a Grievance 
Settlement Committee which has become final or any settlement re- IS 
fer red to i.n sub-section (4) of section 12 or any award of an arbitrator 
or a body of arbitrators of a Board of Arbitrators; or 
(f> locks-out any of his employees in contravention of sub-
sectiolil (2) of section 18, 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 20 
three months, Of with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or 
'with both. 
(2) Any employee who goes on strike in contravention of sub-section 
(1) of section 18, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to three mdnths, or with fine which may extend to one .2, 
thousand rupees, or with both. 
20. (1) No court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under 
this Act or the abetment of any such offence, save on complaint made by 
or under the authority of the appropriate Government. 
(2) No court inferior to that of " Metropolitan Magistrate or Judicial 30 
Magistrate c:rf the first class shall try any 'offence under this Act. 
21. (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company. every person who at the time the offence was committed was in 
charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct of the 
business Bf the eompany, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be 35 
guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and puni-
shed areordblgfy: 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any 
8\leh penon liable to any punishment, jf he prO\"eS that the offence Was 
committed without his knowledge 'Or that he had exercised all due 40 
diligence to prevent the commilsionof such offence. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything containt!d in sub-section (1), where an 
offence under this Act has been committed by a company and it is proved 
that the offence has been committed with the consent or connivance of, 
or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, 45 
secretary, or other offtcer of the company, such director, manager, secre-
tary, or other '6fftcer shall also be dl'(Amf'rl to be' guilty of that offence and 
,hall be liable to b(' proceeded aga~nst and punished accordingy, 

II 
ExpI4714tion.-For the purpose~ of this section,-
(a) "company" means any body corporate and includes a ftrm or 
other association of indiv;duals; and 
(b) "director", in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm. 
CHAPTER V 
MISCELLANEOUS 
22. Where any money is due to any employee under any order of any 
Grievance Settlement Committee, or settlement referred to in sub-section 
(4) of section 12 or award of any arbitrator, body of arbitrators or Board 
10 of Arbitrators, the employee himself or any other person authorised by 
him in writing in this behalf or, in the case of the death of the employee, 
his assignee or heirs may, without prejudice to any other mode of re-
covery, make an application to the appropriate Government for the 
recovery of the money due to him, and if the appropriate Govemment 
15 is satisfied that the money is so due, it shall issue a certiftcate for that. 
amount to the Collector who shall proceed to recover the same in the 
same manner as an arrear of land revenue: 
Provided that every such application shall be made within one year 
from the date on which the money became due to the employee frorrt the 
20 employer: 
Provided further that any such application may be entertained after 
the expiry of the said period of one year, if the appropriate Government 
is satisfied that the applicant had sufficient cause for not making the 
application within the said period. 
2.5 23. Where in any establishment, any joint consultative rnachM~ 
consisting of representatives of en'll'loyees and employers or any other 
body consisting of one or more persons (by whatever name called) has 
been set up for the purpose of settling individual employment disputes or 
employment disputes therein and the appropriate Government is satis-
30 fled that the functionin~ of such j~int consultative machinery or other 
body has been benefiCial to the employees employed in such establish-
ment the appropriate Government may, by notiflr.ation in the Offteial 
Gazette, direct that the provisions of this Act shall not apply in relation 
to such establishment, or ~hall npply in relation to such establishment 
3S with such modifications as may be specified in RHch notification. 
24. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedin~ shall lie against any 
person for anything which is in go,d faith done or intended to be dOl'le 
in pursuance of this Act or any rule made thereunder. 
Z!t The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding any-
40 thing inconsistent therewith containei in any contract ot service er any 
ofber law. 
28. The appropriate Go\'emmet'.t ma\'o by notification in the Of!!cial 
Gazette, direct that any power exercisable by it under this Act or rules 
or regulations made thereunder shall,· in relation to such matte~6 and 
Recove.,. 
at money 
due from 
employer. 
Modi8ca-
tion of 
proYisicms 
ef Act 
in their 
applkatiQD 
to certain 
est.bUlh-
m-.tts. 
Protec. 
tion of 
aetion 
taklen 
under 
the Act. 
Effect 
of con-
tract or 
lawl 
in con· 
.istent 
with 
this 
Act. 
Delegation 
ot powers. 
• 

-. 
Act not to· 
apply to 
certain 
establish-
ments. 
Power to 
make 
rui ... 
12 
subject to such conditions, if any, as may be specified in the direction, 
be exercisable also,-
(4) where the appropriate Government is the Central Govern-
ment, by such officer or authority subordinate to the Central Govern-
ment or by the State Government or by such ofticer or authority , 
subordinate to the State Government, as may be specified in the noti-
fication; and 
(b) where the appropriate Government is a State Government, by 
such officer 'Or authority subordinate to the State Government as may 
be s~ified in the notification. 10 
Z7. Nothing in this Act shall apply to any establishment owned or 
managed by any organisation exclUSively engaged in any charitable or "l 
philanthropic service. 
ZI. (1) The appropriate Government may by notification in the Official 
Gazette and subject to the condition of previous publication, make rules IS 
for the purpose of giving effect to the provisions of this Act. 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality ot the fore-
going power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, 
namely:-
(4) the authority which is the employer in relation to an estab- 20 
lishment under the control of any department of the Central or 
State Government, under sub-clause (4) of clause (4) of section 2; 
(b) the manner of choosing the members, of the Grievance 
Settlement Committee, Consultative Councilor Local Consultative 
Council, representing employees. under sub-section (3) of section 3 25 
or sub-section (7) of section 4. as the case may be; 
(c) the procedure of the Consultative Council and Local Con-
sultative Council. under sub-sectton (9) of section 4; 
(d) the term of office of the members CJf the Grievance Settle-
ment Committee, Consultative Councilor Local Consultative Counml, 30 
under section 5; 
(e) the manner of ascertaining the support for any organisation 
of employees under sub-secti,or (1) of section 6; 
(f) travelling and other rompensatory allowances payable to 
the members of the Grievance Settlement Committee, Consultative 3S 
Councilor Local Consultative Council being employees' represen-:o 
tatives, in relation to any duty performed by them as such members, 
under section 7; 
(g) the manner of registering regulations, under sub-section (2) 
of section 9, and the fees pavable for ~taining copies of regulations, 40 
under SUb-section (4) of that section; 
(h) the time within which a reference for arbitration may be 
made by the parties to an individual employment dispute, under 
sub-section (4) of section 11; 
(i) the employment disputes which shall be referred to the 4S 
Local Consultative Council in the first instance, under sub-section (1) 
of section J 2 ; 
(j) the period for l'ettliTlg any employment dispute hv a Local 
ConMlltative Council, under sub-section (3) of section 12; 

(k) the remuneration payable to an arbitrator or a member of a 
body of arbitrators or a Board of Arbitrators or assessor under section 
13; 
(1) the powers of the arbitrator, body of arbitrators or a Board 
5 of Arbitrators under clause (a) of section 15; 
(m) any other matter which has to be, or may be, provided for 
by rules under this Act. 
(3) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall 
be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before the State Legislature. 
10 (4) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall 
.\ be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Pulia-
ment, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may 
be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and 
U, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session er 
J 5 the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modi-
fication in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not b. 
made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or 
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modifica-
tion or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of any thine 
20 previously done under that rule. 
2$ 
30 
35 
4S 
SCHEDULE I 
[See section 2(5)] 
MA'I'l'ERS, ANY DISPUTE OR DIFFERENCE IN BESPECT OF WHICH BJ:TWEBN 
ANY EMPLOYEE AND HIS EMPLOYER IS AN EMPLOYMENT DISPUTB 
(1) Wages, including the period and mode of payment. 
(2) Compensatory and other allowances. 
(3) Hours of work and rest intervals. 
(4) Leave with wages and holidays. 
(5) Rationalisation. 
(6) Medical benefits. 
(7) Superannuation benefits. 
(8) Canteens, rest rooms, first·aid facilities and other facilities 
to be provided to employees. 
(9) Rules of discipline. 
SCHEDULE II 
[See section 2 (8)] 
MATl'ERS, ANY DISPUTE OR DIFFERENCE IN RESPECT OF WlUCK BIlTWUIN 
ANY EMPLOYEE AND HIS EMPLOYER IS AN INDMDUAL 
BMPLOYMENT DISPUTE 
(1) Termination of employment of any employee whether by 
way of discharge, dismissal or retrenchment or otherwise. 
(2) Suspension of an employee. 
(3) Money due from the employer to an employee. or the amount 
at which a benefit, which is capable of being computed in terms .f 
money, is to be computed. 
(~) Any matter not referred to in Schedule I or this Schedule, 
relating to the terms of employment or the conditions ot law.U' ot 
any employee. .... 

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
·It has been urged, both insidl and outside Parliament. that emplo-
yees of educational, scientific, research and training institutions should 
be given protection on the lines of the protection available to workmen 
under the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947. 
2. In the Committee on comprehensive Industrial Relations Law and 
Comp:lsition of Indian Labour Conference, there was unanimity about 
the need for giving statutory protection to all employees from arbitrary 
action ·of employers. However, it was also feIt that the machinery and 
the provisions need not be the same for employees in all kinds of under-
takings or institutions. Different variants of the machinery as well as 
the procedure could either be incorporated in the comprehensive law 
itself or a separate law may be enacted to cover employees in such 
undertakings or institutions as did not come within the purview of 
'industry'. 
3. In its judgment of February, 1978 in Bangalore Water Supply and 
Sewerage Board VS. A Rajappa and others, the Supreme Court held that 
educational institutions and research institutes which satisfied the tests 
lsid down by it would come within the definition of the term 'industry' 
in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947. The Supreme Court also over-
ruled its earlier judgment in the Management of Safda'rjang Hospital 
VB. Kuldip Singh Sethi and held that all hospitals would come within 
the purview of that Act. Prior to this judgment the provisions of the 
. Industrial Disputes Act were held to apply to all hospitals. By that 
judgment, hospitals run by Government and on charitable lines were 
excluded from the purview of. that Act. Hospitals and nursing homel 
run as a business in a commercial way, however, continued to be 
covered by that Act. 
4. Since hospitals, educatioJ:}al, scientific, research and training ins-
titutions have special. and distinct characteristi~s of their own and an 
atmosphere that eschews strife and conflicts has to be maintained there-
in these institutions have been excluded from the purview of the 
Industrial Relations Bill. But the employees engaged in these establish-
ments also need protection and a machinery for the resolution of their 
individuals and collective employment disputes has to be provided for. 
The Bill seeks to achieve this objective. 
5. The Bill applies to hospitals, educational, scienti6c, research and 
training institutions, in. which 20 or more persons are employed or were 
employed on any day of the preceding twelve month&. Employees draw-
ing wages more than Rs. 1600 per mensem would not be covered by the 
BtU. Certain other categories of employees are also excluded. 
14 

IS . '. 
6. Th. Bill enjoins on an employer to constitute, within a specified 
period, a Grievance Settlement CQmmittee for the' resolution of iDdi-
vidual emPloyment disputes and a CoD8Ultative Council and a Loc:al. 
Cp~ltative ~uncil for the resolution ofemploymemdiapules oi- • 
cOll~~ti,:,e nature. It also provide,' for the arbitration of ,disputes not 
resolved by the Grievance -Settlement Committee or the Local Con-' 
Bultative Council or Consultative Council. 
7. There is provision for the recognition of an association of employees 
which h8'S the inlppdr't' of the i majOrity df"employeea'ln an establishment. 
'The representatives"ot employees on the'Crl:~~hceJ Settlement Com-
mittee, Local ConSultative Couric'il and'Co~ta'tive CounCil would be 
nominees of a recognised association. No office-bearer of a recognised 
ask'6ciationof employees could be a person who is not employed in an 
establishment. The ~i1f provides for an effective machinery for the 
r~scSlu·tiorio'f inciiVidu'ar arid' collectiveemp1oyment disputes. LOck-outs 
or strikes wouIe; thererore; be redundant' arid they are propos~d to be 
prohibited. ' 
8. Where any matter is referred for arbitration under the provisions 
'of the Bili'the arbitration award will hrwe to be given within a specified 
period. The employers as well as the employees would have the right to 
choose arbitrators either ~rom the panels maintained by the appropriate 
Government or from outside. Matters which would constitute in-
dividual employment dispirtes include termination of employment of any 
employee whether by way of discharge, dismissal or retrenchment or 
otherwise, suspension and computation of moneys due from the em-
ployer to an employee. Matters which would be employment disputes 
'of a collective nature include wages and allowances, hours of work, 
leave wi~ wages and holidays, rationalisation, medical benefits, 
superannuation benefits and rules of discipline. 
9. The Central Government would be the appropriate Government in 
respect of establishments which are under its control or those which 
have branches or units or offices in two or more States; in respect o£ 
others the State Government would be the appropriate Government. 
10. Appropriate penal provisions are also provided in the Bill 
for ensuring strict compliance of the law. 
NEW DELHI; RA VINDRA VARMA. 
The 25th August, 1978, 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 7 ,of the Bill provides for the payment of travelling andothert 
compensatGry allowances' to members of the Grievance Settlement Coin-
mittee, Consultative Council and Local Consultative Council. Such, 
allowances aTe to be paid ..by the employer at such rates as may be pres. 
cribed by rules. Where the Central Government is the employer in 
relation to the establishments covered by the Bili, such allowances will' 
have to be met from the Consolidated Fund of India and they will be 
of a recurring nature. It is not possible to estimate the expenditure-
that may have to be incurred out of the Consolidated Fund of India.: 
towards the payment of such allowances. 
2. Clause 13 0' the Bill provides for the remuneration payable by the 
parties to an arbitrator. Where' the Central Government is the em· 
ployer in relation to any establishment to which the provisions of the 
Bill are applicable and any individual employment dispute or employ· 
ment dispute- concerning that establishment is referred for arbitration, 
it may have to pay the arbitrator's fee. As the arbitrator's fee will 
have to be paid only if any such dispute is referred for arbitration and 
the number of such disputes cannot be estimated at present, it is, 
not possible to give an estimate of the recurring expenditure that rna,!" 
have to be incurred. 
3. There will be no non·recurring expenditure. 
I6 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 23 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to direct, 
by notification in the Oftieial Gazette, that the provisions of the Bill 
t:hall not apply in relation to any establishment, or shall apply in relation 
to such establishment with such modifications as may be specified in 
such notification, where any joint consultative machinery consisting of 
representatives of employees and employer or any other body has been 
set up in such establishment for the purpose of settling individual em-
ployment disputes or employment disputes and tbe appropriate Gov-
ernment is satisfied that the functioning of such joint consultative 
machinery or other body has been beneficial to the employees employed 
in such establishment. 
2. Sub-clause (1) of clause 27 of the Bill empowers the appropriate 
Government to make rules for the purpose of giving effect to the pro-
visions of the Bill. The rules are to be made by notification in the 
Official Gazette and are subject to the conditions of previous publica-
tion. Sub-clause (2) of that clause enumerates the matters in regard 
to which such rules may be made. The matters in regard to which such 
rules may be made relate, inter-alia, to-
(i) the manner of choosing the members of the Grievance 
Settlement Committee, Consultative Council or Local Consultative 
Coun~l, representing employees; 
(ii) the procedure ot. the Consultative Council and Local Con-
sultative Council; 
(iii) the terms of office of the members of the Grievence Settle-
ment Committee, Consultative Council or Local Consultative 
Council; 
(iv) the manner of ascertaining the support for any organisation 
of employees; and 
(v) the remuneration payable to an arbitrator or a member of 
a body of arbitrators or Board of Arbitrators. 
3. Every rule made by the State Government under clause 27 is re-
quired to be laid before the State Legislature and every rule made by 
the Central Government under that clause is required to be laid before 
tke Parliament. 
4. The delegation of. legislative power under the aforementioned pro-
visions relates to matters of procedure or administrative detail or to 
matters in respect of which it is not practicable to make detailed pro-
visions. lienee the delegation of legislative power is of a normal 
character. 
17 

LOK SABRA 
A 
BILL 
to consolidate and amend the law relating to the conditions of service 
of employees employed in hospitals and educational institutions 
with a view to securing the welfare of such employees, and for the 
investigation and settlement of disputes between such employees 
and their employers, and for matters connected therewith or inci-
dental thereto. 