Ord.lot 
1_. 
s 
BilI No. 141 of 1996 
THE CONSERVATION OF FOREIGN EXCHANGE AND PREVENTION 
OF SMUGGLING ACTIVITIES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1990 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Conservation of Foreign Exchange and 
Prevention of Smuggling Activities Act, 1974. 
. -' 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-first Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Conservation of Foreign Exchange 
and Prevention of Smuggling Activities (Amendment) Act, 1990. 
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 30th day of 
July, 1990. I 
2. In the Conservation of Foreign Exchange and Prevention of Smug-
e1ing Activities Act, 1974 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), 
in section 9, in sub-section (1), for the figure~ letters and words "31st day 
of July, 1990", the figures, letters and words "31st day of July, 1993" shall 
be substituted. I ~ 
3. (1) The Conservation of F'oreign Exchange and Prevention of 
Smuggling Activities (Amendment) Ordinance, 1990, is hereby repealed. 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal. anything done or any action taken 
under the principal Act, as amended by the said Ordinance, shall be 
deemed to have been done or taken under the principal Act as amende4 
by this Act. ~ 1--
SboI1 
tit1eaD4 
com-
mence· 
meDt. ,-
Amend· 
mental 
MCtiOllt 
ofAet , 
a20f 
1874. 
Repeal 
and AV· 
m.. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Conservation of Foreign Exchange and Prevention of Smuggling 
Activities Act, 1974 provides for preventive detention of persons in certain 
cases for the purposes of conservation and augmentation of foreign ex-
~hange aDd for prevention of smuggling activities. 
2. Sub-section (1) of section 9 of the Act provides that any person in 
respect of whom an order of detention is made any time before the 31st 
day of July, 1990, may be detained without obtaining the opinion of an 
Advisory Board for a longer period than three months Dut not exceeding 
six months from the date of his detention. However, a comparative ana .. 
lysis of the figures in regard to seizures of contraDana goods effected in 
the highly vulnerable areas during the last two years -shows that the 
menace of smuggling has not abated in any way· in the said areas. Since 
the maximum dama'ge to the society is caused by the smugglers operating 
in the highly vulnerable areas, tlie longer period of detention from one to 
two years under section 10 of the Act, of the smugglers, their associates 
and the links. is a necessary deterrent. It was, therefore, considered 
nedllary to continue the provisions of section 9 in respect of detention 
orders which may be passed even after 31-7~1990. 
3. Accordingly, the Conservation of Foreign Excilenge and Pm.· 
tion of Smuggling Activities (Amendment) Ordinallce, 199o (5 Gf· l~) 
was promulgated by the President on the 30th July, 1990 to continue the 
provisions of section 9 of the Act for a period of three yeats beyond 31st 
July, ·1990. 
4. This Bill seeks to replace the aforesaid Ordinance. 
N'gW DI:un; MADHU DANI)AVATB. 
The 9th August, 1990. 
2 

ExTItAcT FROM mB CONSERVATION OF FORBIGN ExCHANGE AND PRBVl:NTION 
OF SMU'GOL1NG Acrnl'tIai Act, 1974 
. (52 QJ' 1974) 
• • • • • 
9. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act.. any person 
(including a foreigner) in respect of whom an order of detention is made 
under this Act at any time before the 31st day of July, 1990, may be de--
tained without obtaining, in accordance with the provisions of sub-clau.se 
(a), of clause (4) of article 22 of the Constitution, the opinion of an Advi-
eory Board for a period longer than three months but not exceeding six 
months from the date of his detention, where the order of detention has 
been made agaiIult such person with a view to preventing him. from smug-
gling goods or abetting the smu'ggling of goods or engaging in transport-
ing or concealing or keeping smuggled goods and the Central Govern.-
ment or any officer ot the Central Government, not below the rank of an 
Additional Secretary to that Government, specially empowered for the 
purposes of this section by that Government, is satisfied that such person-
(a) smuggles or is likely to smuggle goods into, out ot or through 
any area highly vulnerable to smuggling; or 
(b) abets or is likely to abet the smuggling of goods into, out of 
or through any area highly vulnerable to smuggling; or 
(c) engages or is likely to engage in transporting or concealing or 
keeping smuggled goods in any area highly vulnerable to smuggling. 
and makes a declaration to that effect within five weeks of the detention 
of such person. 
E~lanation. I.-In this sub-section, "area high vulnerable to Bmugp. 
1ng" mems-: ~. : _J 
(i) the Indian customs waters contiguous to the States of Goa, 
Gujarat, Karnataka, Kerala, Maharashtra and Tamil Nadu and the 
Union territories of Daman and Diu and Pondicherry; 
(ii) the inland area fifty kilometres in width from the coast of 
India falling within the territories of the States of Goa, Gujarat, 
Karnataka, Kerala, Maharashtra and Tamil Nadu and the Union ter-
ritories of Daman and Diu and Pondicherryi 
(iii) the inland area fifty kilometres in width from the India· 
. pakistan border in the States of Gujarat. Jammu and Kashmir, 
Punjab and Rajasthan; ! 
(i">, the customa airport of Delhi; anel 
• l_ .J,,/o 
Caseain 
which 
and 
~. 
Btaneel 
under 
which 
perlIOnI 
maybe 
detained 
tor 
periocu 
longer 
than 
three 
monthl 
without 
dbtaln· 
in, 
the 
opinion 
of 
Adviaoly 
Board. 

<v) such further or other Indian customs waters, or inland area 
not exceeding one hundred kilometres in width from any other coast 
or border of India, or such other customs station, as the Central Gov-
ernment may, having regard to the vulnerability of such waters, area 
or customs station, as the caSe may be, to smuggling, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf. 
ExplanatiOn 2.-For the purposes of Expla'7l4tion 1. "customs airport" 
and "customs station" shall have the same meaning as in clauses (10) and 
(13) of section 2 of the Customs Act, 1962. respectively. 52 of 1_ 
• • .. .. .. 
-' 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Conservation of Foreign Exchange and 
Prevention of Smuggling Activities Act. 1974. 
(Prof. Madhu Dandavate, 
Minister of Finance.) 