1
THE CHILDREN WITH SPECIFIC LEARNING DISABILITIES
(IDENTIFICATION AND SUPPORT IN EDUCATION)
BILL, 2017
By
SHRI OM PRAKASH YADAV,  M.P.
A
BILL
to identify and support the children with learning disabilities in education and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament  in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of  India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Children with specific Learning Disabilites
(Identification and Support in Education) Act, 2017.
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu & Kashmir.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notifications
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In  this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government” means,—
(i) in relation to the Central Government or any establishment wholly or
substantially financed by that Government or a Cantonment Board constituted
under the Cantonments Act, 2006, the Central Government.
Bill No. 142 of 2017
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Definitions.
41 of 2006.
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(ii) in relation to a State Government or any establishment, wholly or
substantially financed by that Government or any local authority other than a
Cantonment Board, the State Government.
(b) “educational instutution” includes a private educational institution.
(c) “dyscalculia” means a learning disability characterized by difficulty in
mathematics.
(d) “dysgraphia” means a learning disability characterized by difficulty with the
act of writing both in the technical as well as the expressive sense including difficulty
with spelling.
(e) “dyslexia” means a learning disability that affects a person's ability to acquire,
process and use either spoken, written or nonverbal information including organization
and planning, functional literacy skills, memory, reasoning, problem solving and perceptual
skills or in other words, difficulty with language in its various uses including reading.
(f) “dyspraxia” means a learning disability that affects the person's ability to plan
motor tasks and to make an appropriate body response.
(g) “in service” means in service of any institution run or managed by the Central
or State Government or run or managed with the aid of Central or State Government.
(h) “prescribed” means as prescribed by the rules made under this Act.
(i) “specific learning disability” means a disorder in one or more of the basic
psychological process involved in understanding or in using language, spoken or
written, which disorder may manifest itself in the imperfect ability to listen, think,
speak, read, write, spell or do mathematical calculations and includes such conditions
as perceptual disabilities, brain injury, minimal brain dysfunction, dyslexia, dyspraxia,
dyscalculia, dysgraphia and development aphasia, but does not include a learning
problem that is primarliy the result of visllal, hearing or motor disabilities, of mental
retradation, of emotional disturbance, or of environmental, cultural or economic
disadvantages.
3. (1) The appropriate Government  including local self Governments shall conduct
an annual survey to identify the number of persons with specific learning disabilities, the
nature of facilities and assistance provided to them and the extent to which they are benefitted.
(2) The manner of conduct of survey, qualification of personnel involved in survey,
maintenance of records and publication of reports shall be such as may be prescribed.
4. The appropriate Governments including local self Governments shall,—
(i)  conduct mass awareness campaigns to create awareness in the community
regarding Special Learning disability, its causes and prevention, treatment and
remedial  measures;
(ii)  sponsor or cause to sponsor awareness campaigns and disseminate or
cause to be disseminated information on learning disabilities;
(iii) educate the public through the pre-schools, schools, primary health centres,
village level workers and anganwadi workers about specific learning disabilties,
their causes and remedial measures;
(iv) create awareness amongst the masses through television, radio and other
mass media; and
(v) promote research in specific learning disabilities.
5. The appropriate Governments shall,—
(i) set up adequate number of teachers training institutions and assist the
national institutes and other voluntary organizations to develop teachers training
programmes specializing in specific learning disabilities;
Annual Survey
on persons with
specific learn-
ing disabilities.
Mass awareness
campaign.
Setting up of
teacher training
Institutions.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(ii) improve the teacher education programmes to incorporate specific learning
disabilities, its theory and practices within the curriculum of teacher education.
(iii) ensure that newly inducted teachers attend at-least one-month mandatory
training in inclusive education, with special focus on specific learning disabilities.
(iv) provide adequate training to the regular teachers in service, in inclusive
education with special focus on specific learning disabilities; and
(v) train the teachers and staff in anganwadis to facilitate early detection of
specific learning disabilities.
6. (1) Every educatinal institution shall be equipped with a resource room and a special
educator trained in specific learning disabilities and where special educator trained in such
disabilities is not available, a person trained in special education shall be appointed.
(2) The faciliteis of the resource room and qualification of the special educator shall be
such as may be prescribed.
(3) Every educational institution shall endeavor to detect specific learning disabilities
in children at the earliest.
(4) Where a child is suspected with specific learning disability, a detailed evaluation of
the child including his socio-economic background and family background shall be conducted
and the child may be referred to a clinical psychologist or a Learning Disability Detection and
Remediation Centre set up under section 7 to detect if, he is suffering from a specific learning
disability.
(5) Where a child is detected with a specifi learning disability, an Individualised
Education Plan shall be formulated for the child depending on the specific needs of the child
by a team consisting of the Principal of the school, the class teacher of the child another
teacher, special educator, the parents of the child and the child himself.
(6) The child may be referred to a Learning Disability Detection and Remediation
Centre set up under section 7 for specialized support, if found necessary.
(7) The individualized Education Plan shall be periodicaly revised, and the progress of
the child shall be closely monitored in terms of attainment levels and completion of education.
7. (1) The State Government shall set up adequate number of Learning Disability
Detection and Remediation Centres in every district to train and equip children with specific
learning disabilities who require specialized training.
(2) There shall be at least one Learning Disability Detection and Remediation Centre
in evey district.
(3) The District Learning Disability Detection and Remediation Centres shall provide
specialized training to children with specific learning disabilities, assist the schools in the
concerned district to set up resource rooms, provide training and support to the regular
teachers in dealing with children with specific learning disability.
(4) The District Learning Disability Detection and Remediation Centres may also
offer practical courses in dealing with children with specific learning disabilities for
parents and teachers subject to regulations as may be prescribed by appropriate government.
(5) The appropriate Governments may distribute to every educationnal institution the
learning materials including special text books and teaching aids for the children with
specific learning disability through the District Learning Disability Detection and
Remediation Centres.
(6) The manner in which Learning Disability Detection and Remediation Centres
shall be set up or recognized, constitution, structure and function shall be such as may be
prescribed.
Special
facilities in
educational
institutions.
Setting up of
Learning
Disability
Detection and
Remediation
Centre.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
8. (1) The Central Government shall establish a National Centre for specific Learning
Disabiliteis to provide leadership, public awareness and grants to support research and
innovative practices in specific learning disabilities.
(2) The appropriate Government may establish Regional Centres for specific Learning
Disabilities at the State and District Level.
(3) The manner in which the National and Regional Centres for specific learning
disability shall be set-up, constitution, structure and function shall be such as may be
prescribed.
9. (1) The Central Government shall frame guidelines for certification of children with
specific learning disabilities.
(2) The Central Government shall lay down qualifications for certifying authorities of
children with specific learning disability.
(3) The appropriate Government shall designate persons, having requisite qualifications
and experience, as certifying authorities, who shall be competent to issue the certificate of
specific learning disability.
10. (1) The appropriate Governments shall make suitable modifications in the curriculum
and examination system to meet the needs of the children with specific learning disabilities.
(2) Notwithstanding and without prejudice to any other concessions provided to the
children with specific learning disabilities in examinations, the appropriate Governments
shall ensure that the children with specific learning disabilities are provided the following
concessions—
(a) twenty five percent  extra time for completion of the examination paper;
(b) facility of scribe or amanuensis when ever  necessary;
(c) oral test to be conducted along with written tests up to class IX and  promotion
to the next class on the average of both;
(d) standards of  arithmetic to be relaxed as per the level of the child;
(e) use of calculators to be allowed;
(f) errors of interchanging of computation signs and number reversal to be
ignored;
(g) exemption from second and third language;
(h) alternate subjects like home science and electronics to be made available;
(i) spelling or grammar errors and incorrect sentence construction shall be
ignored;
(j) direction errors in geography and other subjects shall be ignored;
(k) exemption from diagrams, charts and graphs; and
(l) such other concessions as may be prescribed.
11. The appropriate Governments and local authorities shall by notification in the
official gazette formulate schemes for ensuring employment of persons with specific
learning disabilities and such schemes shall include training and welfare of persons with
specific learning disability, relaxation of upper age limit, and schemes promoting self
employment.
12. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by parliament, by
law, in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the state Governments for carrying out the
purposes of this Act.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Estabilishment
of Natural and
Regional
Centres for
specific
learning
disabilities.
Guidelines for
Certification
of Children
with learing
disabilities.
Curriculum
and
examination
system for
children with
specific
learning
disabilities.
Employment
of persons
with specific
learinign
disabilities.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.

5
13. (1) Whoever fraudulently avails or attempts to avail any benefit meant for persons
with Specific learning disabilities, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which
may extend us to  two years or with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees or with both.
(2) Whoever assists or facilitates the commission of the offence under sub-section (1)
shall be punishable with imprisonment of two years or with a fine which may extend to one
lakh rupees or with both.
(3) The appropriate Government shall report the names of the registered medical
practitioners who have  been convicted of the offence under sub-section (2) to the respective
State Medical Council for taking necessary action including removal of his name from the
register of the Council for a period of two years for the first offence and permanently for the
subsequent offence.
(4) Any Principal or teacher of a school convicted under sub-section (2) shall also be
liable to face the appropriate disciplinary action including suspension or removal from service.
(5) No person shall be punished under sub-section (1) or (2) for an act done by them in
good faith or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act and any rules or orders made
thereunder.
14. Without prejudice to the provisions of section 13, the appropriate Government on
the application of any aggrieved person or otherwise shall look into complaints with respect
to matters relating to,—
(a) deprivation of rights of persons with specific learning disabilities; and
(b) non-implementation of laws, rules, bye-laws, regulations, executive orders,
guidelines or instructions made or issued for the welfare and protection of rights of
persons with specific learning disabilities.
15. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing  the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of the period of three years
from the date of commencement of this Act.
16. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of the
provisions in any other law, for the time being in force.
17. (1) The appropriate Governments may, by notification in the official Gazette, make
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
(3) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before the State Legislature.
Punishment
for availing
benefits
meant for
persons with
learning
disabilities.
Complaint
mechanism
Power to
remove
difficulty.
Act not in
derogation of
only other
law.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
30
30

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Children with learning disability are a disadvantaged section of the society. There is
no law or policy in this context at present. There has not been a systematic study to gauge
the prevalence of learning disabilities in India, though, isolated studies by independent
researchers and organizations estimate that fourteen percent of all the school children suffer
from learning disabilities. It is a matter of concern that adequate research and funds have not
been channelized to address this particular issue. Further, there is gross lack of awareness of
learning disability among the parents, teachers and the community which results in branding
of children as lazy or uninterested.
A specific learning disability affects the ability to learn and use certain skills, e.g.,
reading, writing, listening, speaking, reasoning, directing attention, doing mathematical
calculations and coordinating movements. The common forms of specific learning disabilities
are: dyslexia (difficulty in reading), dysgraphia (difficulty in writing) and dyscalculia (difficulty
in mathematics). It may affect a single skill or combination of skills. Learning disability is
distinct from mental retardation, and many a times, those suffering from such disabilities may
have near normal, normal or superior intellectual ability, but the congnition, memory, motor
activity and brain function of such children might be different from other individuals. Many
great personalities like Thomas Alwa Edison and Albert Einstein were once discarded by the
school system as failures.
The major challenge in identification of children with specific learning disabilities is
the invisibility of their condition. The teachers, parents and peers often regard them as a
slow learners or a failure, or attribute to them laziness or attitude. The diverse socio-cultural
and economic conditions of the country make it a further complicated exercise. If the children
with specific learning disabilities are identified at an early age, they can be accommodated
into the mainstream by providing appropriate and specialized training. Further, new centres
should be opened to train and equip such children and the teachers and parents should also
be trained to deal with them. The curriculum and assessment methods have to be restructured
to accommodate the children with specific learning disabilities or appropriate concessions
should be given to them.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; OM PRAKASH YADA V
July 3, 2017.
6

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for conducting annual survey to detect the number of
persons affected with specific learning disability. Clause 4 provides for conducting mass
awareness campaigns. Clause 5 provides for setting up of teacher training institutions.
Clause 6 provides for special facilities in educational institutions.  Clause 7 provides for
setting up of Learning Disability Detection and Remediation Centres. Clause 8 provides for
setting up a National Centre for specfic Learning Disabilities. Clause 11 provides for
employment of persons with specific learning disabilities . Clause 12 provides for the Central
Government to provide funds to the State Governments. The Bill, if enacted, will involve
recurring expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India to the tune of rupees five hundred
crore per annum. A non-recurring expenditure of one hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.
7

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 17 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. As the matter will relate to details only, the delegation of powers
is of normal character.
8

GMGIPMRND—953LS(S3)—21-7-2017.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to identify and support the children with learning disabilities in education and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Om Prakash Yadav, M.P.)