10K SABRA 
CORRIGENDA , 
to 
THE BOLANI ORES LIMlTiill (.'iCQUISITION OF SHARES) AND 
MIOCELLANEOUS PROVISIOI~S BILL, 1978 
Do ~.As introduced in Lok Sabha 7 
1. Page 3, line 37,-
"e quipmen t s " read - ''e quipmen t" 
2. Page 6, line 1,'" 
3. Page 7, line 21,-
omi t "the" 
4. Page 8, in the marginal. heading to clause 20,-
for 'Co gni zence II £€~~ 'Co gni zanc e " 
5. Page 8, in the marginal heading to clau se 23,-
for "dissolve" read "di s sol v eel " -
6. Page 9, line 22,-
omi t "published" 
7 • :Page 9, in the marginal heading to clau se 28,-
for 
NEW DELHI; 
~st 30, 1~W Bliadra 8, 1 
"made" re ad ''make'' ",.,-
(Saka) 

.1 
As IN'l'BODUCED IN Lox SABKA ON 
~ . I ( 
.~ '. ,,; " .... ';} , 
Bill WOo ld"'~'l'" 
- ?II .. , •• 
THE BOLANI ORES LIMITEr> (ACQUISITION OF S~) AND 
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS BILL, 1978 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CLAUSES 
1. Short title and commencement. 
2. DeBntthms. 
CHAPTER II 
ACQUlSlTlON AND TRANSFER OF SHARES OF BoLANI ORa LIMrrm 
3. Vesting in the Central Government of the shares held by the 
Company. 
4. Payment of amount to the Company. 
5. Allocation of shares to the Steel Authority of India. 
CHAPTER III 
VESTING OF UNDERTAKINGS IN THE STEEL AUTHORITY OF INDIA AND DISSOLUTION 
OF BOLANI ORE'S LIMITB:D 
6. Vesting of undertakings in the Steel Authority of India and 
dissolution of Bolani Ores Limited. 
7. "Undertaking"-meanin~ of. 
CHAPTER IV 
PRoVISIONS RELATING TO OFFICERS AND EMl'lDYEI!:S 
8. Provisions relating to officers and other employees of dissolved 
company. 
9. Provisions relating to directors. 
10. Provision relating to auditors. 
11. Directors, etc., not entitled to compensation. 
12. Provident fund. 
L 13. Gratuity. welfare fund and other funds. 
CHAPTER V 
FINANCIAL PROVISIONS 
14. Provisions with respect to income-tax. and surtax. 
1~. Taxes, fees and other charges not payable. 

CHAPTER VI 
MlsCl!U.ANIIOUS 
HI. Duty to deliver possession of propertt-. etc. 
17. Penalties. 
18. Offences by companies. 
19. Protection of action taken in ,ood faith. 
20. Cognizance of offences. 
21. Saving of contracts, etc. 
22. Saving of legal proceedings. 
23. Board of Directors of the Steel Authority of India to adopt 
accounts of dissolved company. 
24. Transfer of documents relating to the dissolved. company. 
25. Power to remove difficulties. 
26. Act to override the provisions of other laws. 
27. Power to amend memorandum and articlei of auociation. 
28. Power to make rules. 

8111 No. 141,., It71 
THE BOLANI ORES LIMITED (ACQUISITION OJ' SHARES) AND 
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS BILL. 1978 'r 
BILL 
to provide few the acquisition of ,hares tYf the Bolani Ores Limited in 
public interest in order to serve "etter the needs of the 714ticm land 
to IGCilit4te the promotion. and development i-n the inferist,' 0tJ the 
genercU public, of 7l4tion.CIl stftl indurtry cmd fcJtr menter, cmmected 
therewith or incidental tMNto. ' 
WHJ!:REAS Bolani Ores Limited' was incorporated as a private Umt-
ted company in June, lm57 for supplying ores mainly to the DurgapUll' 
Steel Plant; " 
WHERIIAS 50.5 per cent. shares in the share capital 01. the said Bolani 
S Ores Limited are held by the Steel Authority of India Limited, a wholly 
owned Government company and the remaining 49.5 per cent. share. 
are held by the Orissa Mmeral Development Company Liml~d; 
Wm:Rl!:AS cumulative losses suffered by' the said Bolan! Ores' Li!ntted 
.at the end of 1977-78 were to the extent of OWl' Rs. 270 lakhsiand the 
to said Bolani· Ores Limited is in need of urgent funds W carry on the opera-
tions of its undertakings; 

Shorttltle 
and 
com-
mence-
ment, 
Deftni-
Uoaa. 
AND WHIItIlAS the Orissa Mineral Development Company il not 
willing to contribute any further amount towards the share capital of 
the Bolani Ores Limited; 
Alm WHEREAS the Bolani Ores Limited is the main source of supply 
of iron ores to the Durgapur Steel Plant and without further substan- S 
tial investments by way of capital outlay and otherwise the supply of 
iron ores to the said Plant cannot be maintained; 
Alm WHEREAS it is expedient in the public interest that the shares 
Of the said Bolani Ores Limited should be acquired; 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-ninth Year of the Republic 10 
of India as follows:-
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMTNARY 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Bolani Ores Limited 
of Shares) and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1978. 
(Acquisition 
I,S 
(2) It shall come into foree on such date as the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
%. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "appointed day" means the date on which this Act comes 
into force; :ao 
(b) "Bolani Ores Limited" means the Bolani Ores Company 
LiInited, a company formed and registered under the Companies Act 
: ': : 't~ha~6:~ registered office at Chartered Bank Buildings in Cal-
~~".~, lbe,State of West Bengal; 
(I' . 
(e) "Companies Act" menns the Companies Act, 1956; 25 lof 1.e 
(d) "dissolved company" means the Bolani Ores Limited dissolved 
by virtue of section 6; , 
-46) l'-r!the ~ompanY" means the Qri_ Mineral Development Com-
panv LfmfteQ, '-c~y:'tenn@d(-and~~tketf'ttnder the Com-
panies Act and havinr. its ~stered office at Chartered Bank Bun- 30 
dings, Calcutta in the State ofCWest Bengal; 
(f) "Steel Authontv of 'Itidia" means the Steel Authority of 
.~ Liplite4" ~. ~PlUly f~eci. and regi,s~Ite4 uDd~tM Cam-
~s ~\.aJl4, ,~vi.mt Us, registQJi~ ~ce at ,!i'~ Delhi. 
' .. '~l :8n'e asJJrovideti in Section 1'. the wonIsarid ~resillofts used 35 
;. ..... n '9!lQ net de6neal but·cieftned in the Companies Act' ba.e'1he mean-
In~ Tespecilvely assigned to them inttrat Aet. . . ' . 
, 
.' .:. 
• r 
. ',·AcQOJII'lIIOW i I\!at 'l'RAMBI'BIt 01' BJJAJtiz· OF EOLAM ODS L'mIt'I'D 
VeIUn, 3. (1) On the appointed day, all the shares held by the' ~~panyfn 40 
~~ "r!, 9 !!,r'C;~'~ c~tal e~,' tJ1~ ~oll\Ili 9re~. L.i~H~d sl}~n, by \1ftu;," 9., t .t~J.' Act, 
Govern- .: (tt~~ ~~e~~,d, ~~, ,n.~ s~a11 v~~ In\th~ Cent1'.al GqvemJ1l~t .. 
ment • • ;(2) All the sJaM~ w~p ha,!e v~ted in , the ~n~aI Oovt!rnment 
ot the under ~~e;ctipn (n sh~ij. ~,forc~fof ,such ye$t~g; befl'~cJ and dill-
~::es charged' of all trusts, liabilities. obligations, mortllalles, charges, liens 4S 
by the .,",f~~C1;U'nbraftces fl~ctmt4bem. ami· artY' attaCbmentror'lI'1jiinction 
Compeny. .. -q1' a_748C!1D8e ar-Me!' oI11llY ,CMlrt, -tribunal or other 'atithcWlfy 'n!ttrtctJng 
.-" .u,e Q!, SU41\ Ib'-elin any ~an~ Bhall be deemed ~to hi. ,been :Wttlf~ drawn. ' - , . . ~ 

a 
- .. (1) For the transfer tel, IW. VAl'" in, the Central Government 
under section 3 of the shares held by the Company in the Bolani Ores 
Limited, the Central Government shall, within thirty c1aYs from the ap-
pointed day, pay to the Company In cash an amount of forty-me thou-
S , ...... fty~ bJllldl;ecl ·rapees. 
(Z~ Wbenthe Ceo ... l Govel'll.Dlent fails to pay to the CoaqNUlY 
... amount apeci8ed in .,.b-Mdion (1) withOl the periN ~iftea In 
tlaat sub-section, tile Central Government shall pay on the said amo1ll1t 
. _pie Interest at -the rate of six per teDt. per 8DDum from Ute appointed 
10 .. ,. ttI1 the date of payment. 
5. (1) All the fthares held by the Comp~ny -in the Bolqni Ores Lim,i-
.ted which have vested in the Central Government by virtue of section 3 
shall, immediately atter they have so ves~ed, stand transferred to. and 
shall vest in. the Steel Authority of India. 
IS (2) The amount paid hy the Centrlll Government for the shares which 
,tanci trans:fenocd to, and vested in, the Steel Authority of Incilia under 
.ub-section (n shall be deemed to be the contrihution by the Central CrOv-
ernment to the equity capital of the Steel Authority of India and .the 
S~l Authority of India shall issue (if necessary, after amending its 
~o :memorandum and articles of association) to the Central Government 
forty!-nine fully paid-up shares of the face value of one thousand rupee. 
each and pay to that Government five hundred rupees in cash. 
2$ 
]0 
CHAPTER III 
VESTING 0 .. UNDERTAKINGs IN THE &rEEL AUTHORITY' 0.. INDIA AND 
DrSSOJ.UTJON OF BOLANI ORES LIMITED 
G. On .the apPQi~ted day-
(a). all the undertakings of the Bolani Ores Limited. the share~~ 
of which have vested in the Steel Authority of India by virtue of 
section 5. shall ·stand transferred to, afJ.d ~ll veat in, the Steel 
Authority of India; 
(b) the Bolani Ores Limited shall stand dissolved. 
'7. J'or the purposes of this Act, the undertakings of the dissolved COIn-
, palilY shall be deemed to include all assets, rights, lease-bolds (including 
~ leMes). industrial or other l~cences, powers. authorities and prtvi-
35 JeJl~ a~dall property. movable and immovable, including land". build-
ings, works, mines, works~ops. projects, stores. instruments, machinery. 
automobiles and other vehicles, equipments, cash or bank balances. cash 
in b~d. ,r~serve funds. investments nnd book debts and all ot);aer rights 
.:nd interests in. or arising out of, such property as we.re immediat~y 
040 b,efQ.te tbe lip-pointed day in the OWll.r,rship, p<ls.seSiion. poWj;lr or control 
()t th~ di:lsolv~~ companyo.and all boob;. of ac::cQunt, ~gi~ters, m&pS, draw-
.ir}e:s, J;.e!;ords Qf $urv~y and all Qther documents of whatever nature 
""atin,g tllereto, and ~h!lll ~lso be deeJDed to inc],ude .. all borrowi!1g1J. 
liabilities and obligations of whatever kind of the dissolved com~py· 
Payment 
of amount 
to the 
Com-
pany. 
Al1Qca,-
ti~of 
shares to 
the Steel 
Authority 
of India. 
Vestin, 
-of under-
takinls 
in the 
Steel 
Autho-
rity of 
India 
and 
dissolu_ 
tion of 
Bolan! 
Ores 
Limited. 
"Under-
taking"-
meanfn, 
of. 
I 
I 
.~ 
" 

Provi-
sions re-
lating to 
officers 
and 
other 
employees 
of dis-
solved 
company. 
Pro-
visioDi 
relating 
to direc-
tors. 
Provision 
relating 
to audi-
tors. 
Direc-
tor., etc., 
not 
entitled 
to com-
pensation. 
" CHAPTER IV 
PRoIvrsroNs RIlLATING 'l'O OllTICERS AND EMPLOYDS 
, ' " ~ r' - 'j 
'I~ 
8. (1) Every officer (not being a director) or other employee holdhig 
oIBce immediately before the appointed day in the diSS()1ved company in 
relation to any undertaking of such ct'Impany, shall, as from tM appoin- S 
ted day, continue to hold office as such in respect of the undel"taking 
vested in the Steel Authority of India by virtue of section 6, by the 
same tenure and upon the same terms and conditions of service and with 
the, same rights and privileges as to retirement benefits as would have 
been admissible to him if the company in which he was holding office had 10 
not been dissolved and shall continue to do so unless and until such 
tenure and tenns and conditions are duly altered by the Steel Authority 
of India. . .", 
(2) Notwithstanding anyth1n,~ contained in sub-section (1), rulel!11 
relating to the conditions of service and Standing Orders applicable to 15 
the officers or other employees referred to in sub-section (1), as imme-
diately before the ~ppointed day, shall continue to apply unless and until 
they are duly altered by the Steel Anthority of India. 
9. Every person holding office as a director of the dissolved company 
immediately before the appointed day shall, on that day, cease to hold 20 
office as such director. 
10. Every person appointed under section 619 of the Com.pani~ Act 
as an auditor of the dissolved company holdin~ office immediately before 
the appointed day, msy continue to hoM office as such auditor in relation 
til the undertakings of the dissolved company which stand vested· in 25 
the Steel Authority of India by virtue t')f section 6, for the duration for 
which he was so appointed, on the same terms and conditions as were 
ap,plicable to him immediately before the appointed day. 
11. (1) Notwithstanding pnything contained in any law for the time 
being in force, no director or managerial personnel specified in section 30 
197A of the Companies Act or other person entitled to mana~e the whole 
or a substantial part of the business and affairs of the undertakings of 
the dissolved. company under a special agreement or otherwise- shall 
be entitle-d to any compensation aEZ:ain~t the dissolved company or 
the Central Government or the Steel .Authority of India for the loss of 3S 
office or for the premature tennfnation of any contract of management 
entered into by him with the dissolved company Whether sueh loss Or 
termination was due to the provisions of this Act. 
(2) Notwithstandin~ anything contained in the Industrial Disputes '" 
Act, 1947, or in any other law for the time beinq in force,. the provisions.~ 141 at 1 • 
of sub-section (1) of section 8 shall not entitle Bny oftlcer or othet: ,epl-
ployee referred to in that sub-section to any comPensation under that Act 
or under any other law for the time befng in force and no claim for such 
compensation shall be entertained by any court, tribunal or other .. , 
authority. 4S 

U. Where a. provident fund has been established by the dissolved provl-
company for the 'benefit of the employees and the same stands vested in dent 
a trust, the monies and other assets standing to the credit of such provi- fund. 
dent fund !!hall continue to be held in trust with the same objects as were . 
, applicable before the appointed day and the trustees of such trusts func-
tioning il'l'lmediately bef<>re the appointed day shall, subject to the provi-
sions of the trust deeds and the rules relating to such trusts, continue to 
function as trustees m respect of such provident fund maintained in re-
lation to the undertakings of the dissolved company which stand vested in 
10 the Steel Authority of India by virtue of section 6, as if this Act had not 
be~ .. passed: 
Provided that the right to nominate trustees and other rights relating 
to the. trust vested in the dissolved company shall vest in the Steel Au-
thori ty of India. 
IS 13. Where any gratuity, welfare fund or other fund has been established 
by the dissolved company for the benefit of its employees and is in exis-
tence immediately before the appointed day, all monies arid other assets 
standing to the credit of or relatable to such gratuity, welfare f~d or 
other fund shall vest in the Steel Authority of India. 
CHAPTER V 
FINANCIAL PROVISIONS 
14.. (1) The Steel Authority of India shall be liable to pay any swn 
under the provisions of the Income-tax Act or the Com~~lDies (Profits) 
Surtax Act which the dissolved company would have been liable to pay 
2S if the dissolution had not taken place, in the like manner and to the same 
extent as the dissolved company. 
(2) For the purpose of making an assessment of the income or, as the 
case may be, the chargeable profits of the dissolved company and for the 
purpose of levying any sum in accordance with the provisions of sub-
30 section (1 ~,-
(a) any proceeding taken against the dissolved company before 
the appointed day sha1l be deemed to have been taken against the 
Steel Authority of India and may be continued against the Steel 
Authority of India from the stage at which it stood immediately be-
3S fore the appointed day; 
(b) any proceeding which could have been talten against the 
dissolved company, if the dissolution had not taken place, may ~. 
taken ,~ain.st the Steel Authority of India; and 
(c) all the wovaions of the Income-tax Act or, as the case may 
be, the Companies (Profits) Surtax Act shall apply accordingly. 
(3) The assessme~t of the income or, as the case may be, the charge-
able profits of the previous year of, the dissolved company up to the 
aPPOinted day shall be made as if such dissolution had not taken place 
and all the provisions of the Income-tax Act or as the case may b~. the 
045 Companies (Profits) Surtax Act shall, so far as may be, apply accordingly. 
Gratuity. 
welfare 
fund 
and other 
funda. 
p~ 
visioDi 
with 
respect 
to 
income-
tax and 
luryax. 

Taxes, fees 
andotber 
char~ea 
not 
payable. 
ties, etc. 
8 
(4) The transfer and vesting the undertakings of the diuol~ 
company in the Steel Authority of India under the pl'OVisiODS of tbi& &:t 
shall be deemed to be an amalgamation in relation to the dissolved com-
pany and the Steel Authority of India and the provisions of the lDc:0me-
tax Act shall, so far as may be, apply aCcordingly as if references in the , 
said Act to the amalgamating company and the amalgamated. com~ 
were references to the dissolved company and the Steel Authori~ of 
India respectively. 
(5) The accumulated loss add the unabsorbed depreciation, if ally, of 
the dissolved company shall be deemed to be the loss or, as the Ca18 may to 
be, allowance for depreciation of the Steel Authority of India for the pre-
vious year in which the amalgamation referred to in sub-section (4) has 
taken place and the provisions of the Income-tax Act relating to IUtt-off 
and carry forward of loss and allowance for depreciation sha.lJ. apply 
accordingly. IS 
(6) The provisions of sub-sections (1) to (5) shall have effect notwith-
atahding anything to the contrary contained in the InOOme-tax Act or 
the Companies (Proths) surtax Act. 
E:tpt'4ncttion.-For the purposes of this section,-
(a) "Income-tax Act" means the Income-tax Act, 1961; 
(b) "ComPlBnies (Profits) 5tlrta"lt Act" means the Companies 
(Profits) Surtax Act, 1964; 
(c) words and expressions used in this section and not defined 
in this Act bUt defin.ed in the Income-tax At't or the CotnpaI!1es 
30 43 of 1881. 
. (Profits.) SUrtax Aet shall have the meanings respectively dsigned .is 
to them in the sAid Acts. 
15. For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declhetl that nl) taxes, 
duties, fees or other charges of whatever nature (including registration 
chargeEl), shall be pdya.b~ in respect of anyttaJUd,er of shar1!l or trans-
fer of undertakift'gS O!" transfer of any immovable property,· under -the 30 
provisions of this Acrt. 
CHAPTIlR VI 
16. (1) Where any property appertaining to any of the undertakings 
of the dissolved company has been transferred to, and vested in, the Steel 35 
A~rity of India;..... . 
(a) every persOD in whose posse_em, eu&tody or cOftttolmy 
such property may be. shall, on demand by the St~el Authority of 
mdja, forthwith deliver the property to the Steel Authority of India . 
or to such person as the Steel Authority of India may authorise in 40 I 
this bellalf j 
(b) any person who, immediately before such vesting, bas, iJ1 
'bis"poSsession, custody or control, anybooks, documents or other p.~. 
relating to any o~ the undertakings of the dissolved companym.J,l 
be liable to8Ccount for the .aid books, documents and papers to the 4S . 

7 
Steel Authority of India and shall deliver them to tme Steel Autho-
rity of India or to such person as the Steel Authority of India may 
authorise in this behalf. 
(2) Without prejudice to the other provisions contained in this sec-
S tion, it shall be lawful for the Steel Authority ot India to take all neces-
sary steps for taking possession of all properties, which have been 
transferred to, and vested in, it under this Act. 
17. Any person who.-
(a) having in his possession, custody or control any property 
10 forming part of the dissolved company wrongfully withholds such 
property from the Steel Authority of India; or 
(b) wrongfully obtains possession of, or retains, any property 
forming part of any of the undertakings of the dissolved oompany; or 
(c) wilfully withholds or fails to furnish to the Steel Autho-
IS rity of India or any person authorised by it any books, documents 
or other papers relating to any of the undertakings 'of the dissolved 
company which may be in his possession, custody or control; or 
(d) fails to deliver to the Steel Authority of India or to a person 
authorised by it, any assets, books of account, registers or other docu-
20 ments in his possession, custody or control relating to any of the 
undertakings of the dissolved company; or 
(e) wrongf.ully removes or destroys any property forming part 
of any of the undertakings of the dissolved company; or 
<f) wrongfully uses any property forming part of any of the 
2S undertakings of the dissolved company, 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend 
to two years, or with the fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees, 
or with both. 
18. (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
30 company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed was 
in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct of 
the business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed 
to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against 
and punished accordingly: 
3S Provided that nothing contained in this sub-sedion shall render any 
such person liable to any punishment if he proves that the offence was 
committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised all due dili-
gence to prevent the commission of such offence. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) where 
40 any offence under this Act has been committed by a company ana it is 
proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or conni-
vance of, is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, 
manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director, mana-
ger, secretary or other officer shall be deemed ,to be guilty of that offence 
4S and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly. 
Erplanatioo.-For the purposes 011 this sectton-
(4) "company" means any body corporate and includes a firm 
or other association of individuals; and 
Penaltie& 
Offences 
by 
compani_ 

Protection 
of action 
taken in 
good faith. 
Coenizence 
of offen-
ces. 
Saving 
of con-
tracts. etc. 
Savlng of 
legal 
proceed-
ings. 
Board of 
Directors 
of Steel 
Authority 
of India 
to adopt 
accounts of 
dissolve 
company. 
Transfer 
of docu-
mentl 
relating 
to the 
dissolved 
Com-
pany. 
8 
(b) "~ctor", in relation k a finn, means a partner in the firm. 
19. No suit, prosecution or other legal proeeecling shall lie against the 
Central Government or the Steel Authority at rndia or any of its officers 
or other employees for anything which is in good faith done or intenaed 
to be done under this Act. 5 
20. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Pro-
cedure, 1973, no court shall take cognizance of any offence under this 2 of 1974. 
Act except on a complaint, in writing, made by the Central Government 
or any officer authorised in this behalf by that Government. 
·Zl. All contracts, deeds. bonds, agreements and other instruments of 10 
whatever nature to which the dissolved company is a parfy subsisting 
or having effect immedia~ly before the appointed. day, shall, as kom 
that day ,be of full torce and effect against, or, as the case may be, in 
favour of, the Steel Authority of India and may be ·enforced as fully 
and effectually as it, instead of the dissolved company, the Steel Autho- IS 
rity of India had been a party thereto. 
22. If. on the appointed day, there is pending any suit, arbitration, 
appeal or other legal proceeding of whatever nature by or against the 
dissofved company, the same shan not abate, be discontinued or be in 
any way prejudicially affected by reason of the transfer of the undertakings 20 
of the dissolved company or of anything contained in this Act, but toe 
suit, arbitration, appeal or other proceeding may be continued, prosecuted 
and enforced by or against the Steel AuthOrity of India in the same 
manner and to toe same extent as it would or might have been continued, 
prosecuted and enforced by or against the dissolvea company if this Act 25 
had not been passed. 
23. (1) The accounts of the dissolved company shall stand closed on 
the appointed day and the balance-sheet and the profit and loss accounts 
for the current financial year up to the appointed day shall be prepared 
and audited in accordance with the provisions of the Companies Act. 30 
(2) Notwithstanding the provisions in the Companies Act. the Board 
of Directors of the Steel Authority of India shall be deemed to be the Board 
of Directors of the dissolved company and the shareholders of the Steel 
Authority of India shall be deemed to be the shareholders of the dis-
solved company for the purpose of adoption of the accounts, directors' 35 
report and completion of other formalities in accordance with the pro-
visions of the Companies Act in this regard. 
24. (1) The Registrar o~ Companies with whom the dissolved com-
pany is registered shall, as Boon as may be after the appointed day, 
transfer all documents relating to the dissolved company to the Regls- 40 
trar of Companies New Delhi. 
-(2) The Registrar of Companies, New Delhi, on receipt of the documents 
relating to the dissolved company, shall add those documents to the file 
maintained by him in relation to the Steel Authority of India, and shall 
consolidate the files relating to the dissolved company and the Steel 45 
Authority of India and the documents filed by the dissolved company 
shall, for the purposes of the Companies Act, be deemed to have been 
flled by the Steel AuthOrity of India in relation to the busm,ess of, the 

9 
under.taKb!l.gs of the dissolved compaa,. which, stamls 1Iransferred to and 
vestecl in the Steel Authority of lDdia by virtue of sectiOll 6~ 
25. If any difReulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Ad, the CeMral Government may, by order, published in the OfJicial 
5 Gazette, make such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of 
this Act, sa appears to it to be necessary, for the removal of the difleulty: 
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a 
period of three years from the appointed day, 
218. The provisions of this Act or of any order made thereunder shall 
10 have effect notwithstanding anything contained in the Companies Act 
or in any other law for the time being in force or in any contract, ex-
press or implied, or in any rules or regulations having effect by virtue 
of any law other than this Act. 
27, (1) For the purpose of giving effect t:> the provisions of this Act, 
IS the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make amendments in the memorandum or articles of association, or both, 
of. the Steel Authority of India. 
(2) Any amendments in the memorandum or articles ()f association 
of the Steel Authority of India made in pursuance of sub-section (1) 
20 shall have effect notwitR!tanding anything containea in the Companies 
Act. 
28, (1) The Central Government may, by notification published in 
the Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act. 
(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act 
25 shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of 
Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or i1l1 two or more successive sessions, 
and it, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session 
or the successive sessions af\Gresaid, both Houses agree in making any 
30 modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not 
be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form 
or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modi-
fication or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of any-
thing previously done under that rule, 
Power to 
remove 
difficul-
ties. 
Act to 
override 
the 
provisions 
of other 
laws, 
Power to 
amend 
memo-
randum 
and 
articles of 
association. 
Power to 
tnade 
rules. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Bolani Ores Limited was incorporated as a private limited company 
in June, 196'1 for supplying iron ore mainly to the Durgapur Steel Plant. 
The capital of the company was contributed by the Government of India 
to the extent of 50.5 per cent., the remaining 49.5 per cent. being contri-
buted. by the Orissa Mineral Development Company Limited (OMDC) , 
a company of the Bird Group. In February, 1973, the sb-ares of the Central 
Government in the company were transferred to the Steel Authority of 
India Limited (SAIL). 
2. The present financf.al position of the company is far from Batis~ 
factory. The accumulated losses suffered by the company till the end 
of 1977-78 is over Rs. 270 lakhs against the paid-up capital of Rs. 100 
lakhs. The company is in immediate need of funds to the extent of 
about Rs. 250 lakhs to complete the capital schemes in hand and for pro-
viding balanCing facilities and to replace some of the worn out earth 
movmg machinery, failing which the regular supply of iron ore of Rde-
quate quality to the Durgapur Steel Plant cannot be ensured. Bolani 
Ores Limited is the main source of supply of iron ore to the Durgapur Steel 
Plant which has no other alternative economic source of bulk supply and 
closure or ineffiCient working of the mine by the Bolani Ores Limited. will 
seriously affect the interests of the steel plant. The Orissa Mineral Deve-
10pment Company is not interested in making any further investment 
in the Bolani Ores Limited. In order to ensure the regular supply of 
adequate quality of iron ore to the Durgapur Steel Plant, it is necessary 
that substantial investments are made in the Bolani Ores Limited by the 
Central Government. It is therefore necessary in the public interec;t to take 
over the company. The Bill proposes to acquire the shares held by the 
OMDC in the Bolani Ores Limited. To facilitate the efficient mana~ement 
of the Bolani Ores Limited. it ic; proposed to transfer the undertakin~ o~ 
that company to the Steel Authority of India Limited which is the apex 
body for all steel plants. 
3. The present !!tate of affairs of the Bolatli Ores Limited has revealed 
that the shares of the company do not have any value under the COD"en-
tional methods of valuation namely, net worth and profit earning capa-
city. It is however proposed to make a payment of an amount of 
Rs. 49,500 at +he rate d Mlpef' onc fot' each share of the face value of 
Rs. 100 for the acaui.t!lition of the shares. 
4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 
NEW DELm; BIJU PATNAIK. 
The 17th August, 1978. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLES 117 AND 
2'74 OF THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. 1 0-6 178-DUR, dated the 18th August, 1978 from Shrl 
Biju Patnaik, Minister of Steel and Mines to the Secretary, Lok Sabha.] 
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the Bolani 
Ores Limited (AcqUisition of Shares) and Miscellaneous Provisions Bill. 
i978 to provide for the acquisition 'of certain shares of Bolani Ores Limited 
and for matters connected therewith or inci<ientRI thereto has recommend-
ed under clal1ses (1) and (3) ot article 117 and clause (t) of article 274 
of the ConstitutioY'l of India, the introduction and consideration by Lok 
Sabha of the said Bill. 
10 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
~~'.}JT1. ~(.,:,::! q,"U"I;. ''; . '!::,,/, " 
The Bill seeks to provide for the acquisit'ion by the Central'Govern-
~t ~f .. r~p.e.,~af~ ffi, ~lani Ores .~+mited, presen~y held by the Orissa 
MiDer,.L};~ov~lpp)jll~~~ ~oIDp4ny,~.~i~ed,(, qMDC) , and tranSf~ of the 
<;wn~': t.p the ,&~l ~q~~ori~ of Indi~ ltimited ($AIL). 
2. Clause 4 of the Bill provides for paythbnt by the Centrat Govern. 
me:Q~ r~ q~, .j,Q CM~t of ~an rmo~t, o~/Fy:~~es ,for,ty-nine thousand and 
five hund'red, for the transfer to, and vesting in it, of the shares of the 
company held by OMOC. The said amount will carry simple interest 
at the rate of six per cent. per annum for the period commenciong from 
the apPointed day, the date on which the Act would take effect, and 
ending on the date on which payment of such amount is made by the 
Central Government to OMOC. Interest at the said rate is likely to be 
of the order of rupees one thousand. 
3. Thus, the total estimated non-recurring expenditure involved if the 
Bill is enacted, wiJl be of the order of rupees fifty thousand and five 
hundred. 
4. The purpose of acquisition by the Central Government o~ the shares 
of Bolani Ores Limited, presently held by OMDC is to ensure proper 
functioning through SAIL, so as to enable it to maintain a high level at 
production and maintain regular supply of iron ore to the Durgapur Steel 
Plant. As presently foreseen, estimated additional investment for this 
purpose by Government will be of the order of about Rs. 250 lakhs. Such 
expenditure will, however, be incurred after due appropriation by Parlia-
ment by law. ' -
5. The Bill, if enacted, is not likely to involve any other recurring or 
non-recurring expenditure. 
II 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATIOR 
Clause 28 of the Bill seeks to confer on the Central Government the 
general rule maldt1g power for irnplementatffJn of the p~viakma of the 
Bill when enacted. The power of making rules will be ccmftaed to 
matters of detail aDd procedure. 
2. The delegation of legislaUve power ii, therefore, of normal charac-
ter. 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the acquisition of shares of the Bolani Ores Limited in 
public interest in order to serve better the needs of the nation and to 
facilitate the promotion and development in the interests of the 
general public, of national steel industry and for matters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto. 
(Shlri Bftju Pa.tn4i1e, MitliBter of 
Steel and Mines). 