THE DNA TECHNOLOGY (USE AND APPLICATION)
REGULATION BILL, 2019
——————
 ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
——————
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
CLAUSES
1. Short title, extent and commencement.
2. Definitions.
CHAPTER II
DNA REGULATORY BOARD
3. Establishment of  DNA Regulatory Board.
4. Composition of  Board.
5. Term of office and conditions of service of Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and
Member.
6. Meetings of Board.
7. Member not to participate in meetings in certain cases.
8. Removal and resignation of Chairperson or Member and filling up of casual
vacancies of Board.
9. V acancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of  Board.
10. Delegation of powers of  Board.
11. Officers and other employees of  Board.
12. Functions of Board.
CHAPTER III
A
CCREDITA TION OF DNA LABORATORIES
13. Prohibition of  DNA testing, etc., without accreditation.
14. Granting of accreditation or renewal thereof.
15. Power of  Board to suspend or revoke accreditation.
16. Appeal against rejection, suspension or revocation of accreditation.
Bill No. 142-C of 2018
AS PASSED BY LOK SABHA
ON 08.01.2019

CLAUSES
CHAPTER IV
OBLIGATIONS OF DNA LABORATORY
17. Obligations of  DNA laboratory.
18. Appointment of  incharge, scientific, technical and other staff, of  DNA laboratory.
19. Responsibilities of person incharge of  DNA laboratory.
20. Measures to be taken by DNA laboratory.
21. Consent for taking bodily substances to be taken from a person arrested.
22. Bodily substances given voluntarily.
23. Sources and manner of collection of samples for DNA testing.
24. Taking of bodily substances for re-examination.
CHAPTER V
DNA D
ATA BANK
25. Establishment of  DNA Data Banks.
26. Maintenance of  indices by DNA Data Bank.
27. Directors of  DNA Data Banks.
28. Officers and other employees of National DNA Data Bank and Regional DNA
Data Banks.
29. Comparison and communication of  DNA profiles.
30. Sharing of  DNA profiles with foreign Government or international organisation.
31. Retention and removal of records.
CHAPTER VI
P
ROTECTION OF INFORMATION
32. Security and confidentiality of information.
33. Use of  DNA profiles, DNA samples and records, etc., for facilitating identification
of persons.
34. Access to information in certain cases.
35. Access to information for operation, maintenance and training.
36. Access to information in DNA Data Bank for one time keyboard search.
37. Restriction on access to information in crime scene index.
38. Prohibition on access to information in DNA Data Bank.
CHAPTER VII
F
INANCE, ACCOUNTS, AUDIT AND REPORTS
39. Grants by Central Government.
40. DNA Regulatory Board Fund.
(ii)

CLAUSES
41. Budget.
42. Annual report.
43. Accounts and audit of Board.
44. Annual report and auditor's report to be laid before Parliament.
CHAPTER VIII
O
FFENCES AND PENALTIES
45. Penalty for unauthorised disclosure of information in DNA Data Bank.
46. Penalty for obtaining information from  DNA Data Bank without authorisation.
47. Penalty for using DNA sample or result without authorisation.
48. Penalty for unlawful access to information in DNA Data Bank.
49. Penalty for destruction, alterations, contamination or tampering with biological
evidence.
50. Penalty for contravention where no specific punishment is provided.
51. Offences by companies or institutions.
CHAPTER IX
M
ISCELLANEOUS
52. Chairperson, Members, officers to be public servants.
53. Protection of action taken in good faith.
54. Power of Central Government to supersede Board.
55. Power of Central Government to issue directions.
56. Power to amend Schedule.
57. Court not to have jurisdiction.
58. Power to make rules.
59. Power to make regulations.
60. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament.
61. Power to remove difficulties.
THE SCHEDULE.
(iii)

1
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
THE DNA TECHNOLOGY (USE AND APPLICATION)
REGULATION BILL, 2019
A
BILL
to provide for the regulation of use and application of Deoxyribonucleic Acid (DNA)
technology for the purposes of establishing the identity of certain categories of
persons including the victims, offenders, suspects, undertrials, missing persons and
unknown deceased persons and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the DNA Technology (Use and Application) Regulation
Act, 2019.
(2)It extends to the whole of India.
(3)It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint:
Bill No. 142-C of 2018
5
AS PASSED BY LOK SABHA
ON 08.01.2019

2
Definitions.
Provided that different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act and
any reference in any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed as
a reference to the coming into force of that provision.
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(i) "Board" means the DNA Regulatory Board established under sub-section (1)
of section 3;
(ii) "bodily substances" means any biological material of, or from the body of, a
person, whether living or dead, unidentified human remains, and includes intimate
bodily substance and non-intimate bodily substance as defined in clauses (a) and (c)
of sub-section (3) of section 23;
(iii) "Chairperson" means the Chairperson of the Board;
(iv) "crime scene index" means a list of entries of DNA profiles, in a DNA Data
Bank derived from DNA samples found—
(a) at any place where an offence was committed or is reasonably suspected
of having been committed; or
(b) on or within the body of the victim, or a person reasonably suspected
of being a victim, of an offence; or
(c) on anything worn or carried by the victim at the time when an offence
was, or is reasonably suspected of having been, committed; or
(d) on or within the body of a person, or on anything, or at any place,
associated with the commission of an offence;
(v) "Director" means a Director of the National DNA Data Bank or a Regional
DNA Data Bank appointed under section 27;
(vi) "DNA Data Bank" means a DNA Data Bank established under sub-section (1)
of section 25;
(vii) "DNA laboratory" means any laboratory or facility established by the Central
Government or a State Government or a person or an organisation which has been
granted accreditation under this Act to perform DNA testing;
(viii) "DNA profile" means the result of analysis of a DNA sample for establishing
human identification in respect of matters listed in the Schedule;
(ix) "DNA sample" means bodily substances of any nature collected for
conducting DNA testing and includes the materials derived in a DNA laboratory from
such bodily substances;
(x) "DNA testing" means the procedure followed in DNA laboratory to develop
DNA profile;
(xi) "Fund" means Fund of the Board constituted under sub-section ( 1) of
section 40;
(xii) "known sample" means the bodily substances of a person whose identity is
established;
(xiii) "medical practitioner" means a medical practitioner who possesses any
medical qualification as defined in clause (h) of section 2 of the Indian Medical Council
Act, 1956 and whose name has been entered in a State Medical Register under that
Act;
(xiv) "Member" means a Member of the Board and includes the Chairperson and
Vice-Chairperson;
102 of 1956.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(xv) "Member-Secretary" means the Member-Secretary of the Board;
(xvi) "missing persons' index" means a list of entries of DNA profiles, in a DNA
Data Bank, derived from—
(a) unidentified human remains; or
(b) the personal effects of persons who are missing; or
(c) the bodily substances of relatives of the missing persons;
(xvii) "notification" means a notification published in the Official Gazette;
(xviii) "offenders' index" means a list of entries of DNA profiles of samples taken
from offenders, in a DNA Data Bank;
(xix) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made by the Central Government
under this Act;
(xx) "proficiency testing" means a quality assurance measure used to monitor
performance and identify areas in which improvement may be needed and includes—
(a) internal test which is devised and administered by the DNA laboratory; and
(b) external test, which may be open or blind, and which is devised and
administered by an external agency;
(xxi ) "quality assurance" includes the systematic actions necessary to
demonstrate that a product or service meets specified standards of quality;
(xxii) "quality manual" means a document which specifies the quality procedures,
quality systems and practices of an organisation relating to standards, quality control
and quality assurance;
(xxiii) "quality system" means the organisational structure, responsibilities,
procedure, process and resources for implementing quality management;
(xxiv) "regulations" means the regulations made by the Board under this Act;
(xxv) "suspects' index" or "undertrials' index" means a list of entries of DNA
profiles derived from DNA samples taken from the suspects or as the case may be,
undertrials, in a DNA Data Bank;
(xxvi) "unknown deceased persons' index" means a list of entries of DNA profiles
derived from DNA samples taken from the remains of a deceased person, whose identity
is not known, maintained in a DNA Data Bank;
(xxvii) "validation process" means the process by which a procedure is evaluated
to determine its efficacy and reliability for casework analysis and includes—
(a) developmental process, being the acquisition of test data and
determination of conditions and limitations, of any new DNA methodology for
use on case samples; and
(b) internal process, being an accumulation of test data within the DNA
laboratory, to demonstrate that the established methods and procedures are
performed as specified in the laboratory.
(2) The words and expressions used and not defined in this Act but defined in the
Indian Penal Code, the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 and the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973,
shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in those Codes or that Act.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45 of 1860.
1 of 1872.
2 of 1974.

4
CHAPTER II
DNA REGULATORY BOARD
3. (1) The Central Government may by notification, establish for the purposes of this
Act, a Board to be called the DNA Regulatory Board.
(2) The Board shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual
succession and a common seal, with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire,
hold and dispose of property, both movable and immovable, and to contract, and shall, by
the said name, sue or be sued.
(3) The head office of the Board shall be at such place in the National Capital Region,
as the Central Government may, by notification, specify.
(4) The Board may, with the approval of the Central Government, establish regional
offices at such other places as it may deem necessary.
4. The Board shall consist of the following Members to be appointed by the Central
Government, namely:—
(a) the Secretary to the Government of India in the Department of Biotechnology,
who shall be the Chairperson, ex officio;
(b) an eminent person from the field of biological sciences having experience of
not less than twenty-five years in the field, who shall be the Vice-Chairperson;
(c) a member of the National Human Rights Commission to be nominated by its
Chairperson, ex officio;
(d) the Director-General of the National Investigation Agency and the Director
of the Central Bureau of Investigation or their nominees not below the rank of the Joint
Director, to be nominated by the Central Government, ex officio;
(e) the Director General of Police of a State, to be nominated by the Central
Government by rotation every three years from amongst the States in alphabetical
order, ex officio;
(f) the Director of the Centre for DNA Fingerprinting and Diagnostics, Hyderabad,
to be nominated by the Central Government, ex officio;
(g) the Director of the National Accreditation Board for Testing and Calibration
of Laboratories, New Delhi, to be nominated by the Central Government, ex officio;
(h) the Director of a Central Forensic Science Laboratory to be nominated by the
Central Government, by rotation every three years, ex officio;
(i) an officer not below the rank of the Joint Secretary to the Government of India
in the Ministry of Law and Justice, to be nominated by the Central Government,
ex officio;
(j) an officer not below the rank of the Joint Secretary to the Government of India
in the Ministry of Science and Technology, to be nominated by the Central Government,
ex officio;
(k) one expert, from amongst persons of eminence in the field of biological
sciences having experience of not less than twenty-five years in the field; and
(l) an officer, not below the rank of Joint Secretary to the Government of India or
equivalent, with knowledge and experience in biological sciences, to be nominated by
the Central Government, ex officio, who shall be the Member-Secretary.
Establishment
of DNA
Regulatory
Board.
Composition
of Board.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

5
5. (1) The Chairperson shall hold the office in the Board till he remains Secretary in the
Department of Biotechnology.
(2) The Vice-Chairperson appointed under clause (b) and the Member appointed under
clause (k), of section 4, shall hold office for a period of three years or till he attains the age of
sixty-five years, whichever is earlier and shall be eligible for re-nomination for a further
period of three years.
(3) The Vice-Chairperson appointed under clause (b) and the Member appointed under
clause (k), of section 4, shall be entitled to such pay and allowances as may be prescribed.
(4) The Chairperson and other ex officio Members may be entitled to such allowances
as may be prescribed.
6. (1) The Board shall meet at such time and place and shall, subject to this section,
observe such rules of procedure with regard to the transaction of business at its meetings
(including the quorum at such meetings) as may be specified by regulations.
(2) The Chairperson shall preside over the meetings of the Board and if, for
any reason, he is unable to attend a meeting, the Vice-Chairperson and in his absence,
the senior-most Member present, reckoned from the date of his appointment to the Board,
shall preside over such meeting:
Provided that in case of common date of appointment of Members, the Member senior
in age shall be considered as senior to the other Members.
(3) All questions which come up before any meeting of the Board shall be decided by
a majority of votes of the Members present and voting, and in the event of an equality of
votes, the Chairperson or, in his absence, the Vice-Chairperson or, in his absence, the Member
presiding over the meeting, shall have a casting vote.
(4) Save as otherwise provided under this Act, the Chairperson shall have powers of
general superintendence and direction of the affairs of the Board and may also exercise such
other powers as may be delegated to him by the Board.
(5) All orders and decisions of the Board shall be authenticated by the Member-
Secretary.
7. Any Member having any direct or indirect interest, whether pecuniary or otherwise,
in any matter coming up for consideration at a meeting of the Board, shall, as soon as
possible after relevant circumstances have come to his knowledge, disclose the nature of his
interest at such meeting and such disclosure shall be recorded in the proceedings of the
Board, and such Member shall not take part in any deliberation or decision of the Board with
respect to that matter.
8. (1) The Central Government may remove from office the Chairperson or any other
Member, who—
(a) has been adjudged as an insolvent;
(b) has been convicted of an offence involving moral turpitude;
(c) has become physically or mentally incapable of acting as a Member;
(d) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially
his functions as a Member; or
(e) has so abused his position as to render his continuance in office prejudicial
to the public interest:
Provided that the Chairperson or a Member shall not be removed from office on the
grounds specified under clause ( d) or clause ( e) except by an order made by the Central
Government after an inquiry made in this behalf in which the Chairperson or such Member
has been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in the matter.
Term of office
and conditons
of service of
Chairperson,
Vice-
Chairperson
and Member.
Meetings of
Board.
.
Member not to
participate in
meetings in
certain cases.
Removal and
resignation of
Chairperson or
Member and
filling up of
casual
vacancies of
Board.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

6
(2) If, for any reason, other than temporary absence, any vacancy occurs in the
office of a Member, the Central Government shall appoint another Member from the same
category in accordance with the provisions of this Act to fill such vacancy, and such
Member shall hold office for the remainder of the term of the Member in whose place he
has been appointed.
(3) Any Member may, by a notice of not less than thirty days in writing under his
hand, addressed to the Central Government, resign from office:
Provided that the Member shall, unless he is permitted by the Central Government to
relinquish his office sooner, continue to hold office until the expiry of three months from
the date of receipt of such notice or until a person is duly appointed in his place or till the
expiry of his term of office, whichever is earlier.
9. No act or proceeding of the Board shall be invalid merely by reason of—
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Board; or
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a Member of the
Board; or
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Board not affecting the merits of the
case.
10. (1) The Board may, by general or special order published in the Official Gazette,
delegate to the Chairperson or any other Member, subject to such conditions, if any, as
may be specified in the order, its functions under this Act (except the power to make
regulations), as it may deem necessary.
(2) An order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament.
11. (1) The Board may, with the approval of the Central Government, appoint such
officers and other employees, as it considers necessary, for the efficient discharge of its
functions under this Act.
(2) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of
service, including the manner of appointment, of the officers and other employees, under
sub-section (1) shall be such as may be prescribed.
12. The Board shall for the purposes of this Act, perform the following functions,
namely:—
(a) advice the Central Government and the State Governments on all issues
relating to establishing of DNA laboratories and DNA Data Banks, including planning,
organisational structure, size, number, location and laying down guidelines, standards
and procedures for establishment and functioning of such laboratories and Data
Banks including manpower, infrastructure and other related issues concerning
monitoring of their performance and activities; upgradation of DNA laboratories;
and making recommendations on funds required for such purposes;
(b) grant accreditation to laboratories and to suspend or revoke such
accreditation;
(c) supervise DNA laboratories and DNA Data Banks, including their quality
control;
(d) develop the training modules and frame guidelines for training of manpower,
including the police and investigating agencies dealing with DNA related matters;
(e) regulate and audit DNA training programmes for DNA laboratories and
DNA Data Banks;
Vacancies, etc.,
not to
invalidate
proceedings of
Board.
Delegation of
powers of
Board.
Officers and
other
employees of
Board.
Functions of
Board.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

7
(f) identify scientific advances and recommend research and development
activities in DNA testing and related issues, including intellectual property issues;
(g) lay down procedures for communication of information relating to DNA
profile in civil and criminal proceedings and for investigation of crimes by law
enforcement and other investigating agencies;
(h) recommend methods for optimum use of DNA techniques and technologies
for administration of justice or for such other relevant purposes as may be specified by
regulations;
(i) adopt and disseminate best practices, concerning the collection and analysis
of DNA sample to ensure quality and consistency in the use of DNA techniques, and
on all ethical and human rights issues relating to DNA testing in consonance with
international guidelines enumerated by the United Nations Organisation and its
specialised agencies, inter alia, relating to—
(i) the rights and privacy of citizens;
(ii) the issues concerning civil liberties;
(iii) issues having ethical and other social implications in adoption of
DNA testing technology; and
(iv) professional ethics in DNA testing;
(j) give advice on matters under this Act which may be referred to it by the
Central Government or the State Government;
(k) make recommendations to the Central Government for the application of
privacy protection in relation to the access to, or the use of, DNA samples and their
analyses, and ensure—
(i) implementation and sufficiency of such protection;
(ii) appropriate use and dissemination of DNA information;
(iii) accuracy, security and confidentiality of DNA information;
(iv) timely removal and destruction of obsolete, expunged or inaccurate
DNA information; and
(v) such other steps as may be required to protect privacy;
(l) facilitate exchange of ideas and information on DNA technology;
(m) create awareness among public and other stakeholders, including police
officers, prosecutors and judicial officers on the use and application of DNA technology;
(n) assist in such manner as may be prescribed, in criminal investigation between
various investigation agencies within the country and with any foreign State,
international organisation or institution in dealing with DNA testing;
(o) advice the Central Government on any modifications required to be made in
respect of any matter under the Schedule;
(p) frame guidelines for storage and destruction of bodily substances including
known sample;
(q) perform such other functions as may be prescribed.
CHAPTER III
A
CCREDITATION OF DNA LABORATORIES
13. (1) No laboratory shall undertake DNA testing, analysing or any other procedure
to generate data and perform analysis relating thereto without obtaining accreditation from
the Board:
Prohibition of
DNA testing,
etc., without
accreditation.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

8
Provided that a laboratory functioning as on the date of the commencement of this
Act, may undertake DNA testing or any other procedure relating thereto, for a period of sixty
days from such commencement and apply to the Board in accordance with sub-section (2)
for obtaining accreditation:
Provided further that such laboratory may, after making an application, continue to
undertake DNA testing or any other procedure relating thereto, until its application is decided
by the Board.
(2) A laboratory seeking accreditation under sub-section (1) shall apply to the Board
in such form and manner along with such fees and documents as may be specified by
regulations.
(3) A laboratory seeking accreditation shall comply with such onsite assessment
requirements, standards and such other requirements, as may be specified by regulations.
(4) The application for renewal of accreditation shall be made to the Board at least sixty
days prior to the expiration of the accreditation in such form and manner and along with such
fees as may be specified by regulations.
14. (1) The Board may, within a period of ninety days from the receipt of application for
accreditation or renewal thereof, and after carrying out inspection of the laboratory, its
records and books, and if it is satisfied that the laboratory fulfils all requirements under this
Act, by order, grant accreditation to such laboratory or renew it, subject to such conditions
as it may deem fit:
Provided that no application for accreditation shall be rejected by the Board without
recording the reasons thereof, and giving the applicant an opportunity of being heard.
(2) The accreditation or renewal of accreditation under this section shall be valid for a
period of two years.
15. (1) The Board may revoke the accreditation granted to a DNA laboratory, if such
laboratory fails to—
(a) undertake DNA testing or any other procedure relating thereto;
(b) comply with any of the conditions subject to which the accreditation has
been granted;
(c) comply with the provisions of this Act or the rules and regulations made
thereunder or any other law for the time being in force;
(d) comply with the guidelines issued by the Board under this Act; or
(e) submit or offer for inspection its laboratory or books of account and any
other relevant documents, including audit reports, when so demanded by the officers
or agency authorised by the Board.
(2) Where the Board is of the opinion that any delay in revoking accreditation given to
a DNA laboratory is prejudicial or detrimental to the public interest, it may suspend the
accreditation forthwith pending final decision on such revocation.
(3) No revocation of accreditation of a DNA laboratory shall be made by the Board
without giving the laboratory an opportunity of being heard.
(4) On the revocation or suspension of accreditation of the DNA laboratory, the
laboratory shall hand over all DNA samples and records relating to DNA testing from its
laboratory to such DNA laboratory as may be directed by the Board and it shall not retain
any sample or record.
16. Any laboratory aggrieved, by an order of rejection of its application for accreditation
or renewal thereof under section 14 or an order of suspension or revocation of accreditation
under section 15, may prefer an appeal to the Central Government or such other authority as
Granting of
accreditation
or renewal
thereof.
Power of
Board to
suspend or
revoke
accreditation.
Appeal against
rejection,
suspension or
revocation of
accreditation.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

9
that Government may, by notification, specify, within a period of sixty days from the date of
such order, which shall be decided by the Central Government or the authority, as the case
may be, within a period of sixty days from the date of receipt of such appeal.
CHAPTER IV
O
BLIGATIONS OF DNA LABORATORY
17. (1) Every DNA laboratory, which has been granted accreditation for undertaking
DNA testing or any other procedure under this Act, shall—
(a) follow such standards and procedures for quality assurance in the collection,
storage, testing and analysis of DNA sample,
(b) establish and maintain such documentation and quality system,
(c) prepare and maintain quality manuals containing such details,
(d) share DNA data prepared and maintained by it with the National DNA Data
Bank and the Regional DNA Data Bank, in such manner,
as may be specified by regulations.
(2) The DNA laboratory shall report the results of the DNA testing in conformity with
the provisions of this Act and the regulations made thereunder.
18. Every DNA laboratory shall appoint a person to be incharge of the laboratory and
employ such scientific, technical and other staff, possessing such qualifications and
experience as may be specified by regulations, for discharging the duties and performing the
functions under this Act.
19. The incharge of the DNA laboratory shall,—
(a) take such measures for facilitating skill upgradation and advancement in the
knowledge of its employees in the field of DNA testing and other related fields, as may
be specified by regulations;
(b) ensure that its employees undergo regular training in DNA related subjects,
in such institutions, level and intervals, as may be specified by regulations;
(c) maintain such records relating to the laboratory and its personnel as may be
specified by regulations.
20. (1) Every DNA laboratory shall,—
(a) possess such infrastructure,
(b) maintain such security and follow such procedure to avoid contamination of
DNA samples,
(c) establish and follow such documented evidence control system to ensure
integrity of physical evidence,
(d) establish and follow such validation process and written analytical procedure,
(e) prepare such indices,
(f) use such equipment for the methods it employs,
(g) have such documented programme for calibration of instruments and
equipment,
(h) conduct annual quality audits with such standards,
(i) install such security system for the safety of DNA laboratory and its
personnel,
Obligations of
DNA
laboratory.
Appointment
of incharge,
scientific,
technical and
other staff, of
DNA
laboratory.
Responsibilities
of person
incharge of
DNA
laboratory.
Measures to
be taken by
DNA
laboratory.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

10
(j) charge such fees for conducting DNA testing or any other procedure relating
thereto, not exceeding twenty-five thousand rupees,
as may be specified by regulations.
(2) The DNA laboratory shall, after deriving the DNA profile and depositing it with the
DNA Data Bank,—
(a) return the biological sample or remaining material for its preservation to the
investigating officer in a criminal case till the disposal of the case or the order of the
court; and
(b) in all other cases, destroy the biological sample or remaining material and
intimate the person concerned.
(3) For the purposes of this section,—
(a) "analytical procedure" means an orderly step by step procedure designed to
ensure operational uniformity;
(b) "quality audit" means an inspection used to evaluate, confirm or verify
activity related to quality;
(c) "calibration" means a set of operations which establish, under specified
conditions, the relationship between values indicated by a measuring instrument or
measuring system, or values represented by a material, and the corresponding known
values of a measurement.
21. (1) No bodily substances shall be taken from a person who is arrested for an
offence (other than the specified offences) unless the consent is given in writing for the
taking of the bodily substances.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, "specified offences" means any
offence punishable with death or imprisonment for a term exceeding seven years.
(2) If the consent required under sub-section (1) for taking of bodily substances from
a person is refused or cannot be obtained, the person investigating the case may make an
application to the Magistrate having jurisdiction for obtaining bodily substances from the
arrested person.
(3) The Magistrate may, if he is satisfied that there is reasonable cause to believe that
the bodily substances may confirm or disprove whether the person so arrested was involved
in committing the offence, order for taking of bodily substances from such person.
22. (1) Subject to sub-section (2), any person who—
(a) was present at the scene of a crime when it was committed; or
(b) is being questioned in connection with the investigation of a crime; or
(c) intends to find the whereabouts of his missing or lost relative, in disaster or
otherwise,
may voluntarily consent in writing to bodily substances being taken from him for DNA
testing.
(2) If the person giving voluntary consent is below the age of eighteen years and the
consent of the parent or guardian of such person is refused or cannot be obtained, the
person investigating the case may make an application to the Magistrate having jurisdiction,
for obtaining such bodily substances and the Magistrate, if he is satisfied that there is
reasonable cause for taking the bodily substances from such person, order for taking of
bodily substances from that person.
23. (1) For the purposes of this Act, samples for DNA testing may be collected from the
following sources, namely:—
(a) bodily substances;
(b) scene of occurrence, or scene of crime;
Consent for
taking bodily
substances to
be taken from
a person
arrested.
Bodily
substances
given
voluntarily.
Sources and
manner of
collection of
samples for
DNA testing.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

11
(c) clothing and other objects; or
(d) such other sources as may be specified by regulations.
(2) For the purposes of sub-section ( 1),—
(a) any intimate bodily substance from living persons shall be collected, and
intimate forensic procedures shall be performed, by a medical practitioner;
(b) any non-intimate bodily substance shall be collected and non-intimate
forensic procedure shall be performed by the technical staff trained for the collection
of samples for DNA testing, under the supervision of a medical practitioner or a scientist
having expertise in molecular biology or such other person as may be specified by
regulations:
Provided that before collecting bodily substances for DNA testing of a victim or a
person reasonably suspected of being a victim who is alive, or a relative of a missing person,
or a minor or a disabled person, written consent of such victim or such relative or the parent
or guardian of such minor or disabled person shall be obtained and, in case of refusal, the
person investigating the case may make an application to the Magistrate having jurisdiction,
for obtaining such bodily substances and the Magistrate, if he is satisfied that there is
reasonable cause for taking the bodily substances from such person, order for taking of
bodily substances from that person.
(3) For the purposes of this section,—
(a) "intimate bodily substance" means a sample of blood, semen or any other
tissue, fluid, urine or pubic hair, or a swab taken from a person's body orifice other than
mouth; or skin or tissue from an internal organ or body part, taken from or of a person,
living or dead;
(b) "intimate forensic procedure" means any of the following forensic procedures
conducted on a living person, namely:—
(i) external examination of the genital or anal area, the buttocks and breasts
in the case of a female;
(ii) taking of a sample of blood;
(iii) taking of a sample of pubic hair;
(iv) taking of a sample by swab or washing from the external genital or anal
area, the buttocks and breasts in the case of a female;
(v) taking of a sample by vacuum suction, by scraping or by lifting by tape
from the external genital or anal area, the buttocks and breasts in the case of a
female;
(vi) taking of a photograph or video recording of, or an impression or cast
of a wound from, the genital or anal area, buttocks and breasts in the case of a
female;
(c) "non-intimate bodily substance" means any of the following taken from or of
a person, living or dead, namely:—
(i) handprint, fingerprint, footprint or toeprint;
(ii) a sample of hair other than pubic hair;
(iii) a sample taken from a nail or under a nail;
(iv) swab taken from any part of a person’s body including mouth, but not
any other body orifice;
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

12
(v) saliva; or
(vi) a skin impression;
(d) "non-intimate forensic procedure" means any of the following forensic
procedures conducted on a living individual, namely:—
(i) examination of a part of the body other than the genital or anal area, the
buttocks and breasts in the case of a female, that requires touching of the body
or removal of clothing;
(ii) taking of a sample of hair other than pubic hair;
(iii) taking of a sample from a nail or under a nail;
(iv) taking of a buccal swab with consent;
(v) taking of a sample by swab or washing from any external part of the
body other than the genital or anal area, the buttocks and breasts in the case of
a female;
(vi) scraping or lifting by tape from any external part of the body other
than the genital or anal area, the buttocks and breasts in the case of a female;
(vii) taking of a handprint, fingerprint, footprint or toeprint; or
(viii) taking of a photograph or video recording of, or an impression or
cast of a wound from, a part of the body other than the genital or anal area, the
buttocks and breasts in the case of a female.
24. If the trial court is satisfied with the plea of the accused person that the bodily
substances taken from such person or collected from the place of occurrence of crime had
been contaminated, the court may direct the taking of fresh bodily substances for
re-examination.
CHAPTER V
DNA D
ATA BANK
25. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification, establish a National DNA Data
Bank and such number of Regional DNA Data Banks for every State, or two or more States,
as it may deem necessary.
(2) A Regional DNA Data Bank shall share all DNA data stored and maintained by it
with the National DNA Data Bank.
(3) The National DNA Data Bank shall receive DNA data from Regional DNA Data
Banks and shall store the DNA profiles received from the DNA laboratories in such format as
may be specified by regulations.
26. (1) Every DNA Data Bank shall maintain the following indices for various categories
of data, namely:—
(a) a crime scene index;
(b) a suspects' index or undertrials' index;
(c) an offenders' index;
(d) a missing persons' index; and
(e) unknown deceased persons' index.
(2) In addition to the indices referred to in sub-section (1), every DNA Data Bank shall
maintain, in relation to each DNA profile, the following information, namely:—
Taking of
bodily
substances for
re-examination.
Establishment
of DNA Data
Banks.
Maintenance
of indices by
DNA Data
Bank.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

13
(a) in case of a profile in the suspects' index or undertrials' index or offenders' index,
the identity of the person from whose bodily substances the profile was derived; and
(b) in case of a profile, other than a profile in the suspects' index or undertrials'
index or offenders' index, the case reference number of the investigation associated
with the bodily substances from which the profile was derived.
(4) The indices maintained under sub-section ( 1) shall include information of data
based on DNA testing and records relating thereto, prepared by a DNA laboratory.
27. (1) The Central Government shall appoint a Director of the National DNA Data
Bank, on the recommendations of a selection committee to be constituted by that Government,
in such manner and consisting of such persons, as may be prescribed, for the purposes of
execution, maintenance and supervision of the National DNA Data Bank.
(2) The Director of the National DNA Data Bank shall be a person of eminence possessing
such educational qualifications and experience in biological sciences, as may be prescribed.
(3) The Director of the National DNA Data Bank shall be not below the rank of a
Director to the Government of India or equivalent and shall function under the supervision
and control of the Board.
(4) The Director of the National DNA Data Bank shall exercise such powers and
perform such duties as may be specified by regulations.
(5) The Central Government may appoint a Director for each Regional DNA Data Bank,
who shall be not below the rank of Deputy Secretary to the Government of India or equivalent,
and shall function under the supervision and control of the Board.
28. (1) The Board may, with the approval of the Central Government, appoint such
officers and other employees, as it considers necessary, for the efficient discharge of the
functions of the National DNA Data Bank and the Regional DNA Data Banks.
(2) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the terms and other conditions of
service including the manner of appointment, of the Director of the National DNA Data Bank
and the Director of each of the Regional DNA Data Bank, shall be such as may be prescribed.
(3) The Board may appoint such number of officers and experts and other employees
to assist the DNA Data Banks in the discharge of its functions, on such remunerations and
upon such terms and conditions, including the manner of appointment, as may be specified
by regulations.
29. (1) The criteria and procedure to be followed by the National DNA Data Bank on
receipt of a DNA profile for comparison with DNA profiles maintained in the DNA Data Bank
and communication of the results shall be made to such persons and in such manner as may
be specified by regulations:
Provided that if the DNA profile is derived from the bodily substances of a living
person who is neither an offender nor a suspect or an undertrial, no comparison shall be
made of it with the DNA profiles in the offenders' index or suspects' index or undertrials' index
maintained in the DNA Data Bank.
(2) Any information relating to a person's DNA profile contained in the suspects' index
or undertrials' index or offenders' index of the DNA Data Bank shall be communicated only to
the authorised persons.
Directors of
DNA Data
Banks.
Officers and
other
employees of
National DNA
Data Bank and
Regional DNA
Data Banks.
Comparison
and
communication
of DNA
profiles.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

14
30. (1) On receipt of a DNA profile from the Government of a foreign State or an
international organisation or any institution of such Government or international organisation,
the National DNA Data Bank may compare such DNA profile with the DNA profiles contained
in the crime scene index, the offenders' index, the suspects' index, the undertrials' index, the
missing persons' index and the unknown deceased persons' index, to determine whether
there is a match between the profiles and the National DNA Data Bank Director may with the
prior approval of the Central Government, communicate any of the following information to
such Government or organisation or institution, as the case may be, through any agency
authorised by notification by the Central Government, namely:—
(a) that there is no match between the profiles;
(b) if there is a match between the profiles, any information relating to such
matching DNA profile; or
(c) if, in the opinion of the National DNA Data Bank Director, the DNA profile is
similar to the one contained in the DNA Data Bank, information relating to such similar
DNA profile.
(2) After receiving the similar DNA profile under clause (c) of sub-section (1), if the
foreign Government or organisation or institution referred to in sub-section (1) informs that
the possibility of a match between the similar DNA profile with the DNA profile provided by
it has not been excluded, any further information in relation to such similar DNA profile may
also be furnished in the manner specified in sub-section (1).
(3) The Central Government may, in consultation with the Board,—
(a) determine the nature and extent of sharing DNA profiles in respect of offenders,
suspects, undertrials, missing persons and unknown deceased persons with the
Government of a foreign State or an international organisation or an institution
established by that Government or organisation, as the case may be;
(b) seek similar information from such foreign State, organisation or institutions,
and the provisions of sub-sections (1) and (2) shall, mutatis mutandis, apply.
31. (1) The information contained in the crime scene index shall be retained.
(2) The Director of the National DNA Data Bank shall remove from the DNA Data Bank
the DNA profile,—
(i) of a suspect, after the filing of the police report under the statutory provisions
or as per the order of the court;
(ii) of an undertrial, as per the order of the court,
under intimation to him, in such manner as may be specified by regulations.
(3) The National DNA Data Bank shall, on receiving a written request of a person who
is neither an offender nor a suspect or an undertrial, but whose DNA profile is entered in the
crime scene index or missing persons' index of the DNA Data Bank, for removal of his DNA
profile therefrom, remove the DNA profile of such person from DNA Data Bank under
intimation to the person concerned, in such manner as may be specified by regulations:
Provided that where such DNA profile is of a minor or a disabled person, removal shall
be made on receiving written request from a parent or the guardian of such minor or disabled
person.
(4) Subject to this section, the criteria for entry, retention and removal of any DNA
profile in, or from, the DNA Data Bank and DNA laboratories shall be such as may be
specified by regulations.
Sharing of
DNA profiles
with foreign
Government
or
international
organisation.
Retention
and removal
of records.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

15
CHAPTER VI
PROTECTION OF INFORMATION
32. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Board shall ensure that the information
relating to DNA profiles, DNA samples and any records thereof, forwarded to, or in custody
of, the National DNA Data Bank or the Regional DNA Data Bank or a DNA laboratory or any
other person or authority under this Act, are secured and kept confidential.
(2) The Board shall take all necessary measures to ensure that the information referred
to in sub-section (1) are protected against access, use or disclosure not permitted under this
Act or regulations made thereunder, and against accidental or intentional destruction, loss
or damage.
(3) Without prejudice to sub-sections (1) and (2), the Board shall—
(a) adopt and implement appropriate technical and organisational security
measures;
(b) ensure that any agency appointed or engaged for performing any functions
under this Act have in place appropriate technical and organisational security measures
for the information; and
(c) ensure that the agreements or arrangements entered into with any investigation
agency, international organisation or institution, impose obligations equivalent to
those imposed on the Board under this Act, and require such agency, organisation, or
institution to act only on instructions from the Board.
(4) Notwithstanding anything in any other law for the time being in force, and save as
otherwise provided in this Act, the Board or any of its officers or other employee, the
Director of the National or Regional DNA Data Bank or any of its officers or other employees,
or the incharge and other staff of DNA laboratory or any officer or employee of the agency
engaged under this Act shall not, whether during his service or thereafter, reveal any
information relating to DNA profiles, DNA samples and any records thereof to anyone.
33. All DNA data, including DNA profiles, DNA samples and records thereof, contained
in any DNA laboratory and DNA Data Bank shall be used only for the purposes of facilitating
identification of the person and not for any other purpose.
34. Any information relating to DNA profiles, DNA samples and records thereof,
maintained in a DNA Data Bank shall be made available for the following purposes, namely:—
(a) facilitating the identification of persons in criminal cases by the law
enforcement and investigating agencies;
(b) judicial proceedings, in accordance with the rules of admissibility of evidence;
(c ) facilitating prosecution and adjudication of criminal cases;
(d) taking defence by an accused in the criminal case in which he is charged;
(e) investigation relating to civil disputes or other civil matters or offences or
cases specified in the Schedule, by making such information available to the concerned
parties with the approval of the court, or to the concerned authority; or
(f) such other purposes as may be specified by regulations.
Security and
confidentiality
of information.
Use of DNA
profiles, DNA
samples and
records, etc.,
for facilitating
identification
of persons.
Access to
information in
certain cases.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

16
35. Access to such information contained in the National DNA Data Bank and the
Regional DNA Data Banks may be made available by the Director if he considers appropriate,—
(a) to a person or class of persons, for the sole purpose of proper operation and
maintenance of the DNA Data Bank; and
(b) to the personnel of any DNA laboratory for the sole purpose of training,
in accordance with such terms and conditions as may be specified by regulations.
36. A person who is authorised to access an index of the DNA Data Bank, including
information of DNA identification records or DNA profile in that index, may also access that
index for the purposes of carrying out one time keyboard search on information obtained
from any DNA sample collected for the purpose of criminal investigation, except for a DNA
sample voluntarily submitted solely for elimination purposes.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, "one time keyboard search" means a
search under which information obtained from a DNA sample is compared with the information
in the index of the DNA Data Bank without resulting in the information obtained from the
DNA sample being included in the index.
37. Access to the information in the crime scene index contained in the DNA Data Bank
shall be restricted, in such manner as may be specified by regulations, if such information
relates to a DNA profile derived from bodily substances of—
(a) victim of an offence which forms or formed the object of relevant
investigation; or
(b) a person who has been eliminated as a suspect in the relevant investigation.
38. (1) No person who receives the DNA profile for entry in the DNA Data Bank shall
use it or allow or cause it to be used for purposes other than those for which it has been
collected in accordance with the provisions of this Act.
(2) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, no person shall communicate, or authorise
the communication of, or allow or cause to be communicated, any information on DNA
profiles contained in the DNA Data Banks or the information communicated under section 29
or section 30.
(3) No person to whom information is communicated or who has access to information
under this Act shall use that information for any purpose other than for which the
communication or access is permitted under the provisions of this Act.
CHAPTER VII
F
INANCE, ACCOUNTS, AUDIT AND REPORTS
39. The Central Government may, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law, in
this behalf, make to the Board grants of such sums of money as the Central Government may
consider necessary.
40. (1) There shall be constituted a Fund to be called the DNA Regulatory Board Fund
and there shall be credited thereto—
(a) any grants and loans made to the Board under this Act;
(b) all sums received by the Board including fees or charges, or donations from
such other source as may be decided by the Central Government; and
(c) any income from investment of the amount of the Fund.
(2) The Fund shall be applied by the Board for meeting,—
(a) the salaries and allowances payable to the Members, the officers, experts and
the other employees, including administrative expenses, of the Board; and
Access to
information
for operation,
maintenace
and training.
Access to
information in
DNA Data
Bank for one
time keyboard
search.
Restriction on
access to
information in
crime scene
index.
Prohibition on
access to
information in
DNA Data
Bank.
Grants by
Central
Government.
DNA
Regulatory
Board Fund.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

17
(b) the expenses for carrying out the purposes authorised under this Act.
41. (1) The Board shall prepare in each financial year, in such form and at such time as
may be prescribed, its budget for the next financial year showing the estimated receipts and
expenditure of the Board and forward the same to the Central Government.
(2) The Board, with the prior approval of the Central Government, shall adopt financial
regulation which specifies in particular, the procedure for drawing up and implementing the
Board's budget.
42. The Board shall prepare in each financial year, in such form and at such time as may
be prescribed, its annual report giving a full account of its activities during the previous
financial year and submit a copy thereof to the Central Government.
43. (1) The Board shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records and
prepare an annual statement of accounts, in such form as may be prescribed, in consultation
with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
(2) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and any person appointed by him in
connection with the audit of the accounts of the Board under this Act shall have the same
rights and privileges and authority in connection with such audit as the Comptroller and
Auditor-General generally has in connection with the audit of Government accounts and, in
particular, shall have the right to demand the production of books, accounts, connected
vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect any of the offices of the Board.
(3) The accounts of the Board, as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor General of
India or any other person appointed by him in this behalf, together with the audit report
thereon shall be forwarded annually to the Central Government by the Board.
(4) The accounts of the Board shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-General
annually and any expenditure incurred in connection with such audit shall be payable by the
Board to the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
44. The Central Government shall cause the annual report and auditor's report of the
Board to be laid, as soon as may be after they are received, before each House of Parliament.
CHAPTER VIII
O
FFENCES AND PENALTIES
45. Whoever, by virtue of his employment or official position or otherwise, has in his
possession, or having access to, individually identifiable DNA information kept in the DNA
laboratory or DNA Data Bank, wilfully discloses it in any manner to any person or agency
not entitled to receive it under this Act, or under any other law for the time being in force,
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and also
with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees.
46. Whoever, without authorisation, wilfully obtains individually identifiable DNA
information from the DNA laboratory or DNA Data Bank, shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and also with fine which may extend
to one lakh rupees.
47. Whoever, without authorisation, wilfully uses any DNA sample or result of any
DNA analysis, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three
years and also with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees.
Budget.
Annual report.
Accounts and
audit of Board.
Annual report
and auditor's
report to be
laid before
Parliament.
Penalty for
unauthorised
disclosure of
information in
DNA Data
Bank.
Penalty for
obtaining
information
from DNA
Data Bank
without
authorisation.
Penalty for
using DNA
sample or
result without
authorisation.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

18
48. Whoever, accesses information stored in the DNA Data Bank, otherwise than in
accordance with the provisions of this Act, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term
which may extend to two years and also with fine which may extend to fifty thousand rupees.
49. Whoever, knowingly and intentionally, destroys, alters, contaminates or tampers
with biological evidence which is required to be preserved under any law for the time being
in force, with the intention to prevent that evidence from being subjected to DNA testing or
to prevent the production or use of that evidence in a judicial proceeding, shall be punishable
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years and also with fine which may
extend to two lakh rupees.
50. Whoever, contravenes any of the provisions of this Act or the rules and regulations
made thereunder for which no penalty is provided in this Act, shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years and also with fine which may extend
to fifty thousand rupees.
51. ( 1) Where an offence under this Act, has been committed by a company or
institution, every person who at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, and
was responsible to, the company or institution for the conduct of the business of the company
or institution, as well as the company or institution, shall be deemed to be guilty of the
offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person
liable to any punishment provided in this Act, if he proves that the offence was committed
without his knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of
such offence.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), where an offence under
this Act has been committed by a company or institution and it is proved that the offence has
been committed with the consent or connivance of or is attributable to any neglect on the
part of any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company or institution, such
director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of the offence
and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section,—
(a) "company" means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association
of individuals; and
(b) "director", in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.
CHAPTER IX
M
ISCELLANEOUS
52. The Chairperson, Members and other officers of the Board, National DNA Data
Bank and Regional DNA Data Banks shall be deemed, when acting or purporting to act in
pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act, to be public servants within the meaning of
section 21 of the Indian Penal Code.
53. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against the Central
Government or any officer of the Central Government or the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson
or any Member or officer of the Board or the National DNA Data Bank or the Regional DNA
Data Banks acting under this Act for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be
done under this Act or the rules or regulations made thereunder.
54. (1) If at any time the Central Government is of the opinion—
(a) that, on account of circumstances beyond the control of the Board, it is
unable to discharge the functions or perform the duties assigned to it by or under the
provisions of this Act; or
Penalty for
unlawful access
to information
in DNA Data
Bank.
Penalty for
destruction,
alterations,
contamination
or tampering
with biological
evidence.
Penalty for
contravention
where no
specific
punishment is
provided.
Offences by
companies or
institutions.
Chairperson,
Members,
officers to be
public
servants.
Protection of
action taken
in good faith.
Power of
Central
Government
to supersede
Board.
45 of 1860.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

19
(b) that the Board has persistently defaulted in complying with any direction
issued by the Central Government under this Act or in the discharge of the functions
or performance of the duties imposed on it by or under the provisions of this Act and
as a result of such default, the financial position of the Board or the administration of
the Board has suffered; or
(c) that circumstances exist which render it necessary in the public interest to do so,
it may, by notification, supersede the Board for such period, not exceeding six months, as
may be specified in the notification:
Provided that before issuing any such notification, the Central Government shall give
a reasonable opportunity to the Board to make representations against the proposed
supersession and shall consider the representations, if any, of the Board.
(2) Upon the publication of a notification under sub-section  (1) superseding the
Board,—
(a) the Chairperson and other Members shall, as from the date of supersession,
vacate their offices as such;
(b) all the powers, functions and duties which may, by or under this Act, be
exercised or discharged by or on behalf of the Board shall, until the Board is
reconstituted under sub-section (3), be exercised and discharged by an administrator
who shall be an official not below the rank of a Secretary to the Government of India,
to be appointed by the Central Government; and
(c) all property owned or controlled by the Board shall, until the Board is
reconstituted under sub-section (3), vest in the Central Government.
(3) On the expiration of the period of supersession specified in the notification issued
under sub-section ( 1), the Central Government may reconstitute the Board by a fresh
appointment and in such case any person or persons who vacated their offices under
clause (a) of sub-section (2), shall not be deemed to be disqualified for appointment:
Provided that the Central Government may, at any time, before the expiration of the
period of supersession, take action under this sub-section.
(4) The Central Government shall cause a copy of the notification issued under
sub-section (1) and a full report of any action taken under this section and the circumstances
leading to such action to be laid before each House of Parliament at the earliest.
55. (1) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this Act, the Board shall, in
the discharge of its functions and duties under this Act, be bound by such directions on
questions of policy as the Central Government may give in writing to it from time to time.
(2) If any dispute arises between the Central Government and the Board as to whether
a question is or is not a question of policy, the decision of the Central Government thereon
shall be final.
56. (1) The Central Government may, if it is of the opinion that it is expedient so to do,
by notification, amend the Schedule so as to include therein or exclude therefrom, or vary the
description of, any entry in any Part thereof.
(2) Every notification issued under sub-section (1) shall, as soon as may be after it is
issued, be laid before each House of Parliament.
57. No court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any suit or proceeding in respect of
any matter which the Board is empowered by or under this Act to determine.
58. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for carrying out the
provisions of this Act.
Power of
Central
Government
to issue
directions.
Power to
amend
Schedule.
Court not to
have
jurisdiction.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

20
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the pay and allowances of the Vice-Chairperson and the Member under
sub-section (3), and the allowances payable to the Chairperson and other ex officio
Members under sub-section (4), of section 5;
(b) the salaries and allowances payable to, and the terms and other conditions of
service of officers and employees of the Board under sub-section (2) of section 11;
(c) manner in which the Board shall assist and co-operate in criminal investigation
between various investigation agencies within the country and with any foreign State,
international organisation or institution in dealing with DNA testing under clause (n)
of section 12;
(d) such other functions of the Board under clause (q) of section 12;
(e) the manner of constitution of a selection committee and persons comprising
the committee, for the appointment of a National DNA Data Bank Director under
sub-section (1) of section 27;
(f) the educational qualifications and experience of the Director of the National
DNA Data Bank under sub-section (2) of section 27;
(g) the salaries and allowances payable to, and the terms and other conditions of
service including the manner of appointment, of the Director of the National DNA Data
Bank and the Director of each of the Regional DNA Data Bank under sub-section (2) of
section 28;
(h) the form in which and the time at which the Board shall prepare its budget
under sub-section (1) of section 41;
(i) the form in which and the time at which the Board shall prepare its annual
report under section 42;
(j) the form in which the annual statement of accounts shall be prepared by the
Board under sub-section (1) of section 43; and
(k) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed, or in respect of which
provision is to be, or may be, made by rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
59. (1) The Board may, with the previous approval of the Central Government and after
previous publication, by notification in Official Gazette, make regulations consistent with
this Act and the rules made thereunder, to carry out the provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
regulations may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the time and the place at which the Board shall meet and the procedure it shall
observe with regard to the transaction of business at its meetings (including quorum
at such meetings), under sub-section (1) of section 6;
(b) the other relevant purposes for the optimum use of DNA techniques and
technologies under clause (h) of section 12;
(c) the form, the fee and the manner in which an application for accreditation
shall be made by a DNA laboratory under sub-section (2) of section 13;
(d) onsite assessment requirements, standards and such other requirements to
be complied by a DNA laboratory under sub-section (3) of section 13;
(e) the form, the fee and the manner in which an application for renewal of
accreditation shall be made by a DNA laboratory under sub-section (4) of section 13;
Power to
make
regulations.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

21
(f) the obligations to be carried out by a DNA laboratory under sub-section (1) of
section 17;
(g) the educational qualifications and experience and other eligibility criterias in
respect of person in charge of a DNA laboratory, technical and managerial staff, and
other employees of DNA laboratory under section 18;
(h) the measures to be taken, the level and intervals in which the employees shall
undergo training and the records to be maintained, by the in charge of a DNA laboratory
under section 19;
(i) the measures to be taken by DNA laboratories under sub-section  (1) of
section 20;
(j) the other sources for collection of DNA sample under clause ( d) of
sub-section (1) of section 23;
(k) such other person under whose supervision DNA sample may be collected,
under clause (b) of sub-section (2) of section 23;
(l) the format in which the National DNA Data Bank shall receive DNA data from
Regional DNA Data Banks and store the DNA profiles under sub-section  (3) of
section 25;
(m) the powers and duties of the National DNA Data Bank Director under
sub-section (4) of section 27;
(n) the appointment of number of officers, experts and other employees, their
remunerations, terms and conditions of appointment, including the manner of
appointment, under sub-section (3) of section 28;
(o) the criteria and the procedure to be followed by the National DNA Data Bank
Director on receipt of a DNA profile, the person to whom the result shall be
communicated and the manner of communication under sub-section (1) of section 29;
(p) the manner in which the DNA profile of a suspect or an undertrial shall be
expunged by the National DNA Data Bank Director under sub-section  (2) of
section 31;
(q) the manner in which the DNA profile of a person who is neither an offender
nor a suspect shall be expunged from the crime scene index or a missing persons' index
under sub-section (3) of section 31;
(r) other criteria for entry, retention and expunction of any DNA profile under
sub-section (4) of section 31;
(s) the other purposes for which the information relating to DNA profiles, DNA
samples and records relating thereto shall be made available under clause ( f) of
section 34;
(t) the terms and conditions for access to information under section 35;
(u) the manner in which access to the information in the crime scene index shall
be restricted under section 37;
(v) any other matter which is to be, or may be, or in respect of which provisions
is to be, or may be, made by regulations for carrying out the provisions of the Act.
60. Every rule and every regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may
be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of
thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions,
and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive
sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation or
both Houses agree that the rule or regulation should not be made, the rule or regulation shall
Rules and
regulations to
be laid before
Parliament.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

22
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so,
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity
of anything previously done under that rule or regulation.
61. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to it to be necessary, for removing
the difficulty:
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of the period of
two years from the date of commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament.
Power to
remove
difficulties. 5
10

THE SCHEDULE
[See sections 2(1)(viii), 12(o), 34(e) and 56(1)]
List of matters for DNA testing
PART A
Offences under Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) where DNA testing is useful for
investigation of offences.
PART B
Offences under special laws:
(i) The Immoral Traffic (Prevention) Act, 1956 (104 of 1956);
(ii) The Medical Termination of Pregnancy Act, 1971 (34 of 1971);
(iii) The Pre-conception and Pre-natal Diagnostic Techniques (Prohibition of Sex
Selection) Act, 1994 (57 of 1994);
(iv) The Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act, 2005 (43 of 2005);
(v) The Protection of Civil Rights Act, 1955 (22 of 1955);
(vi) The Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities)
Act, 1989 (33 of 1989);
(vii) The Motor V ehicles Act, 1988 (59 of 1988).
PART C
Civil disputes and other civil matters:
(i) Parental dispute (maternity or paternity);
(ii) Issues relating to pedigree;
(iii) Issues relating to assisted reproductive technologies (surrogacy, in-vitro
fertilisation and intrauterine implantation or such other technologies);
(iv) Issues relating to transplantation of human organs (donor and recipient) under
the Transplantation of Human Organs Act, 1994 (42 of 1994);
(v) Issues relating to immigration or emigration;
(vi) Issues relating to establishment of individual identity.
PART D
Other cases:
(i) Medical negligence;
(ii) Unidentified human remains;
(iii) Identification of abandoned or disputed children and related issues.
23

MGIPMRND—3169LS(S3)—08-01-2019.
LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the regulation of use and application of Deoxyribonucleic Acid (DNA)
technology for the purposes of establishing the identity of certain categories of persons
including the victims, offenders, suspects, undertrials, missing persons and unknown
deceased persons and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(As passed by Lok Sabha)