 AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 142 of 2021
THE MANAGEMENT AND CONTROL OF
STUBBLE BILL, 2021
By
SHRI BHOLA SINGH, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the formulation of a national policy to set up advanced
tools, techniques and technologies for control and management of the
disposal of stubble directly outside the agricultural farm lands, for
their scientific management and for preparing a model stubble
management policy to prevent open burning or open depositing
of stubble garbage or waste so as to protect the environment
and ultimately mother Earth from being polluted by smoke and
smog spread due to the burning of stubble in open fields which
is also responsible for the climate change and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.

WHEREAS decisions were taken at the United Nations Conference on
the Human Environment held in Stockholm in June, 1972, in which India 
participated, to  take appropriate steps for the preservation of  the natural 
resources of the earth which, among other things, include the preservation of 
the quality of air and control of air pollution;
AND WHEREAS it is considered necessary to implement the decisions 
aforesaid in so far as they relate to the preservation of the quality of air and 
control of air pollution;
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-second Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Management and Control of Stubble 
Act, 2021.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may,
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the
Government of that State and in other cases, the Central Government;
(b) “biomass pellets” include pellets created from agro-residual waste and
stubble;
(c) “Custom Hiring Centers” means units comprising sets of farm
machinery, implements and equipment meant for custom hiring by farmers;
(d) “garbage” means the garbage or waste material which is not of any
use to farmers;
(e) “public place” means any place which is open to use and enjoyment of
the general public whether it is actually used or enjoyed by the public or not
and includes a road, street, market, house gully or way, whether a throughfare
or not, and the landfill sites to which public are granted access or have a right
to resort or over which they have a right to pass; and
(f) “stubble’’ means the short, stiff stalks of grain or hay remaining on an
agricultural field after harvesting of crop.
3. ( 1) The Central Government shall, within six months of the
commencement of this Act, frame and publish in the Official Gazette a National
Policy for management and control of disposal of stubble throughout the country.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions contained in sub-
section (1), the National Policy shall include–
(a) establishment of Custom Hiring Centres (CHCs) for in-situ crop
residue management machinery in all the districts across country;
5
2
15
10
20
25
30
Definitions.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
National
Policy for
management
and control of
disposal of
stubble.

(b) provision for Information, Education and Communication (IEC)
activities for creating awareness among farmers regarding disposal of
stubble;
(c) policy for distribution of in-situ crop residue management
machinery to farmers on subsidy;
(d) policy for biomass utilization of stubble for power generation
through co-firing in pulverized coal fired boilers;
(e) setting up power plants which are capable of generating power
from stubble or combination of stubble with other bio degradable garbage;
(f) mandatory provision for all coal based Thermal Power Plants to
use minimum five per cent. of biomass pellets and upto ten per cent. to be
co-fired with coal;
(g) promote technology to use stubble in construction and development
of tourist places and spots;
(h) setting up of stubble recycling plants; and
(i) promote participation of Panchayat at all levels in educating people
in control and management of stubble in their areas.
4. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time
being in force, the disposal of stubble by any person, by himself or through
another, knowingly or otherwise by burning it in open agricultural fields and
public places is hereby prohibited.
(2) No person shall, knowingly or otherwise, place or permit to be placed,
except in accordance with such procedure and after complying with such
safeguards as may be prescribed, any stubble or garbage with stubble in any
public place or in a place open to public view unless,—
(a) the stubble is placed in a power plants capable of generating power
from the stubble or combination of stubble with other bio-degradable
garbage; or
(b) the stubble is deposited in a location designated by a local self-
Government having jurisdiction on an area for the lawful use or disposal of
stubble, as the case may be.
(3) Whoever contravenes the provisions of this section shall be guilty of
committing an offence under this Act.
5. It shall be the duty of the local self-Government to,—
(a) establish sufficient number of Custom Hiring Centres (CHCs) for
in-situ crop residue management machinery in central and convenient
location;
(b) provide crop residue management machinery to the farmers;
(c) setting up of appropriate number of stubble recycling plants;
3
Prohibition to
throw stubble
in  p u blic  p la c e.
Establishment
of Custom
Hiring Centres
and distribution
of crop residue
machinery.
5
10
15
20
25
35
30

(d) establish Information, Education and Communication (IEC) centres
for creating awareness among farmers; and
(e) adequate arrangement for collection and deposit of stubble
collected.
6. (1) Whoever commits any act in contravention of any of the provisions
of this Act shall be liable to pay fine which shall not be less than twenty thousand
rupees, but which may extend upto fifty thousand rupees.
(2) Whoever having been convicted of an offence under this Act is again
convicted of any offence under this Act shall be punished with simple
imprisonment which may extend upto one year.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal procedure,
of 1973, an offence punishable under this Act shall be cognizable and bailable.
7. It shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to extend
welfare measures, appropriate medical facilities and special allowances
to the workers who are engaged to execute works under the National
policy framed under this Act.
8. All offences under this Act shall be tried in a summary way by a Judicial
Magistrate of the first class and the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973 shall, as far as may be, apply to such trials.
9. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by
Parliament by law in this behalf, provide requisite funds, from time to
time to State Governments for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
10. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation
of any other law for the time being in force dealing with the subject matter of
this Act.
11.(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be
after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a
total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or
more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree
in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified
form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything
previously done under that rule.
Penalty.
Welfare
Measures for
Workers.
Central
Government
to Provide
Funds.
4
Offence to be
tried
Summarily.
Act to
Supplement
other Laws.
Power to
Make Rules.
5
10
15
20
25
35
30
2 of 1974.
2 of 1974.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
In recent years, during the winter season most of the cities in the
National Capital region have been badly affected with the smoke and smog
and air pollution due to the burning of stubble by the farmers in Punjab, Haryana,
Rajasthan and other States. Farmers of Haryana and Punjab cultivate wheat
and paddy in every six months. During this time, after harvesting a crop, it is
used to clean the fields. Air pollution arises after burning pollen. The pollution
level increases in Delhi, especially after the burning of stubble by the farmers
of Haryana and Punjab. The matter has reached the Supreme Court. The
Supreme Court and the NGT both have issued the instructions on the ban on
burning of Stubble. Since then the farmers are demanding from the Government
for alternatives of dispose of stubble. In addition to wheat and paddy, sugarcane
leaves are most commonly burnt. According to an official report, more than
500 million tonnes of parali (crop residues) is produced annually in the country,
cereal crops (rice, wheat, maize and millets) account for seventy per cent. of
the total crop residue. Ozone layer is bursting with carbon monoxide and
carbon dioxide gases in the smoke that comes out of the burn, due to which
the ultraviolet rays, which can prove fatal to the skin, reach the ground directly.
Its smoke causes irritation in the eyes. The problems relating to breathing and
lung diseases are also increasing.
The Ministry of Power had brought out a policy for biomass utilization
for power generation through co-firing in pulverized coal fired boilers in
November, 2017. As per the policy, all fluidized bed and pulverized coal units
(coal based thermal power plants) of power generating utilities, public or private,
located in shall endeavor to use 5-10 per cent. blend of biomass pellets made,
primarily of agro residue along with coal after assessing the technical feasibility
viz. safety aspects etc. In line with the policy, Central Electricity Authority
(CEA) had issued an advisory to all concerned State Governments, power
plants utilities, power equipment manufacturers and other stakeholders to
promote use of biomass pellets. The Ministry of Power has decided that the
States of Haryana and Punjab shall issue bids for all coal based Thermal
Power Plants to use minimum five per cent. of biomass pellets and upto ten
per cent. to be co-fired with coal.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to provide for formulation of national policy
to set up advanced tools, techniques and technologies for control and
management of the disposal of stubble directly outside the agricultural farm
lands, for their scientific management and for preparing a model stubble
management policy to prevent open burning or open depositing of stubble
garbage or waste so as to protect the environment and ultimately mother
Earth from being polluted by smoke and smog spread due to the burning of
stubble in open fields which is also responsible for the climate change.
Hence this Bill.
 NEW DELHI;  BHOLA SINGH
July 6, 2021.
5

6
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 7 of the Bill provides for welfare measures, medical facilities and
special allowances to the workers who are engaged to execute the work
under this Act. Clause 9 makes it mandatory that the Central Government
shall provide funds from time to time for carrying out the purposes of this Bill.
At this stage it is not possible to quantify the funds which may be required for
the implementation of the provisions. However, it is estimated that a sum of
rupees one hundred crore may involve from the Consolidated Fund of India as
recurring expenditure per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore may
also be involved.

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make
rules for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters
of detail only, the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.
7

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
to provide  for the formulation of a national policy to set up advanced tools,
techniques and technologies for control and management of the disposal
of stubble directly outside the agricultural farm lands, for their scientific
management and for preparing a model stubble management policy to
prevent open burning or open depositing of stubble garbage or waste
so as to protect the environment and ultimately mother Earth from
being polluted by smoke and smog spread due to the burning of
stubble in open fields which is also responsible for the climate
change and for matters connected therewith
or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Bhola Singh, M.P .)