As introduced in Lok Sabha
 
Bill No. 142 of 2022
THE REHABILITATION AND RELOCATION OF PERSONS  
DISPLACED DUE TO CLIMATE CHANGE BILL, 2022
By
Dr. Heena Vijaykumar Ga vit, M.P.
a
BILL
to provide for the rehabilitation of persons displaced due to climate change,  
realization of their rights of life, health, food, water, shelter,  
property and resettlement and for matters  
connected therewith.
 Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:—
 1. (1) This Act may be called the Rehabilitation and Relocation of Persons Displaced 
due to Climate Change Act, 2022.
  ( 2) It extends to the whole of India.
Short title, 
extent and 
commencement.
5

  ( 3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the official gazette, appoint.
 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:—
   ( a) “appropriate Government’’ means  in the case of a State, the Government of that  
 State, and in all other cases, the Central Government;
   ( b) “climate change” means the long-term shifts in temperatures and weather  
 patterns whether natural or man made;
   ( c) “climate-induced migration’’ refers to person who have been forced to migrate  
 and leave their traditional habitat, temporarily or permanently owing to climate change  
 that jeopardized their existence and affect the quality of their life;
   ( d) “compensation” means the amount the money rewarded to the displaced person  
 for loss or damage suffered by them;
   ( e) “forced displacement” means the involuntary migration for displacement of  
 person away from their habitant home caused due to the “conflicts” including persecution,  
 trafficking, and natural disasters which may trigger floods, drought and landslides;
   ( f) “internally displaced person” means those person who, for reasons of sudden or  
 progressive climate change is obliged to leave his habitual place of residence and is in  
 need of a durable resettlement;
   ( g) “prescribed’’ means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
   ( h) “rehabilitation” means the rehabilitating or restoring back the displaced person  
 to their former State due to climate change;
   ( i) “relocation” means relocating displaced persons to other places within the  
 country; and
   ( j) “resettlement” means an area where displaced persons are resettled by the  
 appropriate Government.
 3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the official gazette, set up 
a National Committee to be known as the National Committee on Internally Displaced 
Persons to solve the issues related to internally displaced persons due to climate change.
  ( 2) The National Committee shall consist of one person only (hereinafter referred 
to as the Presiding Officer) to be appointed by the Central government in such manner 
as may be prescribed.
  (3) The functions of the National Committee shall be such as may be prescribed. 
  ( 4) The Salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of services 
of Presiding Officer shall be such as may be prescribed.
 4. (1) Every State Government shall, as soon as may be, by notification in the 
official gazette, set up a State Committee to be known as the State Committee or 
Internally Displaced Persons.
  ( 2) Each State Committee shall comprise of one Presiding Officer to be appointed 
by the State Government concerned in such manner as may be prescribed. 
 5. (1) Every State Government shall, in each district under its jurisdiction establish 
a District Committee to be known as the District Committee on Internally Displaced 
Persons.
  ( 2) Each District Committee shall:—
    (a) consist of a Presiding Officer having experience of not less than ten years  
  in the area of disaster management including rescuing, rehabilitation  
Definitions.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
2
Setting up of 
the National 
Committee 
on Internally 
Displaced 
Persons.
State Committee 
on Internally 
Displaced 
Persons.
District 
Committee 
on Internally 
Displaced 
Persons.
40
45

  resettlement, and providing funds to work in the context of internally displaced  
  victims of climate change, to be appointed by State Government in such manner  
  as may be prescribed.
    (b) ensure that its officers and employees  are trained for handling and managing  
  the internally displaced victims of climate change. 
    (c) ensure available resources relating to internally displaced persons owing to  
  climate change are so maintained and readily available for use or use of it during such  
  events to trigger and rescue and protect them from such events;
    (d) ensure that all the projects under it or within its jurisdiction conform to the  
  standard and specifications laid down for prevention and mitigation of disasters by  
  the National Commission, State Commission or the District Commission, as the case  
  may be; 
    (e) carry out relief, rehabilitation, and reconstruction activities in the affected  
  area; and
    (f)  take such other measures as may be necessary for disaster management.
 6. (1) The presiding officer of the National Committee, State Committee or District 
Committee shall ensure the rehabilitation, relocation and resettlement of the internally 
displaced persons.
  ( 2) The rehabilitation of the internally displaced persons shall include:—
    (a) rescuing the displaced families due to climate change from the affected areas  
  and take them to a safer and better place;
    (b) providing adequate shelter and basic resources as a relief until proper  
  resettlement is arranged for the displaced; and
    (c) setting up temporary medical services, health and sanitation awareness  
  workshops and education camps for children.
  ( 3)  The Resettlement and relocation of internally displaced persons shall include,—
    (a) resettlement of internally displaced persons in a safe and better area;
    (b) allotting the habitation site and house to the displaced persons in a safe and  
  better area with adequate facilities and infrastructure; 
    (c) allocating land to the displaced families;
    (d) providing land and payment for construction of cattle sheds and petty shops  
  for the displaced families; 
    (e) allocating one–time grant to artisans and small traders;
    (f) providing mandatory employment opportunities to the members of the  
  affected families;
    (g) constructing and repairing of tubewells, rainwater-harvesting, and water  
  tanks in each home in order to provide safe and healthy drinking water and for use for  
  other purposes;
    (h) setting up educational institutions and infrastructures for children of the  
  victims of climate change;
    (i) issuance of Identity cards to be specified as climate-induced displaced  
  families, so they may be included in the Government allotted schemes and receive  
  benefits from it;
Rehabilitation, 
Relocation, and 
Resettlement 
Schemes for 
Internally 
Displaced 
persons due to 
Climate Change.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
3
40

    (j) constructing of hospitals with free medical facilities and proper healthcare  
  provision for women and children; 
    (k) payment of the rehabilitation and resettlement amount to the displaced  
  family:
      Provided that the appropriate Government may, by notification increase the  
    rate of rehabilitation and resettlement amount payable to the affected families,  
    taking into account the rise in the price index. 
 7. (1)  Where the appropriate Government is satisfied that there is likely to be involuntary 
internal displacement of persons due to environmental disasters, then, the State Government 
and local authority shall, by, notification, appoint in respect of that project, an officer not 
below the rank of Joint Collector or Additional Collector or Deputy Collector to be the 
Administrator for rehabilitation and resettlement of the displaced persons under this Act.
  ( 2)The Administrator appointed under sub-section (1) shall, with a view to enabling 
him or her to function and efficiently and to meet the special time frame, be provided with 
such powers, duties, and responsibilities as may be prescribed by the appropriate Government 
and provided with office infrastructure and be assisted by such officers and employees who 
shall be subordinate to him as the appropriate Government may decide.
  (3) Subject to the superintendence, directions, and control of the appropriate 
Government and the Commissioner for Rehabilitation and Relocation and Resettlement 
appointed under section 7, the formulation, execution, and monitoring of the rehabilitation, 
relocation  resettlement of the displaced person shall vest in the Administrator. 
 8. (1) The State Government shall appoint an officer of the rank of the Commissioner 
or Secretary for the rehabilitation and relocation  resettlement of affected families under this 
act, to be called the Commission for Rehabilitation, Relocation and Resettlement. 
  ( 2) The Commissioner shall be responsible for formulation and implementation of 
rehabilitation and relocation and resettlement schemes or plans under this Act.
  ( 3) The Commissioner shall be responsible for the post-implementation social audit 
in consultation with the Gram Sabha in rural areas and municipality in urban areas, as the 
case may be.
 9. (1) The Central Government may, whenever necessary, for national or inter-
State projects, constitute a  National Monitoring committee in order to review and 
monitor the implementation of rehabilitation, relocation, and resettlement for 
internally displaced persons due to climate change schemes or plans under this Act.
  ( 2) The National Monitoring Committee may, besides having representation 
of the concerned Ministries and Departments of the Central and State Governments, 
associate with it eminent experts from the relevant fields.
  ( 3) The Central Government shall provide officers and other employees to the 
Committee necessary for its efficient functioning.
  ( 4)  The procedures to be followed by the National Monitoring Committee and 
the allowances payable to the experts and officers and employees shall be such as may 
be prescribed.  
 10. (1) The State Government shall constitute a State Monitoring Committee in 
order to review and monitor the implementation of rehabilitation and relocation and 
resettlement schemes or plans under this Act.
  ( 2) The State Monitoring Committee may, besides having representatives of 
the concerned Ministries and Departments of the State Government, associate with it 
eminent experts from the relevant fields.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
4
Procedure and 
Manner of 
Rehabilitation 
and 
Resettlement.
National 
Monitoring 
Committee for 
Rehabilitation 
and 
Resettlement.
Commissioner 
for 
Rehabilitation, 
Relocation and 
Resettlement.
State 
Monitoring 
Committee.
40
45

  ( 3) The procedures to be followed by the State Monitoring Committee and the 
allowances payable to the experts shall be such as may be prescribed by the State. 
 11. The States and Union territories shall provide all the relevant information on the 
matters covered under this Act, to the National Monitoring Committee in a regular and 
timely manner, and also as and when required.
 12. The Central Government shall, be the authority for coordination with 
the department of forest and climate change, the department of rehabilitation, the 
department of disaster management, the department of women and child development, 
the department of social justice and empowerment, the department of law and justice 
shall collect and maintain data on displacement caused by climate change, including 
information from-
   (a) the International Organization for Migration;
   (b) the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees;
   (c) United Nations International Children’s Emergency Fund; and
   (d) other international organizations that are collecting such data. 
 13.  (1) The Central Government shall formulate a specific scheme for internally 
displaced persons due to climate change providing them with the benefits under the 
scheme.
  ( 2) The Central Government shall constitute a Fund for Internally Displaced 
Persons due to Climate Change for carrying out the purpose of this act.
  ( 3) The fund should be utilized to compensate the affected families due to the 
climate change. 
 14. (1) The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament 
by law in this behalf provide requisite funds for the effective implementation of this 
Act.
  ( 2) Each State Government shall, after due appropriation made by the State 
Legislature in this behalf, provide requisite funds for the effective implementation of 
this Act.
 15. (1) The Central Government may issue such guidelines to the appropriate government 
or, as the case may be, the local authority, as it deems fit for the purposes of implementation 
of the provisions of this act.
  ( 2) The appropriate Government may issue guidelines and give such directions, as 
it deems fit, to the local authority or the Internally Displaced Persons due to the Climate 
Change committee regarding the implementation of the provisions of this Act.
  ( 3) The local authority may issue guidelines and give such directions, as it deems 
fit, to the Internally Displaced Persons due to the Climate Change committee regarding the 
implementation of the provisions of this Act.
 16. No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central Government, the 
State Government, the National Committee for Internally Displaced Persons due to Climate 
Change, the State Committee for Internally Displaced Persons due to Climate Change, the 
local authority or any person, in respect of anything which is in good faith done or intended 
to be done,  in pursuance of this Act, or any rules or order made thereunder.
 17. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make 
rules for carrying out the purpose of this Act. 
  ( 2) Every rule made under this act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon 
5
10
15
Appropriate 
Government to 
provide information to 
National Monitoring 
Committee.
Collection and 
Maintenance of 
data.
Scheme and 
Fund for 
Internally 
Displaced 
Persons.
Power of 
appropriate 
Government to 
issue guidelines.
20
25
5
Appropriate 
Government to 
provide funds.
Protection of 
action taken in 
good faith.
Power to make 
rules.
30
35
40
45

as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session for a total 
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive 
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both House agree in making any modification in the rule or 
both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect 
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously 
done under that rule. 
  ( 3) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as 
may be after it is made, before the State Legislature.
  ( 4) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers, 
such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:
    (a) training for officers who will be rescuing the people who were displaced due  
  to the climate change; 
    (b) The national committee for internally displaced persons due to climate  
  change, the state committee for internally displaced persons due to climate change,  
  and local authorities should be obliged to carry out all functions as prescribed in the  
  act;
    (c) The form and manner of issuing identity cards to Internally Displaced Persons  
  due to Climate Change by the Committee concerned.  
 18.  (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central 
Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to it to be necessary for removing 
the difficulty:
    Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of three  
  years from the commencement of rehabilitation and relocation of a person displaced  
  due to the climate change act. 
  ( 2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
made, before each House of Parliament. 
6
Power to remove 
difficulties.
5
10
15
20
25

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
 Nearly five million people in India were internally displaced due to climate change 
and disasters in 2021, the United Nations has said in a report. Climate change is one of the 
greatest challenges facing the world today and the individuals and communities displaced 
from their homes and lands as a result of climate change are the human face of this challenge. 
In India, every year there are always changing weather patterns and events that result in the 
catastrophe by causing environmental disruption which leads to people being displaced in 
their own States or country due to climate change, losing their traditional habitat, and fleeing 
from their homes due to changing weather patterns and events which disrupts their livelihood 
by destroying their land, homes, and cattles, etc. caused by the extreme weather events such 
as extreme rainfall which eventually leads to the problem water–logging triggering into 
floods, especially in coastal areas, cloud-burst in also hilly areas and hilly areas facing with 
landslides, drought, extreme food issues and etc.
 However, the absence of a uniform policy for internally displaced people also lends 
itself to the broader ignorance of the movement induced by climate change.  This is muddled 
even further when people migrate to new lands and cross borders, often to nations that are 
devoid of frameworks for the rehabilitation and protection of climate-displaced people.
 Presently, the enormity of internal displacements suggests that climate-driven movement 
will only worsen as the world grapples with an escalating climate emergency.
 We are a democratic country and every citizen is entitled to equal rights. Thus, this 
bill seeks to address the issues related to climate-induced migration that is triggered due to 
the extreme weather conditions which eventually forces a family to leave their traditional 
habitat to be in a safe and better place to be protected from such environmental disaster.
 The bill seeks to lay down the rehabilitation, relocation, and resettlement of internally 
displaced victims of climate change in order to provide them with assistance, protection and 
better facilities.
 The bill is a framework to provide the rehabilitation, relocation and resettling the people 
affected due to the climate change, provide them with housing infrastructure, food, water 
and basic amenities, providing them with employment opportunities to gain back their lost 
livelihood.
 Hence this Bill.
   New Delhi;                        HEENA  VIJAYKUMAR GA VIT
5 July, 2022.
7

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
 Clause 3 of the Bill provides for setting up of  a National Committee on Internally 
Displaced Persons. It also provides for appointment of a Presiding Officer for the Committee. 
Clause 8 provides for the Constitution of a National Monitoring Committee by the Central 
Government. Clause 11 provides for the collection and maintenance of data on displacement 
caused by climate change. Clause 12 provides for the constitution of a fund for Internally 
Displaced Persons due to climate change. Clause 13 provides for the appropriate government 
to provide funds.
 The Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. 
However, at this stage, it is not possible to quantify the amount but it is estimated that an 
amount of fifty crore rupees may involve as recurring expenditure per annum.
 A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be 
involved.
8

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
 Clause 16 and 17 of the Bill empowers the Central Government make rules for carrying 
out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation 
of legislative powers is of normal character.
9

LOK SABHA
a
BILL
to provide for the rehabilitation of persons, displaced due to climate change,  
realization of their rights of life, health, food, water, shelter,  
property and resettlement and for matters  
connected therewith.
(Dr. Heena Vijaykumar Gavit, M.P.) 