• \ 
11 of 1948. 
As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA ON 
Bill No. 142 of 1981 
THE CENTRAL SILK BOARD (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1981 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Central Silk Board Act, 1948. 
BE it enacted. by Parliament in the Thirty-second Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. (1) Th;s Act may be called the Central Silk Board (Amendment) Short 
Act, 1981. title aDd 
com-
5 (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government 
nlay, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
2. In section 4 of the Central Silk Board Act, 1948 (hereinafter 
referred to as the principal Act), after sub-sectiO'll ,(4), the following sub-
sections shall be inserted, namely:-
10 "(5) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, the term of 
! 
t 
office of a member shall be such period, not exceeding three years, 
as may be prescribed. 
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (5),-
(a) the Central Government may terminate the appOintment 
of the Chairman after giving him notice for a period of not less 
than three months; 
mence. 
ment. 
Amend. 
ment of 
section 4. 

Amend-
ment of 
section 
13. 
·iI 
(b) the Chairman may resign his oftlce by giving notice in 
writing for a period of not less than three montba to the Central 
Government, and on such resignation being notified in the Official 
Gazette by that Government, the Chairman shall be deemed to 
have vacated his ofBce.". 
3. In section 13 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3), for the words 5 
"which may be comprised. in! one session or in two successive sessions, 
and it, befol'8l the expiry of the session in which it :s so laid or the session 
immediately following", the words "which may be comprised in one 
session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry 
of the Sessic:m. immediately following the session or the successive sessions 10 
aforesaid:' shall be substituted 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Central Silk 'Board is set up under the Central Silk Board Act, 
1948. The Board has the duty to promote the development 0'[ the silk 
industry. 
2. The Board has members representing various interests associated 
with the silk industry. The Chairman of the Board, who is also a member 
of the Board, enjoys administrative and financial powers and is the 
pivotal authority in the Board. The existing rules made under the 
Act provide for the members to hold office for a· period of 
three years, but there is no provision in the Act spt.cifically 
far the termination of the appointment of the Chairman. The working 
of the Board has shown that it may be necessary to terminate his ap-
pointment in certain' circumstances. Accordingly, the proposed amend-
ment to se'C1ion 4 of the Act enables the Central Government (i) to 
provide for the term of a member of. the Board for such period, not ex-
ceeding three years, as may be prescribed; (ii) to provide for. termination 
of the appointment of the Chairman of the Board by giving him not less 
than three months notice; and (iii) to provide for the resignation of 
office by the said Chainnan by giving not less than three months notice. 
3. It is also proposed to avail of this opportunity to amend section 13 
of the Act sUitably so as to bring the rule-laying formula in sub-section 
(3) thereof into conformity with the formula as recommended by the 
Committees on S'Ubordinate Legislation of both Houses. 
4. The Bill seeks to nchieve the above objects. 
NEW D'LHI; PRANAB MUKHERJEE. 
The 23rd November, 1981. 
3 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
The Bill seeks to in'Sert two new sub-sections (5) and (6) in section 
4 of the Central Silk Board Act, 1948. The newly inserted sub-sp.ction 
(5) provides for prescribing the term of office of a member of the Board 
which shall not exceeii three years. 
The proposed delegation of legislative power is of normal character. 
4 

• 
Power of 
Central 
Govern-
ment to 
make 
rules. 
.-
• 
13. (1) • 
Ex'1'urt noM TIU CJ:N'1'BAL Sn.It BauD Mr, 1MB 
(61 or 1MB) 
• • • 
• • • 
• 
• 
(3) Every ru·e made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may 
be after it is mar.e, before each House of Parliament while it is in session 
for a total perlo.! of thirty days which may be comprised in one session 
or in two succ=ssive· sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session in 
which it !is 80 laid or the sessioQ immediately following both· Houses 
agree in ~ any modification lii"tne- rule or both Houses agree that 
the rule should. not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in 
such modifted »rm or be ~ no effect, as the case may be; so, howewr, 
that any such modiftcation or annulment shall be without prejudice to 
the validity of anything previously done under that rule . 
• • •• • • 
5 

LOltSABHA 
• BILL 
1 
t 
I 
\ { 
l 
\, 
further to amend .the Central Sllk Board Act, INS. 
(Shri PrAub KUm47' Mukher;ee, Miniater oj Cc>mmerce 
AM sleeltmd MiM'.) 