1
THE INDIAN PENAL CODE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015
By
SHRI RABINDRA KUMAR JENA, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Indian Penal Code (Amendment) Act, 2015.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the  Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the Indian Penal Code, 1860, in section 304B, in sub-section (1), the words “within
seven years of her marriage” shall be omitted.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No.  142  of  2015
Amendment
of section
304B.
45 of 1860.
5
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Section 304B (1) of the Indian Penal Code provides that where the death of a woman is
caused by any burns or bodily injury or occurs otherwise than under normal circumstances
within seven years of her marriage and it is shown that soon before her death she was
subjected to cruelty or harassment by her husband or any relative of her husband for, or in
connection with, any demand for dowry, such death shall be called “dowry death”, and such
husband or relative shall be deemed to have caused her death.
There is a need to widen the scope of section 304B for the purpose of providing justice
to women who are actually victimized for demand of dowry by husband or relatives. It is
necessary that the limit of seven years of marriage as provided in section 304B be removed.
The arbitrary limit of seven years allows a family or person who is aware of the existing legal
provisions to harass and kill the victim for dowry in the eighth year of marriage or even later.
In such cases, the accused should not be allowed to take the plea that death of woman
has not occurred within a period of seven years from the date of marriage.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend section 304B of the Indian Penal Code with a view
to remove the limit of seven years from the date of marriage in case of death of a woman
owing to demand for dowry by husband or his relatives.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RABINDRA KUMAR JENA
March 11, 2015.

3
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860
(45 OF 1860)
* * * * * * * *
304B (1) Where the death of a woman is caused by any burns or bodily injury or occurs
otherwise than under normal circumstances within seven years of her marriage and it is
shown that soon before her death she was subjected to cruelty or harassment by her husband
or any relative of her husband for, or in connection with, any demand for dowry, such death
shall be called “dowry death”, and such husband or relative shall  be deemed to have caused
her death.
* * * * * * * *
* * * * * * * *
Dowry death.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
————
(Shri Rabindra Kumar Jena, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—297LS(S3)—30-04-2015.