1
THE FRUIT AND VEGETABLE BOARD BILL, 2014
By
SHRI DEVJI M. PATEL, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for effective measures for storage and marketing of fruits and vegetables,
development of fruit and vegetable industry and for matters connected therewith.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fifth Year of the Republic of  India as follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Fruit and Vegetable Board Act, 2014.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint:
Provided that different dates may be appointed for different provisions of  this
Act and for different States or different parts thereof.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. 142  of  2014
-
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
2. It is hereby declared that it is expedient in the public interest that the Union
Government should take under its control the fruit and vegetable industry.
3. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "Board" means the Fruit and Vegetable Board constituted under section 4;
(b) "dealer" means a dealer in fruits and vegetables;
(c) "Executive Director" means the Executive Director appointed under section 6;
(d) "Government" means the Central Government;
(e) "member" means a member of the Board and includes the Chairperson; and
(f) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
4. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
a Board to be known as the Fruit and Vegetable Board.
(2) The board shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual
succession and a common seal, with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both
movable and immovable, and to contract and shall by the said name sue and be sued.
(3) The head office of the Board shall be at New Delhi and the Board may, with the
previous approval of the Government, establish its offices or agencies at places in or outside
India.
(4) The Board shall consist of the following members, namely:—
(a) a chairperson to be appointed from amongst the fruit and vegetable growers
by the Government in such manner as may be prescribed;
(b) three members of Parliament of whom two shall be nominated by the Speaker
of the House of the People and one by the Chairman of the Council of States;
(c) five officers not below the rank of Joint Secretary, to be appointed by the
Government as members to represent respectively:—
(i) the Union Ministry dealing with Agriculture;
(ii) the Union Ministry dealing the commerce;
(iii) the Union dealing with finance;
(iv) the Union dealing with industrial development; and
(v) the Indian Council of Agricultural Research;
(d) four members to be appointed by the Government from amongst the growers
of fruits;
(e) four members to be appointed by the Government from amongst the growers
of vegetables; and
(f) two members to be appointed by the Government from amongst the dealers
and exporters of fruits and vegetables.
(5) The Board shall elect, from amongst its members, a Vice-Chairperson who shall
exercise such powers and perform such functions as may be prescribed or as may be delegated
to him by the Chairperson.
(6) The term of office of the members and the procedure to be followed by the Board in
discharge ot its functions shall be such as may be prescribed.
Declaration as
to expediency
of control by
the Union
Government.
Definitions.
Constitution
of Fruit and
Vegetable
Board.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
(7) The Executive Director and one such officer of the Government (not being a member
of the Board), as may be deputed by the Government, shall have the right to attend the
meetings of the Board and take part in the proceedings thereof but shall not have the right to
vote.
(8) The Board may associate with itself in such manner and for such purposes, as may
be prescribed, any person whose assistance or advice it may require in complying with any
of the provisions of this Act and a person so associated shall have the right to take part in the
discussions of the Board relevant to the purposes for which he has been associated, but
shall not have the right to vote.
5. The salary, allowances and other terms of conditions of services of the Chairperson
shall be such, as the Government may, from time to time, determine.
6. (1) The Government shall appoint an Executive Director to exercise such powers and
perform such duties may be prescribed or as may be delegated to him by the Chairperson.
(2) The Government shall appoint a Secretary to the Board to exercise such powers
and perform such duties as may be prescribed or as may be delegated to him by the Chairperson.
(3) The salaries, allowances and terms of conditions of service in respect of leave,
pension, provident fund and other matters of the Executive Director and the Secretary shall
be such as the Government may, from time to time, determine.
(4) Subject to such control, restrictions and conditions as may be prescribed, the
Board may appoint such other officers and employees as may be necessary for the efficient
performance of its functions.
(5) The Chairperson, the Excutive Director, the Secretary and other officers and
employees of the Board shall not undertake any work not connected with their duties under
this Act except with the prior permission of the Government.
7. (1) The Board may appoint such Committees as may be necessary for the efficient
discharge of the duties and performance of its functions under this Act.
(2) The Board shall have the power to co-opt as members of any committee appointed
under sub-section (1), such number of persons who are not members of the Board, as it may
think fit and the persons co-opted shall have the right to attend the meetings of the committee
and take part in the proceedings of the committee but shall not have the right to vote.
8. (1) It shall be the duty of the Board to promote by taking such measures as it thinks
fit, the storage and marketing of fruits and vegetables and the development of the fruit and
vegetable products industry.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-section (1), the measures
may provide for—
(a) formulating policies for overall development and improvement of production,
quality, storage and marketing of fruits and vegetables;
(b) fixing annual production targets of fruits and vegetables;
(c) review of measures for attaining production targets, viz, supply of inputs like
fertilizer, water supply, plant protection measures, credit facilities etc.;
(d) fixing import quotas for improved seeds;
(e) advising the Government on extension of cold storage facilities;
(f) review of the price trends of fruits and vegetables;
(g) development of fruit and vegetable products industries;
Salary and
allowances and
other
conditions of
service of
Chairperson.
Appointment
of Executive
Director, etc.
Committees of
the Board.
Functions of
the Board.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

4
(h) the need for price support and other measures to ensure fair prices to the
growers;
(i) regulation, control and promotion of the export of fruits and vegetables and
fruit and vegetable products and review of the grading of fruits and vegetables; and
(j) collection and maintenance of statistics on any matter relating to fruits and
vegetables and fruit industries.
9. (1) The Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette and for reasons to be
specified therein, direct that the Board shall be dissolved from such date and for such period
as may be specified in the notification:
Provided that before issuing any such notification, the Government shall give a
reasonable opportunity to the Board to make representation against the proposed dissolution
and shall consider the representations, if any, of the Board.
(2) When the Board is dissolved under the provisions of sub-section ( 1),—
(a) all powers and duties of the Board shall, during the period of dissolution, be
exercised and performed by such person as the Government may appoint in this behalf;
(b) all funds and other properties vested in the Board shall, during the period of
dissolution, vest in the Government; and
(c) as soon as the period of dissolution expires, the Board shall be reconstituted
in accordance with the provisions of this Act.
10. (1) The Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the powers and functions of the Vice-Chairperson of the Board;
(b) holding of minimum number of meetings of the Board every year;
(c) the circumstances in which and the authority by which a member may be
removed;
(d) the power which may be exercised and the duties which shall be performed
by the Executive Director and the Secretary;
(e) the procedure to be followed at the meetings of the Board for the conduct of
business and the number of members which shall form the quorum at a meeting;
(f) the maintenance of records of business transacted by the Board and the
submission of copies thereof to the Government;
(g) the power of the Board, its Chairperson, the Executive Director and
Committees of the Board with respect to the incurring of expenditure;
(h) the conditions subject to which the Board may incur expenditure outside
India;
(i) the preparation of estimates of receipts and expenditure of the Board and the
authority by which the estimates are to be sanctioned;
(j) the form and the manner in which the accounts shall be maintained by the
Board;
(k) the deposit of the funds of the Board in Banks and the investment of funds;
(l) the conditions to be observed by the Board in borrowing the money;
(m) the collection of any information or statistics in respect of fruits and
vegetables; and
Dissolution of
the Board.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

5
(n) any other matter which has to be, or may be, prescribed by or provided for by
rules under this Act.
(3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule, or both Houses agree that the rule
should not be made, the rule shall, thereafter, have effect only in such modified form or be of
no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
11. (1) The Board may make regulations not inconsistent with this Act and the rules
made thereunder for enabling it to discharge its functions under this Act.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such regulations may
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the procedure to be followed at the meetings of the committees appointed by
the Board and the number of members which shall form a quorum at a meeting;
(b) the delegation to the Chairperson, members, Executive Director, Secretary or
other officers of the Board, or any of the powers and duties of the Board under this
Act;
(c) the travelling and other allowances, leave and other conditions of service of
officers (other than those appointed by the Government) and other employees of the
Board;
(d) the maintenance of the accounts of the Board;
(e) the maintenance of the registers and other records of the Board and its
various committees;
(f) the appointment by the Board of agents to discharge, on its behalf, any of its
functions;
(g) the persons by whom, and the manner in which, payments, deposits and
investments may be made on behalf of the Board.
(3) No regulation made by the Board shall have effect until it has been approved by the
Government and published in the Official Gazette, and the Government, in approving a
regulation, may make any change therein which appears to it to be necessary.
(4) The Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, cancel any regulation
which has been approved and thereupon, the regulation shall cease to have effect.
Power to make
regulations.
5
10
15
20
25
30

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The fruits and vegetables are grown in the country on an extensive scale. With the
establishment of Horticulture Directorates in the States and the encourgagement given to
horticulture, the production of fruits and vegetables is growing day by day. But there are no
adequate storage or good transport facilities for these commodities. The export and import
policies are also not well defined for these items.
At present there is a great scope for exporting of fruits and vegetables and the products
based on processing of fruits and vegetables. Therefore, to encourage production, storage
and export of fruits and vegetables and their products, it is expedient that the
Union Government takes under its control, the development of fruits and vegetables and the
fruit and vegetable products industry.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; DEVJI M. PATEL
November 3, 2014
6

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the constitution of the Fruit and Vegetable Board.
Clause 5 provides for payment of such salary and allowances to the Chairperson of the
Board as may be determined by the Government. Clause 6(3) provides for payment of salaries
and allowances to the Executive Director and the Secretary to the Board. Clause 6(4) provides
for appointment of such other officers and employees as may be necessary for efficient
performance of the functions of the Board. Clause 7 provides for appointment of committees
and co-option of such persons as members thereon who are not members of the Board. Such
members of the Committees will have to be paid travelling and other allowances for attending
the meetings of the Committees. Clause 8 provides that the Board shall take such measures
as it thinks fit to promote the development and improvement of production, storage and
marketing of fruits and vegetables and the fruits and vegetable products industry. It is
estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees five crore will be involved
from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees ten crore is also likely to be incurred.
7

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLA TION
Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. Clause 11 empowers the Fruit and V egetable Board to make regulations,
by notification in the Official Gazette, with the previous approval of the Central Government.
The matters in respect of which rules or regulations may be made pertain to procedural
or administrative details and as such the delegation of legislative power is of a normal
character.
8

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for effective measures for storage and marketing of fruits and vegetables,
development of fruit and vegetable industry and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Devji M. Patel, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—2721LS(S3)—02.12.2014.