न “To BE INTRODUCED पा Lox 8805५

Bill No. 142 of 1986

THE MERCHANT SHIPPING (SECOND AMENDMENT) BILL, 1986
A

BILL
further to amend the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958,

Br it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-seventh Year of the Republic
of India as follows:—

1, (1) This Act may be called the Merchant Shipping (Second
Amendment) Act, 1986. '

(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government
may by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint and different dates
may be appointed for different provisions of this Act.

2. In Part VI of the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 (hereinafter
referred to as the principal Act), for the sub-heading “Masters, mates
and engineers” the sub-heading “Masters, mates, engineers, skippers,
etc.” shall be substituted,

Short
title
and
com- ~
mence-
ment.

Substitu-
tion of
new sub.
heading
for sub-

Heading
of Part VI.


Substitu-
tion of
new sec-
tions for
sections
75 and 76.

Applica-
tion of
Part.

Defini-

tions.

Certifi-
cates of
compe-~
tency to
be held
by offi-
cers of

ships.

shall be substituted, namely:—

eee 9 2

3. For sections 75 and 76 of the principal Act, the following

‘75, This Part applies to—

(a) every sea-going Indian ship fitted with mechanical
of propulsion wherever it is; and

(b) every foreign ship while it is at a port or place in Ind

75A. In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires,—

(a) “contiguous zone” means the contiguous zone ७०
described, or notified as such for the time being unde:
5 of the Territorial Waters, Continental Shelf, 1
Economic Zone and other Maritime Zones Act, 19763

(b) “Convention” means the International
Standards of Training, Certification and
farers, 1978, signed at London on the 7th
amended from time to time;

76. (1) Every Indian ship, other
than two hundre@ tons gross é!
when going to sea from any p
officers duly certificated

Yo) in every case, with y
(0) if the ship is a foreign-going
ing a certificate not lower than that
(i) first mate;

1 (ii) second mate; and
(ii) navigational watchkeeping
(c) in the case of a home-trade
ing a certificate not lower than that
7 (i) a mate; and ai tus

gross and engaged in the coasting trade of India, w! ०
shall be provided with officers duly certificated under this 2
ing to the following scale, namely:— i डिनर
|] (a) with a duly certificated master; and =
(0) with an officer holding a certificate not lower tials
of a navigational. watchkeeping officer. 7 not oe
(3) Every Indian ship when going to sea from any port or
shall be provided with engineers or engine drivers duly
under this Act according to the following scale, namely:—
(a) if the ship has a propulsion power of 3000 KW or
with at least one marine engineer officer class I designated as


20

25

30

35

40

35
chief engineer, one marine engineer officer class II designated as
second engineer and one marine engineer officer class IV;

(b) if the ship has a propulsion power of 750 KW or more
but less than 3000 KW, with at least one marine engineer officer
class II having service endorsement on his certificate of com-
petency in such form and manner as may be prescribed, and
designated as chief engineer, one marine engineer officer class
III designated as second engineer and one marine engineer
officer class IV;

(c) if the ship has a propulsion power of 350 KW or more
but less than 750 KW, with at least one marine engineer officer
class III designated as chief engineer and one marine engineer
officer class IV or engine driver of a sea-going ship designated
as second engineer;

(d) if the ship has a propulsion power of less than 350 KW.
with at least one engine driver of sea-going ship designated as
engineer-in-charge.

(4) Every Indian fishing vessel when going to sea from any port

or place in India, shall be provided—

(a) if the vessel is of twenty-four metres or more in length
and is operating beyond the contiguous zone, with a certificated
skipper grade 1 and a certificated mate of a fishing vessel;

(b) if the vessel is of twenty-four metres or more in length
and is operating within the contiguous zone, with a certificated
skipper grade II and a certificated mate of a fishing vessel;

(c) if the vessel is of less than twenty-four metres in length
and is operating beyond the contiguous zone, with a certificated
skipper grade II and a certificated mate of a fishing vessel;

(d) if the vessel is less than twenty-four metres in length
and is operating within the contiguous zone, with a certificated
skipper grade IT;

(e) if the vessel has a propulsion power of 750 KW or more,
with at least one engineer of a fishing vessel, who shall he
designated as chief engineer and one engine driver of a fishing
vessel;

(f) if the vessel has a propulsion power of 350 KW or more
but less than 750 KW, with at least one engineer of a fishing
vessel who shall be designated as chief engineer;

(क if the vessel has a propulsion power of less than 350 KW,
with at least one engine driver of a fishing vessel who shall be
designated as engineer-in-charge.

(5) Every ship, whether at sea or in any port or place, shall

engage such number of persons and with such qualifications as may
be prescribed for maintaining watches;


Substitu-
tion of
new sec-
tion for
section 78.

Grades of
certifi-
cates of
compe-
tency.

substituted, namély:—

Explanation—For the purposes of clause (e) and (f) of s
section (4), any person holding a certificate of competency 88.
marine engineer officer class I or class II shall be deemed to be
duly certificated engineer of a fishing vessel, and for the p
of clause (g) of that sub-section, a person holding a certificate
competency as engine driver of a sea-going ship shall be
to be a duly certificated engine driver of a fishing vessel.

fs

4. For settion 78 of the principal Act, the following section

“78. (1) Certificates of competency shall be grant
with the provisions of this Act for each of the fc
namiely;—

extra Master;
master of a foreign-going ship;
first mate of a foreign-going shi
second mate of a foi 0
master of a home-trade
mate of a home-tr

skipper grade II of a fishing Ve
mate of a fishing vessel;
engineer of a fishing vessel;
engine driver of a fishing vessel; —
dredger master grade I; ...
dredger master grade II;
dredger mate grade I;
dredger mate grade II;
dredger engineer grade I;
dredger engineer grade गत
dredger driver grade I;
dredger driver grade II.

(2) A certificate of competency granted for any grade of en;
or engine driver shall state whether it entitles the holder to
engineer of ships or fishing vessels fitted with steam or motor


5

or with any other type of engines and the holder shall not be entitled
to act as enginéer of a ship fitted with a type of engine not stated
in the certificate.

(3) Certificates issued to masters, mates and engineers who have

51 to work on board ships carrying dangerous goods shall require
endorsement as to the additional qualifications that may be prescrib-
ed.

(4) If it appears to the Central Government that certificates of
competency for grades, other than those referred to in sub-section (1)
cel may be granted, it may, by notification in the official Gazette, specify
the other grades in respect of which certificates of competency may

be granted.

(5) A certificate of competency for a foreign-going ship shall be
deemed to be of a higher, grade than the corresponding certificate
15 of a home-trade ship, and shall entitle the lawful holder thereof
to go to sea in the corresponding grade in such home-trade ship; but
no certificate for a home-trade ship shall entitle the holder to go
to sea as a master or mate ofa foreign-going ship.

(6) ‘A certificate ‘of competency as’ extra master shall be deemed
20 to be of a higher grade than any other Certificate of competency as
master Or mate of. a foreign-going ship or a home-trade ship, or

\ navigational watchkeeping officer.

‘ (7) A certificate of competency as extra first class engineer shall

be deemed to be of a higher grade than any other certificate of

25 competency as marine engineer officer, engineer or engine driver of
a fishing vessel or engine driver of a sea-going ship.”

5, In section 79 of the principal Act, after sub-section (2), the follow-
ing sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—

“(3) Every certificate granted under sub-section (2), shall be
30 valid for such period as may be prescribed.”.

6. In section 84 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1),—
(i). in clause,. (०) -4

(A) for the words “master, mate, engineers and engine
drivers”, the words “mates and engineers” shall be substituted;

35 * | (98) the word-“and” at the end. shall be omitted;

(ii) after clause (b), the following clause shall be inserted,
namely:—

“(c) who is not required to sign the agreement with the
crew, shall submit before commencing the first voyage from any
4० port to the Mercantile Marine Department having jurisdiction
over such port, a list of crew with the particulars of grades of
certificates of master, mates and engineers and shall also report
to that Department of any later change in the list of the crew

1 before any subsequent voyage.”,

Amend-
ment of
section
19.

Amend-
ment of
section
84,


Inser~
tion of
new sec-
tion 86A.

Foreign
ships
not to
‘sail
without
certifi-
cated
officers.

Substitu-
tion of
new sec-
tion for
section
87.

Power to
make
tules,

inserted, namely: —

substituted, namely:— 1

6
7. After section 86 of the principa Act, the following section shall be

“6A. (1) Every master of a foreign ship shall, before proceed-
ing to sea from any port or place in India, ensure that the ship has
the requisite number of officers and engineers of appropriate grades 3
as specified by the Convention.

(2) A surveyor or any person authorised in this behalf by the
Central Government may, at any reasonable time, go on board a ship
to which any of the provisions of this Part applies for the purpose
of ensuring that the officers holding certificates issued in accordance
with the Convention are actually appointed and are present, and
satisfy himself about the adequacy of such officers for the watch
keeping duties in ports and at sea.

| (8) If any report made under sub-section (2) by a surveyor or F
any person authorised in this behalf by the Central Government, 15
reveals any deficiency in a foreign ship in relation to the require.
ments of the Convention and the Central Government is satisfied
that it will be useful for such ship to proceed to sea, that ship may
be detained by the officer authorised for this purpose till such re-
quirements are fulfilled.”. 20

8. For section 87 of the principal Act, the following section shall be

“87. (1) The Central Government may make rules to carry out
the provisions of this Part.

(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the al
foregoing powers such rules may provide for all or any of the follow-
ing matters, namely:—

(a) the form and manner in which a service endorsement —
shall be made on the certificate or competency of a marine
engineer officer class IT;

(b) the number of persons and the qualifications they may

possess for maintaining watches by a ship at sea or in any fort
' or place;

(c) the conduct of the examination of persons desirous of
obtaining certificates of competency and endorsements thereon © 5
for the grades falling under section 78; 3S

(d) the qualifications to be required of persons desirous of
obtaining certificates of competency for the grades falling under
section 78;

30

1 (९) the fees to be paid by applicants for examination;

(f) the period for which certificate granted under stfb-section
(2) of section 79 shall be valid;

(g) the form of such certificates and the manner in which
copies of certificates are to he kept and recorded; |


10

15

20

25

30 Act, and the principal Act shall cont
certificates as if this Act had not be

7

(h) the circumstances or cases in which certificates of cori-
petency may be ca.xcelled or suspended.”.

9. In section 436 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), in the Table,

for Serial No. 17 and the entries relati
5 No. and entries thereof shall be substitu

ing thereto, the following Serial
ted, namely: —

x 2 3 4
“17 Ig -

(०) any person causes a ship General Imprisonment which may
or fishing vessel to pro- extend to six months or
ceed to sea without the fine which may extend to
required certificated ten thousand rupees, or
personnel; both.

(6) any person having been 76 Imprisonment which may
engaged as one of the extend to six months or
officers referred to in fine which may extend to

section 76 goes to sea as five thousand rupees, cr
such officer without being both.
duly certificate.

(0). any master fails to submit 84(z) (० Fine which may extend to

the required crew list or
fails to report the changes
made in the list before
commencing the relevant
voyage.

five thousand rupees and

in addition, a fine which
may extend to one thousand.
Tupees for every day during
which the offence continues
after conviction, ?,

10, Notwithstanding anythin;

8 contained in this Act, the amendments

made to the principal Act by this Act shall not apply to, or in relation

to,

any certificate of competency granted under section

78 or recognised

under section 86 of the principal Act before the commencement of this

inue to apply in relation to such
en enacted.

Amend-
ment of
section
436.

Saving.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS be:

Part VI of the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958, inter alia, provides for
manning of officers for different categories of Indian ships and fishing
vessels, grades of certificates of competency which should be granted,
examination for the grant of such certificates etc. The existing provi+
sions of this Part were based generally on accepted international practices
in the absence of any internationally accepted instrument laying down

the minsmum requirements of training, syllabi, examination and certi-

fication of ship’s officers and watchkeeping crew.

2. In 1978, under the joint auspices of the International Maritime

Organisation and the International Labour Organisation, the Interna-
tional Convention on Sandards of Training, Certification and Watchkeep- —

ing for Seafarers, 1978 was adopted. Tis Convention lays down manda-
tory minimum requirements for the certification of various officers work-
ing on ships and syllabi for the examination of officers for grant of
various certificates. The Convention entered into force from 28-4-1984,

India ratified it on 16-11-1984 and it came into force for India from —

16-2-1985. It is, therefore, considered necessary to give effect to the
provisions of the Conyention by amending the relevant provisions of
Part VI of the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958.

3, The salient proposals are:—

(1) While the existing provisions of Part VI of the Act apply
only to Indian ships wherever they are, it is proposed to apply the
amended Part also to foreign flag ships while they are at Indian
ports or places because the Convention requires the Contracting

States (and India as a Contracting State) to ensure that any ship

calling at their ports is manned by seafarers possessing the certificates
as required by the Convention. For this purpose existing section 75
is sought to be substituted by a revised section.

(2) It is proposed to substitute the existing section 76 to bring the
manning scales for ships in conformity with the provisions of the
Convention, particularly in relation to watchkeeping requirements,

propulsion power of ships, ete. It is also proposed to prescribe 4

manning scales for fishing vessels in conformity with the interna-
tional practice. an

(3) It is proposed to substitute existing section 78 to specify
grades of certificate of competency by retaining some of the exist-—
ing grades, revision of nomenclature of some of the existing grades —

of certificates and insertion of some grades of certificates in con-
formity with the Convention. It is further proposed to insert grades
of certificates for dredgers for which examinations are conducted
and also to provide for prescribing the period of validity of all such
certificates. 6



9

(4) As the Convention requires contracting States to ensure
that any foreign flag ship calling at its Ports or places to comply with
the Convention requirements, it is proposed to insert a new section
868 to provide that no foreign flag ship shall proceed to sea from any
port or place in India unless it has the required number of officers of
appropriate grade as prescribed by the Convention, to empower
the authorised surveyor to inspect foreign Ships to ensure compliance
by, such ships of the Convention requirements and to empower him
to detain ships which are found to be deficient in respect of the
Convention requirements. ¢
4 The remaining amendments included in the Bill are of a minor
or consequential nature.

5. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.

New Deut; RAJESH PILOT
The 27th November, 1986.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

The Merchant Shipping (Amendment) Bill, 1986 seeks to amend the
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 by way of substitution of sections 75, 76, 78
and 87, amendments of sections 84 and 436 and insertion of new section
86A with a view to facilitating the implementation of the International
Convention on the Standards and Training, Certification and Watch-
keeping for Seafarers, 1978 and for certain related matters. Implemen-
tation of these provisions would result in the increase in the wage bill of
the technical staff of the Directorate General of Shipping and Mercantile
Marine Department. It would also necessitate incurring of additional
expenditure for making arrangements for the various training courses
prescribed under the Convention. There are, in all, 14 such training
courses prescribed under the Convention which are as under:—

1. Radar Observer's Course,
2. First Aid at Sea Course,
3. Life Boatmen's Course,
4. Rader Simulators Course,
5, Course for revalidation of Certificates given by Nautical and
Engineering College,
6. Maritime Law Course,
7. Medical Aid Course,
8. Fire Fighting Course for ratings,
9. Fire Fighting Course for officers,
10. Tanker Safety Course, H
11. Safe Practice Course for chemical carriers and liquid gas, .
carriers, /
12, Safe Practice Course for hazardous cargo carriers, F
13, Survival at Sea and Fire Fighting Courses, and
44. Radio Telephony Course.

The above training courses would involve some expenditure by way
of appointing Nautical Engineers and Ship-Surveyors and examination —
clerks, The annual recurring expenditure on requirements of above addi-
tional staff will be about Rs. 8.00 lakhs, out of which a sizeable portion, to
the extent of about Rs. 4.00 lakhs, is anticipated to be recovered by way —
of examination fees annually. However, this will not involve creation of
additional posts since these will be adjusted against posts held in
abeyance. | ee

The annual non-recurring expenditure on fw
will be to the extent of Rs. 3.70 lakhs.

rniture, machines, ete.

10



MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 7 of the Bill seeks to substitute section 87 of the Merchant
Shipping Act, 1958 so as to enable the Central Government to make ruleg
in respect of certain matters provided in Chapter VI of the said Act,
These matters, inter alia, relate to the form and manner in which a
service endorsement shall be made on the certificate of competency of
a marine engineer officer class II and the number of persons and the
qualifications they may possess for maintaining watches by a ship at sea
or in any port or place, the conduct of examination of persons desirous
of obtaining certificates of competency and the fees to be paid by appli-
cants for the examination and other matters.

The matters with respect to which rules may be made under the
aforesa 0 provisions are matters of procedure and administrative detail.
The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, normal in character,

i


'

ही

ExrRAcTS FROM THE MERCHANT SHIPPING 80% 198...
(44 oF 1958) ; १०
e * * # 28.6

PART VI
CERTIFICATES OF OFFICERS

Masters, mates and engineers

15. This Part applies only to sea-going ships fitted w!
means of propulsion. oF 821;

18. (1) Every foreign-going Indian ship,
of two hundred tons gross or more when going
place in India and every ship-carrying p
in India shall be provided with officers
according to the following scale, n

(a) in every case, with a
ie
(b) if the ship

or place in India shall be provided with engineers duly
this Act according to the following scale, namely:— _

(a) if the ship is of one hundred nominal
with at least two engineers one of whom shall be a
designated as the chief engineer, and the other a first. laste
class engineer designated as the second engineer;

(b) if the shiv is of less than one hundred nominal h
with at least one first class or second class engineer designated as |
chief engineer.

(3) Everv home-trade Indian shin when going to sea frem any por
or place in India and every ship carrying passengers between ports 6

12


38

places in India shall be provided with engineers or engine drivers duly
certificated according to the following scale, namely;—

(a) if the .ship is of fifty nominal horse-power or more, with at
least one first class or second class engineer designated as the chief
engineer;

(७) if the ship is of less than fifty nominal horse-power, with at
least one first class or second class engineer designated as the chief
engineer, or with at least one engine driver of a sea-going ship.

(4) Every fishing vessel when going to sea from any port or place in
India shall be provided—

(a) if the vessel exceeds twenty-five tons gross but does not
exceed fifty tons gross, with a certificated skipper;

(b) if the vessel exceeds fifty tons gross, with a certificated
skipper anda certificated second. hand;

(c) if the vessel is of fifty nominal horse-power or more, with at
least one engineer duly certificated, being an engineer of a fishing
vessel, who shall be designated as the chief engineer;

(d) if the vessel is of less than fifty nominal. horse-power, with
at least one engineer duly certificated, being an engineer of a fishing
vessel, who shall be designated as the chief engineer or with at least
one engine driver of a fishing vessel. duly certificated. ~

Exvlanation—For the purposes of clause (c), persons holding certi-
fieates of ‘comnetency as first class or second ‘class engineers shall be
deemed to be duly certificated and for the purnoses of clause (d), persons
holding certificates of combetenev as engine driver of sea-going ships
shall be deemed to be duly’ cértificated. A

(5) Nothing in this section which relates to engineers or engine drivers
shall apply te any.ship to which the provisions of the Inland Steam-
vessels. Act, 1917, apply.

Ervlanation.—In this section “nominal horse-nower”. in relation to
anv ship, means the horse-power of the engines of the ship calculated in
the prescribed’ manner.

* + * * A *

78.. (1). Certificates of competency shall-be granted in accordance with
this Act for each of the following grades, namely:—
master of a foreign-going ship;
first mate of a foreign-going ship;
second mate of a foreign-going ship;
master of a home-trade ship;
mate of a home-trade ship:
first class engineer;
second class engineer;
engine driver of a-sea-going ship;
skipper of a fishing vessel;

Grades
of certi.
ficates of
compe-
tency,


Produc-
tion of
certifi-
cates of
compe-
tency to
shipping
master,

Power to
make
rules as to
grant,
cance].
lation or
suspen-
sion of
certifi-
cates of
compe-
tency.

3

14

second hand of a fishing vessel;
engineer of a fishing vessel;
engine driver of a fishing vessel.

(2) ‘A certificate of competency granted for the grade of
class engineer or engine driver shall state whether it entitles
to act as engineer or engine driver of ships fitted with steam
of ships fitted with any other type of engines and the holder
be entitled to act as engineer or engine driver of a ship fitted
of engine not stated in the certificate. F

(3) If it appears to the Central Government that cerfifical
petency for grades other than those referred to in sub.
be granted, it may, by notification in the Official ९
other grades in respect of which certificates of competency
ed. 7४ ont ae

(4) A certificate of competency for a foreign-going ship sh
ed to be of a higher grade than the corresponding certi
trade ship, and shall entitle the lawful holder thereof
corresponding grade in such last-mentionéd ship;
home-trade ship shall entitle the holder to
a foreign-going ship.
*

*

the ship are by this Act rec
* + } tat

87. ‘The Central Government may le
sions of this Part relating to certificates of ९
such rules,— है

‘ama

(a) prescribe the manner in which the
of ships may be calculated, and the methods by
tion may be made in respect of different types

(b) provide for the conduct of the ex: inal
desirous of obtaining certificates of competency for
under section 78; .

(ec) prescribe the qualifications to be resnectively
persons desirous of obtaining certificates of competency
falling under section 78; ॥70338

(व) fix the fees to be paid by applicants for examination; _

> 16 Tine

(e) prescribe the form of such certificates and the ‘manner,
which copies of certificates are to be kept and recorded; as

(f) prescribe the circumstances or cases in which certificates
competency may be cancelled or suspended. 758#9%
* * है 7 (21298 * iwalih


éMUAagy
PART XVI
PENALTIES AND PROCEDURE

Penalties

436. (1) . के . . 7 Penalties.
(2) The offences mentioned in the second column of the following

table shall be punishable to the extent mentioned in the fourth column

of the same with reference to such offences respectively.

Serial Offences Section of Penalties
No. this Act to
which offence
has
reference
« डे = के *

17. Ifany person -

(०) having been engaged as one of the officers General Fine which may extend to
referrcd to in section 76 goes to sea as such five hundred rupees.
officer without beisg aS certificated; or

(5) employs a person as an officer without
asecrtianing that the person is duly certi-
fieated.

* * * * *



(Shri Rajesh Pilot,
Minister of State of the Ministry of Surface