As unTRopuceD IN Lok SABHA

\ छा 1४०. 142 of 1991

‘THE REMITTANCES OF FOREIGN EXCHANGE AND INVESTMENT
IN FOREIGN EXCHANGE BONDS (IMMUNITIES AND
EXEMPTIONS) BILL, 1991

A
BILL

to provide for certain immunities to persons receiving remittances in
foreign exchange and io persons owning the Foreign Exchange Bonds
and for certain exemptions from direct taxes in relation to such re-
mittances and. bonds and for matters connected therewith or incidental
thereto.

Wnrreas the position relating to balance of payments has become
difficult and it is necessary to attract large inflow of foreign exchange;

35०७ WHEREAS with a view to attracting such inflow of foreign
exchange, it is expedient to provide for certain immunities and
exemptions to render it possible for certain persons to receive the said
remittances in foreign exchange and to own the said Bonds;

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-second Year of the Republic
of India as follows: —
CHAPTER 1
‘PRELIMINARY

5 1. (A) This Act may be called the Remittances of Foreign Exchange
and Investment in Foreign Exchange Bonds (Immunities and Exemptions)
Act, 1991. |

(2) It extends to the whole of India.

Short
title and
extent.


Defini-
tions,

Immuni-

ties,

2
CHAPTER II
REMITTANCES OF FOREIGN EXCHANGE

2: In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires,—

Non-resident Special Deposit Account maintained in India under the
tules made under the Tnreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1973,

Eaplanation—For the purposes of this clause, “specified date”
हो the Ist day of December, 1991 or such other later date as the
Central Government may, by ' notification in the Offisial Gazette,
specify in this behalf;

(c) all other Words and expressions used in this Chapter but not
defined and defined in ine Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1973
shall have the meanings Tespectively assigned to them in that Act.

5. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the

time being in force,—

(a) no recipient, Who claims immunity under this Chapter in
accordance with such scheme as the Reserve Bank of India may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, specify for the purposes of receiv-
ing remittances under this Chapter, shall be required to disclose, for

any purpose whatsoever, the nature and source of the remittance
made to him;

(0) no inquiry or investigation shall be commenced against the

recipient under any such law on the ground that he has received
such remittance;

(2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall apply—

(@) to any foreign exchange which is required to be brought
into India under any of the provisions of.

(6) the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1973; or

5

10

20

30

40

46 of 1973.

46 of 1973,

46 of 1973,


4 1961.
46 of 1973,

45 of 1860,
61 of 1985.

28 of 1987,

49 of 1988,

43 of 1961,

43 of 1961.

27 of 1957,

23 of 1955.

10

15

20

55

30

35

हु

(i) the Income-tax Act, 1961, read with the Foreign Exchange
Regulation Act, 1973,

if the period within which such foreign exchange is to be brought
into India has not expired or where such period has been extended,
in any manner, by the Central Government or the Reserve Bank of
India or any other authority, such extended period has not expired
on the date of commencement of this Act;

(b) in relation to prosecution for any offence punishable under
Chapter IX or Chapter XVII of the Indian Penal Code, the Narcotic
Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985, the Terrorists and
Disruptive Activities (Prevention) Act, 1987, the Prevention of
Corruption Act, 1968 or for the purpose of enforcement of any civil
liability. \

(3) The Central Government shall cause the scheme notified under
clause (a) of sub-section (1) to be laid, as soon as may be after it is noti-
fied, before each House of Parliament.

4. Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of section 3,—

(a) any remittance received under this Chapter shall not be
taken-into account for the purpose of any proceeding under the
Income-tax Act, 1961 and, in particular, the recipient shall not be
entitled to claim any set-off or relief in any assessment, re-assessment,
appeal, reference or other proceeding under that Act or to re-open
any assessment or re-assessment made under that Act on the ground
that he has received such remittance.

Explanation—For the avoidance of doubt, it is hereby declared
that the provisions of the Income-tax Act, 1961 will apply to any
income which accrues cr arises or is deemed to accrue or arise to
the recipient from the amount of the remittance;

(b) any remittance received under this Chapter shall not form
part of the assets of any assessee for the purposes of computing his
net wealth under the Wealth-tax Act, 1957 in relation to any assess-
ment year commencing before the 1st day of April, 1992.

CHAPTER HI
INVESTMENT IN FoREIGN ExcHANGE Bonps
5. (1) In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires,—

(a) “Foreign Exchange Bonds” means the Bonds, issued by the
State Bank of India constituted under the State Bank of India Act,
1955 in accordance with such scheme, as the Reserve Bank of India
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf,
which are purchased on er after the date of the commencement of
this Act but before the syecified date,

Eaplanation—For the purposes of this clause, “specified date”
means the Ist day of December, 1991 or such other later date as the
Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
specify in this behalf; ¢
(७) “non-resident Tndfan’” means an. individual, being a citizen
of-India or a person of Indian origin who is resident outside India.

Remit-
tances
not to be
taken
into
account
in certain
cases,

Defini-
tions.


4

Explanation 1A person shall be deemed to be of Indian origin t
ib— i |
(® he, or either of his parents or any of his grand-parents,
Was a vilizen of India by virtue of the Constitution or the Citizen-
ship Act, 1955; or, 5 STof lt

(ii) he at any time, held an Indian passport:

Provided that the nationals of Pakistan or Bangladesh shall
not be deemed to be of Indian origin,

Ewplanation 2,--A Spouse, (not being a national of Pakistan or
Bangladesh) of a person of Indian origin shall also be deemed to be 10
of Indian origin;

(c) “overseas corporate body” means any institution, association
or body, whether incorporated or not, established under the laws of

@ country outside Indiy wherein any non-resident Indian has any
interest;

(४) all other words and expressions used in this Chapter but
not defined and defined in the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act,
1973, shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in that 46 of 1973.
Act. ।
(2) ‘The Central Goverment shall cause the scheme notified under 20

clause (a) of sub-section (1) to be Inid, as soon as may be after it is noti-
fied, before each House of Parliament,

‘heeds 6. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Wealth-tax Act,
ties. 1957, the Gift-tax Act, 1958, the Income-tax Act, 1961,

Exchange Regulation Act, 1973 and the Foreign Contributi
tion) Act, 1976,—

M 27 of 1957,
the Foreign jg of 1958,
ion (Regula- 25 43 of 1961,
46 of 1973,

49 of 1976.
no non-resident Indian or overseas corporate body who or

(a)
which owns the Foreign Exchange Bonds or any person resident in
resident Indian or overseas corporate body, shall be required to
disclose, for any purpose whatsoever, the nature and source of the
investment in such Bonds; {

(6) no inquiry or investigation shall be commenced against any
of the persons referred to in clause (a) under any of the said Acts
on the ground that such person owns such Bonds;

30

35
(c) the fact that any of the persons referred to in clause (a)
owns such Bonds shall not be taken into account and shall be
inadmissible as evidence in any proceedings relating to any offence
or the imposition of any penalty under any of the said Acts,

(2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall apply to foreign exchange which 40
is required to be brought into India under any of the provisions of—

(i) the Foreign, Exchange Regulation Act, 1973; or

AG of 1973,
(४) the Income-tax Act, 1961, read with the Foreign Exchange 43 of 1961,
Regulation Act, 1973, | 46 of 1973.

if the period within which such foreign exchange is to be brought into 45
India has not expired or where such period has been extended, in

manner, by the Central Government or the Reserve Bank of adie oy


any other authority, such extended period has not expired on the date
of commencement of this Act,

7. Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of section

Foreign
Bonds
(a) the provisions of the Income-tax Act, 1961 shall not apply Mottobe
10 any interest accruing in relation to the Foreign Exchange Bonds: into
account
(b) the provisions of the Wealth-tax Act, 1957 shall not apply in — incer-
relation to the Foreign Exchange Bonds; tain
cases.
(c) the provisions of the Gift-tax Act, 1958 shall not apply

where any non-resident Indian becomes a resident in India and
makes a gift of the Foreign Exchange Bonds.



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The present Position relating to balance of payments has become
difficult and it has become necessary to attract larger inflow of foreign
exchange. In order to encourage such inflow of foreign exchange, it
is proposed to allow—

(@) remittances of foreign exchange to Persons resident in India;

(0) the State Bank of India to issue Foreign Exchange Bonds to
non-resident Indians and overseas corporate bodies wherein non-
resident Indians have any interest,

in accordance with the schemes to be notified by the Reserve Bank of
India. It is also Proposed to provide immunities to persons receiving such
Temittances and to Persons owning such bonds mainly from the Foreign
Exchange Regulation Act, 1973 and the Direct Tax Laws.

2. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.

New Deum; MANMOHAN SINGH.
The 28th August, 1991,



MEMORANDUM @?=GARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 3 of the Bill provides that the Reserve Bank of India may
specify a scheme for the purpose of laying down details of the manner
in which the remittances of foreign exchange can be received by per-
sons resident in India and other matters connected therewith,

2. Clause 5 of the Bill provides that the Reserve Bank of India may
specify a scheme setting out the details relating to sale of Foreign
Exchange Bonds by the State Bank of India, including the persons who
can purchase the Bonds, the denomination of the Bonds, the interest
admissible thereon, the date of maturity of the Bonds, etc,

3. The matters in respect of which the schemes are to be specified
are matters of administrative detail or procedure and it is not practi-
cable to provide for them in ihe Bill itself. The delegation of Jegisla-
tive power is, therefore, of a normal character,


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for certain immunities to persons receiving remittances in
foreign exchange and to persons owning the Foreign Exchange Bonds
and for certain exemptions from direct taxes in relation to such

remittances and bonds and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto,

(Dr. Manmohan, Singh, Minister of Finance.)