हु * & INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

“3 06 19864 '

Bill No. 143 of 1986
—_—_—_—_————

THE SHIPPING DEVELOPMENT FUND COMMITTEE (ABOLITION)
BILL, 1986

A
BILL

to abolish the Shipping Development Fund Committee constituted under
the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 and to provide for certain matters
incidental thereto.

Be it enacted by: Parliament in the Thirty-seventh Year of the
Republic of India as follows:—

CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
§ 1. (1) This Act may be called the Shipping Development Fund Com- Short
mittee (Abolition) Act, 1986, title and
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government io
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. ment,
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— Defini-
10 (a) “Act” means the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958; tions,

(b) “appointed day” means the date of commencement of this
Act;

(c) “Committee” means the Shipping Development Fund Com-
tittee constituted under section 15 of the Act;

15 (०) “designated person” means the person appointed as such
under section 16 of this Act;


Aboli-
tion of
the
Shipping
Develop.
ment
Fund
Com-
mittee
and con-
sequen-
tial
amend-
ments
in the
Act.

Conse-
quential
provi-
sions.

2

(e) “Fund” means the Shipping Development Fund formed

under section 14 of the Act; 1

(f) “notified order” means an order notified in the Official
Gazette;

(g) “shipowner” means a person of the description mentioned in
section 21 of the Act or who had obtained loans or financial assistance
im any other form from the Committee;

(h) “shipping concern” means any concern engaged in the
business of shipping owned, controlled or managed by a shipowner.
CHAPTER II 10

AspoLition or THE Surprinc DEVELOPMENT FuND COMMITTEE AND VESTING
OF ASSETS AND LIABILITIES OF THE COMMITTEE IN THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT

3. On and from the appointed day, the Shipping Development Fund
Committee constituted under section 15 of the Act shall stand abolished,
and accordingly the Act shall stand amended as follows:— 15

(a) in the long title, the words “and a Shipping Development
Fund” shall be omitted;

(b) Part IV shall be omitted,

4, On the abolition of the Committee—

(a) all the rights and privileges of the Committee shall become 20
the rights and privileges of the Central Government;

(b) all properties, movable and immovable, including ९४४९
balances, reserve funds, instruments and moneys lying to the credit
of the Committee and all rights and interests in, or arising out of,
such properties as were immediately before the appointed day, in
the ownership, possession, power or control of the Committee, and
all books of account, registers, records and all other documents of
whatever nature relating thereto, shall vest in the Central Govern-

- ments

2!

4 2. = om

(c) all borrowings, liabilities and obligations of the Committee 30
of whatever kind and subsisting immediately before the appointed
day, shall he deemed, on and from such day to be the borrowings,
liabilities and obligations, as the case may he, of the Central Gov-
ernment; and

(d) all contracts entered into, and all matters and things 35
engaged to be done by, with er for, the Committee and subsisting
immediately before the appointed day, shall be deemed, on and from
such day to have been entered inte. or engaged to be done by, with
or for, the Central Government. a



3

5. (1) If, on the appointed day, any suit appeal or other proceeding
whatever nature in relation (0 the Fund. or the Committe is pending
by or against such Commitice, the same shall not abate, be discontinued,
or be in any way prejudicially affected by reason. of ithe abolition of the

5 Committee; but such suit, appeal or other proceeding may be continued,
prosecuted and enforced by or against the Central Government.

(2) Where, before the appointed day, no cause of action for any suit or
proceeding or any right to appeal arose in favour of, or against the Com-
mittee and the institution of any suit or proceeding on such cause of

10 action or the filing of such appeal was not harred before thd appointed day,
such suit or proceeding may be instituied or appeal may be filed by or
against the Central Government,

6. On the appointed day, all moneys and cash balances lying in the
credit of the Committee shall become part of, and be credited to, the
15 Ccnsolidated Fund of India.

7. (1) Every person, who has been, immediately before the appointed
day, employed under the Committee, shel] become on and from the ap-
pointed day, an employee of the Central Government and shail hold office
under the Central Government with the same rights and privileges as to

20 pension, gratuity and other matters as would have been admissible to
him if there had been no such vesting and shall continue to do so unless ang
until his employment under the‘ Central Government is duly terminated
or until his remuneration and other conditions of service are duly altered
by the Central Government.

25 (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Disputes
Act, 1947, or in any other law for the time being in force, the transfer
of the services of any officer or other person employed under the
Committee shall not entitle such offieex or other employee to any com-
pensation wnder this Aci or under any other law for the time being in

force and no such claim shall be entertained by any court, tribunal or
other authority.

(3) Where, under the terms of any contract of service ot otherwise,
any person whose services stand transferred to the Central Government
by reason of the provisions of this Act, is entitled to any arrears of salary

35 OF Wages or any paymenis for any leave not availed of, or to any other
payment, not being payment by way of gratuity or pension, such person
may enforce his claim against the Cenlral Government.

Continua.

tion of
Suits, ete.
against
Central
Govern-
ment.

Moneys,
ete, of
the Com.
mittee to
be credi-
ted to the
Consoli-
dated
Fund of
India,

Transfer
of ser-
vices of
existing
employees
of the
Com-
mittee,


Power of
Central
Govern-
ment to
call for
repay-
ment
before
agreed
period,

Appoint-
ment of
receiver
without
interven-
tion of
court.

CHAPTER III
SPECIAL POWERS OF THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT

8. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time
being in force or any thing in any agreement to the contrary, the Central
Government may, by notice in writing, require a shipowner to whom the 5
Committee had granted any financial assistance at any time before the
appointed day, to discharge forthwith in full his entire dues and also
discharge his other liabilities to the Central Government if—

(a) it appears to the Central Government that false or mis-
leading information in any material particular was given by the 10
shipowner for the purpose of procuring or for continuing to procure
the benefit of such financial assistance; or

(b) the shipowner has failed to comply with the terms of his
agreement with the Committee; or

(c) there is a reasonable apprehension that the shipowner is
unable to pay his debts or, that proceedings for liquidation have
been or may be commenced against the shipowner; or

(d) the Central Government has reason to believe that the
shipowner has not used or applied the financial assistance granted
by the Committee strictly for the purpose for which it was granted

or has otherwise misapplied or misappropriated the same for wrong-
ful gain; or

(e) the property assigned, charged, hypothecated, mortgaged
or pledged to the Committee as security for financial assistance
is not insured or kept insured by the shipowner to the satisfaction
of the Central Government, or if such property has depreciated in 59
value to such an extent that, in the opinion of the Central Govern-
ment, further security to the satisfaction of the Central Govern-
ment should be given and such security is not given; or

(f) without the permission of the Central Government any
ship, machinery, plant or other property, whether forming part of
ihe security or otherwise, is removed by such shipowner without
being replaced; or

0

(g) for any other reason, it is necessary so to do to protect the
interests of the Central Government.

35°

Explanation—For the purposes of this Act, “financial assistance”
shall inelude any loan, advance or monetary assistance including any
guarantee or counter-guarantee given to the shipowner by the Com-
mittee at any time before the appointed day.

9. (1) Where the Central Government issues a notice under section
8 and the shipowner fails to comply with such notice, the Central Gov- 4°

“ernment may notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for

the time being in force or anything contrary contained in any agreement,
deed or other instrument in the nature of any guarantee or counter-
guarantee, may appoint without intervention of the court, a receiver to



10

a5

20

9
a

go

35

49

45

5

detain and take possession of any ship or other assets belonging to the
Shipowher whether mortgaged, hypothecated or charged with power to—

(७) sell such ship or other assets by public auction notwith-
standing anything to the contrary contaimed in section 51 of the Act;

(७3) demana and recover all the income in respect of which he
15 appointed receiver of any such smp or oiler assets and to appro-
priate the same in the discnarge of rents, taxes and other dues and
outgoing attecting the same and in payment of the labilities of tne
ship owner under any mortgage, hypothecation or charge to the
Central Government; or

(6) use, operate, charter or lease such ship or other assets to
generate incomes, rents or prolits to meet the liabilities of the
ship owner to the Central Government under the mortgage, hypo-
thecation or charge, and pay the residue, if any, of the money
received by him to the person who, but for the appointment of the
receiver, would have been entitled to receive the income of which
he is appointed receiver, or who is otherwise entitled to such
property,

(2) A receiver appointed under this section shall be deemed to be
the agent of the shipowner and the shipowner shall be solely responsible
for the receiver's acts or defaults unless such acts or defaults are due
to any improper intervention on the part of the Central Government.

10. (1) Where the. Central Government requires a shipowner
to make immediate repayment of any financial assistance pursuant to a
notice issued under section 8 and the shipowner fails to
make any such repayment, the Central Government may, notwithstanding
anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, or
anything contrary contained in any agreement, deed or other instru-
ment in the nature of any guarantee or counter-guarantee, and without
prejudice to anything contained in section 9, by notified order, appoint
as many persons as it thinks fit,—

(a) to be directors ot the company if the shipowner is a com-
pany, as defined in the Companies Act, 1956, or

(b) in any other case, to be the administrators of the shipping
concern,

(2) The power to appoint directors or administrators under this
section includes the power to appoint any individual, firm or body
Corporate to be the directors or, as the case may be, administrators on
Such terms and conditions as the Central Government may think fit.

(3) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the power
to appoint direciors or administrators include the power to remove or
repiace the persons so appointed.

(4) Nothing in the Companies Act, 1956, or in any other law for the
lime being in force or in any instrument relating to the shipowner if
it is a company shall, in so far as it makes, in relation to a director, any
provision for the holding of any share qualification, age limit, restriction
on the number of directors or directorships, retirement by rotation or

removal from office, apply to any director appointed by the Central
Government under this section,

Appoint-
ment of
directors
and
adminis
trators,


Effect of
notified
order.

Powers
and
duties of
directors
and admi-
nistrators,

No right
to com-
pensation
for termi-
nation of
contract
of manag-
ing

direc-
tor, ete,

Applica.

tion of
Act 1 of
1956.

6

11. (1) On the issue of a notified order under section 10—

(a) if the shipowner is a company as defined in the Companies
Act, 1956, all persons holding office as, directors of the shipowner
and in any other case, all persons holding any office having the
powers of superintendence, direction and control immediately before
the issue of the notified order, shall be deemed to have vacated their
offices as such;

(b) any contract of management between the shipowner and
director or person referred to in clause (a) and 10 holding office as
such immediately before the issue of the notified order shall be
deemed to have been terminated,

(2) The directors or administrators, appointed under section 10, shall
take such steps as may be necessary to take into their custody or under
their control, the property, effects and actionable claims to which the
shipowner is, or appears to be, entitled, and all the property and effects
of the shipowner shall be deemed to be in the custody of the directors

or administrators, as the case may be, as from the date of the notified
order.

(3) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, the directors
appointed under section 10, shall, for all purposes, be the directors of
such company duly constituted under the Companies Act, 1956, and

such directors, shall alone be entitled to exercise all the powers of such
director. H

12. Subject to the control of the Cent:
or, as the case may be, the adm
shall take such steps as may be
managing the business of the shi
and discharge such duties as may
managing the said business,

ral Government, the directors,
inistrators appointed under section 10,
necessary for the purpose of efficiently
ipowner and shail exercise such powers
be exercisable by persons in charge of

13. (1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any
contract or in any law for the time being in force, no managing or whole-
time director or any other director or a manager or any person in charge
of management of a shipowner which is a company shall be entitled to
any compensation for the loss of office or for the premature termination,

under this Act, of any contract of management entered into by him with
such company,

i (2) Nothing contained in sub-section (1) shall affect the right of any
such managing or whole-time director, or any other director or manager
or any such person in charge of management to recover from the ship
owner moneys recoverable otherwise than by way of such compensation.

14. (1) Where directors have been appointed under section 10 in

relation to a company, then, notwithstanding anything contained in the
Companies Act, 1956 or

such company,—

(a) it shall not be lawful for the share holders of such company
or any other person to nominate or appoint any person to be a
director of the company;

20

25

90

35

in the memorandum or articles of association of -

45



7

(&) no resolution passed at any meeting of the shareholders of
such company shall be given effect to unless approved by the Central
Government;

(c) no proceeding for the winding up of such company or for

5 the appointment of a receiver in respect thereof shall lie or be
continued in any court, except with the consent of the Central
Government.

(2) Subject to the other provisions of this Act and subject to

such other exceptions, restrictions and limitations, if any, as the Central

10 Governmeni may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this

behalf, the Companies Act, 1956, shall continue to apply to a shipowner

which is a company in the same manner as it applied thereto before the
issue of the notified order under section 10.

15. (1) Any amount payable to the Central Government by the ship-
15 owner pursuant to a notice issued under section 8 may be recovered in
the same nianner as an arrear of land revenue.

(2) The Central Government may, for purposes of sub-section (1),
appoint an officer to prepare a certificate specifying the ammount due
from such shipowner and send it to the Collector of fhe district in which

20 the shipowner owns any property or carries on business provided that
the officer so appointed shall, before sending the certificate to the Collec-
tor, give an opportunity of being heard to the shipowner.

(9) The’ Collector shall on receipt of such certificate, proceed to
recover from such shipowner the amount specified in the certificate.

25. 16, (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, and subject to such conditions, restrictions and limitations as
may be specified therein or otherwise, delegate all or any of its powers
and functions under this Chapter to a designated person.

(2) Where any notification has been issued under sub-section (1),

3° the provisions of this Act shall apply in relation to the designated per-

son as they apply in relation to the Central Government in respect of

any matter in relation to which the powers and functtons of the Central
Government have been delegated to the designated person.

CHAPTER IV

35 MISCELLANEOUS

1]

17. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstand-

ing anything inconsistent therewith contained in anv other law for the

time being in force or in the memorandum or articles of association of

40 anv company which is a shipowner or in anv agreement. deed or other
instrument having effect by virtue of any law other than this Act.

18. No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central
Government or anv director or administrator annninted hv the Central
Government or the designated nerson or anv officer or other emnlovee
of the Central Government or the designated person for anv lose or
4 damage caused or likely to be esused bv anvthins which is in a good faith
done or intended to he done in pursuance of this Act or ony other law
‘or provision having the force of law.

Recovery
of dues
as arrears
of land
revenue,

Delega-
tion of
powers
to the
Designa.
ted
person,

Effect of
Ordinance
of

the Act in
other

laws,

Protec.
tion of
action
taken.

in good
faith, पर


Indemni-
fication of
directors,
ete,

Direc-
tors, etc.,
to be
public
servants.

8

19. Every director or administrator appointed under section 10 and
the designated person appointed under section 16 shall be indemnified
by the Central Government against all losses and expenses incurred by
him in relation to the discharge of his duties, except such as are caused
by his own wilful act or default.

20. Every director or administrator appointed under section 10 and
the designated person appointed under section 16 shall be deemed to be
a public servant within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal
Code.



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The Shipping Development Fund Committee (SDFC) was established
by the Government in 1959, under section 15 of the Merchant Shipping
Act, 1958. The main function of the SDFC is to administer the Ship-
ping Development Fund, formed with grants and loans from the Govern-
ment, which is utilized for granting loans and extending different types
of financial assistance for purposes of acquisition and maintenance of
ships. The current fall in freight rates and the recession in the inter-
national shipping industry have placed a considerable financial burden on
the SDFC and affected its ability to finance new ship acquisitions.
Although the SDFC performed well its role as a developmental body,
its record in respect of enforcing recovery of loans extended by it has
been well below expectations. The Government has since decided to estab-
lish a new financing agency under the Companies Act in the place of
the SDFC which would be endowed with wider financial responsibili-
ties and greater flexibility of operations.

2. It is, therefore, considered necessary through legislation to abolish
the Shipping Development Fund and the SDFC and provide, among
other things, for the vesting of the assets and liabilities thereof in the
Government, transfer of the employees of the SDFC to the Government,
special powers of recovery of outstanding dues of the Committee
including appointment of receiver without intervention of courts,
appointment of directors and administrators, recovery of dues as arrears
of land revenue and a power to recall loans before the agreed period to
Government. These powers could be exercised by the Government
directly or through a designated person.

3. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.

New DEtu;

The 26th November, 1986. है VISHWANATH PRATAP SINGH.

PRESIDENT’S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF THE
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

[Copy of letter No. 10|65|$4-CIE-1, dated 28th November, 1986 from
Shri Vishwanath Pratap Singh, Minister of Finance to the Secretary-
General, Lok Sabha.]

The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the
proposed Bill to abolish the Shipping Development Fund Committee
constituted under the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958, and to provide for
certain matters incidental thereto, recommends under clauses (1) and
(3) of article 117 of the Constitution of India, the introduction and consi-
deration of the Bill in Lok Sabha.

9


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clauses 4, 5 and 7 of the proposed legislation dealing with conse-
quential provisions and continuation of suits against the Central Govern-
ernment and transfer of services of the existing employees of the SDFC
may involve expenditure out of the Consolidated Fund of India. It has
not been possible at this stage to correctly estimate such expenditure.
However, as on date, SDFC’s guarantees and counter-guarantees amount
to a total value of about Rs. 626 crores. The transfer of the employees |
of the SDFC to the Government would entail a recurring yearly expen-
diture of approximately Rs. 18 lakhs.

10


ANNEXURE

Extracts FROM THE MERCHANT SHIPPING Act, 1958

(44 or 1958)

An Act to foster the development and ensure the efficient maintenance
of an Indian mercantile marine in a manner best suited to serve the
national interests and for that purpose to establish a National Shipping
Board and a Shipping Development Fund, to provide for the registration
of Indian ships and generally to amend and consolidate the law relating
to merchant shipping.

* * * * *
PART IV
Surepinc DEVELOPMENT FUND

14, There shall be formed a fund to be called the Shipping Develop-

ment Fund (hereinafter in this Part referred to as the Fund) there shall
be credited thereto— .
(a) the amount of such grants as the Central Government may
make for being credited to the Fund;

(b) the amount: of any loans advanced by the Central Govern-
ment to the Committee constituted under section 15 for carrying out
the objects of the Fund;

(bb) the amounts received by the said Committee on the issue
and sale of bonds and debentures;

(c) such sums of money as may, from time to time, be realised
out of repayment of loans made from the Fund or from interest on
loans or dividends from investments made from the Fund;

(d) such other sums as may be received for being credited to
the Fund.

15, (1) The Central Government shall constitute a committee to be
called the Shipping Development Fund Committee (hereinafter in this
Part referred to as the Committee) consisting of a chairman and such
number of other members, not exceeding twelve as the Central Govern-
ment may think fit to appoint thereto.

(2) The Committee so constituted shall be a body corporate by the
name aforesaid having perpectual succession and a common seal with

power to acquire, hold and dispose of property and may by that name
‘sue and be sued. ‘

(3) The Committee shall have power to regulate its own procedure.
"SIF wr I

Forma-
tion of
Shipping
Develop-
ment
Fund,

Shipping
Develop-
ment
Fund
Com-
mittee.


Applica-
ation

of the
Shipping
Develop-
ment
Fund.

12

16. (1) The Fund shall vest in the Committee and shall be applied
towards meeting the expenses of the Committee and for granting loans
and financial assistance in any other form,—

(a) to persons of the description mentioned in section 21—

(i) for the acquisition and maintenance of ships, including
modification, reconstruction and renovation thereof; and

(ii) for meeting any short-term financial requirements;
(9) to Indian ship-yards for the construction of new ships.

(2) The Committee shall not grant any loan or give any financial
assistance under sub-section (1) except on such terms and conditions as
the Central Government may from time to time specify, and any such
term may, if the loan or financial assistance is granted or given to a
company, provide for the appointment by the Committee of one or more
directors of such company and such provision and any appointment of
directors made in pursuance thereof shall be valid and effective not-
withstanding anything to the contrary contained in the Companies Act,
1956, or in any other law for the time being in force or the memoran-
dum, articles of asociation or any other instrument relating to the
company and any provision regarding share qualification, age limit,
number of directorships, removal from office of director and such like
conditions contained in any such law or instrument aforesaid, shall not

apply to any director appointed by the Committee in pursuance of the
term as aforesaid.

(24) Any director appointed in pursuance of sub-section (2) shall,—

(a) hold office during the pleasure of the Committee and may
be removed or substituted by any person by order in writing by the
Committee; +

(9) not incur any obligation or liability by reason only of his
being a director or for anything done or omitted to be done in good
faith in the discharge cf his duties as a director or anything in
relation thereto;

(c) not be liable to retirement by rotation and shall not be

taken into account for computing the number of directors liable to
such retirement.

(2B) Every director appointed by the Committee shall be indemnified
by the Committee against all lusses and expenses incurred by him in,
or in relation to, the discharge of his duties, except such as are caused
by his own wilful act or default.

(2C) No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against any director
appointed by the Committee for any loss or damage caused or likely
to be caused by anything which is in good faith done or intended to be

done in pursuance of this Act or any other law or provision having the
force of law.

(3) The Committee shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant
records and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as
the Centra] Government may, in consultation wit the Comptroller and
Auditor-General of India, prescribe.



aa

(4) The accounts of the Committee shall be audited by the Comp-
troller and Auditor-General of India or a person authorised by him in
this behalf at such intervals as the Comptroller and Auditor-General
of India may specify and any expenditure incurred in connection with
such audit shall be payable by the Committee.

(5) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and any person
authorised by him in connection with the audit of the accounts of the
Committee shall have the same rights, privileges and authority in
connection with such audit as’the Comptroller and Auditor-General
of India has in connection with the audit of Government accounts
and, in particular, shall have the right to demand the production of
books, accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers
and to inspect any office of the Committee.

(6) The accounts of the Committee as certified by the Comptroller
and Auditor-General of India or any person authorised by him in
this behalf, together with the audit report thereon, shall be forwarded
to the Central Government and that Government shall cause the same
to be laid before each House of Parliament.

16A. (1) The Committee may issue and sell bonds and debentures,

with or without interest, for the purpose of carrying out the objects of
the Fund.

(2) The honds and debentures of the Committee shall be. guaranteed.
by the Central Government as to the repayment of the principal and
the payment of interest, at such rate as may be fixed by the Central
Government on the recommendation of the Committee at the time the
bonds and debentures are issued. है

17. No act done or proceeding taken by the Commiffee shall be
questioned on the ground merely of the existence of any vacancy in or
defect in the constitution of, the Committee,

17A. Notwithstanding anything contained in any enactment for the
time being in force relating to income-tax or wealth-tax, the Committee
shall not be liable to pay—
(a) income-tax in respect of its income, profits or gains; and

: (b) wealth-tax in respect of its net wealth.

18. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, declare that with effect from such date as may be specified in
the notification, the Committee shall be dissolved, and thereupon—

(a) all the property vested in the Committee shall vest in the
Central Government; and

(b) all the liabilities of the Committee shall become the
liabilities of the Central Government.”

Borrow-
ing
powers,

Acts and
proceed.
ings of
Commit-
tee not
to be
invalid,

Exemp-
tion from
liability
to pay
income-
tax and
wealth-
tax,

Dissolu-
tion of the
Committee.


Power to
make rules
in respect
to matters
in this
Part.

se.

19. (1) The Central Government may make rules to carry out the
purposes of this Part.

(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the fore-
going power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following
matters, namely:—

(a) the term of office of members of the Committee and the
manner of filling casual vacancies in the Committee;

(b) powers of the Chairman of the Committee;

(c) the travelling and other allowances payable to members of
the Committee;

(d) the appointment of officers and other employees of the
Committee and the terms and conditions of their service;

(e) the custody and investment of the Fund;

(f) the execution of instruments and the mode of entering into
contracts by or on behalf of the Committee and the proof of docu-

ments purporting to be executed, issued or sfgnéd by or on behalf
of the Committee;

(ff) the manner and terms of issue, sale and redemption of
bonds and debentures by the Committee;

(g) any other matter which may be or is to be prescribed,
* ‘ * क्र = *


LOK SABHA :

a
BILL

to abolish the Shipping Development Fund Committee constituted under
the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 and to provide for certain matters
incidental thereto, है

(Shri Vishwanath Pratap Singh,
Minister of Finance.)