As IntRopucep IN Lok SABHA

9 Sain 7
a

Bill No. 143 of 2000

THE POPULATION POLICY BILL, 2000
By
‘Apv, Urtamrao Dutkats, MP.
A
BILL

to provide for population policy and for promoting small family norm and for matters
connected therewith.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows: —
1. (J) This Act may be called the Population Policy Act, 2000.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.

(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
5 notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, “appropriate Government”
means the Central Government in relation to Union territories and the State Government
in relation to a State.

3. A married couple who have no child shall be provided with the following
facilities: —

10 (a) free two room house;

Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment,

Definition,

Facilities toa
married couple
who have no
child,


Incentives for
adopting small
family norm.

Facilities toa
couple who
have two
children,

No person
shall procreate
more than (४०
children.
Introduction of
subject relating
to population
control ia
schools.

Age for
marriage.

No increment
or promotion to
an employee
who violates
the provision of

secuon 8.
Undertaking to
be given by

Government
employees.

Undertaking to
be given by
members of
Parliament and
State Legisla-
ture,

No free mater-
nity facilites for
procreation of
third child.
Disincentives
for violation of
the provisions
of this Act,

2

(b) out of turn promotion to those who are in Government/State/Public
Undertaking service or any other organisation connected with the Government;
and

(c) free medical treatment, food, pension, etc. in their old age.

4. A married couple who have only one child and voluntarily undergo sterilisation
shall be given the following facilities: —

(a) two bed room house at concessional rates;
(b) free education including technical education, to the child;

(c) out of turn promotion to those who are in Government service and one
time cash reward of rupees twenty-five thousand to those who are not in
Government service; and

(d) employment to the child after completion of his education.

5.A married couple who have two children and if either of them voluntarily undergo
sterilisation shall be given the following facilities

(a) free education to both children;
(b) job to one child;
(c) preferential allotment of house under Government housing schemes; and

(d) two extra increments to those who are in Government service and one
time cash reward of rupees five thousand to those who are not in Government
service.

6.No person after one year from the commencement of this Act shall procreate more
than two children.

7. The appropriate Government shall introduce a compulsory subject relating
to population control in all educational institutions for all children who have attained
the age of fifteen years irrespective of course they are pursuing.

8. No marriage shall be solemnised between a male who is less than twenty-eight
years of age and a female who is less than twenty-five years of age.

9. Any Central or State Government employee who violates the provision of section है
shall not be given any increment or promotion during the tenure of his service.

10. On and from the commencement of this Act, every employee who is in service in
connection with affairs of the appropriate Government shall give an undertaking that he
shall not procreate more than two children.

11. A member of either House of Parliament or Legislature of a State shall give an
undertaking that he shall not procreate more than two children.

12, In any Government hospital, free maternity facilities shall not be provided for
procreation of third child.

13. Any person who procreates more than two children after one year from the
commencement of this Act shall not be entitled to following faciluies:—

10

15

20

25

30

35


10

15

20

25

30

a;

(i) essential items from public distribution

(ii) allotment of house from a housing scheme sponsored by Government; and
(iii) availing of any welfare or social security scheme.

14, Every family, within three months from the date of commencement of this Act,

shall register all details of members of that family with the Registrar of Births and Deattis
in the concerned jurisdiction.

15. Every birth or death of any person in a family shall be compulsorily registered
with the registrar of Births and Deaths in the concerned jurisdiction.

16, The Registrar of Births and Deaths shalt forward the names and other details of
those persons who procreate more than two children after one year from the commencement
of this Act to the appropriate Government.

17. (1) There shall be constituted a fund to be called the National Population
Fund by the Central Government.

(2) The Central Government and every State Government shall contribute to the
fund in such ratio as may be prescribed by the Central Government,

18. The fund constituted under section 17 shall be utilised for the following
purposes:—

() giving of national population control award to the State Government or
Union territory which has recorded the least population growth during the ye

(ii) giving wide publicity through print and electronic media regarding need
for population control; and
(iii) providing funds to popularise the family planning programmes.

19, Any person who is running his own company, firm society or corporation, if
violates the provisions of the Act shall not be allowed to avail himself of any loan or
facility of any kind from any Government company or financial institution.

20, The provisions of this Act shall apply notwithstanding anything contained to the
contrary in any other law for the time being in force.

21. The provisions of this Act shall not apply to persons who are having more than
two children on the date of commencement of this Act.

22. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the provisions of this Act.

Registration of
family with the
registrar of
births and
deaths.

Every birth and
death shall be
compuisorily
registered with
the Registrar.
Details of
persons who:
procreate moce
than wo
children to be
forwarded to
Government.

Constitution of
National
Population
Fund.

No Joan
facilities to a
person who
violates the
provision of
the Act,

Act to have
over-riding
effect.
Provisions of
this Act not to
apply to those
persons who
have more than
two children on
the date of
‘commencement
of this Act.
Power to make
rules.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

For the last fity years, India has doubled its population and by the turn of the century
India shall have three out of ten most populous cities in the world, and half the population
of these cities would be living in slums under squalid conditions, It is expected that within
another 10—20 years, India will be the most populous country in the world. Without
massive public contributions for air pollution control and perspective planning, living
conditions in all urban areas will progressively deteriorate.

‘The breakdown of the civic amenities due to over crowding, law and order situation,
unemployment and widening of the gap between the haves and haves-not has progressively
created an explosive situation. The need for housing is far beyond the available finances
and educational facilities are hopelessly inadequate to meet the existing demands. There
is no balance between population growth and the infrastructure and available opportunities
with the existing resources and it will not be possible to meet the demands of growing
population.

The country has achieved the production targets but due to over population it is
becoming insufficient and the progress of the country is hampered.

Therefore, the time has come when strong measures have become essential and if
such measures are not taken at the earliest, it-will create a havoc. Therefore, the Bill seeks to
provide for a new population policy.

Hence this Bill.

New Dewi; UTTAMRAO DHIKALE
July 24, 2000


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clauses 3 to 5 of the Bill provides that certain benefits are to be given to thsoe who
have no child or who have one child or who have two children, Clause 7 provides for
introduction of compulsory subject relating to population control in all educational
institutions, Clause 17 provides for establishing National Population Control Fund to which
the Central Government shall also contribute. The Central Government shall have to incur
some expenditure for implementing the provisions of this Bill in respect of Union territories.
The State Governments will incur expenditure in respect of their State out of their respective
Consolidated Funds, The Bill, therefore, will involve an annual recurring expenditure of
about rupees one thousand crore out of the Consolidated Fund of India.

A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 22 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying
Out the provisions of the Bill. As the rules to be made wil

Il relate to matters of details only,
the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character,


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for a population policy and for promoting small family
norm and for matters connected therewith.

(Apv, Uttamrao Dhikale, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MAND—2612LS—16.08.2000.