Bill No. 143  of  2010
THE EMPOWERMENT OF WOMEN BILL, 2010
————
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
————
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
CLAUSES
1. Short title, extent and commencement.
2. Definitions.
CHAPTER II
E
DUCATIONAL  RIGHTS
3. Free education to women.
4. Free vocational training to girl students.
CHAPTER III
EMPLOYMENT RIGHTS
5. Reservation of posts in Government Services.
6. Working Women Welfare Fund.
7. Representation of women employees in trade unions.
8. Constitution of Advisory Committee.
9. Central Advisory Committee.
10. Appointment of Officers.
11. Register of women employees.
12. Annual Report of Advisory Committees.
13. Employer to furnish information in respect of women employees.
CHAPTER IV
S
EXUAL HARASSMENT
14. Meaning of sexual harassment.
15. Special Officer to deal with cases in the Government offices.
16. Special Officer for every district.
(i)
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

17. Women employees not to be harassed.
18. Women employees to approach Special Officer in case of harassment.
19. Special Officer to make inquiries.
20. Special Officer to recommend action against guilty.
21. Special Officer to have powers of a Civil Court.
22. Punishment.
CHAPTER V
S
OCIAL SECURITY RIGHTS
23. Provision of pension to destitute women.
24. Women’s home.
25. Insurance Scheme for women.
26. Welfare Fund for women other than working women.
CHAPTER VI
E
CONOMIC RIGHTS
27. Establishment of  Women Development Bank.
28. Board to manage Bank.
29. Board to frame policies and determine business of Bank.
30. Sitting of Bank.
31. Capital of Bank.
32. Dealings and transactions of Bank.
33. Duty of Bank.
34. Terms and conditions for granting loan.
35. Application for availing loan.
36. Women registered with Employment Exchanges to get priority.
37. Officers and staff.
CHAPTER VII
S
OCIAL RIGHTS
38. Establishment of lineage.
39. Right to refuse to fill forms in certain cases.
40. Misdemeanour under the Act.
41. Penalties.
CHAPTER VIII
P
ROPERTY RIGHTS
42. Rights of an unmarried woman.
43. Rights of a married woman.
44. Rights of a widow.
(ii)

CHAPTER IX
SPECIAL COURTS
45. Establishment of  Special Courts for Women.
46. Qualification for appointment as Chief Judge and other Judges.
47. Senior most Judge to act as Chief Judge or to discharge his functions in certain
circumstances.
48. Term of office.
49. Resignation and removal.
50. Salary and allowances and other terms and conditions of service of Chief Judge
and other Judges.
51. Financial and administrative powers of the Chief Judge.
52. Staff of the Special Court.
53. Jurisdiction, powers and authority of Special Courts.
54. Power of Special Courts.
55. Exclusion of jurisdiction of courts except the concerned High Court and Supreme
Court.
56. Transfer of pending cases.
57. Free legal aid to women.
CHAPTER X
M
ISCELLANEOUS
58. Act to have over-riding effect.
59. Power to remove difficulties.
60. Power to make rules.
(iii)

Bill No. 143 of  2010
THE EMPOWERMENT OF WOMEN  BILL, 2010
By
KUMARI SAROJ PANDEY, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for empowerment of women in all fields and for matters connected therewith.
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Empowerment of Women Act, 2010.
(2)  It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) “bank” means the Women Development Bank established under section 27;
(c) “child” means a person who has not attained the age of fourteen years;
(d) “court” means a special court established under section 45;
Short title,
extent and com-
mencement.
Definitions.
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(e) “destitute woman” means a woman who has been separated, divorced or a
widow or an unmarried woman who has no source of income;
(f) “employer” means:
(i) in relation to an establishment which is under the control of the
appropriate Government, a person or an authority appointed by the appropriate
Government, for the supervision and control of employees or where no  person
is so appointed, the head of the department;
(ii) in relation to an establishment under any local authority, the person
appointed by such authority for the supervision and control of employees or
where no person is so appointed, the chief executive officer of the local authority;
(iii) in any other case, the person who, or the authority which, has the
ultimate control over  the affairs of the establishment;
(g) “establishment” includes:—
(i) a factory;
(ii) a mine;
(iii) a plantation;
(iv) an agricultural field;
(v) an establishment wherein persons are employed for the exhibition of
equestrian, acrobatic and other performances;
(vi) a place where, manufacture, production, or such other similar activity
is carried out;
(vii) a place where trading either wholesale or retail in any product is
carried out;
(viii) a hotel, restaurant, lodge or any eating place;
(ix) a shop where sale in any product is carried out or a service is provided;
(x) a place where construction work is carried out;
(h) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(i) “property” means movable and immovable property and includes all rights
pertaining to property by way of lease, licence and inheritance.
CHAPTER II
E
DUCATIONAL RIGHTS
3. The appropriate Government shall,—
(a) provide free and compulsory education upto graduation level to all women;
(b) open adequate number of educational institutions exclusively for women;
(c) reserve fifty per cent. of seats in educational institutions for women till
adequate number of educational institutions exclusive to them have been set up; and
(d) provide scholarships to women for pursuing higher education.
Explanation.—In this section, ‘free education’ means uniform, books and stationery,
nutritious meals during school hours and transportation free of cost and no fees for
admission or for taking any examination shall be charged.
4. The appropriate Government shall provide vocational training free of cost to all
girl students.
Free
vocational
training to
girl students.
Free education
to women.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

CHAPTER III
EMPLOYMENT RIGHTS
5. The Central Government shall reserve thirty per cent. of posts and appointments
under its control for women.
6. (1) The Central Government shall constitute a Fund to be called Working Women
Welfare Fund for carrying out the following purposes:—
(i) to ensure the right to work for women;
(ii) to ensure equal wages to women employees;
(iii) to ensure steady and definite increase in the number of  women employees
in the total work force;
(iv) to ensure, after suitable amendments, proper application of the existing
labour laws for the benefit of the women employees;
(v) to ensure child care facilities including provision of  milk, tiffin, clothes,
toys and trained ayahas to look after the children;
(vi) to ensure mobile child care facilities for  women agricultural
employees;
(vii) to ensure retiring rooms with adequate facilities like bathrooms,
latrines, etc. at the work-site for the women employees;
(viii) to ensure residential facilities for women employees nearest to the place
of their work;
(ix) to ensure recreational facilities for  children of working  women at the
child care centres;
(x) to ensure proper and adequate security arrangement for the women
employees at the work site;
(xi) to ensure  conducive working conditions for the women employees;
(xii) to ensure reservation of beds in the hospitals for women employees;
(xiii) to ensure proper and adequate maternity facilities for the women
employees;
(xiv) to ensure equality for married and unmarried women employees in the
employment as well as in service conditions;
(xv) to ensure cheap, safe and quick transportation facilities for women
employees;
(xvi) to ensure protection from health hazards, particularly for the women
employees working in hazardous industries like cashew, mines, tobacco and
construction projects.
(2) Every employer and State Government shall contribute to the Fund in such ratio
as  may be determined by the Central Government.
7. The appropriate Government shall ensure representation of women employees in
various committees of trade unions formed for the purposes of working class.
8. (1) The Central Government shall constitute Advisory Committees  in every State
and Union territory in respect of the area at the city level, district level and an apex body at
State level, consisting of equal number of representatives from the appropriate Government,
the employees and the trade unions, who shall be women, to advise the Central Government
Reservation of
posts in
Government
Services.
Working Women
Welfare Fund.
Representation
of women
employees in
trade unions.
Constitution
of Advisory
Committees.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
3

4
on such matters arising out of the administration of this Act as may be referred to it by the
Central Government including matters relating to the utilisation  of the Fund.
(2) The members of the committees so constituted shall from amongst themselves
elect the Chairperson of the committees.
(3) The Central Government shall publish the names of the members of all Advisory
Committees in the Official Gazette.
9. The Central Government shall constitute a Central Advisory Committee which shall
coordinate the functioning of all the Advisory Committees to ensure their proper function-
ing and for the adoption of uniform policies.
10. The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint
as many officers as it may deem necessary for the proper enforcement of the provisions of
this Act.
11. The Advisory Committee at the district level shall maintain a register of women
employees in its area and the information contained therein shall be checked with the
information supplied by each employer regarding women employed by them and their
specific needs, if any.
12. Each Advisory Committee shall, as soon as may be, after the end of each financial
year, prepare a comprehensive report of its activities of the previous year, which were
financed from the Fund, together with a statement of accounts.
13. The appropriate Government may require an employer, who employs women in his
industry or establishment, to furnish for the purposes of this Act, such statistical and other
information, in such form and within such period, as may be prescribed.
CHAPTER IV
S
EXUAL HARASSMENT
14. For the purposes of this Act, ‘sexual harassment’  includes—
(i) harassing any employee by virtue of her being a female;
(ii) indecent representation of women with a view to annoy or irritate her and
which results in mental agony to  a female employee;
(iii) detaining a female employee before or after normal working hours in the
absence of other employees and when there is no work to be performed by that female
employee, with a view to outrage her modesty or molest her;
(iv) paying less wages or giving  more work  to a female employee  than her male
counterpart;
(v) refusing to grant leave of absence to a female employee or permission to her
during her pregnancy/termination of pregnancy or other periods when she would not
be physically or biologically fit to perform her work to her fullest capacity;
(vi) passing of obscene or lewd comments against a female employee ;
(vii) making a female employee attend office on holidays or come to such place
where her presence is not required in connection with her employment;
(viii) compelling a female employee to attend a party/dance or any musical
programme or to dine with her employer or any other person if the female employee is
not willing to do so;
(ix) refusal to allow rest to female employee as provided under the provisions of
any  other law for the time being in force;
Central Advisory
Committee.
Appointment of
Officers.
Register of
women
employees.
Annual Report
of Advisory
Committees.
Employer to
furnish infor-
mation in re-
spect of
women
employees.
Meaning of
Sexual harass-
ment.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

5
(x) making her dress in a way which would present her in an obscene manner;
(xi) making her perform such a job or duty which would denigrate her
personality;
(xii) touching or otherwise fondling or flirting bodily of a female employee in
the guise of teaching her the job or help her in her job;
(xiii) making her perform such duties which she cannot with her physical
condition would be able to perform;
(xiv) gestures or actions either by word or by written material intending to
insult or cause mental injury to a female employee;
(xv) showing pornography or other obscene literature to a female employee;
(xvi) sexual advances with a view to assault or molest or outrage modesty of a
female employee;
(xvii) offering unwanted suggestions or advice about physical appearance or
on other matters of a female employee with a view to hurt her; and
(xviii) doing of any other act or causing any act by using position as an employer
with a view to exploiting a female employee.
15.   The Central Government shall designate an officer, who shall be a woman,  to be
the Special Officer in every department, or office or an establishment under its jurisdiction
to deal with complaints lodged by female employees in her department or office or
establishment.
16. The appropriate Government shall appoint a Special Officer, who shall be a
woman, for every district to deal with cases arising out   of this Act within the territorial
jurisdiction of that district.
17. No person being an employer or manager or supervisor in charge of the office/
organisation or a factory or establishment or any other work place or any other employee or
any other person shall indulge or cause to be indulged in sexual harassment of women
employees.
18. If any female employee has been subject to sexual harassment, she may approach
the concerned Special Officer for redressal of her grievances.
19. As soon as a complaint has been lodged with the Special Officer, she shall make or
cause to be made an inquiry into the facts and circumstances of the complaint.
20. If after the inquiry, the Special Officer finds any person guilty of sexual
harassment, she shall—
(a) in case the guilty is an employee of the Government, recommend to the
appropriate authority for taking such disciplinary action as she may deem fit;
(b) in case the guilty is not employed in Government service, recommend to the
employer or other person in charge of the affairs of the organisation where the accused
is employed, such action as she may deem fit;
Provided that if it is brought to the notice of the Special Officer that no action has
been taken by the employer or the person in charge of the affairs of the organisation where
the accused is employed—
(i) in case it is an office or establishment under the control of the Central
Government, the Central Government shall terminate the services of both the accused
person and the person in charge of the office where the victim is employed;
Special officer to
deal with cases in
the Government
offices.
Special Officer
for every district.
Women em-
ployees not to
be harassed.
Women em-
ployees to ap-
proach Special
Officer in case of
harassment.
Special Officer to
make inquiries.
Special Officer
to recommend
action against
guilty.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

6
(ii) in case the work place where the victim is employed is not under the control
of the Central Government, the facilities and concessions extended to that organisation
by the Central Government shall be withdrawn forthwith.
21. A Special Officer while discharging her functions under the provisions of this Act
shall have the powers of a Civil Court and the proceedings thereof shall be in accordance
with the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.
22. Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter shall be punished with
imprisonment for a period of not less than seven years and with fine not less than fifty
thousand rupees and shall be disqualified from joining the Government service.
CHAPTER V
S
OCIAL SECURITY RIGHTS
23. The appropriate Government shall provide a pension at the rate of rupees one
thousand and five hundred per mensem, to be revised from time to time, to all destitute
women till they are gainfully employed or facilities for self-employment have been
extended to  them or accommodated in women’s homes .
24. (1) The appropriate Government shall establish women’s homes in every district
for accomodating destitute women.
(2) In every women’s home:—
(i) medical care, food and clothes shall be supplied free of cost to the inmates;
(ii) recreational facilities shall be made available; and
(iii) necessary facilities for self employment shall be made available.
25. (1) The Central Government shall frame and administer an Insurance Scheme
for all women.
(2) The Insurance Scheme so administered shall cater to housewives, working women
and self-employed women in both organised and unorganised sectors.
(3) The Insurance shall cover against accidents, injuries, illness connected with
pregnancy or otherwise or any loss in  self-employment due to natural calamity or any
mishap.
(4) The Central Government shall determine the amount of insurance and the
premium payable by every woman and the period of the insurance cover thereon.
26. (1) The Central Government shall constitute a Fund to be called the Women
Welfare Fund for carrying out welfare measures for women other than working women.
(2) Every State Government shall contribute to the Fund in such ratio as may be
determined by the Central Government.
(3) The Fund shall be utilised for providing necessary facilities to women pursuing
education, or self-employment and for payment of pension to destitute women.
CHAPTER VI
E
CONOMIC RIGHTS
27. (1) The Central Government shall establish a Women Development Bank with
its headquarters at New Delhi.
(2) The Bank shall set up its regional offices in every State capital and a branch
in every city having a population of more than one million and in every district:
Provided that the bank may set up more than one branch in a city or a district in
accordance with its population and requirement.
28. (1) The Bank shall be managed by a Board consisting of the following, namely:—
(a) a Chairperson, who shall be an expert in banking service to be appointed by
the Central Government;
Special Officer
to have powers
of a Civil Court.
Punishment.
Provision of
pension to
destitute
women.
Women's home.
Insurance
Scheme for
women.
Welfare Fund for
women other
than working
women.
Establishment
of Women
Development
Bank.
Board to
manage Bank.
5 of 1908.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

7
(b) members to represent the following:—
(i) Union Ministry of Women and Child Development;
(ii) Union Ministry of Finance;
(iii ) a representative of National Commission for Women
 established under the National Commission for Women Act, 1990;
(iv) a representative of reputed Women’s Associations in the country; and
(v) a representative of Legal profession.
(2) The terms of appointment, qualification of Chairperson and other members of the
Board shall be such as may be prescribed.
(3) The salaries and other allowances and conditions of service of the Chairperson
shall be such as may be prescribed.
(4) The members of the Board shall be entitled to such allowances as may be
prescribed for attending the sittings of the Board.
29. The Board shall frame policies and determine business of the bank with a view to
achieve alround development of women.
30. (1) The Board shall hold sittings as often as possible but in any case not later than
three months from the date of its previous sitting.
(2) The sittings of the Board shall be presided over by the Chairperson and in his
absence, by any member to be elected as acting chairperson  from members amongst
themselves.
31. (1) The authorised capital of the Bank shall be rupees five hundred crore and it
may be increased at any time by the Central Government by notification in the Official
Gazette.
(2) Every State Government shall contribute to the bank in such ratio as may be
determined by the Central Government.
32. The dealings and transactions of the bank shall be exclusively with women and
with such organisations as are engaged in the welfare activities of women.
33. The bank shall perform the following business, namely:—
(i) accept deposits, either in cash or in any banking instrument from women;
(ii) open savings and other accounts in favour of women;
(iii) extend loans to women for pursuing education including higher and
technical education;
(iv) extend loans to women for self-employment;
(v) extend loans to women for  medical treatment, expenses during  pregnancy
including cost of termination of pregnancy, marriages, religious ceremonies and for
such other similar purposes as may be prescribed; and
(vi) extend loans to women for purchase/construction of houses, purchase of
vehicles and consumer durables.
34. (1) The bank may impose such terms and conditions, as it may deem necessary,
before granting loans to women.
(2) The loan amount shall be determined in accordance with circumstances and
merits of every case.
(3) The loan amount shall be repayable over such period as may be determined by
the bank.
20 of 1990.
Board to frame
policies and
determine
business of
Bank.
Sitting of Bank.
Capital of Bank.
Duty of Bank.
Terms and Con-
ditions for grant-
ing loan.
Dealings  and
transactions of
Bank.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

8
35. (1) Every woman who wishes to avail of loan facility may make an application to
the nearest bank.
(2) The bank, on receipt of an application under sub-section ( 1), shall take a
decision with regard to grant of loan, within a period of one month from the date of receipt
of such application and state reasons in case the loan amount is not granted.
36. (1) The appropriate Government shall forward names of women registered with
employment exchanges under their jurisdiction to the concerned regional office.
(2) Any woman who has registered herself with an employment exchange and is not
gainfully employed shall have preference in getting loan for self-employment.
37. The bank shall appoint necessary officers and staff for efficient functioning of
the bank:
Provided that one half of the total number of appointments or posts shall be reserved
for women.
CHAPTER VII
S
OCIAL RIGHTS
38. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
no Government, authority or person, shall  compel any other person who is a citizen of India
to fill and sign any form, statutory or non-statutory, official or non-official, which provides
for establishing a person’s lineage only through  his  father or to prohibit him  to write his
mother’s name instead.
39. After the coming into force of this Act, it shall be lawful for any citizen of India to
refuse to fill a form  which does not give him or her the option to give the name of his or her
mother.
40. It shall be a grave misdemeanour under this Act for any person to describe any
citizen of India as “bastard”.
41. (1) Whosoever compels any citizen of India to act in a manner contrary to the
provisions of sections 38 and 39 of this Act or discriminate against any citizen on the
ground of the citizen’s refusal to act in a manner which is against the provisions of these
sections, shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to one
month and fine of five hundred rupees or one month’s imprisonment in lieu thereof.
(2) The misdemeanour mentioned in section 40 shall be punished with rigorous
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year and with fine of five hundred rupees
or one month’s imprisonment in case of non-payment of fine.
CHAPTER VIII
P
ROPERTY RIGHTS
42.  Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
an unmarried woman shall have the following rights, namely:—
(a) she shall have the right to live in the house of her parents but shall not have
the right to seek partition or disposal of such house;
(b) she shall have the right to claim an equal share in any property, other than
the residential house or dwelling unit referred to in clause (a), as a coparcener to such
property, whether such property is a joint-family property or any premises held on
lease or licence or under any other arrangement by her parents:
Provided that she shall have the right to claim partition of such property, if she
decides to remain unmarried after she attains the age of eighteen years or such other
age of marriage as may be determined under any law for the time being in force;
(c) she shall have the right to claim an equal share as a coparcener, in the gains
of the family business of her parents; and
(d) she shall have right to claim an equal share in any property, as a coparcener,
which is acquired by her parents by way of exchange, sale or transfer of any existing
Application for
availing loan.
Officers and
staff.
Establishment
of lineage.
Right to refuse
to fill forms in
certain cases.
Misdemeanour
under the Act.
Penalties.
Rights of an
unmarried
woman.
Women
registered with
Employment
Exchanges to
get priority.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

9
property or which is acquired by her parents by way of accreditation or succession to
any ancestral property or otherwise.
43.  A married woman shall have the following rights, namely:—
(a) she shall have the right to live in the house of her husband whether owned
by him or by his joint family or owned by him, solely or jointly, as a lessee or licensee:
Provided that such right shall not be void in the event of judicial separation,
divorce or death of the husband:
Provided further that she shall also have the right to live in the residential
house or dwelling unit of her parents, in case she is deserted or divorced by her
husband, without seeking partition or disposal of whole or any part thereof;
(b) she shall have the right to claim an equal share, as a coparcener, in the
property of her husband including that of in the joint family property of her husband,
from the date of marriage, and like any other coparcener she shall also have the right
to claim partition or disposal of whole or part of such property:
Provided that in the event of disposal of part or whole of such property, the
other coparcener shall have right to pre-emption;
(c) she shall have an option to have the custody of the children born out of the
wedlock and shall have the right to claim maintenance, not inconsistent with the
status of the family of her husband, both for herself and for her children which shall
include the expenses to be incurred on the education, training and upbringing of her
children in case of dissolution of marriage:
Provided that if in the interest of the education, training or upbringing of the
children,  it is considered necessary or expedient to leave the children under the
custody of the husband or any one else, she shall have the right to free access to the
children born out of the wedlock, irrespective of estrangement, desertion, divorce or
death of the husband; and
(d) she shall have the right to claim an equal share in the gains of the business
of her husband or in the family business of her husband or in any other business in
which her husband is a partner.
44. A widow shall have the following rights, namely:—
(a) she shall, subject to such eligibility, as may be prescribed, be entitled to
suitable employment by the Central Government in case her deceased husband was
employed in any of the establishment under the Central Government:
Provided that if she is not eligible for any such employment, she shall be
entitled to such monthly pension as would have been payable to her husband at the
time of his deemed superannuation:
Provided further that if the death of her husband occurs during the course of
his duties, she shall be entitled to such monthly salary and allowances, as would have
been payable to her husband till his deemed superannuation, besides any other
compensation admissible to her under any other law for the time being in force;
(b) she shall have the first claim and absolute right to the property of her
deceased husband;
(c) she shall be entitled to have such share and status as the share and status
of her deceased husband would have been, in the family business; and
(d) she shall have the right to live in the residential house or dwelling unit of her
parents, in the case she so desires, without seeking partition or disposal of whole or
any part thereof.
Rights of a
married
woman.
Rights of a
widow.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

10
CHAPTER IX
SPECIAL COURTS
45. (1) The appropriate Government shall set up sufficient number of Special Courts
to deal exclusively with matters arising out of atrocities or offences committed against
women.
(2) Each Special Court shall consist of a Chief Judge and such number of other
Judges as the appropriate Government may deem fit.
(3) Every Special Court shall be headed by the Chief Judge.
46. (1) A person shall not be eligible  for appointment as the Chief Judge unless he,—
(a) is, or has been, a District Judge; or
(b) has, for at least two years, held the office of the Judge of the Special Court;
and has, for at least five years, been associated with women’s cause.
(2) A person shall not be eligible  for appointment as a judge unless he,—
(a) is, or has been, a judicial Magistrate; or
(b) has, for a period of not less than five years, been practising law; and has for
atleast five years, been associated with women’s cause.
(3) Every Chief Judge of a special court in a Union territory shall be appointed by
the President,
(4) Every Chief Judge of a special court  in a State shall be appointed by the
Governor of the State concerned,
(5) Every other Judge of a Special Court shall be appointed by the appropriate
Government,
(6) One-third of the total number of posts of Chief Judges and other Judges in
every State shall be reserved for women.
47. (1) In the event of the occurrence of any vacancy in the office of the Chief Judge
of a Special Court by reason of his death, resignation or otherwise, the senior most Judge of
that Court shall act as the Chief Judge until the date on which a new Chief Judge, appointed
in accordance with the provisions of this Act to fill such vacancy, enters upon his office.
(2) When the Chief Judge is unable to discharge his functions owing to absence,
illness or any other cause, the senior most Judge of that Special Court shall discharge the
functions of the Chief Judge until the date on which Chief Judge resumes his duties.
48. Every Chief Judge and other Judges shall hold office as such for a term of five
years from the date on which he enters upon his office or until he attains,—
(a) in the case of the Chief Judge, the age of 65 years, and
(b) in the case of any other Judge, the age of  60 years,
whichever is earlier.
49. Every Chief Judge or a Judge may, by notice in writing under his hand addressed
to the President in case he is a Chief Judge or a Judge of a Special Court in a Union territory
or to the Governor, in case he is a Chief Judge or a Judge of a Special Court in a State resign
from his office:
Provided that the Chief Judge or any other Judge shall, unless he is permitted by the
President or the Governor, as the case may be, to relinquish his office sooner, continue to
hold office until the expiry of three months from the date of receipt of such notice or until a
person duly appointed as his successor enters upon his office or until the expiry of his term
of office, whichever is the earliest.
Establishment
of Special
Courts for
women.
Qualification
for appoint-
ment as Chief
Judge and other
Judges.
Senior most
Judge to act as
Chief Judge or
to discharge his
functions in
certain circum-
stances.
Term of office.
Resignation
and removal.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

11
50. The salaries and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service
(including pension, gratuity and other retirement benefits) of the Chief Judge or a Judge
of a Special Court shall be such as may by prescribed by the Central Government:
Provided that neither the salary and allowances nor the other terms and conditions of
service of the Chief Judge or a Judge of a Special Court shall be varied to his disadvantage
after his appointment.
51. Every Chief Judge shall exercise such financial and administrative powers over
the Special Court as may be vested in him in such manner as may be prescribed.
52. The appropriate Government shall determine the nature and categories of the
officers and other employees required to assist a Special Court in the discharge of its
functions.
53. Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, every Special Court shall exer-
cise all the judicial  powers and authority exercisable immediately before that day by all
courts (except High Courts and the Supreme Court) in relation to all matters of offences or
atrocities committed against women under the Indian Penal Code or any other law for the
time being in force.
54. Every Special Court constituted under this Act shall have powers of any other
court for the purpose of holding any inquiry as are vested in a civil court under the Code of
Civil Procedure, 1908 and in a criminal court under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
55. On the date of coming into force of this Act, the jurisdiction, powers and authority
in relation to any offences or crimes or atrocities committed against women, shall be exercis-
able by a Special Court and no other court (except High Courts and the Supreme Court) shall
have, or be entitled to exercise any jurisdiction, powers or authority in relation to such
offences or crimes or atrocities committed against women.
56. Every suit or other proceeding pending before any other court or any authority
immediately before the date of coming into force of this Act being a suit or proceeding the
cause of action wherein it is based is such that it would have been if it had arisen after such
constitution, within the jurisdiction of a special such court, shall stand transferred on that
date to such Special Court:
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall apply to a suit or other proceed-
ing pending in a High Court or the Supreme Court.
57. The appropriate Government shall make necessary arrangements and provi-
sions for free legal aid to women for meeting the cost of litigation in Special Courts.
CHAPTER X
M
ISCELLANEOUS
58. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsis-
tent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force or in any instrument
having effect by virtue of any law other than this Act.
59. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official  Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty.
(2) Every order referred to in this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made,
be laid before each House of Parliament.
60. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
Salary and al-
lowances and
other terms and
conditions of
service of Chief
Judge and other
Judges.
Financial and
administrative
powers of the
Chief Judge.
Staff of the
Special Court.
Jurisdiction,
powers and
authority of
Special
Courts.
Power of
Special
Courts.
Exclusion of
Jurisdiction of
courts except
the concerned
High Court and
the Supreme
Court.
Free legal aid
to women.
Transfer of
pending cases.
Act to have
over-riding
effect.
5 of 1908.
2 of 1974.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

12
(2)  Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions afore-
said, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree
that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified
form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that
rule.
5

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Even after sixty-three  years of independence, the socio-economic condition of our
womenfolk has not improved much. They are treated as second grade citizens. Though
women  also equally, if not more than the menfolk, contribute to the nation building activi-
ties, yet they are never recognised. Majority of the women are illiterate, socially insecure,
economically dependent upon menfolk. Though the Government has taken many steps to
improve the status of women, yet they are not sufficient. Womenfolk in our country are
placed at disadvantage in the following sectors:—
(1)  Education
(2)  Employment—they are given less wages than men
(3)  Social rights
(4)  Property rights
(5)  Self-employment opportunities
Atrocities against women are increasing day-by-day. Cases of atrocities against women
are piling up in courts. Courts take a long time in disposing of the cases. Sexual harassment
takes place at the work places. Working women have not been given adequate facilities at
the work places.
Girls are not sent to schools by their parents. They do not get admission in schools.
There is no vocational training facility for them. Women are not given jobs. They do not
have adequate opportunities for self-employment. The National Commission for W omen
does not have adequate powers to deal with the situation.
With a view to alround development of women, it is proposed to bring forward a
comprehensive Bill providing for-—
(1) free education to women;
(2) vocational training;
(3) free insurance facilities;
(4) facilities at the work places;
(5) equal rights in the management, associations, etc.;
(6) Special Courts to deal with atrocities against women;
(7) facilities for destitute women;
(8) property rights.
The Bill seeks to make an attempt to improve the lot of women.
N
EW DELHI; SAROJ  PANDEY
November 9, 2010
13

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of  the Bill makes provision for free and compulsory education to women. It
also provides for opening of adequate number of schools for them. Clause 4 provides for
vocational training to women. Clause 6 makes provision for Working Women Welfare Fund.
Clause 8 provides for constitution of Advisory Committees. Clause 10 provides for
appointment of Special officers to supervise the facilities to working women at the work
places. Clause 16 provides for appointment of Special Officer to investigate cases of sexual
harassment against women. Clause 23 provides for pension to destitute women.  Clause 24
provides for establishment of women’s homes. Clause 25 makes provision for insurance
scheme for women.
Clause 26 provides for setting up of a Fund for women other than working women.
Clause 27 provides for the  establishment of a Women Development Bank. Clause 28 provides
for the Board to manage the Bank. Clause 31 provides that the authorised Capital of the
Bank shall be rupees five hundred crore.Clause 37 provides for appointment of officers and
staff of the Bank. Clause 44 provides that a widow shall be entitled to employment/pension.
Clause 45 provides for establishment of Special Courts for women. Clause 50 provides for
salaries and allowances of Chief Judge or other Judges of Special Courts. Clause 52 provides
for appointment of officers and staff to assist Special Courts. Clause 57 provides for free
legal aid to women.
The Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is
likely to involve an annual recurring expenditure of rupees one thousand crore.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees ten thousand crore is also likely to be
involved.
14

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 60 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
15

LOK  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
to provide for  empowerment of women in all fields and for matters connected therewith.
—————
(Kumari Saroj Pandey,  M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—5556LS(S3)—01.12.2010.