Bill No. 143  of  2015
THE EASTERN REGION TOURISM PROMOTION BOARD  BILL, 2015
By
SHRI RAJESH RANJAN, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of Tourism Promotion Board for the eastern region of
the country and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This act may be called the Eastern Region Tourism Promotion Board Act, 2015.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "Board" means the Eastern Region Tourism Promotion Board established
under section 3;
(c) "Eastern States" include Bihar, Jharkhand, Odisha and West Bengal; and
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
Short title
and
commence-
ment.
10
Definitions.5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
3. (1) The Central Government shall, within one year from the date of commencement
of this Act, by notification  in the Official Gazette, constitute a Board to be known as the
Eastern Region Tourism Promotion Board for promotion of tourism in the Eastern
States.
(2) The Board shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual
succession and a common seal, with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both
movable and immovable, and to contract, and shall by the said name sue and be sued.
(3) The headquarters of the Board shall be at New Delhi and a regional office at
Madhepura in the State of Bihar and the Board may, with the previous approval of the
Central Government, establish offices in the Eastern States.
(4) The Board shall consist of,—
(a) a Chairperson having vast knowledge and working experience in tourism
and hospitality sector to be appointed by the Central Government in such manner as
may be prescribed;
(b) one member each from the Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha representing each of
the Eastern States to be nominated by the respective Presiding Officers of each House
of Parliament;
(c) seven members representing the Union Ministries of—
(i) Tourism;
(ii) Culture;
(iii) Finance;
(iv) Information and Technology;
(v) Planning;
(vi) Road Transport and Highways;
(vii) Railways; and
(d) three members representing the tour operators, to be appointed by the
Central Government.
(5) The Board shall elect from amongst its members, a Vice-Chairperson who shall
exercise such powers and perform such functions, as may be prescribed.
(6) The term of the office of the Chairperson and members of the Board and the
procedure to be followed by the Board in discharge of its functions shall  be such as may be
prescribed.
(7) The Board may associate with itself in such manner and for such purposes, as may
be prescribed, any person whose assistance or advice it may require and the person so
associated shall have the right to take part in the discussions of the Board relevant to the
purposes for which he has been associated, but shall not have the right to vote.
(8) The salary and allowances and conditions of service of the Chairperson and
members of the Board shall be such as the Central Government may, from time to time,
determine.
4. (1) The Board shall have a Secretariat consisting of a Secretary, a Planning
Advisor and such other officers and employees as the Central Government may by order
determine for efficient discharge of the functions of the Board.
(2) The Secretariat of the Board shall function under the direction, supervision and
control of the Chairperson of the Board.
Constitution
of the
National
Flood and
Drought
Control
Board.
Secretariat of
the Board.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40

3
(3) The Administrative expenses of the Secretariat including salaries and allowances
payable to the staff shall  be borne by the Central Government.
5. (1) The Board shall function as a planning and advisory body for the accelerated
and all round development and promotion of tourism in the Eastern States and formulate
various tourism related schemes for each of the Eastern State and address the issues of
common tourism interest of Eastern States in time-bound manner.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of the sub-section ( 1) the
plans and schemes for development and promotion of tourism may provide for—
(a) accelerated promotion of tourism in each Eastern State by way of compilation
of tourism related infrastructural requirement of each State by deputing team of
experts for making ground assessment of the tourism related infrastructural
requirements and making appropriate recommendations;
(b) inter-linking of all the places of tourism importance of all the Eastern
States by air, road and rail and extending communications, telecommunication and
Information Technology at such places;
(c) setting up of tourism facilitation centres at all entry points at the borders of
each State and at airports and railway stations with a view to provide facilities such as
reservation in air services, trains, buses, hotels, motels and guest houses for tourists;
(d) setting up of hotels,  restaurants and motels at all tourism centres with a
view to catering to the needs of different categories of domestic and international
tourists and recognition of private sector hotels, motels and restaurants for the
benefit of tourists in such manner as may be prescribed.
(e) recognizing and preparing a list of paying guest accommodations at places
with no facility of hotel or motel accommodation for staying of tourists;
(f) conducting organized tours of different centres of tourism in all the Eastern
States;
(g) organising cultural functions and events in consultation with appropriate
Government and other organisations concerned at various tourist places in each of
the Eastern States at regular intervals so as to create awareness among domestic and
foreign tourists and general public about the Indian culture, customs and traditions
and way of life of the people;
(h) organising cultural functions in other countries in coordination with Indian
Embassies and High Commissions with a view to depicting Indian Culture and
Traditions and attracting the foreign tourists to Eastern States;
(i) training programmes for tourist guides and tour operators about historical
importance of tourist places, traditions and culture of each of the Eastern States and
services to be extended to domestic and foreign tourists;
(j) recognizing transport and taxi operators and fixing fares to be charged from
the tourists;
(k) recognising shops, showrooms and stalls selling handicrafts, local ornaments
and other such articles in order to prevent fleecing of tourists by unscrupulous traders
and touts;
(l) setting up of health resorts based on Indian system of medicines at various
tourist places in consultation with the appropriate Government;
(m) making arrangement for security of tourists particularly foreign tourists at
various tourist centres in consultation with the appropriate Government;
Functions of
the Board.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
(n) co-ordinating with the Archaeological Survey of India and tourism
departments of the State Governments of the Eastern States with a view to protecting
monuments and heritage sites; and
(o) making adequate arrangements of public conveniences and amenities such
as toilets, urinals, drinking water and sitting places at tourist places.
6. The Board shall give wide publicity to its planning, policies, schemes and programmes
for development of tourism in the Eastern States through all means of communications
including hoardings, banners, posters, booklets and print and electronic media in the country
as well as abroad.
7. (1) The Board shall prepare, in such form and at such time in each financial year, as
may be prescribed, its annual report, giving a true and full accounts of its activities during
the previous financial year and submit a copy thereof to the Central Government.
(2) The Central Government shall cause the annual report to be laid, as soon as may be
after receipt of the report under sub-section (1), before each House of Parliament.
8. The Central Government shall after due appropriation made by the Parliament by
law in this behalf, provide from time to time requisite and adequate funds to the Board as
well as to the States covered under this Act for implementation of tourism development and
promotional plans and schemes formulated by the Board under this Act.
9. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Publicity of
the
programmes,
policies and
schemes for
development
of tourism.
Annual
Report.
Central
Government
to provide
requisite
funds.
Power to
make rules.
5
15
10
20
25

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS  AND REASONS
Our country has a vast tourism potential as we have a large number of historical
places, monuments, forts, historical and archaeological sites and remains, national
monuments, water bodies, beautiful beaches and coastal areas, desert places, gardens,
lagoons, etc.
The four Eastern States are the unique blend of scenic beauty and picturesque locations
having different cultures, traditions and many languages. Most of the tourist centres do not
have adequate facilities for the tourists and the State Governments are not in a position to
spend money for providing the requisite facilities. Air connectivity and rail services are
inadequate. The road network including Highways and National Highways either does not
exist or wherever it exists, it is in a dilapidated condition. The hospitality sector is in doldrums
with no worthy hotel accommodation and so is the travel sector with no worthy fleets of
good buses, taxi and other modes. There are no tourist facilitation centres. The tourists get
cheated by middlemen, touts and others. Such acts and lack of facilities discourage the
tourists from visiting these beautiful places.
Of late, the Central Government has started to promote tourism in the Eastern States
particularly in the States of Bihar, Jharkhand, West Bengal and Odisha by giving incentives
to its employees while availing leave travelling concessions to visit tourist places in Eastern
States.
Hence, it is proposed to set up a Tourism Promotion Board exclusively for the Eastern
States to concentrate upon promoting tourism in that region of the country.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RAJESH  RANJAN
April 8, 2015.
5

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of the Eastern Tourism Promotion
Board. Clause 4 provides that the Central Government shall bear the administrative expenses
of the secretariat of the Board. Clause 5 provides for certain functions of the Board for
promotion of tourism in the Eastern States and providing of certain facilities for tourists.
Clause 6 provides that programmes, policies and schemes for development of tourism in the
Eastern States shall be given wide publicity. Clause 8 provides that the Central Government
shall provide requisite funds to the Board and the State Government concerned for
implementation of schemes for promotion of tourism. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will
involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees
five hundred crore may involve as recurring expenditure per annum.
A sum of rupees two thousand crore may also involve as non-recurring expenditure.
6

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of detail only and as such the
delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.
7

GMGIPMRND—375LS(S3)—30-04-2015.
LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of Tourism Promotion Board for the Eastern region of the
country and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Rajesh Ranjan, M.P.)