LOK SABRA 
CORRIGENDA 
to 
THE INDIAN ELECTRICITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1911 
L-Th bSZ/Ae introduced in Ipk $qbha. 7 
1. Page 3, line 34,-
tQI.. "clause" ~ "clau!le8".' 
2. Page 5, line s 2 and 3,-
/ 
I 
tQl: f shall be Itp1mishable t 
~ '''shall be punishable t 
3. rage?, in the marginal heading ~ eeetion"",w 
{ 
m "undertaking" ~ "undeptakingrJ!f 
4. Page 8, line 9,- : 
tor "tbreof"" ~ "the reo ft·n 
5. Page 8, line 28,-
for "lj,cenee" ma4 ''license It 
Agraha,yana 1 , 181)9 t 8aka) 

9 of 1910. 
As IN'mODUCBD IN Lox SABBA ON 
, 4 DEC 1971 
Bill No. 143 of 1177 
- .j 
THE INDIAN ELECTRICITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1977 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Indian ELectricity Act, 191'0. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-eighth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
l. This Act may be called the Indian Electricity (Amendment) Act, 
1m. 
Short 
title. 
5 2. In section 1 of the Indian Electricity Act, 1910 (hereinafter referred Amend-
to as the principal Act'), in S'ub-section (1), the word "Indian" shall be ment of 
omitted.. section 1. 
3. In sub-section (2) of section 5 of the principal Act, for the words, 
brackets, figures and letter IIsub-sections (1) and (2) of section 7 A, or 
10 as thle case may be, sub-section (3) of that section", the words, brackets, 
figures and letter "alUb-sections (1), (2) and (3) of section 7A" shall be 
s1.&bstituted. 
IS 
4:. In section 6 of the principal Act,-
(i) after sub-section (5), the following sub-section shall be in-
serted, namely:-
"(5A) Where a notice exercising the option of purchasing 
the undertaking has been served upon the licensee under this 
section, th~ licensee shall deliver the undertaking to the State 
Electricity Board, the State Government or the local authority, 
20 as the case may be, on the expiration of the rjelevant period re-
ferred to in suh-section (1) pending the determination and pay-
ment of the V· '~chase price: 
Amend-
ment of 
section 5. 
Amend-
ment of 
secUon 6. 

Amend-
ment of 
section 7. 
Amend-
ment of 
lection '1 A. 
2 
Provided that in any such cUe, the purchaser shall pay to 
the licensee, interest at the Rep.erve Bank rate ruling at the time 
of delivery of the undertaking plus ode per centum on the pur-
chase price of the undertaking for the period from the date of 
delivery of the undertaking to the date of payJ1tent of the pur- S 
chase price."; 
(ii) sub-section (6) shall be omitted. 
5. In section 7 of the principal Act, for the words, brackets and figures 
"or under sub-section (6) of section 6", the words, brackets, figures 
and letter "or under sub-section (SA) of section 6" shall be substituted. 10 
•. In section 7 A of the principal Act,-
(i) for sub-sections (1) to (.1). the following sub-sections shall be 
substituted, namely:-
" (1) Wh~ an undertaking of a licensee is sold under sub-
section (1) of section 5, the purchase price of the undertaking IS 
shall ·be the book value of the undertaking at the time of pur-
chaSe or where thle undertaking has been delivered before the 
purchase under sub-section (3) of that section, at the time of 
delivery of the undertaking. 
(2) For the purposes of sub-sedtion (1), the book valule of 20 
an undertaking shall be an amount equal to the sum of-
(i) the original cost of fixed asset" available for use and 
necessary for the purpose of the undertaking; 
(ii) the cost of intangible assets, Including expenses on 
account of the new capital isSue; ·35 
(iii) the original eost of works in progrefll; 
(iv) the cost of stores, materials and supplies including 
fuel on hand which are required for the purpose o·f the 
undertaking, 
leBB-
30 
(a) the amounts written oft or set aside oll.account of 
depreciation of fixed assets and the amounts written ,Of! 1a 
respect of intangible assets in the books of the undertaking;" 
(b) the oriRinal cost of service lines or other capital works 
or part thereof which bave ~ constructed at the expense 35 
of the consumers or any other. deposits made by the con-
sumers: 
Provided that where the State Electricity Board,. tQ State 
Go*'nment or the local authority, as the case may be, exer-
dses an option not to take over any asset of the undertaking ae- 40 
qUired by the Ueensee without the concurrence of the State 
Govet.'lUMllt una paragraph XV of the Sixth Schedule to the 
Electricity (Supply) Act, 1948, th3 value of such asset shall not M of 
be included. 1948. 

5 
10 
IS 
20 
~8) If there is any -dii!er'ence or dispute regarding the de-
termmation of the book value of the undertaking underaub-
section (2), the same shall be determined by arbitl'ation."; 
(ii) :in sub-aection ~4), for the words, braclclets and figures "sub. 
sections (1) and (2')", the words, bracke~ and figures "sub-sections 
(1) i (2) and (3)" shall be substituted. 
1. After section 7A of the principal Act, the following section shall 
be inserted, namely:-
117AA, (1) If a hdensee upon whom a notice requiring him. to 
deliver the undertaking to the deSignated purchaser has been served 
in pursuance of sub-section (3) of section 5 or a notice exercicoing 
thfq option of purchasing the undertaking has been served under 
aection 6, refuses or fails to deliver the undertaking as required 
Uolldar aub-llection (3) of section 5, or under sub-section (SA) of 
section 6, as the case may be, the State Electricity Board, the State 
Government or the local authority, as the case nuurbe, may, by 
order in W'riting, require the licensee to dellVIe!' Qn or before such 
date as may be specified iri the order, the undertaking to such officer 
as the .Ettate Electricity Board, the State Government or the local 
authority, as the case may be, may appoint in that behalf and the 
licensee shall comply with such order. 
(21) If the ~ensee fails to comply with an order issued under 
sub-section' (1), the officer appointed under that sUlb-section may 
forthwith take possession of the undertaking and may take or cause 
25 to bel taken such steps and use or cause to lbe used such force as 
may, in the opinion of such officer, be reasonably necessary for that 
purpose. 
(,3) On the taking over of possession of the undertaking under 
sub-section (2), the provision~ of section 7 shall apply as if the un-
3P ~g had ,.been ~li*ed to the State Electricitty Board, the 
State Govemment or the local authority, as the case may be, under 
sub-section (a) of section 5 or sub-section (SA) of section 6, as the 
case may t.." . 
Inlertion 
of new 
section 
7AA. 
Power to 
take 
pouealion 
ot under-
lakin,. 
. 8. In Bub:-section (2) of section 36A of the principal Act, for clause Amead-
3c (c) and (4), the following clauses shall be substituted, namely:- ment Of 
J aectton 
.. (0) one member to be nominated by the Central Government 8GA. 
·110 repnsent the Union territory Qf Delhi; 
~) one member to be nominated by the Central Government 
to ftiP1'8Sent the Union territory of the Andaman and Nicobar 
40 Islands;". 

Amend-
ment of 
section 38. 
Substitu-
tion of 
new 
section 
for 
section 
39. 
Theft of 
energy. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
40. 
Insertion 
of new 
section 
42A. 
Penalty 
for 
refUS1l10r 
failure to 
deliver 
possession 
of under-
taking 
and for 
obstruct-
ing the 
taking of 
possession 
thereof. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
44. 
9. In section 38 of the principal Act, for sub-section (3), the following 
sub-section shall be substituted, namely:-
"(3) Every rule made '4Dder section 37 shall be published in the 
Gazette of India and shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made. 
before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total S 
period of thirty days, which may be comprised in one session or in 
two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the ses-
sion immediately following the session or the successive sessions 
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule 
or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 10 
thereafter have eftect only in such modified form or be of no effect. 
as the case may be; so however, that any such modification or annul-
ment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previ-
ously done under that rule.". 
10. For section 39 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
substituted., namely: - IS 
"39. Whoe*, dishonestly abstracts, consumes or uses any 
energy shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to t.hree years, or with fine which shall not be less than 
five hundred rupees but which may extend to five thousand rupees, 20 
or with both: 
PJrovided that the court may, for any adequate and special 
reasons to be mentioned in the judgment, impose a fine of less than 
five hund* rupees:·. 
11. In section 40 of the principal Act, for the words "two years", the 2S 
words "three years" shall be SUbstituted. 
12. After section 42 of the principal Act, the following section shall 
be insertled, namely:-
"42A. Whoever-
(a) being a licensee or an officer or other employee of the 
licensee, wilfully fails or refuses to deliver to the officer ap- 30 
pointed under sub-section (1) of section 7AA, possession of the 
undertaking of which such officer is entitled to take, or 
(b) wilfully obstructs the said oIftcer in entering into pol-
Session of the undertaking or taking poslsession of any of its 3S 
property, 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which m~ extend 
to three years, or with fine which may.extend to one thousand rupees, 
or with both.". 
13. In section 44 of the principal Act, for the words "shall be punish- 40 
able with fine which may extend to five bundred rupees", the words 
"shall be punisihable with imprisonment for a tenn which may extend to 
three years, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or 
with both" shall be substituted.. 

14. In section 46 of the principal Act, for the words "shall be punish-
able with fine which may extend to two hundred rupees", the words shall 
be "punisbable with imprisonment which may 'extend to six months, or 
with fine which may extend to two hundred rupees, or with both" shall be 
S substituted. 
10 
IS 
20 
15. For section 50 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be 
substituted, namely:-
"50. No prosecution shall be instituted against any person for any 
offence against this Act Or any rule, licence or order thereunder, 
except with the previous sanction of the Electrical Inspector, District 
Magistrate or Sub-Divisional Magistrate. 
50A. (1) An Electrical Inspector may, either before or after the 
institution of any proceedings, compound any offence punishable 
under section 39, section 40 or section 44: 
Provided that in a case where proceedings have already been 
instituted in {my court, no composition under this section shall be 
made except with the permission of that co~rt. 
(2) Where an offence has been compounded, the offender, if 
in custody, shall be discharged and no further proceedings shall be 
taken against him in respect of the offence so compounded.". 
16. Section 5!,) of the principal Act shall be re-numbered as sub-section 
(2) thereof, and before the sub-section as so re-numbered, the following 
sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-
"(1) The Central Government may. by general or special order 
authorise the di~charge of any of its functions under sub-section (2) 
of section 34 by an Electrical Inspector. n. 
Amend. 
ment of 
section 
46. 
Substi-
tution 
of new 
sections 
for 
seetloD 
50. 
Institu-
tion of 
prosecu-
tions. 
Power to 
compound 
offences. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
55. 

stATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Indian Electricity Act, 1910, deals with the supply and use of 
electrical energy in the country. The Act also prescribes procedure for 
the purchase and take-over of undertakings of private licensees and 
procedure for determining the purchase price. 
2. With a view to discouraging theft of energy and tampering with 
meters and electrical Installations, the provisions for punishment of 
such offences are being made more stringent. It is proposed to amend 
sections 39. 40, 44 and 46 of the Act suitably. 
3. The Act, at present, does nllt contain a specific provision for taking 
compulsory possession of an undertaking where a licensee refuses or 
wilfully fails to deliver possession to the State Electricity Board, the 
State Government or the local authority. It is proposed to incorporate 
a provision for taking compulsory possession of an undertaking and to 
provide for suitable penalty for such refusal or failure to deliver 
possession. 
4. Sub-section (6) of section 6 of the Act does not provide for pay-
ment of interest on the purchase price of the undertaking for the period 
between the date of delivery of the undertaking and the date of pay-
ment of the purchase price. It is proposed to amend section 6 to pro-
vide for the payment :>f interest for the said period. 
5. Section 7A of the Act provides that where an electrical under-
taking ,is sold under section 5, the purchase price of the undertaking 
shall be the market value of the undertaking at the time of, purchase 
or where the undertaking has been delivered before the purchase under 
sub-section (3) of section 5. at the time of the delivery of the under-
taking, and if there is any difference or dispute regarding such purchase 
price, the same shall be determined by arbitration. It is proposed to 
amend this section to provide for payment of book value of the assets 
of the undertaking which is more realistic instead of the market value. 
6. The other amendments proposed are minor and consequential in 
nature. 
'1. The Bill s~ks to achieve the aforesaid objects. 
NEW DEu'u; P. RAMACHANDRAN. 
The 2nd December, 1977. 

• 
ANNEXURE 
ExTMcrs FROM THE INDIAN EL1!lCTRICITY A~, 1910 
(9 or 1910) 
• • • • 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Indian Electricity Ad, 1910. 
• • • • • 
S. (1) • • • • • 
(2) Where an undertaking is sold under sub-section (1), the purchuer 
shall pay to the licensee the purchase price of the undertaking dettr-
mined in accordance with the provisions of sub-sections (1) and (Z) of 
section 7A, or as the case may be, sub-section (3) of that section'. 
• • • • • 
6. (1) • • • • • 
(6) Where a notice exercising the option of purchasing the undertak-
ing has been served upon the licensee under this section, the licensee shall 
deliver the undertaking to the State Electricty Board, the StateGovern-
ment or the local authority, as the case may be, on the expiration of the 
relevant period referred to in sub-section (1) pending the determination 
and payment of the purchase price. 
• • • • • 
7. Where an undertaking is sold under section 5 or section 6, then up-
on the completion of the sale or on the date on which the undertaking is 
delivered to the intending purchaser under sub-section (3) of section 5 or 
under sub-section (6) of section 6. as the case may be, whichever is 
earlitn'-
(i) the undertaking shall vest in the purchaser or the 'intenClIng 
purchaser, as the case may be, free from any debt, mortgaJe or simi-
lar obligation of the licensee or attaching to the undertaking: 
Provided that any such debt, mortgage or similar obligation shall 
attach to the purchase money in substitution for the undertaldngj 
(ii) the rights, powers, authorities, duties and obligations of the 
licensee under his license shall stand transferred to the purchaser 
and such purchaser shall be deemed to be the licensee: 
Provided that where the undertaking is sold or delivered to a 
State Electl'iclty Board or the State Government, the license shan 
cease to have further operation. 
7A. (1) Where an undertaking of a licensee, not being a loCal' autho-
rity, is sold under sub-section (1) of section 5, the purchase price of the 
undertaking shall be the market value 01 the undertaking at the time of 
purchase or where the underbking has been delivered before the purcbase 
7 
ShOl1 
title, 
extent 
and 
com-
mence-
ment. 
Prov!-
slona 
where 
license 
of a 
licensee 
is re-
voked. 
Purchase 
of under-
takinl. 
Vesting 
of the 
under-
taking in 
the pur-
chuer. 
Determi-
nation of 
purchue 
price. ' 

Central 
Electrl-
city 
Board. 
Further 
provisions 
respect-
ing rules. 
Theft of 
energy. 
8 
under sub-section (3) of that section, at the time of the delivery of the 
undertaking and if there is any difference or dispute regarding such 
purchase price, the same shall be determined by arbitration. 
(2) The market value of an undertaking for the purpose of sub-section 
(1) shall be deemed to be the value of all lands, buildings, works, mate-
rials and plant of the licensee suitable to, and used' by him, for the purpose 
o~ the undertaking, other than (i) a generating station declared by the 
hcense not to form part of the undertaking for the purpose of purchase, 
and (itt) service-lines or other capital works or any part threof which 
have been constructed at the expense of consumers, due regard being had 
to the nature and condition for the time being of such lands, buildings, 
works, materials and plant and the state of repair thereof and to the cir-
cumstance that they are in such position as to be ready for immediate 
working and to the suitability of the same for the purpose of the under-
taking, but without any addition in respect of compulsory purchase or of 
goodwill or of any profits which may be or might have been made from 
the undertaking or of any similar consideration. 
(3) Where an undertaking of a licensee, being a local authority. is 
sold under sub-section (1) of section 5, the purchase price of the under-
taking shall be such as the State Government, having regard to the 
market value of the undertaking at the date of delivery of the under-
taking, may determine. 
(4) Where an undertaking of a licensee is purchased under section 6, 
the purchase price shall be the "alue thereof as determined in accord-
ance with the provisions of sub-sections (1) and (2): 
Provided that there shall be added to such value such percentage, if 
any, not exceeding twenty per centum of that value as may be specified 
in the licence on account of compulsory purchase. 
• • • • • 
:MIA. (1) • • • • • 
(2) The Central Electricity Board shall consist of the following 
members, namely:-
• • • • • 
(c) one member to be nominated by the Central Government to 
represent each of the Union territories of Delhi and Himachal 
Pradesh; 
(d) one member to be nominated by the Central Government to 
represent the Union territories of. Manipur, Tripura and the Andaman 
and Nicobar Islands; 
• • • • • 
38. (1) • • • • • 
(3) All rules made under section 37 shall be published in the Gazette 
of India and shall be laid for not less than thirty days before each House 
of Parliament as soon as may be after such publication and shall be 
subject to such modifications as Parliament may make during the session 
in which they are so laid or the session immediately following . 
• • • • • 
39. Whoever dishonestly ab!;tracts, consumes or uses any energy shall 
be deemed to have committed theft within the meanin,;( of the Indian 
Penal Code; and the existence of artificial means for such abstraction shall 45 of 1860. 
be prima facie evidence of such dishonest abstraction. 

• 
4.0. Whoever maliciously causes energy to be wasted or diverted or 
with in~t to ~t off the supply of energy, cuts or injures, or attempb to 
cut or ~lure, any electric supply-line or works, shall be punishable with 
hn~nment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine 
which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both. 
• • • • • 
44. Whoever-
(cz) connects any meter referred to in section 26, sub-section (1), 
or any meter, indicator or apparatus referred to in section 26, sub-
section (7), with any electric supply-line through which energy is 
supplied by a licensee, or disconnects the same from any such electric 
supply-line; or 
(b) lays, or causes to be laid or connects up any works for the 
purpose of communicating with any other works belonging to a 
licensee; or 
(~) maliciously injures any meter referred to in section 26, sub-
section (1'), or any meter, indicator or apparatus referred to in 
section 26, sub-section (7), or wilfully or fraudulently alters the 
index of any such meter, indicator or" apparatus, or prevents any 
such meter, indicator or apparatus kom duly registering; or 
(d) improperly uses the energy of a licensee; 
shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, 
and, in the case of a continuing offence, with a daily fine which may 
extend to fifty rupees; and if it is proved that any artificial means exist 
for making such connection as is referred to in clause (cz), or such com-
munication as is referred to in clause (b), or for caUSing such alteration 
or prevention as is referred to in clause (c), or for facilitating such im-
proper use as is referred to in clause Cd), and that the meter, indicator 
or apparatus is under the custody or control of the consumer, whether 
it is his property or not, it shall be presumed, until the contrary is 
proved, that such connection, communication, alteration, prevention or 
improper use, as the case may be, has been knowingly and wilfully 
caused by such consumer. 
• • • • • 
46. Whoever negligently causes energy to be wasted or diverted, or 
negligently breaks, throws down or damages any electric supply-line, 
post, pole or lamp or other apparatus connected with the supply of energy, 
shall be punishable with fine which may. extend to two hundred rupees. 
• • • • 
SO. No prosecution shall be instituted against any person for any offence 
against this Act or any rule, license or order thereunder, except at the 
instance of the Government or an Electrical Inspector, or of a person 
aggrieoVed by the ~e; 
• • • • 
Penalty 
for 
malici-
ously 
wasting 
energy or 
injuring 
works. 
Penalty 
for 
interfer-
ence with 
meters or 
licensee', 
work. 
and for 
improper 
use of 
energy. 
Penalty 
for negli-
gently 
wastJna 
energy or 
injuring 
works. 
Institu_ 
tion of 
prosecu-
tions. 

LOK SABRA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Indian Electricity Act, 1910. 
(Shri P. Rmn.achondr4n, 
MjniBter of Energy.) 