Aඌ ංඇඍඋඈൽඎർൾൽ ංඇ Lඈ඄ Sൺൻඁൺ
Bill No. 143 of 2022
THE MADHYA PRADESH CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL 
UNIVERSITY BILL, 2022
By
Dඋ. Kඋංඌඁඇൺඉൺඅ Sංඇ඀ඁ Yൺൽൺ ඏ, M.P.
Aඋඋൺඇ඀ൾආൾඇඍ ඈൿ Cඅൺඎඌൾඌ
Cඅൺඎඌൾඌ
1. Short title, extent and commencement.
2. Definitions.
3. Establishment of University.
4. Objects of University.
5. Powers and functions of University.
6. University to be open to all castes, creed, race or class.
7. Central Government to review work and progress of University.
8. Officers of   University.

Cඅൺඎඌൾඌ
9. Chancellor.
10. Vice-Chancellor.
11. Deans of Schools.
12. Registrar.
13. Finance Officer.
14. Controller of Examinations.
15. Librarian.
16. Other officers.
17. Authorities of University.
18. The Court.
19. Executive Council.
20. Academic and Activity Council.
21. Board of Water Studies.
22. Finance Committee.
23. Other authorities of  University.
24. Power to make Statutes.
25. Statutes, how to be made.
26. Power to make Ordinances.
27. Regulations.
28. Annual report.
29. Annual accounts.
30. Fund of University.
31. Returns and information.
32. Conditions of service of employees, etc.
33. Procedure of appeal and arbitration in disciplinary cases against students.
34. Right to appeals.
35. Provident and Pension Funds.
36. Disputes as to constitution of authorities and bodies.
37. Filling of casual vacancies.
38. Proceedings of authorities or bodies not invalidated by vacancies.
39. Protection of action taken in good faith.
40. Mode of proof of University record.
41. Power to remove difficulties.
42. Statutes, Ordinances and Regulations to be published in the Official Gazette and to 
  be laid before Parliament.
43. Transitional provisions.
(ii)

Aඌ ංඇඍඋඈൽඎർൾൽ ංඇ Lඈ඄ Sൺൻඁൺ
Bill No. 143 of 2022
THE MADHYA PRADESH CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL 
UNIVERSITY BILL, 2022
By
Dඋ. Kඋංඌඁඇൺඉൺඅ Sංඇ඀ඁ Yൺൽൺ ඏ, M.P.
ൺ
BILL
to provide for the establishment and incorporation of a University in Madhya Pradesh 
for the development of agriculture and for the furtherance of the advancement 
of learning and pursuit of research in agriculture and allied sciences 
and declare it to be an institution of national importance.
 Bൾ it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of  India as 
follows:—
 1. (1) This Act may be called the Madhya Pradesh Central Agricultural University Act, 
2022. 
  ( 2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
Short title and 
commencement.

 2.  Whereas the objects of the institution known as the Madhya Pradesh Central 
Agricultural University are such as to make the institution one of national importance, it 
is hereby declared that the institution created under this Act known as the Madhya Pradesh 
Central Agricultural University is an institution of national importance. 
 3. In this Act, and in all Statutes made hereunder, unless the context otherwise requires,—
  ( a) “Academic Council’’ means the Academic Council of the University;
  ( b) “academic staff’’ means such categories of staff as are designated as academic 
staff by the Ordinances;
  ( c) “agriculture’’ means the basic and applied sciences of the soil and water 
management, crop production including production of all garden crops, control of plants, 
pests and diseases, horticulture including floriculture, animal husbandry including veterinary 
and dairy science, fisheries, forestry including farm forestry, home-science, agricultural 
engineering and technology, marketing and processing of agricultural and animal husbandry 
products, land use and management;
  ( d) “Board’’ means the Board of Management of the University;
  ( e) “Board of Studies’’ means the Board of Studies of the University;
  ( f) “Chancellor’’ means the Chancellor of the University;
  ( g) “college’’ means a constituent college of the University whether located at the 
headquarters, campus or elsewhere;
  ( h) “Department’’ means a Department of Studies of the University;
  ( i) “employee’’ means any person appointed by the University and includes teachers 
and other staff of the University;
  ( j) “extension education’’ means the educational activities concerned with the training 
of orchardists, farmers and other groups serving agriculture, horticulture, fisheries and 
improved practices related thereto and the various phases of scientific technology related to 
agriculture and agricultural production including post harvest technology and marketing;
  ( k) “Faculty’’ means Faculty of the University;
  ( l) “Ordinances’’ means the Ordinances of the University;
  ( m) “Regulations’’ means the Regulations made by any authority of the University;
  ( n) “Research Advisory Committee’’ means the Research Advisory Committee of the 
University;
  ( o) “Statutes’’ means the Statutes of the University;
  ( p) “student’’ means a person enrolled in the University for undergoing a course of 
studies for obtaining a degree, diploma or other academic distinction duly instituted;
  ( q) “teachers’’  means  Professors,  Associate Professors, Assistant  Professors, 
Teaching Faculty Members and their equivalent appointed for imparting instruction or 
conducting research or extension education programmes or combination of these in the 
University, college or any institute maintained by the University and designated as teachers 
by the Ordinances;
  ( r) “University’’ means the Madhya Pradesh Central Agricultural University 
established under this Act;
  ( s) “Vice-Chancellor’’ means the Vice-Chancellor of the University;
  ( t) “Visitor’’ means the Visitor of the University. 
Definitions.
Declaration of  Madhya Pradesh Central Agricultural University as an institution of national importance.
2

 4. (1) There shall be established a University by the name of the  Madhya Pradesh 
Central Agricultural University.
  ( 2) The headquarters of the University shall be at Guna in the State of Madhya 
Pradesh and it may also  establish campuses at such other places within its jurisdiction as it 
may deem fit.
  ( 3) The first Chancellor and the first Vice-Chancellor and the first members of the 
Board, the Academic Council and all persons who may hereafter become such officers or 
members, so long as they continue to hold such office or membership are hereby constituted 
a body corporate by the name of the Central Agricultural University.
  ( 4)The University shall have perpetual succession and a common seal and shall sue 
and be sued by the said name.
 5. The objects of the University shall be —
  ( a) to impart education in different branches of agriculture and allied sciences as it 
may deem fit;
  ( b) to further the advancement of learning and conducting of research in agricultural 
and allied sciences;
  ( c) to undertake programmes of extension education in Madhya Pradesh;
  ( d) to promote partnership and linkages with national and international educational 
institutions; and
  ( e) to undertake such other activities as it may, from time to time, determine. 
 6.  The University shall have the following powers, namely:—
  ( i) to make provisions for instructions in agriculture and allied sciences;
  ( ii) to make provisions for conduct of research in agriculture and allied branches of 
learning;
  ( iii) to make provisions for dissemination of the findings of research and technical 
information through extension programmes;
  ( iv) to grant, subject to such conditions as it may determine, diplomas or certificates 
to, and confer degrees or other academic distinctions on the basis of examination, evaluation 
or any other method of testing, on persons, and to withdraw any such diplomas, certificates, 
degrees or other academic distinction for good and sufficient cause;
  ( v) to confer honorary degrees or other distinctions in the manner prescribed by the 
Statutes;
  ( vi) to provide lectures and instructions for field workers, village leaders and other 
persons not enrolled as regular students of the University and to grant certificates to them as 
may be prescribed by the Statutes;
  ( vii) to co-operate or collaborate or associate with any other University or authority 
or institution of higher learning in such manner and for such purpose as the University may 
determine;
  ( viii) to establish and maintain colleges relating to agriculture, horticulture, fisheries, 
forestry, veterinary and animal science, dairying, home-science and allied sciences, as 
necessary;
  ( ix) to establish and maintain such campuses, special centres, specialised laboratories, 
libraries, museums or other units for research and institution as are, in its opinion, necessary 
for the furtherance of its objects;
  ( x) to create teaching, research and extension education posts and to make 
appointments thereto;
The University.
Objects  of the 
University.
Powers of the 
University.
3

  ( xi) to create administrative, ministerial and other posts and to make appointments 
thereto;
  ( xii) to institute and award fellowships, scholarships, studentships, medals and prizes;
  ( xiii) to determine standards of admission to the University which may include 
examination, evaluation or any other method of testing;
  ( xiv) to provide and maintain residential accommodation for students and employees;
  ( xv) to supervise the residential accommodation of the students and employees of the 
University and to make arrangements for promoting their health and general welfare;
  ( xvi) to lay down conditions of service of all categories of employees, including their 
code of conduct;
  ( xvii) to regulate and enforce discipline among the students and the employees and to 
take such disciplinary measures in this regard as it may deem necessary;
  ( xviii) to fix, demand and receive such fees and other charges as may be prescribed by 
the Statutes;
  ( xix) to borrow, with the approval of the Central Government on the security of its 
property, money for the purpose of the University;
  ( xx) to receive benefactions, donations and gifts and to acquire, hold, manage and 
dispose of any property, movable or immovable including trust and endowment properties, 
for its purposes;
  ( xxi) to do all such other acts and things as may be necessary, incidental or conducive 
to the attainment of all or any of its objects.
7. (1) The jurisdiction and responsibility of the University with respect to teaching, 
research and programmes of extension education at the University level, in the field of 
agriculture shall extend to the State of Madhya Pradesh.
  ( 2) All colleges, research and experimental stations or other institutions to be 
established under the authority of the University shall come in as constituent units under 
the full management and control of the officers and authorities and no such units shall be 
recognised as affiliated units.
  ( 3) The University may assume responsibility for the training of field extension 
workers and others and may develop such training centres as may be required in State of 
Madhya Pradesh. 
 8. The University shall be open to persons of either sex and of whatever caste, creed, 
race or class, and it shall not be lawful for the University to adopt or impose on any person, 
any test whatsoever of religious belief or profession in order to entitle him to be appointed 
as a teacher of the University or to hold any other office therein or be admitted as a student 
in the University or to graduate thereat or to enjoy or exercise any privilege thereof:
   Provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent the University 
 from making special provisions for the employment or admission of women, persons 
 with disabilities or of persons belonging to the weaker sections of the society and, 
 in particular, of the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and the other socially and 
 educationally backward classes of citizens. 
9. (1) The President of India shall be the Visitor of the University.
  ( 2) Subject to the provisions of sub-sections (3) and (4), the Visitor shall have the 
right to cause an inspection to be made, by such person or persons as he may direct, of 
the University, its buildings, laboratories, libraries, museums, workshops and equipments, 
and of any institution or college and also of the examination, instruction and other work 
conducted or done by the University, and to cause an inquiry to be made in like manner in 
respect of any matter connected with the administration and finances of the University.
Jurisdiction.
University open 
to all classes, 
castes and creed.
The Visitor.
4

  ( 3) The Visitor shall, in every case, give notice to the University of his intention to 
cause, an inspection or inquiry to be made and the University shall, on receipt of such notice, 
have the right to make, within thirty days from the date of receipt of the notice or such 
other period as the Visitor may determine, such representations to him as it may consider 
necessary.
  ( 4) After considering the representations, if any, made by the University, the Visitor 
may cause to be made such inspection or inquiry as is referred to in sub-section (2).
  ( 5) Where an inspection or inquiry has been caused to be made by the Visitor, the 
University shall be entitled to appoint a representative who shall have the right to appear in 
person and to be heard on such inspection or inquiry.
  ( 6) The Visitor may address the Vice-Chancellor with reference to the results of such 
inspection or inquiry together with such views and advice with regard to the action to be 
taken thereon as the Visitor may be pleased to offer and on receipt of the address made by 
the Visitor, the Vice-Chancellor shall communicate forthwith to the Board, the results of the 
inspection or inquiry and the views of the Visitor and the advice tendered by him upon the 
action to be taken thereon.
  ( 7) The Board shall communicate through the Vice-Chancellor to the Visitor such 
action, if any, as it proposes to take or has been taken by it upon the results of such inspection 
or inquiry.
  ( 8) Where the Board does not, within reasonable time, take action to the satisfaction 
of the Visitor, the Visitor may, after considering any explanation furnished or representation 
made by the Board, issue such directions as he may think fit and the Board shall be bound 
to comply with such directions.
  ( 9) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this section, the Visitor may, by 
an order in writing, annul any proceeding of the University which is not in conformity with 
this Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances:
    Provided that before making any such order, he shall call upon the University 
  to show cause why such an order should not be made and, if any cause is shown 
  within a reasonable time, he shall consider the same.
  ( 10) The Visitor shall have such other powers as may be prescribed by the Statutes. 
 10.  The following shall be the officers of the University, namely:–
  ( 1) the Chancellor;
  ( 2) the Vice-Chancellor;
  ( 3) the Deans;
  ( 4) the Directors;
  ( 5) the Registrar;
  ( 6) the Comptroller;
  ( 7) the University Librarian; and
  ( 8) such other officers as may be prescribed by the Statutes.
 11. (1) The Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor in such manner as may be 
prescribed by the Statutes.
  ( 2) The Chancellor shall, by virtue of his office, be the Head of the University.
  ( 3) The Chancellor shall, if present, preside at the convocations of the University held 
for conferring degrees.
Officers of the 
University.
The Chancellor.
5

 12. (1) The Vice-Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor in such manner as 
may be prescribed by the Statutes.
  ( 2) The Vice-Chancellor shall be the principal executive and academic officer of 
the University and shall exercise general supervision and control over the affairs of the 
University and give effect to the decisions of all the authorities of the University.
  ( 3) The Vice-Chancellor may, if he is of the opinion that immediate action is necessary 
on any matter, exercise any power conferred on any authority of the University by or under 
this Act and shall report to such authority the action taken by him on such matter:
    Provided that if the authority concerned is of opinion that such action ought not 
  to have been taken, it may refer the matter to the Visitor whose decision thereon shall 
  be final:
    Provided further that any person in the service of the University who is aggrieved 
  by the action taken by the Vice-Chancellor under this sub-section shall have the right 
  to appeal against such action to the Board within three months from the date on which 
  decision on such action is communicated to him and thereupon the Board may 
  confirm, modify or reverse the action taken by the Vice-Chancellor.
  ( 4) The Vice-Chancellor, if he is of the opinion that any decision of any authority 
of the University is beyond the powers of the authority conferred by the provisions of this 
Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances or that any decision taken is not in the interest of the 
University, may ask the authority concerned to review its decision within sixty days of such 
decision and if the authority refuses to review the decision either in whole or in part or no 
decision is taken by it within the said period of sixty days, the matter shall be referred to the 
Visitor whose decision thereon shall be final.
  ( 5) The Vice-Chancellor shall exercise such other powers and perform such other 
duties as may be prescribed by the Statutes or the Ordinances.
 13. Every Dean and every Director shall be appointed in such manner and shall 
exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be prescribed by the Statutes.
 14. ( 1) The Registrar shall be appointed in such manner as may be prescribed by 
the Statutes.
  ( 2) The Registrar shall have the power to enter into agreements, sign documents and 
authenticate records on behalf of the University and shall exercise such powers and perform 
such duties as may be prescribed by the Statutes. 
 15. The Comptroller shall be appointed in such manner and shall exercise such 
powers and perform such duties as may be prescribed by the Statutes. 
16. The manner of appointment and powers and duties of the other officers of the 
University shall be as prescribed by the Statutes. 
17. The following shall be the authorities of the University, namely:–
  ( 1) the Board of Management;
  ( 2) the Academic Council;
  ( 3) the Research Council;
  ( 4) the Extension Education Council;
  ( 5) the Finance Committee;
  ( 6) the Faculties and Board of Studies; and
  ( 7) such other authorities as may be prescribed by the Statutes. 
 18. (1) The Board of Management shall be the principal executive body of the University.
The Vice-
Chancellor
Deans and 
Directors.
The Registrar.
The 
Comptroller.
Other officers.
Authorities of 
the University.
The Board of 
Management.
6

  ( 2) The constitution of the Board, the term of office of its members and its powers and 
functions shall be prescribed by the Statutes. 
 19. (1) The Academic Council shall be the principal academic body of the University 
and shall, subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes and Ordinances, have the control 
and general regulation of, and be responsible for, the maintenance of standards of learning, 
education, instruction, evaluation and examination within the University and shall exercise 
such other powers and perform such other functions as may be conferred or imposed upon 
it by the Statutes.
  ( 2) The constitution of the Academic Council and the term of office of its members 
shall be prescribed by the Statutes.
 20. The constitution, powers and functions of the Research Council shall be prescribed 
by the Statutes. 
 21.  The constitution, powers and functions of the Extension Education Council shall be 
prescribed by the Statutes. 
 22. The constitution, powers and functions of the Finance Committee shall be prescribed 
by the Statutes. 
 23.  The University shall have such Faculties as may be prescribed by the Statutes. 
 24.  The constitution, powers and functions of the Board of Studies shall be prescribed 
by the Statutes. 
25. The constitution, powers and functions of other authorities of the University referred 
to in clause (7) of section 17 shall be such as may be prescribed by the Statutes. 
 26.  Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes may provide for all or any of the 
following matters, namely:–
  ( a) the constitution, powers and functions of the authorities of the University, as may 
be constituted from time to time;
  ( b) the appointment and continuance in office of the members of the said authorities, 
the filling up of vacancies of members, and all other matters relating to those authorities for 
which it may be necessary or desirable to provide;
  ( c) the appointment, powers and duties of the officers of the University and their 
emoluments;
  ( d) the appointment of teachers, academic staff and other employees of the University 
and their emoluments;
  ( e) the appointment of teachers and academic staff working in any other University 
or organisation for a specific period for undertaking a joint project;
  ( f) the conditions of service of employees including provision for pension, insurance 
and provident fund, the manner of termination of service and disciplinary action;
  ( g) the principles governing the seniority of service of employees of the University;
  ( h) the procedure for arbitration in cases of dispute between employees or students 
and the University;
  ( i) the procedure for appeal to the Board by any employee or student against the 
action of any officer or authority of the University;
  ( j) the establishment and abolition of Departments, centres, colleges and institutions;
  ( k) the conferment of honorary degrees;
  ( l) the withdrawal of degrees, diplomas, certificates and other academic distinctions;
The Academic 
Council.
The Research 
Council.
The Extension 
Education 
Council.
The Finance 
Committee.
Faculties.
The Board of 
Studies.
Other 
authorities.
Power to make 
Statutes.
7

  ( m) the institution of fellowships, scholarships, studentships, medals and prizes;
  ( n) the delegation of powers vested in the authorities or officers of the University;
  ( o) the maintenance of discipline among the employees and students;
  ( p) all other matters which are to be, or may be, prescribed by the Statutes. 
 27.  (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and Statutes, the Ordinances may provide 
for all or any of the following matters, namely:–
    ( a) the admission of students to the University and their enrolment as such;
    ( b) the courses of study to be laid down for all degrees, diplomas and certificates 
  of the University;
    ( c) the medium of instruction and examination;
    ( d) the award of degrees, diplomas, certificates and other academic distinctions, 
  the qualifications for the same and the means to be taken relating to the granting and 
  obtaining of the same;
    ( e) the fees to be charged for courses of study in the University and for admission 
  to the examinations, degrees, diplomas and certificates of the University;
    ( f) the conditions for award of fellowships, scholarships, studentships, medals 
  and prizes;
    ( g) the conduct of examinations, including the term of office and manner of 
  appointment and the duties of examining bodies, examiners and moderators;
    ( h) the conditions of residence of the students;
    ( i) the special arrangements, if any, which may be made for the residence, 
  discipline and teaching of women students and the prescribing of special courses of 
  studies for them;
    ( j) the appointment and emoluments of employees other than those for whom 
  provision has been made in the Statutes;
    ( k) the establishment of special centres, specialised laboratories and other 
  committees;
    ( l) the manner of co-operation and collaboration with other Universities and 
  authorities including learned bodies or associations;
    ( m) the creation, composition and functions of any other body which is considered 
  necessary for improving the academic life of the University;
    ( n) such other terms and conditions of service of teachers and other academic 
  staff as are not prescribed by the Statutes;
    ( o) the management of colleges and institutions established by the University;
    ( p) the setting up of a machinery for redressal of grievances of employees; and
    ( q) all other matters which by this Act or the Statutes may be provided for by the 
  Ordinances.
  ( 2) The first Ordinances shall be made by the Vice-Chancellor with the previous 
approval of the Central Government and the Ordinances so made may be amended or 
repealed at any time by the Board in the manner prescribed by the Statutes.
 28. The authorities of the University may make Regulations, consistent with this Act, the 
Statutes and the Ordinances for the conduct of their own business and that of the Committees 
appointed by them and not provided for by this Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances in the 
manner prescribed by the Statutes.
Power to make 
Ordinances.
Regulations.
8

 29. (1) The annual report of the University shall be prepared under the direction of the 
Board, which shall include, among other matters, the steps taken by the University towards 
the fulfilment of its objects and shall be submitted to the Board on or after such date as may 
be prescribed by the Statutes and the Board shall consider the report in its annual meeting.
  ( 2) The Board shall submit the annual report to the Visitor along with its comments, 
if any.
  ( 3) A copy of the annual report as prepared under sub-section (1) shall also be 
submitted to the Central Government, which shall, as soon as may be, cause the same to be 
laid before both the Houses of Parliament. 
 30. (1) The annual accounts of the University shall be prepared under the directions of 
the Board and shall, once at least every year and at intervals of not more than fifteen months, 
be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India or by such persons as he may 
authorise in this behalf.
  ( 2) A copy of the annual accounts together with the audit report thereon shall be 
submitted to the Board and the Visitor along with the observations of the Board.
  ( 3) Any observations made by the Visitor on the annual accounts shall be brought 
to the notice of the Board and observations of the Board, if any, shall be submitted to the 
Visitor.
  ( 4) A copy of the annual accounts together with the audit report as submitted to the 
Visitor, shall also be submitted to the Central Government, which shall, as soon as may be, 
cause the same to be laid before both the Houses of Parliament.
  ( 5) The audited annual accounts after having been laid before both the Houses of 
Parliament shall be published in the Official Gazette.
 31. (1) Every employee of the University shall be appointed under a written contract, 
which shall be lodged with the University and a copy of which shall be furnished to the 
employee concerned.
  ( 2) Any dispute arising out of the contract between the University and any employee 
shall, at the request of the employee, be referred to a Tribunal of Arbitration consisting of 
one member appointed by the Board, one member nominated by the employee concerned 
and an umpire appointed by the Visitor.
  ( 3) The decision of the Tribunal shall be final, and no suit shall lie in any civil court 
in respect of the matters decided by the Tribunal.
  ( 4) Every request made by the employee under sub-section (2) shall be deemed to 
be a submission to arbitration upon the terms of this section within the meaning of the 
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (26 of 1996).
  ( 5) The procedure for regulating the work of the Tribunal shall be prescribed by the 
Statutes. 
 32. (1) Any student or candidate for an examination whose name has been removed 
from the rolls of the University by the orders or resolution of the Vice-Chancellor, Discipline 
Committee or Examination Committee, as the case may be, and who has been debarred from 
appearing at the examinations of the University for more than one year, may, within ten days 
of the date of receipt of such orders or copy of such resolution by him, appeal to the Board 
and the Board may confirm, modify or reverse the decision of the Vice-Chancellor or the 
Committee, as the case may be.
  ( 2) Any dispute arising out of any disciplinary action taken by the University against 
a student shall, at the request of such student, be referred to a Tribunal of Arbitration and the 
provisions of sub-sections (2), (3), (4) and (5) of section 32 shall, as far as may be, apply to 
a reference made under this sub-section.
Annual report.
Annual 
accounts.
Conditions 
of service of 
employees.
Procedure of 
appeal and 
arbitration in 
disciplinary 
cases against 
students.
9

 33. Every employee or student of the University or of a college or institution maintained 
by the University shall, notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, have a right to 
appeal, within such time as may be prescribed by the Statutes, to the Board against the 
decision of any officer or authority of the University or any college or an institution, as the 
case may be, and thereupon the Board may confirm, modify or reverse the decision appealed 
against. 
 34. ( 1) The University shall constitute for the benefit of its employees such provident 
or pension fund or provide such insurance schemes as it may deem fit in such manner 
and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed by the Statutes.
  ( 2) Where such provident fund or pension fund has been so constituted, the Central 
Government may declare that the provisions of the Provident Funds Act, 1925 (19 of 1925), 
shall apply to such fund, as if it were a Government provident fund. 
 35. If any question arises as to whether any person has been duly appointed as, or is 
entitled to be, a member of any authority of the University, the matter shall be referred to the 
Visitor whose decision thereon shall be final. 
 36.  Where any authority of the University is given power by this Act or the Statutes 
to appoint Committees, such Committees shall, save as otherwise provided, consist of the 
members of the authority concerned and of such persons, if any, as the authority in each case 
may think fit. 
37. All casual vacancies among the members (other than ex officio members) of any 
authority of the University shall be filled, as soon as may be, by the person who appointed or 
co-opted the member whose place has become vacant and the person appointed or co-opted 
to a casual vacancy shall be a member of such authority or body for the residue of the term, 
for which the person whose place he fills would have been a member. 
38. No act or proceedings of any authority of the University shall be invalid merely by 
reason of the existence of a vacancy or vacancies among its members.
39. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against the Board, 
Vice-Chancellor, any authority or officer or other employee of the University for anything 
which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of any of the provisions of 
this Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances. 
 40.  A copy of any receipt, application, notice, order, proceeding, resolution of 
any authority or Committee of the University, or other documents in possession of the 
University, or any entry in any register duly maintained by the University, if verified by 
the Registrar, shall be received as prima facie evidence of such receipt, application, notice, 
order, proceeding, resolution or documents or the existence of entry in the register and shall 
be admitted as evidence of the matters and transactions therein where the original thereof 
would, if produced, have been admissible in evidence, notwithstanding anything contained 
in the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 or in any other law for the time being in force. 
 41. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central 
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for 
removing the difficulties:
   Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of 
 three years from the commencement of this Act.
  ( 2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
made, before each House of Parliament. 
 42.  Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, and the Statutes, —
  ( a) the first Chancellor and the first Vice-Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor 
and shall hold office for a term of five years;
Power to make 
Ordinances.
Provident and 
pension funds.
Disputes as to 
constitution 
of University 
authorities.
Constitution of 
Committees.
Filling of casual 
vacancies.
Proceedings of the University authorities not invalidated by vacancy.
Protection of 
action taken in 
good faith.
Power to remove 
difficulties.
Mode of proof 
of University 
records.
Transitional 
provisions.
10
1 of 1872.

  ( b) the first Registrar and the first Comptroller shall be appointed by the Visitor and 
each of the said officers shall hold office for a term of three years;
  ( c) the first members of the Board shall be nominated by the Visitor and shall hold 
office for a term of three years;
  ( d) the first members of the Academic Council shall be nominated by the Visitor and 
shall hold office for a term of three years:
   Provided that if any vacancy occurs in the above offices or authorities, the same 
 shall be filled by appointment or nomination, as the case may be, by the Visitor, and the 
 person so appointed or nominated shall hold office for so long as the officer or member 
 in whose place he is appointed or nominated would have held office, if such vacancy 
 had not occurred. 
 43.  (1) Every Statute, Ordinance or Regulation made under this Act shall be published 
in the Official Gazette.
  ( 2) Every Statute, Ordinance or Regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon 
as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session for a total 
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive 
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the Statute, 
Ordinance or Regulation or both Houses agree that the Statute, Ordinance or Regulation 
should not be made, the Statute, Ordinance or Regulation shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously 
done under that Statute, Ordinance or Regulation.
  ( 3) The power to make Statutes, Ordinances or Regulations shall include the power to 
give retrospective effect from a date not earlier than the date of commencement of this Act, 
to the Statutes, Ordinances or Regulations or any of them but no retrospective effect shall 
be given to any Statute, Ordinance or Regulation so as to prejudicially affect the interests of 
any person to whom such Statutes, Ordinances or Regulations may be applicable.
 
Statutes, 
Ordinances and 
Regulations to 
be published 
in the Official 
Gazette and to 
be laid before 
Parliament.
11

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
 Guna is a district that is bounded by the Malwa Plateau in the north, with hills in the 
Chanderi region covered by Forests, the region covers an area of about 6,484.63 sq. km, 
and covers district is divided into 7 tehsils and 5 blocks which comprise of namely Aaron, 
Raghogarh, Madhusudhangarh, Bamori, Chachoda and Kumbhraj are the 7 tehsils and 
Guna, Aaron, Raghogarh, Chachoda, Bamori are 5 blocks. The Guna region is backward as 
compared to the other regions in the country, Guna being a Semi-arid region is inhabited by 
socio-economically heterogeneous and vulnerable people belonging to the backward classes 
where primary occupation is Agriculture.
 Agriculture is the mainstay of the Guna economy. Guna being gifted with rich black 
Cotton soil is considered the granary of the region and has inherited a rich agricultural 
heritage from the past. The major population of Guna is involved in agriculture. The 
economy of the district is mainly dependent on both the agricultural and industrial sectors. 
Most of its lands are used for agricultural purposes. The chief agricultural products in the 
district are wheat, jawar, maize, rice, sugarcane olives, etc. The rich black soil of the district 
and the adoption of the new agricultural technologies by its farmers has helped to increase 
the production of various agricultural items. However, most of the agriculture has become 
subsistence agriculture and keeps the farmers of the region trapped in poverty.
 As per the Human Development index of the region, the health index is 0.5531, the 
Education index is 0.5790, the income index is 0.4300, and lastly, the HDI value is 0.5164. 
The literacy rate of Guna is 34.6 per cent., with female literacy being only 18.0 per cent. 
Children enrolment in schools is 31.01 per cent. 
 The education opportunities in this region are very few, half of the population is 
depended on agriculture, and the farmers are more reliant on agriculture in order to earn a 
livelihood.  Educational opportunities are few and the higher education percentage continues 
to remain low in the region. The poverty levels are high, only a few families can afford to 
send their children outside the region for obtaining a quality education.
 In view of the above, it is proposed to establish an Agricultural University be known as 
the Madhya Pradesh Central Agricultural University in Guna District in the State of Madhya 
Pradesh, as a Agriculture being the core economy front of the district, as an institution of 
higher learning, for carrying out research in agriculture which is relevant to the area, and 
for imparting and amplifying knowledge and modern agricultural methods and skills to the 
children of this region who will be a great source of learning the new techniques in order to  
bring more income and avenues for education which will provide the doubling of farmers 
and better methods for agriculture. 
 This Bill inter alia provides for the following namely:—
    (a) Establishment of a central agricultural university with its head-quarters at Guna 
  in Madhya Pradesh 
    (b) The Objectivity of the University inter alia is to impart education in different 
  branches of agriculture and allied sciences, to undertake research in agriculture and 
  programs of extension education, to promote partnership and linkages with National 
  and International Educational Institutions;
    (c) The University shall have powers, to make provisions for instructions 
  in agriculture and allied sciences, conduct research in agricultural and allied sciences, 
  disseminate the findings of research and technical information through extension 
  programs, program degrees, diplomas, or other academic distinctions, to establish 
  and maintain colleges relating to agriculture, horticulture, animal husbandry, fisheries, 
  etc.;
    (d) Keeping the university open to all irrespective of any gender, sex, race, caste, 
  or creed;
    (e) provide for the Chancellor, the Vice-Chancellor, the Deans, the Directors, 
  the Registrar, the Comptroller, the University Librarian, and, such other officers as 
  may be prescribed by the Statutes;
12

 The Bill seeks to achieve these objectives in order to promote and development of 
agriculture and furtherance of providing education to the children and farmers belonging  to  
the region in order to generate income from the avenue of such education.
 Hence this Bill.
    Nൾඐ Dൾඅඁං;                                              KRISHNAPAL SINGH YADA V
5 July, 2022.
13

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
 Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the establishment of Central Agricultural University. 
Clause 11 provides for the appointment of the Chancellor of the University. Clause 12 
provides for the appointment of the Vice-Chancellor of the University. Clause 13 provides 
for the appointment of Dean and Directors. Clause 14 provides for the appointment of the 
Registrar of the University. Clause 15 provides for the appointment of the Comptroller of 
the University. Clause 16 provides for the appointment of other officers of the University. 
Clause 34 of the Bill provides for payment of pension and provident fund for the benefit of 
its employees or provide such insurance schemes as it may deem fit. The Bill if enacted will 
involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring 
expenditure of about rupees two hundred crore per annum would be involved from 
Consolidated Fund of India.
 A non recurring expenditure of rupees fifty crore is likely to be involved.
14

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clauses 26, 27 and 28 of the Bill empowers the University to make regulations, statues 
and ordinances for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of 
detail only, the delegation of legislative powers is of normal character.
 
15

LOK SABHA
ൺ
BILL
to provide for the establishment and incorporation of a University in Madhya Pradesh 
for the development of agriculture and for the furtherance of the advancement 
of learning and pursuit of research in agriculture and allied sciences 
and declare it to be an institution of national importance.
 
(Dr. Krishnapal Singh Yadav, M.P .)