As rntTRoDUCED IN Lox SaBHA ON’

|| Bill No. 143 of 1991

THE WATER (PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF POLLUTION)
CESS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1991

A
BILL

to amend the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Cess Act, 1977.

Bz it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-second Year of the Republic
of India as follows: —

1. (1) This Act may be called the Water (Prevention and Control of
Pollution) Cess (Amendment) Act, 1991.

5 (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.

2. In section 3 of the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution)
Cess Act, 1977 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act),—

(a) after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be
10 inserted, namely:—

“(@A) Where any person carrying on any specified industry
or any local authority consuming water for domestic purpose
liable to pay cess fails to comply with any of the provisions of
section 25 of the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution)

1974.15 Act, 1974 or any of the standards laid down by the Central

Short
title
and
com-
mence-
ment.

Amend-
ment of
section 3.


Amend-
ment of

section 5,

Amend-
ment of

section 6.

Amend-
ment of
section 7.

2
Government under the Environment (Protection) Act, |
cess shall be, notwithstanding anything contained in sub-
Section (2) of this section, calculated and payable at such rate,
not exceeding the rate specified in column (3) of Schedule IL,

as the Centra] Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, from time to time, specify.”;

(0) in sub-section (3), for the words, brackets and figure “under
sub-section (2)”, the words, brackets, figures and letter “under sub-
section (2) or sub-section (24)” and fee the words “in that subs
section”, the words “in those sub-sectiong” shall be substituted.

3. Section 5 of the principal Act shall be renumbered as sub-section
(1) thereof and after sub-section (1) as so Te-numbered, the following
Sub-section shall be inserted, namely: —

4 In seetion 6 of the principal Act,—

(@) after sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be 20
inserted, namely: —

“(1A) If the return has not been furnished to the officer or
authority under sub-section (2) of section 5, he or it shall, after
making or causing to be made such inquiry as he or it thinks fit,
by order, assess the amount of cess payable by the concerned 25

Person carrying on any specified industry or local authority, as
the case may be.”;

(0) in sub-section (2), after the words, brackets and figure
“under sub-section (1)”, the words, brackets, figure and letter “or
Sub-section (1A)” shall ‘be inserted; 30

(० in sub-section (3), after the words, brackets and figure “under

sub-section (1)”, the words, brackets, figure and letter “or sub-section
(1A)” shall be inserted,

5. In section 7 of the principal Act,— रे

(@) for the words “seventy per cent”, the words “twenty-five 35
Per cent.” shalll be substituted;

(b) the following Proviso shall be inserted at the end, namely:

“Provided that a Person or local authority shall not be en-
titled to a Tebate, if he or it—

(०) consumes water in excess of the maximum quantity
as may be Prescribed in this behalf for any specified industry
or local authority; or



।

3

(b) fails to comply with any of the provisions of section
25 of the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act,
1974 or any of the standards laid down by the Central Gov-
ernment under the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986.”.

5. 6. In section 10 of the principal Act, for the portion beginning with
the words “interest at twelve per cent.” and ending with the words
“actually paid”, the following shall be substituted, namely:—

“Gnterest on the amount to be paid at the rate of two per cent, for
every month or part of a month comprised in the period from the

10. date on which such payment is due till such amount is actually paid”,

7. In section 17 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), in clause (d),
after the words “the rebate”, the words “and the maximum quantity of
water in excess of consumption whereof any person or local authority
shall not be entitled to the rebate” shall be inserted.

8. For Schedule II to the principal Act, the following Schedule shall

15
be substituted, namely: — |

“SCHEDULE II

(See section 3)

Purpose for which water. Maximum rate under Maximum rate under
20 is consumed sub-section (2) of sub-section (2A) of
section 3 section 3

6) Q) @)

1. Industrial cooling, spraying One and a half paise Two and_ one-fourth
in mine pits or boiler feeds por kilo litre paise per kilo litre.

25 2. Domestic purpose Two paise per kilo Three paise per kilo
litre litre.

3, Processing whereby water Four paise per kilo Seven anda half paise
gets polluted.and the pol- litre per kilo litre.
Tutants are easily bio-degra-
30. dable
Seven and a half paise

4. Processing whereby water Five paise per kilo i
ts pollu th ie er per kilo litre.””.

gets polluted and the pollu- litre
tants are not easily bio-
35 degradable and are toxic

Amend-
ment of
section
10.

Amend-
ment of
section
17.

Substi-
tution of
New
Schedule


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Cess Act, 1977 was
Enacted by Parliament with a view to augmenting the resources of the
Central and State Pollution Control Boards and for enabling them to
take steps for the prevention and control of pollution of water. With
the rapid expansion of indusiries and towns, the responsibility and
workload of the Pollution Control Boards have increased considerably.
The funds available with these Boards have not kept pace with the in.
Tet, 775 and with the overall commitments involving heavy financial
liabilities,

2. Cess is collected at such rate, not exceeding the rate specified in
Schedule II annexed to the aforesaid Act, as the Central Government
may specify. It has become necessary to increase the maximum rates of
water cess and, therefore, it is Proposed to increase the rates. The
maximum rates of water cess are also sought to be specified in cases
where any specified industry or local authority liable to Pay cess fails to
comply with any of the provisions of section 25 of the Water (Prevention,
and Control of Pollution)’ Act, 1974 or any of the standards laid down by
the Central Government under the Environment (Protection) Act. 1986.

3. Rebate in cess allowed to any person or local authority is proposed
to be reduced from 70 per cent. to 25 per cent. and it is also intended to

4. It is also Proposed to empower the officers and the authorities
collecting cess to make assessment of the amount of cess where no return
is fled. The rates of interest for delay in payment of cess 15 ales sought
to be increased.

5. The Bill seeks to achieve the aforesaid objects,

New Deunr; KAMAL NATH.
The 27th August, 1991,

PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF THE
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA.

[Copy of letter No. 1/14/91-PL, dated the 29th August, 1991 from
Shri Kamal Nath, Minister of State in the Ministry of Environment and
Forest to the Secretary-General. ]


ANNEXURE

EXTRACTS FROM THE WATER (PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF POLLUTION)
Cress Act, 1977

(36 oF 197)

* * * * *

3. 0) * * * * *

(3) Where any local authority supplies water to any person carrying
on any specified industry or to any other local authority and such person
or other local authority is liable to pay cess under sub-section (2) in res-
pect of the water so supplied, then, notwithstanding anything contained
in that sub-section, the local authority first mentioned shall not be
liable to pay such cess in respect of such water.

Explanation.—For the purposes of this section and section 4, “con-
sumption of water” includes supply of water.

* * * * *

6.) * * * * *

(2) An order of assessment made under sub-section (1) shall specify
the date within which the cess shall be paid to the State Government.

(3) A copy each of the order of assessment made under sub-section
(1) shall be sent to the person or, as the case may be, to the local authority
concerned and to the State Government.

* * * * *
7. Where any person or local authority, liable to pay the cess under
this Act, instals any plant for the treatment of sewage or trade effluent,
such person or local authority shall, from such date as may be prescribed,
be entitled to a rebate of seventy per cent. of the cess payable by such
person or, as the case may be, local authority.
* * * . *
10, If any person carrying on any specified industry or any local
authority fails to pay any amount of cess payable under section 3 to the
State Government within the date specified in the order of assessment
made under section 6, such person or local authority, as the case may
be, shall be liable to pay interest at twelve per cent. per annum on the
amount to be paid from the date on which such payment is due till such
amount is actually paid.

* * * * *

17. (1) * के * *

(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—

* * * * *

5

‘Levy ang
rollec-
tion of

Assess-
ment of
cess,

Rebate.

Interest
payable
for delay
in pay-
ment of
cess.

Power
to make
rules,


(a) the date from which any person or local authority liable |
Pay cess shall be entitled to the rebate under section 7;

* * * * *

SCHEDULE II

(See section 3)

Purpose for which water is consumed Maximum rate

() Q)

1. Industrial cooling, spraying in mine Three-fourths of a paisa
pits or boiler feed.

५ per kilo litre,

2. Domestic purpose. One paisa, per kilo litre

3. Processing whereby water gets pol- Two paise, per kilo litre,

luted and the pollutants are easily
bio-degradable.

4. Processing whereby water gets pol-

Nt

luted and the pollutans ‘are ‘not
easily bio-degradable and are toxic.

Two and a half paise, per kilo litre,



LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to amend the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Cess Act, 1977

(Shri Kamal Nath, Minister of State in the Ministry of Environment
and Forests)