Short title,
extent  and
commencement.
THE ARSENIC CONTAMINATION (PREVENTION) BILL, 2017
By
SHRI NISHIKANT  DUBEY,  M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for effective regulation of the level of arsenic in ground water and identification
of the risk areas of arsenic contamination, formulation of a national policy for mitigating
and preventing arsenic contamination in food and drinking water in the country
for the overall welfare, care and protection of the citizens and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (i) This Act may be called the Arsenic Contamination (Prevention) Act, 2017.
(ii) It extends to the whole of India.
(iii) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:—
(a) "arsenic" means the natural chemical element which has eroded from the
Himalayas and deposited near the foothills of Himalayas in Indo-gangetic plain.
Bill No.  143  of  2017
5
Definitions.
AS  INTRODUCED IN LOK  SABHA

2
5
10
15
(b) " Authority" means the national Arsenic Contamination Prevention Authority
established under section 4;
(c) "ground water" means naturally occurring water found below the surface in
the saturated zone which can be extracted by digging wells and  bores; and
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
3. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, the
Central Government shall, as soon as may be, after the commencement of the Act and in
consultation with the Government of the States, formulate a National Policy for mitigating
and preventing arsenic contamination in food and ground water in the country for the overall
welfare, care and protection of the citizens.
4. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, by notification in the Official
Gazette, establish an Authority to be called the National Arsenic Contamination Prevention
Authority for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) The head office of the Authority shall be at New Delhi and the Authority may
establish offices at other places in the States and Union Territories as it may deem necessary
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(3) The Authority shall consist of the following members who shall be appointed by
the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed, namely:—
(a) a Chairperson, who shall be an expert scientist having adequate knowledge
and professional experience in the prevention of arsenic pollution;
(b) one Deputy Chairperson with such qualifications as may be prescribed;
(c) five Members of Parliament of whom two shall be from Council of the States
and three from  House of the people  to be nominated by the respective Presiding
Officers of the two Houses;
(d) five members, one each to represent the Union Ministries of Drinking
Water and Sanitation, Environment, Forest and Climate Change, Health and Family
Welfare, Agriculture and Farmers welfare and Panchayati Raj,  respectively;
(e) four members to represent the non-Governmental Organisations working
for prevention of arsenic pollution in food and ground water;
(f) four members to be nominated by the Governments of the States to be rotated
amongst the States in alphabetical order.
(4) The Authority shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid having perpetual
succession and common seal with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property both
movable and immovable and to contract and shall by the said name sue and be sued.
(5) The Salary and allowances payable to Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson and
Members, terms of office of the Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson and members of the
Authority and the procedure to be followed in the discharge of the functions of the Authority
shall be such, as may be prescribed.
(6) The Authority shall have a secretariat with such number of officers and staff as
may be prescribed.
(7) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of the
officers and staff of the authority as may be prescribed.
5. (1) Subject to any guidelines issued by the Central Government under the provisions
of this Act, the Authority shall perform and undertake such special steps in close coordination
with concerned Ministries, Departments of the Central and State Government to eliminate
arsenic contamination and to afford the arsenic free drinking water and food to everyone
throughout the country as it may deem necessary and expedient under the Act.
National
policy for
prevention of
arsenic
contamination.
Establishment
of National
Arsenic
Contamination
Prevention
Authority.
Functions of
the Authority.
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(2) Without prejudice to be generality of the foregoing provisions, the Authority
shall—
(a) conduct survey at risk areas to determine the location, scale and causes of
arsenic contamination;
(b) conduct survey of irrigation wells to assess the risk of overuse and exploitation
of ground water on agriculture and human health;
(c) develop awareness at all levels of society about the potential danger of
arsenic in food and water;
(d) assess the availability of low arsenic water resources for human consumption;
(e) strengthen the capacity of agricultural research institutions to develop and
test crops, alternative cropping system, water management processes and soil
rehabilitation methods;
(f) help farmers to adapt by maximizing rain fed production where alternative
water source for irrgiation are insufficient;
(g) prioritise water supply and treatment intervention in worst affected areas;
(h) establish local and affordable capability to test water supplies where arsenic
surveys have been completed;
(i) coordinate and monitor time bound arsenic mitigation plants to eliminate
arsenic exposure;
(j) identify alternative soft water sources and assess their sustainability;
(k) investigate the impact of arsenic on irrigated agriculture;
(l) assess the  effect of contaminated water to arsenic exposure specially on
human health;
(m) assess the likely impact of climate change on the increased demand for and
reduced availability of ground water;
(n) assess the health effects of excess exposure to arsenic and provide preventive
medical assistance; and
(o) such other activities as may be assigned to it, from time to time.
6. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation, made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, pay to the Authority in each financial year such sums as may be considered
necessary and adequate for the performance of the functions of the Authority under this
Act.
7. The Authority shall prepare once in every year, in such form and at such time as may
be prescribed, an annual report giving summary of its activities during the previous year and
submit it to the Central Government, which show cause the same to be laid before both the
Houses of Parliament.
8. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of the period of two
years from the date of the commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall as soon as may be after it is made, be laid
before both the Houses of Parliament.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Annual report.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

4
9. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being applicable to the subject matter of this Act.
10.  (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
to carry out the provisions of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if before the
expirty ofthe session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Act to
supplement
other laws.
Power to
make rules.
5
10

5
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Ground water is the major source of water supply in India. With India facing erratic
monsoon, ground water is perennial source of water supply for the country. It meets eighty-
five per cent of the water demand of the people in rural areas and fifty per cent of the demand
for water in urban areas. Naturally occurring arsenic in ground water used for drinking,
cooking and irrigation is a catastrophe with enormous public health implications. Nearly one
thirty million people across the world have been exposed to excess level of arsenic in their
drinking water over and above the World Health Organisation (WHO) recommended limit of
ten parts per billion. As per the annual report statistics of the Ministry of Water Resources,
eighty-nine per cent of the ground water extracted in India is used for irrigation and nine per
cent of it is used for domestic purposes. Amongst all the States in the country, Uttar Pradesh,
Bihar and Bengal have largest share of replenishable ground water of 77.19 billion cubic
metre.  The arsenic contamination has affected the people of the Uttar Pradesh where arsenic
contaminated ground water is used for irrigation, thereby arsenic accumulates in soil and is
taken up by crops. Ingestion of arsenic has wide ranging health hazards. It has been estimated
that, if unchecked, exposure to arsenic will result in doubling of mortality from cancer.
It is high time for the Union Government to intervene in the matter and provide
assistance to the States for digging arsenic free drinking water wells to the arsenic affected
habitation in the country particularly Uttar Pradesh, Bihar and Bengal. As of now, there is no
effective law to regulate the level of arsenic in ground water and identification of risk areas
for mitigating and preventing arsenic pollution in food and ground water. The Bill aims to
achieve the above objectives.
Hence, this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; NISHIKANT DUBEY
June 28, 2017.

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the establishment of the National Arsenic Contamination
Prevention Authority. Clause 6 of the Bill makes it obligatory for the Central Government to
provide necessary funds to the Authority for the purpose of the Bill. The Bill, if enacted, will
involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of  India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees
twenty five thousand crore may involve as recurring expenditure per annum from the
Consolidated  Fund of India. A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees six thousand
crore is  also likely to be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.
6

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of this Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of details only, the delegation of
legislative powers is of a normal character.
7

LOK   SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for effective regulation of the level of arsenic in ground water and identification
of the risk areas of arsenic contamination, formulation of  a national policy for mitigating
and preventing arsenic contamination in food and drinking water in the country
for the overall welfare, care and protection of the citizens and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Nishikant Dubey, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—952LS(S3)—21.07.2017.