1
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
THE NATIONAL AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS COMMISSION
BILL,  2019
By
SHRI K. NA V ASKANI,  M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of a National Agriculture and Farmers Commission for
welfare of farmers and comprehensive development of agriculture and for matters
connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. ( 1) This Act may be called the National Agriculture and Farmers Commission
 Act, 2019.
(2)  It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "agriculture" includes horticulture, animal husbandry, Forestry, dairy and
poultry farming, pisciculture, and other allied activities, whether or not undertaken
jointly with agriculture;
Definitions.
Bill  No. 143 of  2019
5
10
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(b) "agricultural produce" includes paddy, wheat, coarse cereals, pulses,
sugarcane, gram, cotton, oilseeds, vegetables, fruits, jute, coconut, tobacco, areca
nuts and such other agricultural produce as may be notified by the Central Government,
from time to time;
(c) "Commission" means National Agriculture and Farmers Commission
established under section 3;
(d) "farmer" means any person who cultivates land or causes it to be cultivated
for agricultural or horticultural purposes;
(e) "Fund" means the Agriculture and Farmers Development Fund constituted
under section 5; and
(f) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish
a Commission to be known as the National Agriculture and Farmers Commission for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) The Commission shall consist of—
(a) a Chairperson, having special knowledge in the field of agriculture; and
(b) such number of members including agricultural economist, agriculture
scientist and experts in matters related to the farmers, to be appointed by the Central
Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) The Central Government shall provide such number of experts, officers and staff
to Commission, as may be required for its efficient functioning.
(4) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of
the Chairperson, members, experts and officers and staff of the Commission shall be such
as may be prescribed.
4. The Commission shall—
(a) determine the minimum support price of agricultural produce;
(b) maintain the price of agricultural produce at appropriate levels;
(c) issue the executive instructions to various agencies;
(d) monitor the import and export of agricultural produce;
(e) formulate measures for the welfare of farmers from the adverse effects on
agriculture;
(f ) prepare the national policy, from time to time, to increase the productivity of
agriculture produce;
(g) investigate into the incidents of suicide by the farmers;
(h) frame the rules to carry out the provisions of this Act for the welfare of
agriculture and farmers;
(i) protect the agricultural bio-diversity;
(j) protect the farmers from the fluctuations in prices of agricultural produce in
market;
(k) advice the Central Government in matters related to the farmers and agriculture;
and
(l) undertake such other functions as may be assigned to it, from time to time, by
the Central Government.
Establishment
of National
Agriculture
and Farmers
Commission.
Functions of
the
Commission.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
Constitution
of the
Agriculture
and Farmers
Development
Fund.
Central
Government
to provide
requisite funds.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
5. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
a Fund to be known as the Agriculture and Farmers Development Fund for carrying out the
purposes of this Act.
(2) The Central Government and the State Governments shall contribute to the Fund
in such ratio as may be prescribed.
6. The Central Government shall provide after due appropriation made by Parliament
by law in this behalf, necessary requisite funds, from time to time, for carrying out the
purposes of this Act.
7. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
8. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purpose of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under the rule.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
In the absence of any firm principle regarding intervention in the market by Government
to solve the problems faced by the agricultural sector and the farmers, problems are remaining
unchanged as ever. In the current scenario, an autonomous, powerful intervention by
Government institutions for the protection of interests of farmers and the agriculture
bio-diversity is very essential. Developed countries like European Union, United States of
America, Japan etc. provide production subsidy so that innovative domestic initiatives may
be taken to protect the farmers from the adverse effects of agriculture related problems.
Different Commissions have been set up for different categories in our country, but there is
no autonomous, empowered and dedicated Commission for the welfare of the agricultural
sector till now despite the fact that half of our population is dependent on agriculture which
could protect the rights of farmers. The dedicated Commission for agriculture sector welfare
of farmers is needed.
Efforts are required to be made to increase the income of farmers. Monitoring in right
way is needed to be done by bringing the implementation of crop insurance scheme into the
purview of the Commission and farmers be protected from speculative forces like share
market and future market. On the lines of SEBI like institution which works for more than
three crore share holders, an agriculture regulatory institution is needed for twenty seven
crore farmers which may look into the problem of farmers and present their view point before
Government effectively.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to establish a National Agriculture and Farmer's Commission
to introduce new dimensions in the field of agriculture and to work for protection, benefit and
welfare of the farmers to bring positive bearing on economic progress of country.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; K. NAVASKANI
June 26, 2019.
4

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the constitution of a National Commission for Agriculture
and Farmers. It also provides that the Central Government shall make available necessary
experts, officers and staff for the efficient functioning of the Commission. Clause 5 provides
for the constitution of an Agriculture and Farmers Development Fund. Clause 6 provides
that the Central Government shall provide requisite funds to the Commission for carrying out
the provisions of this Act. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, is likely to involve expenditure from
the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of about
rupees five hundred crore would be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.
5

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
6

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of a National Agriculture and Farmers Commission for
welfare of farmers and comprehensive development of agriculture and for matters
connected therewith.
————
(Shri K. Navaskani, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—1013LS(S3)—04.07.2019.