1
THE STATES REORGANISATION COMMISSION BILL, 2014
By
SHRI CHANDRAKANT KHAIRE, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for constitution of a Commission to study and report on border disputes
between the States and to recommend the Central Government the reorganization of
States and for matters connected therewith.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the States Reorganisation Commission Act, 2014.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 143  of  2014
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "Commission" means the States Reorganisation Commission constituted
under section 3; and
(b) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute a
Commission to be known as the States Reorganisation Commission to study and report on
the border disputes between States and reorganization of States.
4. (1) The Commission shall consist of a Chairperson and two other members to be
appointed by the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service of
the Chairperson and members of the Commission, shall be such as may be prescribed.
(3) The Central Government shall provide such number of officers and staff to the
Commission as may be required for its efficient functioning.
5. (1) The Commission shall perform such function with regard to border disputes
between States and reorganization of States, as may be assigned to it by the Central
Government.
(2) The Commission shall, while recommending reorganization of States, take into
consideration the following—
(a) geographical areas and conditions of States;
(b) the language spoken by people in border areas of the States; and
(c) traditions followed by people in border areas.
6.  (1) The Commission shall, as soon as possible, but not later than one year from the
date of its constitution, prepare and submit a report to the Central Government.
(2) The Central Government shall, after considering the report, cause to be laid an
action taken report on the recommendations of the Commission before each House of the
Parliament.
7.  (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
5
Definitions.
Constitution
of States
Reorganisation
Commission.
Composition
of
Commission.
Functions of
the
Commission.
Report of the
Commission.
Power to
make rules.
10
15
20
25
30
35

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
There are a large number of cases of border disputes between States. Belgam issue of
Maharashtra is one of them. Likewise, problems persist between many States in the country.
Therefore, in order to resolve the issue of border disputes and reorganization of States, a
States Reorganisation Commission is proposed to be constituted to study and report to the
Central Government for resolution of outstanding border issues between two or more States.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; CHANDRAKANT KHAIRE
November 12, 2014
3

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides for constitution of  a States Reorganisation Commission
to study and report on border disputes between States and reorganization of States. Clause
3 provides for appointment of a Chairperson and other members to the Commission. The Bill,
therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is
likely to involve a recurring expenditure of about rupees one crore per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees fifty lakhs is also likely to be involved.

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of this Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
5

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for constitution of a Commission to study and report on border disputes
between the States and to recommend the Central Government the
reorganization of States and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Chandrakant Khaire, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—2877LS(S3)—02.12.2014.