1
THE TECHNOLOGY BANK OF INDIA BILL, 2015
By
SHRI CHANDRAKANT KHAIRE, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for establishment of a Technology Bank to assist professionals engaged in
research work in various disciplines.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Technology Bank of India Act, 2015.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. 144 of  2015
5
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "Bank" means the Technology Bank of India constituted under section 3;
(b) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(c) "professional" means a researcher or a scientist engaged in research work in
space, engineering, energy, medicine including all systems of Indian medicine,
agriculture, chemicals, defence, environment, food processing, non-conventional
energy sources, petroleum and allied products, science and technology including bio-
technology, electronics, ocean development, shipping and roadways or aeronautics.
3. (1) The Central Government shall establish a Bank to be known as the Technology
Bank of India with its headquarters at New Delhi.
(2) The Central Government shall establish a branch of the Bank in every State Union
territory.
(3) The Bank shall consist of a Chairperson and four members to be appointed by the
Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
(4) Every branch of the bank shall consist of a General Manager and such other
officers and staff as may be required.
(5) The terms and conditions of service and appointment, salaries and allowances of
Chairperson, members and employees of the bank shall be such as may be prescribed.
4. The main object of the Bank shall be to financially assist the professionals in their
research work.
5. (1)  Every professional intending to avail of financial assistance from the bank shall
apply to the concerned branch of the Bank.
(2) While applying for loan, the professional shall furnish all details about of research,
experience, infrastructure available with him and required amount of loan and the period for
which it is required.
6. The concerned branch shall forward the application to the Head Office with its
recommendations within a period of fifteen days from the date of receipt of the application.
7. (1) The Head Office shall consider the application taking into account the
recommendations of the concerned branch and arrive at a decision within a period of fifteen
days from the date of receipt of such application.
(2) The Head Office shall have the power either to increase or decrease the amount of
loan applied for or the period for which it is sought and its decision thereon shall be final.
8. (1) Upon the decision of the Head Office to sanction the loan, the loan amount shall
be given to the professional at once.
(2) The loan amount so sanctioned shall be interest free.
(3) The loan amount shall be repayable within such period as may be determined in the
terms and conditions governing the loan.
(4) The loan shall be repayable by the professional after his research work has been
completed or after a period of five years from the date of sanction  of loan, whichever is earlier
or after he has been gainfully engaged or commercial exploited his invention with the
permission of Central Government.
9. Every professional who has been sanctioned a loan by the Bank shall, upon
completion of his research work inform the Central Government or the State Government, as
the case may be and the bank about his research work.
Definitions.
Establishment
of
Technology
Bank of
India.
Object of the
Bank.
Application
for loan.
Branch to
forward
application to
head office.
Head Office
to decide on
sanction of
loan.
Loan.
Professional
to inform
Government
about his
research.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
10. (1) Every professional who applied for loan shall give an undertaking that he shall
not leave the country during the period of his research:
Provided that the Central Government may, in special circumstances to be recorded in
writing, allow a professional to go abroad to acquaint himself with the new techniques which
will promote or help in his research work.
(2) No professional who has been sanctioned a loan by the Bank shall leave the
country until he had submitted his research work to the Central Government and repaid the
loan.
11. The Central Government may, after considering the research work submitted by
a professional, give suitable award to him and provide him with suitable employment in an
office or organization under the Central Government.
12. The Central Government shall provide housing and stipend at such rates, as it
may determine, to a professional during his research for a period of five years or till he
completes his research, whichever is earlier.
13. If any professional violates the provisions of section 10, deportation proceedings
shall be proceeded against him at once and he shall be punished with a fine which may
extend up to rupees five lakh and shall also be required to repay the loan at once.
14. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modication in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Professional
not to leave
the country
during
research.
Employment
to
professionals.
Assistance to
professionals.
Punishment.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Due to lack of facilities and financial assistance, our young researchers and scientists
are not able to do any research work or engage themselves in any project. They are lured by
multinationals and foreign countries and as a result our country is not able to utilise their
talent.
Therefore, it is proposed to encourage our researchers and scientists by giving them
financial and other assistance to do their research work. It is accordingly proposed that the
researchers shall be given  interest free loan by the bank for their research work and during
that period they will be provided with housing and stipend facilities. However, the researchers
will have to submit their papers or projects to the Government after the completion of their
work so that the country can fully benefit from their work.
The Bill  serves two purposes; on the one hand it helps our researchers to do their
work peacefully and on the other it helps us to utilise their talent and benefit from the
research work.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; CHANDRAKANT KHAIRE
April 7, 2015.
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of a Technology Bank of India. It
further provides for the establishment of offices and branches of the bank in every State
capital and Union territory. The bank shall consist of a Chairperson, four person, members,
General Manager and other employees. Clause 4 relates to financial assistance to professionals
in their research work. Clause 11 provides that the Central Government shall give award and
suitable employment to those who have completed their research work. Clause 12 provides
for housing and stipend to researchers for a period of five years.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of
India. It is likely to involve an annual recurring expenditure of rupees ten thousand crore.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one thousand crore is also likely to be
involved.
5

6
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 14 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for establishment of a Technology Bank to assist professionals engaged in
research work in various disciplines.
————
(Shri Chandrakant Khaire, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—376LS(S3)—30-04-2015.