1
Short title
and
commence-
ment.
Bill No. 144 of  2014
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
THE DRUGS (PRICE CONTROL) BILL, 2014
By
SHRI M.K. RAGHAV AN, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for constitution of a Committee for fixing the prices of
drugs and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Drugs (Price Control) Act, 2014.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "dealer" means a person engaged in the business of purchase or sale of drugs,
whether as a wholesaler or retailer and whether or not in conjunction with any other
business and includes his agent;
(b) "distributor" means a distributor of drugs or his agent and includes a stockist
appointed by a manufacturer or an importer for stocking his drugs for sale to a dealer;
and
5
Definitions.
10

2
(c) "drug" includes—
(i) all medicines for internal or external use of  human beings and all
substances intended to be used for, or in the diagnosis, treatment, mitigation, or
prevention of any disease or disorder in human beings including preparations
applied on human body for the purpose of repelling insects like mosquitoes;
(ii) such substances, intended to affect the structure or any function of the
human body or intended to be used for the destruction of vermin or insects
which cause diseases in human beings; and
(iii) drugs of all systems of medicine like allopathy, homoeopathy, ayurveda,
unani and siddha.
3. (1)  There shall be constituted a Committee to be known as the Drugs (Price Control)
Committee (hereinafter referred to as the Committee) to fix the prices of drugs.
(2) The Committee shall consist of—
(i) the Minister of Health and Family Chairman, ex officio;
Welfare, Government of India
(ii) three representatives of major members;
hospitals including Government run hospitals
(iii) two representatives of drugs members;
industry
(iv) two representatives of Indian members;
system of medicine
(v) Secretary to the Government of member
India, Ministry of Health and Family secretary, ex officio.
Welfare.
4. The Committee shall—
(i) fix the prices of drugs after taking into consideration the costs of manufacturing,
storage, packaging, import of formulation and distribution as well as profit of
manufacturer and such other factors as it may deem necessary;
(ii) promote the use of generic drugs; and
(iii) determine the standard of drugs.
5. No person or a manufacturer or a distributor or a dealer shall sell any drug to any
consumer at a price exceeding the price fixed by the Committee.
6. ( 1) Whoever contravenes the provisions of this Act shall be punished with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months and with fine which may extend to
one lakh rupees.
(2) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company, the licence of
such company shall be cancelled forthwith.
Explanation.— For the purpose of sub-section ( 2), "company", means any body
corporate, and includes a firm or other association of individuals.
7. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
Constitution
of Drugs
(Price
Control)
Committee.
Functions of
the
Committee.
Prohibition
on selling of
drug at a price
exceeding the
price
determined by
the
Committee.
Penalty.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule  should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
5

4
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Prices of drugs and medicines are on the increase. The prices are increased arbitrarily by
manufacturers and traders. People, especially poor people are affected by the exorbitant cost
of drugs. They are not able to afford the medicines. At present there is no check on the prices
of drugs. Medical practitioners with the lure of money and costly gifts from manufacturers
generally prescribe costly medicines which common man cannot afford. They should instead
prescribe generic drugs.
The Bill seeks to constitute a Committee to—
(i) fix the prices of drugs;
(ii) promote the use of generic drugs; and
(iii) determine the standard of drugs.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; M.K.  RAGHAV AN
November 12, 2014.

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for constitution of a Committee to be known as the Drugs
(Price Control) Committee to fix the prices of drugs. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would
involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely to involve a recurring
expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore  per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees fifty crore is also likely to be involved.
5

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGA TED LEGISLATION
Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out the
purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative powers is of a normal character.
6

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for constitution of a Committee for fixing the prices of
drugs and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
————
(Shri M.K. Raghavan,  M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—2760LS(S3)—02.12.2014.