Aඌ ංඇඍඋඈൽඎർൾൽ ංඇ Lඈ඄ Sൺൻඁൺ
Bill No. 144 of 2024
THE SPECIAL FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE FOR DEVELOPMENT 
AND CONSERV ATION OF WATER BODIES IN THE 
STATE OF MAHARASHTRA BILL, 2024
By
Dඋ. Hൾආൺඇඍ Vංඌඁඇඎ Sൺ ඏ ൺඋൺ, M.P.
ൺ
BILL
to provide special financial assistance to the State Government of 
Maharashtra to develop and conserve the water bodies 
in the State of Maharashtra.
 B ൾ it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:–
 1. (1) This Act may be called the Special Financial Assistance for Development 
and Conservation of Water Bodies in the State of  Maharashtra Act, 2024. 
  ( 2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and 
commencement.
5

 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,–
   ( a) “aquatic ecosystem” means all organic and inorganic matter and all 
 living organisms living in or located in or on water or the beds or shores of a 
 water body;
   ( b) “drain” includes gutters, wastewater canals, sewers and all outlets or 
 flow of waste water including overflow of rainwater;
   ( c) “groundwater” means all water under the surface of the ground, whether 
 in solid or liquid form;
   ( d) “water” means  all surface water and ground water, whether solid or 
 liquid form; and
   ( e) “water body” means any body of flowing or standing water, whether 
 natural or artificial and whether the flow or presence of water is continuous, 
 intermittent or occurs only during a flood, including but not limited to a lake, 
 river, creek, stream, tank, well, pond and wetland.
 3. The State Government of Maharashtra shall provide the Central Government,–
   ( a) the details of existence of water bodies in the State; and 
   ( b) requirement of financial assistance to protect the water bodies in the 
 State.
 4. The State Government of Maharashtra shall, before informing the Central 
Government under section 3, make the regulation for the purpose of— 
   ( a) designating any area as a water quality control zone for the purpose of 
 protecting water, aquatic eco-system or drinking water source;
   ( b) governing, regulating or prohibiting any use or activity in a water quality 
 control zone or any part of a zone;
   ( c) improving the drainage and sewerage system;
   ( d) ensuring clear separation between sewerage/waste water and sources of 
 clean water to avoid contamination; and 
   ( e) ensuring quick absorption or clear flow of rain water for conservation.
 5. The State Government of Maharashtra shall, before informing the Central 
Government under section 3, take into consideration the scientific, intrinsic and 
other information relating to— 
   ( a) the physical characteristics of land in the area, including its topography 
 and soil types; 
   ( b) the ability of the soil or water in the area to assimilate nutrients and 
 other pollutants;
2
Definitions.
State 
Governments 
to inform 
the Central 
Government.
Power of State 
Governments 
to make 
regulations.
State 
Government 
of Maharashtra 
to consider 
the scientific, 
intrinsic 
and other 
information 
relating to water 
bodies.

   ( c) water bodies or groundwater in the area, including information relating 
 to– 
     ( i) the quality characteristics of the water;
     ( ii) The susceptibility of the water to contamination or adverse changes 
   in level; and
     ( iii) the extent to which the water is undisturbed by human activity.
   ( d) the areas of aquatic ecosystems;
   ( e) whether the area contains a source or a potential source, of drinking 
 water;
   ( f) whether the area supports species that are sensitive to alterations in water 
 quality or quantity resulting from human activity;
   ( g) whether the area provides habitat for endangered species; and
   ( h) the perception of farmers and native inhabitants of the area regarding 
 quality, quantity and prospects of water in a particular zone including— 
     ( i) the possibilities of flood and/or water logging; and
     ( ii) any other matter which the Government considers relevant.
 6. The Central Government shall render scientific and technical advice and 
assistance to the State Government of Maharashtra if so required to achieve 
the purposes of this Act.
 7. (1) The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by 
Parliament by law in this behalf, provide financial assistance to the State 
Government of Maharashtra for protection of water bodies and for promotion 
of rain harvesting and watershed management programmes.
  ( 2) The funds provided under sub-section (1) shall be utilized for,—
    ( a) expeditious completion of ongoing water bodies projects;
    ( b) construction of big and small ponds for the use of irrigation;
    ( c) digging wells and bore wells as it will be required; 
    ( d) meeting costs incurred on implementing the “Water Bodies 
  Development and Conservation Scheme” based on the water resources in 
  the State;
    (e) renovation of old ponds and water reservoirs in the water affected 
  area; and
    ( f) construction of canals.
  (3) The Central Government before releasing the money shall 
ensure that State Government has complied with the provisions of this 
Act.  
3
Central 
Government to 
render scientific 
and technical 
advice.
Central 
Government to 
provide financial 
assistance 
to State 
Government of 
Maharashtra.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
  In our country and Maharashtra State, per capita water availability is 
decreasing due to ever increasing population. Also, due to rising food demands, rapid 
industrialization and urbanization the stress on water management is increasing. 
As an effect water management has emerged as one of grand challenges. The 
distribution of water resources is uneven over a large part of the State of Maharashtra. 
A large area is, therefore, water deficit whereas a small part is surplus in water. Large 
part of the State of Maharashtra has already become water stressed. Maharashtra 
occupies the Western and Central parts of India and has a long coastline of about 
720 km along the Arabian Sea. The average annual rainfall in the State ranges from 
400 to 5000 mm. The State witness frequent drought conditions. Almost, 42.5% 
area of the State is drought prone. Half of the State’s population is dependent upon 
agriculture for their livelihood. So, a large number of proposals relating to water 
bodies and development of water bodies in the State of Maharashtra is required. 
Due to lack of water bodies people have to depend on rain despite having the water 
reservoirs. State have to do the project involve deepening and widening of streams, 
construction of cement and earthen stop dams, work on nullahs and digging of farm 
ponds. Due to non-availability of water bodies, the State Government do not have 
sufficient funds for the development of water bodies projects. The Bill, therefore, 
to meet the expense of development and conservation of water bodies in the State 
of Maharashtra.
  Hence this Bill.
    Nൾඐ Dൾඅඁං;                                                           HEMANT VISHNU SA V ARA
July 22, 2024
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
  Clause 6 of the Bill provides for rendering of scientific and technical advice 
and assistance to the State Government of Maharashtra.  Clause 7 provides for 
financial assistance to the State Government of Maharashtra for protection of water 
bodies etc.
  The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the 
Consolidated Fund of India.  As the sums of moneys which will be given to the 
State of Maharashtra as special financial assistance by appropriation by law made 
by Parliament will be known only after the plans to be implemented by the State 
Government of Maharashtra with the approval of Government of India as identified, 
it is not possible at present to give the estimates of recurring expenditure, which 
would be involved out of the Consolidated Fund of India at this stage.
  No  non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.
5

LOK SABHA
ൺ
BILL 
to provide special financial assistance to the State Government of 
Maharashtra to develop and conserve the water bodies 
in the State of Maharashtra.
(Dr. Hemant Vishnu Savara, M.P .) 