1
THE RIGHT TO ADEQUATE HOUSING BILL, 2017
By
SHRI OM PRAKASH YADAV, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for adequate dwelling house to the families living below poverty line or falling
under low income group in the country by providing one free of cost or at such
reasonable cost and providing interest free loans to families in low income
group for purchase of house and for matter connected therewith
or incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of  India.
1. (1) This Act may be called the Right to Adequate Housing Act, 2017.
(2) It shall extend to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the official Gazette, appoint.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. 144 of 2017
5
AS  INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) ‘‘Committee’’ means Monitoring and Grievance Redressal Committee
constituted under section 8;
(b) ‘‘dwelling house’’ means a house comprising of at least one living room, one
bed room, one kitchen and one toilet with electricity, water and sanitation facilities;
(c) ‘‘Fund’’ means House Building Fund  Constituted under section 7;
(d) ‘‘families living below poverty line’’ means those families who are declared
by the Central Government to be living below poverty line; and
(e) ‘‘prescribed’’ means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1)  The Central Government shall, by notified in the Official Gazette, within period
of five years from the commencement of this Act, provide  free of cost, all-weather dwelling
house to each family living below poverty line in the country:
Provided that while providing the dwelling house the Central Government shall take
into account the number of members in the family.
(2)  For  the purposes of sub-section (1), the Central Government shall, in consultation
with the concerned State Government  or Union territory Administration as the case may be,
cause to be notified a list of all families living below poverty line in each State and Union teritory
in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) The priority of allotting the dwelling house in a State or Union territory shall  be
determined by draw of lot to be conducted in such manner as may be prescribed.
4. (1)  The Central Government shall, within a period of seven years from the
commencement of this Act, provide dwelling house  at fifty per cent of the cost to each family
having an annual income of less than rupees five lakh:
Provided that while providing the dwelling home the Central Government shall take
into account the number of members in the family.
(2)  For the purpose of sub-section (1), the Central Government shall,
(i) in consultation with the State Government or Union territory Administrative
Administration as the case may be, cause to be notified a list of all families
having an annual income less than rupees five lakh in each State and Union
territory in such manner as may be prescribed; and
(ii) provide interest free loans to the family to pay the cost of the house in such
manner as may be prescribed.
           (3)  The priority of allotting the dwelling house in a State or Union territory under
this section shall be determined by the draw of lot to be conducted in such manner as
may be prescribed.
5. (1)  The Central Government shall, after every four years, undertake the maintenance
of the dwelling unit given under section 3 to the families living below poverty line and charge
such nominal amount for the purpose as may be prescribed.
(2)   The Central Government shall, after every four years, undertake the maintenance
of the dwelling house given under section 4 of families whose annual income is less than
rupees five lakh and charge fifty per cent of the maintenance cost.
6. The Central Government shall ensure that on the death of the head of a family living
below poverty line or earning less than rupees five lakh annually, the title of the dwelling unit
shall pass on to the  dependant family members.
7. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish a
Fund to be known as the House Building Fund for poor and families living below poverty line
for the purpose of this Act.
Definitions.
Central
Government
to provide
dwelling house
to families
living below
poverty line.
Central
Government
to provide
dwelling house
at fifty per
cent of the
cost.
Central
Government
to maintain
the dwelling
unit.
Succession of
dwelling unit.
House Building
fund for poor
and below
poverty line
families.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(2)There shall be credited to  the fund,—
(a) amounts received from the Central and the State Government as grant-in aid; and
(b) donations received from private individuals and Organisations.
8. (1)  The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish
a Committee to be known as the  Monitoring and Grievance Redressal Committee to augment
and make effective, the process of providing dwelling houses to the poor and families living
below poverty line and redressal of their grievances.
(2) The Committee shall consist of,—
(i) a retired judge of Supreme court—Chairperson;
(ii) Secretary Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviations, Central
Government—member;
(iii) two eminent persons having experience in working for poor and below poverty
line families—members;
(iv) four Secretaries of Housing Department, State Governments to be nominated
on rotational basis—members,
to be appointed by the Central Government in such manner as may be
prescribed.
(3) The salary and allowances  payable to and other terms and conditions of  Serices of
Chairperson other members of the Committee shall be such as may be prescribed.
(4) The Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation shall provide secretarial
assistance to the Committee.
9. The Committee shall,—
(i) suggest ways to augment the process of providing housing to poor and
families living below the poverty line;
(ii) receive and redress grievances of the people in respect of their right to
housing under this Act;
(iii) suggest, from time to time, the specification that may be adopted while
constructing the houses for poor and families living below the poverty line; and
(iv) perform such other functions as may be prescribed.
10. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such orders shall be made after expiry of the period of three years
from the date of commencement of this Act.
11. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of, the
provisions in any other law, for the time being in force, providing homes to families living
below poverty line and to families  earning less than rupees five lakh per annum.
12.  (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the official Gazette make rules
to carry out the provisions of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of  the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Monitoring
and Grievance
Redressal
Committee.
Functions of
the
Committee.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Act to have
effect in
addition to
other Acts.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Housing forms an indispensable part of ensuring human dignity. Adequate housing
encompasses more than just four walls of room and roof over one's head. Housing is essential
for normal healthy living. It fulfils deep seated psychological needs for privacy and personal
space; physical needs for security and protection from inclement weather. Article 25 of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights recognizes the right to housing as part of right to
adequate standard of living. Article 11(1) of the International Covenant on Economic, Social
and Cultural Rights (ICESCR) also guarantees the right to housing as part of the right to an
adequate standard of living. Besides, the right to adequate housing is also recognized
internationally in several other instruments that have focussed on the need to protect rights
of particular groups such as Convention on the Elimination for all forms of Discrimination
Against Women (CEDAW), Convention on the Right of the Child (CRC) and the International
Convention on Elimination of Racial Discrimination (CERD). India as party to international
covenants has obligation to provide adequate housing to its citizens.
Supreme Court in various judgements such as Olga Tellis Vs. Bombay Municipal
Corporation (1985) 3 SCC 545; Shantistar  Builders Vs. Narayan Khimalal Totame (1990)
1 SCC 520; Chameli Singh Vs. State of UP (1996) 2 SCC 549; PG Gupta Vs. State of
Gujarat (1995) Supp (2) SCC 182, Ahmadabad Municipal Corporation Vs. Nawab Khan
Gulab Khan and Others (1997) 11 SCC 121, has elaborated on the right to adequate
housing, shelter and livelihood being part of all encompassing right to life under article 21 of
the Constitution. Increasing disparity in income has also led to the homelessness in our
country. While some people live in palaces or big houses, some don't even have access to a
shelter. The housing with its rising cost has become unaffordable. According to an estimate,
there are around fifteen crore homeless people in India. These homeless people face vagaries
of weather from chilling cold in winters to heat waves during summer. Many of these homeless
people die every year. Most of these homeless persons are poor or live below the poverty
line. Adequate housing is also necessary for protection of childhood as homeless child is
invariably subjected to child abuse and crime. Still lakhs of persons particularly living below
the poverty line or falling with in low income group are not having roof over their heads and
living in sub-human conditions on pavements, Bastis, Jhuggi-Jhopri  and unauthorised
slums. It is the Government's obligation to guarantee that everyone can exercise this right to
live in security, peace and dignity. Therefore, it is felt that the Government should provide at
least one dwelling house to each family living below poverty line free of cost. Further, the
persons falling within low income group should also be given one dwelling house at fifty
percent of the cost of construction. Since, poor families cannot afford to pay a lump sum
amount to purchase house. It also proposed that they should be given one time interest free
loans for the purpose.
Hence, this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; OM PRAKASH YADA V
July 3, 2017.
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides that the families living below poverty line shall be provided
a dwelling unit free of cost. Clause 4 provides that families earning below rupees five lakh
shall be given a dwelling unit at fifty percent of the cost. Clause 5 provides that Central
Government shall also undertake the maintenance of these dwelling units. Clause 7 provides
that Central Government shall also contribute to the House Building Fund. Clause 8 provides
for establishment of a Monitoring and Grievance Redressal Committee. The Bill, therefore, if
enacted would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. However, at this
stage  it is difficult to estimate the recurring Consolidated Fund of India expenditure that may
be required from as the same will depend on the number of eligible persons for housing and
the decision of the Central Government on the number of housing units to be constructed
every year.  A non-recurring expenditure of about  rupees one crore is also likely to be
involved.
5

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGA TED LEGISLATION
Clause 12 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the matter will relate to details only, the delegation of legislative
powers is of normal character.
6

GMGIPMRND—955LS(S3)—21.07.2017.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for adequate dwelling house to the families living below poverty line or falling
under low income group in the country by providing one free of cost or at such
reasonable cost and providing interest free loans to families in low income group for
purchase of house and matter connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Om Prakash Yadav, M.P.)