Aඌ ංඇඍඋඈൽඎർൾൽ ංඇ Lඈ඄ Sൺൻඁൺ
                   
                                                       
          
Bill  No. 144 of 2025
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2025
By
 SHRI RAJKUMAR ROAT,  M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
Bൾ it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of India 
as follows:— 
1. This Act may be called The Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2025. 
2. In the Eighth Schedule to the Constitution, the existing entries from 4 to 22 
shall be re-numbered as entries from 5 to 23 respectively and before entry 5 so 
re-numbered, the following entry shall be inserted, namely:–
     “4. Bhili.”.
Short title.
Amendment of 
the Eighth
Schedule.

STATEMENT  OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
 Bhili language is not only a medium of communication, but is also an integral 
part of the culture of the Bhil community. Bhili language, spoken in the tribal-
dominated areas of States of Rajasthan, Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh and Maharashtra. 
It is an ancient language which is also used as a mother tongue by millions of people 
of all communities residing with the tribals in the tribal areas of these States.
 The Bhili language encapsulates the traditions, folklore and songs of the 
communities living in the tribal dominated areas of the above mentioned four States, 
but at present, due to the increasing influence of modern education, urbanization and 
other languages, this language is on the verge of extinction. If the Bhili language 
is not given constitutional recognition in time, it will disappear and the coming 
generations will be deprived of its glorious linguistic-cultural identity.
 Even today, in tribal dominated areas of Rajasthan, Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh 
and Maharashtra, Bhili language is used as mother tongue. Further, due to lack 
of constitutional recognition of this language, the children of these areas face 
problem in studying in other languages in the government schools, consequently, as 
compared to other districts of the aforesaid States, literacy rate of the Bhil tribal of 
this areas is very low. By giving constitutional recognition to this language, not only 
the Bhili language and culture be preserved, but the literacy rate will also increase.
 Hence this Bill.
       Nൾඐ Dൾඅඁං;                        RAJKUMAR ROAT   
February 6, 2025.

ANNEXURE 
[Eඑඍඋൺർඍ ൿඋඈආ ඍඁൾ Cඈඇඌඍංඍඎඍංඈඇ ඈൿ Iඇൽංൺ] 
EIGHTH SCHEDULE
[ARTICLES 344(1) AND 351]
Languages
 *     *          *                *                 *
 1. Assamese.
2. Bengali.
3. Bodo.
4. Dogri.
5. Gujarati.
6. Hindi.
7. Kannada.
8. Kashmiri.
9. Konkani.
10. Maithili.
11. Malayalam
12. Manipuri.
13. Marathi.
14. Nepali.
15. Oriya.
16. Punjabi.
17. Sanskrit.
18. Santhali.
19. Sindhi.
20. Tamil.
21. Telugu.
22. Urdu.
 *     *          *                *                 *

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Rajkumar Roat, M.P .)