5

As IntRopucED mv Lox SapHa on

rae 109
कप
We

Bill No, 144 of 1986,
—_

THE INDIAN POST OFFICE (SECOND AMENDMENT) BILL, 1986

A

BILL
further to amend the Indian Post Office Act, 1898.

Be it enacted by Parliament
Republic of India as follows:—

in the Thirty-seventh Year of the

1, (1) This Act may be called the Indian Post Office (Second Amend-

ment) Act, 1986.

(2) It shall come into force on the Ist day of January, 1987.

2. In the Indian Post Office Act, 1898, for the First Schedule, the fol-

lowing Schedule shall be substitute

ed, namely: —

Short

title and
commence~
ment.

Substitu-
tion of a
new Sche-
dule for
the First
Schedule
to Act

6 of 1898,


“THE FIRST SCHEDULE
(See section 7)
INLAND posTAGE RATES

Letters
For a weight not exceeding ten grams 60 paise 5
For every ten grams or fraction thereof, 40 paise
exceeding ten grams
Letter-cards

For a letter-card 35 paise

Post cards (not being post cards containing printed communication) 10
Single 15 paise
Reply हे 30 paise

Post cards containing printed. communication
For a post card 40 paise

Explanation—A post card shal] be deemed to contain a printed 15
communication, if any matter (except the name and address of, and
other particulars relating to, the sender and the place and date of des-
patch) is recorded by printing or by cyclostyling or by any other
mechanical process, not being typewriting, on any part of the post card

except the righthand half of the address-side thereof. Ae
Book, pattern and sample packets
For the first fifty grams or fraction thereof 50 paise
For every additional fifty grams, or 50 paise
fraction thereof, in excess of fifty grams.
Registered newspapers 25
For a weight not exceeding fifty grams. 15 paise
For a weight exceeding fifty grams but 25 paise
not exceeding one hundred grams.
For every additional one hundred grams 10 paise
or fraction thereof, exceeding one hundred grams. 30

In the case of more than one copy of the same issue of a registered
newspaper being carried in the same packet—

For a weight not exceeding one hundred grams 25 paise
For every additional one hundred = grams, 10 paise:
or fraction thereof, exceeding one hundred grams 35

Provided that such packet shall not be delivered at any addressee’s
residence but shall be given to a recognised agent at the Post Office.

Parcels
For a weight not exceeding five hundred grams Rs. 4.00
For every five hundred grams, a fraction thereof, Rs. 4.00". a

exceeding five hundred grams.



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Section 7 of the Indian Post Offce Act, 1898 provides that the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, fix the rates of
postage and other sums to be charged in respect of postal articles sent
by inland post and that the Central Government may also make rules
as 10 the scale of weights, terms and conditions subject to which the
rates so fixed shall be charged. The highest rate of postage when pre paid
shall not exceed the rate set forth in the First Schedule to the Act.

2. The last amendment of the rates mentioned in the First Schedule
was made in June 1982. In order to make good partially, the deficit
in postal working expenses arising out of the increase on account of
pay and allowances consequent upon the implementation of the recom-
mendations of the Fourth Pay Commission and the all-round increase in
other operational costs, such as freight charges and electricity tariffs, the
rates mentioned in the First Schedule are proposed to be increased. It
is enticipated that this increase will result in additional revenue of
about Rs. 86 crores during a full year.

3. The Bill seeks to achieve the above object.

New DELHI;
The 1st December, 1986. ARJUN SINGH.

PRESIDENT’S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF THE
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
[Copy of letter No. 1-44|86-R, dated the Ist December, 1986 from
Shri Arjun Singh, Minister of Communications to the Secretary-General,
Lok Sabha.]

The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the
Indian Post Office (Second Amendment) Bill, 1986, recommends under
Clause (1) of article 117 of the Constitution of India, the introduction of
the said Bill in Lok Sabha,


ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE INDIAN Post Orrice Act, 1898
(6 oF 1898)

* * * * *

THE. FIRST SCHEDULE
(See section 7)
Intanp Postace Rates
Letters
For a weight not exceeding ten grams 50 paise.
For every ten grams or fraction thereof, exceeding ten grams 20 paise.
Letter-cards
For a letter-card 35 paise,
Post cards (not being post cards containing printed communication)
Single t =e oe ee Ee 15 paise.
Reply es ost cS न 30 paise.
Post cards containing printed communication '
For a post card see ce nF on 25 paise.

Explanation.—A post card shall be deemed to contain a printed com-
munication, if any matter (except the name and address of, and other
particulars relating to, the sender and the place and date of despatch) is
recorded by printing or by cyclostyling or by any other mechanical pro-
cess, not being typewriting, on any part of the post card except the right-
hand half of the address-side thereof.

Book, Pattern and Sample packets
For the first fifty grams or fraction thereof ah ae 30 paise.

For every additional twenty-five grams or fraction thereof,
in excess of fifty grams 15 paise.

Registered Newspapers

For a weight not exceeding fifty grams 5 ae 5 paise.

For a weight exceeding fifty grams but not exceeding one
hundred grams = Fe ee a 15 paise,


Be 1

For every additional one hundred grams or fraction thereof, 1
exceeding one hundred grams ee a 10 paise.

In the case of more than one copy of the same issue of a registered
newspaper being carried in the same packet—

For a weight not exceeding one hundred grams Be 15 paise.

For every additional one hundred grams or fraction thereof,
in excess of one hundred grams Ss न -. 10 paise:

Provided that such packet shall not be delivered at any addressee’s
residence but shall be given to a recognised agent at the Post Office.

Parcels are
For a weight not exceeding five hundred grams Re Rs. 3.00

For . every five hundred grams or fraction thereof, exceeding
five hundred grams i me Rs, 3.00



LOK SABHA

A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Post Office Act, 1898.

(Shri Arjun Singh, Minister of Communications.)