4
THE PUBLIC PREMISES (EVICTION OF
UNAUTHORISED OCCUPANTS)
AMENDMENT BILL, 2019
(AS PASSED BY THE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT—
LOK SABHA ON 31ST JULY, 2019   
RAJY A SABHA ON 6TH AUGUST, 2019)
Bill No. 145-F of 2019

1
Amendment of
section 2.
Short title and
commencement.
THE PUBLIC PREMISES (EVICTION OF UNAUTHORISED
OCCUPANTS) AMENDMENT BILL, 2019
(AS PASSED  BY  THE  H OUSES  OF P ARLIAMENT )
A
BILL
further to amend the Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1971.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants)
Amendment Act, 2019.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1971 (hereinafter
referred to as the principal Act), in section 2, clause (fa) and clause (fb) shall be renumbered
as clause (fb) and (fc) respectively, and before clause (fb) as so renumbered, the following
clause shall be inserted, namely:—
'(fa) "residential accommodation occupation" in relation to any public premises
means occupation by any person on grant of licence to him to occupy such premises
on the basis of an order of allotment for a fixed tenure or for a period he holds office, in
accordance with the rules and instructions issued in this regard, made under the
authority of the Central Government, a State Government, a Union territory
Administration or a statutory authority, as the case may be;'.
40 of 1971.
Bill No. 145-F of 2019

2
3. In the principal Act, after section 3A, the following section shall be inserted, namely:—
"3B. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 4 or section 5, if the
estate officer has information that any person, who was granted residential
accommodation occupation, is in unauthorised occupation of the said residential
accommodation, he shall—
(a) forthwith issue notice in writing calling upon such person to show
cause within a period of three working days why an order of eviction should not
be made;
(b) cause the notice to be served by having it affixed on the outer door or
some other conspicuous part of the said residential accommodation, and in
such other manner as may be prescribed, whereupon the notice shall be deemed
to have been served upon such person.
(2) The estate officer shall, after considering the cause, if any, shown by the
person on whom the notice is served under sub-section ( 1) and after making such
inquiry as it deems expedient in the circumstances of the case, for reasons to be
recorded in writing, make an order of eviction of such person.
(3) If the person in unauthorised occupation refuses or fails to comply with the
order of eviction referred to in sub-section ( 2), the estate officer may evict such
person from the residential accommodation and take possession thereof and may, for
that purpose, use such force as may be necessary.".
4. In section 7 of the principal Act, after sub-section ( 3), the following sub-section
shall be inserted, namely:—
"(3A) If the person in unauthorised occupation of residential accommodation
challenges the eviction order passed by the estate officer under sub-section ( 2) of
section 3B in any court, he shall pay damages for every month for the residential
accommodation held by him.".
Insertion of
new section
3B.
Amendment
of section 7.
Eviction from
residential
accommodation.
————
The above Bill has been passed by the Houses of Parliament.
Dated the Chairman.
————
I assent to this Bill.
Dated the President.

MGIPMRND—2470RS(S3)—06-08-2019.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised
Occupants) Act, 1971.
————
(As passed by the Houses of Parliament)