_ As INTRODUCED In Lok SasHa on

=O

Bill (No, 145 of 1986
FIFTY-FIFTH AMENDMENT) BILL, 1986
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India,

THE CONSTITUTION (

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-seventh Year of the
Republic of India as follows:—

1, (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Fifty-fifth Amend-
ment) Act, 1986.

a (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.

2, After article 371G of the Constitution, the following article shall be
inserted, namely:—

“371H. Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution,—

to (a) the Governor of Arunachal Pradesh shall have special
responsibility with respect to law and order in the State of
Arunachal Pratesh and in the discharge of his functions in rela-
tion thereto, the Governor shall, after consulting the Council of
Ministers, exercise his individual judgment as to the action to
be taken:

Short title
and com-
mence-
ment.

Insertion
of new
article
371H.

Special
provision
with res-
pect to
the State
of
Arunachal
Pradesh.


2 --

=

Provided that if any question arises whether any matter is
or is not a matter as respects which the Governor is under this
clause required to act in the exercise of his individual judgment,
the decision of the Governor in his discretion shall be final, and
the validity of anything done by the Governor shall not be called 5
in question on the ground that he ought or ought not to have
acted in the exercise of his individual judgment;

Provided further that if the President on receipt of a report
from Governor or otherwise is satisfied that it is no longer
necessary for the Governor to have special responsibility with 1°
respect to law and order in the State of Arunachal Pradesh, he ;
may by order direct that the Governor shall cease to have such

responsibility with effect from such date as may be specified in
the order:

(b) the Legislative Assembly of the State of Arunachal Pra- 5
desh shall consist of not less than thirty members.”.



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The Government of India have proposed to confer statehood on the

Union territory of Arunachal Predesh. It has also been proposed as
follows: —

(0) Having regard to the sensitive location of Arunachal Pradesh,
the Governor of the proposed. new State shall have special res-
ponsibility with respect to law and order in the State and in
the discharge of his functions thereto, the Governor shall, after
consulting the Council of Ministers, exercise his individual
judgment as to the action to be taken and this special respon-
sibility of the Governor shall cease when the President by
order so directs;

(iii) the Legislative Assembly of the new State of Arunachal Pra-
desh shall consist of forty members. But as it is proposed to
make the existing thirty-member Legislative Assembly of the
Union territory of Arunachal Pradesh to be the provisional
Legislative Assembly for the new State of Arunachal Pradesh
until elections are held on the expiry of the five year term of
the existing Assembly, it is proposed to provide that the Legis-
lative Assembly of the new State of Arunachal Pradesh shall
consist of not less than thirty members.

2. In order to give effect to the above proposals, it is necessary to make
special provisions in the Constitution. This Bill accordingly seeks to
amend the Constitution to provide for the aforesaid matters. A separate

Bill for the establishment of the new State relatable to article 2 is also
being introduced.

New Deu; BUTA SINGH,

The ist December, 1986. Home Minister.


LOK SABHA

A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India,

(Shri Buta Singh, Minister of Home Affairs.)