THE ASSAM REORGANISATION (KARBI DIMANCHAL) BILL, 2016
By
SHRI BIREN SINGH ENGTI, M.P .
————
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
————
PART  I
PRELIMINARY
CLAUSES
1. Short title, extent and commencement.
2. Definitions.
PART  II
FORMATION OF THE AUTONOMOUS STATE OF KARBI DIMANCHAL
3. Formation of Karbi Dimanchal.
4. Executive Power of Karbi Dimanchal.
5. Extent of Executive Power of Karbi Dimanchal.
6. Council of Ministers.
7. Other provisions as to Ministers.
8. Advocate-General for Karbi Dimanchal.
9. Conduct of Business.
10. Duties of Chief Minister as respects the furnishing of information to Governor, etc.
PART  III
T
HE LEGISLATURE
GENERAL
11. Constitution of the Legislature of Karbi Dimanchal.
12. Delimitation of Constituencies.
13. Power of Election Commission to maintain delimitation orders up-to-date.
14. Electors and electoral rolls.
15. Right to V ote.
16. Qualification for Membership.
17. Election to the  Legislative Assembly.
18. Duration of the Legislative Assembly.
19. Sessions of Legislative Assembly, prorogation and dissolution.
20. Right of Governor to address and send messages to Legislative Assembly.
Bill No. 145 of  2016
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

21. Special address by the Governor.
22. Rights of Ministers as respects Legislative Assembly.
OFFICERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE  ASSEMBLY
23. Speaker and Deputy Speaker of Legislative Assembly.
24. Speaker and Deputy Speaker not to preside while a resolution for his removal from
office is under consideration.
25. Secretariat of Legislative Assembly.
26. Public Service Commission.
27. Police Cadre.
C
ONDUCT OF BUSINESS
28. Oath or Affirmation by Members.
29. V oting in Assembly, power of Assembly to act notwithstanding vacancies and
quorum.
D
ISQUALIFICATIONS OF MEMBERS
30. V acation of seats.
31. Disqualifications for membership.
32. Penalty for sitting and voting before making an oath or affirmation or when not
qualified or when disqualified.
33. Powers, privileges, etc. of members.
34. Salaries and allowances of members.
L
EGISLATIVE  POWERS AND PROCEDURE
35. Extent of legislative power.
36. Exemption from taxation of properties of the Union and the State of Assam and of
certain vehicles registered in Assam or Karbi Dimanchal.
37. Inconsistency between laws made by Parliament and laws made by the Legislature
of Karbi Dimanchal.
38. Inconsistency between laws made by the Legislature of the State of Assam and
laws  made by the Legislature of Karbi Dimanchal.
39. Special provisions as to Finance Bill.
40. Procedure as to lapsing of Bills.
41. Assent to Bills.
42. Bills reserved for consideration.
43. Requirements as to sanction and recommendation to be regarded as matters of
procedure only.
P
ROCEDURE IN FINANCIAL MATTERS
44. Annual financial statement.
45. Procedure in Legislative Assembly with respect to estimates.
46. Appropriation Bills.
47. Supplementary, additional or excess grants.
48. V ote on account and exceptional grant.
(ii)

PROCEDURE GENERALLY
49. Rules of procedure.
50. Restrictions on discussion in the Legislative Assembly.
51. Courts not to enquire into the proceedings of Legislative Assembly.
L
EGISLATIVE POWER OF THE GOVERNOR
52. Power of Governor to promulgate ordinances during recess of Legislative Assembly.
PART  IV
FINANCIAL PROVISIONS
53. Consolidated Fund.
54. Contingency Fund.
55. Custody of suitors' deposits and other moneys received by public servants and
courts.
56. Custody, etc., of Consolidated Fund, Contingency Fund and moneys credited to
the public accounts.
57. Certain taxes levied by Assam to be appropriated by Karbi Dimanchal.
58. Distribution of revenues.
59. Authorisation of expenditure pending its sanction by Legislative Assembly.
PART  V
A
SSETS AND LIABILITIES
60. Apportionment of assets and liabilities.
PART  VI
ADMINISTRATIVE RELATIONS
61. Obligation of Karbi Dimanchal, the State of Assam and the Union.
62. Control over the autonomous State in certain cases.
63. Entrustment of functions.
PART  VII
T
RANSITIONAL PROVISIONS
64. Provisions as to provisional Legislative Assembly.
PART  VIII
MISCELLANEOUS P ROVISIONS
65. Special committee for development of Diphu and Haflong.
66. Provisions as to continuance of courts.
67. Provision relating to Services.
68. Continuance of existing laws and their adaptations.
69. Autonomous State to be a State for certain purposes of the Constitution.
70. Power of Governments of Assam and Karbi Dimanchal to carry on trade, etc.,
in Karbi Dimanchal.
71. Power to suspend provisions of this act in case of failure of Constitutional machinery.
(iii)

72. Construction of references to ‘‘State’’ and ‘‘State Government’’ in other laws in
relation to Karbi Dimanchal.
73. Power to construe laws.
74. Effect of provisions of act inconsistent with other laws.
75. Power to remove difficulties.
76. Amendment of the Sixth Schedule.
77. Amendment of Act 2 of 1934.
78. Amendment of Act 37 of 1956.
79. Power to make Rules.
THE FIRST SCHEDULE
THE SECOND SCHEDULE
THE THIRD SCHEDULE
THE FOURTH SCHEDULE
(iv)

1
THE ASSAM REORGANISATION (KARBI DIMANCHAL) BILL, 2016
By
SHRI BIREN SINGH ENGTI, M.P .
A
BILL
to provide for the formation within the State of Assam of an autonomous State to be
known as Karbi Dimanchal and for matters connected therewith.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
PART I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Assam Reorganisation (Karbi Dimanchal)  Act, 2016.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint:
Provided that the different dates may be appointed for different provisions of
this Act.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 145 of  2016
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appointed day” means such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint for the formation of Autonomous State;
(b) “article” means an article of the Constitution;
(c) “autonomous State” means the Autonomous State of  Karbi Dimanchal
formed under section 3;
(d) “constituency” means a territorial constituency provided by order made
under section 12 for the purpose of election to the Legislative Assembly;
(e) “Election Commission” means the Election Commission appointed by the
President under Article 324;
(f) “Governor” means the Governor of Assam exercising his functions as
Governor in relation to Karbi Dimanchal by virtue of this Act;
(g) “law” includes any enactment, Ordinance, regulation, order, bye-law, rule,
scheme, notification or other instrument, having immediately before the appointed
day, the force of law in the whole or in any part of the Autonomous State;
(h) “Legislative Assembly” means the Legislative Assembly of  Karbi  Dimanchal;
(i) “Karbi Dimanchal” means the autonomous State referred to in section 3;
(j) “member” means a member of the Legislative Assembly;
(k) “Official Gazette” means the Official Gazette of Karbi Dimanchal or the
Gazette of India; and
(l) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
PART II
F
ORMATION OF THE AUTONOMOUS STATE OF KARBI DIMANCHAL
3. On and from the appointed day, there shall be formed within the State of Assam an
Autonomous State to be known as Karbi Dimanchal which shall, subject to the provisions
of Part I in the Table appended to Paragraph 20 of the Sixth Schedule, comprising the
following Tribal areas namely:—
(i) the North Cachar Hills District (now Dima Hasao Autonomous District); and
(ii) the Karbi Anglong District.
4. (1) The Executive power of Karbi Dimanchal shall be vested in the Governor and
shall be exercised by him either directly or through officers subordinate to him in accordance
with this Act.
(2) Nothing this section shall—
(a) be deemed to transfer to the Governor any functions conferred by any
existing law on any other authority; or
(b) prevent Parliament or the Legislature of the State of Assam or Karbi Dimanchal
from conferring by law functions on any authority subordinate to the Governor.
5. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the executive power of Karbi Dimanchal
shall extend to the matters with respect to which the Legislature of Karbi Dimanchal has
power to make laws:
Provided that in any matter with respect to which the Legislature of Karbi Dimanchal,
the Legislature of the State of Assam and Parliament have power to make laws, the executive
power of Karbi Dimanchal shall be subject to, and limited by, the executive power expressly
conferred by this Act or by any law made by Parliament upon the Union or the State of
Definitions.
Extent of
Executive
Power of
Karbi
Dimanchal.
Formation of
Karbi
Dimanchal.
Executive
Power of
Karbi
Dimanchal.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
Assam or the authorities thereof or, as the case may be, by the Legislature of the State of
Assam upon the State of Assam or authorities thereof.
(2) On and from the appointed day, the executive of the State of Assam shall not
extend, in relation to Karbi Dimanchal, to the matters with respect to which the Legislature
of Karbi Dimanchal has executive power to make laws under this Act.
(3) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that, save as otherwise provided
in this Act, the executive power of the State of Assam shall, in relation to Karbi Dimanchal,
continue to extend to the matters with respect to which the Legislature of Karbi Dimanchal
has no power to make laws.
6. (1) There shall be a Council of Ministers with the Chief Minister at the head  to aid
and advise the Governor in the exercise of his functions in relation to Karbi Dimanchal.
(2) The question whether any, and if so, what, advice was tendered by Minister to the
Governor shall not be inquired into in any court.
7. (1) The Chief Minister shall be appointed by the Governor and other Ministers
shall be appointed by the Governor on the advice of the Chief Minister, and the Ministers
shall hold office during the pleasure of the Governor.
(2) The Council of Ministers shall be collectively responsible to the Legislative
Assembly.
(3) Before a Minister enters upon his office, the Governor shall administer to him the
oaths of office and of secrecy according to the form set out for this purpose in the First
Schedule.
(4) A Minister who for any period of six consecutive months is not a member of the
Legislative Assembly shall at the expiration of that period cease to be a Minister.
(5) The salaries and allowances of the Ministers shall be such as the Legislature of
Karbi Dimanchal may from time to time by law determine and, until the Legislature so
determines, shall be determined by the Governor.
8. (1) The Governor may, if  he thinks fit to do so, appoint a person who is qualified to
be appointed a Judge of a High Court to be Advocate-General for Karbi Dimanchal.
(2) It shall be the duty of the Advocate-General to give advice to the Government of
Karbi Dimanchal upon such legal matters, and to perform such other duties of a legal
character as may, from time to time, be referred or assigned to him by the Governor, and to
discharge the functions conferred on him by or under this Act or any other law for the time
being in force.
(3) The Advocate-General shall hold office during the pleasure of the Governor, and
shall receive such remuneration as the Governor may determine.
9. (1) All executive action of the Government of Karbi Dimanchal shall be expressed to
be taken in the name of the Governor.
(2) Orders and other instruments made and executed in the name of the Governor shall
be authenticated in such manner as may be specified in rules to be made by the Governor, and
the validity of an order or instrument which is so authenticated shall not be called in question
on the ground that it is not an order or instrument made or executed by the Governor.
(3) The Governor shall make rules for the more convenient transaction of the business
of the Government of Karbi Dimanchal and for the allocation among Ministers of the said
business.
10. It shall be the duty of the Chief Minister of Karbi Dimanchal—
(a) to communicate to the Governor all decisions of the Council of Ministers
relating to the administration of the affairs of Karbi Dimanchal and proposals for
legislation;
(b) to furnish such information relating to the administration of the affairs of
Karbi Dimanchal and proposals for legislation as the Governor may call for; and
Council of
Ministers.
Other
provisions as
to Ministers.
Advocate-
General for
Karbi
Dimanchal.
Conduct of
Business.
Duties of
Chief Minister
as respects
the furnishing
of
information
to Governor,
etc.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

4
(c) if the Governor so requires, to submit for the consideration of the Council of
Ministers any matter on which a decision has been taken by a Minister but which has
not been considered by the Council.
PART III
T
HE LEGISLATURE
GENERAL
11. (1) There shall be a Legislature for Karbi Dimanchal which shall consist of the
Governor and the Legislative Assembly.
(2) The total number of seats in the Legislative Assembly to be filled by persons
chosen by direct election from constituencies in Karbi Dimanchal shall be fixed by the
Central Government by notification in the Official Gazette after consultation with the Election
Commission, but shall not be less than fifty four:
Provided that all the seats of Legislative Assembly shall be reserved for persons
belonging to the Scheduled Tribes.
(3) The existing twenty six Missing Autonomous Council (MAC) Constituencies of
Autonomous Hills District of Karbi Anglong and twenty eight MAC Constituencies of
Autonomous Hills District of Dima Hasao shall be the Legislative Assembly Constituencies
of the Karbi Dimanchal Autonomous State.
(4) The Governor may, if he is of opinion that any unrepresented communities in Karbi
Dimanchal need representation in the Legislative Assembly and are not adequately
represented therein, nominate not more than three members of such communities, not being
persons in the service of the Government, to the Legislative Assembly.
12. (1) The Election Commission shall, in the manner herein provided, distribute the
total number of seats in the Legislative Assembly as fixed under sub-section (2) of
section 11 to single member constituencies and delimit them on the basis of the latest
census figures having regard to the following provisions, namely:—
(a) all constituencies shall, as far as practicable, consist of geographically compact
areas, and in delimiting them, regard shall be had to the physical features, existing
boundaries of administrative units, facilities of communication and public convenience;
(b) every constituency shall be so delimited as to fall only within an Assembly
constituency of the Legislative Assembly of the State of Assam; and
(c) the population of each constituency shall, as far as practicable, be the same
throughout Karbi Dimanchal.
(2) For the purpose of assisting the Election Commission in the performance of its
functions under this section, the Commission shall associate with itself such number of
associate members not exceeding five as the Governor may nominate to represent Karbi
Dimanchal:
Provided that none of the associate members shall have a right to vote or to sign any
decision of the Election Commission.
(3) If owing to death or resignation, the office of an associate member falls vacant, it
shall be filled as soon as may be practicable by the Governor in accordance with the provisions
of sub-section (2).
(4) The Election Commission shall—
(a) publish its proposals for the delimitation of constituencies, together with the
dissenting proposals, if any, of any associate member who desires publication thereof,
in the Official Gazette and in such other manner as the Commission may consider fit,
together with a notice inviting objections and suggestions in relation to the proposals
and specifying a date on or after which the proposals will be further consider by it;
Constitution
of the
Legislature of
Karbi
Dimanchal.
Delimitation
of
Constituencies.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

5
(b) consider all objections and suggestions which may have been received by it
before the date so specified, and for the purpose of such consideration hold one or
more public sittings at such place or places as it may think fit; and
(c) after considering all objections and suggestions which may have been received
by it before the date so specified, determine by one or more orders the delimitation of
the constituencies and cause such order or orders to be published in the Official
Gazette; and upon such publication, the order or orders shall have the full force of law
and shall not be called in question in any court.
(5) As soon as may be after such publication, every such order shall be laid
before the Legislative Assembly.
(6) Upon the completion of each census, the total number of seats in the Legislative
Assembly and the division of Karbi Dimanchal into territorial constitutencies shall be
readjusted by such authority and in such manner as parliament may be law determine;
Provided that such readjustment shall not affect representation in the Legislative
Assembly until the dissolution of the then existing Assembly.
Explanation.—In this section "latest census figures" mean the census figures
with respect to Karbi Dimanchal ascertainable from the latest census of which the
finally published figures are available.
13. (1) The Election Commission may, from time to time, by notification in the Official
Gazette,—
(a) correct any printing mistake in any order made under section 12 or any error
arising therein from inadvertent slip or ommission; and
(b) where the boundaries or name of any territorial division mentioned in any
such order are or is altered, make such amendments as appear to it to be necessary or
expedient for bringing such order up-to-date.
(2) Every notification under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is
issued, before the Legislative Assembly.
14. (1) The persons entitled to vote at an election of members shall be the persons
entitled by virtue of the provisions of the Constitution and the Representation of the People
Act, 1950, to be registered as voters at elections to the House of people.
(2) The electoral roll for every constituency shall consist of so much of the electoral
roll for an Assembly constituency of the Legislative Assembly of the State of Assam as
relates to the areas comprised within each such Constituency and it shall not be necessary
to prepare or revise separately the electoral roll for any such constituency.
15. Every person, whose name is for the time being entered in the electoral roll for a
constituency, shall be entitled to vote at the election of a member from that constituency.
16. A person shall not be qualified to be chosen to fill a seat in the Legislative Assembly
unless he—
(a) is a citizen of India and makes and subscribes before some person authorised
in that behalf by the Election Commission an oath or affirmation according to the form
set out for the purpose in the First Schedule;
(b) is not less than twenty-five years of age; and
(c) is an elector in any constituency in Karbi Dimanchal.
17. The provisions of Part I, Chapter III and IV of Part II and Parts III to XI of the
Representation of the People Act, 1951, and of any rules and orders made thereunder for
the time being in force, shall apply to and in relation to the elections to the Legislative
Assembly of  Karbi Dimanchal as they apply to and in relation to an election to the legislative
Assembly of a State,  subject to such modifications as the President may, after consultation
with the Election Commission, by order, direct.
Power of
Election
Commission
to maintain
delimitation
orders up-to-
date.
Electors and
electoral rolls.
Right to vote.
Qualification
for
Membership.
Election to
the
Legislative
Assembly.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

6
18. The Legislative Assembly, unless sooner dissolved, shall continue for five years
from the date appointed for its first meeting and no longer, and the expiration of the said
period of five years shall operate as a dissolution of the Legislative Assembly:
Provided that the said period may, while a Proclamation of Emergency issued under
clause (1) of article 352  is in operation, be extended by Parliament by law for a period not
exceeding one year at a time and not extending in any case beyond a period of six months
after the Proclamation has ceased to operate.
19. (1) The Governor shall, from time to time, summon the Legislative Assembly to
meet at such time and place as he thinks fit, but six months shall not intervene between its
last sitting in one session and the date appointed for its first sitting in the next session.
(2) The Governor may, from time to time,—
(a) prorogue the Legislative Assembly.
(b) dissolve the Legislative Assembly.
20. (1) The Governor may address the Legislative Assembly and may for that purpose
require the attendance of members.
(2) The Governor may send messages to the Legislative Assembly, whether with
respect to a Bill then pending in the Legislative Assembly or otherwise and when a message
is so sent, the Legislative Assembly shall with all convenient dispatch consider any matter
required by the message to be taken into consideration.
21. (1) At the commencement of the first session after each general election to the
Legislative Assembly and at the commencement of the first session of each year, the Governor
shall address the Legislative Assembly and inform the Assembly of the causes of its summons.
(2) Provision shall be made by the rules regulating the procedure of the Legislative
Assembly for the allotment of time for discussion of the matters referred to in such address.
22. Every Minister and the Advocate-General for Karbi Dimanchal shall have the right
to speak in, and otherwise to take part in the proceedings of, the Legislative Assembly, and
to speak in, and otherwise to take part in the proceedings of, any committee of the Legislative
Assembly of which he may be named a member, but shall not, by virtue of this section, be
entitled to vote.
O
FFICERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY
23. (1) The Legislative Assembly shall, as soon as may be, choose two members of the
Assembly to be respectively Speaker and Deputy Speaker thereof, and, so often as the office
of Speaker or Deputy Speaker becomes vacant, the Assembly shall choose another member
to be Speaker or Deputy Speaker, as the case may be.
(2) A member holding office as Speaker or Deputy Speaker of the Legislative Assembly—
(a) shall vacate his office if he ceases to be a member of the Assembly;
(b) may at any time by writing under his hand addressed, if such member is the
Speaker, to the Deputy Speaker, and if such member is the Deputy Speaker, to the
Speaker, resign his office; and
(c) may be removed from his office by a resolution of the Legislative Assembly
passed by a majority of all the then members of the Assembly:
Provided that no resolution for the purpose of clause (c) shall be moved unless at least
fourteen days' notice has been given of the intention to move the resolution:
Provided further that whenever the Legislative Assembly is dissolved, the Speaker
shall not vacate his office until immediately before the first meeting of the Assembly after the
dissolution.
(3) While the office of Speaker is vacant, the duties of the office shall be performed by
the Deputy Speaker or, if the office of the Deputy Speaker is also vacant, by such member of
the Legislative Assembly as the Governor may appoint for the purpose.
Sessions of
Legislative
Assembly,
prorogation
and
dissolution.
Right of
Governor to
address and
send messages
to Legislative
Assembly.
Special
address by the
Governor.
Rights of
Ministers as
respects
Legislative
Assembly.
Speaker and
Deputy
Speaker of
Legislative
Assembly.
Duration of
the
Legislative
Assembly.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

7
(4) During the absence of the Speaker from any sitting of the Legislative Assembly, the
Deputy Speaker or, if he is also absent, such person as may be determined by the rules of
procedure of the Legislative Assembly, or, if no such person is present, such other person as
may be determined by the Legislative Assembly, shall act as Speaker.
(5) There shall be paid to the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the Legislative
Assembly such salaries and allowances as may be respectively fixed by the Legislature of
Karbi Dimanchal by law and, until provision in that behalf is so made, such salaries and
allowances as the Governor may, by order, determine.
24. (1) At any sitting of the Legislative Assembly, while any resolution for the removal
of the Speaker from his office is under consideration, the Speaker, or, while any resolution for
the removal of the Deputy Speaker from his office is under consideration, the Deputy Speaker,
shall not, though he is present, preside, and the provisions of sub-section (4) of section 23
shall apply in relation to every such sitting as they apply in relation to a sitting from which
the Speaker or, as the case may be, the Deputy Speaker is absent.
(2) The Speaker shall have the right to speak in, and otherwise to take part in the
proceedings of, the Legislative Assembly while any resolution for his removal from office is
under consideration in the Legislative Assembly and shall, notwithstanding anything in
section 27, be entitled to vote only in the first instance on such resolution or on any other
matter during such proceedings but not in the case of an equality of votes.
25. (1) The Legislative Assembly shall have a separate secretarial staff.
(2) The Legislature of Karbi Dimanchal may by law regulate the recruitment, and the
conditions of service of persons appointed, to the secretarial staff of the Legislative Assembly.
(3) Until provision is made by the Legislature of Karbi Dimanchal under sub-section
(2), the Governor may, after consultation with the Speaker of the Legislative Assembly, make
rules regulating the recruitment, and the conditions of service of persons appointed, to the
secretarial staff of the Legislative Assembly, and any rules so made shall have effect subject
to the provisions of any law made under and said sub-section.
26. The Karbi Dimanchal Autonomous State shall have its own department of personnel
administration and as such shall have own service cadre and shall be known as "Karbi
Dimanchal Public Service Commission".
27. The Karbi Dimanchal Autonomous State shall have its own police cadre to be
known as Karbi Dimanchal Police Cadre which shall be recruited by the Karbi Dimanchal
Public Service Commission.
CONDUCT OF BUSINESS
28. Every member of the Legislative Assembly shall, before taking his seat, make and
subscribe before the Governor, or some person appointed in that behalf by him, an oath or
affirmation according to the form set out for the purpose in the First Schedule.
29. (1) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, all questions at any sitting of the
Legislative Assembly shall be determined by a majority of votes of the members present and
voting other than the Speaker or person acting as such.
(2) The Speaker or person acting as such shall not vote in the first instance, but shall
have and exercise a casting vote in the case of an equality of votes.
(3) The Legislative Assembly shall have power to act notwithstanding any vacancy in
the membership thereof, and any proceedings in the Legislative Assembly shall be valid
notwithstanding that it is discovered subsequently that some person who was not entitled
so to do sat or voted or otherwise took part in the proceedings.
(4) Until the Legislature of Karbi Dimanchal by law otherwise provides, the quorum to
constitute a meeting of the Legislative Assembly shall be ten members.
(5) If at any time during a meeting of the Legislative Assembly there is no quorum, it
shall be the duty of the Speaker or person acting as such either to adjourn the Assembly or
suspend the meeting until there is a quorum.
Speaker and
Deputy
Speaker not
to preside
while a
resolution for
his removal
from office is
under
consideration.
Secretariat of
Legislative
Assembly.
Public Service
Commission.
Police Cadre.
Oath or
Affirmation
by Members.
V oting in
Assembly,
power of
Assembly to
act
notwithstanding
vacancies and
quorum.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

8
DISQUALIFICATIONS  OF  MEMBERS
30. (1) No person shall be a member of Parliament or of the Legislative Assembly of the
State of Assam and also of the Legislative Assembly of Karbi Dimanchal, and if a person is
chosen a member of Parliament or of the Legislative Assembly of Assam and also of the
Legislative Assembly of Karbi Dimanchal, then, at the expiration of such period, as may be
specified in rules made by the President, that person's seat in Parliament or, as the case may
be, in the Legislative Assembly of Assam shall become vacant unless he has previously
resigned his seat in the Legislative Assembly of Karbi Dimanchal.
(2) If a member of the Legislative Assembly—
(a) becomes subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned in section 31, or
(b) resigns his seat by writing under his hand addressed to the Speaker, his seat
shall thereupon become vacant.
(3) If for a period of sixty days a member of the Legislative Assembly is, without
permission of the Legislative Assembly, absent from all meetings thereof, the Assembly may
declare his seat vacant:
Provided that in computing the said period of sixty days no account shall be taken of
any period during which the Legislative Assembly is prorogued or is adjourned for more
than four consecutive days.
31. (1) A person shall be disqualified for being chosen as, and for being, a member of
the Legislative Assembly—
(a) if he holds any office of profit under the Government of India or the Government
of any State or the Government of Karbi Dimanchal other than an office declared by the
Legislature of Karbi Dimanchal by law not to disqualify its holder;
(b) if he is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court;
(c) if he is an undischarged insolvent;
(d) if he is not a citizen of India, or has voluntarily acquired the citizenship of a
foreign State or is under any acknowledgement of allegiance or adherence to a foreign
State;
(e) if he is so disqualified by or under any of the provisions of Chapter III of
Part II of the Representation of the People Act, 1951, as applied to and in relation to the
Legislative Assembly by section 17.
(2) For the purposes of this section, a person shall not be deemed to hold an office of
profit under the Government of India or the Government of any State or the Government of
Karbi Dimanchal by reason only, that he is a Minister either for the Union or for such State or
for Karbi Dimanchal.
(3) If any question arises as to whether a member has become disqualified for being
such a member under the provisions of sub-section (1), the question shall be referred for the
decision of the Governor and his decision shall be final.
(4) Before giving any decision on any such question, the Governor shall obtain the
opinion of the Election Commission and shall act according to such opinion.
32. If a person sits or votes as a member of the Legislative Assembly before he has
complied with the requirements of section 28, or when he knows that he is not qualified or
that he is disqualified for membership thereof, or that he is prohibited from so doing by the
provisions of any law made by Parliament or the Legislature of Karbi Dimanchal, he shall be
liable in respect of each day on which he so sits or votes, to a penalty of five hundred rupees
to be recovered as a debt due to Karbi Dimanchal.
V acation of
seats.
Disqualifications
for
membership.
Penalty for
sitting and
voting before
making an
oath or
affirmation or
when not
qualified or
when
disqualified.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

9
33. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and to the rules and standing orders
regulating the procedure of the Legislature of Karbi Dimanchal, there shall be freedom of
speech in the Legislative Assembly of Karbi Dimanchal.
(2) No member of the Legislative Assembly of Karbi Dimanchal shall be liable to any
proceedings in any court in respect of anything said or any vote given by him in the Assembly
or any committee thereof, and no person shall be so liable in respect of the publication by or
under the authority of the Assembly of any report, paper, votes or proceedings.
(3) In other respects, the powers, privileges and immunities of the Legislative Assembly
and of the members and the committees thereof shall be such as may from time to time be
defined by the Legislature of Karbi Dimanchal by law, and until so defined, shall be those for
the time being enjoyed by the House of the People and its members and committees.
(4) The provisions of sub-section (1),  (2)  and (3) shall apply in relation to persons
who by virtue of this Act have the right to speak in, or otherwise to take part in the proceedings
of, the Legislative Assembly or any committee thereof as they apply in relation to members
of that Assembly.
34. Members of the Legislative Assembly shall be entitled to receive such salaries and
allowances as may from time to time be determined by the Legislature of Karbi Dimanchal by
law and, until provision in that respect is so made, such salaries and allowances as the
Governor may, by order, determine.
 LEGISLATIVE  POWERS  AND  PROCEDURE
35. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Legislature of Karbi Dimanchal has
exclusive power to make laws for Karbi Dimanchal or any part thereof with respect to any of
the matters enumerated in Part A or Part B of the Second Schedule.
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Legislature of Karbi Dimanchal and the
Legislature of State of Assam also shall have power to make laws for Karbi Dimanchal or any
part thereof with respect to any of the matters enumerated in Part C of the Second Schedule.
(3) For the removal of doubts it is hereby declared that nothing in sub-section (1) or
sub-section (2) shall derogate from the powers conferred by the Constitution—
(a) on Parliament to make laws for the whole or any part of the State of Assam,
including Karbi Dimanchal, with respect to any of the matters enumerated in the Second
Schedule; or
(b) on the Legislature of the State of Assam to make laws for the whole or any
part of Assam, including Karbi Dimanchal, with respect to any of the matters enumerated
in List II or List III in the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution, except in so far as any
of the matters aforesaid falls within sub-section (1).
36. (1) The property of the Union shall, save in so far as Parliament may, by law,
otherwise provide, be exempt from all taxes imposed by Karbi Dimanchal or by any authority
within Karbi Dimanchal.
(2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall, until Parliament by law otherwise provides, prevent
any authorty within Karbi Dimanchal from levying any tax on any property of the Union to
which such property was immediately before the commencement of this Act liable or treated
as liable so long as that tax continues to be levied in Karbi Dimanchal.
(3) The property of the State of Assam shall, so long as the property of Karbi Dimanchal
in the rest of Assam in exempt from taxes imposed by the Government of Assam or by any
authority within the State of Assam, be exempt from all taxes imposed by Karbi Dimanchal or
by any authority within Karbi Dimanchal.
(4) No vehicle registered at any place in the State of Assam, not being a place in Karbi
Dimanchal, and transiting through Karbi Dimanchal shall be liable to any tax under any law
Powers,
privileges,
etc. of
members.
Salaries and
allowances of
members.
Extent of
legislative
power.
Exemption
from taxation
of properties
of the Union
and the State
of Assam and
of certain
vehicles
registered in
Assam or
Karbi
Dimanchal.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

10
enacted by the Legislature of Karbi Dimanchal so long as any vehicle registered at any place
in Karbi Dimanchal and transiting through the territory of Assam (not comprised in Karbi
Dimanchal) is exempt from payment of any tax under any law enacted by the Legislature of
the State of Assam.
37. (1) If any provision of a law made by the Legislature of Karbi Dimanchal is repugnant
to any provision of a law made by Parliament which Parliament is competent to enact, or to
any provision of any existing law with respect to one of the matters enumerated in the
Concurrent List in the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution, then, subject to the provisions
of sub-section (2), the law made by Parliament, whether passed before or after the law made
by the Legislature of Karbi Dimanchal, or, as the case may be, the existing law, shall prevail
and the law made by the Legislature of Karbi Dimanchal shall, to the extent of the repugnancy,
be void.
(2) Where a law made by the Legislature of Karbi Dimanchal with respect  to one of the
matters enumerated in the Concurrent List in the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution,
which the Legislature of Karbi Dimanchal is competent to enact under this Act contains any
provision repugnant to the provisions of an earlier law made by Parliament or an existing law
with respect to that matter, then, the law so made by the Legislature of Karbi Dimanchal shall,
if it has been reserved for the consideration of the President and has received his assent,
prevail in Karbi Dimanchal:
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall prevent Parliament from enacting at
any time any law with respect to the same matter, including a law adding to, amending,
varying or repealing the law so  made by the Legislature of Karbi Dimanchal.
38. Where a law made by the Legislature of Karbi Dimanchal with respect to one of the
matters enumerated in Part C of the Second Schedule contains any provision repugnant to
the provision of an earlier law made by the Legislature of the State of Assam which that
Legislature is competent to enact, or to any provision of any existing law with respect to that
matter, then, the law so made by the Legislature of Karbi Dimanchal shall, to the extent of the
repugnancy, be void unless the law has received assent under section 41 after the Governor
has obtained the advice of the Chief Minister of Assam:
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall prevent the Legislature of the
State of Assam from enacting at any time any law with respect to the same matter including
a law adding to, amending, varying or repealing the law so made by the Legislature of Karbi
Dimanchal.
Explanation 1.—In this section and in sections 37 and 61, "existing law" means any
law, Ordinance, order, bye-law, rule or regulation passed or made before the appointed day
by any Legislature, authority or person having power to make such a law, Ordinance, order,
bye-law, rule or regulation.
Explanation 2.—In this section and in sections 41 and 52, the reference to the advice
of the Chief Minister of Assam shall, while a Proclamation issued in relation to the State of
Assam under clause (1) of article 356 of the Constitution is in operation, be construed as a
reference to the instructions from the President.
39. (1) A Bill or amendment shall not be introduced into, or moved in, the Legislative
Assembly except on the recommendation of the Governor if such Bill or amendment makes
provisions dealing with any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the imposition, abolition, remission, alteration or regulation of any tax;
(b) the regulation of the borrowing of money or the giving of any guarantee by
Karbi Dimanchal, or the amendment of the law with respect to any financial obligations
undertaken or to be undertaken by Karbi Dimanchal;
(c) the custody of the Consolidated Fund or the Contingency Fund of Karbi
Dimanchal, the payment of moneys into, or withdrawal of moneys from, any such
Fund;
Inconsistency
between laws
made by
Parliament
and laws made
by the
legislature of
Karbi
Dimanchal.
Inconsistency
between laws
made by the
legislature of
the state of
Assam and
laws made by
the legislature
of Karbi
Dimanchal.
Special
provisions as
to financial
Bill.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

11
(d) the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of Karbi Dimanchal;
(e) the declaring of any expenditure to be expenditure charged on the Consolidated
Fund of Karbi Dimanchal or the increasing of the amount of any such expenditure;
(f) the receipt of money on account of the Consolidated Fund of Karbi Dimanchal
or the public account of Karbi Dimanchal or the custody or issue of such money:
Provided that no recommendation shall be required under this sub-section for the
moving of an amendment making provision for the reduction or abolition of any tax.
(2) A Bill or amendment shall not be deemed to make provision for any of the matters
specified in sub-section ( 1) by reason only that it provides for the imposition of fines or
other pecuniary penalties, or for the demand or payment of fees of licences or fees for
services rendered, or by reason that it provides for the imposition, abolition, remission,
alteration or regulation of any tax by any local authority or body for local purposes.
(3) A Bill, which if enacted and brought into operation, would involve expenditure from
the Consolidated Fund of Karbi Dimanchal, shall not be passed by the Legislative Assembly
unless the Governor has recommended to the Assembly for the consideration of the Bill.
40. A Bill pending in the Legislative Assembly shall not lapse by reason of the
prorogation of the Assembly, but shall lapse on a dissolution thereof.
41. When a Bill has been passed by the Legislative Assembly, it shall be presented to
the Governor and the Governor shall declare either that he assents to the Bill or that he
withholds assent therefrom or that he reserves the Bill for the consideration of the President:
Provided that the Governor may, as soon as possible after the presentation to him of
the bill for assent, return the Bill if it is not a Money Bill together with a message requesting
that the Legislative Assembly will reconsider the Bill or any specified provisions thereof and,
in particular, will consider the desirability of introducing any such amendments as he may
recommend in his message and, when a Bill is so returned, the Legislative Assembly shall
reconsider the Bill accordingly, and if the Bill is passed again by the Assembly with or
without amendment and presented to the Governor for assent, the Governor shall not—
(a) give assent in the case of a Bill containing provisions of the nature referred
to in section 38 execpt after obtaining the advice of the Chief Minister of Assam; and
(b) withhold assent in the case of any other Bill.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section and section 42, a Bill shall be deemed
to be a Money Bill if it contains only provisions dealing with all or any of the matters
specified in sub-section (1) of section 39 or any matter incidental to any of those matters and
there is endorsed thereon the certificate of the Speaker of the Legislative Assembly signed
by him that it is a Money Bill :
Provided that a Bill shall not be deemed to be a Money Bill by reason only that it
provides for the imposition of fines or other pecuniary penalties, or for the demand or
payment of fees for licences or fees for services rendered or by reason that it provides for the
imposition, abolition, remission, alteration, or regulation of any tax by any local authority or
body for local purposes.
42. When a Bill is reserved by the Governor for the consideration of the President, the
President shall declare either that he assents to the Bill or that he withholds assent therefrom:
Provided that where the Bill is not a Money Bill, the President may direct the Governor
to return the Bill to the Legislative Assembly together with such a message as is referred to
in section 41, and when a Bill is so returned, the Legislative Assembly shall reconsider it
accordingly within a period of six months from the date of receipt of such message, and if it
is again passed by the Legislative Assembly with or without amendment, it shall be presented
again to the President for his consideration.
Procedure as
to lapsing of
Bills.
Assent to
Bills.
Bills reserved
for
consideration.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

12
43. No Act of the Legislature of Karbi Dimanchal and no provision in any such Act
shall be invalid by reason only that some recommendation or previous sanction required by
the Constitution or this Act was not given, if assent to that Act was given—
(a) where the recommendation required was that of the Governor, either by the
Governor or by the President; and
(b) where the recommendation or previous sanction required was that of the
President, by the President.
PROCEDURE  IN  FINANCIAL  MATTERS
44. (1) The Governor shall in respect of every financial year cause to be laid before the
Legislative Assembly a statement of the estimated receipts and expenditure of Karbi Dimanchal
for that year, hereinafter referred to as "the annual financial statement".
(2) The estimates of expenditure embodied in the annual financial statement shall
show separately—
(a) the sums required to meet expenditure described by this Act as expenditure
charged upon the Consolidated Fund of Karbi Dimanchal; and
(b) the sums required to meet other expenditure proposed to be made from the
Consolidated Fund of Karbi Dimanchal, and shall distinguish expenditure on revenue
account from other expenditure.
(3) The following expenditure shall be expenditure charged upon the Consolidated
Fund of Karbi Dimanchal—
(a) the salaries and allowances of the Speaker and Deputy Speaker of the
Legislative Assembly;
(b) debt charges for which the Autonomous State in liable including interest,
sinking fund charges and redemption charges, and other expenditure relating to the
raising of loans and the service and redemption of debt;
(c) any sums required to satisfy any judgement, decree or award of any Court or
arbitral tribunal; and
(d) any other expenditure declared by the Constitution or by the Legislature of
Karbi Dimanchal to be so charged.
45. (1) So much of the estimates as relates to expenditure charged upon the
Consolidated Fund of Karbi Dimanchal shall not be submitted to the vote of the Legisalative
Assembly, but nothing in this sub-section shall be construed as preventing the discussion
in the legislative Assembly of any of those estimates.
(2) So much of the said estimates as relates to other expenditure shall be submitted in
the form of demands for grants to the Legislative Assembly, and the Legislative Assembly
shall have power to assent, or to  refuse to assent, to any demand, or to assent to any
demand subject to a reduction of the amount specified therein.
(3) No demand for a grant shall be made except on the recommendation of the Governor.
46. (1) As soon as may be after the grants under section 43 have been made by the
Legislative Assembly, there shall be introduced a Bill to provide for the appropriation out of
the Consolidated Fund of Karbi Dimanchal of all moneys required to meet—
(a) the grants so made by the legislative Assembly; and
(b) the expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of Karbi Dimanchal,
but not exceeding in any case the amount shown in the statement previously laid before the
Assembly.
Requirements
as to sanction
and
recommendation
to be regarded
as matters of
procedure
only.
Annual
financial
statement.
Procedure in
Legislative
Assembly with
respect to
estimates.
Appropriation
Bills.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

13
(2) No amendment shall be proposed to any such Bill in the Legislative Assembly
which will have the effect of varying the amount or altering the destination of any grant so
made or of varying the amount of any expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of
Karbi Dimanchal, and the decision of the person presiding as to whether an amendment is
inadmissible under this sub-section shall be final.
(3) Subject to the provisions of sections 47 and 48, no money shall be withdrawn from
the Consolidated Fund of Karbi Dimanchal except under appropriation made by law passed
in accordance with the provisions of this section.
47. (1) The Governor Shall,—
(a) if the amount authorised by any law made in accordance with the provisions
of section 46 to be expended for a particular service for the current financial year is
found to be insufficient for the purposes of that year or when a need has arisen during
the current financial year for supplementary or additional expenditure upon some new
service not contemplated in the annual financial statement for the year, or
(b) if any money has been spent on any service during a financial year in excess
of the amount granted for that service and for the year,
cause to be laid before the Legislative Assembly another statement showing the estimated
amount of that expenditure or cause to be presented to the Legisaltive Assembly a demand
for such excess, as the case may be.
(2) The provisions of sections 44, 45 and 46 shall have effect in relation to any such
statement and expenditure or demand and also to any law to be made authorising the
appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of Karbi Dimanchal to meet such
expenditure or the grant in respect of such deamnd as they have effect in relation to the
annual financial statement and the expenditure mentioned therein or  to a demand for a grant
and the law to be made for the authorisation of appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated
Fund of Karbi Dimanchal to meet such expenditure or grant.
48. (1) Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of this Part, the Legislative
Assembly shall have power—
(a) to make any grant in advance in respect of the estimated expenditure for a
part of any financial year pending the completion of the procedure prescribed in
section 45 for the voting of such grant and the passing of the law in accordance with
the provisions of section 44 in relation to that expenditure;
(b) to make a grant for meeting an unexpected demand upon the resources of the
autonomous State when on account of the magnitude or the indefinite character of the
service the demand cannot be stated with the details ordinarily given in an annual
financial statement; and
(c) to make an exceptional grant which forms no part of the current service of any
financial year; and the Legislature of Karbi Dimanchal shall have power to authorise
by law the withdrawal of moneys from the Consolidated Fund of Karbi Dimanchal for
the purpose for which the said grants are made.
(2) The provisions of sections 45 and 46 shall have effect in relation to the making of
any grant under sub-section (1) and to any law to be made under that sub-section, as they
have effect in relation to the making of a grant with regard to any expenditure mentioned in
the annual financial statement and the law to be made for the authorisation of appropriation
of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of Karbi Dimanchal to meet such expenditure.
PROCEDURE  GENERALLY
49. (1) The Legislative Assembly may make rules for regulating, subject to the provisions
of this Act, its procedure and the conduct of its business including the language or languages
to be used in the Legislative Assembly.
Supplementary,
additional or
excess grants.
Votes on
account and
exceptional
grant.
Rules of
procedure.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

14
(2) Until rules are made under sub-section ( 1), the rules of procedure and standing
orders with respect to the Legislative Assembly of the State of Assam in force immediately
before the commencement of this Act shall have effect in relation to the Legislative Assembly
subject to such modifications and adaptations as may be made therein by the Governor.
50. No discussion shall take place in the Legislative Assembly with respect to the
conduct of any Judge of the Supreme Court, or of a High Court, in the discharge of his duties.
51. (1) The validity of any proceeding in the Legislative Assembly shall not to be
called in question on the ground of any alleged irregularity of procedure.
(2) No officer or member of the Legislative Assembly in whom powers are vested by or
under this Act for regulating procedure or the conduct of business or for maintaining order,
in the Legislative Assembly shall be subject to the jurisdiction of any court in respect of the
exercise by him of those powers.
LEGISLATIVE  POWERS  OF  THE  GOVERNOR
52. (1) If at any time, except when the Legislative Assembly is in session, the Governor
is satisfied that circumstances exist which render it necessary for him to take immediate
action, he may promulgate such Ordinances as the circumstances appear to him to require:
Provided that the Governor shall not without instructions from the President, promulgate
any such Ordinance, if—
(a) a Bill containing the same provisions would under the Constitution or this
Act have required the previous sanction of the President for the introduction thereof
into the Legislative Assembly of Karbi Dimanchal; or
(b) he would have deemed it necessary to reserve a Bill containing the same
provisions for the consideration of the President;  or
(c) an Act of the Legislature of Karbi Dimanchal containing the same provisions
would under this Act have been invalid unless, having been reserved for the
consideration of the President, it had received the assent of the President:
Provided further that the Governor shall not, except on the advice of the Chief Minister
of Assam, promulgate any such Ordinance if with respect to  a Bill containing the same
provisions he would have deemed it necessary under this Act to obtain the advice of the
Chief Minister before assenting thereto.
(2) An Ordinance promulgated under this section shall have the same force and effect
as an Act of the Legislative Assembly assented to by the Governor, but every such
Ordinance—
(a) shall be laid before the Legislative Assembly and shall cease to operate at the
expiration of six weeks from the reassembly of the Legislative Assembly or if before the
expiration of that period a resolution disapproving it is passed by the Legislative
Assembly, upon the passing of the resolution; and
(b) may be withdrawn at any time by the Governor.
(3) If and so far as an Ordinance under this section makes any provision which would
not be valid if enacted in an Act of the Legislature of Karbi Dimanchal assented to by the
Governor, it shall be void.
Provided that—
(a) for the purposes of section 37 relating to the effect of an Act of the Legislature
of Karbi Dimanchal which is repugnant to an Act of Parliament or an existing law with
respect to a matter enumerated in the Concurrent List in the Seventh Schedule to the
Restrictions
on discussion
in the
Legislative
Assembly.
Courts not to
enquire into
the
proceedings of
Legislative
Assembly.
Power of
governor to
promulgate
ordinances
during recess
of Legislative
Assembly.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

15
Constitution, an Ordinance promulgated under this section in pursuance of instructions
from the President shall be deemed to be an Act of the Legislature which has been
reserved for the consideration of the President and assented to by him;
(b) for the purposes of section 38 relating to the effect of an Act of the Legislature
of Karbi Dimanchal which is repugnant to an Act of the Legislature of the State of
Assam or an existing law with respect to a matter enumerated in Part C of the Second
Schedule, an Ordinance promulgated under this section on the advice of the Chief
Minister of Assam shall be deemed to be an Act of the Legislature which has been
assented to on the advice of the Chief Minister.
PART IV
F
INANCIAL PROVISIONS
53. (1) Subject to the provisions of section 54, all revenue received by the Government
of Karbi Dimanchal, all loans raised by that Government by the issue of treasury bills, loans
or ways and means advances and all moneys received by that Government in repayment of
loans shall form one consolidated fund to be entitled "the Consolidated Fund of Karbi
Dimanchal".
(2) All other public moneys received by or on behalf of the Government of Karbi
Dimanchal shall be credited to the public account of Karbi Dimanchal.
(3) No moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of Karbi Dimanchal shall be appropriated
except in accordance with law and for the purposes and in the manner provided in this Act.
54. The Legislature of Karbi Dimanchal may, by law, establish a Contingency Fund in
the nature of an imprest to be entitled "the Contingency Fund of Karbi Dimanchal" into
which shall be paid from time to time such sums as may be determined by such law, and the
said Fund shall be placed at the disposal of the Governor to enable advances to be made by
him out of such Fund for the purposes of meeting unforeseen expenditure pending
authorisation of such expenditure by the Legislature of Karbi Dimanchal by law under section
47 or section 48.
55. All moneys received by or deposited with—
(a) any officer employed in connection with the affairs of Karbi Dimanchal in his
capacity as such, other than revenues or public moneys raised or received by the
Government of Karbi Dimanchal, or
(b) any court within Karbi Dimanchal to the credit of any cause, matter, account
or persons,
shall be paid into the public account of Karbi Dimanchal.
56. The custody of the Consolidated Fund and the Contingency Fund of Karbi
Dimanchal, the payment of moneys into such Funds, the withdrawal of moneys therefrom,
the custody of public moneys other than those credited to such Funds received by or on
behalf of the Government of Karbi Dimanchal, their payment into the public account of Karbi
Dimanchal and the withdrawal of moneys from such account and all other matters connected
with or ancillary to matters aforesaid shall be regulated by law made by the Legislature of
Karbi Dimanchal, and, until provision in that behalf is so made, shall be regulated by rules
made by the Governor.
57. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, any tax on the consumption or
sale of electricity relatable to entry 53 in the State List in the Seventh Schedule to the
Constitution, and any tax on the sale or purchase of goods relatable to entry 54 in the said
List levied by the Government of Assam shall be collected within Karbi Dimanchal, and the
proceeds in any financial year of any such tax leviable within Karbi Dimanchal shall not form
part of the Consolidated Fund of Assam, but shall form part of the Consolidated Fund of
Karbi Dimanchal.
Consolidated
Fund.
Contingency
Fund.
Custody of
suitors'
deposits and
other moneys
received by
public servants
and courts.
Custody, etc.,
of
Consolidated
Fund,
Contingency
Fund and
moneys
credited to the
public
accounts.
Certain taxes
levied by
Assam to be
appropriated
by Karbi
Dimanchal.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

16
(2) Where a tax relatable to entry 54 in the State List aforesaid levied by the Government
of Assam is collected by that Government at the first point of sale or purchase of goods, such
portion of the tax so collected as may be agreed upon by the Governments of Assam and
Karbi Dimanchal or in default of such agreement, as the Central Government may determine
shall be payable to Karbi Dimanchal.
(3) The laws with respect to the taxes referred to in sub-section (1) shall have effect
subject to such exceptions and modifications as the Central Government, may, by order,
specify for the purpose of giving effect to the provisions of that sub-section.
58. (1) The grants-in-aid under clause (1) of article 275 and the share of the taxes on
income, the distributable Union duties of excise, the additional duties of excise on goods of
special importance and estate duty payable to the State of Assam under the Constitution
(Distribution of Revenues) Order, 1969, the Union 'Duties of Excise (Distribution) Act,
1962, the Additional Duties of Excise (Goods of Special Importance) Act, 1957, the Estate
Duty (Distribution) Act, 1962,  shall be construed, as from the appointed day, as payable to
the State of Assam and the Autonomous State of Karbi  Dimanchal in such proportion as the
President may, by order, determine.
(2) Every order made by the President under sub-section (1) shall be laid before
Parliament as soon as may be after it is made.
59. The Governor may, at any time before the appointed day, authorise such expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of Karbi Dimanchal as he deems necessary for a period of not
more than six months beginning with the appointed day pending the sanction of that
expenditure by the Legislative Assembly:
Provided that the Governor may, after the appointed day, authorise such further
expenditure as he deems necessary from the Consolidated Fund of Karbi Dimanchal for any
period not extending beyond the said period of six months.
PART V
A
SSETS AND LIABILITIES
60. The assets and liabilities of the State of Assam immediately before the appointed
day shall be apportioned between that State and Karbi Dimanchal in accordance with the
provisions contained in the Third Schedule.
PART VI
A
DMINISTRATIVE  RELA TIONS
61. The executive power of Karbi Dimanchal shall be so exercised as to ensure
compliance with the laws made by Parliament, the Legislature of the State of Assam and any
existing laws which apply in Karbi Dimanchal, and the executive power of the Union and of
the State of Assam shall extend to the giving of such directions to Karbi Dimanchal as may
appear to the Government of India or the Government of Assam, as the case may be, to be
necessary for that purpose.
62. The executive power of Karbi Dimanchal shall be so exercised as not to impede or
prejudice the exercise of the executive power of the Union  or the Government of Assam, as
the case may be, and the executive power of the Union and the State of Assam shall extend
to the giving of such directions to Karbi Dimanchal as may appear to the Government of
India or the Government of Assam, as the case may be, to be necessary for that purpose.
63. Notwithstanding anything in this Act,—
(a) The Government of Assam may, with the consent of the Government of Karbi
Dimanchal, entrust either conditionally or unconditionally to that Government or to its
officers functions in relation to any matter to which the executive power of the State of
Assam extends;
Distribution of
revenues.
Authorisation
of expenditure
pending its
sanction by
Legislative
Assembly.
Apportionment
of assets and
liabilities.
Obligation of
Karbi
Dimanchal,
the State of
Assam and the
Union.
Control over
the
autonomous
state in
certain cases.
Entrustmen
of functions.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

17
(b) the Government of Karbi Dimanchal may, with the consent of the Government
of Assam, entrust either conditionally or unconditionally to that Government or to its
officers functions in relation to any matter to which the executive power of Karbi
Dimanchal extends.
PART VII
T
RANSITIONAL PROVISIONS
64. (1) Until the Legislative Assembly of Karbi Dimanchal has been duly constituted
and summoned to meet for the first session under the provisions of Part III, there shall be
a Provisional Legislative Assembly which shall consist of not less than thirty five and not
more than fifty five persons as the Central Government may, after consultation with the
Election Commission, by order, determine, and such persons shall be elected in the manner
specified in sub-section (2).
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (1), the members of the Provisional
Legislative Assembly shall be elected in the following manner, namely:—
(a) there shall be an electoral college for each autonomous district within Karbi
Dimanchal which shall consist of the elected members of the District Council thereof,
and each electoral college shall elect such number of persons to the Provisional
Legislative Assembly as the President may, after consultation with the Election
Commission, by order, determine;
(b) the election of members of the Provisional Legislative Assembly shall be in
accordance with the system of proportional representation by means of the single
transferable vote and shall be subject to such rules as the Central Government may,
after consultation with the Election Commission, make in this behalf.
(3) The Central Government may nominate to the Provisional Legislative Assembly
not more than three persons, not being persons in the service of the Government to represent
any unrepresented communities in Karbi Dimanchal which, in its opinion, need
representation in the Assembly.
(4) No person shall be qualified to be chosen as a member of the Provisional Legislative
Assembly unless he is a person whose name is for the time being entered in the electoral roll
for so much of any constituency of the Legislative Assembly of Assam as is comprised
within Karbi Dimanchal and is not less than twenty-five years of age.
(5) If owing to death, resignation or otherwise, the office of a member of the Provisional
Legislative Assembly falls vacant, it may be filled up as soon as practicable under and in
accordance with the foregoing provisions of this section.
(6) The term of office of the members of the Provisional Legislative Assembly shall
expire immediately before the first meeting of the Legislative Assembly duly constituted
under this Act.
(7) The election by the electoral college under this section shall not be called in
question on the ground merely of the existence of a vacancy in the membership of any
District Council forming part of the electoral college.
(8) The Provisional Legislative Assembly constituted under this section shall, for
so long it is in existence, be deemed to be the Legislative Assembly duly constituted
under this Act, and accordingly the provisions of Part III shall, so far as may be, apply in
relation to the Provisional Legislative Assembly as they apply in relation to the Legislative
Assembly.
Provisions as
to provisional
Legislative
Assembly.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

18
PART VIII
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
65. The Central Government may, in consultation with the Governments of Assam and
Karbi Dimanchal, by order, constitute a committee consisting of such number of persons as
it may think fit for advising the two Governments on matters of common interest with respect
to Diphu and Haflong in the field of education and water supply in particular, and with
respect to its development and administration in general.
66. All courts and tribunals and all authorities discharging lawful functions throughout
Karbi Dimanchal or any part thereof immediately before the appointed day shall, unless their
continuance is inconsistent with the provisions of this Act or until other provision is made
by a competent authority, continue to exercise their respective functions.
67. (1) Every person who being a member of All India Service is for the time being
borne on the Assam State Cadre of that service or is otherwise serving in connection with the
affairs of the State of Assam as a member of Class I service of that State may be required by
the Government of that State to serve in connection with the affairs of Karbi Dimanchal for
such period or periods as the Government of Assam may, by order, direct:
Provided that no such order shall be made—
(a) before the appointed day, except with the approval of the Central Government;
and
(b) on or after the appointed day, except in accordance with such rules as may be
made by the Central Government after consultation with the Governments of Assam
and Karbi Dimanchal.
(2) Subject to any general or special order which the Central Government may make in
this behalf, the control over any such person as it referred to in sub-section (1) shall, for so
long as he is required to serve in connection with the affairs of Karbi Dimanchal, be vested
in the Government of Karbi Dimanchal.
(3) Such persons serving in connection with the affairs of the State of Assam
immediately before the appointed day, not being a person referred to in sub-section (1), as
may be determined by agreement between the Government of Assam and the Government of
Karbi Dimanchal or in default of agreement, by the Central Government, may, notwithstanding
anything in the terms of their appointments or their conditions of service, be required to
serve in connection with the affairs of the Autonomous State.
(4) All previous service rendered by a person referred to in sub-section (3) in connection
with the affairs of the State of Assam shall be deemed to have been rendered in connection
with the affairs of the Autonomous State for the purposes of the rules regulating his conditions
of service.
(5) Nothing in sub-sections ( 3) and ( 4) shall be deemed to affect the power of the
Legislature of Karbi Dimanchal or the Governor to determine the conditions of service of
persons serving in connection with the affairs of Karbi Dimanchal:
Provided that the conditions of service applicable immediately before the appointed
day to any person referred to in sub-section ( 3) shall not be varied to his disadvantage
except with the previous approval of the Government of Assam.
68. (1) All laws in force immediately before the appointed day in the Autonomous State
shall continue to be in force therein until altered, repealed or amended by a competent
Legislature or other competent authority.
(2) For the purpose of facilitating the application in relation to the Autonomous State
of any law made before the appointed day, the appropriate Government may, within two
years from that day, by order, make such adaptations or modifications of the law, whether by
Special
committee for
development
of Diphu and
Haflong.
Provisions as
to
continuance
of courts.
Provisions
relating to
services.
Continuance
of existing
laws and their
adaptations.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

19
way of repeal or amendment, as may be necessary or expedient and thereupon every such
law shall have effect subject to the adaptations and modifications so made until altered,
repealed or amended by a competent Legislature or other competent authority.
Explanation.—In this section, the expression "appropriate Government" means as
respects any law relating to a matter enumerated in the Union List in the Seventh Schedule to
the Constitution, the Central Government, as respects any law relating to a matter in the
Second Schedule, the Government of Karbi Dimanchal, and, as respects any other law, the
Government of Assam.
69. Subject to the other provisions contained in this Act, reference to a State (by
whatever form of words) in any of the following articles of the Constitution shall be construed
as including a reference to the Autonomous State, namely
Articles 12 to 15 (inclusive), 16 (except clause (3) thereof) 18, 19, 23, 25,  28 to 31
(inclusive), 31A, 34 to 51 (inclusive), 58, 59, 66, 73, 102, 110 (1) (f); 131, 138, 149, 150, 151, 161,
209, 210, 233, 234, 235, 237, 251, 252, 256 to 258A (inclusive), 261, 262, 263, 268, 269, 270, 272,
274 to 280 (inclusive), 282, 288, 289, 293, 296, 298 to305 (inclusive), 308 to 311 (inclusive), 320,
323 (2), 324 to 329 (inclusive), 339 to 342 (inclusive), 345 to 348 (inclusive) 350, 350A, 350B,
353, 355 to 358 (inclusive), 360, 361, 364 to 367 (inclusive).
Explanation.—Reference in any of the articles above specified to the High Court or to
the State Public Service Commission shall be construed as reference to the High Court of
Assam or the Public Service Commission of the State of Assam, as the case may be.
70. (1) The executive power which the Government of Assam may exercise under
article 298 in Karbi Dimanchal for the carrying on of any trade or business and for the
acquisition, holding and disposal of property and the making of contracts for any purpose
shall, in so far as such trade or business or such purpose is not one with respect to which the
Legislature of the State of Assam may make laws, be subject to legislation by the Legislature
of Karbi Dimanchal.
(2) The executive power which the Government of Karbi Dimanchal may exercise under
article 298 in Karbi Dimanchal for the carrying on of any trade or business and for the
acquisition, holding and disposal of property and the making of contracts for any purpose
shall, in so far as such trade or business or such purpose is not one with respect to which the
Legislature of Karbi Dimanchal may make laws, be subject also to legislation by the Legislature
of the state of Assam.
71. Where a Proclamation is issued under article 356 in respect of Karbi Dimanchal, the
President may, by the same Proclamation or a subsequent Proclamation varying it, suspend
also, in whole or in part, the operation of any of the provisions of this Act.
72. Without prejudice to the provisions of sections 68 and 73 the Central Government
may, after consulting the Government of Assam by notification in the Official Gazette, declare
that any reference to a "State" in a Central Act specified in the notification shall, in its
application to Karbi Dimanchal, be construed as a reference to the whole or any part of Karbi
Dimanchal and any reference to "State Government" in a Central Act specified in the
notification shall in its application to Karbi Dimanchal be construed as a reference to the
Central Government.
73. Notwithstanding that no provision or insufficient provision has been made under
section 68 for the adaptation of a law made before the appointed day, any court, tribunal or
authority required or empowered to enforce such law may, for the purpose of facilitating its
application in relation to the Autonomous State, construe the law in such manner not affecting
the substance as may be necessary or proper in regard to the matter before the court, tribunal
or authority, as the case my be.
Autonomous
State to be a
state for
certain
purposes of
the
Constitution.
Power of
Governments
of Assam and
Karbi
Dimanchal to
carry on trade,
etc. in Karbi
Dimanchal.
Power to
suspend
provisions of
this act in case
of failure of
Constitutional
machinery.
Construction
of reference
to "State" and
"State
government"
in other laws
in relation to
Karbi
Dimanchal.
Power to
construe laws.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

20
74. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law.
75. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the President,
may, by order, do anything not inconsistent with such provisions which appears to him to be
necessary or expedient for the purpose of removing the difficulty.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid before both Houses of Parliament
as soon as may be after it is made.
76. The Sixth Schedule in the Constitution shall stand amended as specified in the
Fourth Schedule.
77. In section 21A of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 in sub-section ( 1), after
words "any State", the brackets and words "(including the Autonomous State of Karbi
Dimanchal)" shall be inserted.
78. In section 16 of the State Reorganisation Act 1956, in sub-section (1), for clause
(d), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
"(d) in the case of the Eastern Zone,—
(i) The Chief Minister and another Minister of the Aunonomous State of Karbi
Dimanchal to be nominated by the Governor of Assam and if there is no Council of
Ministers therein, not more than two members from the Autonomous State of Karbi
Dimanchal to be nominated by the President; and
(ii) the person for the time being holding the office of the Adviser to the Governor
of Assam for Tribal areas."
79. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
to give effect to the provisions of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two successive sessions, and, if before the expiry of
the session in which it is so laid or the session immediately following, both Houses agree in
making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made,
the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case
may be, so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to
the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Effect of
provisions of
act
inconsistent
with other
laws.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Amendment
of the Sixth
Schedule.
Amendment
of Act 2 of
1934.
Amendment
of Act 37 of
1956.
Power to
make Rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS  AND REASONS
Article 244A of the Constitution was inserted by the Constitution (Twenty-Second)
Amendment Act, 1969 to enable Parliament to enact a law to give effect to the scheme for
reorganisation of the State of Assam by forming within the State of Assam an autonomous
State comprising (whether wholly or in part) all or any of the tribal areas, specified in Part-I of
the table appended to Paragraph 20 of the Sixth Schedule. The present Bill has been brought
forward in pursuance of this article and seeks to establish an autonomous State to be known
as 'Karbi Dimanchal Autonomous State' within the State of Assam. As envisaged in the re-
organisation scheme, 'Karbi Dimanchal Autonomous State' will comprise the areas now
forming part of the Karbi Anglong and North Cachar Hills (now Dima Hasao) as defined in
the substantive Part 1 of Paragraph 20 of the Sixth Schedule. The legislative powers of 'Karbi
Dimanchal Autonomous State' have been set out in the second schedule to the Bill and
subject to the provisions of the Bill, the executive powers of  'Karbi Dimanchal Autonomous
State' will extend to matters with respect to which the legislature of "Karbi Dimanchal
Autonomous State', delimitation of constituencies, elections to the Assembly and its
procedure, Council of Ministers for 'Karbi Dimanchal Autonomous State', administrative
relations between the Government of Assam and 'Karbi Dimanchal Autonomous State' and
between the Central Government and the Government of 'Karbi Dimanchal Autonomous
State'. Provision has also been made for transferring to 'Karbi Dimanchal Autonomous State'
such assets and liabilities of the Assam Government in the 'Karbi Dimanchal Autonomous
State' area as are relatable to matters which fall within the purview of the Autonomous State.
Provision has also been made in the Bill for the constitution of a provisional legislative
Assembly for 'Karbi Dimanchal Autonomous State' pending general elections to the Assembly.
In order to dovetail the scheme of the Bill with the main provisions of the Constitution, the
Autonomous State will be treated as a State for certain provisions of the Constitution specified
in clause 69 of the Bill.
As indicated in the re-organisation scheme, the Fourth Schedule to the Bill contains
provisions for the amendment of the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution in order to improve
the procedures of the District Councils and make them function effectively.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; BIREN  SINGH  ENGTI
November 23, 2015.
21
PRESIDENT'S  RECOMMENDATION  UNDER  ARTICLES 117 (1),  274(1)
 AND  117  (3)  OF  THE  CONSTITUTION
————
[Copy of letter No. 11012/206/2015-NE.IV dated 27 April, 2016 from Shri Kiren Rijiju,
Minister of State in the Ministry of Home Affairs to the Secretary General, Lok Sabha].
The President, having been infromed of the subject matter of the Assam Reorganisation
(Karbi Dimanchal) Bill, 2016 by Shri Biren Singh Engti, Member of Parliament, has recommended
under articles 117(1) and 274 (1) for introduction and under article 117(3) of the Constitution
for consideration of the Bill in Lok Sabha.

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 6 of the Bill provides for constitution of Council of Ministers for State of Karbi
Dimanchal. Clause 11 provides for constitution of Legislature for State of Karbi Dimanchal.
Clauses 7, 23 and 34 provides for payment of salaries and allowances to the Ministers,
Speaker and Deputy Speaker and members of the Legislative Assembly. Clause 12 seeks to
empower the Election Commission to delimit the territorial constituencies for elections to the
Legislative Assembly of Karbi Dimanchal. It also provides for appointment of not more than
five associate members to assist the Election Commission in delimiting the constituencies.
Clause 17 provides for elections to the Legislative Assembly of Karbi Dimanchal being held
in accordance with the provisions of the Representation of the People Act, 1951. Clause 25
provides for a separate secretarial staff for the Legislative Assembly. Clause 64 provides for
setting up of a Provisional Legislative Assembly. Clause 60 provides for apportionment of
assets and liabilities of the State of Assam insofar as Karbi Dimanchal is concerned. Clause
65 provides for a special Committee for Diphu and Haflong being constituted for advising
the two Governments on matters of common interest with respect to Diphu and Haflong.
Under clause 69 Karbi Dimanchal is proposed to be treated as State for the purposes of
articles 272, 275 and 282. Clause 78 provides for representation of Karbi Dimanchal on the
Eastern Zonal Council. The Bill, therefore, if enacted would involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of the State of Karbi Dimanchal and Consolidated Fund of India. At this
stage, it is not possible to estimate the expenditure to be incurred from the Consolidated
Fund of Karbi Dimanchal as the same may be estimated when the Karbi Dimanchal Government
comes into existence. However, it is expected that a recurring expenditure of about rupees
five thousand crore per annum would be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five hundred crore per annum is also
likely to be involved.
22

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Governor to make rules for the more convenient
Transaction of Business of the Government of Karbi Dimanchal and for allocation among
Ministers of the said Business. Clause 25 empowers the Governor to make, after consultation
with the Speaker of the Legislative Assembly, rules regulating the recruitment and conditions
of service of persons appointed to the Secretarial staff of the Legislative Assembly, pending
enactment of law on the subject. Clause 49 empowers the Legislative Assembly of Karbi
Dimanchal to make rules for regulating its own procedure and conduct of business.
Clause 56 provides for rules regarding the custody, etc., of Consolidated Fund and
Contingency Fund of Karbi Dimanchal being made by the Governor pending the enactment
of legislation in this behalf. Clause 79 empowers the Central Government to make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the
delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.
23

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * *
SIXTH SCHEDULE
[Articles 244(2) and 275(1)]
Provisions as to the Administration of Tribal Areas in the States of Assam, Meghalaya,
Tripura and Mizoram
1. * * * * *
2. * * * * *
(3) The Governor may, by public notification,—
(a) include any area in [any of the Parts] of the said table,
(b) exclude any area from [any of the Parts] of the said table,
(c) create a new autonomous district,
(d) increase the area of any autonomous district,
(e) diminish the area of any autonomous district,
(f) unite two or more autonomous districts or parts thereof so as to form one
autonomous district,
[(ff) alter the name of any autonomous district,
(g) define the boundaries of any autonomous district:
Provided that no order shall be made by the Governor under clauses (c), (d), (e) and (f)
of this sub-paragraph except after consideration of the report of a Commission appointed
under sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 14 of this Schedule:
Provided further that any order made by the Governor under this sub-paragraph may
contain such incidental and consequential provisions (including any amendment of paragraph
20 and of any item in any of the Parts of the said Table) as appear to the Governor to be
necessary for giving effect to the provisions of the order.
2. There shall be a District Council for each autonomous district consisting of not more
than twenty-four members, of whom not less than three-fourth shall be elected on the basis
of adult suffrage.
* * * * * *
* * * * * *
(6) The Governor shall make rules for the first constitution of District Councils and
Regional Councils in consultation with the existing tribal Councils or other representative
tribal organisations within the autonomous districts or regions concerned, and such rules
shall provide for—
* * * * * *
(e) the term of office of members of Regional Councils;
* * * * * *
(g) the procedure and the conduct of business  (including the power to act
notwithstanding any vacancy) in the District and Regional Councils;
* * * * * *
Autonomous
districts and
autonomous
regions.
Constitution
of District
Councils and
Regional
Councils.
24
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

25
(7) The District or the Regional Council may after its first constitution make rules [with
the approval of the Governor] with regard to the matters specified in sub-paragraph (6) of
this paragraph and may also make rules with like approval regulating—
(a) the formation of subordinate local Councils or Boards and their procedure
and the conduct of their business; and
(b) generally all matters relating to the transaction of business pertaining to the
administration of the district or region, as the case may be:
Provided that until rules are made by the District or the Regional Council under this
sub-paragraph the rules made by the Governor under sub-paragraph ( 6) of this paragraph
shall have effect in respect of elections to, the officers and staff of, and the procedure and the
conduct of business in, each such Council:
Provided further that the Deputy Commissioner or the Sub-Divisional Officer, as the
case may be, of the North Cachar and Mikir Hills shall be the Chairman ex-officio of the
District Council in respect of the territories included in items 5 and 6 respectively of Part A of
the table appended to paragraph 20 of this Schedule and shall have power for a period of six
years after the first constitution of the District Council, subject to the control of the Governor,
to annul or modify any resolution decision of the District Council or to issue such instructions
to the District Council, as he may consider appropriate, and the District Council shall comply
with every such instruction issued.
3. (1) The Regional Council for an autonomous region in respect of all areas with such
region and the District Council for an autonomous district in respect of all areas within the
district except those which are under the authority of Regional Councils, if any, within the
district shall have power to make laws with respect to—
(a) the allotment, occupation or use, or the setting apart, of land, other than any
land which is a reserved forest for the purposes of agriculture or grazing or for residential
or other non-agricultural purposes or for any other purpose likely to promote the
interests of the inhabitants of any village or town:
Provided that nothing in such laws shall prevent the compulsory acquisition of
any land, whether occupied or unoccupied, for public purposes by the Government of
the State concerned] in accordance with the law for the time being in force authorising
such acquisition;
(b) the management of any forest not being a reserved forest;
(c) the use of any canal or water-course for the purpose of agriculture;
(d) the regulation of the practice of Jhum or other forms of shifting cultivation;
(e) the establishment of village or town committees or councils and their powers;
(f) any other matter relating to village or town administration, including village or
town police and public health and sanitation;
(g) the appointment or succession of Chiefs or Headmen;
(h) the inheritance of property;
(i) marriage and divorce;
(j) social customs.
* * * * * *
4. (1) The Regional Council for an autonomous region in respect of areas within such
region and the District Council for an autonomous district in respect of areas within the
district other than those which are under the authority of the Regional Councils, if any,
within the district may constitute village councils or courts for the trial of suits and cases
between the parties all of whom belong to Scheduled Tribes within such areas, other than
Powers of the
District
Councils and
Regional
Councils to
make laws.
Administration
of justice in
autonomous
districts and
autonomous
region.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

26
suits and cases to which the provisions of sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 5 of this Schedule
apply, to the exclusion of any court in the State, and may appoint suitable persons to be
members of such village councils or presiding officers of such courts, and may also appoint
such officers as may be necessary for the administration of the laws made under
paragraph 3 of this Schedule.
(2)  Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the Regional Council for an
autonomous region or any court constituted in that behalf by the Regional Council or, if in
respect of any area within an autonomous district there is no Regional Council, the District
Council for such district, or any court constituted in that behalf by the District Council, shall
exercise the powers of a court of appeal in respect of all suits and cases triable by a village
council or court constituted under sub-paragraph (1) of this paragraph within such region or
area, as the case may be, other than those to which the provisions of sub-paragraph ( 1) of
paragraph 5 of this Schedule apply, and no other court except the High Court and the
Supreme Court shall have jurisdiction over such suits or cases.
(3) The High Court shall have and exercise such jurisdiction over the suits and cases
to which the provisions of sub-paragraph (2) of this paragraph apply as the Governor may
from time to time by order specify.
(4) A Regional Council or District Council, as the case may be, may with the previous
approval of the Governor make rules regulating—
(a) the constitution of village councils and courts and the powers to be exercised
by them under this paragraph;
(b) the procedure to be followed by village councils or courts in the trial of suits
and cases under sub-paragraph (1) of  this paragraph;
(c) the procedure to be followed by the Regional or District Council or any court
constituted by such Council in appeals and other proceedings under sub-paragraph
(2) of this paragraph;
(d) the enforcement of decisions and orders of such councils and courts;
(e) all other ancillary matters for the carrying out of the provisions of
sub-paragraphs (1) and (2) of this paragraph.
* * * * * *
6. (1) The District Council for an autonomous district may establish, construct, or
manage primary schools, dispensaries, markets cattle pounds, ferries, fisheries, roads, road
transport and waterways in the district and may, with the previous approval  of the Governor,
make regulations for the regulation and control thereof and, in particular, may prescribe the
language and the manner in which primary education shall be imparted in the primary schools
in the district.
7. (1) * * * *
(2) The Governor may make rules for the management of the District Fund, or, as the
case may be, the Regional Fund and for the procedure to be followed in respect of payment
of money into the said Fund, the withdrawal of moneys therefrom, the custody of moneys
therein and any other matter connected with or ancillary to the matters aforesaid.
* * * *
8. * * * *
(4) A Regional Council or District Council, as the case may be, may make regulations to
provide for the levy and collection of any of the taxes specified in sub-paragraphs (2) and (3)
of this paragraph and every such regulation shall be submitted forthwith to the Governor
and, until asserted to by him shall have no effect.
Powers of the
District
Council to
establish
primary
schools, etc.
District and
Regional
Funds.
Power to
assess and
collect land
revenue and to
impose taxes.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

27
12. (a) * * * *
(b) The Governor may, by public notification, direct that any Act of the Legislature of
the State of Assam to which the provisions of clause (a) of this sub-paragraph do not apply,
shall not apply to the autonomous district or an autonomous region in that State, or shall
apply to that district or such region, or any part thereof, subject to such exceptions or
modifications, as he may specify in the notification.
13. The estimated receipts and expenditure pertaining to an autonomous district which
are to be credited to, or is to be made from, the Consolidated Fund of the State shall be first
placed before the District Council for discussion and then after such discussion be shown
separately in the annual financial statement of the State to be laid before the Legislature of
the State under article 202.
* * * *
15. (1) If  at any time the Governor is satisfied that an act or resolution of a District or
a Regional Council is likely to endanger the safety of India or is likely to be prejudicial to
public order, he may annul or suspend such act or resolution and take such steps as he may
consider necessary (including the suspension of the Council and the assumption to himself
of all or any of the powers vested in or exercisable by the Council) to prevent the commission
or continuance of such act, or the giving of effect to such resolution.
* * * *
Application of
Acts of
Parliament
and of the
Legislature of
the State of
Assam to the
autonomous
district and
autonomous
regions in the
State of Assam.
Estimated
receipts and
expenditure
pertaining to
autonomous
districts to be
shown
separately in
the annual
financial
statement.
Annulment or
suspension of
acts and
resolutions of
District and
Regional
Councils.
5
10
15

EXTRACT FROM THE RESERVE BANK OF INDIA ACT, 1934
(2 OF 1934)
* * * *
 21A. (1) The Bank may by agreement with the Government of any State undertake—
(a) all its money, remittance, exchange and banking transactions in India,
including in particular, the deposit, free of interest, of all its cash balances with the
Bank; and
(b) the management of the public debt of, and the issue of any loans by, that
State.
* * * *
————
E
XTRACT FROM THE STATES REORGANISA TION ACT, 1956
(37 OF 1956)
* * * *
16. (1) The Zonal Council for each zone shall consist of the following members,
namely:—
* * * *
(d) in the case of the Eastern Zone, the person for the time being holding the office of
the Adviser to the Governor of Assam for Tribal Areas.
* * * *
28
5
10
15
20

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the formation within the State of Assam of an autonomous State to be
known as Karbi Dimanchal and for matters connected therewith or incidental
thereto.
————
(Shri Biren Singh Engti, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—4160LS(S3)—02.07.2016.