Short title, 
extent and 
commencement.
5
As introduced in Lok Sabha
 Bill No. 145 of 2024
THE FARMERS RIGHT TO MINIMUM SUPPORT PRICE 
REALIZATION OF AGRICULTURAL PRODUCE BILL, 2024
By
Adv . Chandra Shekhar Azad, M.P.
A
BILL
to confer upon every farmer the right to realize a minimum price for their agricultural 
produce and for matters connected thereto.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as  
follows:–
CHAPTER I
Preliminary
1.(1) This Act may be called the Farmers Right to Guaranteed Minimum Price 
Realization of Agricultural Produce Act, 2024. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint.

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise require,— 
(a) “agricultural produce” includes the agricultural produce specified under the 
Schedule; 
(b) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of that 
State, and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(c) “Commission” means the Commission for Agricultural Costs and Prices 
(CACP) constituted under the Union Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare to 
recommend Minimum Support Prices (MSPs) to  agricultural produces;
(d) “Department” means the Department for Guaranteed Minimum Support Price 
Realization constituted under section 6; 
(e) “farmer” means any individual or group of individuals collectively including 
but not limited to an individual, forest-produce gatherer, farmer groups, cooperatives 
engaged in the agricultural activity in terms of growing crops and agricultural produce 
on self-owned or leased land; 
(f) “guaranteed minimum support price” means the price that ensures a fifty per 
cent.  profit on the comprehensive cost of production for any agricultural produce as 
determined under section 3, excluding any bonus announced and applicable for the 
respective agricultural produce for that crop season; 
(g) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and 
(h) “trader” means any individual or group of individuals collectively engaged 
in the direct purchase of agricultural produce from the farmer for direct consumption 
or further selling of agricultural produce, in same form or with value-addition, and 
includes but not limited to commission agents, purchasers and arthiyas or adatiyas.
CHAPTER II
Guarantee of Minimum Support Price
3. (1) The Central Government shall, on the basis of recommendation for guaranteed 
minimum support price for each agricultural produce as computed by the Commission under 
section 5, notify the guaranteed minimum price of each agricultural produce, as soon as 
possible, but not later than one month of the receipt of such recommendation from the 
Commission for Agricultural Costs and Prices in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), the Central Government 
shall notify the guaranteed minimum support price two months before the start of kharif 
season on 1st day of April every year and two months before the start of Rabi season or 15th 
day  of September every year, as applicable in such manner as may be prescribed.
4. The State Government shall, notify bonus on each agricultural produce, to be paid 
from the State Government exchequer in addition to the guaranteed minimum support price 
in case of— 
(a) Kharif crops, one month before the start of Kharif season or 1st day of May of 
each calendar year; and 
(b) Rabi crops, one month before the start of the Rabi season or 15th day of October 
of each calendar year. 
5. ( 1) The Commission shall recommend guaranteed minimum support price for all 
agricultural produce subject to quality standards as prescribed under sub-section (2) and (3) 
to the Central Government which shall not be less than a profit margin of at least fifty per 
cent. over and above the comprehensive cost of production including,— 
(a) actual paid-out expenses incurred by farmers on seeds, fertilizers, pesticides, 
hired labour, fuel, irrigation and other inputs from outside, incurred in cash or kind; 
(b) imputed value of unpaid family labour; and 
(c) rentals and foregone interests on farmland and fixed agricultural assets. 
Definitions.
5
Notification 
of Guaranteed 
Minimum 
Support Price 
for Agricultural 
Produce.
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
State 
Government to 
notify Bonus.
45
Computation 
of guaranteed 
minimum 
support price 
for agricultural 
produce.

(2) The Commission shall define the fair and acceptable quality standards for the 
agricultural produce for which the prices shall be notified as per section 3 and computed 
under sub-section (1). 
(3) The Commission shall undertake an annual exercise to classify the quality parameters 
on the basis of which crops not meeting the fair and acceptable quality standards may be 
classified into different categories and announce the guaranteed minimum support prices 
of each category for all agricultural produce which may be based on guaranteed minimum 
support price adjusted for quality differentials. 
(4) The Commission shall prescribe an indicative list of agricultural produce that may be 
grown in a particular sub-district considering the prevalent environment factors, including 
weather, groundwater patterns, soil health and other relevant environment factors.
CHAPTER III
Department of Guaranteed Minimum Support Prices Realization
6. ( 1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
constitute a Department to be known as the Department for Guaranteed Minimum 
Support Price Realization to exercise the powers conferred upon, and to perform the 
functions assigned to it under this Act. 
(2) The Department shall consist of— 
(a) four farmer representatives; 
(b) one Indian Administrative Services officer not below the rank of an 
Additional Secretary to the Central Government; and 
(c) four agricultural experts with a distinguished record in agriculture 
policy formulation of not less than twenty years, to be appointed by the Central 
Government in such manner as may be prescribed. 
(3) The Department shall have its offices in every State to carry out the provisions 
of this Act and help in the facilitation and coordination of the functions vested to it 
under this Act with the respective State Governments. 
(4) The offices of the Department in each State shall consist of such number of 
members appointed by the respective State Governments including representatives of 
agricultural economists and an Indian Administrative Services officer to be appointed 
by the respective State Government in such manner as may be prescribed: 
Provided that the constitution of offices of the Department in each State shall 
be the same as may be decided by the Department through a consultative process 
from the State Governments concerned. 
(5) The Central Government shall appoint such number of staff to the Department 
as may be required to carry out functions of this Act. 
(6) All such staff members, including the members of the Department, shall be 
deemed to be public servants within the meaning of sub-section (28) of section 2 of the 
Bharatiya Nyay Sanhita, 2023. 
(7) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service 
of members and staff of the Department shall be such as may be prescribed.
7. The Department shall— 
(a) review and recommend to the Central Government on a half-yearly basis and 
at least two months before the start of Rabi or Kharif seasons regarding inclusion of 
any crop or agricultural produce including but not limited to spices, cereals, oilseeds, 
pulses, cash crops, dairy produce, fruits, vegetables in the Schedule; 
(b) decide and notify the list of officers along with their roles and responsibilities 
to ensure the smooth implementation of this Act, which includes but not limited to— 
(i) the monitoring of auctions and payments for agricultural produce; 
(ii) mandi operations; 
Constitution of 
the Department 
for Guaranteed 
Minimum 
Support Price 
Realization.
Functions of the 
Department.
3
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
45 of 2023

(iii) categorization, recording and decision for implementation of punitive 
actions or penalties; 
(iv) payment of Compensation as prescribed under section 9: 
Provided that the list of officers shall be prepared from a taluka level and 
be published along with their contact details in leading regional newspapers for 
complete transparency in such manner as may be prescribed; 
(c) from time to time, advise the Union Ministry of Commerce and Industry on the 
import duties that may be levied so that the landed cost of imported agricultural produce 
is at least equal to the price stipulated under section 5; and 
(d) maintenance of separate books of accounts and other records to prepare annual 
statements which shall be audited on an annual basis and the annual statements along 
with audit findings and recommendations to be tabled before each Houses of Parliament.
8. ( 1) The appropriate Government shall ensure that all agricultural markets 
(including Agriculture Produce Market Committee) commence the auction for all 
agricultural commodities at a base offer price not lesser than the guaranteed minimum 
support price notified by the Central Government under section 3. 
(2) The appropriate Government shall, in order to procure agricultural commodities 
at or higher than the guaranteed minimum support price, establish adequate number of 
procurement Centres, either under direct control or through designated procurement 
agencies in a localized manner as far as possible, so that there exists a minimum of one 
Centre per three villages. 
(3) For the purposes of sub-section ( 1), the Central Government, may appoint an 
independent Committee which shall,— 
(a) evaluate the number of such procurement Centres required and their 
preferred village locations and submit their recommendations within a period of 
six months in such manner as may be prescribed; 
(b) ensure increase and maintenance of storage capacity including cold storage 
and affordable access to such facilities to enable farmers to store their agricultural 
produce and sell at the time of procurement operations; and 
(4) The appropriate Government shall ensure direct payments by the traders or 
procurement agency to the farmers bank account or in cash in absence of bank account 
within two days of such procurement. 
(5) The appropriate Government shall aid and advice the Department to ensure 
compliance and cooperation from officers notified under clause (b) of section 7.
9. (1) Any farmer who is not paid by the trader the guaranteed minimum support price 
for his sale of agricultural produce shall be entitled to a compensation payable from the Fund 
constituted under section 10 which shall be equal to the difference between the guaranteed 
minimum support price and price paid to the farmer within a period of seven working days 
from the day the matter is brought to the notice by the aggrieved farmer. 
(2) Where a farmer does not get instant and direct payment of guaranteed minimum 
support price of agricultural produce such farmers shall be entitled to get for compensation 
fixed at ten per cent. per annum on the total payment due from the buyer calculated on daily 
basis.
10. (1) The State Commission shall, by notification in the Official gazette, constitute 
and maintain a Fund to be known as the Farmers Compensation Fund for the payment 
of compensation to farmers for non-receipt of guaranteed minimum support prices or 
delayed payment for sale of agricultural produce under sub-section (1) of section 9. 
(2) The Fund shall be credited all the amount of penalties collected under section 14.
11. All farmers shall be entitled to avail institutional credit from public institutions and 
public sector banks up to such per cent. of the value of the produce in lieu of the warehouse 
receipt, obtained post storage or sales of produce at the storage facilities as may be decided 
4
5
Responsibility 
of appropriate 
Government to 
ensure payment 
of agricultural 
commodities on 
prices not less 
than guaranteed 
minimum 
support price.
Compulsory 
payment of 
compensation 
for not obtaining 
guaranteed 
minimum 
support price.
Constitution 
of Farmers 
Compensation 
Fund.
Farmers’ Right 
to institutional 
credit.
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

by the Department within a period of three months from the date of application of credit 
from the farmer.
12. (1) Any formal or informal agreement, written or oral, or any implicit arrangement 
between the purchasing parties, including, but not limited to the control or influence of 
auction prices by traders, commission agents and private buyers shall be liable for penalties 
as mentioned under section 14 including the cancellation of license by the appropriate 
Government on complaint by aggrieved farmers or public interest groups. 
(2) Any trader who abstains from purchasing any agricultural produce with a view to 
violate the rights conferred on farmers by this Act, especially for the quarter succeeding the 
seasonal harvest of a given commodity for one Rabi and Kharif season consecutively, shall 
be liable for penalties under section 14, including the cancellation of their license by the 
appropriate Government.
13. (1) Department shall constitute sub-district or Block level Dispute Resolution 
Committees for dispute resolution between the farmer and the trader or purchaser 
consisting of not more than seven members, comprising of officials from the respective 
State Agriculture Ministry to be appointed by the State Government concerned in such 
manner as may be prescribed. 
(2) The Dispute Resolution Committee constituted under sub-section ( 1) shall 
provide resolution to the grievances within thirty days from the receipt of such 
complaint from either party, failing which the complainant reserves the right to 
approach to the appropriate Court.
14. ( 1) Any trader, purchaser or commission agent, who contravenes the provision 
of section 12 shall be deemed to have committed a cognizable offence and punishable as 
under,— 
(i) for the first time offence a penalty equal to the total deficit suffered by the 
farmers on account of the violation by the trader, purchaser or commission agent; or 
(ii) for the second time offence a penalty equal to two times the total deficit suffered 
by farmers on account of the violation by trader, purchaser or commission agent; and 
(iii) for the third time an imprisonment for a term upto six months and cancellation 
of license leading to stoppage of any future trading for all non Governmental traders. 
(2) If any Government employee is found indulged in willful negligent in discharging 
of his duties stipulated under this Act, such employee shall be punished,— 
(a) for the first time offence a penalty a half of his month salary; or 
(b) for the second time offence a penalty of full months’ salary with a warning; and
(c) for the third or subsequent time suspension from service till further notice as 
may be prescribed.
15. The provisions of this Act or any rule or order made thereunder shall have effect 
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any law, or any instrument 
having effect by virtue of any law other than this Act.
16. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central 
Government may, by order, as occasion requires, do anything not inconsistent with the 
provisions of this Act, which appears to them to be necessary for the purposes of removing 
the difficulty: 
Provided that no such orders shall be made after expiry of two years from the date 
of commencement of this Act.
17. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Gazette, make rules for 
the purpose of carrying into effect the provisions of this Act. 
(2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon 
as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a 
total period of fourteen days which may be comprised in one session or in two successive 
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
Penalty.
Dispute 
Resolution 
Mechanism.
Penalty.
Overriding 
effect of Act.
Power to 
remove 
difficulties.
Power to make 
rules.
5
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

successive sessions aforesaid both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or 
both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect 
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so however that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously 
done under that rule. 
(3) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall laid, as soon as may 
be after it is made, before the State Legislature.
 
6
5

THE SCHEDULE
[See clause (a) of section 2]
Agricultural Produce
Sl. No.  Category Crop Name
1.  Cereal Paddy 
2.  Cereal Wheat 
3.  Cereal Maize 
4.  Cereal Sorghum 
5.  Cereal Pearl Millet 
6.  Cereal Barley 
7.  Cereal Ragi 
8.  Pulses Gram 
9.  Pulses Tur 
10.  Pulses Moong 
11.  Pulses Urad 
12.  Pulses Lentil 
13.  Oil seed Groundnut 
14.  Oil seed Rapeseed 
15.  Oil seed Soyabean
16.  Oil seed Sesamum 
17.  Oil seed Mustard 
18.  Oil seed Sunflower
19.  Oil seed  Nigerseed
20.  Commercial crop Copra 
21.  Commercial crop Cotton crop
22.  Commercial crop Raw Jute
7

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Minimum Support Price (MSP) declared by the Union Ministry of Agriculture and 
Farmers Welfare signals a right to the farmer to sell the agricultural produce at the declared 
price in case the open market prices fall in order to protect them from financial losses. Over 
the years, however, the efficacy of MSP has declined as most farmers do not receive the 
declared MSP, remaining at best limited to cereals within a handful of States. A close look at 
acreage and declared MSP, especially for pulses and oilseeds in recent years, illustrate that 
MSP has limited impact on acreage under a crop, as farmers have inadequate information 
and Government procurement agencies have focussed comparatively more on selected crops 
in selected geographies. 
The Food Corporation of India (FCI), the primary frontrunners for procuring agricultural 
commodities from farmers, procures only a portion of marketed surplus even for wheat 
and paddy (~32% for wheat and 35% for paddy). They have been able to procure ~160 
million MT of wheat and ~203 million MT of rice, against a production of ~500 million MT 
and ~561 million MT respectively, during FY 2016-17 to FY 2020-21. Despite increasing 
trend of procurement, about 70 per cent of all produce was sold outside these agencies, and 
quite possibly at rates lower than the Minimum Support Price (MSP). Herein, the small and 
marginal farmers, accounting for almost 80 per cent of all Indian farmers remain the worst 
affected, due to small produce, lack of access to Government procurement centres, logistics 
costs and delayed payments, thereby selling it to middlemen as an option of last resort with 
little profit if at all.
Despite the presence of 2477 principal regulated markets (APMC’s) and 4843  
sub-market yards (regulated by APMCs), many farmers do not have access to proper mandis 
for sales at competitive market prices. In places where they exist, the principal market yards 
and sub-market yards set up under the State Agriculture Produce Marketing Committee 
(APMC) have been found lacking in marketing infrastructure, with only a fraction of APMC 
markets having cold storage facilities and proper harvest management infrastructure for 
grading, packing and weighing. Poor digital connectivity and civic infrastructure only 
compounds to the existing deficiencies. In terms of access, the National Commission on 
Farmers (2006) recommended that regulated markets should be available for market area of 
80 sq. km., yet the density of regulated markets varied from 116 sq. km. (Punjab) to 11,215 
sq. km. (Meghalaya). In order to ensure access, the country would need an estimated 41,000 
markets across the country.
The guaranteed realization of minimum support price will also have long term 
environmental benefits – especially on groundwater situation across the country. 
Groundwater stress in India remains at an all-time high. In Punjab, 80% of the blocks 
(talukas) are overexploited when it comes to groundwater. Rajasthan follows close with 
71% of its blocks being overexploited whereas Haryana registers the metric at 61%. Thus, 
aquifers in majority of the areas in these States are subjected to a physically unsustainable 
situation wherein withdrawal is more than the recharge leading to long term declines in water 
table. We fundamentally remain a water stressed society, with per-capita water availability 
at 1500 cubic meters in 2011, a 64 per cent drop from independence era availability of 5000 
cubic meters and water stress threshold of 1700 cubic meters. Much of the dependence 
on groundwater also comes from our choice of crops, growing water intensive crops in 
water scarce regions (e.g., paddy in Punjab, sugarcane in Maharashtra). The promise of a 
guaranteed MSP realization will provide farmers with the right set of incentives to make 
better choices for long term ecological and agricultural sustainability.
Quality also remains a key issue is reduced price realization of agricultural commodities, 
with MSP being applicable for crops at Fair and Acceptable Quality. The classification of 
each crop based on quality parameter and MSP price determination for various varieties 
depending on quality will reduce distress sales by farmers to purchasers, especially private 
parties. The quality differentials will also help in formalizing price of better varieties of 
crops (e.g., Basmati for rice, Sharbati for wheat). 
8

The need is to provide for payment of compensation equal to the difference in value 
between sales price and MSP within seven days of matter being brought to attention by the 
aggrieved farmer. It will ensure quick payment to farmers and in line with agriculture credit 
linked to warehouse receipts will alleviate working capital distress for farmers.
The declaration of guaranteed MSP to farmers shall result in improved farm realization 
for potentially 93 million agricultural households, leading to resurgence in rural economy, 
consequent improvement in socio-economic outcomes and improved tax revenues for the 
Government. The declaration of minimum price realization shall provide an economic 
support to the agricultural community with such practice already implemented across 
different aspects of economy – be it labour (The Code on Wages, 2019 sets a floor wage 
taking into account the living standards and appropriate Government prescribes a minimum 
wage rate which is equal to or more than the floor rate), or land or even other crops like 
sugarcane. 
In such situations, the guaranteed minimum support price needs to be declared for a 
significant majority of our agricultural produce, Government-sourced or otherwise.
Hence this Bill.
New Delhi;                                                              CHANDRA SHEKHAR AZAD  
July 10, 2024
9

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 6 of the Bill provides for the Central Government constitute a Department for 
Guaranteed Minimum Support Price Realization for Agriculture Produce. It also provides 
for appointment of farmers and agricultural experts to the Department. Clause 8 of the bill 
provides that the appropriate Government shall, in order to procure agricultural produce 
at or higher than the guaranteed minimum support price, establish adequate number of 
procurement centers, either under direct control or through designated procurement agencies 
in a localized manner as far as possible, such that there exits a minimum of one Centre per 
five villages. Clause 10 provides for constitution and maintenance of a State Compensation 
Fund. Clause 13 provides for setting up of a Dispute Resolution Committee to redress 
complaints from farmers.
The Bill, therefore if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of 
India.  It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about rupees two lakh crore per annum 
would involve from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one thousand and forty crore is also likely 
to be involved. 
 
10

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 17 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to make rules for carrying 
out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation 
of legislative power is of a normal character.
11

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
to confer upon every farmer the right to realize a minimum price for their agricultural 
produce and for matters connected thereto.
_______ 
(Adv. Chandra Shekhar Azad, M.P .) 