LOK SABHA 
CORRIGENDUM 
to 
'!HE MERCHANT SHIPP ING (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1977 
j-'Ib be/As introduced in Wk Sabha 7 
proposed 
Page 3, in the marginal heading touection 17 A. ,-
after ''paY'' insert "incolne-tax and" 
NEW DWU· -.. , 
lecember 12. 1977 
AgrahaYaIla 21, 11J99 ( Salta) 

As INRTODt1CED IN LoK SABHA Olf 
iIlll No. ItS of 18'7'7 
WAitE 
THE MERCHANT SHIPPING (AMENDMENT) BILL, 19'7'7 
A 
BILL 
furtheT to amend the MeTchant Shipping Act, 1958. 
BJ: it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-eighth Year ofi the 
Republic of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Merchant Shipping (Amendment) Act, 
1977. 
44 of 1958. S Z. In section 14 of the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 (hereinafter refer-
red ·to as the-principal Act), after clause (b), the following clause shall 
be inserted, namely:-
"(bb) the amounts received by the said Committee an the issue 
and sale of bonds and debentures;". 
3. In sub-section (1) of section 15 of the. principal Act, for the word 
10 "six", the word "twelve" shall be substituted. 
" In section 16 of the principal Act,-
(i) in sUb-sectiOD (1), ~r the words and 8gut\eS "in any other 
fonn to persons of the description mentioned in section 21 for 
Short title. 
Amend-
ment 
of sec-
tion 14. 
Amend-
ment 
ot NC-
lion 15. 
Amend. 
ment 
of NC-
tion 18. 

2 
acquisition and maintenance .of ships.", the following shall be substI-
tuted, namely:-
"in any other fonn,-
(a) to persons of the description mentioned in section 
21- 5 
(i) for the acquisition and maintenance of ships, 
including modification, reconstruction and renovation 
thereof; and 
(ii) for meeting any short-term financial require-
ments; 10 
(b) to Indian ship-yards for the construction o~ new 
ships."; 
(ii) for sub-section (2), the following sub-sections shall be sub-
stituted, namely:-
"(2) The Committee shall not grant any loan or give any 15 
financial assistance under sub-section (l) except on such terms 
and conditions as the Central Government may from time to time 
specify, and any such tenn may, if the loan or financial assistance 
is granted or given to a company, provide for the appointment 
by the Committee of one or more directors of such company and 20 
such provision and any apLJointment of directors made in pursu-
ance thereof shall be valid and 2fiective notwithstanding any-
thing to the contrary conta ined in the Companies Act, 1956, or 
in any other law for the tin Ie being in force or in the memoran-
dum, articles of association or any other instrument relating to 25 1 of 1956. 
the company and any provision regarding share qualification, age 
limit, number of directorships, removal from office of director 
and such like conditions contained in any such law or instrument 
aforesaid, shall not apply to any director appointed by the Com-
mittee in pursuance of the term as aforesaid. 30 
(2A) Any director appointed in pursuance of Sublection 
(2) shall,-
(a) hold ofBce during the pleasureo~ the Committee 
and may be removed or substituted by any person by order 
in writing by the Committee; 35 
(b) not incur any obligation or liability by reason only 
of his being a director or for anything done or omitted to be 
done in good faith in the discharge of his duties as a director 
or anything in relation thereto; 
(c) not be liable to retirement by rotation and shall not 40 
be taken into account for computing the number of directors 
liable to such retirement. 
(2B) Every director appointed by the Committee shall be 
indemnified by the Committee against all losses and expenses 
iDcurred by him in, or in relation to, the discharge of his duties, 45 
except such as are caused by his own wilful act or default. 

3 
(2C) No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against any 
director appointed by the Committee for any loss or damage 
caused or likely to be caused by 8nythin~ which is in good faith 
done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or any 
sother law or provision having the :fiorce of law.". 
5. After section 16 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
inserted, namely:-
Insertion 
of new sec· 
tion 16A. 
"16A. (1) The Committee may issue and sell bonds and deben- Borrowing 
tures, with or without interest, for the purpose of carrying out the powers. 
10 objects of the Fund. 
(2) The bonds and debentures of the Committee shall be guar-
anteed by the Central Government as to the repayment of thi;! prin-
Cipal and the payment of interest, at such rate as may be fixed by the 
Central Government on the recommendation of the Committee at the 
IS time the bonds and debentures are issued.". 
20 
8. After section 17 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
inserted and shall be deemed always to have Deen inserted, namely:-
"17A. Notwithstanding anything contained in any enactment for 
the time being in force relating to income-tax or wealth-tax, the Com-
mittee shall not be liable to pay-
(a) income.;tax in respect of its income, profits or gains; 
and 
(b) wealth-tax in respect of its net wealth .... 
"I. In section 18 of, the pri '1.cipal Act, for the worns "and thereupon all 
25 the property vested in the Committee shall vest in the Central Govern-
ment", the following shall be substituted, namely:-
"and thereupon-
(a) all the property vested in the Committee shall vest in 
the Central Government; and 
(b) all the liabilities of the Committee shall become the 
liabilities of the Central Government.". 
8. In sub-section (2) of section 19 of the principal Act, after clause 
(f), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:-
Insertion 
of new see· 
lion 17A. 
Exempt1o~ 
lromllabi-
lIty to pay 
wealth. 
ta. 
Amend-
ment 
of sec· 
tion 18. 
Amend· 
ment 
of sec· 
ce (ff) the manner and terms of issue, sale and redemption of 1Ion 19. 
35 bonds and debentures by the Committee;". 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Shipping Development Fund was formed in March. 1959 und~ 
section 14 of the Merchant Shipping Ar.t, 1958, with the object of faci-
litating the growth of Indian shipping tonnage through grant of loans 
and financial assistance to Indian shipping companies for the acquisi J 
tion and maintenance of ships. 'The fund vests in the Shipping Deve--
lopment Thnd Commntee which was constituted under section 15 of the 
said Act. This Committee consists wholly of government officers. The 
Committee inter alia charges a documentation fee in respect of loanS 
and guarantees given by it. The Committee is a non-profit making orga-
nisation ,and the earnings made by it are incidental to the work con-
nected with '~he development of shipping in India. It is, therefore, felt 
that the Committee should be exempted fram the payment of income-
tax, wealth-tax and any other tax on income, profits or gains on its earn-
ings retrospectively from the date of its constitution. 
2. Section 15 of the Act states tha't the Shipping Development Fund 
Committee shall consist of a Cha~rman and such number of other\ 
members, not exceeding six, as the Central Government may think fit 
to appoint ·thereto. The activities of the Commi'~tee have since increased. 
It has become necessary, therefore, to provide for additional members. 
It is proposed to increase the number of members from six to twelve. 
3. The corpus of the Shipping Development Fund mainly consists of 
amounts granted as loans by the Central Government. It has been ob-, 
served that such loans have not always been adequate to meet the en-
tire requirements of the shipping industry for the expansion of maritime 
fleet. It is, therefore, proposed to empower the Shipping Development 
Fund Committee to resort to public borrowings through the issue and 
sale of bonds and debentures. 
4. At present. the shipping cnmpanies which obtain loans from the 
Committee nre ret']uired to accept nominees of the Committee to serve 
on their board!'! as directors. Hitherto, the nomination of such directors 
was being made by mutual agreement. It is proposed to provide for 
making such nominations in the Act itself and that such directors will 
be granted immunity from legal proceedings in respect of acts done by 
them in good faith. 
5. Loans from the Shipping Development Fund are granted to ship-
owners who satisfy the requirements of s~tion 21 of the Act. Indigenous 
shiphuilding capacity has been e"panding and it is felt that provision 
may be made in the Act to enable loans being granoted to Indian Ship-
yards also for the construction of new ship'3. 
6. The shipping industry is going through a difficult per.iod all the 
world over due to a !;evere and prolonged depression in the ~ght mar-
ket. Indian !':hipping companies are also experiencin~ financial dift\-
culttee. It is felt that provision should be made for the gnun of loans 
to shipping companies to rehabilitate them from temporaryftnancial 
difficulties caused l:-y circumstances beyond t~eir control. 
7. The other amendments proposed in the BUl are minor and conse-
quential in nature. 
8. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 
NEW Dam; CHAND RAM. 
The 5th Decembe,., 1977. 
4 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause '8 of 'the Bill seeks to insert a new alause (if) in sub-secttion 
(2) of section 19 of the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958, to empower the 
Central Government to specify by rules the manner and terms of issue, 
sale and redemption of bonds and debentures by the Shipping Develop-
ment Fund Committee. The matters in respect of which rules may be 
made under this provision are matters of detail and it ishardlyprac-
ticable to provide for them in the Bill itself. The delegation of legis-
IRtive power is, therefore, normal in character. 

Formation 
of Ship-
ping De-
velopment 
Fund. 
Shippin, 
Develop· 
mentFund 
Committee. 
Applica_ 
tion 
of the 
Shipping 
Develop-
mentFund. 
Dissolution 
of the 
Committee. 
Power to 
makerulea 
In respect 
to mattera 
in thill 
Part. 
ANNEXURE 
ExTRACTS . nOM THE Ml:RcHANT SmPPING Ac:r, 1958 
(44 OF 1958) 
• • • • 
140. There shall b~ formed a fund to be called the Shipping Develop-
ment Fund (hereinafter in this Part referred to as the Fund) and there 
shall be credited therf!to-
• • • • 
15. (1) The Central Government shall constitute a Committee to be 
called the Shipping Development Fund Committee (hereinafter in this 
Part referred to as the Committee) consisting of a chairman and such 
number of other members, not exceeding six, as the Central Government 
may think fit to appoint thereto. 
• • • 
1A (1) The Fund shall vest in the Committee and 'Shall be applied 
towards meeting the expenses of the Committee and for granting loans 
and financial assistance in any other form to persons of the desCription 
mentioned in section 21 for acquisition and maintenance of ships. 
(2) The Committee shall not grant any loan or give any financial 
assistance to any person referred to in sub-section (1) except on such 
terms and conditions as the Central Government may from time to time 
specify. 
• • • • 
18. The Central Government may. by notification in the Official Gaz-
ette. declare that, with effect from such date as may be specified in the 
notification, the Committee shall be dissolved, and thereupon all the 
property vested in the Committee shall vest in the Central Government. 
It. (1) • • • • 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the fore-
going power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following mat-
ters, namely: - . 
•• • • 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amem.d the Merchant Sh.ipping Act. 1958. 
(Shri Chand Ram, Minister of State in charge of the Min18try of Shipping 
and Transport.) 