1
THE NATIONAL FOOD SECURITY AUTHORITY BILL, 2015
By
SHRI RAJESH RANJAN, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of a National Food Security Authority for providing food
security to citizens and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the National Food Security Authority Act, 2015.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “National Authority” means the National Food Security Authority constituted
under section 3; and
(b) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
Short title,
and
commencement.
Bill No. 145 of 2015
Definitions.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
a National Authority to be known as the National Food Security Authority to exercise the
powers conferred on, and to perform the functions assigned to it under this Act.
(2) The National Authority shall consist of,—
(a) a Chairperson, who shall be a person having knowledge and professional
expertise in the field of agriculture and food security;
(b) not more than three members having experience in the field of agriculture,
food, security management, economics, law or consumer affairs,
to be appointed by the Central Government:
Provided that if the powers of the National Authority are vested in an individual, such
individual shall be entitled to the same powers and functions and shall be assisted or
provided with the same secretarial support and technical expertise as are available to the
National Authority consisting of more than one person under this Act.
(3) The headquarter of the National Authority shall be at New Delhi.
(4) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of the
service of the Chairperson and members of the National Authority, shall be such, as may
be prescribed.
(5) The National Authority may appoint such number of officers and staff as it
considers necessary for the efficient discharge of its functions under this Act.
(6) The Salary, allowances and terms and conditions of service of officers and staff of
the National Authority shall be such, as may be prescribed.
4. The National Authority shall—
(a) collect and collate data regarding food consumption, food products and
cropping pattern in different countries as well as in the different States of the country
and prepare global inventory for food consumption, contaminates in food products
and emerging risks;
(b) advise the Central Government with regard to timing and modalities for trade
in food products and inputs thereof;
(c) suggest cropping pattern designed to meet consumer preferences for
domestic consumption as well as for exports to other countries;
(d) study and consider the impact of climate change on food production and
recommend measures to reduce the impact of climate change on food production;
(e) advise the Central Government on linkages between food security and energy
security; and
(f) perform such other functions as the Central Government may refer to it from
time to time.
5. (1) The National Authority shall prepare, in such form and at such time, in each
financial year, as may be prescribed, its annual report, giving a full account of its activities
during the previous financial year and submit a copy thereof to the Central Government.
(2) The Central Government shall cause the annual report to be laid, as soon as may
be, after receipt of report under sub-section (1), before each House of Parliament.
6. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be  laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
Constitution
of National
Food Security
Authority.
Functions of
the National
Authority.
Annual
Report.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
5

4
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
As a result of global warming, there is a drastic change in the climatic conditions.
Weather cycles are also changing. Agriculture productivity is on the verge of decline. Cost
of agricultural production is rising because of rising cost of inputs. Besides, as a result of
various factors, consumer tastes and preferences are also undergoing a drastic change.
Hence, there is a need for constitution of a National Food Security Authority to study and
consider the impact and changes in global climate on food production and make appropriate
recommendations to the Central Government to deal with the emerging situation particularly
in the food security and energy security sectors.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RAJESH RANJAN
April 8, 2014.

5
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to provide for constitution of the National Food Security
Authority and it further provides for appointment of officers and staff of the Authority.
Clause 4 provides that the Naitonal Authority shall collect and collate date regarding food
consumption pattern etc. and also study and impact of climate change on food production.
The Bill, if enacted will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is
estimated that a sum of rupees two hundred crore will be involved as recurring expenditure
per annum from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees fifty crore will also be involved.

6
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 6 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of detail only and as such the
delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of a National Food Security Authority for providing food
security to citizens and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Rajesh Ranjan, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—379LS(S3)—30-04-2015.