Aඌ ංඇඍඋඈൽඎർൾൽ ංඇ Lඈ඄ Sൺൻඁൺ
                   
                                                       
          
Bill No. 145  of  2022
THE DEBT RELIEF BOARD BILL, 2022
By
Aൽඏ.  Dൾൺඇ Kඎඋංൺ඄ඈඌൾ,  M.P.
A
BILL
to  provide  for  the  constitution  of  a  Board  for  the  identification  of  loans  to  be 
waived  as  a one-time measure  in  national interest within the country and matters 
connected therewith.  
Bൾ it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third  Year of the Republic  of India as 
follows:—
CHAPTER I
Pඋൾඅංආංඇൺඋඒ
1. (1) This Act may be called the Debt Relief Board  Act, 2022.
    (2)  It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title, extent  and commencement.

  2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, —
   ( a) “appropriate Government” means in case of a State, the Government of that 
State, and in all other cases, the Central Government;
   ( b) “Board” means the Debt Relief Board constituted under sub-section (1) of 
section 3;
   ( c) “loans to be waived” means loans identified by the Board that are to be waived 
in the national interest;
   ( d) “loans with merit” means loans that, if waived, may further the national interest 
and as specified in the Schedule:
       Provided that the Central Government may, if satisfied that it is necessary or 
expedient in the public interest so to do, by notification in the Official Gazette, add any 
other type of loan to the Schedule or omit any type of loan therefrom;
   ( e) ''prescribed'' means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
CHAPTER II
Tඁൾ Dൾൻඍ Bඈൺඋൽ
  3.  ( 1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
constitute, for the purposes of this Act, a Board, to be called the Debt Relief Board.  
   ( 2) The Board shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid having perpetual 
succession and a common seal with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to contract 
and shall, by the said name, sue and be sued.  
   ( 3) The Board shall consist of such number of members, not exceeding 
seventeen, as may be prescribed, and unless the rules made in this behalf otherwise 
provide, the Board shall consist of the following members, namely: —  
    ( a) a Chairperson  to  be  appointed  by  the Central Government in such  
  manner as may be prescribed;
    ( b) three  Members  of  Parliament,  of  whom  two shall be elected by the  
  House of the People and one by the Council of States; 
    ( c) ten members to represent respectively the  Ministries  of   the  Central  
  Government dealing with—
     ( i)   Finance;
     ( ii)   Agriculture and Farmer’s welfare;
     ( iii)   Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries;
     ( iv)   Commerce and Industry;
     ( v)    Co-operation;
     ( vi)   Education;
     ( vii)  Food Processing and Industries;
     ( viii) Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises;
     ( ix)   Corporate Affairs;
     ( x)   Finance; and 
    ( d) three   members   to   represent   the   Finance   Commission,    to    be  
  nominated by the Chairperson in such manner as may be prescribed.
Deﬁnitions.

   ( 4) The office of member of the Board shall not disqualify its holder for being 
chosen as, or for being, a member of either House of Parliament. 
   ( 5) The term of office of the members and other conditions of service of the 
members shall be such as may be prescribed. 
   ( 6)  The Chairperson shall, in addition to presiding over the meetings of the Board, 
exercise and discharge such powers and duties of the Board as may be delegated to him by 
the Board and such other powers and duties as may be prescribed.  
   ( 7)  The Board shall elect from among its members a Vice-Chairperson who shall 
exercise such of the powers and perform such of the functions of the Chairperson as may be 
prescribed or as may be delegated to him by the Chairperson.  
   ( 8)  No act or proceeding of the Board shall be invalidated merely by reason of— 
    ( a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Board;
    ( b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a member of the Board;
    ( c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Board not affecting  the  merits  of  
  the  case.
  4.  ( 1) The Board may appoint the Secretary and such other officers and employees 
as it considers necessary for the efficient discharge of its functions under this Act. 
   ( 2) The terms and conditions of service of the Secretary and other officers and 
employees of the Board shall be such as may be determined by regulations. 
  5. ( 1) Subject to any rules made in this behalf, the Board may, from time to 
time, constitute such Committees as may be necessary for the efficient discharge of its 
functions. 
   ( 2) Every committee constituted under sub-section (1) shall consist of such 
number of persons as the Board may deem fit.
  6 .   (1) The Board may—
    ( i) identify loans to be waived off by the appropriate  Government  to  further  
  the national interest:
        Provided that waiving off of loans shall be a one-time measure to give relief  
  from the vicious cycle of debt trap;
    ( ii) consolidate  the  list  of  such  loans  and  forward  that  list  to appropriate  
  Government to consider waiving that loan;
    ( iii) create  a  set  of  scientific  benchmarks  against which  the application to  
  waive a loan shall be measured against;
    ( iv) undertake programs and projects for  promotion  of  financial  literacy  in  
  the  country;
    ( v) assist and encourage studies and research  for  improvement  of   financial  
  inclusion and responsible credit culture in the country;
    ( vi) strive towards creating metrics to measure  the performance  of  financial  
  institutions in ameliorating suffering due to inability to pay back debts;

    ( vii) collect  statistics   with  regard  to  debt  relief  and  its  social  impact  in  
  the  country; 
    ( viii) promote co-operative efforts among financial institutions  to  waive  off  
  loans with merit in collaboration with local self-governments; 
    ( ix) provide   financial   or   other   assistance   for   improved   methods     for  
  identifying loans with merit in different parts of  the  country  with  special  focus   
  to rural areas, remote and inaccessible regions; 
    ( x) provide    training    in    loan    identification,   restructuring   as   well   as  
  recommendation to waive loans with merit; 
    ( xi) collect  statistics  from  institutions,  local  self-government  and   general  
  public to assist policy making in the domain of loan waivers; and
    ( xii) undertake, assist  or  encourage  scientific,  technological  and  economic  
  research.
CHAPTER III
Fංඇൺඇർൾ, Aർർඈඎඇඍඌ Aඇൽ Aඎൽංඍ
  7.   The Central Government may, after due appropriation made by Parliament 
by law, in this behalf, make to the Board grants and loans of such sums of money as 
that Government may consider necessary.
  8. ( 1) There shall be constituted a fund to be called the Debt Relief Fund and 
there shall be credited thereto—
    ( a) any grants and loans made to the Board  by  the Central Government  
  under section 7;
    ( b) all   fees  levied  and  collected   in   respect   of   certificates   granted   
  under this Act; and
    ( c) all sums  received  by  the  Board  from  such  other sources as may be  
  decided upon by the Central Government.
   ( 2) The Fund shall be applied for meeting—
    ( a) salary, allowances  and  other remuneration  of  the members, officers and  
  other employees of the Board;
    ( b) expenses of the Board in the discharge of its functions under section 6; and
    ( c) expenses on objects and for purposes authorized by this Act.
  9 .  The Board shall prepare in such form and at such time each financial year, as may 
be prescribed, its budget for the next financial year, showing the estimated receipts and 
expenditure of the Board and forward the same to the Central Government.
  10 .  The Board shall prepare, in such form and at such time each financial year, as may 
be prescribed, its annual report, giving a full account of its activities during the previous 
financial year, and submit a copy thereof to the Central Government.
  11 .  The accounts of the Board shall be maintained and audited in such manner as may, 
in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India, be prescribed and the 
Board shall furnish to the Central Government before such date, as may be prescribed, its 
audited copy of accounts together with the auditors’ report thereon.

  12 .  The Central Government shall cause the annual report and auditor’s report to be 
laid, as soon as may be after they are received, before each House of Parliament.
CHAPTER IV 
 Mංඌർൾඅඅൺඇൾඈඎඌ
  13 . Any person who—
   ( a) obstructs any member authorized by the Chairperson in writing or any officer or 
other employee of the Board authorized by it in this behalf or any person authorized in this 
behalf by the Central Government or by the Board, in the exercise of any power conferred, 
or in the discharge of any duty imposed, on him by or under this Act; or
   ( b) having control over or custody of any account book or other record, fails to 
produce such book or record when required to do so by or under this Act, shall be punishable 
with imprisonment which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one 
thousand rupees, or with both.   
  14 . The Board may, by general or special order in writing, delegate to the Chairperson 
or any other member or to any officer of the Board, subject to such conditions and limitations, 
if any, as may be specified in the order, such of its powers and functions under this Act as it 
may deem necessary.
  15 . All members, officers and other employees of the Board shall be deemed, when 
acting or purporting to act in pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act, to be public 
servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).
  16 . No prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Government, or the 
Board or any committee appointed by it, or any member of the Board or such committee, 
or any officer or employee of the Government or the Board or any other person authorized 
by the Government or the Board, for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be 
done under this Act or the rules or regulations made thereunder.
  17 .  Subject to any rule made in this behalf, any person, generally or specially authorized 
by the Board in this behalf, may, whenever it is necessary so to do, for any of the purposes 
of this Act, at all reasonable times, enter upon any land or premises and make any inspection 
or inquiry or do such other act or thing as may be prescribed:
 Provided that no such person shall enter any building or any enclosed courtyard or 
garden attached to a dwelling-house (unless with the consent of the occupier thereof) 
without previously giving such occupier at least twenty-four hours’ notice in writing of 
his intention to do so.  
  18 .  (1) The  Central  Government  may, by notification  in  the Official Gazette, make  
rules to carry out the purposes of this Act.
   ( 2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: —
    ( a) the number of members of the Board under sub-section (3) of section 3;
    ( b) the term of  office  and  other  conditions  of service  of  the  members  of   
  the  Board under sub-section (5) of section 3;
    ( c) the powers and duties of the Chairperson under sub-section (6) of section 3;
    ( d) the powers and functions of the Vice-Chairperson under sub-section (7) of  
  section 3;
    ( e) the constitution of committees under section 5;

    ( f) the  form  in  which, and  the  time  at  which,  the  Board  shall  prepare its  
  budget under section 9 and its annual report under section 10; 
 ( g) the  manner  in  which  the  accounts of the Board shall be maintained      
and audited and the date before which  the  audited  copy  of  the accounts may be  
furnished to the Central Government under section 11;  
    ( h) the  conditions  and  the  restrictions  with  respect  to  the  exercise of  the  
  power to enter under section 17; 
    ( i) any  other  matter  which  is  to  be, or  may  be, prescribed or in respect of  
  which provision is to be, or may be, made by rules.
  19 . (1) The Board may, with the previous approval of the Central Government, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, make regulations consistent with this Act and the rules 
generally to carry out the purposes of this Act.  
   ( 2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, 
such regulations may provide for the terms and conditions of service of the Secretary and 
other officers and employees of the Board under sub-section (2) of section 4; 
  20 .  Every rule and every regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may 
be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period 
of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, 
and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive 
sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation 
or both Houses agree that the rule or regulation should not be made, the rule or regulation 
shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may 
be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the 
validity of anything previously done under that rule or regulation.
  21 .  (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central 
Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to be necessary for removing the 
difficulty:
   Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of two years 
from the commencement of this Act.
   ( 2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
made, before each House of Parliament.
   

THE SCHEDULE
[See section 2(c)]
 Loans with Merit includes:—
  1. “Agricultural loans”: taken to conduct agricultural activities.
  2. “MSME loans”: taken to start or find working capital for MSME industries.
  3. “Education loans”: taken by students to pursue any academic  course  offered   
 by any university within India.
  4. “Treatment loans”: taken  by  individuals  to  meet   their   requirements  with   
 respect  to a medical emergency. 
  5. “Co-operative sector loans”: taken  by  individuals  from  banks  and  NBFCs   
 from the co-operative sector.

STATEMENT  OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
 India has made great progress with respect to financial inclusion and availability 
of institutional credit in the last few decades. However, we have also failed to deepen the 
credit culture in the country. According to NABARD, 52 per cent. of agricultural households 
in India (which constitute more than 70 per cent. of our population), are indebted. More 
than 40 per cent. of the outstanding loans are taken from non-institutional sources. This is 
worrisome, especially since the banking services have reached far and wide in the country. 
One reason for such large amount of non-institutional credit is the loans outstanding with 
institutional lenders. In many cases, the farmers are unable to pay the loan back and is 
alienated from the financial institutions forever. This is true not only for farmers, but also 
for educational loans, MSME loans etc. It is important that we identify loans that could 
be waived off in a single stroke so that these beneficiaries come back to the formal credit 
net. It is understood that continuous loan waivers are impacting the health of our financial 
institutions. If those loans could be identified in a single stroke and waived off, this need 
for continuous and populist loan waivers could be eliminated. The need is to establish Debt 
Relief Board to look into this and recommend the loans to be waived off to the respective 
State as well as Central Governments.
 Hence this Bill.
     Nൾඐ Dൾඅඁං;                                  DEAN KURIAKOSE
4 July, 2022.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
 Clause 3 of this Bill provides for establishment of the Debt Relief Board. It 
also provides for appointment of Chairperson and other members to the Board. Clause 4 
provides for appointment of Secretary and other officers to the Board. Clause 5 provides 
for constitution of Advisory Committees. Clause 7 provides for the Central Government 
to provide grants and loans. Clause 8 provides for the constitution of Debt Relief Fund. 
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of 
India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about one hundred crore per annum 
from the Consolidated Fund of India will be involved.
 A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees twenty five thousand crore is also 
likely to be involved. 

 
 MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
 Clause 18 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying 
out the purposes of this Bill. Clause 19 provides for the Board to make regulations. As the 
rules and regulations will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of legislative power 
is of a normal character.
                               

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to  provide  for  the  constitution  of  a  Board  for  the  identification  of  loans  to  be 
waived  as  a one-time measure  in  national interest within the country and matters 
connected therewith.  
————
(Adv. Dean Kuriakose, M.P .)