1
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
THE COMPULSORY MILITARY TRAINING IN SCHOOLS AND
COLLEGES BILL, 2017
By
SHRI SHRIRANG APPA BARNE, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory military training to all the students
in schools and colleges in the country.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Compulsory Military Training in Schools and Colleges
Bill, 2017.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
Bill No. 145 of  2017
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government; and
(b) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(c) "schools and colleges" means—
(i) a school or college established, owned or controlled by the appropriate
Government or a local authority or a non-Governmental Organisation; or
(ii) an aided school or college receiving aid or grants to meet whole or part
of its expenses from the appropriate Government or the local authority or a non-
Governmental Organisation; or
(iii) an educational institution managed by a private entity, society or a
trust,
which imparts education elementary, secondary, senior secondary or higher education, as
the case may be.
3. The Central Government shall provide military training to all physically and mentally
sound students for a period of not less than three years.
4. (1) The appropriate Government shall include compulsory military training in
theory and practical of the curriculum from class eighth to the graduation level.
(2) The appropriate Government shall evaluate the curriculum regarding military training,
from time to time, and also issue necessary directions to schools and colleges within its
jurisdiction.
5. The Central Government shall issue certificates to all students who successfully
complete military training provided under section 3.
6. The appropriate Government shall employ students who have successfully completed
military training in defence service, paramilitary forces and such other institutions as it may
deem fit for proper utilization of talent:
Provided that all such students who, after successful completion of military training,
remain unemployed shall assist the armed forces in rendering help during natural calamities
and given appropriate remuneration in such manner as may be prescribed.
7. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of the Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
Definitions.
Providing
Mandatory
Military
Training to
students.
Appropriate
Government
to issue
directions for
compulsory
military
training in
schools and
colleges.
Certificate of
military
training.
Employment.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS  AND REASONS
There has been an increase in extremist and naxalite activities in almost all the areas of
the country for the last several years and the incidents of murder, loot and dacoity are also on
the rise. Alongwith this, there is a sense of insecurity in the present world where the
neighbouring countries are always creating an adverse environment for use. The Government
has been making efforts to provide security in the country but it is not possible without the
cooperation and effort of each and every citizen. All the developing nations of the world are
providing compulsory military training to their citizens. But there is no provision for
compulsory military training for citizens and students in our country. Military training shall
inculcate patriotism and a sense of brotherhood alongwith discipline in every student. Military
training shall also pave way for their overall development and welfare of nation.
Military training should be imparted to students alongwith education so that more and
more students can be prepared for Armed Forces and Paramilitary Forces. In view of this, a
provision has been made for compulsory military training in schools and colleges.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SHRIRANG APPA BARNE
June  30, 2017.
3

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides that the Central Government shall provide compulsory
military training to all students for at least three years. Clause 5 provides for issuing certificates
to all students who have successfully completed military training. Clause 6 provides for
giving appropriate remuneration to students for assisting armed forces during natural
calamities. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India. It is likely to involve a recurring expenditure of about rupees eight thousand
crore per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees six thousand crore is also likely to be
involved.

5
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative powers is of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory military training to all the students
in schools and colleges in the country.
————
(Shri Shrirang Appa Barne, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—1020LS(S3)—24.07.2017.