1
THE  SUPREME COURT OF INDIA (ESTABLISHMENT
OF CIRCUIT BENCHES AT MUMBAI, CHENNAI
AND  KOLKATA)  BILL, 2016
By
SHRI RAJEEV SATAV, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of Circuit Benches of the Supreme Court of India
at Mumbai, Chennai and Kolkata.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Supreme Court  of India (Establishment of Circuit
Benches at Mumbai, Chennai and Kolkata) Act, 2016.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, not being later than three months from the
date of assent of the President, as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 146  of  2016
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
2.  There shall be established a Circuit Bench of the Supreme Court of India—
(a) at Mumbai and such number of Judges of the Supreme Court of India,
being not less than five, as the Chief Justice of India may, from time to time, with the
approval of the President, nominate, shall sit at Mumbai on a rotation basis, in order
to exercise the jurisdiction and power for the time being vested in the Supreme
Court of India in respect of cases arising in the States of Rajasthan, Gujarat,
Maharashtra, Goa, Madhya Pradesh, Union Territories of Dadra and Nagar Haveli,
and Daman and Diu and such other territories as may be notified by the Central
Government, from time to time, with approval of the Chief Justice of India;
(b) at Chennai and such number of Judges of the Supreme Court of India,
being not less than five, as the Chief Justice of India may, from time to time, with the
approval of the President, nominate, shall sit at Chennai on a rotation basis, in
order to exercise the jurisdiction and power for the time being vested in the Supreme
Court of India in respect of cases arising in the States of Andhra Pradesh, Odisha,
Kerala, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, Union Territories of Puducherry and Lakshadweep
and such other territories as may be notified by the Central Government, from time
to time, with approval of the Chief Justice of India; and
(c) at Kolkata and such number of Judges of the Supreme Court of India, being
not less than five, as the Chief Justice of India may, from time to time, with the
approval of the President, nominate, shall sit at Kolkata on a rotation basis, in order
to exercise the jurisdiction and power for the time being vested in the Supreme
Court of India in respect of cases arising in the States of Arunachal Pradesh, Assam,
Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, Sikkim,
Tripura, West Bengal, the Union Territory of Andaman and Nicobar Islands and
such other territories as may be notified by the Central Government, from time to
time, with approval of the Chief Justice of India.
Establishment
of Circuit
Benches of
the Supreme
Court of India
at Mumbai,
Chennai and
Kolkata.
5
10
15
20
25

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Law Commissions of India have examined the proposal of creation of regional Benches
of the Supreme Court of India on several occasions. Law Commissions in its 2nd, 6th, 15th,
20th, 26th, 29th and the 95th reports as well as Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice in their 20th (2007), 26th (2008) and
28th (2008) reports have continuously and vigorously emphasised on the setting up Benches
of Supreme Court of India at least on a trial basis.
Moreover, Law Commission of India in its 229th Report had observed that "The
agonies of a litigant coming to New Delhi from distant places like Chennai,
Thiruvananthapuram, Puducherry in the South, Gujarat, Maharashtra, Goa in the West,
Assam or other States in the East to attend a case in the Supreme Court can be imagined;
huge amount is spent on travel; bringing one's own lawyer who has handled the matter in
the High Court adds to the cost; adjournment becomes prohibitive; costs get multiplied".
The proposal, however, has not found favour with the Supreme Court. So the need is
to address the major issues raised against this proposal.
First issue against setting up of regional Benches of the Supreme Court has been
whether the Parliament of India has the jurisdiction to pass such a Bill. Article 130 of the
Constitution clearly states that the Supreme Court shall sit in Delhi or in such other place or
places, as the Chief Justice of India may, with the approval of the President, from time to
time, appoint. Therefore, passing a Bill in that direction with the assent of the President of
India will help in implementing the constitutional provision and will not go against it.
Second issue has been about shortage of Judges. The Bill proposes just five judges,
that too on a rotational basis, at each of the permanent Benches. The benefits of this clearly
overrides any impact at Supreme Court at Delhi, since the number of cases will also get
transferred in a proportional manner to the Benches.
Lastly, some experts feel that this could have an adverse impact on the constitutional
superiority of the Supreme Court. Nothing could be farther from the truth as the increase in
the faith of a common person that justice is tenable without travel across thousands of
kilometres would, any day, be much larger than any minor adjustment that the clerical
processes need to undertake in the short term.
The time has come for the Parliament to pass the Bill which ensures the accessibility
to justice irrespective of one's distance from Delhi and also for the Supreme Court to favour
this progressive legislation.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RAJEEV SATA V
February 10, 2016.
3
————
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLES 117(1) AND 117(3)
OF THE CONSTITUTION
[Copy of letter No. K-15019/6/2016-US.I dated 5 May, 2016 from
Shri D.V . Sadananda Gowda, Minister of Law and Justice to the Secretary General, Lok
Sabha].
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the Supreme Court of
India (Establishment of Circuit Benches at Mumbai, Chennai and Kolkata) Bill, 2016 by
Shri Rajeev Satav, M.P., recommends the introduction of the Bill under artile 117(1) and
consideration under article 117(3) of the Constitution in Lok Sabha.
S3 \F\BILL 2016\LS\4253LS

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides for the establishment of Circuit Benches of the Supreme
Court at Mumbai, Chennai and Kolkata. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure
to the tune of about rupees five crore per annum would be involved from the Consolidated
Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees eighty crores is also likely to be
involved.
4
S3 \F\BILL 2016\LS\4253LS

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of Circuit Benches of the Supreme Court of India
at Mumbai, Chennai and Kolkata.
————
(Shri Rajeev Satav, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—4253LS(S3)—02-07-2016.