1
THE RAILW A YS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2024
By
DR. ALOK KUMAR SUMAN , M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Railways Act, 1989.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India
as follows:—
1.(1) This Act may be called the Railways (Amendment) Act, 2024.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No. 146 of 2024
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title and
Commencement.
5

2
2.  After section 24 of the Railways Act, 1989, the following sections shall be
inserted, namely:—
“(24A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 22, 23 and 24
of the Act, the Central Government shall, by notification, sanction super
fast trains in North-Eastern Railway Zone via Thawe junction in the State of
Bihar.”.
Insertion
of new
section 24A.
24 of 1989.
5

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The section of Varanasi division which comprises Thawe-Gopalganj junction
in State of Bihar is facing number of challenges and disadvantage due to non-
availability of superfast trains for various metropolitan cities of the country. The
area has heavy passenger and trade specific potentialities. The Thawe junction in
Bihar of Varanasi division of the North-Eastern Railway is a residual Station with
number of challenges and disadvantages. Making railway connectivity from this
neglected section by providing the train facilities would provide ample revenue to
the Central Government and overcome difficulties of passengers.
Further, there is rush of pilgrims during the normal days and huge rush during
auspicious days. This area is the native place of lakhs of migrant labourers working
in different parts of the country who face difficulties due to non-availability of super
fast trains. Apart from this, the passengers of this area depend on bigger cities of
country for any specialized medical facilities and education, too. This section/area
does not have any direct train for Delhi or any other metropolitan cities.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Railways Act, 1989 with a view to
sanction super fast trains in North-Eastern Railway Zone via Thawe junction in the
State of Bihar to make railway connectivity for revenue earning to Railway by the
Central Government.
Hence this Bill.
NEW DELHI;                        ALOK KUMAR SUMAN
 July 19, 2024.

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill vide proposed section 24A seeks to sanction super fast
trains in North-Eastern Railway Zone via Thawe junction in the State of Bihar to
make railway connectivity for revenue earning to Railway by the Central
Government. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely to involve an annual recurring expenditure of
about rupees two hundred crore from  the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees three hundred crore is also likely
to be involved.

5
ANNEXURE
[EXTRACTS FROM THE RAILWAYS ACT, 1989]
(24 of 1989)
* * * * *
22. (1) The Central Government shall, before giving its sanction to the opening
of a railway under section 21, obtain a report from the Commissioner that—
(a) he has made a careful inspection of the railway and the rolling stock
that may be used thereon;
(b) the moving and fixed dimensions as laid down by the Central
Government have not been infringed;
(c) the structure of lines of rails, strength of bridges, general structural
character of the works and the size of, and maximum gross load upon, the
axles of any rolling stock, comply with the requirements laid down by the
Central Government; and
(d) in his opinion, the railway can be opened for the public carriage of
passengers without any danger to the public using it.
(2) If the Commissioner is of the opinion that the railway cannot be opened
without any danger to the public using it, he shall, in his report, state the grounds
therefor, as also the requirements which, in his opinion, are to be complied with
before sanction is given by the Central Government.
(3) The Central Government, after considering the report of the
Commissioner, may sanction the opening of a railway under section 21 as such or
subject to such conditions as may be considered necessary by it for the safety of
the public.
23. The provisions of sections 21 and 22 shall apply to the opening of the
following works if they form part of, or are directly connected with, a railway used
for the public carriage of passengers and have been constructed subsequent to the
giving of a report by the Commissioner under section 22, namely:—
(a) opening of additional lines of railway and deviation lines;
(b) opening of stations, junctions and level crossings;
(c) re-modelling of yards and re-building of bridges;
(d) introduction of electric traction; and
(e) any alteration or reconstruction materially affecting the structural
character of any work to which the provisions of sections 21 and 22 apply or
are extended by this section.
Sections 21
and 22 to
apply to the
opening of
certain works.
Formalities to
be complied
with before
giving
sanction to
the opening
of a railway.

6
24. When an accident has occurred on a railway resulting in a temporary
suspension of traffic, and either the original lines of rails and works have been
restored to their original standard or a temporary diversion has been laid for the
purpose of restoring communication, the original lines of rails and works so restored,
or the temporary diversion, as the case may be, may, without prior inspection by the
Commissioner, be opened for the public carriage of passengers, subject to the
following conditions, namely:—
(a) the railway servant incharge of the works undertaken by reason of the
accident has certified in writing that the opening of the restored lines of rails
and works, or of the temporary diversion will not in his opinion be attended
with danger to the public; and
(b) a notice of the opening of the lines of rails and works or the diversion
shall be sent immediately to the Commissioner.
* * * * *
Temporary
suspension of
traffic.

LOK  SABHA
A
BILL
further to amend the Railways Act, 1989.
(Dr. Alok Kumar Suman, M.P .)