Aඌ ංඇඍඋඈൽඎർൾൽ ංඇ Lඈ඄ Sൺൻඁൺ
                   
                                                       
          
Bill No. 146  of  2022
THE MAINTENANCE AND WELFARE OF PARENTS AND 
SENIOR CITIZENS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022
By
Sඁඋං  Kඎඅൽൾൾඉ Rൺං Sඁൺඋආൺ,  M.P.
A
BILL
to amend the Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens Act, 2007.
Bൾ it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third  Year of the Republic  of India as 
follows:—     
1. (1) This Act may be called the Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior 
Citizens (Amendment) Act, 2022.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and 
commencement.

   2. In section 21 of the Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens Act, 
2007, after sub-clause (iii), the following clause shall be inserted, namely: —
“(iiia) every senior citizen  with an annual income of less than rupees eight lakhs 
shall be entitled to a fixed pension amount not exceeding rupees twenty thousand per 
month from the Senior Citizen Welfare Fund, established under the Finance Act 2015, 
in such manner as may be prescribed:
   Provided that no pension shall be paid to a senior citizen, if such senior citizen 
or his immediate family member,—
   ( a)  has paid income tax during the last three financial years; or
   ( b)  is a permanent employee of  any State Government, the Central Government 
     or any Public Sector Undertaking.’’.
   
Amendment of 
section 21.

STATEMENT  OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
 As per estimations carried out in 2019, it was found that by the  year 2050, India 
would be home to 319 million elderly people, i.e., 19.5 per cent of the population. The 
country’s pension system, as it stands today, covers only 35 per cent of senior citizens. 
If it continues to operate at  such  rate, by the year 2050, 20 million, or 61.7 percent of 
India’s elderly population will be without any income security. The rising life expectancy 
have resulted in an increase in population aged 80 years and above, accounting for nearly 
1.1 crore people. When coupled with the ever-increasing trend of family nuclearization, 
age-related difficulties, and increased dependence on others, the economic vulnerability of 
senior citizens remains unquestionable. The Covid-19 pandemic has made it even more 
emergent to financially strengthen the elderly and senior citizens.
 A recent study concluded by the Institute for Competitiveness (IFC), conducted 
on behalf of the Economic Advisory Council to the Prime Minister suggested that the 
government should launch a pilot project on the universal pension income programme for 
all old people living in the districts identified under the Aspirational District Programme. It 
must also ensure that the pension is at least 50 per cent. more than the minimum wages in the 
country. The findings of the study also suggest that the scheme must be non-contributory and 
the overall pension amount be financed equally by the Central and the State Government. 
The pension amount must be based on budgetary taxation instruments and credited through 
direct benefit transfers. 
 Research has also found that universal pension is a flat benefit that is based not 
on means test such as income or asset, participation in labor force, retirement from paid 
employment, etc. It is the easiest to administer and has low administrative cost as compared 
to other schemes. It is also a recognized international best practice, with countries like 
Mauritius, Namibia, Botswana, Antigua, Bolivia, and Nepal having a universal pension 
scheme in place. All these countries have smaller economies than India, and belong to the 
band of countries that are termed developing.
 It is time now, that India emulate a policy to support its aging population during 
their silver years. Article 21 of the Indian Constitution recognizes the right of all citizens to 
lead a life of human dignity. As was observed in the landmark case of Francis Coralie Mullin 
v. Union Territory of Delhi, the right to live includes the right to live with human dignity 
and all that goes along with it, viz., the bare necessities of life such as adequate nutrition, 
clothing and shelter over the head and facilities for reading writing and expressing oneself 
in diverse forms, freely moving about and mixing and mingling with fellow human beings 
and must include the right to basic necessities the basic necessities of life and also the right 
to carry on functions and activities as constitute the bare minimum expression of human self. 
 Thus, it becomes essential that pension be provided to senior citizens universally 
to uphold their fundamental right to life with dignity. Furthermore, the Constitution of India 
casts a duty upon the State to make effective provisions for securing public assistance in 
cases of old age as under article 41. Article 46 requires the State to promote the economic 

interests of the weaker sections of the society with special care, protecting them from social 
justice and all forms of exploitation. By way of this amendment, an attempt is being made 
to fulfil these positive obligations on the State as enshrined under the Directive Principles of 
State Policy so as to allow all elderly people and senior citizens to come out of their lives of 
financial instability, dependence, and vulnerability.
 Hence this Bill.
     Nൾඐ Dൾඅඁං;                        KULDEEP  RAI  SHARMA
 16 February,  2022.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
 Clause 2 of the Bill provides for payment of fix pension amount not exceeding rupees 
twenty thousand to every senior citizen with an annual income of less than rupees eight 
lakhs from the Senior Citizen Welfare Fund.
  The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund 
of India.  It is likely to involve a recurring expenditure of about rupees two hundred crore 
per annum.
 A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be 
involved. 

       MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
 Clause 2 of the Bill provides for making rules for the manner for providing pension 
from Senior Citizens Welfare Fund. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the 
delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.

ANNEXURE 
Eඑඍඋൺർඍ ൿඋඈආ ඍඁൾ Mൺංඇඍൾඇൺඇർൾ ൺඇൽ Wൾඅൿൺඋൾ ඈൿ Pൺඋൾඇඍඌ ൺඇൽ Sൾඇංඈඋ 
Cංඍංඓൾඇඌ Aർඍ, 2007
(Aർඍ Nඈ. 56 ඈൿ 2007)
*                         *                            *          *
 21. The State Government shall, take all measures to ensure that— 
 ( i)  the provisions of this Act are given wide publicity through public media including 
the television, radio and the print, at regular intervals;
 ( ii)  the Central Government and State Government Officers, including the police 
officers and the members of the judicial service, are given periodic sensitization and 
awareness training on the issues relating to this Act; 
 ( iii) effective co-ordination between the services provided by the concerned Ministries 
or Departments dealing with law, home affairs, health and welfare, to address the issues 
relating to the welfare of the senior citizens and periodical review of the same is conducted.
*                         *                            *          *

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens Act, 2007.
————
(Shri  Kuldeep Rai Sharma,  M.P .)