1
THE INDIAN PENAL CODE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015
By
SHRI RABINDRA KUMAR JENA, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as  follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Indian Penal Code (Amendment) Act, 2015.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint:
Provided that different dates may be appointed for different States.
2. In the Indian Penal Code, 1860, in section 370A,—
(i) in sub-section (1), after the words “engages such minor for sexual exploitation
in any manner”, the words “or employs such minor in any form of forced labour or
service” shall be inserted; and
(ii) in sub-section (2), after the words “engages such person for sexual exploitation
in any manner”, the words “or employs such person in any form of forced labour or
service” shall be inserted.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 146 of  2015
Amendment
of section
370A.
5
10
45 of 1860.
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Section 370A of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 which was inserted by the Criminal Law
(Amendment) Act, 2013 provides—
(1) Whoever, knowingly or having reason to believe that a minor has been trafficked,
engages such minor for sexual exploitation in any manner, shall be punished with rigorous
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than five years, but which may extend to
seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
(2) Whoever, knowingly by or having reason to believe that a person has been
trafficked, engages such person for sexual exploitation in any manner, shall be punished with
rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three years, but which may
extend to five years, and shall also be liable to fine.
The Criminal Law (Amendment) Act, 2013 had replaced the erstwhile section 370 of the
Indian Penal Code, 1860 with new provision, which now criminalises anyone who recruits,
transports, harbours, transfers or receives  a person by using certain means including threats,
force, coercion, fraud, deception, abduction, abuse of power, or inducement for purpose of
exploitation. Exploitation includes any act of physical exploitation or any form of sexual
exploitation, slavery or practices similar to slavery, servitude or forced removal of organs.
However, given that the legislation came in as a follow-up to the Justice V erma
Committee Report it primarily focused on sexual exploitation of victims of trafficking. Thus,
section 370A of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 as it currently stands, does not cover the
exploitation of trafficked persons, children or adults, in other sectors of labour, such as
agriculture, domestic work, beggary rackets or in the construction industry, where rampant
exploitation of trafficked persons still exists.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend section 370A of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 in order
to punish a person who employs any minor or a person in any form of forced labour or
service with the same punishment as is provided for an act of sexual exploitation of a minor
or a person who has been a victim of trafficking.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RABINDRA KUMAR JENA
April  8, 2015.

3
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860
(45 OF 1860)
* * * * * * * *
370A. (1) Whoever, knowingly or having reason to believe that a minor has been
trafficked, engages such minor for sexual exploitation in any manner, shall be punished with
rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than five years, but which may
extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
(2) Whoever, knowingly by or having reason to believe that a person has been
trafficked, engages such person for sexual exploitation in any manner, shall be punished with
rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three years, but which may
extend to five years, and shall also be liable to fine.
* * * * * * * *
* * * * * * * *
Exploitation
of a trafficked
person.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
————
(Shri Rabindra Kumar Jena, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—292LS(S3)—30-04-2015.