1
THE PRE-CONCEPTION AND PRE-NATAL DIAGNOSTIC
TECHNIQUES (PROHIBITION OF SEX SELECTION)
AMENDMENT BILL, 2014
By
SHRI ARJUN MEGHWAL, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Pre-conception and Pre-natal Diagnostic Techniques (Prohibition
of Sex Selection) Act, 1994.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fifth  Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  (1)  This Act may be called the Pre-conception and Pre-natal Diagnostic Techniques
(Prohibition of Sex Selection) Amendment Act, 2014.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the Pre-conception and Pre-natal Diagnostic Techniques (Prohibition of Sex
Selection) Act, 1994 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), after section 16A, the
following section shall be inserted, namely:—
Short title
and
commencement.
Bill No. 147 of  2014
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Insertion of
new section
16B.
57 of 1994.
5

2
“16B. (1) The State Supervisory Boards and the Union territory Supervisory
Boards constituted under sub-section (1) of section 16A shall constitute District
Working Committees in each district under their respective jurisdiction for the
purpose of discharging their functions, particularly those referred to in clauses (i),
(iii) and (iv) of sub-section (1) of section 16A, at district level in an efficient manner:
Provided that the District Working Committees may perform such other functions
as may be assigned to them from time to time by respective State Supervisory Boards
or the Union territory Boards, as the case may be.
(2) The District Working Committee shall consist of,—
(i) an officer not below the rank of Additional District Magistrate—
Chairperson, ex-officio;
(ii)  Chief Medical Officer of a Government Hospital—Member, ex-officio;
(iii)  five eminent women activists representing women’s organization—
members; and
(iv) ten persons representing reputed social organizations actively
working in the district for at least ten years for prevention of determination of
sex or female foeticide—members.
(3) The District Working Committee shall meet at least once in every three
months and the quorum to constitute a meeting of the Committee shall be one-third of
the total number of members of the Committee.
(4) For the purpose of performing its functions and activities, the District Working
Committee shall follow such procedures as the State Supervisory Board or Union
territory Supervisory Board, as the case may be, may specify.”.
3.  In section 22 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3), for the words “imprisonment
for a term which may extend to three years and with fine which may extend to ten thousand
rupees”, the words “imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years and with fine
which may extend to one lakh rupees” shall be substituted.
4. In section 23 of the principal Act,—
(i) in sub-section (2), for the words “five years”, the words “ten years” shall be
substituted.
(ii) in sub-section (3), for the words “imprisonment for a term which may extend
to three years and with fine which may extend to fifty thousand rupees for the first
offence and for any subsequent offence with imprisonment which may extend to five
years and with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees”, the words “imprisonment
for a term which may extend to five years and with fine which may extend to one lakh
rupees for the first offence and for any subsequent offence with imprisonment which
may extend to ten years and with fine which may extend to two lakh rupees” shall be
substituted.
5. For section 25 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
“25. Whoever contravenes any of the provisions of this Act or any rules made
thereunder, for which no penalty has been elsewhere provided in this Act, shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months or with fine,
which may extend to ten thousand rupees or with both and in the case of continuing
contravention with an additional fine which may extend to five thousand rupees for
every day during which such contravention continues after the conviction for the first
such contravention.”.
Constitution
of District
Working
Committee.
Amendment
of section 22.
Amendment
of section 23.
Substitution
of new
section for
section 25.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The Pre-conception and Pre-natal Diagnostic Techniques (Prohibition of Sex Selection)
Act, 1994 was enacted with a view to prevent unscrupulous use of ultrasonography scans to
determine the sex of the unborn child. However, there has been no effective implementation
of the provisions of the Act to prevent female foeticide across the country. One of the prime
reasons for it is that there is no effective machinery available at village level to  District level
in the State to create awareness among the masses about female foeticide and to check the
increasing offences. Therefore, it is necessary to provide a mechanism in the Act itself for
constitution of District Working Committees comprising of social workers and officials of
district Administration in every District to create awareness among the masses and to
implement the provisions of the Act. There is also a need to provide stringent punishment
under the Act so as to deter people from committing offences.
The Bill seeks to provide for—
(a) constitution of District Working Committees at district level to create awareness
among the masses and to check increasing offences of female foeticide in every district; and
(b) enhancing the penalty for contravention of the Act so as to deter people from
committing such offences.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; ARJUN MEGHWAL
November 12, 2014.
3

4
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides for the Constitution of District Working Committees in
every district of the States and Union territories. The District Working Committee shall
consist of representatives of women organizations and social organizations working to
prevent determination of sex or female foeticide in the district. The State Governments have
to bear the expenditure in respect of travelling allowance, etc. to be paid to the members of
the District Working Committees from their respective Consolidated Funds. However, the
Central Government have to bear the expenditure in respect of District Working Committees
to be constituted in the Union territories. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve
expenditure out of the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that an annual recurring
expenditure to the tune of rupees one hundred crore is likely to be involved.
A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE PRE-CONCEPTION AND PRE-NA TAL DIAGNOSTIC TECHNIQUES (PROHIBITION
OF SEX SELECTION) ACT, 1994
(ACT NO. 57 OF 1994)
* * * * * * *
22. ( 1) * * * * *
(2) * * * * *
(3) Any person who contravenes the provisions of sub-section (1) or sub-section (2)
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and with
fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees.
* * * * * * *
23. ( 1) * * * * *
(2) The name of the registered medical practitioner shall be reported by the Appropriate
Authority to the State Medical Council concerned for taking necessary action including
suspension of the registration if the charges are framed by the court and till the case is
disposed of and on conviction for removal of his name from the register of the Council for a
period of five years for the first offence and permanently for the subsequent offence.
(3) Any person who seeks the aid of any Genetic Counselling Centre, Genetic Laboratory,
Genetic Clinic or ultrasound clinic or imaging clinic or of a medical geneticist, gynaecologist,
sonologist or imaging specialist or registered medical practitioner or any other person for sex
selection or for conducting pre-natal diagnostic techniques on any pregnant women for the
purposes other than those specified in sub-section (2) of section 4, he shall, be punishable
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and with fine which may extend
to fifty thousand rupees for the first offence and for any subsequent offence with imprisonment
which may extend to five years and with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees.
* * * * * * *
25. Whoever contravenes any of the provisions of this act or any rules made thereunder,
for which no penalty has been elsewhere provided in this act, shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months or with fine, which may extend to
one thousand rupees or with both and in the case of continuing contravention with an
additional fine which may extend to five hundred rupees for every day during which such
contravention continues after conviction for the first such contravention.
* * * * * * *
Prohibition of
advertisement
relating to
pre-conception
and pre-natal
determination
of sex and
punishment
for
contravention.
Offences and
penalties.
Penalty for
contravention
of the
provisions of
the Act or
rules for
which no
specific
punishment is
provided.
5

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Pre-conception and Pre-natal Diagnostic Techniques (Prohibition of
Sex Selection) Act, 1994.
————
(Shri Arjun Meghwal, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—2758LS(S3)—02.12.2014.