1
THE COMMISSION FOR THE FORMATION OF THE STATE OF
BUNDELKHAND BILL, 2015
By
SHRI BHAIRON PRASAD MISHRA, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of a Commission for the formation of a separate State of
Bundelkhand by reorganization of the existing States of Uttar Pradesh and
Madhya Pradesh and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called The Commission for the Formation of the State of
Bundelkhand Act, 2015.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 147 of 2015
5
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. It this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) Bundelkhand includes the districts of Hamirpur, Mahoba, Jhansi, Lalitpur,
Jalaun, Banda and Chitrakoot districts of the State of Uttar Pradesh; and Chattarpur,
Tikamgarh, Panna, Damoh, Sagar and Datia districts of the State of Madhya Pradesh;
and
(b) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
a Commission to study and report on the formation of a separate State of Bundelkhand by
reorganization of the existing States of Uttar Pradesh and Madhya Pradesh.
4. (1) The Commission shall consist of:—
(i) a Chairperson, who shall be a retired Judge of the Supreme Court; and
(ii) four members having at least ten years of experience in the field of social
service in the Bundelkhand region or having special knowledge in the field of regional
development,
to be appointed by the Central Government, in such manner, as may be prescribed.
(2) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service
of, the Chairperson and members of the Commission shall be such as may be prescribed.
(3) The Commission shall have its office at Banda in the State of Uttar Pradesh.
(4) The Central Government shall provide such number of officers and staff to the
Commission as may be required for its efficient functioning.
5. (1) The Commission shall perform such functions with regard to formation of a
separate State of Bundelkhand as may be assigned to it by the Central Government.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision, the Commission
shall make recommendation on,—
(i) allocation of assets to the proposed State of Bundelkhand;
(ii) allocation of Government employees and officers to the proposed State of
Bundelkhand;
(iii) in consultation with the Election Commission of India, delimitation of
constituencies for elections to the House of the People and Legislative Assemblies of
the States of Uttar Pradesh and Madhya Pradesh and the proposed State of
Bundelkhand; and
(iv) allocation of water and natural resources to the proposed State of
Bundelkhand.
6. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide to the Commission such sums of money as the Central Government
may think fit for the purposes of this Act.
7. The Commission shall have the power to secure the assistance of any office or
agency under the administrative control of the existing States of Uttar Pradesh or Madhya
Pradesh for carrying out the functions assigned to it under this Act.
8. (1) The Commission shall submit its report on the formation of a separate State of
Bundelkhand to the Central Government within a period of one year from the date of its first
sitting:
Definitions.
Functions of
the
Commission.
Central
Government
to provide
adequate
funds.
Power of the
Commission
to call upon
to secure
assistance.
Commission
for the
formation of
a separate
State of
Bundelkhand.
Composition
of the
Commission.
Term of the
Commission.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
Provided that the Central Government may, on a request made by the Commission
extend the time for submission of the report for such period, being not more than six months
as it may deem appropriate.
9. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of the Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
3
Power to
make rules.5
10

4
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
One of the poorest and backward regions in the country, Bundelkhand in Central
India is a drought-prone area with limited natural resources, severe water scarcity, improper
land planning and management, poor industrial development, limited livelihood options,
gender discrimination and poor economic growth. The people of this region have remained
politically and economically separated from mainstream and have very low levels of economic
and human development.
Lack of information and awareness measures to empower communities, gender
discrimination, exclusion of girls from education, inadequate skills and limited capacity
building opportunities, poor access to development services, very little access to livelihoods
and lack of collaborative action from different development agencies are the major issues
that need to be addressed and resolved.
The region is economically and industrially one of the most backward region in India.
Lack of resources, poor communications and infertile land are some of the reasons for
under-development of the region. Since the early 1960s, there has been a movement for
establishing a Bundelkhand State for proper development of the region. Bundelkhand is
geographically the central part of India covering some part of the State of Madhya Pradesh
and some part of  the State of Uttar Pradesh. In spite of being rich in minerals, the people of
Bundelkhand are very poor and the region is underdeveloped and underrepresented in
State and Central politics. There are several local parties and organisations—some are
promoting further development of the region and some seeking separate statehood.
Bundelkhand region falls in and is being administered by two States. The States of
Uttar Pradesh and Madhya Pradesh possess different strategy and development orientation.
This is the root cause of all crisis. The common region of Bundelkhand is being administered
by two different approaches. Now how this condition affects development can be illustrated
by drawing one’s attention towards ravine formation. Ravine formation is a natural process
which gets accelerated when there is deforestation. Now both these States are having a
separate policy regarding managing ravines. So ravine formation is increasing while the
authorities in the both States capital blame each other.
There are many other such examples but the root cause of all this is the lack of
political organisation. Thus, the demand for a separate State of Bundelkhand is being raised
time and again.
The people of Bundelkhand have the right to claim political entity that will play
pivotal role in shaping the destiny of this poorest region in the country.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; BHAIRON PRASAD MISHRA
March 26, 2015.

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the constitution of a Commission for the formation of
a separate State of Bundelkhand. Clause 4 provides for the salary and allowances of the
Chairperson and members of the Commission. Clause 6 provides for payment of funds to
the Commission by the Central Government. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure
of rupees twenty crore per annum would be involved. A non-recurring expenditure of about
rupees five crore is also likely to be involved.

6
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the provisions of the Bill.
As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of legislative power is
of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of a Commission for the formation of a separate State of
Bundelkhand by reorganization of the existing States of Uttar Pradesh and
Madhya Pradesh and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Bhairon Prasad Mishra, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—373LS(S3)—30-04-2015.