     AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
  Bill No. 147 of 2024
THE CRIMINAL LAWS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2024
By
DR. ALOK KUMAR SUMAN, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 and the
Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic
of India as follows:–
1. (1)  This Act may be called  the Criminal Laws (Amendment) Act,
2024.
(2)   It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
5

2. In the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 (hereinafter referred to as
Sanhita), after section 106, the following section shall be inserted, namely,–
“106A. Whoever, being a registered medical practitioner, causes the death
of any person during medical treatment due to any medical negligence
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both:
Provided that causing the death of a person during medical treatment or
intervention done with consent in accordance with the section 88 of this
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita shall not be considered as medical negligence,
unless the contrary is proved supported by a team of medical experts or a
medical Board.
Explanation.— For the purpose of this section, “registered medical
practitioner” means a medical practitioner who possesses any medical
qualification recognised under the National Medical Commission Act, 2019
(30 of 2019) or the National Commission for Homeopathy Act, 2020 (15 of
2020), or the National Commission on for Indian system of Medicine Act,
2020 (14 of 2020) and or the National Commission for Allied and Healthcare
Professions Act, 2021 (14 of 2021).”.
3.  After section 119 of the Sanhita the following section shall be inserted,
namely,–
“119A. Whoever,––
(i) commits or abets the commission of an act of violence against an
healthcare service personnel; or
(ii) abets or causes damage or loss to any property of a healthcare service
personnel, shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which shall not be
less than three months, but which may extend to five years, and with fine,
which shall not be less than fifty thousand rupees, but which may extend to
two lakh rupees:
Provided that while committing an act of violence against a healthcare
service personnel if a person causes grievous hurt as defined in section 116 to
healthcare service personnel, he shall be punished with imprisonment for a
term which shall not be less than six months, but which may extend to seven
years and with fine, which shall not be less than one lakh rupees, but which
may extend to five lakh rupees.”.
4. In the First Schedule to the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023
under the heading “I.— OFFENCES UNDER THE BHARATIY A NYAYA
SANHITA”,—
Insertion of
new section
106A.
45  of 2023.
Insertion of
new section
119A.
5
10
Causing
death by
medical
negligence.
Violence
against health
care service
personnel and
damage to
property.
15
20
Amendment
of  First
Schedule.
2
25
30
3546  of 2023.

(b) after the entries relating to section 119(2), the following entry shall
be inserted, namely:–
1   2     3     4 5 6
119AViolence
against
Healthcare
service
professionals
Imprisonment
which shall not
be less than
three months
but which  may
extend upto
five years and
fine, which
shall not be
less than fifty
thousand but
which may
extend.
cognizable Court of
Session
Non-
bailable
3
5
10
15

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Constitution of India guarantees to all persons the right to life
and personal liberty and the equal protection of laws to all classes of
citizens. It is deemed necessary and expedient to enact legislation for
the protection of these rights guaranteed by the Constitution. In this
regard,   the Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Jacob Mathew vs.
State of Punjab AIR 2005 SC3180; (2005) had afforded necessary
guidelines and procedures, to be adopted by the Central and State
Government for proceeding against a medical professional to be held
responsible under Section 106(1) of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023.
The Ethics and Medical Registration Board of the National Medical
Commission [Letter No. NMC/MCI/EMRB/C-12015/0023/2021/ETHICS/
022426 dated-29/09/2021 in compliance with the mandamus issued by the
Apex Court (vide supra) has framed specific guidelines needed for
prosecution of doctors for causing death of innocent patients due to ‘gross’
medical negligence. The Hon’ble Supreme Court in the aforesaid judgment
(vide supra) had coined a few terms to deal with the cases of death due
to medical negligence. Since the provisions available under section 106 of
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 is generic in nature and as such insufficient
to deal with the professional medical negligence, which is more complex
where the help of medical experts become necessary. The constitution
bench of the Hon’ble Supreme Court in the matter of Lalita Kumari vs.
State of U.P. & OR’s, [2 SCC 1 : (2014) 1 SCC (Cri) 524] vide Judgment
dated 12.11.2013 (and partially modified on 05.03.2014) held that while
ensuring and protecting the rights of the accused and the complainant, a
preliminary inquiry (in medical negligence cases) should be made time bound
and in any case it should not exceed 7 days. The fact of such delay and
the causes of it must be reflected in the General Diary entry.
The Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Jacob Mathew vs. State
of Punjab opined that to prosecute a medical professional for negligence
under criminal law it must be shown that the accused did something or
failed to do something which in the given facts and circumstances no
medical professional in his ordinary senses and prudence would have done
or failed to do. The hazard taken by the accused doctor should be of such
a nature that the injury which resulted was most likely imminent. Negligence
to be established by prosecution must be culpable or gross and not the
negligence merely base upon an error of judgment. And death should have
been the direct cause. The Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Jacob
Mathew vs. State of Punjab observed that the word ‘gross’ has not been
used in section 106(1) of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, yet it is
settled that in criminal law negligence or recklessness, to be so held, must
be of such a high degree as to be ‘gross’. The expression ‘rash or negligent
act’ as occurring in Section 106(1) of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023
has to be read as qualified by the word ‘grossly’.
4

5
To cope with the difficulty of unjust litigations against doctors, the
Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Jacob Mathew vs. State of Punjab
issued some guidelines for proper investigations. But almost sixteen years
have passed by and in the absence of a clear cut section in Bharatiya
Nyaya Sanhita, our police responsible to register an FIR , is still groping in
the dark to find out a suitable.
Section of law to proceed with case of death due to medical negligence
cases, resulting thereby, such cases are registered ‘usually’ under Section
105 Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, or ‘occasionally’ under Section 106C(1)
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023. This mix up has made the life of both the
complainant and the accused miserable. The accused is harassed by the
police and invariably the FIR is quashed by the Hon’ble courts for want of
proper investigations and as such justice is eluded for both. This frustrates
the general public and now-a-days, the hapless people, in case of any
eventuality, resort to violence to press for unjust compensation on the spot.
However, in the Epidemic Diseases (Amendment) Act, 2020, some
specific Sections to deal with the cases of violence have been added.
Since the incidence of violence is not limited to epidemic period only, the
same provisions are required to be added in criminal laws to deal with the
cases of violence during the time of peace. The Hon’ble Supreme Court in
the case of Jacob Mathew vs. State of Punjab quoted that ‘Medical
Professionals in Criminal Law- The criminal law has invariably placed the
medical professionals on a pedestal different from ordinary mortals. The
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita enacted in the year 2023 sets out a few vocal
examples. Section 26 in the Chapter on General Exceptions provides
exemption for acts not intended to cause death, done by consent in good
faith for person’s benefit. Section 30 provides for exemption for acts done
in good faith for the benefit of a person without his consent though the
acts cause harm to a person and that person has not consented to suffer
such harm. There are four exceptions listed in the Section which is not
necessary in this context to deal with. Section 31 saves from criminality
certain communications made in good faith. The present day scenario
demands some new sections in criminal law to deal with the prevailing
situation properly.
Hence this Bill.
   NEW DELHI;       ALOK KUMAR SUMAN
August 7, 2024

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
 further to amend the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 and  the Bharatiya
Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023.
————
(Dr. Alok Kumar Suman, M.P .)