5
Short title and 
commencement.
Amendment of 
article 312.
10
As introduced in Lok Sabha
 
Bill No. 147 of 2022
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022
By
Dr. Shrikant Eknath Shinde, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
 B e it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:—
 1. ( 1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2022.
  ( 2) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
 2. In article 312 of the Constitution:—
(a) in clause ( 1), for the words “all-India judicial service”, the words “all-India 
judicial service and an all-India Health Service” shall be substituted;
(b) after clause (3), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
     “(3A) The all-India health service referred to in clause (1) shall not include any 
post inferior to that of the Chief Medical Officer of a district’’.

2
 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
 By creating this all-India service under the proposed Bill it will enhance the quality 
of medical services within the nation and accountability of the medical practitioners at the 
same time but by protecting their interest at the same time. All these steps shall be taken in 
order to improve the quality of life for both the common citizens of India and the medical 
practitioners of the country while retaining the best talent and avoiding the so-called brain 
drain.
 India had an ‘Indian Medical Service’ in British-ruled India, a military medical service, 
which was abolished when India got independence in 1947. Ever since, multiple committees 
and commissions have recommended the re-introduction of this service. The All-India 
Service Act of 1951 mentions ‘The Indian Medical and Health Service’ as an All-India 
Service, but never implemented for reasons that are unknown till date.
 The 15th Finance Commission has also recommended that an All-India Medical and 
Health Service be established. Furthermore, the Covid pandemic has led to a renewed 
demand for the constitution of the Indian Medical & Health Service (IMHS).To explain this 
point further, note that in India, there are not just allopathic doctors but also doctors of the 
alternative systems of medicine, commonly known as AYUSH doctors. In fact, there is also 
a separate Ministry of AYUSH, and even Indian missions abroad have AYUSH facilitation 
centres. These systems of medicine have entirely different concepts of disease causation and 
cure. Further, within each of these systems of medicine, there will be graduates in medicine 
and post-graduates in medicine. The point here is that a common entrance exam to the 
Indian Medical Service will lead to the selection of a very diverse group whose existing 
skill sets will have to be fully utilised, and new skill sets added, if the true potential of such 
a service is to be realised.
 The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the constitution with a view to provide for a 
constitutional provision for creation of all-India health services.
 The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
   New Delhi;            SHRIKANT EKNATH SHINDE 
5 July, 2022

3
ANNEXURE
Extract from the Constitution of India 
 *                      *               *           *   *  
 312. (1) Notwithstanding anything in Chapter VI of Part VI or Part XI, if the Council 
of States has declared by resolution supported by not less than two-thirds of the members 
present and voting that it is necessary or expedient in the national interest so to do, Parliament 
may by law provide for the creation of one or more all India services (including an all-India 
judicial service) common to the Union and the States, and, subject to the other provisions of 
this Chapter, regulate the recruitment, and the conditions of service of persons appointed, to 
any such service. 
 ( 2) The services known at the commencement of this Constitution as the Indian 
Administrative Service and the Indian Police Service shall be deemed to be services created 
by Parliament under this article.
 ( 3) The all-India judicial service referred to in clause ( 1) shall not include any post 
inferior to that of a district judge as defined in article 236. 
 ( 4) The law providing for the creation of the all-India judicial service aforesaid may 
contain such provisions for the amendment of Chapter VI of Part VI as may be necessary 
for giving effect to the provisions of that law and no such law shall be deemed to be an 
amendment of this Constitution for the purposes of article 368.
 *                      *               *           *   *  
  
    
All-India 
services.

LOK SABHA
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
(Dr. Shrikant Eknath Shinde, M.P.) 