 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bill No. 147 of 2026 
 
THE BANKERS’ BOOKS EVIDENCE BILL, 2026 
A 
BILL 
to provide for law relating to evidence with respect to bankers’ books and to align 
it with contemporary digital banking practices and for matters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy -seventh Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:— 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Bankers’ Books Evidence Act, 2026. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,–– 
(a) “bank” and “banker” mean— 
(i) any company or corporation carrying on the bu siness of 
banking; 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Short title and 
commencement. 
 
 
 
Definitions. 

2 
 
 
  (ii) any entity or class of entities operating in financial sector, to 
whose books the provisions of this Act shall have been extended as 
hereinafter provided; 
(iii) any post office savings bank or money order office; 
(b) “bankers’ books” include ledgers, day -books, cash-books, account 
books and all other records used in the ordinary course of business of the bank, 
whether kept in written or physical form or stored in any form of data storage 
mechanisms such as electronic or digital form, or otherwise, either onsite or 
at any offsite or virtual or cloud location, including a back -up or disaster 
recovery site, or both; 
(c) “certified copy”, in relation to any entry or information contained in 
the bankers’ book, shall mean the following, namely:— 
(i) where the bankers’ book is maintained in written or physical 
form, a copy of any entry or information in such books toget her with a 
certificate referred to in sub-section (1) of section 3; and  
(ii) where the bankers’ book is maintained in any other mode of 
data storage mechanisms, such as, electronic or digital form or 
otherwise, a copy of any entry or information in such b ankers’ book, 
which is printed on paper, stored, recorded or copied in optical or 
magnetic media or semi -conductor memory, or otherwise stored, 
recorded or copied in any electronic or digital form, together with the 
certificate in accordance with the provi sions of sub -section ( 2) of   
section 3; 
(d) “company” means any company as defined in clause ( 20) of              
section 2 of the Companies Act, 2013 and includes a foreign company within 
the meaning of clause (42) of the said section; 
(e) “corporation” means any body corporate established by or under any 
law for the time being in force in India and includes the Reserve Bank of India, 
the State Bank of India or any corresponding new bank constituted under the 
Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970 
and the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings)           
Act, 1980; 
(f) “legal proceeding” means—  
(i) any proceeding or inquiry in which evidence is or may be taken;  
(ii) an arbitration; and  
(iii) any invest igation or inquiry under the Bharatiya Nagarik 
Suraksha Sanhita, 2023, or under any other law for the time being in 
force for the collection of evidence, conducted by a police officer, or by 
any other person (not being a Magistrate) authorised in this behalf by a 
Magistrate or by any law for the time being in force; 
(g) “notification” means a notification published in the Gazette of India 
and the expression “notify” with its grammatical variation and cognate 
expressions shall be construed accordingly; and 
(h) “trial” means any hearing before the Court at which evidence                        
is taken. 
(2) Words and expressions used herein and not defined but defined in the 
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996, the Information Technology Act, 2000, the 
Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 and the Bharatiya Sakshya           
Adhiniyam, 2023, shall have the same meanings as assigned to them in the                     
said Acts. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35 
 
 
 
 
 
 
40 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
45 
 
 
 
 
 
 
50 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
18 of 2013. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 of 1970. 
 
 
40 of 1980. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
46 of 2023. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
26 of 1996. 
 
21 of 2000. 
 
46 of 2023. 
 
 
47 of 2023. 

3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
21 of 2000. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
40 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 45 
 
3. ( 1) Every copy of any entry or information of the bankers’ books, 
maintained in written or physical form, as referred to in sub-clause (i) of clause (c) 
of sub-section (1) of section 2, shall be accompanied by a certificate stating the 
following, namely:— 
(a) that the said copy is a true and correct copy of such entry or 
information; 
(b) that such entry or information is contained in one of the ordinary 
books of the bank and was made in the usual and ordinary course of business 
of the bank;  
(c) that such books are still in the custody of the bank, but where the 
book from which such copy was prepared was destroyed, it was destroyed in 
the usual course of business of the bank after the date on which the copy had 
been so prepared;  
(d) that such copy itself ensures its accuracy, if that copy was obtained 
by mechanical or other process; and 
(e) such other conditions as may be notified by the Central Government,  
in such form as specified in the First Schedule. 
(2) Every copy of any entry or information of the bankers’ books, maintained 
in any mode of data storage mechanisms, such as, electronic or digital form or 
otherwise, as referred to in sub -clause ( ii) of clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1) of             
section 2, shall be accompanied by a certificate stating the following, namely:–– 
(a) the particulars of the computer system or device involved in the 
production of the said copy from bankers’ books as may be appropriate for the 
purpose of showing that the said copy was produced by a computer system or 
device referred to in clauses (a) to (e) of sub-section (2) of section 7; and 
(b) specifying any of the matters to which the conditions mentioned in 
section 7 relate,  
in such form as specified in the Second Schedule. 
(3) Every certificate referred to in sub-sections (1) and (2) shall bear the date 
of its issue, be signed or authenticated, either manually or by means of digital or 
electronic signature in accordance with the provisions of the Information 
Technology Act, 2000, by the branch head or the office head or any other officer of 
the bank duly authorised by the bank in this behalf, and shall state therein the full 
name and official designation of the officer so signing or authenticating: 
Provided that for the purposes of this section it shall be sufficient for a matter 
to be stated to the best of the knowledge and belief of the person stating it in the 
certificates specified in the respective Schedule. 
4. The Central Government may, if it considers necessary or expedient so to 
do, from time to time, by notification, extend the application of the provisions of 
this Act to the books of any entity or class of entities operating in the financial sector, 
subject to such con ditions, exceptions or modifications as may be specified in the 
notification, and the Central Government may, in like manner, rescind, vary or 
modify any such notification. 
5. Subject to the provisions of this Act, a certified copy of any entry in a 
banker’s book shall in all legal proceedings be received as prima facie evidence of 
the existence of such entry and shall be admitted as evidence of the matters, 
transactions and accounts therein recorded in every case where, and to the same 
extent as, the origi nal entry itself is now admissible by law, but not further or 
otherwise. 
 
 
Conditions for a 
certified copy. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Power to extend 
provisions of 
Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Mode of proof 
of entries in 
bankers’ books. 

4 
 
 
 
Admissibility of 
electronic or 
digital records. 
 
 
 
 
 
Conditions for 
admissibility of 
records 
maintained in 
electronic or 
digital form. 
 
 
 6. Notwithstanding of anything contained in any other law for the time being 
in force, the admissibility of an electro nic or digital record of a banker’s book in 
evidence, shall not be denied on the ground that it is an electronic or digital record 
and such record shall, subject to the conditions specified in section 7, be admissible, 
valid and legally enforceable, as other evidence.  
7. (1) The conditions to be satisfied, in relation to the information or record of 
banker’s book maintained in electronic or digital form, for its admissibility, validity 
and enforceability as evidence, shall be following, namely:—  
(a) the copy of the record w as produced by a computer system or 
communication device during the period over which such computer system or 
communication device was used regularly to create, store, or process 
information for the purposes of any activity regularly carried on over that 
period by the person having lawful control over the use of the computer system 
or communication device; 
(b) during the said period, information of the kind contained in such copy 
of the record or, of the kind from which the information so contained is 
derived, was regularly fed into the computer system or communication device 
in the ordinary course of the said activities; 
(c) throughout the material part of the said period, the computer system 
or communication device was operating properly, or, if not, then in respect of 
any period in which it was not operating properly or was out of operation 
during that part of the period, was not such as to affect the said record or the 
accuracy of its contents; 
(d) the information contained in such copy of the record repr oduces, or 
was derived from, such information fed into the computer system or 
communication device in the ordinary course of the said activities; 
(e) the said copy is a true copy of such entry or information and was 
prepared from all the relevant records, and it correctly represents, or is 
appropriately derived from, such records; 
(f) the data entry or any other operation had been performed only by 
authorised persons after taking adequate safeguards and no unauthorised 
alteration or change of the data is ob served or detected during the relevant 
time; 
(g) adequate safeguards were taken to transfer the data relating to such 
entry or the information accurately from the computer system or 
communication device to an identifiable removable media, including but not 
limited to optical or magnetic media, semiconductor memory, discs or 
otherwise, in any electronic or digital form, and all steps for safe storage and 
custody of such removable device were taken; 
(h) no tampering with the system or other event which may be essential 
for establishing the integrity and accuracy of the system  is observed or 
detected;  
(i) the network, devices and the data contained therein were secure and 
equipped to meet the challenge of cyber risks or threats; and 
(j) such other conditions as may be notified by the Central Government. 
(2) Where over any period, the function of creating, storing or processing entry 
or information for the purposes of any activity regularly carried on over that period 
as mentioned in clause (a) of sub-section (1) was regularly performed by means of 
one or more computer systems or communication devices, whether–– 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
40 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 45 
 
 
 

5 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
40 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 45 
 
(a) in standalone mode; or 
(b) on a computer system; or 
(c) on a computer network; or 
(d) on a computer resource enabling information creation or providing 
information processing and storage; or  
(e) through an intermediary,  
all such computer system or communication device used for that purpose during that 
period shall be treated for the purposes of this section as constituting a single 
computer system or communication device and the references in this Act to a 
computer system or communication device shall be construed accordingly. 
8. (1) No officer of a bank shall, in any legal proceeding to which the bank is 
not a party, be compelled to produce any banker’s book, the contents of which may 
be proved under this Act, or to appear as a witness to prove the matters, transactions 
and accounts recorded therein, unless by order of the Court made for special cause, 
to be recorded in writing. 
(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1), the expression “special cause” means 
the following, namely:–– 
(a) where accuracy or genuineness of the entry or information in the 
bankers’ book is doubtful; or  
(b) where any event has occurred, which suggest that the regularity or 
ordinary nature of record keeping in the bank is interrupted; or 
(c) where the bank does not comply with any order made under          
section 9. 
9. (1) On an application by any party to a leg al proceeding, the Court may 
order that such party be at liberty to inspect and take copies of any entries in a 
banker’s book for any of the purposes of such proceeding, or may order the bank to 
prepare and produce, within such period as may be specified i n such order, the 
certified copies of all such entries, accompanied by a further certificate that no other 
entries are to be found in the books of the bank relevant to the matters in issue in 
such proceeding, and such further certificate shall be dated and  signed or 
authenticated in the manner specified in sub-section (3) of section 3. 
(2) An order under this section or section 8 may be made either with or without 
summoning the bank and shall be served on the bank three clear days (exclusive of 
bank holidays) before the same is to be complied with, unless the Court otherwise 
directs. 
(3) The bank may, at any time before the expiry of the period provided for 
compliance of any order in sub-section (2), either offer to produce their books at the 
trial or give notice of their intention to show cause against such order and thereupon 
the same shall not be enforced without being heard before making any further order. 
10. (1) The costs of any application to the Court under or for the purposes of 
this Act and the cost s of anything done or to be done under an order of the Court 
made under or for the purposes of this Act shall be in the discretion of the Court, 
which may further order that such costs or any part thereof be paid by the party to 
the bank, or by the bank to any party where such party had incurred expenditure in 
consequence of any fault or improper delay on the part of the bank. 
(2) Any order made under this section for the payment of costs to or by a bank, 
may be enforced as if the bank were a party to the proceeding. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Case in which 
officer of bank 
not compellable 
to produce 
books. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Inspection of 
books by order 
of Court. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Costs. 

6 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Order of Court 
to be construed 
as order made by 
specified officer. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Power of Central 
Government to 
amend 
Schedules. 
 
Protection of 
action taken in 
good faith. 
 
Power to remove 
difficulties. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Laying before 
Parliament. 
 
Repeal and 
savings. 
 (3) Any order under this section awarding costs may, on an application to any 
Civil Court designated in the order, shall be executed by such Court as if the order 
were a decree for money passed by itself. 
(4) Nothing contained in sub-section (3) shall be construed to derogate from 
any power, which the Court mak ing the order may possess for the enforcement of 
its directions with respect to the payment of costs. 
11. (1) Where the provisions of section 8, 9 or 10 are applied for conduct of 
any investigation or inquiry referred to in sub -clause ( iii) of clause ( f) o f                             
sub-section (1) of section 2, the order of Court referred to in the said sections shall 
be construed as referring to an order made by an officer not below the rank of a 
Superintendent of Police or such other officer as may be specified in this behalf by 
the appropriate Government. 
(2) In sub -section (1), the expression “appropriate Government” means the 
Government by which the police officer or any other person conducting the 
investigation or inquiry is employed. 
12. The Central Government may, by notification, modify the certificates 
specified in the Schedules from time to time, as may be necessary, to give effect to 
the provisions of this Act. 
13. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against any person 
for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act. 
14. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the 
Central Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such 
provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may be necessary or 
expedient for removing the difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry 
of two years from the date of commencement of this Act. 
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after 
it is made, before each House of Parliament. 
15. Every notification issued under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be 
after it is issued, before each House of Parliament. 
16. (1) The Bankers’ Books Evidence Act, 1891 is hereby repealed. 
(2) Notwithstanding the repeal of the enactment referred to in sub-section (1), 
such repeal shall not affect— 
(a) the previous operation of the enactment so repealed and orders or 
anything duly done or suffered thereunder; or  
(b) any right, privilege, obligation or liability, acquired, accrued or 
incurred under the enactment so repealed; or 
(c) any investigation, inquiry, legal proceeding or remedy in respect of 
any such right, privilege, obligation, liability, penalty, forfeiture or 
punishment; or 
(d) the previous operation of any certificate in respect of any entry or 
information in a banker’s book, or notification or order so issued, amended, 
repealed, superseded or rescinded or anything duly done or suffered under the 
enactment so repealed; or  
(e) any proceeding including that relating to an appeal, review or 
reference, instituted before, on, or after the date of commencement of this Act 
under the repealed enactment and such proceeding shall be con tinued under 
the said enactment as if this Act had not come into force and the said enactment 
had not been repealed; or 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
40 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
45 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
18 of 1891. 
 
 
 

7 
10 of 1897. 
5 
(f) any reference to the repealed enactment in any other legislation, rule,
order, or any other legal instrument shall, in so far as it is not inconsistent with 
the provisions of this Act, be construed as a reference to this Act or its 
corresponding provisions; or 
(g) revive anything not in force or existing at the time of such repeal.
(3) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section (2), the provisions of
section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 shall apply with regard to the effect of 
repeal. 

8 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
[See section 3(1)] 
CERTIFICATE 
(To be filled by the Branch Head or Office Head or such other officer of the 
bank duly authorised by the bank in this behalf) 
I, _________________(Name), Son/daughter/spouse of ____________ 
residing/employed at____________________________ (Branch/Office Address) 
do hereby solemnly affirm and sincerely state and submit to the best of the 
knowledge and belief as follows:—  
(a) that the copy of the entry or information is a true and correct copy of
such entry or information; 
(b) that such entry or information is contained in one of the ordinary
books of the bank and was made in the usual and ordinary course of business 
of the bank; 
(c) that such books are still in the custody of the bank, but where the
book from which such copy was prepared was destroyed, it was destroyed in 
the usual course of business of the bank after the date on which the copy had 
been so prepared; and 
(d) that such copy itself ensures its accuracy, if that copy was obtained
by mechanical or other process. 
Date (DD/MM/YYYY): _____   (Full name and signature) 
Place: ____________         Official Designation 

9 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE 
[See section 3(2)] 
CERTIFICATE 
(To be filled by the Branch Head or Office Head or such other officer of the 
bank duly authorised by the bank in this behalf) 
I, _______________(Name), Son/daughter/spouse of _______________ 
residing/employed at __________________________ (Branch/Office Address) do 
hereby solemnly affirm and sincerely state and submit to the best of the knowledge 
and belief as follows:—  
(a) the copy of the entry or information is produced from the computer
system or communication device (hereinafter referred to as “the system”) 
being described as ____________________________________ ( brief 
particulars of the system be provided (see section 3(2)(a)); 
(b) the said copy of the record was produced by the system du ring the
period over which the said system was regularly used to create, store, or 
process information for the purpose of any activities regularly carried on over 
that period by the person having lawful control over its use; 
(c) during the said period, information of the kind contained in such copy
of the record or of the kind from which the information so contained is derived 
was regularly fed into the system in the ordinary course of the said activities; 
(d) throughout the material part of the said period , the system was
operating properly or, if not, then in respect of any period in which it was not 
operating properly or was out of operation during that part of the period, was 
not such as to affect the record or the accuracy of its contents; 
(e) the information contained in such copy of the record reproduces or is
derived from such information fed into the system in the ordinary course of 
the said activities; 
(f) the said copy is a true copy of such entry or information and is
prepared from all the relevan t records, and correctly represents or 
appropriately derived from such record; 
(g) data entry or any other operations had been performed only by
authorised persons and no unauthorised alteration or change of the data is 
observed or detected during the relevant time; 
(h) adequate safeguards were taken to transfer the data relating to such
entry or the information accurately from the computer system or 
communication device to an identifiable removable media, including but not 
limited to optical or magnetic me dia, semiconductor memory, discs or 
otherwise, in any electronic or digital form, and all steps for safe storage and 
custody of such removable device were taken; 
(i) no tampering with the system or other event which may vouch for the
integrity and accuracy of the system, were observed or detected; and 
(j) the network, devices, and the data contained therein are secure and
equipped to meet the challenge of cyber risks or threats. 
Date (DD/MM/YYYY): _____   (Full name and signature) 
Place: ____________  Official Designation 

10 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Bankers’ Books Evidence Act, 1891 was enacted to facilitate the use of 
certified copies of bank records as evidence in legal proceedings without requiring 
production of the original records. The Act was enacted at a time when banking 
records were predominantly maintained in physical form. With the advancement of 
technology and growth of digital banking, bank records are increasingly created, 
stored and maintained using contemporary technology. It has, therefore, become 
necessary to modernise and strengt hen the existing legal framework to meet the 
requirements of the present banking system.  
2. Accordingly, it is proposed to repeal the Bankers’ Books Evidence
Act, 1891 and introduce the Bankers’ Books Evidence Bill, 2026, which, inter alia, 
provides for the following:–– 
(a) to expand the scope of the definition of “bankers’ books” to include
all forms of records maintained by banks, whether in physical, electronic, 
digital, virtual, cloud -based or in any other form, thereby provid ing a 
comprehensive, technology-neutral and future-ready legal framework; 
(b) to provide for standardised certificate formats and authentication by
manual or digital or electronic signature; 
(c) to expressly recognise admissibility of electronic bank recor ds and
permit their production in either physical or electronic form; 
(d) to empower the Central Government to extend applicability of the
proposed legislation to any entity or class of entities operating in the financial 
sector subject to certain conditions; and  
(e) to define the expression “special cause”, for which a Court may, by
order in writing, compel an officer of the bank to produce any bankers’ books 
or to appear as witness to prove matters, transactions or accounts, in any legal 
proceeding where the bank is not a party. 
3. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
NEW DELHI;  NIRMALA SITHARAMAN. 
The 28th July, 2026. 

11 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
The provisions of the Bill do not involve any expenditure of recurring or 
non-recurring nature from the Consolidated Fund of India. 

12 
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Every notification issued under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after 
it is issued, before each House of Parliament.  
2. The matters in respect of which notification may be issued are matters of
procedure and administrative detail, and as such, i t is not practical to provide for 
them in the proposed Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of 
a normal character. 

LOK SABHA 
———— 
A 
BILL 
to provide for law relating to evidence with respect to bankers’ books and to align 
it with contemporary digital banking practices and for matters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto. 
———— 
(Smt. Nirmala Sitharaman, Minister of Finance and Corporate Affairs) 