. (१ (a
i ‘ As INTRODUCED IN 12३१8 ०४
: e be -
o

|] Bill No. 147 of 1986
THE STATE OF ARUNACHAL PRADESH BILL, 1986

ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES

PART I
PRELIMINARY
CLAUSES
1. Short title.
2. Definitions.
PART II

ESTABLISHMENT OF THE STATE OF ARUNACHAL PRADESH
3. Establishment of the State of Arunachal Pradesh.
4. Amendment of First Schedule to the Constitution.

PART III
REPRESENTATION IN THE LEGISLATURES
The Council of States
5. Amendment of Fourth Schedule to the Constitution.
Allocation of sitting member.
7. Amendment of section 27A of Act 43 of 1950.
The House of the People

Allocation of seat in the existing House of the People.

=

2

0

Provision as to sitting members.

The Legislative Assembly
10, Provision as to Legislative Assembly.
11. Provisional Legislative Assembly.
12. Speaker and Deputy Speaker.
13. Rules of Procedure.

Delimitation of Constituencies
14, Delimitation of constituencies.

15. Powers of Election Commission to maintain delimitation orders
up-to-date.

16. Amendment of Scheduled Castes Orders.
17. Amendment of Scheduled Tribes Orders.
PART IV
+ Hicu Court
CLAUSES
18. Common High Court for Assam, Nagaland, Meghalaya, Manipur,
Tripura and Arunachal Pradesh.

@


19.

@)

Provision “as to advocates.

20, Practice and procedure in the common High Court.

21.

22.
23.
24.
25.

Custody of seal of the common High Court.

Form of writs and other processes.

Powers of Judges.

Principal seat and other places of sitting of the common High Court.
Procedure as to appeals to Supreme Court.

26. Transfer of proceedings from the High Court of Assam, Nagaland,

27.
28.

34.

Meghalaya, Manipur, Tripura and to Mizoram the common High
Court.

Interpretation,

Right to appear or to act in proceedings transferred to the common
High Court.

. Saving.

PART V
AUTHORISATION OF EXPENDITURE AND DISTRIBUTION OF REVENUES

. Authorisation of expenditure pending its sanction by the Legisla-

ture,

. Reports relating to the accounts of the existing Union territory of

Arunachal Pradesh.

. Allowances and privileges of Governor of Arunachal Pradesh.
. Distribution of revenues.

PART VI
ASSETS AND LIABILITIES is

Property, assets, rights, liabilities, obligations, etc.
PART VII

PROVISIONS AS TO SERVICES

35. Provision relating to All-India Services.

36. Provisions relating to other services.
37. Other provisions as to services.
38. Provisions as to continuance of officers in same posts.
39. Advisory Committees.
40. Prohibition of representation after certain period.
41. Fower of Central Government to give directions.
PART VII
ICEGAL AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
CLAUSES
42. Amendment of article 210, article 239A and article 240 of the
Constitution.
43. Amendment of Act 28 of 1958.
A4..Amendment of Act 20 of 1963.
45, Amendment of Act 84 of 1971.
46. Continuance of existing laws and their adaptations.

ok ke em 1


47.
48.
49,
50.
51.

(iii)
Power to construe laws.
Provisions as to continuance of courts, etc.
Effect of provisions of Act inconsistent with other laws.
Power to remove difficulties.
Power to make rules.
THE FIRST SCHEDULE.
THE SECOND SCHEDULE.
THE THIRD SCHEDULE.
THE FOURTH SCHEDULE. i


Bill No. 147 of 1986
5  ्लस्‍््न्लन- जन

THE STATE OF ARUNACHAL PRADESH BILL, 1986

A
BiLL

to provide for the establishment of the State of Arunachal Pradesh and
for matters connected therewith.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty Seventh Year of the
Republic of india as foliows;—
PART. L
PRELIMINARY
1. This Act may be called the State of Arunachal Pradesh Act, 1986.
5 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—

(a)“Administratoz” means the Administrator appointed by the

President under article 239;

(b) “appointed day” means the day which the Central Govern-
10 ment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint;

(c) “article” means an article of the Constitution;

(७) “Election Commission” means the Election Commission
appointed by the President under urticle 324;

(६) “existing Union territory of Arunachal Pradesh” means the
Union territory of Arunachal Pradesh as existing immediately before
the appointed day;

Short title,

Defini-
tions,


Establish-
ment of
the State
of
Arunachal
Pradesh,
Amend-
ment of
First
Schedule
to the
Constitu-
tion.

Amend-
ment of
Fourth
Schedule
to the
Constitu-
tion.

Allocation
of sitting
member.

Amend-
ment of
section
27A of
Act 43
of 1950.

2

(f) “law” includes any enactment, ordinance, regulation, order,
bye-Jaw, rule, schene, notification cr other instrument. having, imme-
diately before the appointed day, the force of law in the whole or
any part of the existing Union tertitory of Arunachal Pradesh;

(g) “sitting memter”, in relation to either House of Parliament 5
or of the Legislative Assembly of the existing Union territory of
Arunachal Pradesh, means a person who, immediately before the
appointed day, is a member of that House or that Assembly;

(h) “treasury” includes a sub-treasury.

PART Tt बुक

EsTABLISHMENT OF THE STATE OF ARUNACHAL PRADESH
3. On and from the ar pointed day, there shall be established a new
State. to be known as the State of Arunachal Pradesh comprising the
territories which immediately before that day were comprised in the
existing Union territory of Arunachal Pradesh. 15

4 On and from the appointed day, in the First Schedule to the Con-
stitution, — 4
(a) under the heading “I. THE STATES”, after entry 23, the
following entry shall be inserted, namely:—
“94, Arunachal Pradesh The territories svecified in sertion 20
7 of the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971."5
(b) under the heading ना. THE UNTON TERRITORIES”, entry
8 relating to Arunachal Pradesh shall be omitted.

PART पा
REPRESENTATION IN THE ‘LEGISLATURES 25
The Council of States

5. On and from the appointed day, in the Fourth Schedule to the Con-
stitution, in the Table,—

(a) entries 24 and 25 shall he re-numbered as entries 25 and 26
resnectively, and before entry 25 as so re-numbered, the following 3°
entry shall be inserted, namely:—

94, Arunachal Pradesh. -.--1”;
(b) entry 26 shall be omitted.

6. (1) On and from the appointed day. the sitting member of the
Council of States representing the existing Union territory of Arunachal 35
Pradesh shall be deemed to have been duly elected under clause (4) of
article 80 to fill the seat allotted to the State of Arunachal Pradesh in that
Council. oa 4

(2) The term of office of such sitting member shall remain unaltered.

7, On and from the appointed day, in sertion 27A of the Representa- 4०
tion of the People Act, 1950, in sub-section. (4), for the words “The elec-
toral college for each of the Union territories of Arunachal Pradesh and 4
Pondicherry”, the words “The electoral college for the Union territory

of Pondicherry” shall be substituted.



43 of 1950.

of 1950,

1963.

5

10

15

20

25

0

35

fe)

3

The House of the People

8. (1) On and from the appointed day, the allocation of seats to the
Stale of Arunacnal Praaesn in the House of the People shall be *wo;
and the First Schedule to the Representation of the People Act, 1950,
Shall be deemed to be amended, accordingly.

(2) On and from the appomted day, the two parliamentary constitu-
encies of the existing Union territory of Arunacnal Pradesh Shall be
deemed to be the parliamentary constituencies of the State of Arunachal
Pradesh and the Deumitation of Parliamentary and Assembly Constitu-
encies Order, 1976, shall be construed accordingly.

9. The sitting members oi the House of the People representing the
Constituencies which, on the appointed day, by virtue of the provisions
cf section 8 become the consutuencies of the State of Arunachal Pradesh
shail be deemed to have been elected under sub-clause (@) of clause
(1) of articie 81 to the House of the Feople by their constituencies,

The Legislative Assembly

40. On and from the appointed day, the total number of seats in the
Legisiauve 4assembly of tne Stace of Arunachal Pradesh to be filled by
personas, chosen by direct etection from assembly constituencies snail!
Se forty; ana the Second Scnedule to the Representation of the People
Act, 1950, shall be deemed to be amended accordingly.

il, (1) Notwitastanding anything contained in this Act (including
Provisions reiating to the swength of the Legislative Assembly of the
State of Arunachal Pradesh), until the Legislative Assembly of that
State has been duly constituted and summoned to meet for the first
session, there shall be a provisional Legislative Assembly which shall
consist of members elected: py the territorial constituencies of the Legis-
lative Assembly of the existing Union territory of Arunachal Pradesh,

(2) The period of five years refeired to in clause (1) of article 172
shail, in the case of the provisional Legislative Assembly referred to in
sub-section (1), be deemed to have commenced on the day on which
the duration of the existing Legislative Assembly of the Union territory
of Aiunachal Pradesh commenced under section 5 of the Government of
Union Territories Act, 1963

(3) The provisional Legislative Assembly constituted under this sec-
tion shail, for so long as it is in existence, be deemed to be the Legisla-
tive Assembly of the State of Arunachal Pradesh and shall be competent
to discharge all the functions of a Legislative Assembly of a State under
the Constitution,

12. The persons who immediately before the appointed day are the
Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the Legislative Assembly of the
Union territory of Arunachal Pradesh, shall be the Speaker and the De-
puty Speaker, respectively, of the provisional Legislative Assembly of
the State of Arunachal Pradesh on and from that day.

13. The rules of procedure and conduct of business of the Legislative
Assembly of the existing Union territory of Arunachal Pradesh as in

Alloca-
tion of
Seats in
the exist-
ing House
Of the
People,

Provision
as to sit-
ting

members,

Provision
as to .
Legisla-
tive
Assembly,

Provi-
sional
Legisla-
tive As.
sembly,

Speaker
and De-
puty
Speaker,

Rules of
Procedure,


Delimi-
tation of
constitu-
encies,

+

4

force immediately before the appointed day shall, until rules are made
under clause (1) of article 208, be the rules of procedure and conduct
of business of the provisional Legislative Assembly of the State of Aru-
nachal Pradesh, subject to such modifications and adaptations as may
be made therein by the Speaker thereof.

Delimitation of constituencies

14, (1) The Election Commission shail, in the manner herein provided,
distribute, whether before or after the appointed day, the seats assigned
to the Legislative Assembly of the State of Arunachal Pradesh under
section 19 to single-membet territorial constituencies and delimit them 0
having regard to the provisions of the Constitution and to the following
provisions, namely:—

(a) all constituencies shall, as far as practicable, be geographi-
cally compact areas, and in delimiting them regard shall be had to
physical features, existing boundaries of administrative units,
facilities of communication and public convenience; and

(b) constituencies in which seats are reserved for the Scheduled
Tribes shall, as far as practicable, be located in areas where the
proportion of their population to the total population is the largest.

a

(2) For the purpose of assisting it in the performance of its functions 20
under sub-section (1), the Election Commission shall associate with itself
as associate members,—

(a) the sitting members of the House of the People referred to in
section 9; and

(0) such six of the members of the Legislative Assembly of the 25
existing Union territory of Arunachal Pradesh or, as the case may
be, the provisional Legislative Assembly referred to in section 11 as
the Speaker thereof may nominate:

Provided that mone of the associate members shall have a right to
vote or to sign any decision of the Election Commission. 30

(3) If, owing to death or resignation, the office of an associate mem-
ber falls vacant, it shall be filled, if practicable, in accordance with the pro-
visions of sub-section (2).

(4) The Election Commission shall—

(a) publish its proposals for the delimitation of constituencies 35
together with the dissenting proposals, if any, of any associate mem-
ber who desires publication thereof, in the Official Gazette and in such
other manner as the Commission may consider fit, together with a
notice inviting objections and suggestions in relation to the proposals
and specifying a date on or after which the proposals will be further 40
considered by it;

(b) consider all objections and suggestions which may have been
received by it before the date so specified;

(c) after considering all objections and suggestions which may
have been received by it before the date so specified, determine by
one or more orders the delimitation of constituencies and cause such
order or orders to be published in the Official Gazette; and upon such
publication, the order or orders shall have the full force of law and
shall not be called in question in any court.



3

(5) As soon as may be after stich publication, every such order
relating to assembly constituencies shall be laid before the Legislative
Assembly of the existing Union territory of Arunachal Pradesh or, as
the case may he, the provisional Legislative Assembly referred to in

5 section 11.

15. (1) The Election Commission may, from time to time, by noti-
fication in the Official Gazette,—

(a) correct any printing mistake in any order made under sec-
tion 14 or any error arising therein trom inadvertent slip or omission;

10 (6) where the boundaries or name of any territorial division
mentioned in any such order are or is altered; make such amend-
menis as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for bringing such
order up-to-date.

(2) Every notification under this section relating to an assembly

15 constituency shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is issued, before

the Legislative Assembly of the existing Union territory of Arunachal

Pradesh or, as the case may be, the provisional Legislative Assembly re-
ferred, to in section 11,

16. (1) On and from the appointed day, the Constitution (Schedul-
go ed Castes) Order, 1950, shall stand amended as directed in the First
Schedule,

(2) On and from the appointed day, the Constitution (Scheduled
Castes) (Union Territories) Order, 1951, shall stand amended as directed
in the Second Schedule.

25 17. (7) On and from the appointed day, the Constitution (Schedul-
ed Tribes) Order, 1950, shall stand amended as directed in the Third
Schedule,

(2) On and from the appointed day, the Constitution (Scheduled
Tribes) (Union Territories) Order, 1951, shall stand amended as directed
goin the Fourth Schedule.

PART IV
Hicu Courr

18. (1) On and from the appointed day,—
(a) there shall be a common High Court for the States of
35 Assam, Nagaland, Meghalaya, Manipur, Tripura, Mizoram and Aru-
nachal Pradesh to be called the Gauhati High Court (the High
Court of Assam, Nagaland, Meghalaya, Manipur, Tripura, Mizoram
and Arunachal Pradesh) (hereinafter referred to as the common
High Court);

40 (b) the Judges of the High Court of Assam, Nagaland, Megha-
laya, Manipur, and Mizoram Tripura holding office immediately be-
fore that day shall, unless they have elected otherwise, become on
that day the Judges of the common High Court.

(2) The expenditure in respect of the salaries and allowances of
45 the Judges of the common High Court shall be allocated amongst the
States of Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram,

Nagaland and Tripura in such proportion as the President may, by order,
determine.

Power of
Election
Commis-
sion to
maintain
delimi‘a-
tion
orders
up-to-
date,

Amend-
ment of
Scheduled .
Castes
Orders,

Amend-
ment of
Scheduled
Tribes
Orders,

Common
High
Court for
Assam,
Naga-
land,
Megha-
laya,
Manipur,
Tripura,
Mizoram
and
Arunachal
Pradesh.


Provision
as to

advocates.

Practice
and pro-
cedure
in the
common
High
Court,
Custody
of seal
of the
common
High
Court.

Form of
writs and
other
proces-
ses,

Powers
of
Judges.

6

19. (1) On and from the appointed day,—
(a) in the Advocates Act, 1961, in section 3, in sub-section (1),
for clause (0), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
“(b) for the States of Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Manipur,
Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland and Tripura to be known as
the Bar Council of Assam, Nagaland, Meghalaya, Manipur, Tri-
pura, Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh;”; \

(0) the Bar Council of Assam. Nagaland, Meghalaya, Manipur,
Tripura and Mizoram shall be deemed to be the Bar Council of
Assam, Nagaland, Meghalaya, Manipur, Tripura, Mizoram and Aru-
nachal Pradesh:

(2) Any person who, immediately before the appointed day, is an
advocate entitled to practise in the High Court of Assam, Nagaland,
Meghalaya, Manipur, Tripura and Mizoram shall be entitled to practise
as an advocate in the common High Court.

(3) All persons who, immediately before the appointed day, are ad-
vocates on the roll of the Bar Council of Assam, Nagaland, Meghalaya,
Manipur, Tripura and Mizoram shall as from that day, become advocates
on the roll of the Bar Council of Assam, Nagaland, Meghalaya, Manipur,
Tripura, Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh,

(4) The right of audience in the common High Court shall be regu-
lated in accordance with the like principles as, immediately before the
appointed day, are in force with respect to the right of audience in the
High Court of Assam, Nagaland, Meghalaya, Manipur, Tripura and Mizo-
ram

Provided that as among the Advocates-General of the States of Aru-
nachal Pradesh, Assam, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland and

Tripura, the right of audience shall be determined with reference to

their dates of enrolment as advocates.

20. Subject to the provisions of this Part, the law in force immedia-
tely before the appointed day with respect to practice and procedure in
the High Court of Assam, Nagaland, Meghalaya, Manipur, Tripura and
Mizoram shall, with the necessary modifications, apply in relation to the
common High Court. }

21. The law in force immediately before the appointed day with
respect to the custody of the Seal of the High Court of Assam, Nagaland,
Meghalaya, Manipur, Tripura and Mizoram shall. with the necessary
modifications, apply with respect to the custody of the Seal of the com-
mon High Court.

22, The law in force immediately before the appointed day with
respect to the form of writs and other processes used, issued or award-
ed by the High Court of Assam, Nagaland, Meghalaya, Manipur, Tripura
and Mizoram shall, with necessary modifications, apply with respect to
the form of writs and other processes used, issued or awarded by the
common High Court.

23. The law in force immediately before the appointed day with
respect to the powers of the Chief Justice, single Judges and division
courts of the High Court of Assam, Nagaland, Meghalaya, . Manipur,
Tripura and Mizoram and with respect to all matters, ancillary to the

20

25

30

40

45


7

exercise of those powers shall, with the necessary modifications, apply
in relation to the common High Court,

24, (1) The principal seat of the common High Court shall be at
the same place at which the principal seat of the High Court of Assam,
Nagaland, Meghalaya, Manipur, Tripura and Mizoram is located imme-
diately before the appointed day.

(2) The President may, by notified order, provide for the establish-
ment of a permanent bench or benches of the common High Court at one
or more places within the territories to which the jurisdiction of the High

10 Court extends, other than the principal seat of the High Court, and for
any matters connected therewith:

Provided that before issuing any order under this sub-section, the
President shall consult the Chief Justice of the common High Court and
the Governor of the State in which the bench or benches is or are pro-

15 posed to be established.

(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) or sub-
section (2), the Judges and division courts of the common High Court
may also sit at such other place or places in the States of Assam, Naga-
land, Meghalaya, Manipur. Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh as the Chief

20 Justice may, with the approval of the Governor of the State concerned,
appoint. :

25. The law in force immediately before the appointed day relating to
appeals to the Suvreme Court from the High Court of Assam, Nagaland,
Meghalava, Manivur, Tripura and Mizoram and the Judges and division

25 courts thereof shall. with the necessary modifications, apply in relation 16
the common High Court.

26. (1) Ali proceedings pending in the High Court of Assam, Naga-
Jand, Meghalaya, Manivur, Tripura and Mizoram immediately before the
appointed day shall, from such day, stand transferred to the common Hieh
30 Court.
(2) Every proceeding transferred under sub-section (1) shall be dis-
posed of by the common High Court as if such proceeding was entertained
by that High Court.

27. For the purposes of section 26,--

35 (a) proceedings shall be deemed to be pending in a court until
that court has disposed of all issues between the parties, including
any issues with respect to the taxation of the costs of the proceedings
and shall include appeals, applications for leave to appeal to the
Supreme Court, avplications for review, petitions for revision and

40 petitions for writs; and

(b) references to a High Court shall be construed as including
references to a Judge or division court thereof; and references to an
order made by a court or a Judge shall be construed as including
references to a sentence, judgment or decree passed or made by that

45 court or Judge.

Principal
seat and
other
places
of sitting
of the
common
High
Court,

Proce-
dure as
to ap-
peals to
Supreme
Court.

Transfer
of pro-
ceedings
from the
High
Court of
Assam,
Nagaland,
Megha-
laya,
Manipur,
Tripura
and to
Mizoram
the com-
mon High
Court.

Interpre-
tation,


Right to 28. Any person who, immediately before the appointed day, is an advo-
cone ' cate entitled to practise in the High Court of Assam, Nagaland, Megha-
or to act

jaya, Mamipur, Tripura and Mizoram and was authorised to appear or to

cooling? act in any proceedings transferred from the said High Court to the com-
transfer- mon High Court under section 26 shall have the right to appear or to act, 5
red to as the case may be, in the common High Court in relation to those pro-
the com- —_ ceedings. ioe
mon High #
Court.
Saving. 29. Nothing in this Part shall affect the application to the common
High Court of any provisicns of the Constitution, and this Part shall have
effect subject to any provisicn that may be made on or after the appoint- 10
ed day with respect to that High Court by any Legislature or other
authority having power to make such prcvisions,
PART V
AUTHORISATION OF EXPENDITURE AND DISTRIBUTION OF REVENUES
Authori- 30, (1) The President may, at any time before the appointed day, 15
sation of authorise by order such expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of the
expendi- State of Arunachal Pradesh as he deems necessary for a period of not
ia a more than six months beginning with the appointed day, pending the
aa sanction of such expenditure by the Legislative Assembly of the State of
ion by Arunachal Pradesh: 20
Satie Provided that the Governor of Arunachal Pradesh may, after the
का appointed day, authorise ky order such further expenditure as he deems
necessary from the Consolidated Fund of the State of Arunachal Pradesh
for any veriod not extending beyond the said period of six months.
(2) The President or, as the case may be, the Governor of Arunachal 25
Pradesh shall make separate orders under sub-section (J) in respect of
periods falling in different financial years.
Reports 31. (1) The reports of the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India

relating referred to in section 49 of the Government of Union Territories Act, 1963, 20 3
to the relating to the accounts of the existing Union territory of Arunachal Pra- 50
accounts desh in respect of any period prior to the appointed day, shall be sub-

she ie mitted to the Governor of Arunachal Pradesh who shall cause them to be
union Jaid before the Legislative Assembly of the State.
territory (2) The Governor may, by crder,-—
e ane (a) declare any expenditure incurred out of the Consolidated 35
oe Fund of the existing Union territory of Arunachal Pradesh on any
service 1n respect of any period prior to the appointed day during the
financial year 1986-87 or in respect of any earlier financial year in
excess of the amount granted for that service and for that year as
disclosed in the reports referred to in sub-section (1) to have been 40
duly authorised, and
(b) provide for any action to be taken on any matter arising out
of the said reports.
32. The allowances end privileges of the Governor of Arunachal Pra- 5
a desh shall, until the Governors (Emoluments, Allowances and Privileges} 43 of 1989
and pri. Act, 1982, comes into force, be such as the President may, by order, ‘
vileges determine.
of Gov-
ernor of
Aruna-
chal

Pradesh.



of 1957,

of 1979,

of 1962,

of 1956,

pan 9 SF sec २81६० 34g

33. The Fresident shall, by order, determine the grants-in-aid of the
revenues of the State of Arunachal Pradesh and the share of that State
in the Union duties of excise, estate duty and taxes on income and for
that purpose amend thereby the relevant provisions of the Additional

5 Duties of Excise (Goods of Special Importance) Act, 1957, the Union
Duties of Excise (Distribution) Act, 1979, the Estate Duty (Distribution)

Act, 1962 and the Constitution (Distribution of Revenues) Order, 1985 in

such manner as he thinks fit.

PART Vi

10 न ASSETS AND LIABILITIES

34, (1) All such property and assets within the existing Union terri-
tory of A1unachal Pradesh as are held immediately pefore the appointed
day by the Union for purpeses of governance of that Union territory
shall, on and from that day, pass to the State of Arunachal Pradesh unless

15 the purposes for which such property and assets are so held are Union
purposes: :
| Provided that the cash balances in the treasuries in the existing
Union territory of Arunachal Pradesh before the appointed day shall,
as from that day, vest in the State of Arunachal Pradesh.

20 (2) All rights, liabilities and obligations (other than those relatable
to, or in connection with, a Union purpose), whether arising out of any
contract or otherwise, which are, immediately before the appointed day,—

(a) the rights, liabilities and obligations of the Central Govern-
ment arising out of, or in connection with, the governance of the
25 existing Union territory of Arunachal Pradesh; or
(b) the rights, liabilities and obligations of the Administrator of
the existing Union territory of Arunachal Pradesh in his capacity as
such, or of the Government of that Union territory,
shall, on and from the appointed day, be the rights, liabilities and obliga-
go tions of the Government of the State of Arunachal Pradesh,

(3) The right to recover arrears of —
1 (a) any tax or duty being a tax or duty enumerated in the State
List in the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution; or
(0) any duty referred to in article 268; or
35 (c) any tax under the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956,

which have fallen due in the existing Union territory of Arunachal Pra-
desh shall pass to the State of Arunachal Pradesh.

(4) The provisions of this section shall not apply to or in relation to,—

(a) any institution, undertaking or project the expenditure’ in
40 relation to which is immediately before the appointed day, met from
and out of the Consolidated Fund of India; |
(b) any property which has been placed by the Union at the
disposal of the administration of the existing Union territory of
Arunachal Pradesh subject to the condition that the ownership there-
45 of will continue to vest in the Union, 1

Distri.
bution
of reve.
nues,

Property,
assets,
rights,
liabilj-
ties obli.
gations,
ete,


Provi-

slun re-
lating to
All India
Services.

Provisions
relating

to other
services,

Other
provi-
siong as
to ser-
vices.

10 . ased wash

Explanation—For the purposes of this section,—

(a) “liability” includes liability in respect of any civil deposit,
local fund deposit, charitable or other endowment, provident fund
| account, pension or actionable wrong;

(b) “Union purposes” means the purposes of Government rela- 5
table to any of the matters mentioned in the Union List.

PART शा
PROVISIONS AS TO SERVICES

35. Every member of the Indian Administrative Service, the Indian
Police Service and the Indian Forest Service who, immediately before
the appointed day, is holding any post in the existing Union territory of
Arunachal Pradesh shall, until otherwise directed by the Central Govern-
ment, be deemed to be on deputation, on and from the appointed day, to
the Government of the State of Arunachal Pradesh on the same terms

and conditions of service as are applicable to him under the relevant cadre
rules: 80 |

Provided that the period of such deputation shall in no case extend
beyond a period of three years from the appointed day.

Explanation —In this section, “cadre rules” means the Indian Adminis-
trative Service (Cadre) Rules, 1954, the Indian Police Service (Cadre)

Rules, 1954 or the Indian Forest Service (Cadre) Rules, 1966, as ‘the case
may be.

36. (1) Every person who immediately before the appointed day is
serving in connection with the affairs of the Union under the administra-
tive control of the Administrator of the Union territory of Arunachal Pra-
desh shall, unless otherwise directed by an order of the Central Govern-
ment, be deemed to have been allocated for service as from that day in
connection with the affairs of the State of Arunachal Pradesh:

Provided that no directions shall be issued under this section after

the expiry of a period of one year from the appointed day. 30
(2) The provisions of this section shall not apply in relation to
persons to whom the provisions of section 35 apply.

37. (1) Nothing in this section or section 36 shall be deemed to affect
on or after the appointed day, the operation of the provisions of Chapter
I of Part XIV of the Constitution in relation to determination of the con- 85

ditions of service of persons serving in connection with the affairs of the
State. of Arunachal Pradesh

Provided that the conditions of service applicable immediately before
the appointed day in the case of any person referred to in section 36
shall not be varied to his disadvantage except with the previous approval 40
of the Central Government.

(2) ‘All services prior to the appointed day rendered by a person
deemed to have been allocated under section 33 in connection with the
administration of the existing Union territory of Arunachal Pradesh,
shall be deemed to have heen rendered. in connection with the affairs of 45
the State of Arunachal Pradesh for the purposes of the rules regulating

his conditions of service.


10

15

20

C)

35

40

il

38. Every person who, immediately before the appointed day, is hold-
ing or discharging the duties of any post or office in connection with the
affairs of the existing Union territory of Arunachal Pradesh shall con-
tinue to hold the same post or office and shall be deemed, on and from
that day, to have been duly appointed to the post or office by the Gov-
ernment of, or other appropriate authority in, the State of Arunachal
Pradesh on the same terms and conditions of appointment and on the
same tenure as he was holding the post or office immediately before that
day: नि

Provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent a
competent authority on or after the appointed day from passing in rela-
tion to such person any order affecting his continuance in such post or
office. tne

39. The Central Government may, by order, establish one or more
Advisory Committees for the purpose of assisting it in regard to—

(a) the discharge of its functions under this Part; and

(0) the ensuring of fair and equitable treatment to all persons
affected by the provisions of this Part and the proper consideration
of any representations made by such persons.

40. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any law
or rule for the time being in force, no representation shall lie against
any order passed under the provisions of this Part on the expiry of three
months from the date of publication or service, whichever is earlier, of
such order:

Provided that the Central Government may, suo motu or otherwise
and for reasons to be recorded, re-open any matter and pass such orders
thereon as may appear to it to be appropriate if it is satisfied that it is
necessary so to do in order to prevent any miscarriage of justice to any
affected person.

41, The Central Government may give such directions to the Gov-
ernment of the State of Arunachal Pradesh as may appear to it to be neces-
sary for the purpose of giving effect to the foregoing provisions of this
Part and the State Government shall comply with such directions.

PART VIII

LEGAL AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

42, On and from the appointed day,—

(०) in article 210, in clause (2), in the second proviso, for the
words “ Legislature of the State of Mizoram”, the words “Legislatures
of the States of Arunachal Pradesh and Mizoram” shall be substituted;

(b) in article 239A, in clause (1), for the words, “, Pondicherry
and Arunachal Pradesh”, the words “and Pondicherry” shall be
substituted;

(c) in article 240, in clause (1),—

(i) entry (9) shall be omitted;

Provisions
as to con.
tinuance
of officers
in same
posts,

Advisory
Commit-
tees,

Prohibi-
tion of
represen-
tation
after cer
tain
period.

Power

of Cen-
tral Gov»
ernment
to give
direc-
tions,

Amend-
ment of
article
210, arti-
cle 239A.
and
article
240 to
the Con-
stitution.


Amend-_
ment of
Act 28,

of 1958.

Amend-
ment of
Act 20

of 1963.

Amend-
ment of
Act 84

of 1971.

Conti-
nuance of
existing
Jaws and
their
adapta-
tions.

om it 42 aa

(#) in the provisos, for the words “Pondicherry or Arunachal
Pradesh”, the words “or Pondicherry” shall be substituted.

43. On and from the appointed day, in the Armed Forces (Special
Powers) Act, 1958, in the long title and in sub-section (2) of section 1, for
the werds “Assam, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland and Tripura
and the Union territory of Arunachal Pradesh”, the words “Arunachal
Pradesh, Assam, Manipur, Meghalaya, Nagaland and Tripura” shall be
substituted.

44. On and from the appointed day, in the Government of Union Ter-
ritories Act, 1963,—

(® in clause (४) of sub-section (1) of section 2, for the words
“, Pondicherry and Arunachal Pradesh” the words “and Pondicherry”
shall be substituted;

(४) in section 33, in sub-section (2), the proviso shall be omitted;

(६६) in section 44, sub-section (2) shall be omitted.

45. On and from the appointed day, in the North-Eastern Council Act,
1971,—

(a) in section 2, for clauses (b) and (c), the following clause
shall be substituted, namely: — |

*(b) “north-eastern area” means the area comprising the
States of Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizo-
ram, Nagaland and Tripura.’;

(9) in section 3, in sub-section (1), for clause (b), the following
clause shall be substituted, namely:—

“(b) the Chief Minister of the States of Arunachal Pradesh,
Assam, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland and Tripura.”.

46. (1) All laws in force, immediately before the appointed day, in
the existing Union territory of Arunachal Pradesh shall continue to be in
force in the State of Arunachal Pradesh until altered, repealed or amended
by a competent Legislature or other competent authority.

(2) For the purpose of facilitating the application in relation to the
State of Arunachal Pradesh of any law made before the appointed day,
the appropriate Government may, within two years from that day, by
order, make such adaptations and modifications of the law, whether by
way of repeal or amendment, as may be necessary or expedient, and there-
upon every such law shall have effect subject to the adaptations and
modifications so made until altered, repealed or amended by a competent
Legislature or other competent authority.

Explanation—In this section, the expression “appropriate Govern-
ment” means, as respects any law relating to a matter enumerated in the
Union List in the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution, the Central
Government, and as respects any other law, the Government of the State
of Mizoram.

10

15

30

35

40


a

10

5

20

a

go

35

= a aba)

47. Notwithstanding ‘that no provision or insufficient provision has
been made under section 46 for the adaptation of a law made before the
appointed day, any court, tribunal or authority required or empowered
to enforce such law may, for the purpose of facilitating its application
in relation to the State of Arunachal] Pradesh, construe the law in such
manner not affecting the substance as may be necessary or proper in
regard to the matier before the court, tribunal or authority, as the case
may be. प्र ‘

48. All courts and tribunals and all authorities discharging lawful
functions throughout the existing Union territory of Arunachal Pradesh
or any part thereof immediately before the appointed day shall, unless
their continuance is inconsistent with the provisions of this Act or until
other provision is made by a competent Legislature or other competent
authority, continue to exercise their respective functions,

49. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding any-
thing inconsistent therewith contained in any other law.

50. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of
this Act, the President may, by order, do anything not inconsistent with
such provisions which appears to him to be necessary or expedient for
the purpose of removing the difficulty |

Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of three
years from the appointed day.

(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid before each
House of Parliament.

51. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, make rules to give effect to the provisions of this Act.

(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may
be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session,
for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session
or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions afore-
said, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both
Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall there-
after have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case
may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be

without prejudice to the validity of anything previously dene under that
tule.

Power te
construe
laws.

Provisiona
as to
continu-
ance of
courts,
ete.

Effect of
provi-
sions

of Act
inconsis-
tent with
other
laws.

Power
to re-
move
diffi-
culties.

Power te
make
rules,


a - 14 ‘a

Ct ie r

THE FIRST SCHEDULE
[See -section 16(1)]

AMENDMENTS TO THE CONSTITUTION (SCHEDULED CasTES) 0४०४, 1950
In the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950—
(4) im paragraph 2, for the figures “XX”, the figures “XXI” shall
be substituted;
(2) in the Schedule, after Part XX, the following Part shail be
inserted, namely:—

“PART XXI

Arunachal Pradesh 6,

1. Bansbhor

2. Bhuimali or Mali

3. Brittial Bania or Bania
4, Dhupi or Dhobi '
5. Dugla or Dholi

I
6. Hira नि हे
7, Jalkeot
8, Jhalo, Malo or Jhalo-Malo
9. Kaibartta or Jaliya cae
10, Lalbegi हे ; is
11, Mahara
12. Mehtar or Bhangi
13. Muchi or Rishi
14, Namasudra
15. Patni 25
16. Sutradhar.”, i
j THE SECOND SCHEDULE
[See section 16(2)]
AMENDMENTS TO THE ConstiTUTION (ScHEDULED Castes) (Union
‘TerriTorIes) ORper, 1951 3°

In the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) (Union Territories) Order,
1951,— 1

(1) in paragraph 2, for the words and figures “Parts I to III”
the words and figures “Parts I and II” shall be substituted;

(2) in paragraph 4, for the figures “1956,”, the figures and word 38
1956 and” shall be substituted and the portion beginning with the
words, figures and brackets “and any reference to a Union territory”
and ending with “the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act,
1974” shall be omitted;


15 i a

(3) in the Schedule, Part I1I—Arunachal Pradesh shall be
omitted,

THE THIRD SCHEDULE
[See section 17(1)]
5 AMENDMENTS To THE Constrrution (Scumputen Trrpes) Onpir, 1950
In the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950,—

(1) in paragraph 2, or the figures “XVII”, the figures “SVITI"
shall be substituted;

(2) in the Schedule, after Part XVII, the following Part shall

10 be inserted, nameély:—

“PART XVIII—Arunachal Pradesh
All tribes in the State including:—

. Abor

. Aka

. Apatani
Dafla
Galong

. Khampti
Khowa

. Mishmi

. Momba

10. Any Naga tribes
11. Sherdukpen
12. Singpho.”.

5

20

हुए एक वय की का #% ६७ ७ od

25 THE FOURTH SCHEDULE
[See section 17(2)]

AMENDMENTS To THE ConstITUTION (SCHEDULED TRIBES) (UNIEN
TERRITORIES) 0फ्ाक, 1951

In the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) (Union Territories) Order,
go 1951,— oe
(1) in paragraph 2, for the words and figures “Parts I and IT” the

word and figure “Part I” shall be substituted;

(2) in paragraph 3, the portion beginning with the words, bra-
ckets and figures “and any reference”, and ending with the “North-
35 Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971” shall be omitted;

(9) in the Schedule, Part 1I—Arunachal Pradesh shall be
omitted. ‘ | 3१% sey


: STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

With a view to a satisfying the desires and aspirations of the people of
Arunachal Pradesh, the Government of India have decided to undertake
legislative measures to confer Statehood on the Union territory of
Arunachal Pradesh. This Bill is intended to give effect to this decision
and will come into force on a date to be notified by the Central Govern-
ment. It seeks to establish a new State of Arunachal Pradesh comprising
the territories of the existing Union territory of Arunachal Pradesh and
makes the necessary supplemental, incidental and consequential pro-
visions,

2. The notes on clauses explain in detail the provsion of the Bill,
New Detar; BUTA SINGH.
The 1st December, 1986. i t

PRESIDENT’S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLES 117 AND
274 OF THE CONSTITUION OF INDIA

[Copy of letter No. F. 12013/5/86-SR, dated the 1st December, 1986
from Shri Buta Singh, Minister of Home Affairs to the Secretary-General,
Lok Sabha.]

The President: having been informed of the subject matter of the Bill
to provide for the establishment of the State of Arunachal Pradesh and
for matters connected therewith, recommends the introduction of the
Bil] in Lok Sabha under articles 117(1) and 274(1) of the Constitution
and the consideration of the Bill in Lok Sabha under article 117(3) of
the Constitution,

ee



Notes on clauses

Clauses 3 and 4—Clause 3 provides for the establishment of the new
State of Arunachal Prdesh while clause 4 makes necessary consequential
amendments in the First Schedule to the Constitution.

Clauses 5 and 6—These clauses deal with the representation of
Arunachal Pradesh in the Council of States. At present there is one seat
in the said Council for the Union territory of Arunachal Pradesh. It is
proposed to continue this representation for the new State also. The
sitting Member from Arunachal Pradesh in the Council of States will be
deemed to be duly elected and will represent the new State for the un-
expired term.

Clause 7.—The amendment is of a consequential nature.

Clauses 8 and 9—These clauses deal with representation of Arunachal
Pradesh in the House of the People. At present there are two seats in
the House of the People for the Union territory of Arunachal Pradesh.
It is proposed to continue this representation for the new State also. The
sitting Members from Arunachal Pradesh in the House of the People
will be deemed to have been duly elected and will represent the new
State.

Clause 10—This clause provides that the number of seats in the
Legislative Assembly of the State of Arunachal Pradesh to be filled by
persons by direct election shall be 40.

Clause 11—This clause provides for a provisional Legislative Assembly
for the new State consisting of the existing members of the Union
territory Assembly until the Legislative Assembly of the new State is
duly constituted. This clause also provides for the period of 5 years in
the case of the provisional Legislative Assembly being deemed to have
commenced on the date on which the duration of the existing Union
territory Assemb!y commenced.

Clause 12.—This clause provides for the continuance of the existing
Speaker and Deputy Speaker of the Legislative Assembly of the Union
territory of Arunachal Pradesh.

Clause 13—This clause provides for the continuance of the existing
tules of procedure of the Legislative Assembly of the existing Union
territory of Arunachal Pradesh.

Clause 14 and 15.—These clauses provide for delimitation of the
Assembly Constituencies by the Election Commission according to the
procedure generally followed by the Delimitation Commission,

Clauses 16 and 17 and the Schedule seek to make the necessary con-
sequential amendments in the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order,
1950, the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) (Union Territories) Order,
1951, the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950 and the Constitu-
tion (Scheduled Tribes) (Union Territories) Order, 1951.

17


18

Clauses 18 to 29—At present the jurisdiction of the common High
Court for the States of Assam, Nagaland, Meghalaya, Manipur, Tripura
and Mizoram, called the Gauhati High Court extends to the Union
territory of Arunachal] Pradesh. Clause 18 provides for common High
Court for the States of Assam, Nagaland, Meghalaya, Manipur, Tripura,
Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh to be called the Gauhati High Court.
The detailed provisions contained in other clauses follow broadly the
relevant provisions of the previous Reorganisation Acts and deal inter
alia with the powers, functions and the procedure to be followed by the
new common High Court.

Clauses 30 to 33—These clauses deal with authorisation of expendi-
ture and distribution of revenues. As it will take some time for the new
State to prepare its budget and have it approved by the State Legisla-
ture, provision has been made in clause 30 that before the new State
comes into existence, the President may, by order, authorise expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of the State for a period of six months.
Thereafter the power will be exercised by the Governor. Provision has
been made in clause 32 to enable the President to determine the
allowances and privileges of the Governor of the new State. Clause 33
empowers the President to determine by order the grants-in-aid to the
new State and its share of Central Taxes.

Clause 34—This clause relates to transfer of property, assets, rights,
liabilities and obligations to the new State. This clause provides that all
properties and other assets in the Union territory of Arunachal Pradesh
which are at present held for purposes of governance of the Union
territory and which are not properties or assets held for Union purposes
shall vest in the new State alongwith the cash balances in the treasuries
in the Union territory. Under this clause, all rights, liabilities and other
obligations arising out of, or in connection with the governance of the
Union territory excluding those relatable to the Union purposes become
the rights, liabilities and obligations of the new State. However, insti-
tutions, undertakings or projects financed at present out of the Consoli-
dated Fund of India and properties of the Central Government placed
at the disposal of the Government of Arunachal Pradesh will not be
transferred to the new State [vide clause 34(4)]. It is not proposed to
transfer any deb‘ liability to the new State on account of the capital
outlay made by the Central Government on the properties which become
vested in the new State under the provisions of this clause.

Clauses 35 to 41—Clause 35 provides for the officers of the Indian
Administrative Service, Indian Police Service and the Indian Forest
Service serving in the Union territory at present, being deemed to be on
deputation on and from the appointed day to the Government of the
State of Arunachal Pradesh on the same terms and conditions of service
as are applicable under the relevant Cadre Rules, the period of such
deputation not extending beyond a period of three years from the
appointed day in any case. Clauses 36 to 38 are on the same lines as
corresponding provisions of the previous Reorganisation Acts. Clause
39 provides for the establishment of one or more Advisory Committees
by the Central Government for the purpose of assisting it in regard to
the discharge of its functions relating to provisions as to services and for
ensuring a fair and equitable treatment to all persons so affected. Clause
40 prohibits representation against orders passed under the provisions
of Part VII after a certain period. Clause 41 empowers the Central
Government to give directions to the new State for the purpose of giving
effect to the various provisions relating to services,


19

Clause 42 to 45.—These clauses make consequential amendments in
article 210 (relating to language to be used in the Legislature), article
239A (creation of local Legislature or Council of Ministers or both or
certain Union © territories), article 240 (power of President to make
regulations for certain Union territories). The consequential amend-
ments ४280 include amendments in the Armed Forces (Special Powers)
Act. 1958, the Government of Union Territories Act, 1963 and the North-
Eastern Council Act, 1971.

Clauses 46 to 51.—These clauses make the usual provisions regarding
the continuance of existing laws and adaptations of those laws and their
interpretation by courts, ete. These provisions follow the corresponding
provisions of the previous Reorganisation Acts.


‘ FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 14 of the Bill seeks to empower the Election Commission of
India to delimit the assembly constituencies of the new State of Aruna-
chal Pradesh, For this purpose, non-recurring expenditure of about
Rs, 50,000 will have to be incurred. This expenditure will be met from
the Consolidated Fund of India.

2, According to the Budget estimates of Arunachal Pradesh for the
current year, the domestic revenue receipt of the Union territory are
Rs. 17.95 crores, while the non-plan expenditure on revenue account is
Rs, 65.61 crores. The gap is met by the grants-in-aid given by the Cen-
tral Government As a State, Arunachal Pradesh will be entitled to a
share in the income tax and additional excise duties of the Central
Government to the extent of about Rs. 4.35 crores. The new State’s
share in the basic excise duty of the Central Government will be deter-
mined by the Finance Commission. Consequently, the State’s revenue
would be augmented and the non-plan revenue deficit reduced corres-
pondingly. In the past, Finance Commission has taken note of such
deficits and recommended suitable grants-in-aid under article 275(1) of
the Constitution. It is, herefor, proposed o provide for such quantum
of grants-in-aid to the new State as may be considered necessary until
the recommendations of the next Finance Commission become available,
by suitably amending the provisions of the Constitution (Distribution
of Revenue) Order, 1985, in exercise of the powers sought to be taken
in clause 33. of the Bill.

3. Clause 39 of the Bill seeks to empower the Central Government to
establish one or more Advisory Committees for the purpose of assisting
it in regard to the dicharge of its functioning in relation to allocation
of members of the Services and the ensuring of fair and equitable treat-
ment to all persons affected. Some xpenditure not exceeding Rs. 5,000
may have to be incurred out ० the Consolidated Fund of India on account
of travelling allowances of members of the Committe.

20


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 82 of the Bill enables the President to determine by order the
allowances and privileges of the Governor of the new State,

2. Clause 33 of the Bill empowers the President to determine by
order the grant-in-aid to the new State and its share of Central taxes
and amend for that purpose the relevant provisions of the Additional
Duties of Excise (Goods of Special Importance) Act, 1957, the Union
Duties of Excise (Distribution) Act, 1979, the Estate Duty (Distribution)
Act, 1962, and the Constitution (Distribution of Revenues) Order, 1985,

3. Clause 46 provides for the adaptation of existing laws to facilitate
their application to the new State: The power to adapt is being con-
ferred on the Central Government in the case of laws relating to matters
enumerated in the Union List in the Seventh Schedule to the Constitu-
tion and on the Government of the new State in the case of all other
laws,

4. Clause 51 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make
Tules to give effect to the provisions of the Bill when enacted, The
Tules, if any will be confined to matters of procedure and other matters
of minor detail relating to the enforcement of the various provisions
included in the Bill,

5. The various provisions aforementioned are modelled on identical
or analogous provisions in the State Reorganisation Acts passed by
Parliament earlier, Besides, they are mainly of a consequential nature
or pertain to matters of detail and procedure. Ag such the proposed
delegation of legislative powers is of a normal character,


Language
to be
used in
the Legis.
Jature,

Creation
of local
Legis-
latures or
Council of
Ministers
or both for
certain
Union
territo-
ties,

Power of
President
to make
regulations
for certain
Union
terri-
tories,

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE CoNSTITUTION or INDIA
* * * * *
210. (1) * * * * *

(2) Unless the Legislature of the State by law otherwise provides, this
article shall, after the expiration of a period of fifteen years from the
commencement of this Constitution, have effect as if the words “or in
English” were omitted therefrom:

* * * * *

Provided further that in relation to the Legislature of the State of
Mizoram, this clause shall have effect as if for the words “fifteen years”
occurring therein, the words “forty years” were susbtituted,

* * * * *

239A. (1) Parliament may by law create for any of the Union terri-
tories of Goa, Daman and Diu, Pondicherry and Araunchal Pradesh—
* * * * *

240. (1) The President may make regulations for the peace, progress
and good government of the Union territory of—

* * * * *

(g) Arunachal Pradesh:
. * * * *

Provided that when any body is created under article 239A to func-
tion as a Legislature for the Union territory of Goa, Daman and Diu,
Pondicherry or Arunachal Pradesh, the President shall not make any
regulation for the peace, progress and good government of that Union
territory with effect from the date appointed for the first meeting of
the Legislature:

‘Provided further that whenever the body functioning as a Legisla-
ture for the Union territory of Goa, Daman and Diu, Pondicherry or
Arunachal Pradesh is dissolved, or the functioning of that body as
such Legislature remains suspended on account of any action taken
under any such law as is referred to in clause (1) of article 239A, the
President may, during the period of such dissolution or suspension,
make regulations for the peace, progress and good government of that
Union territory

* * * * *

22

—


FIRST SHCHEDULE
(Articles 1 and 4)

* * * * *

U. THE UNION TERRITORIES

Name Extent
* * * *

8. Arunachal Pradesh The territories specified in section

7 of the North-Eastern Areas (Re-
organisation) Act, 1971,
* * * *

FOURTH SCHEDULE
[Articles 4(1) and 80 (1)]

* * * *
TABLE
* *

26. Arunachal Pradesh,

* * * * *

EXTRACT FROM THE Conszrrution (ScHeputep Casts) Orper, 1950

(९.0. 19)

* * * * *

2. Subject to the provisions of this Order, the castes,
or parts of, or groups within, castes or tribes, specified in
of the Schedule to this Order shall, in relation to the St
those Parts respectively relate, be deemed to he Schedi
far as, regards member thereof resident in the
Telation to them in those Parts of that Schedule.

780९5 or tribes
Parts I to XX
ates to which
luled Castes so
localities specified in

* * * * *
EXTRACTS FROM THy Constitution (ScHEeputep Castes) (Unton
TERRITORIES) Orper, 1951
(९.0. 32)

* * * * *
2. Subject to the provisions of this Or
or parts of, or groups within, castes or tribes,


डर 24

4. Any reference in this Order to a Union territory in Part I of the
Schedule shall be construed as a reference to the territory constituted
as a Union territory as from the ist day of November, 1956, any reference
to a Union territory in Part II of the Schedule shall be construed as a
reference to the territory constituted as a Union territory as from the
ist day of November, 1966 and any reference to a Union territory in Parts
गा and IV of the Schedule shall be construed as a reference to the
territory constituted as a Union territory as from the day appointed
under clause (b) of section 2 of the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisa-
tion) Act, 1971. i

THE SCHEDULE
® t of * *

Parr IIl—Arunachal Pradesh
Throughout the Union territory: —

1. Bansphor
2. Bhinmali or Mali
3. Brittial-Bania or Bania
4. Dhupi or Dhobi
5. Dugla or Dholi
6. Hira
7. Jalkeot
8. Jhalo, Malo or Jhalo-Malo
9. Kaibartta or Jaliya
10. Lalbegi !
11. Mahara
12. Mehtar or Bhangi
13. Muchi or Rishi
14. Namasudra
15, Patni
16, Sutradhar.
* * * * *

ExTRACT FROM THE ConstrTuTION (SCHEDULED TRIBES) Orper, 1950
(0.0. 22)
* * * * *
2. The tribes or tribal communities or parts of, or groups within, tribes
or tribal communities, specified in Parts I to XVII of the Schedule to this

Order shall, in relation to the States to which those Parts respectively
relate be deemed to be Scheduled ‘Tribes so far as regards members


25
thereof resident in the localities specified in relation to them respectively
in those Parts of that Schedule.

* * * * *

ExTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION (SCHEDULED TRIBEs) (UNION
TERRITORIES) ORDER, 1951
(C.O. 33)
* * * * *

2. The tribes or tribal communities, or parts of, or groups within,
tribes or tribal communities, specified in Parts I and II of the Schedule
to this Order shall, in relation to the Union territories to which those
Parts respectively relate, be deemed to be Scheduled Tribes so far as

regards members thereof resident in the localities specified in relation
to them respectively in those Parts of that Schedule.

3. Any reference in this Order to a Union territory in Part I of the
Schedule shall be construed as a reference to that territory constituted
as a Union territory as from the Ist day of November, 1956 and any
reference to a Union territory in Parts II and ITI of the Schedule shall be
construed as a reference to the territory constituted as a Union territory
as from the day appointed under clause (b) of section 2 of the Nerth-
Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971.

THE SCHEDULE
* * * * *
PART II.—Arunachal Pradesh

Throughout the Union territory: —

All tribes of the Union territory including:
. Abor
Aka
. Apatani
. Dafia ey

Nor

. Galong
. Khampti
. Khowa
-. Mishmi
. Momba

छ 9० जय के एए ep w

a
छ

. Any Naga tribes
- Sherdukpen
. Singpho.

hee
nyo

* * treat * *


26

EXTRACTS FROM THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE Act, 1950
(43 or 1950)

= * * रू *
Consti- 27A, (1) * * * * *

tution of

electoral) (4) The electoral college for each of the Union territories of
ounces Arunachal Pradesh and Pondicherry shall consist of the elected members
filing ot cf the Legislative Assembly constituted for that territory under the
seats it Government of Union Territories Act, 1963 (20 of 1963).

the Council

of States * * * * *

allotted to

Union

territories.
ExtRAcTs FROM THE ARMED Forces (SPECIAL Powers) Act, 1958

(28 oF 1958)

An Act to enable certain special powers to be conferred upon members
of the armed forces is disturbed areas in the States of Assam, Mani-
pur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland and Tripura and the Union
territories of Arunachal Pradesh and Mizoram,

* * * * *
Short * * * * *
title 1 @
peat (2) It extends to the whole of the States of Assam, Manipur,
i. Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland and Tripura and the Union territories of
Arunachal Pradesh and Mizorm.
* * * * *
Extract FROM THE ApvocaTes Act, 1961
(25 oF 1961)
* * 4 * * *
State 3. (1) There shall be a Bar Council—
Bar
Councils. * धर * * :
(b) for the States of Assam, Manipur, Meghalaya, Nagaland and
Tripura and the Union territories of Mizoram and Arunachal
Pradesh, to be known as the Bar Council of Assam, Nagaland,
Maghalaya, Manipur and Tripura;
* * * * *
EXTRACTS FROM THE GOVERNMENT OF UNION TERRITORIES Acr, 1963
(20 oF 1963)
* * * * *
Defini_ 2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
tions and * * 1 के * *
‘interpre-
tation, (h) “Union territory” means any of the Union territories of Goa

Daman and Diu, Pondicherry and Arunachal Pradesh.
* * * *


27
38. (1) * के * के ie

(2) Until rules are made under sub-section (1), the rules of procedure
and standing orders with respect. to the Legislative Assembly of the
State of Uttar Pradesh in force immediately before the commencement
of this Act in any Union territory shall have effect in relation to the
Legislative Assembly of that Union territory subject to such modifications
and adaptations as may be made therein by the Administrator;

Provided that the provisions of this sub-section shall apply in relation
to the Legislative Assemblies of the Union territories of Arunachal
Pradesh and Mizoram as if for the words “the State of Uttar Pradesh”,
the words “the State of Assam” had been substituted,

ok * * * *

44. (1) * * * * *

Exrracts rroM tHe Norru-Eastern Counci Act, 1971
(84 67 1971)

* * * * *

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—

* * * * *

(b) “north-eastern area” means the area comprising the States
of Assam, Manipur, Meghalaya, Nagaland and Tripura and the Union
territories of Arunachal Pradesh and Mizoram; and

(c) “State” includes the Union territories of Arunachal Pradesh
and Mizoram.

3. (1) There shall be a Council to be called the North-Fastern Council
which shall consist of the following members, namely: —

* * * * *

(9) the Chief Ministers of the States of Assam, Manipur,
Meghalaya, Nagaland and Tripura and of the Union territories of
Arunachal Pradesh and Mizoram; and

* * * * *

Rules of
proce-
dure.

Council
of Minis.
ters,

Defini-
tions,

Setting
up and
compo-
sition of
the
North.
Eastern
Council,


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for the establishment of the State of Arunachal Pradesh and
for matters connected therewith.

(Shri Buta Singh, Minister of Home Affairs)