1 • 
2. 
3. 
LOK SABRA 
CORRIGENDA 
to 
THE IN'lEREST BILL, 1977 
I-To be/As introduced in 10k Sabha 7 
Page 2, line 3,-
m "Baking" ~ "Banking" 
Page 2, line 38,-
for "de mage s" ~ lid amage s " 
Page 5, line 12,-
for "state" read "stage" 
Agrahayana 22, 1 99 ( Saka) 

10 of 1949. 
As INTRODUCED IN Lox SABHA ON. 
, 6 DEC 1911 
DiU No. 1"7 of 1177 
THE INTEREST SILL, 1977 
A 
BILL 
to conlOZidate and amend the law relating to the allDwance of in.terest in 
certain cases. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-eighth Ye8l' of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Interest Act, 1977. Short title, 
extent and (2) It exfends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and commence-
S Jt.ubmir. ment. 
10 
IS 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Oftlcial. Gazette, appoint. 
Z. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "court" includes a tribunal and an arbitrator; 
(b) Rcurrent rate of interest" means the highest of the maximum 
rates at which interest may be paid on different classes of deposits 
(other than those maintained in savings account or those maintained 
by charitable or religiOUS institutions) by di1ferent clasaes of 1IChe-
duled banks in accordance with the directions given or issued to 
banking companies generally by the Reserve Bank of India under the 
Banking Regulation Act, 1949. 
Deftnitions. 

Power ot 
court to 
allow 
interest. 
2 
Explanation.-In this clause, "scheduled bank." means a bank, not 
being a co-operative bank, transacting any business authorised by the 
Baking Regulation Act, 1949. 
(c) "debt" means any liability for an ascertained sum of money 
and includes a debt payable in kind, but does not include a judgment 5 
debt; 
(d) "personal injuries" includes any disease and any impair-
ment OF a person's physical or mental condition; 
(e) all other words and expressions used herein but not defined 
10 of 1949 
and defined in the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, shall have the 10 2 of 1934. 
meanings respectively assigned to them in that Act. 
3. (1) In any proceedings for the recovery of any debt or damages or 
in any proceedings in whic:h a claim for interest in resped of any debt 
or damages already paid is made, the court may, if it thinks fit, aUow 
interest to the person entitled to the debt or damages or to the person 15 
making such claim, as the case may be, at a rate not exceeding the <!urrent 
rate of interest, for the whole or part of the following period, that is to 
say,-
(a) if the proceedings relate to a debt payable by virtue of a 
written instrument at a certain time, then, from the date when the 20 
debt is payable to the date of institution of the proceedings; 
(b) it the proceedings do not relate to any such debt, then, from 
the date menti~ned in this reg8l'd in a writ~n notice given by the 
person entitled or the person making the claim to the person liable 
that interest will be claimed, to the date of institution of the pro- 25 
ceedings: 
Provided that where the amount of the debt or damages has been 
repaid before the institution of the proceedings, interest shall not be 
allowed under this section for the period after such repayment. 
(2) Where, in any such proceedings as are mentioned' in sub- 30 
"ection (1 ),-
(a) judgment, ordier or adr. is gi~ lot Ii 811m -whkh, aPart 
from interest on damages, exceeds four' thousand rupees, jaIld i 
(b) the sum represents or includes damages in respect Of !Per-
sonal injuries to th.e plaintiff or any other person, or in reSpect of a 35 
person's death. , 
then, the power conferred by tthat sub-section shall be exerc:ised SO as 
to Include in that sum interest on th05e demages or _ sUeh part C)f them 
as the court considers appropriate for the whole or part of the period 
from the date mentioned in the notice to the date of institution of the 40 
proceedings, ufiless the colll't I. satisfied tlUtt ff~re are 8Petial reasons 
why no interest should be given its respeCt of th_ ~1Ii'f*. 
(3) ,Nothing in tItis· seeti~-
(0) shan .pply 1ft relation tt.-
(i) any debt or damages upon whfth hit'erest is i"lt8Me as 4S 
of richt, by virtue of any .g.reemeat; Or 

26 of 1881. 
5 of 1908. 
S 
3 
Oi) any debt or damages upon which payment of intereSt 
js ba1"l'8d, by virtue of aD express agreement; 
(b)· ...... dIkt-
(i) the eompeDSation recoverable for the djshonour of a bUI 
ijf n:tIaiiee, proDiiiSOry note or Cheque, lis delbied hi the Nap-
tlatile instrumehts Act, 1881; or 
(ii) the provisioaa of rule I of Ordet 0 of the I'ltst Sdledule 
to the Code of Q.n Procedure. 1108. 
(c) s)Ulli empoftr the cOUrt to awatd interest upOn hiterfit 
10 4. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained. in section 3, mterest shall 
be payable in all cases in which it is payable by virtue of any enactment 
or other ruie of law or usage having the force of iaw. 
. (2) Notwithstandiilg as aforeSaid, and without prejudice to the gene-
r.~ty of the provisions of su.seCtioil (1), the court sliaD, in each of the 
IS NilowlDg eases, 8110w interest from the date specified below to the date 
of institution of the proceedings at such rate as the court may cQusider 
reasonable, unless the court is satisfied that there are special reason:. 
why interest should not be allowed, namely:-
20 
2S 
(a)' where money or other property has been deposited as seeu-
rity for the performance of an obligation imposed by law or contract, 
from tbe date of the deposit; 
(b) where the obligation to pay money or restore any property 
arises by virtue of a fiduciary relationsbip, from the aate of the cause 
of action; 
(c) where money or other property is obtained or retained by 
fraud, (rom the elate of the cause of action; 
(d) where the claim is for dower or maintenance, from the date 
of the cause of action. 
Interest 
payable 
under 
certain 
enact-
ments. 
5 of 1908. 5. Nothin'g in this Act shall affect the provisions of section 34 of the Section 34 
32 of 1839. 
30 Code ofi Civil Procedure, 1908. of the 
Code of 
Civil 
Procedure 
1908 to 
apply. 
6. (1) As from the commencement of this Act, the Interest Act, 1839 Repeal and 
and any other law corresponding thereto in force in any State immediate- saving. 
Iy before such commencement shall stand repealed. 
(2) The provisions of this Act shall not apply to any suit or other legal 
proceeding pending at the commencement of this Act and the provisions 
35 of the corresponding law applicable immediately before such commence-
ment shall, notwithstanding the repeal of such law by sub-section (1), 
continue to apply to such suit or other legal proceeding. 
(3) The mention of particular matters in sub-section (2) shall not be 
40 held to prejudice or affect the general application of section 6 of the 
10 of 1897. General Clauses Act, 1897, with regard to the effect of repeal. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Law Commission of India in its sixty-third Report had recom-
mended the revision of the existing Interest Act, 1839. This Act is a 
very short one; besides a preamble, it contains only one section and a 
proviso. However, it is a statute of importance, since i'l; prescribes the 
general law of interest which becomes applicable in the absence of any 
contractual or statutory provisions specifically dealing with the subject. 
According to the Commission, almost every phrase used in the Act has 
given rise to problems of interpretation and judicial decisions have dis-
closed divergence of views in respect of the same. The Commission has 
revised the Act comprehensively so as to make its provisions more 
precise, speCific, unambiguous and juristically satisfactory. It Is pro-
posed to replace. the existing Act by a new Act based on the recommen-
dations of the Law Commission. The Bill seeks to achieve this object. 
H. M. PATEL. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 7th December, 1977. 
4 

Clause 3 of the Bill empowers a court to allow interest on any debt or 
damages already paid, or to include interest on damages where the sum 
exceeds four thousand rupees, or to allow interest in respect of certain 
other cases, _I 
Clause 4 of the Bill empowers a court to allow interpst from the date 
of institution of proceedings up to certain specified dates in the case of 
money or other properties deposited as security, or restored by virtue of 
a fiduciary relationship, or obtained or retained by fraud. 
It is not possible to envisage the situations in which expenditure would 
have to be incurred from the Consolidated Fund of India. Hence no 
estimate of such expenditure can be given at this state. 
J . 
• 

, 
-
LOK SABHA 
i; 
DILL 
to comolidate and amend the law relating to the allowance of interest 
in certain cases. 
) e 'is 
,1 
(Shr ' H M Patel Ml'nl'ster of rinance) 1 " , 