IDK SABHA 
CORRI GENnA 
to 
THK CONSTITUTION (IDRTY-:FOURTH .AMENIMENT) 
BILL, 1977 
L.To be/As introduced in wk Sabha 7 
1. Page 1, line 8,-
after "article 32" inse;rt ''of the Constitution" 
2. Page 2, line 19,-
after "article 2~ II insert "of ·the Constitution ll 
NRW DELHI; 
December ~ 1977 
Agrahayana.23, 1899 (Saka) 

As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABRA ON 
, 6 DEC 197, 
.. BlIl No. 148 of tl71 
),$ 
THP; CONSTITUTION (FORTY -FOURTH AMENDMENT) BILL, 1977 
A 
BILL 
fUf'tMf' to amend the Constitution of India.. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-eighth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Constitution 
ment) Act, 1977. 
(Forty-fourth Amend- Short 
title. 
5 2. Article 31D of the Constitution shall be omitted. 
3. (1) Article 32A of the Constitution shall be omitted. 
(2) Any proceedings pending before the Supreme Court under 
article 32 immediately before the commencement of this Act may be 
dealt with by the Supreme Court as if the said article 32A had been 
10 omitted with effect on and from the 1st day ()of February, 1977. 
4. (1) Article 13lA of the Constitution shall be omitted. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where 
immediately before the commencement of this Act any reference made by 
a High Court under the said article 13lA is pending before the Supreme 
IS Court, the Supreme Court may, having regard to-
(a) the stage at which the reference is so pending; and 
Omission 
of article 
3ID. 
Omission 
of article 
32A.· 
Omission 
of article 
lIlA. 

Omission 
of article 
144A. 
Amend-
ment of 
article 145. 
Omlaion 
of artlele 
2HA. 
2 
(b) the ends of justice, 
either deal with the case as if that article had not been omitted or 
return the case to the High Court for disposal as if that article had 
been omitted with effect on and from the 1st day of February, 1977. 
5. (1) Article 144A of the Constitution shall be omitted. 
(2) Any case pending before the Supreme Court immediately before 
the commencement of this Act may be dealt with by the Supreme Court 
as if the said article 144A had been omitted with effect on and from th~ 
1st day of February, 1977. 
t. In article 145 of the Constitution,-
(a) in CIlause (1), in sub-clause (ee) , for the words, figures and 
letters "articles ISlA and 139A", the word, figures and letter Uarti-
cle 139A" shall be substituted; 
(b) in clause (2), the words, figures and letter "article 144A 
anr\ of" shall be omitted; 
(e) in clause (3), the words, figures and letter "Subject to the 
provisions ot article 144A," shall be omitted. 
If. (1) Article 22SA" ot the Constitution shall be omitted. 
5 
IS 
(I) Nty proeeedtnp pending before a High Court UDder 'artiele 228 
Immediately before the commencement ot this Act may be dealt with 20 
by the High Court as it the said article 228A had been omitted with 
,..,. effect on and from the 1st day Of February, 1977. 
Amend-
ment of 
article 
228. 
Omission 
of article 
228A. 
Amead-
ment of 
article 
360. 
8. In article 228 of the Constitution, in the opening portion, the words, 
figures and letter ", subject to the provisions of article l31A," shall be 
omitted. 
8. (1) Article 228A of the Constitution shall be omitted. 
(2) Any case pending before a High Court immediately before 
the commencement of this Act may be dealt with by the High Court as 
if the said article 228A had been omitted with effect on and from the 
1st day of February, 1977. 
10. In article 366 of the Constitution, chlUse (4A) and clause (26A) 
shall be omitted. ' 
.' , . 
30 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, inserted 
various articles in the COllstlLution to curtail, both directly and indirect-
ly, the jurisdiction of 'the Supreme Court and the High Courts to l'eview 
the constitutionality of laws. Article 32A barred the Supreme Court 
1rom considering the constitutional validity of any State law in proceed-
ings for the enforcement of fundatnental rights unless the constitu-
tional validity of any Central law was also in issue in such proceedings. 
Article 13lA gave to the Supreme Court exclusive jurisdiction to decide 
the constitutional validity vf a Central law and thus deprived the High 
Courts of their jurisdiction. in respect of the same. Article· 144A pro~ 
vided thai the minimum number of Judges of the Supreme Court who 
shall "sii..j2r the purpose of determining the constitutional validity of 
any Centra?'1uw or State law shall be seven and reqUired a special 
majority Of two-thirds for the invalidation of such law. Article 226A 
barred the High Courts from deciding the validity of any Central law 
and article 228A required that there should be a :Bench of at least ft'\l'e 
Judges for determining the constitutional validity of any State law and 
prescribed a special majority for a judgment invalidatin'g such a law. 
2, It is considered that articles 32A, 131A and 22'8A cause hardship 
to persons living in distant parts in India. Further, article 32A would 
lead to multiplicity of proceedings as cases relating to the validity of 
a State law which could be disposed of by the Supreme Court itself 
have to be heard first by the High Court. The minimum number of 
Judges in every caSe wherein the constitutional validity of a law is 
involved, IlJwever unsubstantial the challenge might be, results in 
valuable judicial time being lost in hearing and rejecting /Submissions 
that have no substance" The Supreme Court has, in MIs. Misrilal Jain 
VS. the State of Oris!:a and Others (AIR 1977 SC 1686) expressed the 
hope that articIe 144A would engage the prompt attention of Parlia-
ment and would be amended so as to leave to the court itself the duty 
to decine how large a Bench should decide any particular case. In fact, 
a number of "cases have been held up in the Supreme Court and High 
Courts as a result of the aforementioned articles. 
3, It is, therefore, prop:lsed to omit articles 32A, 131A, 144A, 226A 
and '228A. It is also proposed to make special provisIons to enable the 
Supreme Court and the High Courts to deal with pending eases in the 
s:.tme manner as if the said articles had been omitted with effect from 
the 1st February, 1977 (viz., the date on which those articles were 
brought into force). Necessary consequential amendments to articles 
145, 228 and 386 are also proposed to be made. 
4. Article 31D confers special power on Parliament to enact certam 
laws in respect of anti-national activities. It is considered that these 
powers of Parliament to make laws for dealing with anti-national 
activities and anti~national associations are ctf a sweeping nature and 
are capable of abuse. It is, therefore. proposed to omit article SID. 
5. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 
NEW l1tt.Hl; SHANT! B'ftUSHAN. 
The 12th December. 1977. 
3 

Savin·got 
laws in 
respect of 
anti-na-
tional 
activities. 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
• • • • • 
31D. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in article 13, no law 
'providing for-
(e) the prevention or prohibition of anti-national activities; or 
(b) the prevention of formation of, or the prohibition of, anti-
national associations, • 
shall be deemef\ to be void on the ground that it is inconsistent with, or 
takes away or abridges any of the i'ights conferred by, article 14, article 
19 or article 31. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, Padiament shall 
have, and the Legislature of a State shall not have, power to make laws 
with respect to any of the matters referred to in sub-clause (a) or sub-
clause (b) of clause (1). 
(3) Any law with respect to any matter ll'eferred to in sub-clause (0) 
or sub-clause (b) of clause (1) which is in force immediately before the 
commencement of section 5 of the Constitution (Forty-second Amend-
ment) Act, 1976, shall continue in force until altered or repealed! or 
amended by Parliament.. 
(4) In this article,-
(0) "association" means an association of persons; 
(b) Uanti-national activity", in relation to an individual or asso-
Ciation, means any action taken by such individual or association-
(i) which is intended, or which supports any claim, to bring 
about, on any ground whatsoever, the cession of a part of the 
territory of India or the secession of a part of the territory of India 
or which incites any individual or association to bring about such 
cession or secession i 
(ii) which disclaims, questions, threatens, t\isrupts or is 
intended to threaten or disrupt the sovereignty and integrity of 
India or the security of the State or the unity of the nation; 
(iii) which is intender\, or which is part of a scheme which is 
intended, to overthrow by force the Government as by law 
estab~; . 
(iv) which is intended, or which is part of a scheme whfch 
is intended, to create internal disturbance or the disruption of 
pub1tc services; 
4 

& 
(v) which is intended, or which is part of a scheme .hith 
is mtendetl, to threaten or disrupt harmony between different 
religious, racial, language or regional 'groups or castes or com-
munities; 
(c) "anti-national association" means an associatiori-
(i) which has for its object any anti-national activity; 
(ii) which encourages or aids persons to undertake or engage 
in any anti-national activity; 
(iii) the members whereof undertake or engage in any anti-
national activity . 
• • • • • 
3ZA. Notwithstanding anything in article 32, the Supreme Court shall 
not consider the constitutional validity of any State law in any proceed-
ings under that article unless the constitutional validity of any Central 
law is also in issue in such proceedings. 
• • • • • 
13lA. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other prOvision 
of this Constitution, the Supreme Court shall, to the exclusion of any 
other court, have jurisrtiction to determine all questions relating to the 
constitutional validity of any Central :law. 
(2) Where a High Court is satisfted-
(II) that a case pending before it or before a court subordinate 
to it involves questions as to the constitutional validity of any Central 
law or, as the case may be, of both Central and State laws; and 
(b) that the determination of such questions is necessary for the 
disposal 01 the case, 
the High Court shall refer the questions for the decision of the Supreme 
Court. 
(3) Without prejudice to the provisions of claUSe (2), where, on an 
appUcation made by the Attomey-General of India, the Supreme Court 
is sattsfled,-
(II) that a case pending before a High Court or before a court 
subordinate to a High Court involves questions as to the constitutio-
nal validity of any Central law or, as the case may be, of both Cen-
tral and State laws; and 
Constitu_ 
tional vali-
dityof 
State 
la.vs 
not to 
be COn-
sidered 
in pro-
r.eedints 
under 
article 
82 • 
Exclusive 
jurisdic_ 
tion of 
the Sup-
reme 
Court in 
regard 
to ques-
tions as 
toconati-
tutional 
vaUdityof 
Central 
laws. 

Special 
provi_ 
sions .. 
to dis-
posalof 
questions 
reIat-
Ingto 
constitu-
tional 
validity 
ollaWI. 
Rules 01 
Court, etc. 
(b) that the determination of such questions is necessary for the 
disposal of the case, 
the Supreme Court may require the High Court to Il'efer the questions to 
it for it~ decision. 
(4) When a reference is made under clause (2) or clause (3), the Higb . 
Court shall stay all proceedings in respect of the case until the Supreme 
Court decides the questions so Il'eferred. 
(5) The Supreme Court shall, after giving the parties an opportunity 
of being heard, decide the questions so referred, and may-
(a) either dispose of the case itself; or 
(b) return the case to the High Court together with a copy of 
its judgment on such questions for disposal of the case in conformity 
with such judgment by the High Court or, as the case may be, the 
court subordinate to it . 
• • • • • 
1~. (1) The minimum number of Judges of the Supreme Court Who 
shall sit for the purpose of determining any question as to theo consti-
tutional validity of any Central law or State law shall be seven. 
(2) A Central law or a State law shall not be declared to be consti-
tutionally invalid by the Supreme Court unless a majodty of not les3 than 
two-thirds of the Judges sitting for the purpose of determining the ques-
tion as to the constitutional validity of such law hold it to be constitu-
tionally invalid. 
145. (1) Subject to the provisions of any law made by Parliament, the 
Supreme Court may from time to time, with the approval of the President, 
make rules for regulating generally the practice and procedure of the 
Court including-
• • • • • 
(cc) rules as to the proceedings in the Court under M'ticles 13lA 
and 139A; 
• • • • • 
(2) Subject to the proviSions of article 144A and of clause (3'), rules 
made under this article may fix the minimum number of Judges wlloat'e 
to sit for any purpose, ami may provide for the powers of single Juages 
and· Division Courts. 
(3) Subject to the prOVisions of article 144A"the minimum number of 
Judges who are to sit fOl' the purpose of deciding my case involving a 
substantial question of law as to the interpretation' of this Constitution, 
or tor the purpose of hearin'g any reference under article 143 shall 'be Ave: 
Provided that, where the Court hearing an appeal under any ot the pro-
visions rJf this Cbapter other than article 132 consists of' lesa than· ftve 
Judges and In the course of the hearing of the appeld the Court is'satisfled 
that the appeal involves a substantial question' of law'1lS 'to die' inteipl!e-

7 
tation of this Constitution the determination of which is ne~sary for 
the ,dis~sal of the appeal, such Court sball refer the question for opinion 
rto a Court con9~ituted as required by this clause for the purpose of decid-
ing any case involving such a question and shall on receipt of the opinion 
d-iapGse of the appeal in conformity with such opinion . 
• • • • • 
JZ6A. Notwithstanding anything in article 226, the High Court shall 
not consider the constitutiop.aJ. validity of any Central law in any proceed-
lng" under that article. 
• • • • • 
III. If the High Court is satisfied that a oase pending in a court IUb-
ordinate to it involves a substantial questton. of law u to the interpre-
tattcm 01 tbis Ccmstltutlon the detemdnat1cm cd wbich Is necessary tor the 
dilpoaal of the cue, it shall withdraw the eale ann, subject to the provi. 
lions of a!rticle lSlA, may-
(G) either dispole of the cue Itself, or 
(b) determine the said question of law and return the case to 
the CClurt from which the case has been so withdrawn together with 0 
copy of its judgment on such question, and the said court shall on 
receipt tnereof, proceed to dispose of the ease in conformity with such 
judgment. 
Constitu-
tional 
validity 
ofCen_ 
tral 
Jaws 
not 
to be 
oonsi .. 
dered 
lnprocee. 
dings 
under 
BlUcie . 
~ae, 
Transf.r 
of cer-
tain cu .. 
toHiIb 
Court. 
228A. (1) No rli~h Court shall h:we jurisdiction to rleclare any Cen- Special 
tral law to be ~onstitutionally invalid. provi. 
(2) Suh;ect to the provisions of article 131A, the HiJ!:h Court may 
determine all questions relating to the constitutional vnlidity of any State 
law. 
(3) The minimum number of Jud)l,es who shalf sit for the purpose of 
determininJ( any question 88 to ~e constitutional v.aHdity of any State 
law shall be five: 
Provided that where the High Court consist$ of less than flV'e .Tu-i.[!'e9, 
all the Judges of the High Court may sit and determine such question. 
(4) A State law shall not be dec1a'!'ed toO be constitutionally invalid 
by the High Court unless--
(II) where the High Court consislq of flve JudJtes or morf'. not 
less than two-thir& of the Jud've!il sitt.inl! for the purpos .. of deter-
mining the valfdity of such hw. hold it to be constitutlonallv invalid: 
and 
sions 
as to 
dis-
posal 
of 
ques-
tions 
relating 
to cons. 
titutional 
validity 
of State 
laws. 

Defini-
tiona. 
8 
(b) where the High Court consists of less than five Judges, all the 
Judges of the High Court sitting for the purpose hold it to be const! .. 
tutionally invalid. 
(5) The provisions of this a'l'ticle shall have effect notwithstBllding 
anything contained in this Part. 
~:rplanation..-In computing the number of Judges of a High Court for 
the purposes of this article, a Judge who is disqualified by r~aS9P qf 
personal or pecuniary bias shall be exc:ludect 
• • • • • 
388. In this Constitution, unless the context otherwise Il'equires, the 
following expressions have the meanings hereby respectively assigned to 
them, that is to say-
• • • • • 
(fA) "Central law" means any law other than a State law but 
itoes not include any amendment of this Constitution made under 
article 388; 
• • • • • 
(28A) I·State law" means-
(II) a State Act or an Act of the Legislature 0'1 a UnioD 
territory: 
(b) an Ordinance promulgated by the Governor of a State 
under RIl'ticle 213 or by the administrator of a Union territory 
under article 23gB: 
(c) any provision with respect to a matter in the State List 
in a Central Act made before the commencement of this Consti-
tution; 
(d) any provision with respect to a matter in the State List 
or the Concurrent List in a Provincial Act; 
(e) any notification. order. scheme. rule, reltUlation or bye-
law or anv other instrument havinl! thf' force of law mal\e under 
anv Act. Ordinance or pro\'isions referred to in sub-c1au.se (a), 
sub-clause (b). sub-clause (e) or sub-clause Cd); 
(1) any notification. order. Rcheme. rule. rellulat;on or bve-
law or any other instrument havinS! the force of law, not fal1in~ 
under sub-clause '(e). and made bv A Stqtf' Government or the 
administrator of a Union territory or an I'Ifficer or authority RUb-
ordinate t~ such Government (lr administrator; and 
(g) any other law (includinsr anv usal!e or custom having thp. 
force of law) wi,th respect to a mElttel.' in the State List:; 
• • • • • 

"!to ..... -, 
LOK SABHA 
• 
BILL 
further to amend the Constitution of India. 
(Shri Shanti Bhushan, 
Minister of Law, Justice 
and Company Affairs.) 