1
THE PRESERV ATION AND PROTECTION OF HISTORICAL
HERITAGE BILL, 2015
By
SHRI RAJEEV SATAV, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for framing of a national policy for preservation and protection of historical
heritage and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Maintenance and Protection of Historical Heritage
Act, 2015.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. 148 of  2015
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "historical heritage" includes historical and archaeological site and remains,
antiquities and historical monument of significant historical importance relating to
Indian culture, civilization or national freedom movement;
(c) "non-governmental organisation" means an organisation, institution,
educational centre or research institution engaged in the field of preservation, protection
and maintenance of historical heritage for a period not less than three years with a
good track record of its activities; and
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, by notification in Official
Gazette, formulate a national policy for preservation and protection of historical heritage
in the country.
(2) The national policy formulated under sub-section (1) may provide for—
(a) measures for preservation and protection of historical heritage which have
been declared as of national importance as well as other historical heritage;
(b) criteria for the selection of non-governmental organisations for entrusting
the work of preservation of historical heritage;
(c) constitution of a body at national level to monitor and regulate the functioning
of non-governmental organisations engaged in the field of preservation of historical
heritage;
(d) providing adequate financial assistance to the non-governmental
organisations entrusted with the task of preservation of historical heritage under
this act;
(e) prescribing duties of non-governmental organisations for the preservation,
safety and protection of historical heritage;
(f) creating awareness among people about the importance of preservation and
protection of historical heritage; and
(g) any other measure necessary for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
4. (1) It shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to implement the national
policy framed under section 3.
(2) The appropriate Government shall monitor and review, from time to time, the
functioning of non-governmental organisations engaged in preservation and protection of
historical heritage in such manner, as may be prescribed.
5. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the State Governments for carrying out the provisions
of this Act.
6. If any non-Governmental organisation indulges in any act which is or is likely to be
detrimental to the preservation and protection of any historical heritage, the appropriate
Government may initiate such action against such organisation as it may deem fit including
imposition of fine or withdrawal of financial assistance or recovery of loss caused to the
Government exchequer.
7. (1) The Central Government, may by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
Definitions.
Framing of a
national
policy for
maintenance
and
protection of
historical
heritage.
Implementation
of the
national
policy.
Central
Government
to provide
adequate
funds.
Penalty.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses, agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
5

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
India is a unique country in terms of its cultural heritage. Vibrant examples of thousand
years of culture and civilization are existing in the form of various historical heritage,
monuments, sites, remains etc. in the country. These are evidence of our golden and glorious
past which hold important and prestigious position for the citizens of India. However, irony
is that due care is not being given to many of the heritages, which have neither been
identified nor marked. Many of these historical heritage are being damaged due to some
construction over these structures. Adequate surveillance, protection and security of these
heritage is very important. The practical experience has not been very positive in this regard.
There is an immediate need to formulate a policy for preservation, protection and maintenance
of historical heritage at the community level. Also, there is a need to make efforts to encourage
non-governmental organisations and other institutions engaged in the field of preservation
of historical heritage by giving them financial assistance to achieve the objectives.
The Bill seeks to provide for framing of a national policy for the preservation, protection
and maintenance of historical heritage by entrusting the responsibility to the non-
governmental organisations engaged in the related field.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RAJEEV SATA V
February 25, 2015.
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the formulation of a national policy for preservation
and protection of historical heritage in the country. It also provides for adequate financial
assistance to the Non-governmental organizations for carrying out the provisions of the
Act. Clause 5 provide for adequate funds to the State Governments for carrying out the
provision of the Act. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India. At this stage, it is difficult to give an exact estimate of the
expenditure to be incurred on it. However, it is estimated that a recurring expenditure of
rupees one thousand crore per annum will be incurred from the Consolidated Fund of India.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.
5

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matter of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
6

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for framing of a national policy for preservation and protection of historical
heritage and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Rajeev Satav, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—108LS(S3)—30-04-2015.