THE SCHEDULED CASTES AND THE SCHEDULED TRIBES
(PREVENTION OF ATROCITIES) AMENDMENT
BILL, 2013
A
BILL
to amend the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities)
Act, 1989.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fourth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. ( 1) This Act may be called the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes
(Prevention of Atrocities) Amendment Act, 2013.
(2)  It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities)
Act, 1989 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in the long title, for the words
“Special Courts” the words “Special Courts and the Exclusive Special Courts” shall be
substituted.
Short title and
commence-
ment.
Amendment
of long title.33 of 1989.
Bill No. 148 of  2013
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK  SABHA

2
3. In section 2 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1),—
(i)  after clause (b), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
‘(bb) “dependent” means the spouse, children, parents, brother and sister
of the victim, who are dependent wholly or mainly on such victim for his support
and maintenance;
(bc) “economic boycott” means—
(i) a refusal to deal with,  work for hire or do business with other
person; or
(ii) to deny opportunities including access to services or contractual
opportunities for rendering service  for consideration; or
(iii) to refuse to do anything on the terms on which things would
be commonly done in the ordinary course of business; or
(iv) to abstain from the professional or business relations that one
would maintain with other person;
(bd) “Exclusive Special Court” means the Exclusive Special Court
established under sub-section (1) of  section 14 exclusively to try the offences
under this Act;
(be) “forest rights” shall have the meaning assigned to it in sub-section (1)
of section 3 of the Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers
(Recognition of Forest Rights) Act, 2006;
(bf) “manual scavenger” shall have the meaning assigned to it in
clause (g) of sub-section  (1) of section 2 of the Prohibition of Employment as
Manual Scavengers and their Rehabilitation Act, 2013;
(bg) “public servant” means a public servant as defined under section 21
of the Indian Penal Code, as well as any other person deemed to be a public
servant under any other law for the time being in force and includes any person
acting in his official capacity under the Central Government or the State
Government, as the case may be;’;
(ii) after clause (e), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
‘(ea) “Schedule” means the Schedule appended to this Act;
(eb) “social boycott” means a refusal to permit a person to render to other
person or receive from him any customary service or to abstain from social
relations that one would maintain with  other person or to isolate him from
others;
(ec) “victim” means any individual who falls within the definition of the
‘‘Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe’’ under clause (c) of sub-section (1) of
section 2, and who has suffered or experienced physical, mental, psychological,
emotional or monetary harm or harm to his property as a result of the commission
of any offence under this Act and includes his relatives, legal guardian and
legal heirs;
  (ed) “witness” means any person who is acquainted with the facts and
circumstances, or is in possession of any information or has knowledge
necessary for the purpose of investigation, inquiry or trial of any crime involving
an offence under this Act, and who is or may be required to give information or
make a statement or produce any document during investigation, inquiry or
trial of such case and includes a victim of such offence;’;
Amendment
of section 2.
2 of 2007.
25 of 2013.
45 of 1860.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(iii) for clause (f), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
“(f) the words and expressions used but not defined in this Act and
defined in the Indian Penal Code, the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 or the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973, as the case may be, shall be deemed to have the
meanings respectively assigned to them in those enactments.”.
4. In section 3 of the principal Act,––
(i) for sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
‘(1) Whoever, not being a member of a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled
Tribe,—
(a) puts any inedible or obnoxious substance into the mouth of a
member of a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe or forces such member
to drink or eat  such inedible or obnoxious substance;
(b) dumps excreta, sewage, carcasses or any other obnoxious
substance in premises, or at the entrance of the premises, occupied by a
member of a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe;
(c) with intent to cause injury,  insult or annoyance to any member
of a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe, dumps excreta, waste matter,
carcasses or any other obnoxious substance in his neighbourhood;
(d) garlands with footwear or parades naked or semi-naked a member
of a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe;
(e) forcibly commits on a member of a Scheduled Caste or a
Scheduled Tribe any act, such as removing clothes from the person,
forcible tonsuring of head, removing moustaches, painting face or body
or any other similar act, which is derogatory to human dignity;
(f) wrongfully occupies or cultivates any land, owned by, or in the
possession of or allotted to, or notified by any competent authority to be
allotted to, a member of a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe, or gets
such land transferred;
(g) wrongfully dispossesses a member of a Scheduled Caste or a
Scheduled Tribe from his land or premises or interferes with the enjoyment
of his rights, including forest rights,  over any land or premises or water
or irrigation facilities or destroys the crops or  takes away the produce
therefrom.
Explanation.––For the purposes of clause ( f) and this clause, the
expression “wrongfully” includes—
(A) against the person’s will;
(B) without the person’s consent;
(C) with the person’s consent, where such consent has been
obtained by putting the person, or any other person in whom the
person is interested in fear of death or of hurt; or
(D) fabricating records of such land;
(h) makes a member of a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe to
do ‘‘begar’’ or other forms of forced or bonded labour other than any
compulsory service for public purposes imposed by the Government;
(i) compels a member of a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe to
dispose or carry human or animal carcasses, or to dig graves;
45 of 1860.
18 of 1872.
2 of 1974.
Amendment
of section 3.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
(j) makes a member of a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe to do
manual scavenging or employs or permits the employment of such member
for such purpose;
(k) performs, or promotes dedicating  a Scheduled Caste or a
Scheduled Tribe woman to a deity, idol, object of worship, temple, or
other religious institution as a devadasi or any other similar practice or
permits aforementioned acts;
(l) forces or intimidates or prevents a member of a Scheduled Caste
or a Scheduled Tribe—
(A) not to vote or to vote for a particular candidate or to vote
in a manner other than that provided by law;
(B) not to file a nomination as a candidate or to withdraw
such nomination; or
(C) not to propose or second the nomination of a member of
a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe as a candidate in any
election;
(m) forces or intimidates or obstructs a member of a Scheduled
Caste or a Scheduled Tribe, who is a member or a Chairperson or a holder
of any other office of a panchayat under PART IX of the Constitution or
a municipality under PART IXA of the Constitution, from performing their
normal duties and functions;
(n) after the poll, causes hurt or grievous hurt or assault or imposes
or threatens to impose social or economic boycott upon a member of a
Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe or prevents from availing benefits
of any public service which is due to him;
(o) commits any offence under this Act against a member of a
Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe for having voted or not having
voted for a particular candidate or for having voted in a manner provided
by law;
(p) institutes false, malicious or vexatious suit or criminal or other
legal proceedings against a member of a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled
Tribe;
(q) gives any false or frivolous information to any public servant
and thereby causes such public servant to use his lawful power to the
injury or annoyance of a member of a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled
Tribe;
(r) intentionally insults or intimidates with intent to humiliate a
member of a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe in any place within
public view;
(s) abuses any member of a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe
by caste name in any place within public view;
(t) destroys, damages or defiles any object generally known to be
held sacred or in high esteem  by members of  the  Scheduled Castes or
the Scheduled Tribes.
Explanation. ––For the purposes of this clause, the expression
“object” means and includes statue, photograph and portrait;
(u) by words either written or spoken or by signs or by visible
representation or otherwise promotes or attempts to promote feelings of
enmity, hatred or ill-will against members of  the  Scheduled Castes or  the
Scheduled Tribes;
(v) by words either written or spoken or by any other means
disrespects any late person held in high esteem by members of the
Scheduled Castes or  the Scheduled Tribes;
(w) (i) intentionally touches a woman belonging to a Scheduled
Caste or a Scheduled Tribe, knowing that she belongs to a Scheduled
Caste or a Scheduled Tribe, when such act of touching is of a sexual
nature and is without the recipient’s consent;
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55

5
(ii) uses words, acts or gestures of a sexual nature towards a woman
belonging to a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe, knowing that she
belongs to a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe.
Explanation.––For the purposes of sub-clause ( i), the expression
“consent”  means an unequivocal voluntary agreement when the person
by words, gestures, or any form of non-verbal communication,
communicates willingness to participate in the specific act:
Provided that a woman belonging to a Scheduled Caste or a
Scheduled Tribe who does not offer physical resistance to any act of a
sexual nature is not by reason only of that fact, is to be regarded as
consenting to the sexual activity:
Provided further that a woman’s sexual history, including with the
offender shall not imply consent or mitigate the offence;
(x) corrupts or fouls the water of any spring, reservoir or any other
souche ordinarily used by members of the Scheduled Castes or the
Scheduled Tribes so as to render it less fit for the purpose for which it is
ordinarily used;
(y) denies a member of a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe any
customary right of  passage to a place of public resort or obstructs such
member so as to prevent him from using or having access to a place of
public resort to which other members of public or any other section thereof
have a right to use of access to;
(z) forces or causes a member of a  Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled
Tribe to leave his house, village or other place of residence:
Provided that nothing contained in this clause shall apply to my
action taken in discharge of a public duty.
(za) obstructs or prevents a member of a Scheduled Caste or a
Scheduled Tribe in any manner with regard to—
(A) using common property resources of an area, or burial or
cremation ground equally with others or using any river, stream,
spring, well, tank, cistern, water-tap or other watering place, or any
bathing ghat, any public conveyance, any road, or passage;
(B) mounting or riding bicycles or motor cycles or wearing
footwear or new clothes in public places or taking out wedding
procession, or mounting a horse or any other vehicle during wedding
processions;
(C) entering any place of worship which is open to the public
or other persons professing the same religion or taking part in, or
taking out, any religious, social or cultural processions including
jatras;
(D) entering any educational institution, hospital, dispensary,
primary health centre,  shop or place of public entertainment; or
any other public place;  or using any utensils or articles meant for
public use in an any place open to the public; or
(E) practicing any profession or the carrying on of any
occupation, trade or business or employment in any job which
other members of the public, or any section thereof, have a right to
use or have access to;
(zb) causes physical harm or mental agony of a member of a
Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe on the allegation of practicing
witchcraft or being a witch; or
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

6
(zc) imposes or threatens a social or economic boycott of any person
or a family or a group belonging to a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled
Tribe,
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than six
months but which may extend to five years and with fine.’;
(ii) in sub-section (2),––
(a) in clause ( v), for the words “on the ground that such person is a
member of a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe or such property belongs to
such member”, the words “knowing that such person is a member of a Scheduled
Caste or a Scheduled Tribe or such property belongs to such member”shall be
substituted;
(b) after clause (v), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:––
“(va) commits any offence specified in the Schedule, against a
person or property, knowing that such person is a member of a Scheduled
Caste or a Scheduled Tribe or such property belongs to such member,
shall be punishable with such punishment as specified under the Indian
Penal Code for such offences and shall also be liable to fine.”.
5. For section 4 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:–
“4. (1) Whoever, being a public servant but not being a member of a Scheduled
Caste or a Scheduled Tribe, wilfully neglects his duties required to be performed by
him under this Act and the rules made thereunder, shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than six months but which may extend
to one year.
(2) The duties of public servant referred to in sub-section ( 1) shall include––
(a) to read out to an informant the information given orally, and reduced
to writing by the officer in charge of the police station, before taking the signature
of the informant;
(b) to register a complaint or a First Information Report under this Act and
other relevant provisions and to register it under appropriate sections of this
Act;
(c) to furnish a copy of the information so recorded forthwith to the
informant;
(d) to record the statement of the victims or witnesses;
(e) to conduct the investigation and file charge sheet in the Special Court
or the Exclusive Special Court within a period of sixty days, and to explain the
delay if any, in writing;
(f) to correctly prepare, frame and translate any document or electronic
record;
(g) to perform any other duty specified in this Act or the rules made
thereunder:
Provided that the charges in this regard against the public servant shall
be booked on the recommendation of an administrative enquiry.
(3) The cognizance in respect of any dereliction of duty referred to in
sub-section (2) by a public servant shall be taken by the Special Court or the Exclusive
Special Court and shall give direction for penal proceedings against such public
servant.”.
45 of 1860.
Punishment
for neglect of
duties.
Substitution
of new
section for
section 4.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

7
6. In section 8 of the principal Act,––
(i) in clause ( a), for the words “any financial assistance to a person accused
of”, the words “any financial assistance in relation to the offences committed by a
person accused of” shall be substituted;
(ii) after clause (b), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:––
“(c) the accused was having personal knowledge of the victim or his
family, the Court shall presume that the accused was aware of the caste or tribal
identity of the victim, unless the contrary is proved.”.
7. In section 10 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1),––
(a) after the words and figures “article 244 of the Constitution”, the words,
brackets, letters and figures “or any area identified under the provisions of clause
(vii) of sub-section (2) of section 21” shall be inserted;
(b) for the words “two years”, the words “three years” shall be substituted.
8. For section 14 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:––
“14. (1)  For the purpose of providing for speedy trial, the State Government
shall, with the concurrence of the Chief Justice of the High Court, by notification in
the Official Gazette, establish an Exclusive Special Court for one or more
Districts:
 Provided that in Districts where less number of cases under this Act is recorded,
the State Government shall, with the concurrence of the Chief Justice of the High
Court, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify for such Districts  the Court of
Session to be a Special Court to try the offences under this Act:
   Provided further that the Courts so established or specified shall have power
to directly take cognizance of offences under this Act.
(2) It shall be the duty of the State Government to establish an adequate number
of Courts to ensure that cases under this Act are disposed of within a period of two
months, as far as possible.
(3) In every  trial in the Special Court or the Exclusive Special Court, the
proceedings shall be continued from day-to-day until all the witnesses in attendance
have been examined, unless the Special Court or the Exclusive Special Court finds the
adjournment of the same beyond the following day to be necessary for reasons to be
recorded in writing:
Provided that when the trial relates to an offence under this Act, the trial shall,
as far as possible, be completed within a period of two months from the date of filing
of the charge sheet.
9. After section 14 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
“14A. ( 1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 an appeal shall lie, from any judgment, sentence or order, not being
an interlocutory order, of a Special Court or an Exclusive Special Court, to the High
Court both on facts and on law.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (3) of section 378 of the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 an appeal shall lie to the High Court against an order
of the Special Court or the Exclusive Special Court granting or refusing bail.
Amendment
of section 8.
Amendment
of section
10.
Special Court
and Exclusive
Special
Court.
Substitution
of new
section for
section 14.
Insertion of
new section
14A.
Appeals.
2 of 1974.
2 of 1974.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

8
(3)  Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force, every appeal under this section shall be preferred within a period of ninety
days from the date of the judgment, sentence or order appealed from:
Provided that the High Court may entertain an appeal after the expiry of the said
period of ninety days if it is satisfied that the appellant had sufficient cause for not
preferring the appeal within the period of ninety days:
Provided further that no appeal shall be entertained after the expiry of the
period of one hundred and eighty days.
(4) Every appeal preferred under sub-section ( 1) shall, as far as possible, be
disposed of within a period of three months from the date of admission of the
appeal.
 10. For section 15 of the principal Act,  the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
“15. (1) For every Special Court, the State Government shall, by notification in
the Official Gazette, specify a Public Prosecutor or appoint an advocate who has been
in practice as an advocate for not less than seven years, as a Special Public Prosecutor
for the purpose of conducting cases in that Court.
(2) For every Exclusive Special Court, the State Government shall, by
notification in the Official Gazette, specify an Exclusive Public Prosecutor or appoint
an advocate who has been in practice as an advocate for not less than seven years, as
an Exclusive Public Prosecutor for the purpose of conducting cases in that Court.”.
11. After Chapter IV of the principal Act, the following Chapter shall be inserted,
namely:—
“CHAPTER IVA
R
IGHTS OF VICTIMS AND WITNESSES
15A. ( 1) It shall be the duty and responsibility of the State to make
arrangements for the protection of victims, their dependents, and witnesses
against any kind of intimidation or  coercion or inducement or violence or threats of
violence.
(2) A victim shall be treated with fairness, respect and dignity and with due
regard to any special need that arises because of the victim’s age or gender or
educational disadvantage or poverty.
(3) A victim or his dependent shall have the right to reasonable, accurate, and
timely notice of any Court proceeding including any bail proceeding and the Special
Public Prosecutor or the State Government shall inform the victim about any
proceedings under this Act.
(4) A victim or his dependent shall have the right to apply to the Special Court
or the Exclusive Special Court, as the case may be, to summon parties for production
of any documents or material witnesses or examine the persons present.
(5) A victim or his dependent shall be entitled to be heard at any proceeding
under this Act in respect of bail, discharge, release, parole, conviction or sentence of
Substitution
of new
section for
section 15.
Special Public
Prosecutor
and Exclusive
Public
Prosecutor.
Insertion of
new Chapter
IVA.
Rights of
victims and
witnesses.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

9
an accused or any connected proceedings or arguments and file return submission
on conviction, acquittal or sentencing.
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973, the Special Court or the Exclusive Special Court trying a case under this Act
shall provide to a victim, his dependent, informant or witnesses––
(a) the complete protection to secure the ends of justice;
(b) the travelling and maintenance expenses during investigation, inquiry
and trial;
(c) the social-economic rehabilitation during investigation, inquiry and
trial;
(d) relocation.
(7) The State shall inform the concerned Special Court or the Exclusive Special
Court about the protection provided to any victim or his dependent, informant or
witnesses and such Court shall periodically review the protection being offered and
pass appropriate orders.
(8) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-section (6), the
concerned Special Court or the Exclusive Special Court may, on an application made
by a victim or his dependent, informant or witness in any proceedings before it or by
the Special Public Prosecutor in relation to such victim, informant or witness or on its
own motion, take such measures including––
(a)  concealing the names and addresses of the witnesses in its orders or
judgments or in any records of the case accessible to the public;
(b) issuing directions for non-disclosure of the identity and addresses of
the witnesses;
(c) take immediate action in respect of any complaint relating to harassment
of a victim, informant or witness and on the same day, if necessary, pass
appropriate orders for protection:
Provided that inquiry or investigation into the complaint received under
clause ( c) shall be tried separately from the main case by such Court and
concluded within a period of two months from the date of receipt of the complaint:
Provided further that where the complaint under clause (c) is against any
public servant, the Court shall restrain such public servant from interfering with
the victim, informant or witness, as the case may be, in any matter related or
unrelated to the pending case, except with the permission of the Court.
(9) It shall be the duty of the Investigating Officer and the Station House
Officer to record the complaint of victim, informant or witnesses against any kind of
intimidation, coercion or inducement or violence or threats of violence, whether given
orally or in writing, and a photocopy of the First Information Report shall be immediately
given to them at free of cost.
(10) All proceedings relating to offences under this Act shall be video
recorded.
2 of 1974.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

10
(11) It shall be the duty of the concerned State to specify an appropriate scheme
to ensure implementation of the following rights and entitlements of victims and
witnesses in accessing justice so as––
(a) to provide  a copy of the recorded First Information Report at free of
cost;
(b)  to provide immediate relief in cash or in kind to atrocity victims or
their dependents;
(c) to provide  necessary protection to the atrocity victims or their
dependents, and witnesses;
(d) to provide relief in respect of death or injury or damage to
property;
(e) to arrange food or  water or clothing or shelter or medical aid or
transport facilities or daily allowances to victims;
(f) to provide  the maintenance expenses to the atrocity victims and their
dependents;
(g)  to provide  the information about the rights of atrocity victims at the
time of making complaints and registering the First Information Report;
(h) to provide  the protection to atrocity victims or their dependents and
witnesses from intimidation and harassment;
(i) to provide  the information to atrocity victims or their dependents or
associated organisations or individuals, on the status of investigation and
charge sheet and to provide copy of the charge sheet at free of cost;
(j) to take necessary precautions at the time of medical examination;
(k) to provide information to atrocity victims or their dependents or
associated organisations or individuals, regarding the relief amount;
(l) to provide information to atrocity victims or their dependents or
associated organisations or individuals, in advance about the dates and place
of investigation and trial;
(m) to give adequate briefing on the case and preparation for trial to
atrocity victims or their dependents or associated organisations or individuals
and to provide the legal aid for the said purpose;
(n) to execute the rights of atrocity victims or their dependents or
associated organisations or individuals at every stage of the proceedings under
this Act and  to provide the necessary assistance for the execution of the
rights.
(12) It shall be the right of the atrocity victims or their dependents, to take
assistance from the Non-Government Organisations, social workers or
advocates.”.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

11
12.  After section 23 of the principal Act, the following Schedule shall be inserted,
namely:—
“THE SCHEDULE
[See section 3(2) (va)]
Section under Name of offence and punishment.
the Indian
Penal Code,
45 of 1860
120A Definition of criminal conspiracy.
120B Punishment of criminal conspiracy.
141 Unlawful assembly.
142 Being member of unlawful assembly.
143 Punishment for unlawful assembly.
144 Joining unlawful assembly armed with deadly weapon.
145 Joining or continuing in unlawful assembly, knowing it has been
commanded to disperse.
146 Rioting.
147 Punishment for rioting.
148 Rioting, armed with deadly weapon.
217 Public servant disobeying direction of law with intent to save person
from punishment or property from forfeiture.
319 Hurt.
320 Grievous hurt.
323 Punishment for voluntarily causing hurt.
324 V oluntarily causing hurt by dangerous weapons or means.
325 Punishment for voluntarily causing grievous hurt.
326B V oluntarily throwing or attempting to throw acid.
332 V oluntarily causing hurt to deter public servant from his duty.
341 Punishment for wrongful restraint.
354 Assault or criminal force to woman with intent to outrage her modesty.
354A Sexual harassment and punishment for sexual harassment.
354B Assault or use of criminal force to woman with intent to disrobe.
354C V oyeurism.
354D Stalking.
359 Kidnapping.
363 Punishment for kidnapping.
365 Kidnapping or abducting with intent secretly and wrongfully to confine
person.
376B Sexual intercourse by husband upon his wife during separation.
376C Sexual intercourse by a person in authority.
447 Punishment for criminal trespass.
506 Punishment for criminal intimidation.
509 Word, gesture or act intended to insult the modesty of a woman.”.
Insertion of
new Schedule.

12
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989
(the Act) was enacted and brought into force on the 31st January, 1990, with a view to
prevent the commission of offences of atrocities against the members of the Scheduled
Castes and Scheduled Tribes, to provide for Special Courts for the trial of such offences
and for the relief and rehabilitation of the victims of such offences.
2. Despite the deterrent provisions made in the Act, atrocities against the members of
the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes continue at a disturbing level. Adequate justice
also remains difficult for a majority of the victims and the witnesses, as they face hurdles
virtually at every stage of the legal process. The implementation of the Act suffers due to (a)
procedural hurdles such as non-registration of cases; (b) procedural delays in investigation,
arrests and filing of charge-sheets; and (c) delays in trial and low conviction rate.
3. It is also observed that certain forms of atrocities, known to be occurring in recent
years, are not covered by the Act. Several offences under the Indian Penal Code [other than
those covered under section 3(2)(v)] are also committed frequently against the members of
the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, on the ground that the victim was a member of
a Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe. It is also felt that the public accountability provisions
under the Act need to be outlined in greater detail and strengthened.
4. Therefore, it becomes necessary to make a comprehensive review of the relevant
provisions of the Act, after due consultation with the State Governments, Union territory
Administrations, concerned Central Ministries, National Commission for the Scheduled
Castes, National Commission for the Scheduled Tribes, certain Non-Governmental
Organisations and Activists.
5. It is, therefore, proposed to amend the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes
(Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989 by the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes
(Prevention of Atrocities) Amendment Bill, 2013 which, inter alia, provides the following,
namely:—
(a) to amend, the long title of the Act so as to provide for the establishment of
"Exclusive Special Courts" in addition to the Special Courts for the trial of the offences
of atrocities against the members of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes;
(b) to amend section 2 of the Act and to insert certain new definitions like
"economic boycott", "Exclusive Special Court", "Forest Rights", "manual  scavenger",
"public servant", "social boycott", "victim and witness";
(c) to amend section 3 of the Act relating to "Punishments for offences of
atrocities" so as to, inter alia, provide some more categories of atrocities in the said
section for which the same punishment, as provided in the said section, may be
imposed;
(d) to substitute section 4 of the Act relating to "Punishment for neglect of
duties" so as to provide certain duties upon the public servant and to provide
punishment for neglect of the duties specified in the said section;
(e) to amend section 8 of the Act relating to "Presumption as to offences" and
to provide that if the accused was acquainted with the victim or his family, the court
shall presume that the accused was aware of the caste or tribal identity of the victim
unless proved otherwise;
(f) to substitute section 14 of the Act relating to "Special Court" so as to
provide that the State Government shall, with the concurrence of the Chief Justice of
the High Court, establish an Exclusive Special Court for one or more districts to try
the offences under this Act;

13
(g) to amend section 15 of the Act relating to "Special Public Prosecutor" so as
to insert a new sub-section which provides that for every Exclusive Special Court, the
State Government shall, specify an Exclusive Public Prosecutor or appoint an advocate
who has been in practice as an advocate for not less than seven years, as an Exclusive
Public Prosecutor for the purpose of conducting cases in that court; and
(h) to insert a new Chapter IV A relating to "Rights of victims and witnesses"
(new section 15A) so as to impose duty and responsibility upon the State for making
arrangements for the protection of victims, their dependents and witnesses against
any kind of intimidation, coercion or inducement or violence or threats of violence.
6. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
N
EW DELHI; KUMARI  SELJA
The  28th November, 2013

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 14 of the Bill, inter alia, stipulates that for the purpose of speedy trial, the
State Government shall, with the concurrence of the Chief Justice of the High Court, establish
the Exclusive Special Court for one or more districts. However, in Districts where less
number of cases under the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of
Atrocities) Act, 1989, is recorded, the State Government shall, with the concurrence of the
Chief Justice of the High Court, specify for such Districts the Court of Session to be a
Special Court to try the offences under this Act. The Courts so established or specified,
shall have power to directly take cognizance of offences under the Act.
Sub-clause (2) of clause 15 of the Bill provides that for every Exclusive Special Court,
the State Government shall, specify an Exclusive Public Prosecutor or appoint an advocate
who has been in practice as an advocate for not less than seven years, as an Exclusive
Public Prosecutor for the purpose of conducting cases in that Court.
Due Central assistance is already provided to the State Governments and the Union
territory administrations, under the Centrally Sponsored Scheme for implementation of the
Protection of Civil Rights Act, 1955 and the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes
(Prevention of Atrocities)Act, 1989. The funding pattern of the Scheme is such that over
and above the committed liability of respective State Governments, the expenditure is shared
between Centre and States on 50:50 basis and Union territory administrations receive 100
per cent. Central assistance. The Central assistance is, inter alia, p rovided for setting up
and functioning of  Exclusive Special Courts. As per available information, presently 179
Exclusive Special Courts have already been set up by the States namely, Andhra Pradesh
(23), Bihar (11), Chhattisgarh (6), Gujarat (25), Karnataka (7), Kerala (1), Madhya Pradesh
(43), Rajasthan (17), Tamil Nadu (4), Uttar Pradesh (40) and Uttarakhand (2). Central assistance
is presently being availed by some of the States for this purpose, which is permissible.
However, at this stage,  it is not possible to estimate with any degree of precision, the likely
additional requirement of funds which may be required, since the number and details of
such courts to be set up by the concerned State Government and Union territory
administrations can not be anticipated. Similarly number of Exclusive Public Prosecutors to
be appointed by them is also presently not known.
14

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE SCHEDULED CASTES AND THE SCHEDULED TRIBES
(PREVENTION OF ATROCITIES) ACT, 1989
(33 OF 1989)
An Act to prevent the commission of offences of atrocities against the members of the
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes, to provide for Special Courts for the trial
of such offences and for the relief and rehabilitation of the victims of such offences
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
* * * * *
2.  (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
* * * * *
(f) words and expressions used but not defined in this Act and defined in the
Code or the Indian Penal Code shall have the meanings assigned to them repectively
in the Code, or as the case may be, in the Indian Penal Code.
* * * * *
CHAPTER II
O
FFENCES OF ATROCITIES
3.  (1) Whoever, not being a member of a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe,—
(i) forces a member of a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe to drink or eat
any inedible or obnoxious substance;
(ii) acts with intent to cause injury, insult or annoyance to any member of a
Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe by dumping excreta, waste matter, carcasses or
any other obnoxious substance in his premises or neighbourhood;
(iii) forcibly removes clothes from the person of a member of a Scheduled Caste
or a Scheduled Tribe or parades him naked or with painted face or body or commits
any similar act which is derogatory to human dignity;
(iv) wrongfully occupies or cultivates any land owned by, or allotted to, or
notified by any competent authority to be allotted to, a member of a Scheduled Caste
or a Scheduled Tribe or gets the land allotted to him transferred;
(v) wrongfully dispossesses a member of a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled
Tribe from his land or premises or interferes with the enjoyment of his rights over any
land, premises or water;
(vi) compels or entices a member of a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe to
do ‘begar’ or other similar forms of forced or bonded labour other than any compulsory
service for public purposes imposed by Government;
(vii) forces or intimidates a member of a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe
not to vote or to vote to a particular candidate or to vote in a manner other than that
provided by law;
(viii) institutes false, malicious or vexatious suit or criminal or other legal
proceedings against a member of a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe;
(ix) gives any false or frivolous information to any public servant and thereby
causes such public servant to use his lawful power to the injury or annoyance of a
member of Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe;
(x) intentionally insults or intimidates with intent to humiliate a member of a
Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe in any place within public view;
Definitions.
Punishments
for offences
of atrocities.
15
45 of 1860.

(xi) assaults or uses force to any woman belonging to a Scheduled Caste or a
Scheduled Tribe with intent to dishonour or outrage her modesty;
(xii) being in a position to dominate the will of a woman belonging to a Scheduled
Caste or a Scheduled Tribe  and uses that position to exploit her sexually to which she
would not  have otherwise agreed;
(xiii) corrupts or fouls the water of any spring, reservoir or any other source
ordinarily used by members of the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes so as to
render it less fit for the purpose for which it is ordinarily used;
(xiv) denies a member of a Scheduled  Caste or a Scheduled Tribe  any customary
right of passage to a place of public resort or obstructs such member so as to prevent
him from using or having access to a place of public resort to which other members of
public or any section thereof have a right to use or access to;
(xv) forces or causes a member of a Scheduled Caste  or a Scheduled Tribe  to
leave his house, village or other place of residence,
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than six months but
which may extend to five years and with fine.
(2) Whoever, not being a member of a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe,—
* * * * *
(v) commits any offence under the Indian Penal Code punishable with
imprisonment for a term of ten years or more against a person or property on the
ground that such person is a member of a Scheduled Caste or  a Scheduled Tribe or
such property belongs to such member, shall be punishable with imprisonment for life
and with fine;
* * * * *
4. Whoever, being a public servant but not being a member of a Scheduled Caste  or
a Scheduled Tribe, wilfully neglects his duties required to be performed by him under this
Act, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than six
months but which may extend  to one year.
* * * * *
8. In a prosecution for an offence under this Chapter, if it is proved that—
(a) the accused rendered any financial assistance to a person accused of, or
reasonably suspected of, committing, an offence under this Chapter, the Special
Court shall presume, unless the contrary is proved, that such person had abetted the
offence;
* * * * *
CHAPTER III
E
XTERNMENT
10. (1) Where the Special Court is satisfied, upon a complaint or a police report that a
person is likely to commit an offence under Chapter II of this Act in any area included in
'Scheduled Areas' or 'tribal areas', as referred to in article 244 of the Constitution, it may, by
order in writing, direct such person to remove himself beyond the limits of such area, by
such route and within such time as may be specified in the order, and not to return to that
area from which he was directed to remove himself for such period, not exceeding two years,
as may be specified in the order.
* * * * *
Punishment
for neglect
of duties.
Presumption
as to
offences.
Removal of
person likely
to commit
offence.
45 of 1860.
16

CHAPTER IV
SPECIAL COURTS
14. For the purpose of providing for speedy trial, the State Government shall, with the
concurrence of the Chief Justice of the High Court, by notification in the Official Gazette,
specify for each district a Court of Session to be a Special Court to try the offences under
this Act.
15. For every Special Court, the State Government shall, by notification in the Official
Gazette, specify a Public Prosecutor or appoint an advocate who has been in practice as an
advocate for not less than seven years, as a Special Public Prosecutor for the purpose of
conducting cases in that Court.
* * * * *
Special
Court.
Special Public
Prosecutor.
17

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to amend the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities)
Act, 1989.
—————
(Kumari Selja, Minister of Social Justice and Empowerment)
GMGIPMRND—3490LS(S4)—06-12-2013.