As InTRoDUCED IN’ Lok SABHA oN

, g BEC lub

Bill No. 148 of 1986

THE PREV

TION OF FOOD ADULTERATION (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 1986

A
BILL
further to amend the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954.

Be jt enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-seventh Year of the
Republic of India as follows: —

1. (1) This Act may be called the Prevention of Food Adulteration
(Amendment) Act, 1986.

5. (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint

37 of 1954. 2. In section 12 of the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954
(hereinafter referred to as the principal Act) ,—

(a) in the opening paragraph, after the words “a food inspector”,
10 the words “or a recognised consumer association, whether the pur-
chaser is a member of that association or not,” shall be inserted;

(b) in the first proviso, for the words “such purchaser shall
inform the vendor at the time of purchase of his intention”, the
words “such purchaser or recognised consumer association shall

15 inform the vendor at the time of purchase of his or its intention” shall
be. substituted; हा

Short

title and
commence=
ment.

Amend-
ment of
section 12.


प्र श्र

(०) in the second proviso, for the words “purchaser of article
of food who inteds”, the words “purchaser of article of food or re-
cognised consumer association who or which intends” shall be sub-
stituted;

(d) in the third proviso, for the words “purchaser shail be 5 है

entitled to get refund of the fees paid by him”. the words “purchaser
or recognised consumer association shall be entitled to get refund of
the fees paid by him or it” shali be substituted;

(e) the following Explanation shall be-added at the end, name-

ly:— s 10

‘Explanation.—For the purposes of this-section and section
20, “recognised consumer association” means a voluntary consu-
mer assoviation registered under the Companies Act, 1956 or

under any other law for the time being in force.’.
Amend- 3. In section 20 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), in the. pro- 15
ment of viso—
section 20,

(a) after the words “a purchaser”, the words “or recognised
consumer association” shall be inserted;

(b) for the words “if he produces”, the words “if he or it produ-
ces” shall be substituted, 20

1 of 1956,



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954 is a consumer protec-
tion legislation, which is designed to prevent adulteration of food stuffs.
The Act at present does not confer any right on recognised Consumer
Associations to draw legal samples and launch prosecution where neces-
sary,

2. A purchaser of an article of food can also draw a sample of it, for
analysis by the Public Analyst on payment of prescribed fee. If the
report of analysis shows adulteration, he can initiate legal action in the
Court. To promote Voluntary Consumer Movement in the enforcement
of this Act, it is considered necessary to confer powers on Consumer
Associations also to enable them to draw samples of food stuffs for the
purpose of analysis under section 12 and to initiate legal action under
section 20 of the Act, if the article of food is found adulterated on analysis.

3. Opportunity has been taken to explain the expression “recognised
Consumer Association” under the Act. so as to mean a Voluntary Con-
sumer Association registered under the Com panies Act, 1956 or any other
Jaw ‘for the time being in force.

4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above object.

#, V. NARASIMHA RAO
NEW DELHI;
the 1st December, 1986


Purchaser
may have
food ana-
lysed.

Cognizance
and trial

of offences,

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE PREVENTION oF Foop ApuLTERATION Acr, 1954,

(37 oF 1954)

* * * * *

12, Nothing contained in this Act shall be held to prevent a purchaser
of any article of food other than a food inspector from having’ such
article analysed by the public analyst on payment of such fees as may be
prescribed and from receiving from the public analyst a report of his
analysis:

Provided that such purchaser shall inform the vendor at the time of
purchase of his intention to have such article so analysed:

Provided further that the provisions of sub-section (J), sub-section
(2) and sub-section (3) of section 11 shall, ‘ar as may.be, apply to a
purchaser of article of food who intends to € such article so analysed,
as they apply to a food inspector who takes a sample of food for analysis:

Provided also that if the report of the public analyst shows that’ the
article of food is adulterated, the purchaser shall be entitled to get re-
fund of the fees paid by him under this section.

* - कं है. * *

20. (1) No prosecution for an offence under this Act, not being an
offence under section 14 or section 14A, shall be instituted except by, or
with the written consent of, the Central Government or the State Go-
vernment or a person authorised in this behalf. by general or special
order, by the Central Government or the State Government:

Provided that a prosecution for an offence under this Act may be
instituted by a purchaser referred to in section 12, if he produces in court
a copy of the report of the public analyst along with the complaint.

* * * * *



LOK SABHA

A
BILL

further to amend the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954

(Shri P, V. Narasimha, Rao,
Minister of Health and
Family Welfare)