5
Short title and 
commencement.
Amendment of 
article  239AA.
As introduced in Lok Sabha
Bill No. 148 of 2022
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022
By
Shrimati Aparupa Poddar, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India. 
 B e it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:—
 1. ( 1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2022.
  ( 2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may by 
notification in the official Gazette, appoint
 2. In article 239AA of the Constitution, in clause ( 2), in sub-clause ( b), for the 
words “Scheduled Castes”, the words “the Scheduled Castes and the women” shall be 
substituted.  

2
5
10
20
25
Reservation of 
seats for women 
in the House of 
the people.
Insertion of new 
article 330A. 
15
30
35
 3. In article 330 of the Constitution, in clause ( 1), after sub-clause (c), the following 
sub-clause shall be inserted, namely:—
  “( d) the other Backward Classes;’’.
 4. After article 330 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted,  
namely: —
  “330A. (1) Seats shall be reserved for women in the House of the People.
  ( 2) As nearly as may be, one-fifth of the total number of seats reserved under  
clause (2) of article 330 shall be reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes or 
the Scheduled Tribes or the Other Backward Classes, as the case may be:
  Provided that where the seat reserved for the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled 
Tribes or the Other Backward Classes, as the case may be, in relation to a State or Union 
territory is one, then, in every block comprising of five general elections to the House of the 
People, the seat in the first general elections shall be reserved for women belonging to the 
Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes or the Other Backward Classes and no seat shall 
be so reserved in the other four general elections:
  Provided further that where the seats reserved for the Scheduled Castes or the 
Scheduled Tribes or the Other Backward Classes, as the case may be, in relation to a State 
or Union territory are two, then, in every block comprising of five general elections to the 
House of the People, — 
(a) one seat shall be reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes 
or the Scheduled Tribes or the Other Backward Classes in the first two general 
elections in such a manner that the same constituency is not reserved for women in 
both the aforesaid elections; and 
(b) no seat shall be reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes or 
the Scheduled Tribes or the Other Backward Classes in the third, fourth and fifth 
general elections.
(3) As nearly as may be, one-fifth (including the number of seats reserved for 
women belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes or the Other Backward 
Classes) of the total number of seats to be filled by direct election to the House of the People 
in a State or Union territory shall be reserved for women and such seats may be allotted 
by rotation to different constituencies in that State or Union territory in such manner, as 
Parliament may by law determine:
  Provided that where the seat, not being a seat reserved for the Scheduled Castes or 
the Scheduled Tribes or Other Backward Classes, in relation to a State or Union territory is 
one, then, in every block comprising of five general elections to the House of the People, 
the seat in the first general elections shall be reserved for women and no seat shall be so 
reserved for women in the other four general elections:
  Provided further that where the seats, not being seats reserved for the Scheduled 
Castes or the Scheduled Tribes, in relation to a State or Union territory are two, then in every 
block comprising of five general elections to the House of the People,— 
Amendment of 
article 330.
40

3
Insertion of new 
article 333A.
Reservation 
of seats for 
women in the 
Legislative 
Assemblies of 
the States.
5
10
20
25
15
30
35
(a) one seat shall be reserved for women in the first two general elections in 
such a manner that  the same constituency is not reserved for women in both the 
aforesaid elections; and
(b) no seat shall be reserved for women in the third, fourth and fifth general 
elections.”
 5. In article 332 of the Constitution, in clause ( 1), for the words ‘‘the Scheduled 
Tribes’’, the words ‘’the Scheduled Tribes and the Other Backward Classes’’ shall be 
substituted. 
 6.  After article 332 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, 
namely: 
 “332A.  (1) Seats shall be reserved for women in the Legislative Assembly of every 
State.
 ( 2) As nearly as may be, one-fifth of the total number of seats reserved under 
clause (3) of article 332 shall be reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes 
or the Scheduled Tribes, as the case may be:
 Provided that where the seat reserved for the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled 
Tribes or the Other Backward Classes, as the case may be, in relation to a State is one, 
then, in every block comprising of five general elections to the Legislative Assembly of 
that State, the seat in the first general elections shall be reserved for women belonging 
to the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes or the Other Backward Classes, as the 
case may be: 
 Provided further that where the seats reserved for the Scheduled Castes or 
the Scheduled Tribes or the Other Backward Classes, as the case may be, in relation 
to a State are two, then, in every block comprising of five general elections to the 
Legislative Assembly of that State, — 
(a) one seat shall be reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled 
Castes or the Scheduled Tribes or Other Backward Classes in the first two 
general elections in such a manner that the same constituency is not reserved 
for women in both the aforesaid elections; and
(b) no seat shall be reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes 
or the Scheduled Tribes or the Other Backward Classes in the third, fourth and 
fifth general elections. 
   ( 3) As nearly as may be, one—
Fifth (including the number of seats reserved for women belonging to the 
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes or the Other Backward Classes) 
of the total number of seats to be filled by direct election in the Legislative 
Assembly of every State shall be reserved for  women and such seats may be 
allotted by rotation to different constituencies in that State in such manner, as 
Parliament may by law determine.”. 
Amendment of 
article 332.

4
Insertion of new 
article 334A.
Reservation of 
seats for women 
to cease after 
twenty-five 
years. 5
10
15
7. After article 334 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted,  
namely: — 
“334A. Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of this Part or Part 
VIII, the provisions of the Constitution relating to the reservation of seats for women 
in the House of the People, the Legislative Assembly of a State and the Legislative 
Assembly of the National Capital Territory of Delhi shall cease to have effect on the 
expiration of a period of twenty-five years from the commencement of the Constitution 
(Amendment) Act, 2022:  
Provided that nothing in this article shall affect any representation in the House 
of the People, the Legislative Assembly of a State or the Legislative Assembly of the 
National Capital Territory of Delhi until the dissolution of the then existing House, 
Legislative Assembly of a State or the Legislative Assembly of the National Capital 
Territory of Delhi, as the case may be.”.
 8. The amendments made to the Constitution by this Act, 2022 shall not affect 
any representation in the House of the People, the Legislative Assembly of a State or the 
Legislative Assembly of the National Capital Territory of Delhi until the dissolution of the 
House, the Legislative Assembly of a State or the Legislative Assembly of the National 
Capital Territory of Delhi, as the case may be, in existence at the commencement of the said 
Act. 
Amendments 
not to affect the 
representation 
in the House 
of the People 
or Legislative 
Assembly of 
a State or the 
Legislative 
Assembly of the 
National Capital 
Territory of 
Delhi.

5
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
 As of June, 2021, India ranked 148th in a list of 193 countries on the basis of the 
percentage of elected women representatives in the national parliaments. In March 2021, 
there were seventy-eight women Members of Parliament in the House of the People, which 
was the highest ever number recorded. As on April 2022, the highest number is now eighty-
one. The first ever House of the People had only twenty-four. Women’s representation in 
the House of the People comprises only 14.4 per cent, significantly lower than the global 
average of 25.8 per cent for lower houses of the Parliament. When it comes to occupying 
leadership roles, the numbers are even lower, a paltry 6 per cent. The staggeringly slow rate 
of growth, years after independence, indicates that steps must be taken to mitigate this lack 
of representation. India’s numbers are lower than even the likes of Afghanistan, Pakistan 
and Saudi Arabia. 
 The Constitution of India guarantees equality before the law and also equality of 
opportunity, that is not biased based on sex, gender, religion, caste, creed or any other 
consideration. While this law exists on paper, this amendment seeks to make it a reality in 
the House of the People, by enhancing the opportunities available to women, and especially 
women from the lower strata of society, i.e., those belonging to Scheduled Castes, Scheduled 
Tribes, or Other Backward Classes.
 The absence of a large chunk of the country’s population, i.e., around 48.5 per cent. 
from the annals of the highest policy and law-making institution of the country is alarming 
and a cause of concern about the roundedness of the policing being churned out. More 
women reservation can lead to more diversity in decision making. It can also enable proper 
addressing of all gendered perspectives that governance issues are rife with. Countries such 
as Rwanda and Finland are exceptional examples of how a shift in gender roles leads to 
better functioning of democracies.
 Twenty States of India have implemented a fifty percent representation of women at the 
Panchayat or Village Council level. This has had many benefits, including better policies, 
governance and even fiscal expenditure. But there is not much to celebrate. More often than 
not, cases of women leaders being used as proxies come to light. The State of Nagaland 
has never seen a woman Member of Legislative Assembly and there is no woman Member 
of Parliament from the erstwhile State of Jammu and Kashmir and States such as Tripura, 
Nagaland, Arunachal Pradesh, and Himachal Pradesh. 
 Thus, by way of this amendment, an attempt is being made to bring to fruition an 
endeavor that was spearheaded more than two decades ago. There is enough evidence to 
suggest that doing so would lead to more investments in public goods related to socio-
economic concerns, such as drinking water and roads. It will also lead to more nuanced 
legislations, a rising from lived experiences. Lastly, it will enhance women participation, 
self-esteem, public confidence and be an excellent step in fulfilling the constitutional 
mandate of gender equality.
 Hence this Bill.     
   New Delhi;                          APARUPA PODDAR 
5 July, 2022.

6
ANNEXURE 
Extract from the Constitution of India 
 *                   *                *             *                   *
 239AA. (1) *              *              *              *                 *
  ( 2)(a) *              *              *              *                              *
(b) The total number of seats in the Legislative Assembly, the number of seats 
reserved for Scheduled Castes, the division of the National Capital Territory into territorial 
constituencies (including the basis for such division) and all other matters relating to the 
functioning of the Legislative Assembly shall be regulated by law made by Parliament. 
 330. (1) Seats shall be reserved in the House of the People for —
 *                   *                *             *                   *
(b) the Scheduled Tribes except the Scheduled Tribes in the autonomous districts 
of Assam; and
 *                   *                *             *                   *
 332. (1) Seats shall be reserved for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes, 
[except the Scheduled Tribes in the autonomous districts of Assam], in the Legislative 
Assembly of every State ***. 
Special 
provisions with 
respect to Delhi.
Reservation 
of seats for 
Scheduled 
Castes and 
Scheduled 
Tribes in the 
House of the 
People.
Reservation 
of seats for 
Scheduled 
Castes and 
Scheduled 
Tribes in the 
Legislative 
Assemblies of 
the States.

LOK SABHA
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India. 
(Shrimati Aparupa Poddar, M.P .)