1
THE RAILWAYS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2024
By
DR. ALOK KUMAR SUMAN, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Railways Act, 1989.
  BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of
India as follows:—
1.(1) This Act may be called the Railways (Amendment) Act, 2024.
   (2)  It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. After section 24 of the Railways Act, 1989, the following section shall be
inserted, namely:—
     “24A. Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 22, 23 and
24 of the Act, the Central Government may, by notification, sanction
daily running of train No. 05305/05306 (CPR ANVT Train) via Thawe
junction in the State of Bihar.”.
Bill No. 148 of 2024
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5
Short title and
commencement.
Insertion of
new section
24A.
SpecialProvisions ofrailway atThawe junctionin the State ofBihar.
10
24 of 1989.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
 The Railways is the life line of the country. Development of North-Eastern
Region is totally depend on trains facilities. The section of Varanasi division of
North-Eastern Railway which comprises Thawe-Gopalganj junction is facing number
of challenges and disadvantage due to non-availability of trains for various
metropolitan cities. To overcome such difficulties and to make railway connectivity
from this neglected section by providing the train facilities would certainly provide
ample revenue to Railway.
In the Thawe-Gopalgnaj section, there is one of the most important and
reverable religious peeth. Seeing the rush of pilgrims during normal days an huge
rush during auspicious days, and considering the fact that this area is the native to
lakhs of migrant labours who are working in different parts of country. The train
facilities to this junction is must. This section/area does not have any direct train for
Delhi or any other metropolitan cities of the country.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Railways Act, 1989 with a view to
provide sanctioning of daily running of summer special train No. 05305/05306 at
Thawe junction in the State of Bihar to Delhi after the approval of Railway Board
without any further delay. The aforesaid train facility will cater the need of the
neglected Thawe junction which is a long awaited demand of lakhs of people of the
various districts of the States of Uttar Pradesh and Bihar.
Hence this Bill.
NEW DELHI;                       ALOK KUMAR SUMAN
 July 19, 2024
2

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill vide proposed section 24A seeks to provide for sanctioning
of  daily running of summer special train No. 05305/05306 via Thawe junction in
the State of Bihar. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely to involve an annual recurring expenditure of
about rupees three hundred crore from  the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees three hundred crore is also likely
to be involved.
3

ANNEXURE
[EXTRACT FROM THE RAILWAYS ACT, 1989]
(24 OF 1989)
* * * * *
21. No railway shall be opened for the public carriage of passengers until the
Central Government has, by order, sanctioned the opening thereof for that purpose.
* * * * *
22. (1) The Central Government shall, before giving its sanction to the opening
of a railway under section 21, obtain a report from the Commissioner that—
(a) he has made a careful inspection of the railway and the rolling stock
that may be used thereon;
(b) the moving and fixed dimensions as laid down by the Central Government
have not been infringed;
(c) the structure of lines of rails, strength of bridges, general structural
character of the works and the size of, and maximum gross load upon, the axles
of any rolling stock, comply with the requirements laid down by the Central
Government; and
(d) in his opinion, the railway can be opened for the public carriage of
passengers without any danger to the public using it.
(2) If the Commissioner is of the opinion that the railway cannot be opened
without any danger to the public using it, he shall, in his report, state the grounds
therefore, as also the requirements which, in his opinion, are to be complied with
before sanction is given by the Central Government.
(3) The Central Government, after considering the report of the Commissioner,
may sanction the opening of a railway under section 21 as such or subject to such
conditions as may be considered necessary by it for the safety
of the public.
* * * * *
23. The provisions of sections 21 and 22 shall apply to the opening of the following
works if they form part of, or are directly connected with, a railway used for the
public carriage of passengers and have been constructed subsequent to the giving
of a report by the Commissioner under section 22, namely:—
(a) opening of additional lines of railway and deviation lines;
(b) opening of stations, junctions and level crossings;
(c) re-modelling of yards and re-building of bridges;
(d) introduction of electric traction; and
Sanction of the
Central
Government to
the opening of
railway.
Formalities to be
complied with
before giving
sanction to the
opening of a
railway.
Sections 21 and
22 to apply to
the opening of
certain works.
4

(e) any alteration or reconstruction materially affecting the structural character
of any work to which the provisions of sections 21 and 22 apply or are extended by
this section.
* * * * *
24. When an accident has occurred on a railway resulting in a temporary
suspension of traffic, and either the original lines of rails and works have been
restored to their original standard or a temporary diversion has been laid for the
purpose of restoring communication, the original lines of rails and works so restored,
or the temporary diversion, as the case may be, may, without prior inspection by the
Commissioner, be opened for the public carriage of passengers, subject to the
following conditions, namely:—
(a) the railway servant incharge of the works undertaken by reason of the
accident has certified in writing that the opening of the restored lines of rails and
works, or of the temporary diversion will not in his opinion be attended with danger
to the public; and
(b) a notice of the opening of the lines of rails and works or the diversion shall
be sent immediately to the Commissioner.
 * * * * *
Temporary
suspension of
traffic.
5

LOK  SABHA
A
BILL
further to amend the Railways Act, 1989.
(Dr. Alok Kumar Suman, M.P .)