Short title, extent 
and commencement.
Aඌ ංඇඍඋඈൽඎർൾൽ ංඇ Lඈ඄ Sൺൻඁൺ
Bill No. 149 of  2022 
THE  NATIONALISATION OF INTER-STATE RIVERS BILL, 2022
By
Sඁඋං  Rൺඇඃൾൾඍඌංඇඁൺ Hංඇൽඎඋൺඈ Nൺං඄-Nංආൻൺඅ඄ൺඋ,  M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for nationalisation of inter-State rivers for the purpose of equitable 
distribution of river waters among the States and for matters connected therewith or 
incidental thereto.
Bൾ it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows :–
1. (1) This Act may be called the Nationalisation of Inter-State Rivers Act, 2022. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint.

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 
(a) “appropriate Government” means the State Government or Union territory 
Administration, in case of a State or a Union Territory, as the case may be, and the Central 
Government in all other cases; 
(b) “Committee” means the Water Distribution Committee established under section 7;
 (c) “inter-State river” means any river which has its source in one State and passes 
through two or more States including the States in which the river has its origin before it 
submerges into the sea and also includes lake, tank, rivulet, which has its source from a river 
which is an inter-State river; and 
(d) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3.  Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, no 
State shall have exclusive right over an inter-State river or to its use.
4.  From the date of commencement of this Act, the Central Government shall have the 
exclusive right and control over all inter-State rivers.
5. (1) Every State Government and Union territory Administration shall forward its 
requirements of water for all purposes including irrigation, drinking water and electricity to 
the Central Government. 
(2) While forwarding its requirements, every State Government and Union territory 
Administration shall indicate the rivers, which are not inter-State rivers, and their status 
and any dam constructed within the State on any river, including an inter-State river, and its 
capacity for storage of water and electricity generated from those rivers.
(3) Every State Government and Union territory Administration shall also indicate the 
average rainfall in the State during the last three years in different seasons and the amount 
of rainfall during the current year.
6. (1) It shall be the duty of the Central Government to distribute river water of every 
inter-State river and Union territory within which such rivers pass through. 
(2) While distributing river water, the Central Government shall take into consideration 
the following factors:— 
(a) the population and area of each interested State and Union territory;
(b) the land available for farming in each State and Union territory; 
(c) the requirements for drinking water and for, agricultural and other purposes in 
each State and Union territory; 
(d) the length of inter-State river passing through each State and Union territory; 
and 
Deﬁnitions.
Central 
Government to 
have right and 
control.
State 
Governments 
to forward 
requirements of 
water/electricity.
Central 
Government to 
distribute inter-
State river water.
No State to 
have exclusive 
right over an 
inter-State river.

(e) the requirements and availability of electricity in each State and Union territory.
7. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the official Gazette, 
establish a committee to be known as the Water Distribution Committee to advise and 
make recommendations to the Central Government about distribution and sharing 
of water of inter-State rivers to each State and UT and matters connected therewith. 
(2) The Committee shall consist of,— 
(i) a retired Judge of the Supreme Court—Chairperson; 
(ii) Secretary, Ministry of Jal Shakti—Member; 
(iii) Chairperson, Central Water Commission—Member; 
(iv) two eminent persons having experience in water resource management; 
(v) four Secretaries of Irrigation or PWD Department from the State Governments, 
to be nominated on rotational basis—Members; 
to be appointed by the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed.-.
(3) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of 
service of Chairperson and other members of the Committee shall be such as may be 
prescribed. 
(4) The Ministry of Jal Shakti shall provide secretarial assistance to the Committee. 
(5) The Committee while discharging its function shall follow such procedure and meet 
in such manner as may be prescribed.
8. (1) From the date of commencement of this Act, no appropriate Government shall 
construct any hydro-electrical plant or project on any inter-State river or based on it.
(2) The Central Government shall have the exclusive right and control to 
construct any power plant meant for power generation on any inter-State river and 
shall distribute electricity in such ratio, among the States and Union territory through 
which the inter-State rivers pass, as may be prescribed. 
(3) The appropriate Government shall pay to the Central Government in such 
ratio as may be prescribed for the electricity it receives from any hydro-electrical plant 
or project constructed on an inter-State river.
9. (1) The Central Government may by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules 
for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 
(2)  Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive  sessions,  and   if,  before   
the  expiry  of  the  session  immediately following the session or the successive sessions 
Establishment 
of Water 
Distribution 
Committee.
Central 
Government to 
construct hydro-
electrical plants on 
inter-State rivers.
Power to make 
rules.

aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses 
agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such 
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification 
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under 
that rule.

STATEMENT  OF OBJECTS  AND REASONS
There are many rivers big or small flowing through many States before they submerge 
into the nearest sea. Today half of the population of the country do not have access to potable 
water. Water is also not available for irrigation and other purposes. As a result, production of 
agricultural products has been considerably affected. It has been observed that many States 
through which a river flows, fight for considerable share of river water and try to deprive the 
just and due demand of other States. Consequently, many disputes are pending in Tribunals 
for settlement. It is a common knowledge that Tribunals take a long time before delivering 
judgement.
Water is a precious resource and calls for judicious management of the limited water 
resources. It is hightime that the country needs to rise above political, ideological and regional 
differences and also move away from a narrow project centric approach to a broader, holistic 
approach to issues of water management.
Therefore, it is proposed that only the Central Government shall have the exclusive 
right and control over all inter-State rivers and it shall distribute river water according to pre-
determined formula for allocation of water, on the recommendations of Water Distribution 
Committee. It is proposed that the Central Government shall also have the exclusive right 
over electricity projects constructed on inter-State rivers. This measure will not only enable 
distribution of river water among the different States without affecting the interests of the 
concerned States but also enable proper utilisation of available resources.
Hence this Bill.
Nൾඐ Dൾඅඁං;                    RANJEETSINHA HINDURAO NAIK-NIMBALKAR 
4 July, 2022. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 7 of the Bill provides for establishment of Water Distribution Committee to 
advise and make recommendations to Central Government regarding distribution and 
sharing of water. 
Clause 8 provides that the Central Government shall construct hydro electrical plants or 
projects on inter-State rivers. Though there is a provision that the appropriate Government 
shall pay to the Central Government in such ratio as may be prescribed for the electricity it 
receives, yet expenditure will be incurred from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely 
that an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees five hundred crore will be involved 
from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of above rupees three hundred crore is also likely to be 
involved

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGA TED LEGISLATION
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out 
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of 
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK SABHA
_________
A
BILL
to provide for nationalisation of inter-State rivers for the purpose of equitable 
distribution of river water amongst the States and for matters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto.
_________
(Shri Ranjeetsinha Hindurao Naik-Nimbalkar , M.P .)