9" 
(C) the cost of packing which is of • durable 
nature and is returnable to the assessee or to the 
buyer, whosoever supplied it. 
EzpIClnClotion.-In this sub-clause, "packing" Includes 
the wrapper, container, bobbin, pim, spool, reel or warp 
beam or any other thing in which or on which the exeis· . _. . -' 
LOK .. BABHA- .,'-
CORRIGENDA 
to 
THE CUSTOMS, CENTRAL EXCISES ,aID SALT AND CEN'ffiAL 
BOARDS OF REVENUE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1977 
L-To belAs introduced in Ipk Sa.bha 7 
1. Page 3, line 27,-
after "is" insert "not" 
2. Page 17, line 8 from bottom,-
for "firts" ~ "first" 
3. Page 24, in the marginal heading to ~ection 75,-
4. 
for "materrials" ~ "materials" 
Page 28i against line 5 from bottom, in the 
margina citation,-
for "1863" ~ "1'''3'' 
1'EW DElliI; 
December 15. 197~ 
for dift~t ;;rieti~- -of thp. samr "xciSllbJe ~oOdi ot·· for c!t'ffetent 
areas or 10r different seasons.". 


As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA ON 
19 OEC 1917 
Bill No. 149 of 1977 
THE CUSTOMS, CENTRAL EXCISES AND SALT AND CENTRAL 
BOARDS OF REVENUE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1977 
A 
BILL 
to provide for certain amendments to the Customs Act, 1002, the Central 
Excises and Salt _4ct, 1944 and the Cenflral Boards of Revenue Act, 
1963. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-eighth Year of the RepUblic 
of India as follows:-
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
S 1. (1) This Act may be called the Customs, Cent~al Excises and 8alt Short 
and Central Boards of Revenue (Amendment) Act, 1977. title and 
commence-
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government ment. 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint: 
Provided that different dates may be appointed for different provisions 
10 of this Act and any reference in any such provision to the commencement 
of this Act shan be construed as a reference to the com;ng into force of 
that provision. 
CHAPTER II 
AMENDMENTS TO TIlE Cl1STOM~ Acr, 1962 
52 of 1962. IS ~. In section 2 of the CuS".:oms Act, 1962 (hereafter in this Chapter 
referred to as the Customs Act), in clause (28), for the words "waters 
extending into the sea to a distance of twelve nautical miles m.?asureti 
from the appropriate base line on the coast of Inciia''', the words and figures 
"waters extending into the sea up t() the limit of contiguous zone of India 
Amend-
ment of 
section 2, 


Amend-
ment of 
.ection 14. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 15. 
Amend-
ment of 
aection 27. 
2 
under secti~n 5 of the Territorial Waters, Continental Shelf, Exclusive 
Economic Zone and other Maritime Zones Act, 1976" shall be substituted. 
3. In section 14 of the Customs Act,-
(<<) in sub-section (1), in clause (<<), for the proviso, the follow-
80 of 1978. 
ing proviso shall be substituted, namely:- S 
"Provided that such price shall be calculated with reference 
to the rate of exchange as in force on the difte on which a bID of 
entry is presented under section 46, or a shipping bill or bill 
of export, as the case may be, is presented under section 50;"; 
(b) after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be in- 10 
serted, namely:-
'(3) For the purposes of this section-
(<<) "rate of exchange" means the rate of exchangc-
(i) determined by the Central Government, or 
(ii) ascertained in such manner as the Central Gov- IS 
emment may direct, 
for the conversion of Indian currency into foreign currency 
or foreign currency into Indian currency; 
(b) "foreign currency" and "Indian currency" have the 
meanings respectively assigned to them in the Foreign Ex- 20 
change Regulation Act, 1973.'. 46 of 1973. 
4. In section 15 of the Customs Aci-
(<<) in sub-section (1), the words ", rate of exchange" shall be 
omitted; 
(b) suib-section (3) shall be omitted. • 2S 
5. In section 27 of the Customs Act, for sub-section (1), the following 
sub-section shalll be SUbstituted, namely:-
"(1) Any person claiming refund of any duty paid by him in 
pursuance of an order of assessment made by an officer of customs 
lower in rank 'than an Assistant Collector of Customs may make an 30 
application for refund of such duty to the Assistant Collector of 
Customs-
(a) in the case of any import made by any individual for 
his personal use or by Government or by any educational, research 
or charitable institution or hospital, before the expiry of one year; 3S 
(b) in any other case, before the exp'hry of six months, from 
the date of payment of duty: 
Provided that ,the limitation of one year or six months, as the 
case may be, shall not apply whf'l'e any duty has been paid under 
protest. 40 
E:r:pZ«nation.-Where any duty is paid provisionally under section 
18, 'the period of one yea.'r or six months, as the case may be, Ehall be 
computed from the date of adjustment of duty after the final assess-
ment thereof.". 


3 
6. In section 28 of the Customs Act, in sub-section (1).-
(a) for the opening paragraph. the following shall be substituted, 
namely:-
"When any duty has not been levied or has been shorl-Ievied 
or erroneously refunded, the proper officer may.-
(a) in the case of any import made by any individual 
for his personal use 01' by Government or by any educational, 
research or charitable institution or hospital, within one 
year; 
10 (b) in any other case. within six months. 
from the relevant date, serve netice on the person chargeable 
With the duty which has not been Ilevied or which has beaD 80 
short-levied or to whom the refund has erroneously been made. 
requiring him to show cause why he shoUild not pay the amount 
15 specified in the notice: "; 
(b) in the proviso, for the words' "six months" " the words' "one 
ye ... • and "six months'" shall be substitutecf.. 
7. Atfter section 28 of the Customs Act, the following section shall be 
insertecl, namely:-
Amend-
ment of 
section 28. 
Insertion 
of new 
section 
28A. 
"28A. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, if the Power 
30 
3S 
Central Government is satisfied- not to 
(a) that a practice was, or is, generally prevalent regarding 
levy of duty (including non-levy thereof) on any goods imported 
into, or exported from, India; and 
(b) that such goocf.s were, or are, liable-
(i) to cf.uty, in cases where according to the saicl practice 
the duty was not, or is being, levied, or 
(ii) to a higher amount of duty than what was, or is 
being, levied, according to the. said practice, 
then, the Central Government may, by notification in the Oftlcial 
Gazette, dJrect that the whole of the duty payable on such joods, or, 
as the case may be, the duty in excess of that payable on IUch goods, 
but for the said practice, shall not be required to be paid in respect of 
the goods on which the duty was not, or is not being, levied. or was, 
01' i8 being, short-levied, in accordance with the said practice.". 
8. In section 46 of the Customs Act, in sub-section (3),-
(a.) in the proviSO, for the words "such manifest or report". the 
words "such I1'eport" shall be substituted; 
(b) after the proviso as so amended, the following further proviso 
shall be inserted, namely:-
"Provided further that a bill of entry may be presented 
even before the delivery of such manifest if the vessel by which 
the goods have been shipped for importation into India is expected 
to arrive within a week from the date of Burb pn!sentation.". 
recover 
duties not 
levied or 
short-
levied a. 
a result 
of ,eneral 
practice. 
Amead-
meDtof 
secUon .. 


Amend .. 
ment of 
iectiOft 61. 
Amend-
mental 
section 
'7~. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
118. 
Amend-
ment ot 
section 
122. 
Amen6-
RNnt ·ot 
section 
128. 
Substitu-
tion of 
new sec-
tion for 
section 
130. 
4 
9. In section 61 of the Customs Act,-
(a). for the opening paragraph, the following shall be substituted, 
namely:-
"Any warehoused goods maybe left in the warehouse in 
which they art" deposited or in any warehouse to which they 5 
may be removed,-
(a) in the case of non-consumable stores, till 'the expiry 
of three years; and 
(b) in the case of any other goods, till the expiry of one 
year, 
after the cbte on which the proper officer made an order under 
section 60 permitting the deposit of the goods in a warehouse: "; 
(b) in the. first proviso, for the words "three yeaIs", in both places 
where they occur. the words "three years or one year. as the case may 
10 
be," shall be substituted. IS 
10. In section 75 of the Customs Act-
(a) after sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be in-
serted, namely:-
"(lA) Where it appears to 'the Centr'al Govemment that the 
quantity of a particular marterial imported into Jndlla is mOte 20 
than ihe total quantity of like material that has been used. in the 
goods manufactured in India and exported outside India, then, 
the Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, declare that so much of the material as is contained in 
the goods exported shall, for the purpose of sub-section (1), be 2S 
deemed to be imported material."; 
(b) in sub-section (2), in clause (a), for the words "gooda of that 
class or description", the words "export goods of that class or des-
cription" shall be substituted. 
11. in section 113 of the Customs Act, in clause (i), after the words 30 
"dutiable or prohibited. goods", the words "or goods entered for exporta-
tion muler claim for drawback" shall be insel'lted. 
12. In section 122 of the Customs Act, for clauses (b) and (c), the fol-
lOWing clauses shall be substitutecl. namely:-
.. (b) where the value of the goods liable to confileation dots not 3' 
aceed twenty-five thousand rupees, by an Aaaistant CoJ.lectGr of 
Customs; 
(c) where the value of the goods liaible to conftaeatloft ,4081 not 
ex~eed two thousand five hundred rupees, by a ~ted 'o~. of 
cuS'toms lower in rank than an Assistant Collector of Customs.". 40 
13. In section 128 of the Customs Act, in sUb-section (1). in the 'ot'eJ1to 
iRt patAgraph, after the WOIl"ds "any decision ~ order passed ·uader thll 
Act", the brackets, words and figures "(not Ibei1lg an order pusad UDder 
section 130)" shall be inserted. 
14. For section 130 of the Customs Act, the following section abaU be 4' 
substituted, namely:-


18 of 1167. 
s 
to 
IS 
20 
30 
5 
"130. (1) The Board may, of its own motion or otherwise call for 
and examine the record of any proceeding in which a Collector of 
Customs has passed any decision or order under this Act for the pur-
pose of satisfying itself as to the correctness; legality or propriety of 
such decision or order and may pass such order thereon as it thinks 
fit 
,(Z) The Collector of Customs may of his own motion or other-
wise call for and examine It he record of any proceeding in which an 
oftlcer of customs SUlbordinate to him has passed any decision or 
order under this Act (not being an order paased in appeal under sec-
tion 128) for the purpose o£ satisfying himself as to the correctness, 
legality or propriety of such decision or order and may pass such 
order thereon as he thinks fit. 
(3) (a) No order enhancing any penalty or fine in lieu of confis-
cation or confiscating goods of greater value shall be passed under this 
section unless the person affected by the proposed order has been given 
a reaIJonable opportunity of showing cause against it. 
(b) Where the Board or, as the case may be, the Collectorot 
Customs' is of opinion that any duty of customs has not !been 1ev1ad 
Of has been shott-leVted, no order levying or enhancing the dUty shall 
be tn'atfe under this section unless the person affected by the pr0pos-
ed order is given notice to show cause against it within the time limit 
specified in section 28. 
(4) No proceeding shall be initiated under this section in res-
pect of any decision or order after the expiry of a period of one year 
from the date of such decision or order: 
ProVided that where in respect of any decision or order passed-
by an officer of Cu.c;toms before the commencement, of the CUlJtoms, 
Central Excises and Salt and Central Boards of Revenue (Amend-
ment) Act, 1977, the period of one year for initiating revision pro-
ceedings had expired at such commencement, then, revision proceed-
ings may be initiated within a period of. six months from such 
commencement." . 
15. In section 131 of the Customs Act, after suMection (Z), the follow-
35 iftg sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-
40 
"(2A) An application under sub-section (1) shall 'be accompanied 
by a He of one bundred and twenty .. five rupees.". 
11. Iii section 135 of the Customs Act, for the words "six months", 
wherever they occur, the words "one year" shall be subsUtutect.. 
11. After section 143 of the Customs Act, the following seotion shall. be 
inserted, namely:-
"l~. (1) When any material is imported under an import 
licence belongin~ to the category of Advance Licence granted under 
1m, orGer made under the Imports and Exports (Control) Act, 1947, 
'Subject to an obligation to export the goods as are specified in the 
said Licence. the Assistant Collector of Customs may, notwithstand-
ing anything contained .in this Act, permit clearance of such material 
1vtthout payment of duty leviable thereon. 
(2) The permission for clearance without payment of duty unrler 
BUb4~tiOl1 (l)ehtdl be subj~ to the following conditian .. 1hat is to 
SO, 88y-
Powers 
of revi-
sion of 
Board. 
Amend. 
ment of 
section 
131. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
135. 
Insertion 
of new 
section 
143A. 
Duty 
defer_ 
ment. 


Amend-
ment Of 
section 
159. 
Amend-
mental 
section 2. 
6 
(a) the duty payable on the material imported shall be 
adjusted against the dorawback of duty payable under this Act or 
under any other law for the time bemg in force on the export of 
goods specifled in the said Advance .Licence; and 
(b) where the duty is not so acijusted either for the reason 5 
that the goods are not exported as required by the said Advance 
Licence or for any oth~ sufficient Ifeason, the importer shall, not-
withstanding anything contained in section 28, be liable to pay 
the amount of duty not so adjusted together with simple interest 
at the rate of twelve per cent. per annum from the date the said 10 
permiSsion for clearance is given to the date of payment. 
(3) While permitting clearance under sub-section (1), the Assist-
ant Collector of Customs may Il"equire the importer to execute a bond 
with such surety or security as he thinks fit for complying with the 
conr\itions speCified in SUb-section (2).". 15 
18. In section 159 of the Customs Act, for the words "in two successive 
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session in which it is so laid or 
the session immediately following", the words "in two or more succe.ive 
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following 
the session or the successive sessions aforesaid" shall be substituted. ao 
CHAPTER III 
.AMENDMENTS TO THE CENTRAL EXCISES AND SALT ACT, 1944 
19. In section 2 of the Central Elreises and Salt Act, 1944 (hereafter 1 of 1944 
in this Chapter referred to as the Central Excises and Salt Act), for clause 
(f), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:- :as 
'(f) "manufacture" shall include-
(i) any manufacturing process to make a product marketable 
to the consumell"s or users; 
(ii) any process carried out on the excisable gool\&-
(a) with the aid of power or machine; or 30 
(b) without the aid of power or machine where 
specifically so provided ill the First Schedule, 
which, in either case, adds to their value but does not include any 
process camied out in the cc.urse of manufacture of any other 
excisable goods; . . 3S 
(iii) applying, either on the excisable goods or on their 
packing or both, trade mark as defined in the Trar\e and Merchan-
dise Marks Act, 1958; 
(iv) packing of the excisable goods for their storage in the 
retailer's or industrial consumer's premises, but .does not in- 40 
elude- . 
(a) packing done solely for the purpose of transporting 
the said goods; or 
(b) packing clone by the retailer; 
(v) any other process incidental or ancillary to the comple- 4S 
tion of a manufactured product, 
anCl the word "manufacturer" shall be construed' accordingly and 
shall include not only a person who employs hired labour in the 
fa of 191i8. 
... . . 1; 


7 
production or manufacture of excisable goods, but also any person who 
engages in their production or manufacture on his own account;'. 
30. In section 3 of the Central Excises and Salt Act, for sub-section 
(8), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:-
S ,. (8) Different tariff values may be fixed-
10 
IS 
20 
30 
35 
(a) for different classes or descriptions of the same excisable 
goods; or 
(b) for excisable goods of the same class or r\escription-
(i) produced or manufactured by different classes of 
producers or manufacturers; or 
(ii) sold to different classes of buyers: 
Ptrovided that in fixing different tariff values in respect of excisable 
goods falling under sub-clause (i) or sub-clause (ii) , regard shall be 
had to the sale prices charged by the rtifferent classes of producers or 
manufacturers or, as the case may be, the normal practice of the 
wholesale 'trade in such goods.". 
21. After section 3 of the Central EXCises and Salt Act, the following 
section shall be inserted, namely:-
U3A. Where any excisable goods, after payment of duty of excise, 
are subjected to further manufacture-
(4) by any of the processes referred to in sub-clauses (i), 
(ii) and (v) of clause (f) of section 2; or 
(b) by applying any trade mark refel'll'ed to in sub-clause 
(iii) of the said clause (f); or 
(c) by the packing referred to in sub-clause (iv) of the said 
clause (f), 
anlt such goods continue to fall under the same sub-item of a particular 
Item in the First Schedule, or if there is no sub-item, under the same 
Item in the said Schedule, the duty of excise already paid on such 
go('ds shall be adjusted against the duty of excise leviable thereon 
after such further manufacture.". 
12. In section 4 of the Central Excises and Salt Act-
(a) fot' sub-section (2), the following sub-seeti( n shall be substi-
tuted, namely:-
"(2) Where the value of any excisable goods is determined 
with reference tiJ the price which includes the cost of tral1'SpOrta-
tion !rom the place of removal to the place of delivery, whether 
on average basis or otherwise, such cost of transportation shall be 
excluded from such price."; 
Amend· 
mentof 
section 8. 
Insertion 
otnew 
section 
3A. 
Adjuat-
nlent of 
duty. 
Amend. 
mentof 
section'-


1 of 1956. 
l of 1956. 
8 
(b) in sub-section (4) ,-
(i) for clause (c) including the Explanation thereto, the 
following shall be substituted, namely:-
'(C) Urelated person" means a person who is so associated 
with the assessea that such person and the assessee S 
have such interest, dilrectly or indirectly in the business of 
each other, as may affect the price charged for the excisable 
goods, and includes a holding company, a subsidiary company, 
an employee, a relative, or a distributor of the assessee and 10 
any sub-distributor of such distributor. 
Explanation I.-In this clause "holding company" and 
"subsidiwry company" have the same meanings as in the Com-
panies Act, 1956. 
E~lanatWn ll.-In this clause, "relative" has the same 
meaning as in the Companies Act, 1956 and includes.- IS 
(i) in relation to a partnership firm .• a relative of 
every partner of that firm; and 
(ii) in relation to a company, a relative of the 
chairman or a relative of a director such directGr being 
a person controlling or managing the business of the 21) 
company. 
E~lanation lll.-Where by agreement or otherwise-
(i) any excisable goods are generally sold only to or 
through a particu'- dealer in the whole of India or in 
more than one State or in the whole r:f a State 01'· in a 
region comprising several districts of one or more States loS 
or in a metropolitan city having a population of more 
than one million as ascertainen at the last preceding 
census of which the relevant figures have been published; 
or 
(ii) the entire production of an assessee of any 30 
excisable go;)ds is generally sold in an area or a city 
smaller than the area covered bv the region or the metro-
politan city referred to in clause (i) and such sales are 
generally to or through one particu181l' dealer only. 
such dealer shall be deemed to be a distributor or, as the case 35 
may be, sub-distributorj"; 
(ii) in clause (d)-
(A) for the portion commencing with the words' ''value'' 
in relation to' and ending with the words "wrapped, cOllt!lVied 40 
or wounn", the following shall be SUbstituted, namely:-
'''vRlue'' in relation to any excisable goodl'.-
ei) where the /lOOM afe delivered at the time of 
removal in a packed condition. includes the crst of pack-
ing requilfed for their ~tora·p.f! In the Tll!tl!lilP.1"s or industria1 4S 
consumer'A premises hut dOI!R not include--
(A) the cost of nllckinll done snlely for the pur-
pose of transportin{1 such /loods: 
(B) the cost of paclring done hy the retailer-: 
and 


, 
10 
15 
30 
(e) the cost of packing which is ot a durable 
nature and is returnable to the assessee or to the 
buyer, whosoever supplied it. 
Ezplanation.-In this sub-clause, "packing" includes 
the wrapper, container, bobbin, pim, spool, reel or warp 
beam or any other thing in Which or on which the excis-
able goods are wrapped, contained or wound; > 
(B) after sub-clause (ii), the following E:q)lanatlon shall be 
inserted, namely:-
'E~IaMtion ....... :ror the removal of doubts His baby 
declared that "value" includes-
(i) the expenses Incurred by or on bebalf of the 
assessee for promoting the sale of eJrefsable gOOds; 
(ii) the expenses incurred by the assessee for the 
sale of exdsable goods in the course of the wholesale 
trade either from the factory or from any place ,out-
side the factory: 
Provided that where the sale is from any place 
outside the factory, the cost of transportation of the 
goods from the factory to S1.reb place shall be dedueted; 
(iii) the expenses incurred by the assessee fof dis-
charging the obligation for Il'ectifying, manufacturing 
defects for the periOd for which such obUgation is 
normally undertaken by or on behalf of the manUfac-
turers of such goods, or any amount representing the 
discount or reduction made in the price of such excis-
able goods on account of transfer of the obligation 
aforesaid to any other person; . ' 
(i1') , the profit made,by the assessee on the sale 
of the excisable goods;' 
13. After section 4 of the Central Excises ~nd S!llt Act, the followin~ 
seetlon shall he inserted, namely:-
35 
• 
... - _. -----... ---
"5. (1) The Central Government mav,. by rules made under this 
lIe~ion. provide for remission of duty of ex('isf! leviable em any exciA-
able Jtnods which due to any natural' C8US~ are friuhd'to he dpftcient In 
quan'titY'. 
(2) Anv rules made under sub-section (1) may, havin~ re~a,rd 
to the. nature of the excisable ~oor1!1 or of pr~e~!llh~ or of curfng 
thereof. the nerlod of their stOI'9J!P n'r' transft and' ~t1iet' relp.vant con-
siderations. ftx the limit or limits of percentage b~yond.whiC'h no "uch 
remission· shall be allowed: 
Provided that' dffferpnt lfmft or Hmfts nf perce"ta,.e mllV be "xed 
for different varietfes of the:> samf' "1C'cisable ~oOdi or· tn1- dfffetent 
areas 01' for different seasons.". 
Insertion 
01 new 
section 5 . 
Remis-
lion 01 
duty on 
goods 
found 
deficient 
in quan-
tity. 


Insertion 
of new 
sections 
llA,lIB 
and lie. 
Recovery 
of duties 
not levied 
or not 
paid or 
short-
levied or 
short_ 
paid 
or errone-
ously 
refunded. 
Claim 
for-mund 
of duty. 
10 
M. After section 11 of the Central Excises and Salt Act, the foUowina 
sections shall be inserted, namely:-
CllA. (1) When any duty of excise has not been levied or 
paid or has been short-levied or short-paid or erroneously refund-
ed, a Central Excise Officer may, within six months from the 5 
'r~lcvlUlt date, serve notice on the penlon chargeable with the duty 
which has not been levied or paid or which bas been short-:levied or 
short-paid orto whom the refund has erroneously been made, nsquir-
1ng him to show cause why he should not pay the amount specifted 
in the notice: 10 
Provided that where any duty of eX'Cise has not been levied or 
paid or has been short-levied or short-paid or erroneously 
refunded by reason of fraud, collusion or any wilful mis-
statement or suppression of facts, or contravention of any of the 
provisions of this Act or of the rules made thereunder with Intent 15 
to evade payment of duty, by such person or his agent, the provisions 
of this sub-section shall have effect, as if for the words "six months", 
the words "five years" were substituted. 
E~Ian4tion.-Where the service of the notice is stayed by an ao 
order of a court, the period of such stay shall be excluded in comput-
ing the aforesaid period of six months or five years, as the case may 
tMa. ' \ 
(2) The Assistant Collector of Central Excise shall, after consi-
dering the representation, if any. mane by the person on whom notice 
is served under sub-section (1). determine the amount of duty of 35 
excise due from such person (not hein~ in excess of the amount speei-
fied in the notice) and thereupon such person shall pay the amount 
so determined. 
(3) For the purposes of this section-
(i) Clrefund" includes rebate of duty of excise on excisable 30 
goods exported out of India or on excisable materials uBefl in the 
manufacture of goods which are exported out of India; 
(ii) "relevant date" means,-
(a) in the caSe of excisablr. ~oods on which duty of excise 
haR not been levied or naid or has been short-levied or short. 35 
paid, th,e dAte on which the duty was reQuired to be paid 
under this Act or the rules made thereunder; 
(b) in a case where duty of excise is provisionally 
assessed under this Act or the rules made thereunder, the 
nate of adjustment of duty after th~ final assossment thereof:- 40 
(c) In the case of excisable p.oods on which duty of excise 
has been el'l1'Oneously refunded. the date of such retund. 
1tB, (1) Any person e1ajmfn~ refund of any ituty of exciR" may 
make an anplication for refund of such tiutv to the Assistant Collector 
of CeQtral Excise before :tn~ ~1Cpil'V of six months lfom the date of 45 
f'.YRle~t, of duty; - ~ 


f 
S 
10 
IS 
]0 
2S 
3S 
40 
Provided that the limitation of six DlOnthl.hall not appry w~ 
any duty has been paid under protest. ' 
Ea:plGnation.-Where any duty of excise is paid provisionally 
under this Act or the rules maue thereunder, the periud of six months 
shall be computed from the date of adjustment of duty after tbi Bnal 
assessment thereot 
(2) If on receipt of any such application, the Assisqmt Collector 
"01 Central Excise is satisfied that the whole or any part of tbe duty 
of excise paid by the applicant should be refunded to him, he may 
, make an order accordingly. 
(3) Where as a result of any order passed in appeal or l1'evision 
under this Act refund of any duty of excise becomes due to any 
person, the Assistant Collector of Central Excise may refUnd the 
amount to such person without his having to make any claim in that 
~. -
(4) Save as otherwise provif\ed by or under this Act, no claim 
for refund of any duty of excise shall be entertained. 
(5) Notwithstanding anything Contained in any other law, ,.the 
provisiON of this section shall alao apply to a clafm for refund of any 
amount collected as duty of excise made on the ground that the goods 
in respect of which such amount was collected were not excisable or 
were entitled to exemption from duty and no court shall have any 
jurisdiction in respect of such claim. 
Ea:planation.-For the purposes of this section, "refunel" includes 
Il'ebate of duty of excise on excisable goods exported out of India or 
on excisable materials used in the manufacture of goods which are 
exported out of India. 
nc. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act. if tbp. 
Central Government is satisfted-
(4) that a practice was, m Is, generally prevalent regarding 
levy of duty of excise (including non-levy thereof) on any 
excisable goods; anel 
('b) that such goods were, or, are, liable-
(i) to duty ot excise, in cases where according to the said 
practice the dUty was not, or is not beJn:g, levled, or 
(ii) to a higher amount of duty of excise than what wu, 
or is being, levied according to the said practice. 
then, the Central Govemment may, by notiftcatlon in the OfIlctal 
Gazette, direct that the whole of the duty of excise payable on such 
goods, or, as the case may be, the duty of excise in excess of that pay-
able on such goods, but for the said practice, shall not be required tn 
be paid in respect of tha goods on which the duty of excise was not, 
or is not being, levied, or was, or is being. short-levied, in accordance 
with the said practice.'. 
4S 15. In section 35 of the Central Excises and Salt Act, in sub-section 
(l), after the words "the rules made thereunder", the brackets, words, 
figures and letter .. (not being an order passed under section 35A)" shall 
be inserted. 
Power 
not to 
recover 
duty of 
excise 
not levied 
orlhort-
levied .. 
a retlult of 
general 
practice. 
Amend-
mentor 
.eetion 
H. 


Su.bIUtu-
tionof 
neoN 
section 
for 
section 
35A. 
Revision 
by Board 
or Col-
lector. 
Amend-
mentof 
section 
18. 
12 
as. For section 35A of the Central Excises a~ Salt Acl, lh,e fo~wiDi 
..... ' ... \._ .. ' . " )' I." I"~ .1. 
BecUon shall be substituted, namely:-
"35A. (1) The Central Board of Excise and C~~~ R9;~M~~cl 
under the Central Boards of Revenue Act, 1963, (hereiD8fter referre4, M of 1963. 
to fts the Board), may,' of its own motion or otherwise, call-'for and 5 
examine the record of any proceeding in which any deCision or oNe!' 
,hIlS been passed under this Act or the rules made thereunder by a 
Collector of Central Excise (not being a decision OIl' order-JjassedOJlI 
ap~a~ under section 3S) for the purpose of s.atisiying itse.J:f ~ to the 
corr~c~ess, legality or propriety of such decision or~rd.!r a~<l U\'y 10 
~~S8 s~ order thereon as it thinks fit. 
(2) -The Collector of Central Excise may, of his own motion or 
otherwise. call for and examine the record of any proceeding in which 
any ciecision OJ;" order has been passed under this Act or ~ rules 
made thereunder by a Central ExCise Officer subordinate to ~ ~ot IS 
" .' ~ ," ... : 1 
being a decision or order passed on appeal under section 35) for the 
purpoae o~ satisfying himself as to the correctness, legality or pro-
priety of such decision or order and may pass such order·tbereon JlS 
he thinks 6t. 
(3) (a) No decision or order under this section shall be varied so 20 
as to prejudicially affect any p~rson unless such per~On is giY~n a 
reasonab~ opportunity of making a t'epresentation and, 'if 'he so 
~~~, 9t .l,,~g heard i~ his defence. 
(b) Where the Board or, af. the case may be, tbe Collector of 
Central Excise is of opinion that any duty of excise has not been 25 
levied or has been short-levied or erroneously refunded, no qrder 
levying or enhancing the duty. or no order requiring payment of the 
duty 80 refunded, shall be made under this section unless the person 
affected by the proposed order is given notice to show cause against 
n, ~~J,n lAe ~e ~mit sp~i11ed in section llA,". 30 
(4) No proceedings shall be commen~~~ ':ln4~~ t~ ~iion in 
respect of any decision or order [whether such decIsion or order has 
been passed before or after the commencement of the Customs, Central 
Exdaes and Salt and Central Boards of Revenue (Amendment) Act, 
1977] after the expiration of a period of one year from the date of 35 
s~cb. deci,,!Jion or order. 
,1:J. l~ se~tion 36 of the Central Excisj!s and Salt Act,-
.. ,. '.' • , "',' •••• ., < , 
(a) after sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be 
inaerteci, namely:-
"(lA) Every application under sub-section (1) .U be 40 
accompanied by a fee of ifUpeeS one hundred and twentf~~Ve.'~; 
(b) in sub-section (2), after the second proviso, the foUowInl .,,' 
further proviso "haH b~ inserted, ~amely:-
~ ." .' ,: . . ,.' 
!Wravided also that where the Central Government is of 
~on,ihat any duty of excise has 'not been levied or hal been ",S 


S 
short-levied or erroneously refunded, no order levying or en .. 
bancing the duty. or no order requiring payment of the duty so 
refunded, shall be made under this section unless the person 
affected by the proposed order is given notice to show cause 
against it within the time limit specified in section llA.". 
28. In section 37 of the 'Central Excises and, Salt Act, in sub-sectiOD Amend. 
(~), af~r ~use (ib), the following claUse ,hall be in,serted, namely: _ ment of 
. • I I ., ," . . . •• • ".' . . section 
"(iIc) provide for the remission of tluty of excise leviable on any 37. 
excisable goods, whic!h due to any natural cause are fO'UDd to be 
10 deftcient in quantity, the limit or limits of percentage beyond which 
no such remission shall be allowed and the different limit or limits 
of percentage fur different varieties of the same excisable goods or 
for di1ferent areas or for different seasons;" . 
29. Mtet: section 37 of the Central Excises and Salt Act, the following 
's section shah be inserted, nam~ly:-
"37A. The Central Government may, by notiftcat~~ iJl tJie 0fBclal 
Gazette, direct that subject to such connitions, if any, as may be 
specifted in the n9tiftcation-
(0) any power exercisable by the Board under this Act may 
be exercisable also by a ColI~ctor of Central Excise empowered 
in this behalf by the Central Government; 
(b) any power exercisable by a Collector of Central Excise 
under this Act may be exercisable also by a Deputy Collector of 
Central Excise or an Assistant Collector of Central Excise em-
2S powered in this behalf by the Central Government; 
(c) any power ex.ercisable by a Deputy Collector of tAtnkal 
Excise under this Act may b1! exercisable also by an Assistant 
Collector of Central Excise empowered in this behalf by the 
Central Government; and 
30 (d) any power exercisable by an Assistant Collector of 
3S 
Central Excise under this Act may be exercisable also by a gazet-
ted oftker of Central Excise empowered in this behalf by the 
Baard!'. . 
CHAPTER IV 
.AMENDMENT TO THE CENTRAL BOARDS OF RIlVENUE ACT, 1963 
30. III seetion 3 of the Central Boards of Revenue Aet. 1963. In lub-
seetioD (2) for the words "Dot exeeeding flve". the words "not exeeeding 
seven" shall be subsdtuted. 
Insertion 
of new 
section 
37 \. 
Delega-
tion of 
powers. 
Amend-
mentot 
Act 54 of 
1983. 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASoNS 
The Bill seeks to carry out certain amendments in the Customs Act, 
1962 and the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944. Essentially the amend-
merits are intended to remove certain practical difficulties experieruled' in 
the operation of Customs and Central Excise laws, and doubts regardillg 
tht:l intel'pretation of certain important provisions therein, to provide faci-
lities to exporters and to increase the minimum punishment for smug-
gling. Some of the amendments to the Customs Act and the Central Ex-
cises and Salt Act are similar in nature. 
The Bill also seeks to amend the 'Central Boards of Revenue Act, 1963, 
with a view to raise the maximum strength of the members of each of 
the two Boards (.the Central Bo&rd of Direct Taxes and othe Central Board 
of Excise and Customs) as it has become necessary in view of the pheno-
men8ll increase in the responsibilities of the two Boards. 
The notes on clauses appended to the Bill explain in detail the various 
provisions thereof. 
NEW D&;uu; SATISH AGARWAL. 
The 3rd DecQ t7I.ber. 1977. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLES 117 AND 274 
OF THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. 492/11/77-Cus. VI, dated the 13th December, 1977 
from Shri Satish Agarwal. Minister of State in the Ministry of Finance to 
the Secretary, Lok Babha.] 
The President having been informed of the subject matter of the Cus .. 
toms, Central Excises and Salt and Central Boards of Revenue (Amend, 
ment) Bill, 1977 has recommended, under clause (1) and cla.use (3) of 
article 117 and clause (1) of article 274 of the Constitution, the introduc- 1 
tion in, aDd consideration by. !.ok Sabha of the said Bill. 
" 
14 


Notes on Clauses 
CZwse 2.-This clause seeks to amend clause (28) of section 2 of the 
Customs Act, 1962 with a view to make the limits of the "Indian customs 
waters" as co--extensive with that of the contiguous zone of India under 
section 5 of the Territorial Waters, Continental Shelf, Exclusive Economic 
Zone and other Maritime Zones Act, 1976. 
Clause a.-This clause seeks to amend section 14 of the Customs Act 
1962 wi'th a view'to specify the rate of exchange ~hich shall be applicabl~ 
for calculating the pri::e both for imported goods and the export goods. 
It also seeks to avoid the n~essity under the existing law of recalculating 
the price with reference to the date of inward entry of 'the vessel. 
ClAuse 4.-This clause which seeks to amend section 15 of the Customs 
Act is consequential to the amendment proposed in clause 3 to section 
1~ . 
ClAuse S.-This clause seeks to amend section 27 of the Customs Act 
to provide a longer time limit, i.e., one year for claiming refund of duty of 
customs in respect of non-commercial im.portations, i.e., importations made 
by any individual for his personal use or by Government or by any educa-
tional, research or charitable institution or hospital. 
ClAuse 6.-This clause seeks to amend section 28 of the Customs Act to 
provide a longer time limit;i.e., one year for issuing notice in respect of 
non-commerclal imporiations for payment of duties not-levied, shori-
levied or erroneously refunded. This change is complementary to the 
Rmendment proposed in clause 5. 
ClAuse 7.-This clause seeks to in.'!el't a new section 28A in the Customs 
Act with a view to empower the Central Government not to recover duties 
not levied or the difference in duty short-levied as a result of the practice 
that generally prevailed during the period the non-levy or short-leVY 
occurred. The rationale for this amendment is that if all concerned--the 
assessee, the customs authorities and the consumers-had acted upon 
a ('ertain basis, that basis should not be disturbed retrospectively and no 
demand should be made in respect of assessments made on that bas1a 
fIlerely because subsequently a different assessment is regardP.d as appro-
priate. 
Clause 8.-This clause seeb ¥> amend section 46 of the Customs Act. 
At present only in special circumstances the Co~lector may permi,t a bill 
of entry to be presented before the delivery of import manifest or report. 
A proviSion is now being made in this clause that the bill of entry may be 
preseJYted even before the ftling of import manifest if the vessel by which 
the goods have h~en shipped for importation into India is expected to 
arrive within a week. 
Cl4UB8 9.-This clause seeks to amend section 61 of the Customs Act 
with· a view to provide that except for non-consumable stores the period 
for which thl' goods can be retained in the werehouse would be one year 
insitead of three years as at present. 
15 


16 
. Clause IO.-·TItis clause seeks to insert a new sub-section (IA) in sec-
bon 75 of the Customs Act with a view to introduce a provision for deem-
ing materia.ls as imported for grant of drawback of duty. If on an overall 
basis, it appears to the Central Government that the quantity of imports 
of a material is more than, the quantity of comparable material used in all 
the exported products, then the Central Govenunent may, by notfftcation 
in the Official Gazette" prOvide that such material when contained in any 
~ort goods shall, for the purpose of granting drawback, be deemed to 
be imported material. A consequential change is also being made in sec-
tion 75 (2) (a) by adding the word 'export' before the words 'goods of that 
c19ss or description'. 
Clause H.-This clause seeks to amend clause (i) of section 113 of -the 
Customs Act which provides for confiscation of goods in case of misdeclil-
ration. It is now being provided that this clause will apply not only 'to 
dutiable and prohibited goods but also ,to goods entered for exportation 
under claim for drawback. 
CLause 12.-This clause seeks to amend section 122 of the Customs Act 
with a view to enh:mce the power of adjudication of the Assistant Collec-
tors and of gazettci officers lower in rank than 'the Assistant Co1s1eclors. 
Clause 13.-This clause seeks to amend section 128 of the Customs Aet 
with a view to mal.e it clear that no appeal lies to the Board under section 
128 of the Customs Act against any order pallsed by a Colleetor of Cus-
toms under section 130 of the Customs Act. 
Clause 14.-This clause seeks to substitute section 130 of the Customs 
Act with a view to make two changes, narruely, (i) to give 'the power to 
the Collectors to revise the decisions or orders passed by officers subor-
dinate to them, and (ii) as in the case "f the Central Excises and Salt 
Act, t!l provide a time limit for commencement of the proceedings and 
not for their finalisation. 
Clause 15.-This clause seeks to Insert a new liIub-section (2A) in 
section 131 of t:le Customs Act to p'rovide that an application for revision 
shall be accompanied by a fee of one hundred and twenty..£ive rupees. 
Clause l6.-This clause seeks to amend section 135 of the Customs 
Act with a view to enhanCe the minimum punishment for certain kintb 
of offences from six months to one year. 
Clause 17.-This clause seeks to insert a new section 143A in the CU8~ 
toms Act with a view to provide for deferment of payment of duty on 
gOOds imported against Advance Licence granted under the Imports and 
EDcports (Control) Act, 1947 and its adjustment against the drawback 
payable on the export of produetg specified in such Licence. The, new 
provision also requires the importer to pay the unadjusted amoun.t toge-
ther with interest on that amount at the rate of 12 per cent. per annum. 
CZeluse 18.-This clause seeks to amend section 159 of tlie Customs Act 
relating to layin~ of rules before ellch Hr,use of Parliament to bring it in 
oonfirmlty with the recommendations of the Committee on Subordinate 
Legislation. 
Clause 19.-This clausp s~ek!; to ~Ub<:mlltn dause (f) of sectinn 2 of 
the Central Excises and Salt Act with a view to -"ake it clear that the 


I, 
word 'manufacture' shall include certain processes, applying of a regis-
tered trade mark as defined in the Trade and Merchandise Marks Act 
1958 on the excisable goods and the packing of excisable goods for thed 
storage in the retailer's or industrial consumer's premises but shall not 
include the packing done solely for the purpose of transport of the said 
goods GIl' packing done by the retailer. The processes comprise (i) any 
manufacturing process to make a product marketable to the consumers or 
users, (ii) any process carried out on the excisable goods which adds to 
their value and which is carried out with the aid of power or machine or 
if carried on without the aid of power or machine where specifical1y so 
provided in the First Schedule provided that such process is not carried 
out in the course of manufacture of any other goods, and (iii) any other 
process incidental or ancillary t:> the completion of a manufactured 
ll'l"oduct. 
Clause 20.-This clause seeks to substitute sub-section (3) of section 3 
of the Central Excises and Salt Act with a view to set the legal position 
beyond doubt that different tariff values may be fixed not only for diffe-
rent classes or descriptions of the excisable goOOs but also for (i) excisa-
ble goods of the same class or description produced or manufactured by 
different classes of pr:>ducers or manufacturers, or (ii) excisable goods 
of the same class or description sold to different classes of buyers. While 
fixing different tariff values, regard should be had to the sale prices 
charged by the r\ifterent classes of producers or manufacturers or to the 
normal practice of the wholesale trade in such goods. 
Clause 21.- This clause seeks to insert a new section 3A in the Cen-
tral Exeises and Salt Act which prov:des for adjustment of the duty al-
ready paid.. against the duty leviable after further manufacture as indi-
cated in this clause. 
Clause 22.-This clause seeks to amend section 4 of the Central Excises 
and Salt Act with a view to bring out more clearly the intention behind 
the valuation provision introduceci. in the Central Excise law in the year 
1973 and to effect certain other changes. Sub-section (2) af section 4 is 
being substituted to provide that even in the cases of equalised freight 
the cost of transportation shall be excluded from the price. The defini-
tion of 'related person' is also being recast to provide that only a person 
who is so associated with the assessee' that such person and the assessee 
have such business interest between each other as may aftect the price 
charged will be a related person. Employee of the assessee is also being 
included in the category of 'related persons'. The definition of 'relative' is 
being extended to cover in the case of a partnership firm, a relative of a 
partner and in the case of a company, a relative of the chairman or of a di-
rector who is controlling or managing the business of the company. The 
expressions 'distributor' and 'sub-cUstributor' are also being defined. 
Clause (d) of sub-section (4) is also amended with a view to effect two 
changes. In the lirts place 'sub-clause (i) is being amende(! to make it 
conform to the new definition of 'manufacture'. Further, it is now being 
c1arl1led that the cost of packing which is of a durable nature is not to be 
included not only when the packing supplien by the assessee is return-
able to him butaIso where the p'lck;n~ supplied by the buyer is return-
able to him. Lastly, the Explanation is being reworded to make it clear 
that it is an inclusive and not an exhaustive definition of 'packing'. An 
Explanatfon is being added to aub-clause (11) of clause (d) to clarify that 


18 
the value includes the expenses incurred by or on behalf of the aSS&OSee 
for promoting the sale of excisable goods, the expenses incurred by the 
~essee for the sale of ex"'Cisable goods In the course of wholesale trene, 
the expenses incurred by the assessee for discharging the warranty obli-
gation for rectifying manufacturing defects for the period during which 
Qonnally warranty is given ann also any amount representing the dis-
count or Il'eduction given for the transfer of the warranty obligat;on to 
a.oy other person. The value shall also include the profit made by the 
&S8e5iee on the sale of the excis: .. ble goods. 
Clause 23.-This clause seeks b insert a new section 5 in the Central 
Excises and Salt Act with a view to empower the Central Government 
to make rules for remission of duty on any excisable goods liable to 
duty but which due to any natural cause are found to be deficient in 
quantity. Such rules may also fix the limit or limits 01 percentage 
beyond which no such remission shall be allowed and the different 
limit or limits of percentuge for different varieties of the same excis-
able goods or for different areas or for different seasons. 
Clause 24.-This clause seeks to insert new sections llA t lIB and 
lie in the Central Ex~ises and Salt Act. Section llA seeks to incor-
porate in the Act the existing provision contained in the Central Excise 
Rules relating to recovery of duties not levied or not paid or shOf.t-levled 
or short-paid or erI"Jneously refunded. SimilarlYt DeW section llB 
seeks to incorporate in the Act the time limit of· six months provided 
in the Central Excise Rules for claiming refund of duty paid in ~S. 
It also imposes a prohibition that no claim for refund, except as other-
wise provided by or under the Central Excises and Salt Act, shall be 
entertained. It is being further provided that the pl":>visions of this 
section shall also apply to a claim for refund of any amount caUded 
as duty of excise though the goods in respect of which such amount 
was collected were in fact mt liable to duty of excise or were exempt 
from such duty and no court shall have any jurisdiction in respect 
of such claim. New section UC seeks to provide that if the Central 
Government is satisfied that there has been a uniform practice or near 
uniform practice prevaiUng all over India for assessment of any 
goods, the Government may direct that the duty in excess of that pay-
eble in accordance with such practice shall not be required to be paid 
for the period during which the Government considers that such prac-
tice was prevalent. 
Clause 25.-This clause seeks to amend section 35 of the Central 
Excises and Salt Act with a view to provide that no appeal ullder this 
section shall lie. to the Central Board ofExciae and Customs against a 
decision or order passed in revision under section 35A by a Collector of 
Central Excise. 
Clause 26.-This clause'seeles to substitute section 35A of the ·CeRal 
Excises and Salt Act with a view to make two chanits in thisprovi-
sian. In the ftrst place, the CoUector of Central Excise· is. b,mg, ,given 
the power to reviae any decision or order ~1IHd .under, ,tbe.,Central 
Bxcises and Salt Act or the, rules made thereunder by a Central Exmse 
dlfteer subordinate to him. Secondly, it is beiDg provided that where 
the proposed order in revision relates to levy or . enhancement of 
duty or requires pa~ent·Of duty erroneously refunded, the notice to 
ShlW cause should be given to the person affected witbiD the time limit 


19 
specified in section llA i.e. the time limit for issuing notice for recovery 
of duties not levied or not paid, or short-levied or short-paid or erro-
neously refunded. 
Clause 27.-This clause seeks to amend sectkm 36 of the Central 
E1Cc1ses and Salt Act, firstly to provide that every application for revi-
sion under sUb-section (1) shall be accompanied by a fee of rupees 
one hundred and 'tweny-five and secondly that no order levying or 
enhancing the duty or no order requiring the payment of duty so 
refunded shall be made by the Central Government unless the person 
affected by the proposed order is given notice to show cause against 
it within the time limit specified in section llA. 
Ctause 28.-This clause seeks tJ nmend sed;on 37 of the Central 
Excises an1 Salt Act for m1king rules in respect of matters dealt WIth 
by new se :tion 5, inserted by clausz 23. 
Clause 29.-This clause seeks to insert a new section 37A in the 
Central Excises and Salt Act to p:ovide for a general prJvision lor 
delegation of powers as in section 152 of the Customs Act. 
Clause 30.-This claUse seeks to amend sub-section (2) of section 
3 of the Central Boards of Revenue Act, 1963 with a view to provid;! that 
each of the two Boards, namely, t:le Central Board of Direct Taxes and 
the Central Board of Excise and Customs shall consist of such number 
of persons not exceeding seven as the Central GJvernment may deem 
fit to appoint. The maximum strength, at present, is five. 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 30 of the Bill seeks t::> amend the Central Boards of Revenue 
Act, 1963. The effect of this amendment will be that the maximum 
number of members of each of the two Boards, namely, the Central 
BJard of Excise and Customs and the Central Board of Direct Taxes 
could be up to seven instead of the present strength of five. The amend-
ment proposed as such does not involve any expenditure, but as and 
when the number of members is increased, there will be additional 
expenditure. It is not possLble to anticipate accurately the expendi-
ture which would be inV'::>lved in this regard because that would depend 
on the increase in the number of members. However, on the basis .that 
the maximum number of members would be seven in each of the two 
Boards, the recurring annual expenditure is likely to be ot the order 
of Rs. 2,64,000. The non-recurring . expenditure will be of the order 
of Rs. 60,000. 
20 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 28 seeks to insert a new clause in sub-se~tion (2) of section 
37 of the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944 which provides for the 
making of rules. Under the new clause, the Central Government is 
being empowered to make rules to provide for the remission of duty of 
excise leviable on any excisable goods which due to any natural cause 
arc found to be deficient in quantity, for the limit or limits of percen-
tage beyond which no such remission shall be allowed and for the 
different limit or limits of percentage for di~erent varieties of the 
same excisable g::lods or for different areas or for different seasons. 
The matters with respect to which rules may be made ate matters 
of procedure and detail and it is not practicable to provide them in the 
Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a nor-
mal character. 
21 


Defini-
tions. 
Valuation 
of goods 
for 
purposes 
of assess-
ment. 
Date for 
determi-
nation of 
rate of 
duty and 
tariff valu-
ation of 
imported 
goods. 
* 
ANNEXURE' 
EX'J!RACTS ,FROM TiB CU8'l~ Act, .1862 
(52 OF 1962) 
• ... 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
• • • ... 
• 
• 
(28) "Indian customs waters" means the waters extending into 
the sea to a distance of twelve nautical mileI!I l!rJBaIure& 'fnm, the 
appropriate base line on the coast of India Del includes My be" 
gulf, harbour, creek or udal river; 
... ... ... ... • 
14. (1) For the purposes of the Customs Tariff Act, 1975, or any other 
law for the time being in ~)rce whereunder a duty of customs is charge-
able on any goods by reference to their value, the value of such goods 
shall be d·eemed to be-
(a) the price at which such or like goods are ordinarily sold, 
or loffered for sale, for delivery at the time and place of importation 
or exportation, as the case may be, in the course of international 
trade, where the seller and the buyer have no interest in the busi-
ness of each other and the price is the sole consideration for the sale 
or offer for sale: 
Provided that in the case of imported goods, such price shall be 
calculated with reference to the rate of exchange as in force on the 
relevant date referred to in sub-section (1) of section 15; 
• ... • • • 
15. (1) The rate of duty, rate of exehange and tariff valuation, if any, 
applicable to any imported goods, shall be the rate and valuation in 
force.-
(a) in the case of goods entered for home consumption under 
section 46, r:>n the date on which a bill or entry in respect of such 
goods is presented under that section; 
(b) fn the case of goods clearer! from a warehouse under sec-
tion 68, on the date on which the goods are actually removed from 
the warehouse; 
(c) in the case of any other goods, on the date at payment of 
duty: . I ' 
Provided that if a bill of entry has been presented before the 
date ~f entry inwards of the vessel by which the goods are im-
ported, the bill of entry shall be deemed to have been presented on 
the date of such entry inwards. 
• • • • ... 
22 
IU of 
1975. 


7 of lM7. 
23 
(3), For the purposes of section 14 and this seetion-
(a) "rate "f exchange" means the rate of exchange determined 
by 'the Central Government for the comrcrsion of Indian currency 
into foreign . currency or foreign currency into Indian currency; 
(b) "foreign currency\' and "Indian currency" have the mean-
ings respectively assigned to them in the Foreign Exchange Regula-
·.tion.Ad, 1947. 
• • • • • 
.17. (1) Aay person chumJng refund of any duty paid by him in pur-
aumae·of anm-dar of.·assessIRent made .by an ,deer of eustems lower 
in: rBDk than an Auistant Collector of Customs may make an appli-
cation for refund of such duty t) the Assistant Collector of Customs 
before the expiry of six months from the date of payment of duty: 
.P.revided that the Itmituion of"ix mcmths ·shall not apply where·· any 
duty bas'been paid under protest. 
&rplanation.-:Wbere any duty is paid provisionally under section 18, 
the period, of six months shall be computed from the date at adjustment 
of duty after the final assessment 'thereof. 
• • • • • 
28. (1) When aay duty has not been levied or has been short-levied 
or erroneously refunded, the proper officer may, within six months from 
the relevant date, serve notice on the person chargeable with the duty 
wbidh has not beerdevied orwhieh has'beensoshort-levied or to wh~m 
the ,refund ·bas·errOlleeusJy been made, reqUiring him to show cause 
why 'he sh,yld not pay the amount specified in the notice: 
Provided that where any duty has not been levied or has been short-
levied or has been errel\eOusly l'<6funded by reason of collusion or any 
wilful mil-statement or suppression of facts by the importer or the 
exporter or the agent or employee of the importer 'or exporter, the 
profilll(JIIS of this sub.aecttonshal1 have effect as if ilGr the words usix 
months" tbe words "five years" were substituted. 
• • • • • 
M. (1) • • • • • 
(") A bt11 of entry under sulHection (1) may be Presented at any 
time 1lfter '~he delivery of the import manifest or import report as the 
case may be: 
Provided that the Collector of Customs may in any special circums-
tances permit a bnt of entry to be presented before the delivery of such 
manifest or repert. 
• • • • • 
Claim for 
refund of 
duty. 
Notlcelor 
payment 
of· duties 
BOt levied, 
shol't-
levied or 
errone-
ously re-
funded. 
ktry 
ot 
loods 
on impor~ 
taUon. 


Period for 
'l'Ihieh 
goods 
may re-
main 
ware-
housed. 
Drawback 
onimpor-
ted mater-
rials used 
in the 
manu-
facture 
of ,oods 
which are 
exported. 
Confisca-
tion of 
gOCKla at-
tempted 
to belm-
properly 
exported, 
etc. 
Adjudica-
tion of 
eonftaca-
tions and 
penalties. 
61. Any warehoused goods may be left in the warehouse in which 
they are deposited or in any warehouse to which they may be removed, 
till the expiry of three years after the date on wh.i.ch the proper officer 
made an order under section 60 permitting the deposit of the gOJds 
in a warehouse: 
Pl'I:>vided that-
(i) in the caSe of any goods which are likely to deteriorate, the 
aforesaid period of three years may be reduced by the Collector of 
Customs to such shorter period as he may deem fit; 
(ii) in the case of any goods which are not likely to deteriorate, 
the aforesaid period I()f three years may, oD sufticient cause being 
shown, be extended by the Collector of Customs for a period not 
exceeding one year and by the Board for such further period as it 
may deem fit: 
Provided further that when the licence for any private warehoWie is 
cancelled, the owner (jf any goods warehoused theJ:ei'n shall, within seven 
days from the date on which notice of such cancellation is given or witni •• 
such extended period as the proper office may allow, remove the goocts 
from such warehouse to another warehouse or clear them for home con-
sumption or exportation. 
• • • • • 
75. (1) • • • • • 
(2) The Central Government may make rules for the purpose of 
carrying out the provisions of sub-section (1) and, in particular, such 
rules may provide-
(a) for the payment of drawback equal to the amOWlt of duty 
actually paid on the imported matedals used ill the manufacture of 
the goods or as is specified in the rules as the average amount of 
duty paid IJn the materials of that class or description used in the 
manufacture of goods of that class or descI'iption either by manufac-
turers generally or by any particular manufacturer; 
• • • • • 
113. The following export goods shall be liable to confiscation:-
• • • • • 
(i) any dutiable or prohibitet\ goods which do not correspond in 
any material particular with the entry made under this Act or in 
the case of baggage with the declaration made under section 77 in 
respect thereof; 
• • • • • 
122. In every case under this Chapter in which anything is liable to 
confiscation or any person is liable to a, penalty, such confiscation or 
penalty may be adjuged,-
• • • • • 
(b) where the valve of the goods liable to confiscation does not 
exceed ten thousand rupees and where the penalty proposed to be 
imposed does not exceed two thousand rupees, by an Assistant 
Collector of Customs; 


2S 
(c) wher.e the value of the goods liable to confiscation does not 
exceed ODe thousand rupees and where the penalty proposed to be 
imposed does not exceed two hundred rupees, by a gazetted officer 
of customs lower in rank than an Assistant Collector of Customs. 
• • • • • 
128. (1) Any person aggrieved by any decision or order passed under Appeals. 
6ia Act may, within three months from the date of the communication 
~ him of such decision or order-
(4) where the decision pr order has been passed by a Conector 
at Customs, appeal to the Board. 
(b) where the decision or order has been passed by an ofticer 
of customs lower in .rank than a Collector 1:>( Customs, appeal to the 
Appellate Collector of Customs: 
Provided that the Appellate Authority may, if it is satisfted that 
the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from presenting the 
appeal within the aforesaid period of three m:>nths, allow it to be 
!presented within a further period of three months. 
• • • • • 
130. (1) The Board may of its own motion or on the application of 
.any aggrieved person call for and examine the recorr\ of any proceeding 
in which an officer of customs has passed any decision or order under 
.-t1iis Act (not being an order passed in appeal under section 128) for the 
purpose of satisfying itself as to the legality or p'ropriety of any such 
·.decision or order and may pass such order thereon as it thinks fit: 
Provided that no order enhancing any penalty or fine in lieu of con-
. fiscation or confiscating goods of greater value shall be passed under 
. this section unless the person affected by the proposed lorder has been 
given a reasonable opportunity of showing caUSe against it: 
Provided further that where the Board is of opinion that any duty 
,of customs has not been levied or has been short-levied, no order levy-
iag or enhancing the duty shall be made unless the person affected by 
"the proposed order is given notice to show cause against it within the 
"time limit specified in section 28. 
(2) No decision or order passed by an officer of customs shall be 
'revised under this section by the Board of its own motion and no appli-
cation for the revis):>n of any such decision or order shall be entertain-
ed, after the expiry of two years from the date of such decision or order . 
• • • • • 
135. (1) Without prejudice to any action that may be taken under 
;. this Act, if any person-
(4) is in relation to any goods in any way knowingly concerned 
· in any fraudulent evasion or attempt. at evasion of any duty charge-
· able thereon or of any prohibition for the time befng imposed under 
this Act or any other law for the time being in force with respect to 
· such goods, or 
Powers of 
revision 
of Board. 
EvuioDOf 
duty or 
prohibi-
tions. 


Ruleland 
certaJn 
notiftea-
tiona to 
be laid 
before 
ParUa-
ment. 
26 
(b) acquires possession of or is in any way concerned in carryJD,,-
removing, depositing, harbouring, keeping, concealing, selling or pur-
chasing or in any other manner dealing with any goods which he 
knows or has reason to believe are liable to confiscation under aec- . 
tion 111, 
he shall be punishable,-
(i) in the case of an offence relating to any of the goods to w1ilc1i . 
section 123 applies and the market price whereof exceeds one laldl of 
rupees, with imprisonment for a term which may extend to seva. 
years and with fine: 
Provided that in the absence of special and adequate reasons to • 
the contrary to be recorded in the judgment of the court, such im-
prisonment shall not be for less than six months; 
(ii) in any other case, with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to three years, or with fine, or with both. 
(2) If any person convicted of an offence wider this section or under 
sub-section (1) of section 136 is again convicted of an offence under tbUI c 
section, then, he shall be punishable for the second and for every subse-
quent offence with imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven . 
years and with fine: 
Provided that in the absence of special and adequate reasons to tlie 
contrary to be recorded in the judgrrumt of the court su~ imprisouinent 
shall not be for less than six months. 
(3) For the purposes of sub-sections (1) and (2), the following sbaD" 
not be considered as special and adequate reasons for awarding a sentence ,. 
of imprisonment for a term of less than six months, namely:- ' 
(i) the fact that the accused has been convicted for the first time ' 
for an offence under this Act; 
(ii) the fact that in any proceeding under this Act, othertli8l'l a 
prosecution, the accused has been ordered to pay a penalty or the 
goods which a~e the subject matter of such proceectings have bed·· 
ordered to be confiscated or any other action has been taken apiIiit. 
him for the same act which constitutes the offen-ce; 
(iii) the fact that the accused was not the principal offender and . 
was acting merely as a carrier of goods or otherwise was a seeolidary . 
party to the commission of the offence; 
(iv) the age of the accused . 
• • • • • 
lB. Every rule made under this Act Ilnd every notit\cation iSmed' 
under sections 11, llB, 11H, 11-1, 11K, 11N, 14, 25, 43, 86, 89; 70; 14; 'l5j 
76, 98, 101 and 123 shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made or issued ' 
before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of 
thirty days which may be comprised in ODe session or bl two succeiidve 
sessions, and if~ before the expiry ot the session In which it is so ldl or' 
the session immediately follOWing, both Houses agree in matdng 'any' 
modification in the rule or notification or both Houses agree that the'rule . 


2' 
should not be made or the notification should not be issued. the rule or 
notification shall thereafter have e1fect only in such modified form or be 
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification 
or annulment shan be without prejudice to the validity of anything pre-
viously done under that rule or notification. 
• • • • • 
Ex'l1lACTS PROM THE CENTRAL EXCISES AND SALT AK:r, 1944 
(1 01' 1944) 
• • • • • 
2. In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or Deflni-
context,- ticma. 
• • • • • 
(f) "manufBcture" includes any process incid~ntal or ancillary 
to the completion of a manufactured product; and 
(i) in relation to tobacco includes the preparation of ciga-
rettes, cigars, cheroots, biris. cigarette or pipe or hookah tobacco, 
chewing tobacco or snuff; . 
(i4) in relation to m8nufactUl'ed tobacco, includes the label-
ling or re-labelling of containers and re-packing from bulk 
packs to retail packs or the adoption of any other trea~ent 
to render the produt:t marketable to the consumer; 
(ii) in relation to salt, includes collection, removal, prepa-
ration, steeping. evaporation, boiling, or anyone or more of these 
processes, the separation or purification of salt obtained in the 
manufacture of saltpetre, the separation of salt from earth or 
other substance so as. to produce alimentary salt, and the excava-
tion or removal of natural saline deposits or efflorescence; 
(iii) in relation to patent or proprietary meaicines as defin-
ed in Item No. 14E of the First Schedule and in relation to cos-
metics and toilet preparations as defined in Item No.f4F of that 
Schedule, includes the conversion of powder into tablets or 
capsules, the labellilli Dr re-Iabelling of containers intended for 
consumers and re-packing from bulk packs to retail packs or the 
adoption of any other treatment to render the product mark~~ 
abJe to the consumers; 
(iv) in relation to goods comprised in Item No. lOA of the 
First Schedule, iDcludes sizing, beaming. warping, wrapping, 
winding or reeling, or anyone or more of these processes, or tne 
conversion of any form of the said goods into another form at 
such goods; 
and the word "manufacturer" shall be construed accordingly and shall 
fnc1ude not only a PersOn· who employs hired labour in the production or 
manufacture o~ 'excii;at)le goods, but also any person who engages m their 
production or manufactUre on his own account; 
• • • • • 


Duties 
'pecified 
in the 
First 
Schedule 
to be 
levied. 
Valuation 
of excis-
able goods 
for pur-
poses of 
charging 
of duty 
of excise. 
Appeals. 
28 
3. (1) • • • • • 
(3) Different tariff values may be ftxed for different classes or des.. 
criptions of the same article. 
• • • • • 
4. (1) • • • • • 
(2) Where, in relation to any excisable goods the price thereof for 
delivery at the place of removal is not known and the value thereof Ii 
determined with reference to the price for delivery at a place other than 
the place of removal, the cost of transportation from the place of ~emoval 
to the place of delivery shall be excluded from such price. 
• • • • • 
(4) For the purposes of this section,-
• • • • • 
(.c) "related person" means a person who is so associated with 
the assessee that they have interest, directly or indirectly, in the 
business of each other and includes a holding company, a subsidiary 
company, a relative and a distributor of the assessee, and -any sub-
distributor of such distributor. 
ExpZanation.-In this clause "holding company", subsidiary com-
pany'" and "relative" have4!tthe same meanings as ih the Companies 
Act, 1956j : . ; . ~ : ':: 
(d) "value" in relation to any excisable goods,-
(i) where the goods are delivered at the time of removal in 
a packed condition, includes the cost of such packing except the 
cost of the packing which is of a durable nature and is return-
able by the buyer to the assessee. 
j' Explanation.-In this sub-clause "packing" means the wrap-
per, container, bobbin, pirn, spool, reel or warp beam or any 
other thing in which or on which the excisable goods are wrap-
ped, contained or wound; 
, 
(ii) does not include the amount of the duty of excise, sales 
tax and other taxes, if any, payable on such goods and, subject 
to such rules as may be made, the lrade discount (such discount 
not being refundable on any account whatsoever) allowed in 
accardance with the normal practice of the wholesale trade at 
the time of removal in respect of such goods sold or contracted 
for sale; . 
• • • • • 
35. (1) Any person deeming himself aggrieved by any decision or 
order passed by a Central Excise Otftcer und.er this Act or the rules 
made thereunder may, within three months from the date of such decision 
or order, appeal therefrom.~o the Central Board of Excise and Customs 
constituted under the Central Boards -of Revenue Act, 1963, or, in suoh 
cases as the Central Government directs, to any Central Excise Oftlcer 
not inferior in rank to an Assistant Collector of Central Excise and em-
powered in that behalf by the Central Government. Such authority or 
officer may thereupon make such fllll'ther inquiry and pass such order 88 
1 of 19M. 
HoU883. 


54 of 1963. 
he thinks fit, confirming, altering or annulling the decision or order 
appealed against: 
Provided that no such order in appeal shall have the effect of subject-
ing any person to any greater confiscation or penalty than has been 
adjudg~d against him in the original decision or order. 
. . . '" . 
35A. The Central Board of Excise and Customs, constituted under the 
Central Boards of Revenue Act, 1963, may. of its own motion or other-
wise, call for and examine the record of any proceeding in which any 
decision or order has been passed under this Act or the rules made there-
under (not b~ing a decision or order passed on appeal under section 35) 
for the purpose of satisfying itself as to the correctness. legality or 
propriety 01 such decision or order and may paIS such order thereon as 
it thinks fit: 
Provided that no deCision or order shall be varied so as to prejudicially 
affect any person unless such person is given a reasonable opportunity 
of making a representation and, if he so desires, of being heard In hiI 
defence: 
Provided further that no proceedings shall be commenced under this 
section in respect of any decision or order (whether such decision or 
order has been passed before or after the coming into force of this section) 
after the expiration of a period of, one year from the date of such decision 
or order. 
38. (1) • • • • • (2) The Central Government may, of its Own motion or otherwise. 
call fol' and examine the record of any proceeding in which any decision 
or order has been passed under section. 35 or section 35A of this Ac.t fqr. 
the purpose of satisfying itself as to the correctness. legality or propriety 
of such decision or order and may pass such order thereon as it thinks tit: 
Provided that no decision or order shall be varied so 35 to prejudicially 
affect any person unless such person is given a reasonable opportunity 
of making a representation and, jf, he so desires, of being haard in his 
defence: 
Provided further that no proceedings shall be commenced under this 
sub-section in respect of any decision or order (whether such decision or 
order has been passed before or after the coming into force of this sub-
section) after the expiration of a period of one year from the date of, such 
decision or order. 
• • • • • 
37. (1) • • • • • 
(~) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the fure-
going }Jower, such rules may-
• • • • • • 
EXTRACT FROM THE CENTJlAL BoARDs OF REVENUE ACT, 1983 
(54 or 1963, 
• • • • • 
3. (1) • • • • • (1) Each Board shall consist of luch number of persons not exceeding 
five as the Central Government may think fit to appoint. 
• • • • • 
Revision 
by Board. 
Revision 
by Central 
Govern-
ment. 
Power Of 
CCftltral 
Govem-. 
ment to 
make 
rules. 
Constitu-
tion of 
separate 
Central 
Boards for 
Direct 
Taxes 
and for 
Excise 
.ndega· 
tolDS. 


LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to pl'ovide for certain amendments to the Customs Act, 1962, the Central 
kcisea and Salt Act, 1944 and the Central BoaTds of Revenue Act, 1963. 
(Shri .SC1tiah AggnoC11, 
Minuter oJ StG.te in the 
Min.iBtry of FinAnce.) 
