25
THE COAL REGULATORY AUTHORITY BILL, 2013
——————
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
——————
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
CLAUSES
1. Short title and commencement.
2. Definitions.
CHAPTER II
PRICING OF COAL
3. Principles for determination of price.
 CHAPTER III
COAL REGULATORY AUTHORITY
4. Establishment and incorporation of Authority.
5. Qualifications for appointment of Chairperson and Members.
6. Selection Committee.
7. Term of office and conditions of service of Chairperson and Members.
8. Powers of Chairperson.
9. Resignation by Chairperson and Members.
10. Restriction on employment after cessation of office as Chairperson or Member.
11. Chairperson and Members deemed to retire from service.
12. Prohibition of acting as arbitrator.
13. Prohibition of practice.
14. Removal of Chairperson or Members.
15. Meetings of Authority.
16. V acancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of Authority.
17. Officers and other employees of Authority.
CHAPTER IV
F
UNCTIONS AND POWERS OF THE AUTHORITY
18. Functions of Authority.
19. Authority to perform certain functions relating to coal mines.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No.  149  of  2013

CLAUSES
CHAPTER V
DISPUTE  RESOLUTIONS
20. Power to resolve disputes.
CHAPTER VI
APPEALS TO APPELATE TRIBUNAL
21. Appellate Tribunal.
22. Technical Member (Coal).
23. Terms and conditions of service of Technical Member (Coal).
24. Appeals to Appellate Tribunal.
25. Procedure and powers of  Appellate Tribunal.
26. Right to legal representation.
27. Power of Appellate Tribunal to make rules.
28. Orders passed by Appellate Tribunal to be executable as a decree.
29. Appeal to Supreme Court.
CHAPTER VII
F
INANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT
30. Grants by Central Government.
31. Fund.
32. Accounts and audit.
33. Annual report and its laying before Parliament.
CHAPTER VIII
P
OWER OF CENTRAL GOVERNMENT
34. Power of Central Goverment to issue directions.
CHAPTER IX
OFFENCES AND PUNISHMENT
35. Punishment for contravention of directions of Authority.
36. Penalty for wilful failure to comply with orders of Appellate Tribunal.
37. Offences by companies.
CHAPTER X
M
ISCELLANEOUS
38. Maintenance of data bank and information.
39. Obligations of entities.
40. Furnishing of returns, etc., to Central Government.
41. Chairperson, Members, etc., to be public servants.
42. Protection of action taken in good faith.
(ii)

CLAUSES
43. Civil courts not to have jurisdiction.
44. Cognizance of certain offences.
45. Provisions of this Act to be in addition to and not in derogation of other laws.
46. Power of Central Government to make rules.
47. Power of Authority to make regulations.
48. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament.
49. Power to remove difficulties.
(iii)

1
Short title
and
commencement.
THE COAL REGULATORY AUTHORITY BILL, 2013
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of Coal Regulatory Authority to regulate and conserve
resources in the coal sector , protect the interests of consumers of coal and producers
of coal and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fourth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Coal Regulatory Authority Act, 2013.
 (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint and different dates may be appointed for different provisions
of this Act.
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,––
(a) “Appellate Tribunal” means the Appellate Tribunal referred to in section 21;
 (b) “Authority” means the Coal Regulatory Authority established under sub-
section (1) of section 4;
Definitions.
Bill No.  149 of  2013
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(c) “Chairperson” means the Chairperson of the Authority appointed under
sub-section (3) of section 4;
(d) “captive mine” means a mine authorised for production and consumption of
coal for specified end use;
(e) “coal” includes anthracite, bituminous coal, lignite, peat and any other form
of carbonaceous matter sold or marketed as coal and coke;
(f) “coal mine” means a mine in which there exist one or more seams of coal;
(g) “company” means a company formed and registered under the Companies
Act, 1956 and includes any body incorporated or established under a Central Act or
a State Act;
(h) “consumer” means any person who mines or procures coal for his own use;
(i) “entity” means a person, association of persons or a body of individuals,
whether incorporated or not or artificial juridical person, firm, company or co-operative
society, by whatever name called or referred to, engaged in the business of coal, coal
mines and washeries;
(j) “Member” means a Member of the Authority appointed under sub-section
(3) of section 4;
(k) “mine” shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause (j) of sub-section (1)
of section 2 of the Mines Act, 1952;
(l) “mine closure plan” means a mine area rehabilitation process to create self-
sustained ecosystem of the area with a view to restore physical, chemical and biological
quality of the area which is disturbed by the mining;
(m) “mining lease” means a lease granted for the purpose of undertaking mining
operations and includes a sub-lease granted for such purpose under section 5 of the
Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 and the Coal Bearing
areas (Acquisition and Development) Act, 1957;
(n) “mining operations” means any operation undertaken for the purpose of
mining any mineral;
(o) “notification” means a notification published in the Official Gazette;
(p) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(q) “regulations” means regulations made by the Authority under this Act;
 (r) “Secretary” means the Secretary of the Authority;
 (s) “supply” in relation to coal, means the sale of coal to a consumer and a
trader;
(t) “trading” means purchase of coal for resale thereof and the expression
“trade” shall be construed accordingly;
(u) “washing” means such process or combination of processes as may be
approved in this behalf by the Central Government or the Authority by which the
whole or any part of the sale and mineral matter found in the coal is removed therefrom.
(2) Words and expressions used herein and not defined in this Act but defined
in the Mines Act, 1952; the Coal Bearing Areas (Acquisition and Development) Act,
1957; the Coal Mines (Taking Over of Management) Act, 1973; the Coal Mines
(Nationalisation) Act, 1973; the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation)
Act, 1957; the Coal Mines (Conservation and Development) Act, 1974 shall have the
meanings, respectively, assigned to them in those Acts.
35 of 1952.
67 of 1957.
20 of 1957.
35 of 1952.
20 of 1957.
15 of 1973.
26 of 1973.
67 of 1957.
28 of 1974.
1 of 1956.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
CHAPTER II
PRICING OF COAL
3. (1) The Authority shall, subject to the policy guidelines issued by the Central
Government in this behalf, specify by regulations the principles and methodologies for
determination of price of raw coal and washed coal and any other by-product generated
during the process of washing of coal for all coal producers, including captive coal producers,
and in doing so, be guided by the following, namely:––
(a) grade and quality of coal;
(b) the mining operation, production and supply to be based on commercial
principles;
(c) the factors that would encourage industry best practices, competition,
efficiency, economical use of resources, good performance and optimum investments;
(d) safeguarding of consumers’ interest and at the same time, recovery of the
cost of coal including a reasonable return to coal mine developer;
(e) maintenance of uninterrupted supply of coal to consumers that would
promote production and supply of goods and services;
(f) the principles of rewarding efficiency in performance;
(g) multiyear price determination principles;
(h) gross calorific value or grade of coal with certain adjustment for quality,
such as moisture content, volatile matter, ash, size and any other relevant parameters
as may be determined by the Authority.
(2) The individual coal producers shall, in accordance with the principles and
methodologies as specified by the Authority in sub-section ( 1),determine the price of raw
coal and washed coal and any by-product generated during the process of washing coal.
(3) The price of coal produced by captive mines in accordance with the principles and
methodologies as specified under sub-section (1) shall provide the basis for determination
of––
 (a) the amount of royalty payable to the State Government;
 (b) the price of coal declared as surplus by the Central Government.
(4) The Central Government may direct the Authority to determine the principles and
methodologies for determination of price of coal in any other case not provided for in the
regulations specified in sub-section ( 1).
CHAPTER III
C
OAL REGULATORY AUTHORITY
4. (1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by notification,
appoint, there shall be established, for the purposes of this Act, an Authority to be called
the Coal Regulatory Authority.
(2) The Authority shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual
succession and a common seal, with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire,
hold and dispose of property, both movable and immovable, and to contract, and shall, by
the said name, sue or be sued.
(3) The Authority shall consist of a Chairperson and the following four Members,
namely:—
(a) one Member (Legal);
Principles for
determination
of price.
Establishment
and
incorporation
of
Authority.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

4
(b) one Member (Technical);
(c) one Member (Finance); and
(d) one Member (consumer interest),
to be appointed, by notification, by the Central Government.
(4) The Authority shall designate any one of the members also as Member
(Administration) who shall exercise such financial and administrative powers as may be
vested in him under the regulations made by the Authority.
 (5) The head office of the Authority shall be at such place as the Central Government
may, by notification, determine.
(6) The Authority may, in consultation with the Central Government, establish offices
at other places in India.
5. (1) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as the Chairperson unless he
has adequate knowledge and experience of not less than fifteen years in dealing with
problems relating to mining, law, economics, commerce, finance, management or public
administration:
Provided that a person who is or has been in the service of Government shall not be
appointed as Chairperson unless he is holding or has held the post not below the rank of
Secretary to the Government of India.
(2) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as Member (Legal) unless he is or
has been a member of the Indian Legal Service and has held Grade I post of that service for
a period of not less than seven years or who has held a civil judicial post for at least fifteen
years in the territory of India or who is qualified to be a Judge of a High Court.
(3) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a Member (Technical) unless he
possesses a Bachelor’s degree in engineering and has the experience of not less than
fifteen years in coal mining industry.
(4) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a Member (Finance) unless he
possesses a Master’s degree in Business Administration with Finance or equivalent and
has the experience of not less than fifteen years in the field of financial matters.
(5) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a Member (consumer interest)
unless he has the experience of not less than fifteen years  in sectors relating to power, steel
or cement.
(6) The Chairperson, or any other Member of the Authority, shall not hold any other
office during the term of his office.
6. (1) The Central Government shall, for the purpose of selecting the Chairperson and
Members of the Authority, and for preparing a panel of persons to be considered for
appointment as Technical Member of the Appellate Tribunal, constitute a Selection Committee
consisting of–
(a) Cabinet Secretary – Chairperson;
(b) the Secretary to the Government of India, Ministry of Coal–Member;
(c) the Secretary to the Government of India, Ministry of Power—Member;
(d) the Secretary to the Government of India, Ministry of Law and Justice–
Member;
(e) the Chairman of the Public Enterprises Selection Board–Member;
(f) a person nominated by the Central Government from amongst directors or
heads or Professors of a reputed engineering or management Institute–Member.
Qualifications
for
appointment
of
Chairperson
and
Members.
Selection
Committee.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

5
(2) The Central Government shall, as soon as possible from the date of occurrence of
any vacancy by reason of death, resignation or removal of the Chairperson or a Member
and six months before the superannuation or end of tenure of any Chairperson or Member,
make a reference to the Selection Committee for filling up of the vacancy.
(3) The Selection Committee shall recommend a panel of a minimum of two names for
every vacancy referred to it.
(4) No appointment of the Chairperson or Members shall be invalid merely by reason
of any vacancy in the Selection Committee.
7. (1) Before appointing any person as the Chairperson or a Member, the Central
Government shall satisfy itself that such person does not have any financial or other
interest which is likely to affect prejudicially his functions as Chairperson or other Member.
(2) The Chairperson or Member shall hold office for a period of five years, from the
date on which he enters upon his office or till he attains the age of sixty-five years whichever
is earlier, but shall not be eligible for re-appointment as such.
Explanation .––For purposes of this section, appointment of a Member as the
Chairperson shall not be deemed to be re-appointment.
(3) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of
service of, the Chairperson and Members shall be such as may be prescribed:
Provided that neither the salary and allowances nor the other terms and conditions of
service of the Chairperson or a Member shall be varied to his disadvantage after appointment.
(4) The Chairperson and every Member shall, before entering upon his office, make
and subscribe to an oath of office and secrecy in such manner and before such authority as
may be prescribed.
8.The Chairperson shall have the powers of general superintendence and directions
in the conduct of the affairs of the Authority and shall, in addition to presiding over the
meetings of the Authority, exercise and discharge such other powers and functions of the
Authority, as may be assigned to him by the Central Government.
9. The Chairperson or a Member may resign his office by giving notice thereof in
writing to the Central Government and on such resignation being accepted, the Chairperson
or such Member shall be deemed to have vacated his office.
10. The Chairperson or a Member, upon ceasing to hold office as such, shall––
(a) be ineligible for further employment under the Central Government or any
State Government; and
(b) not accept any commercial employment for a period of two years from the
date he ceases to hold such office except with previous approval of the Central
Government.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section,––
(i) “employment under the Central Government or the State Government”
includes employment under any local or other authority within the territory of
India or under the control of the Central Government or State Government or
under any corporation or company or society owned or controlled by such
Government;
(ii) “commercial employment” means employment in any capacity under,
or agency of, a person engaged in trading, commercial, industrial or financial
business in the field of coal and includes also a director of a company or partner
of a firm or setting up practice either independently or as partner of a firm or as
an advisor or a consultant.
Term of office
and conditions
of service of
Chairperson
and Members.
Powers of
Chairperson.
Resignation by
Chairperson
and Members.
Restriction on
employment
after cessation
of office as
Chairperson
or Member.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

6
11. (1) A person in the service of the Central Government, a State Government or any
undertaking, corporation or company owned or controlled by the Central Government or a
State Government or from any other non-Governmental organisation or corporate body
shall resign or retire from such service before joining the Authority as the Chairperson or
other Member as the case may be.
 (2) A person who, immediately before the date of assuming office as the Chairperson
or a Member, was in the service of Government, shall be deemed to have retired from service
on the date on which he enters upon office as such Chairperson or Member but his
subsequent service as the Chairperson or a Member shall be reckoned as continuing approved
service counting for pension in service to which he belonged.
12. No person, while holding office as such Chairperson or a Member, shall act as an
arbitrator in any matter.
13. On ceasing to hold office, the Chairperson or a Member shall not appear, act or
plead before the Appellate Tribunal.
14. (1)The Central Government may remove from office the Chairperson or a Member,
who—
(a) has been adjudged as insolvent; or
(b) has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the Central
Government, involves moral turpitude; or
(c) has become physically or mentally incapable of acting as Chairperson or a
Member; or
(d) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially
his functions as Chairperson or a Member; or
(e) has so abused his position as to render his continuance in office prejudicial
to the public interest; or
(f) acts as an arbitrator in any matter; or
(g) has been guilty of proved misbehaviour:
Provided that no Chairperson or Member shall be removed from office under clause
(d) or clause (e) or clause (f) or clause (g) unless the Central Government, after holding an
inquiry by any person appointed or authority constituted for the purpose and in accordance
with such procedure as may be prescribed in this behalf, is satisfied that such person
ought, on such ground or grounds, to be removed.
(2) The Central Government may, in consultation with the Chairperson of the Appellate
Tribunal, suspend from office the Chairperson or a Member against whom an inquiry has to
be held until the Central Government has passed an order on receipt of the report of the
inquiry authority.
15. (1) The Authority shall meet at such times and places, and shall observe such
procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings (including the quorum at
such meetings) as may be specified by regulations.
(2) The Chairperson or, if he is unable to attend a meeting of the Authority, the senior
most Member present in the meeting, shall preside over the meeting.
(3) All questions which come up before any meeting of the Authority shall be decided
by a majority of the Members present and voting, and in the event of an equality of votes,
the Chairperson or in his absence, the person presiding, shall have a second or casting
vote.
(4) All orders and decisions of the Authority shall be authenticated by the Secretary
of the Authority.
Prohibition of
acting as
arbitrator.
Prohibition of
practice.
Removal of
Chairperson or
Members.
Meetings of
Authority.
Chairperson
and Members
deemed to
retire from
service.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

7
16. No act or proceeding of the Authority shall be invalid merely by reason of—
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in, the constitution of the Authority; or
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as the Chairperson or a
Member of the Authority; or
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Authority not affecting the merits of
the case.
17.  (1) The Central Government may, by notification, appoint a Secretary to exercise
and perform such powers and duties, under the control of the Chairperson, as may be
specified by regulations.
(2) The Authority may, with the approval of the Central Government, determine the
number, nature, categories and qualifications of officers and employees, required to assist
the Authority in the discharge of its functions.
(3) The Authority may appoint other officers and employees as determined under
sub-section (2), to assist the Authority in the efficient discharge of its functions.
(4) The salaries and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service
of the Secretary, other officers and employees of the Authority shall be such as may be
prescribed.
(5) The Authority may appoint consultants required to assist the Authority in the
discharge of its functions on such terms and conditions as may be specified by regulations.
(6) The Authority may by a general or special order in writing delegate to any Member,
Secretary, officer of the Authority or any other person subject to such conditions, if any, as
may be laid down in the order, such of its powers and functions under this Act (except the
power to make regulations under section 47) as it may deem necessary.
CHAPTER IV
F
UNCTIONS AND POWERS OF THE AUTHORITY
18. (1) The Authority shall,––
(a) specify by regulations  methods of testing for declaration of grades or
quality of coal;
(b) monitor and enforce closure of mines as per approved mine project plan
towards closure of mine;
(c) ensure adherence of approved mining plan;
(d) specify the principles and methodologies for determination of price of raw
coal, washed coal and any other by-product generated during the process of coal
washing as per the provisions of Chapter II;
(e) call for information, record or other documents from the entities and publish
statistics and other data in relation to the coal industry;
(f) specify by regulations procedure for automatic coal sampling and weighment;
(g) specify by regulations the standards of performance and norms of operational
efficiency except in the area related to mines safety;
(h) adjudicate upon disputes between the parties under Chapter V;
(i) discharge such other functions as the Central Government may, for the
purpose of carrying out the provisions of this Act, entrust to it.
Vacancies,
etc., not to
invalidate
proceedings
of Authority.
Officers and
other
employees of
Authority.
Functions of
Authority.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

8
(2) The Authority may advise the Central Government on all or any of the following,
namely:—
(a) formulation of policies in coal sector, including allotment or earmarking of
coal blocks for any purpose, through any mode, and coal linkage;
(b) promotion of competition, efficiency and economy in activities of the coal
industry;
( c) promotion of investment in coal industry;
(d) development of various mining technologies, beneficiation methods to
improve mining and conservation of coal resources;
(e) any other matter referred to the Authority by the Central Government:
Provided that if the Central Government having considered the advice of the Authority,
comes to a prima facie conclusion that such advice cannot be accepted or needs modification,
it shall refer the advice back to the Authority for its reconsideration, and the Authority may
within fifteen days from the date of receipt of such reference, forward to the Central
Government its advice after reconsidering the reference made by the Central Government
and after receipt of further advice, if any, the Central Government shall take a final decision.
19. (1) The Authority shall specify by regulations, with the prior approval of the
Central Government, the terms and conditions which shall apply to the holders of permission
granted by the Central Government for opening of a coal mine, seam or section of a seam.
 (2) The Authority may recommend for consideration of the Central Government
suspension or cancellation of permission granted by the Central Government for opening a
coal mine, seam or a section of a seam.
CHAPTER V
D
ISPUTE  RESOLUTION
20. (1) Save in cases where arbitration is provided for in the relevant agreements
between entities or between an entity and any other person, as the case may be, the
Authority shall adjudicate disputes relating to grading, quality, testing, pricing, supply and
sampling of coal.
(2) Notwithstanding any agreement between entities or between an entity or any
other person providing for settlement of disputes by arbitration, the entities or persons
concerned may agree to submit any dispute relating to grading, quality, testing, pricing,
supply and sampling of coal to the Authority for adjudication.
(3)  Any consumer aggrieved by any act or omission of any entity relating to grading,
quality, testing, pricing, supply and sampling of coal may apply to the Authority for
adjudication.
(4) The disputes referred to in sub-section ( 1) or sub-section ( 2) or sub-section ( 3)
shall be decided by a majority decision of the Authority.
(5) The Authority may, if it is satisfied that it is in the public interest to do so, on its
own motion, and after recording the reasons in writing, examine any matter relating to
pricing or supply which, in the opinion of the Authority, is in contravention of the principles
and methodologies specified in the regulations made under sub-section ( 1) of section 3,
and pass such order or direction (including any interim order or direction) as it may deem fit
in the circumstances of the case:
Provided that the Authority shall, before examining any matter and passing any order
or direction, provide an opportunity of being heard to the persons likely to be affected by
such order or direction.
Authority to
perform
certain
functions
relating to
coal mines.
Power to
resolve
disputes.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

9
(6) Any order or direction made by the Authority under sub-section (4) shall remain in
force for such period, not exceeding six months from the date of the order, as may be
specified in such order or direction by the Authority.
(7) The Authority shall have, for the purposes of discharging its functions under this
Act, the same powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908,
while trying a suit, in respect of the following matters, namely:––
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him
on oath;
(b) requiring the discovery and production of documents;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;
(d) any other matter which may be prescribed.
CHAPTER VI
A
PPEALS TO APPELATE TRIBUNAL
21. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Appellate Tribunal established under
section 110 of the Electricity Act, 2003 shall be the Appellate Tribunal for the purposes of
this Act and the said Appellate Tribunal shall exercise the jurisdiction, powers and authority
conferred on it by or under this Act:
Provided that the Technical Member of the Appellate Tribunal for the purposes of
this Act shall be called the Technical Member (Coal) and shall have the qualifications
specified in sub-section (2) of section 22.
 (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Electricity Act, 2003, the Central
Government may, for the purposes of this Act, appoint one or more Technical Members
(Coal) on the Appellate Tribunal for Electricity or designate a Technical Member of the said
Tribunal having the qualifications specified in sub-section ( 2) of section 22 and when a
Technical Member (Coal) is appointed, he shall be in addition to the three other members
appointed under the said Act.
22. (1) The Technical Member (Coal) shall be appointed from the panel prepared by
the Search Committee constituted under sub-section ( 1) of section 6.
(2) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a Technical Member (Coal) of
the Appellate Tribunal unless he––
(i) is, or has been, a Secretary for at least one year in the Ministry or Department
of the Central Government having adequate experience in coal sector; or
(ii) is a person of ability and standing, having adequate knowledge or experience
in dealing with matters relating to mining, industry, commerce or administration.
23. The term of office, salaries and allowances payable to and the other terms and
conditions of service of the Technical Member (Coal) shall be the same as applicable to the
other members of the Appellate Tribunal.
24. (1) Any party to the dispute aggrieved by any direction or order made by the
Authority may prefer an appeal to the Appellate Tribunal.
(2) Every appeal under sub-section (1) shall be preferred within a period of forty-five
days from the date on which a copy of the direction or order made by the Authority is
received by the entity or the aggrieved person and it shall be in such form, verified in such
manner and be accompanied by such fee as may be prescribed:
Appellate
Tribunal.
Technical
Member
(Coal).
Terms and
conditions of
service of
Technical
Member
(Coal).
Appeals to
Appellate
Tribunal.
5 of 1908.
36 of 2003.
36 of 2003.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

10
 Provided that the Appellate Tribunal may entertain any appeal after the expiry of the
said period of forty-five days if it is satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not filing it
within that period.
(3) On receipt of an appeal under sub-section ( 1), the Appellate Tribunal may, after
giving the parties to the appeal an opportunity of being heard, pass such orders thereon as
it thinks fit.
(4) The Appellate Tribunal shall send a copy of every order made by it to the parties
to the appeal and to the Authority.
(5) The appeal preferred under sub-section (1) shall be dealt with by it as expeditiously
as possible and endeavour shall be made by it to dispose of the appeal finally within one
hundred and eighty days from the date of receipt of appeal:
Provided that where any such appeal could not be disposed of within the said period
of one hundred and eighty days, the Appellate Tribunal shall record its reasons in writing
for not disposing of the appeal within that period.
(6) The Appellate Tribunal may, for the purpose of examining the legality or propriety
or correctness of any direction or order of the Authority referred to in the appeal preferred
under sub-section ( 1), on its own motion or otherwise, call for the records relevant to
disposing of such appeal and make such orders as it thinks fit.
25. The provisions of sections 112, 120 to 124 (both inclusive) of the Electricity Act,
2003 shall, mutatis mutandis, apply to the Appellate Tribunal in the discharge of its functions
under this Act as they apply to it in the discharge of its functions under the Electricity Act,
2003.
26. The applicant or appellant may either appear in person or authorise one or more
chartered accountants or company secretaries or cost accountants or legal practitioners or
any of its officers to present his or its case before the Appellate Tribunal.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section,––
(a) “chartered accountant” means a chartered accountant as defined in clause
(b) of sub-section (1) of section 2 of the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949 and who
has obtained a certificate of practice under sub-section ( 1) of section 6 of that Act;
(b) “company secretary” means a company secretary as defined in clause (c) of
sub-section ( 1) of section 2 of the Company Secretaries Act, 1980 and who has
obtained a certificate of practice under sub-section ( 1) of section 6 of that Act;
(c) “cost accountant” means a cost accountant as defined in clause ( b) of sub-
section (1) of section 2 of the Cost and Works Accountants Act, 1959 and who has
obtained a certificate of practice under sub-section ( 1) of section 6 of that Act;
(d) “legal practitioner” means an advocate, vakil or an attorney of any
High Court, and includes a pleader in practice.
27.  The Appellate Tribunal may, by notification, make rules consistent with the
provisions of this Act as to the conduct and procedure in respect of all proceedings before
it under this Act.
28. (1) Every order made by the Appellate Tribunal under this Act shall be executable
by the Appellate Tribunal as a decree of a civil court, and for this purpose, the Appellate
Tribunal shall have all the powers of a civil court.
 (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), the Appellate Tribunal
may transmit any order made by it to a civil court having jurisdiction and such civil court
shall execute the order as if it were a decree made by that court.
Procedure and
powers of
Appellate
Tribunal.
Right to legal
representation.
Power of
Appellate
Tribunal to
make rules.
Orders passed
by Appellate
Tribunal to be
executable as
decree.
36 of 2003.
38 of 1949.
56 of 1980.
23 of 1959.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

11
29. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 or in
any other law for the time being in force, an appeal shall lie against any order, not being an
interlocutory order, of the Appellate Tribunal to the Supreme Court on one or more of the
grounds specified in section 100 of that Code.
(2) No appeal shall lie against any decision or order made by the Appellate Tribunal
with the consent of the parties.
(3) Every appeal under this section shall be preferred within a period of ninety days
from the date of the decision or order appealed against:
Provided that the Supreme Court may entertain the appeal after the expiry of the said
period of ninety days, if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause
from preferring the appeal in time.
 CHAPTER VII
F
INANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT
30. The Central Government may, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, make to the Authority grants of such sums of money as the Central Government
may think fit for being utilised for the purpose of this Act.
31. (1) There shall be constituted a Fund, in such manner as may be prescribed, to be
called the Coal Regulatory Authority Fund and the following shall be credited thereto––
(a) all grants, fees and charges received by the Authority under this Act; and
(b) all sums received by the Authority from such other sources as may be
approved by the Central Government.
(2) The Fund shall be applied in meeting––
(a) the salaries and allowances payable to the Chairperson and other Members
and the administrative expenses including the salaries, allowances and pensions
payable to the officers and employees of the Authority;
(b) the other expenses of the authority in connection with the discharge of its
functions and for the purposes of this Act.
32. (1) The Authority shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records and
prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be prescribed by the Central
Government in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
(2) The accounts of the Authority shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-
General of India at such intervals as may be decided by him and any expenditure incurred in
connection with such audit shall be payable by the Authority to the Comptroller and Auditor-
General of India.
Explanation.––For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the decisions of
the Authority taken in the discharge of its functions under this Act, being matters appealable
to the Appellate Tribunal, shall not be subject to audit under this section.
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India or any other person appointed by
him in connection with the audit of the accounts of the Authority shall have the same rights
and privileges and authority in connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor-
General has in connection with the audit of the Government accounts and, in particular,
shall have the right to demand the production of books, accounts, connected vouchers and
other documents and papers and inspection of offices of the Authority.
 (4) The accounts of the Authority as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor-General
of India or any other person appointed by him in this behalf together with the audit report
thereon shall be forwarded annually to the Central Government and that Government shall
cause the same to be laid before each House of Parliament.
Appeal to
Supreme
Court.
Grants by
Central
Government.
Fund.
Accounts and
audit.
5 of 1908.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

12
33. (1) The Authority shall prepare once every year in such form and at such time as
may be prescribed, an annual report giving a summary of its activities including information
relating to the proceedings and policies during the previous year and such report shall also
contain statements of annual accounts of the Authority.
 (2) A copy of the report shall be forwarded to the Central Government and the Central
Government shall cause such report to be laid, as soon as may be after it is received, before
each House of Parliament.
CHAPTER VIII
P
OWER OF CENTRAL GOVERNMENT
34. (1) The Central Government may, from time to time, by writing issue to the Authority
such directions as it may think necessary in the interest of the sovereignty and integrity of
India, the security of the State, friendly relations with foreign States, public order or for
promoting energy efficiency.
(2) Without prejudice to the foregoing provision, the Central Government may, if it
deems necessary or expedient so to do in public interest or for maintaining or increasing
supplies of coal or for securing its equitable distribution and ensuring its adequate
availability, issue policy directives to the Authority in writing and such policy directives
shall be binding upon the Authority:
Provided that no such directive shall relate to any day-to-day affairs of the Authority:
Provided further that the Authority shall, as far as practicable, be given an opportunity
of expressing its views before any directive is issued under this sub-section.
(3) The decision of the Central Government on whether a question is one of policy or
not shall be final.
(4) Every directive issued by the Central Government shall be laid before each House
of Parliament while it is in session.
CHAPTER IX
O
FFENCES AND PUNISHMENT
35. If any entity fails to comply with any rules or regulations made under this Act or
any direction or order of the Authority, such person shall be punishable with fine which
may extend to twenty-five crore rupees and in case of continuing contravention with
additional fine which may extend to ten lakh rupees for every day during which the
contravention continues.
36. If any entity wilfully fails to comply with the order of the Appellate Tribunal, he
shall be punishable with fine which may extend to twenty-five crore rupees and in case of a
second or subsequent offence with fine which may extend to thirty crore rupees and in the
case of continuing contravention with additional fine which may extend to twenty lakh
rupees for every day during which such default continues.
37.  (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company, every
person who at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was responsible to,
the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall
be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and
punished accordingly:
 Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person
liable to any punishment provided in this Act, if he proves that the offence was committed
without his knowledge or that he has exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission
of such offence.
Annual report
and its laying
before
Parliament.
Power of
Central
Government
to issue
directions.
Punishment
for
contravention
of directions
of Authority.
Penalty for
wilful failure
to comply
with orders of
Appellate
Tribunal.
Offences by
companies.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

13
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), where an offence under
this Act has been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been
committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to, any neglect on the part
of any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager,
secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable
to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
Explanation.–– For the purpose of this section,––
(a) “company” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other
association of individuals; and
(b)“director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.
CHAPTER X
M
ISCELLANEOUS
38. (1) The Authority shall maintain a data bank and information system relating to
activities of entities in such form and manner as may be specified by regulations.
 (2) The Authority shall have power to verify the data supplied by the entities and
appoint any person or persons for the purpose and take such measures as it may consider
necessary.
39. (1) Every entity shall—
(a) maintain such documentary records as may be specified by regulations;
(b) allow inspection of such facilities and documentary records, as may be
specified by regulations.
(2) The Authority may call for any information from any entity including information
which is considered necessary for ensuring transparency or ascertaining true ownership of
the entity.
(3) The Authority or any officer authorised by the Authority shall have all the powers
of an inspecting officer as provided under section 209A of the Companies Act, 1956 to
inspect and obtain information, wherever necessary, from the entities.
(4) It shall be the duty of every entity to carry out the directions of the Authority
given under this section.
(5) The Authority shall maintain confidentiality in respect of any information and
record received by it from the entities and shall not disclose information contained therein
to any person or authority except on the grounds of public interest.
40. The Authority shall furnish to the Central Government at such time and in such
form and manner, such returns and statements and such particulars in regard to any matter
in connection with proposed or existing activities under this Act, as may be prescribed.
41. The Chairperson, Members, Secretary, officers and other employees of the
Authority and Chairperson, Member and officers and other employees of the Appellate
Tribunal shall be deemed, when acting or purporting to act in pursuance of any of the
provisions of this Act, to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian
Penal Code.
42. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central
Government, Authority or Appellate Tribunal or any officer of the Central Government or
Chairperson, Member, officer or other employee of the Authority or Technical Member
(Coal) of the Appellate Tribunal for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be
done under this Act or the rules or regulations made thereunder.
Maintenance
of data bank
and
information.
Obligations of
entities.
Furnishing of
returns, etc.,
to Central
Government.
Chairperson,
Members,
etc., to be
public
servants.
Protection of
action taken
in good faith.
1 of 1956.
45 of 1860.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

14
43. No civil court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any suit or proceeding in respect
of any matter which the Authority or the Appellate Tribunal is empowered by or under this
Act to determine, and no injunction shall be granted by any court or other Authority in
respect of any action taken or to be taken in pursuance of any power conferred by or under
this Act.
44. (1) No court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under Chapter IX
save on a complaint made by the Authority or by any investigating agency directed by the
Central Government.
(2) No court inferior to that of a Chief Metropolitan Magistrate or of a Chief Judicial
Magistrate shall try any offence punishable under Chapter IX.
 (3) Every offence punishable under Chapter IX shall be cognizable.
45. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of, the
provisions of any other law for the time being in force, relating to safety in mines, forests
and environment.
46. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for carrying out the
provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:––
(a) the salaries and allowances payable to and the other terms and conditions
of service of the Chairperson and the other Members under sub-section (3) of section 7;
(b) the manner in which and authority before which the oath is to be taken
under sub-section (4) of section 7;
(c) the procedure of holding inquiry under proviso to sub-section (1) of section 14;
(d) the salaries and allowances payable to and the other terms and conditions
of service of the Secretary, other officers and employees of the Authority, under sub-
section (4) of section 17;
(e) the form of, manner of verification of and fee for, appeal under
sub-section (2) of section 24;
(f) manner in which the Fund shall be constituted under section 31;
(g) the form in which the annual statement of accounts of the Authority shall be
maintained under sub-section (1) of section 32;
(h) the form in which and the time at which the annual report of the Authority
shall be prepared under sub-section ( 1) of section 33;
(i) the time at which and the form and manner in which returns and statements
shall be furnished by the Authority to the Central Government under section 40.
47. (1) The Authority may, by notification, make regulations consistent with this Act
and the rules made thereunder to carry out the provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
regulations may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:––
(a) the principles and methodologies for determination of price under sub-
section (1) of section 3;
(b) the time and places of meetings of the Authority and the procedure (including
quorum necessary for the transaction of business) to be followed at such meetings
under sub-section (1) of section 15;
Civil courts
not to have
jurisdiction.
Cognizance of
certain
offences.
Provisions of
this Act to be
in addition to
and not in
derogation of
other laws.
Power of
Central
Government
to make rules.
Power of
Authority to
make
regulations.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

15
(c) the powers and duties of the Secretary under sub-section (1) of section 17;
(d) the terms and conditions of the consultants appointed under sub-section
(5) of section 17;
(e) methods of testing for declaration of grades or quality of coal under clause
(a) of sub-section (1) of section 18;
(f) the procedure for coal sampling and weighment under clause ( f) of sub-
section (1) of section 18;
(g) the standards of performance and norms of operational efficiency under
clause (g) of sub-section (1) of section 18;
 (h) the terms and conditions which shall apply to holders of permission  under
sub-section (1) of section 19;
(i) the form and manner of maintaining data bank and information system by the
Authority under sub-section ( 1) of section 38;
(j) maintenance of documentary records by an entity, under clause ( a) of sub-
section (1) of section 39;
(k) facilities and documentary records to be inspected under clause (b) of sub-
section (1) of section 39.
48. Every rule made by the Central Government and every regulation made by the
Authority under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House
of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised
in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree
in making any modification in the rule or regulation or both Houses agree that the rule or
regulation should not be made, the rule or regulation shall thereafter have effect only in
such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule or regulation.
49. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to be necessary for removing
the difficulty:
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of two years
from the date of commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is
made, before each House of Parliament.
Rules and
regulations to
be laid before
Parliament.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

16
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The Integrated Energy Policy brought out by the Planning Commission, Working
Group on Coal for XI plan and the Expert Committee on Road Map for Coal sector Reforms
had recommended for an independent regulator for the coal sector to make India a long-term
player in the international market for coal. It was felt that the coal sector is characterised by
a structure of near monopoly producers and regulated by agencies which are either very
closely associated with the Government and the monopoly producers to command full
confidence of consumers and private investors, or too general to operate with necessary
degree of expertise.
2. Keeping in view the above, a need was felt for the establishment of an independent
Regulatory Authority for effective monitoring and regulating the coal sector operations. The
objectives to set up the Coal Regulatory Authority are:
(i) to oversee the compliance with the approved mining plan and to suggest
terms and conditions for mining to ensure conservation of coal and observance of
best practices along with monitoring of mine closure plan;
(ii) to put in place regulation that will be a counter to the practices and methods
of a monopolistic producer of coal;
(iii) to examine that the coal supply meets certain standards, including the required
calorific value;
(iv) to collect information and publish statistics and other data relating to the
coal sector;
(v) to ensure transparency in fixing of price by the monopoly Coal Producer;
(vi) redressal of the complaints between producers and consumers and also
grievances of the consumers.
3.The Coal Regulatory Authority Bill, 2013 provides for establishment of the Coal
Regulatory Authority comprising of a Chairperson and four other Members, namely, Legal,
Technical, Finance and Consumer Interest of which any one will be designated to look after
the work of administration. Major functions of the Coal Regulatory Authority, inter alia,
are—
(a) to specify by regulation methods of testing for declaration of grades or
quality of coal;
(b) to monitor and enforce closure of mines as per approved mine project plan
towards closure of mine;
(c) to ensure adherence of approved mining plans;
(d) to specify the principles and methodology for determination of price of raw
coal and washed coal or any other by-product generated during the process of washing;
(e) to call for information, record or other documents from the entities and publish
statistics and other data in relation to the coal industry;
(f) to specify the standards of performance and norms of operational efficiency
except in the area related to mines safety;
(g) to specify procedure for automatic coal sampling and weighment.
4.The Bill provides for creation of a Fund called “The Coal Regulatory Authority
Fund”, wherein all grants, fees, charges received by the authority shall be credited. However,
start-up funding will be provided by the Government.

17
5.The Bill further provides that the Appellate Tribunal for Electricity already established
under the Electricity Act, 2003 shall act as Appellate Tribunal for the appeals against the
decisions of the Coal Regulatory Authority, by adding one more Technical Member (Coal) in
the said Appellate Tribunal.
6.The Bill also provides for a dispute resolution mechanism for resolving disputes
between entities or between an entity and any other person relating to grading, quality,
testing, pricing, supply and sampling of coal.
7.The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
SRIPRAKASH  JAISWAL
N
EW DELHI;
 The  3rd September, 2013
————
PRESIDENT'S  RECOMMENDATION  UNDER  ARTICLE  117  OF
THE  CONSTITUTION  OF  INDIA
————
[Copy of letter No. 13011/4/2007-CA-II (Vol.V) (Pt.II), dated 3rd December, 2013
from Shri Sriprakash Jaiswal, Minister of Coal to the Secretary-General, Lok Sabha]
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the Coal Regulatory
Authority Bill, 2013, recommends the introudction of the Bill in Lok Sabha under
article 117(1) and consideration under article 117(3) of the Constitution.

Notes on Clauses
Clause 1. —This clause provides for the short title and commencement of the proposed
legislation.
Clause 2. — This clause defines various words and expressions used in the proposed
legislation which, inter alia, include – “Appellate Tribunal”, “Authority”, “Chairperson”,
“captive mine”, “coal mine”, “mine closure plan ”, “mining lease ”, “mining operations”, etc.
Clause 3. — This clause seeks to provide that the Authority shall, subject to the policy
guidelines issued by the Central Government in this behalf, specify by regulations the
principles and methodologies for determination of price of raw coal and washed coal and any
other by-product generated during the process of washing of coal. This clause also seeks to
provide that the individual coal producers shall, in accordance with the principles and
methodologies as specified by the Authority in sub-clause (1), determine the price of raw
coal and washed coal and any other by-product generated during the process of washing of
coal.
Clause 4. — This clause provides for the establishment of an Authority to be called
the Coal Regulatory Authority. This clause further provides that the Authority shall consist
of a Chairperson and four Members, namely- (a) one Member (Legal), (b) one Member
(Technical), (c) one Member (Finance) and (d) one Member (consumer interest).
Clause 5.— This clause seeks to provide for the qualifications for appointment of the
Chairperson and Members of the Authority.
Clause 6.—This clause provides for the constitution of a Selection Committee by the
Central Government for the purpose of selecting the Chairperson and Members of the
Authority and for preparing a panel of persons to be considered for appointment as Technical
Member of the Appellate Tribunal.
Clause 7.— This clause seeks to provide for the term of office and conditions of
service of the Chairperson and Members of the Authority. This clause also seeks to provide
that the Chairperson and every Member shall, before entering upon his office, make and
subscribe to an oath of office and secrecy.
Clause 8.— This clause provides for the powers and functions of the Authority.
Clause 9.— This clause seeks to provide the provisions regarding the resignation by
the Chairperson and Members of the Authority.
Clause 10.—This clause provides for the restriction on employment after cessation of
office as Chairperson or Member of the Authority.
Clause 11.—This clause provides that a person in the service of the Central Government,
a State Government or any undertaking, corporation or company owned or controlled by the
Central Government or a State Government or from any other non-Governmental  organisation
or  corporate body shall resign or retire from such service before joining the Authority as the
Chairperson or other Member as the case may be. This clause further provides that a person
who, immediately before the date of assuming office as the Chairperson or a Member, was in
the service of Government, shall be deemed to have retired from service on the date on which
he enters upon office as such Chairperson or Member but his subsequent service as the
Chairperson or a Member shall be reckoned as continuing approved service counting for
pension in service to which he belonged.
Clause 12.—This clause seeks to provide that no person, while holding office as
Chairperson or Member, shall act as an arbitrator in any matter.
18

19
Clause 13.— This clause provides that on ceasing to hold office, the Chairperson or a
Member shall not appear, act or plead before the Appellate Tribunal.
Clause 14.— This clause provides provisions regarding the removal of the Chairperson
or a Member of the Authority from office. This clause also contains the provisions regarding
the suspension from office of the Chairperson or a Member of the Authority.
Clause 15.—This clause contains provisions regarding the meetings of the Authority
(including the quorum at such meetings).
Clause 16. — This clause provides that vacancies, etc., shall not invalidate the
proceedings of the Authority.
Clause 17.— This clause makes provisions for the officers and other employees of the
Authority including their salaries and allowances and other terms and conditions of service.
This clause also provides the provisions regarding the delegation by the Authority of its
powers and functions to any Member, Secretary, officer of the Authority or any other person.
Clause 18.— This clause provides for the functions of the Authority.
Clause 19. — This clause provides that the Authority, with the prior approval of the
Central Government, shall specify the terms and conditions which shall apply to the holders
of permission granted by the Central Government for opening of a coal mine, seam or section
of a seam.
Clause 20.—This clause contains provisions regarding the adjudication of disputes
by the Authority, relating to grading, quality, testing, pricing, supply and sampling of coal.
Clause 21.— This clause provides that subject to the provisions of the proposed
legislation, the Appellate Tribunal established under section 110 of the Electricity Act, 2003
shall be the Appellate Tribunal for the purposes of the proposed legislation and the said
Appellate Tribunal shall exercise the jurisdiction, powers and authority conferred on it by or
under the proposed legislation. However the Technical Member of the Appellate Tribunal for
the purposes of the proposed legislation shall be called the Technical Member (Coal) and
shall have the qualifications specified in sub-clause (2) of clause 22.
Clause 22.— This clause provides that the Technical Member (Coal) shall be appointed
from the panel prepared by the Search Committee constituted under sub-clause (1) of clause 6.
This clause further provides the qualification for appointment of the said Member.
Clause 23.— This clause seeks to provide for the terms and conditions of service of
the Technical Member (Coal).
Clause 24.— This clause contains provisions regarding appeals to the Appellate
Tribunal.
Clause 25.— This clause seeks to provide for the procedure and powers of the Appellate
Tribunal.
Clause 26.— This clause contains provisions regarding the right to legal representation.
It provides that the applicant or appellant may either appear in person or authorise one or
more chartered accountants or company secretaries or cost accountants or legal practitioners
or any of its officers to present his or its case before the Appellate Tribunal.
Clause 27.— This clause provides for the power of the Appellate Tribunal to make
rules, consistent with the provisions of the proposed legislation, regarding the conduct and
procedure in respect of the proceedings before it.
Clause 28.— This clause seeks to provide that every order made by the Appellate
Tribunal under the proposed legislation shall be executable by it as a decree of a civil court.
Clause 29.— This clause provides provisions regarding appeal to the Supreme Court
against the orders passed by the Appellate Tribunal.

20
Clause 30.— This clause provides that the Central Government may, after due
appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, make to the Authority grants of such
sums of money as the Central Government may think fit for being utilised for the purpose of
the proposed legislation.
Clause 31.— This clause seeks to provide for the constitution of a Fund to be called
the Coal Regulatory Authority Fund.
Clause 32.— This clause provides that the Authority shall maintain proper accounts
and other relevant records and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may
be prescribed by the Central Government in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-
General of India. This clause further provides that the accounts of the Authority shall be
audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India. This clause also provides that the
accounts of the Authority certified by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India together
with the audit report, shall be laid before each House of Parliament by the Central Government.
Clause 33.—This clause seeks to provide that the Authority shall prepare every year
an annual report also containing statements of its annual accounts. This clause further
provides that a copy of the report shall be forwarded to the Central Government who shall
cause the same to be laid before each House of Parliament.
Clause 34.—This clause provides for the power of the Central Government to issue
directions to the Authority. This clause further provides that every directive issued by the
Central Government shall be laid before each House of Parliament.
 Clause 35.— This clause seeks to provide for the punishment for contravention of the
directions of the Authority.
Clause 36.— This clause provides for the penalty for wilful failure to comply with the
orders of the Appellate Tribunal.
Clause 37.— This clause contains provisions regarding offences by companies.
Clause 38.— This clause provides that the Authority shall maintain a data bank and
information system relating to activities of entities in such form and manner as may be
specified by regulations. This clause further provides that the Authority shall have power to
verify the data supplied by the entities and appoint any person or persons for the purpose
and take such measures as it may consider necessary.
Clause 39.— This clause provides for the obligations of the entities.
Clause 40.— This clause provides for furnishing of returns, statements and other
particulars to Central Government by the Authority.
Clause 41.— This clause provides that the Chairperson, Members, Secretary, officers
and other employees of the Authority and Chairperson, Members, officers and other
employees of the Appellate Tribunal shall be deemed to be public servants.
Clause 42.— This clause provides for the protection of action taken in good faith by
the Central Government, Authority or Appellate Tribunal or any officer of the Central
Government or the Chairperson, Member, officer or other employee of the Authority or
Technical Member (Coal) of the Appellate Tribunal.
Clause 43.— This clause provides that no civil court shall have jurisdiction to entertain
any suit or proceeding in respect of any matter which the Authority or the Appellate Tribunal
is empowered by or under the proposed legislation to determine.
Clause 44.— This clause provides that no court shall take cognizance of any offence
punishable under Chapter IX save on a complaint made by the Authority or by any
investigating agency directed by the Central Government. This clause further provides that
no court inferior to that of a Chief Metropolitan Magistrate or of a Chief Judicial Magistrate
shall try any offence punishable under Chapter IX. This clause also provides that every
offence punishable under Chapter IX shall be cognizable.

21
Clause 45.— This clause seeks to provide that provisions of the proposed legislation
shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of, the provisions of any other law for the time
being in force, relating to safety in mines, forests and environment.
Clause 46.— This clause empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the provisions of the proposed legislation.
Clause 47.— This clause seeks to empower the Authority to make regulations.
Clause 48.— This clause lays down that the rules and regulations made under the
proposed legislation shall be laid before each House of Parliament.
Clause 49.— This clause provides that if any difficulty arises in giving effect to the
provisions of the proposed legislation, the Central Government may, by order published in
the Official Gazette, make such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of the proposed
legislation, as may appear to be necessary for removing the difficulty. However, no order
shall be made after the expiry of two years from the date of commencement of the proposed
legislation. This clause further provides that every order made under this clause shall be laid,
as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 30 of the Bill provides that the Central Government may, after due appropriation
made by Parliament by law in this behalf, make to the Authority grants of such sums of
money as the Central Government may think fit for being utilised for the purpose for the
proposed legislation.
2. Sub-clause (1) of clause 31 of the Bill provides for the constitution of a Fund to be
called the Coal Regulatory Authority Fund wherein shall be credited— (a) all grants, fees
and charges received by the Authority under the proposed legislation; and ( b) all sums
received by the Authority from such other sources as may be approved by the Central
Government. Sub-clause (2) of clause 31 of the Bill provides that the Fund shall be applied in
meeting— (a) the salaries and allowances payable to the Chairperson and other Members
and the administrative expenses including the salaries, allowances and pensions payable to
the officers and employees of the Authority; ( b) the other expenses of the authority in
connection with the discharge of its functions and for the purposes of the proposed legislation.
22

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 46 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules to carry out the
provisions of the proposed legislation. Sub-clause (2) of this clause enumerates the matters
with respect to which rules may be made under this clause. These matters, inter alia, relate
to — (a) the salaries and allowances payable to and the other terms and conditions of service
of the Chairperson and the other Members under sub-clause (3) of clause 7; (b) the form in
which and authority before which the oath is to be taken under sub-clause (4) of clause 7; (c)
the procedure of holding inquiry under proviso to sub-clause (1) of clause 14; (d) the salaries
and allowances payable to and the other terms and conditions of service of the Secretary,
other officers and employees of the Authority, under sub-clause (4) of clause 17; (e) the form
of, manner of verification of and fee for, appeal under sub-section (2) of section 24; (f) manner
in which the Fund shall be constituted under clause 31; ( g) the form in which the annual
statement of accounts of the Authority shall be maintained under sub-clause ( 1) of clause
32; (h) the form in which and the time at which the annual report of the Authority shall be
prepared under sub-clause (1) of clause 33; (i) the time at which and the form and manner in
which returns and statements shall be furnished by the Authority to the Central Government
under clause 40.
2. Clause 47 of the Bill empowers the Authority to make regulations, consistent with
the provisions of the proposed legislation and the rules made thereunder, to carry out the
provisions of the proposed legislation. Sub-clause (2) of this clause enumerates the matters
with respect to which regulations may be made under this clause. These matters, inter alia,
relate to — (a) the principles and methodologies for determination of price under sub-clause
(1) of clause 3; ( b) the time and places of meetings of the Authority and the procedure
(including quorum necessary for the transaction of business) to be followed at such meetings
under sub-clause (1) of clause 15; ( c) the powers and duties of the Secretary under sub-
clause (1) of clause 17; (d) the terms and conditions of the consultants appointed under sub-
clause (5) of clause 17; ( e) methods of testing for declaration of grades or quality of coal
under item (a) of sub-clause (1) of clause 18; (f) the procedure for coal sampling and weighment
under item (f) of sub-clause (1) of clause 18; (g) the standards of performance and norms of
operational efficiency under item (g) of sub-clause (1) of clause 18; (h
) the terms and conditions
which shall apply to holders of  permission  under sub-clause (1) of clause 19; (i) the form
and manner of maintaining data bank and information system by the Authority under sub-
clause (1) of clause 38; (j) maintenance of documentary records by an entity, under item (a)
of sub-clause (1) of clause 39; (k) facilities and documentary records to be inspected under
item (b) of sub-clause (1) of clause 39.
3. Clause 48 of the Bill provides that every rule made by the Central Government and
every regulation made by the Authority under the proposed legislation shall be laid before
each House of Parliament.
4. Clause 49 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to remove any difficulty
which may arise in giving effect to the provisions of the proposed legislation, by order
published in the Official Gazette, not inconsistent with the provisions of the proposed
legislation. This clause requires that every such order shall be laid, as soon as may be after
it is made, before each House of Parliament.
5. The matters in respect of which rules and regulations may be made and orders may
be issued are generally matters of procedure and administrative details and it is not practicable
to provide for them in the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a
normal character.
23

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for  the establishment of Coal Regulatory Authority to regulate and conserve
resources in the coal sector, protect the interests of consumers of coal and producers
of coal and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
—————
(Shri Sriprakash Jaiswal, Minister of  Coal)
GMGIPMRND—3489LS(S4)—06-12-2013.