THE JUVENILE JUSTICE (CARE AND PROTECTION OF
CHILDREN) BILL, 2000

ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES

i CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
{ CLauses
1. Short title, extent and commencement.
|| 2. Definitions:
| 3. Continuation of inquiry in respect of juvenile who has ceased to be a juvenile.
i CHAPTER IL

{ JUVENILE IN CONFLICT WITH LAW

4. Juvenile Justice Board.

3, Procedure, etc., in relation to Board.

6. Powers of Juvenile Justice Board.

7. Procedure io be followed by a Magistrate not empowered under the Act.
8. Observation homes.

9. Special homes..

10. Apprehension of juvenile in conflict with law.

11. Control of custodian over juvenile. ।
12, Bail ‘of juvenile. ° |
13. Information to parent, guardian or probation officer.
14, Inquiry by Board regarding juvenile.

1 15. Order that may be passed regarding juvenile.

| 16... Order that may not 06 passed against juvenile. . |

i 17. Proceeding under Chapter शा of the Code of Criminal Procedure not competent |
against juvenile:

| 18. No joint proceeding of juvenile and person not a juvenile.

19. Removal of disqualification attaching to conviction.

i 20. Special provision in respect of pending cases.

21. Prohibition of publication of name, etc., of juvenile involved in any proceeding |
uader the Act, “

22. Provision in respect of escaped juvenile.
23. Punishment for cruelty to juvenile or child.
24, Employment of juvenile or child for begging.

25. Penalty for giving intoxicating liquor or narcotic drug of psychotropic substance
to juvenile or child.

26. Exploitation of juvenile or child employee.

27. Special offences.

28. Alternative punishment.



(ii)

CLAUSES

29.
30.
31.
32.
33,
34,
35.
36.
37.
38,
39.

40.

41.
42.

43.

44.

45.

46.

AT.

48,

49.
50.
51.
52.
53,
54.
55.
56.
57.

58.

39.

CHAPTER गा
(CHILD IN NEED OF CARE AND PROTECTION
Child Welfare Committee,
Procedure, etc., in relation to Committee,
Powers of Committee.
Production before Committee.
Inquiry.
Children’s homes.
Inspection.
Social auditing.
Shelter homes.
‘Transfer.
Restoration.
CHAPTER IV
REHABILITATION AND SOCIAL REINTEGRATION
Process of rehabilitation and social reintegration.
Adoption.
Foster care.
Sponsorship.
After-care organisation.
Linkages and co-ordination.

CHAPTER V

MISCELLANEOUS
Attendance of parents or guardian of juvenile or child.
Dispensing with attendance of juvenile or child.

Commital to approved place of juvenile or child suffering from dangerous diseases
and his future disposal.

Presumption and determination of age.

Sending a juvenile or child outside jurisdiction.

Reports to be treated as confidential.

Appeals,

Revision.

Procedure in inquiries, appeals and revision proceedings.

Power to amend orders.

Power of the competent authority to discharge and transfer juvenile or child.

‘Transfer between children’s homes, under the Act, and juvenile homes, of like
nature in different parts of India.

‘Transfer of juvenile or the child of unsound mind or suffering from leprosy or
addicted to drugs.

Release and absence of juvenile or child on placement.

|
7
v
|
1
|
|
|
i
q

Cuauses
60.
61.
62.
63.
64.
65.

66.
67.
68,
69.
70.

(iii)

Contribution by parents.

Fund.

Central, State, district and city advisory boards.
Special juvenile police unit.

Juvenile in conflict with law undergoing sentence at commencement of this Act.

Procedure in respect of bonds.
Delegation of powers.

Protection of action taken in good faith.
Power to make rules,

Repeal and savings.

Power to remove difficulties.



Short title, ex-
tent and com-
mencement.

Definitions.

2

AND WHEREAS, it is expedient to re-enact the existing law relating to juveniles bearing
jn mind the standards prescribed in the Convention on the Rights of the Child, the United
Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Administration of Juvenile Justice, 1985 (the
Beijing Rules), the United Nations Ri
Liberty (1990), and all other relevant international instruments; दि

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as
foliows:—

CHAPTER I

PRELIMINARY

les for the Protection of Juveniles Deprived of their
डा

1. (J) This Act may be called the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) 19

Act, 2000.
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— is

(a) “advisory board" means 8 Central or a State advisory board ora district
and city level advisory board as the case may be, constituted under section 62;

(b) "begging" means—

@ soliciting or receiving alms in a public place or entering into any

private premises for the purpose of soliciting or receiving alms, whether under 2.2

any pretence;

(0 exposing or exhibiting with the object of obtaining or extorting alms,
any sore, wound, injury, deformity or disease, whether of himself or of any
other person or of an animal;

(2) "Board" means a Juvenile Justice Board constituted under section 4;
(d "child in need of care and protection” means a child,—

(i) who is found without any home or settled place or abode and without
any ostensible means of subsistence,

ii) who resides with a person (whether a guardian of the child or not)
and such person—

(a) has threatened to kill or injure the child and there is areasonabie

Jikelihood of the threat being carried out, or

(b) has killed, abused or neglected some other child or children
and there is a reasonable likelihood of the child in question being killed,
abused or neglected by that person,

(iii) who is mentally or physically challenged or ill children or children
suffering from terminal diseases or incurable diseases having no one to support
or look after,

(iv) who has a parent or guardian and such parent or guardian is unfit or
incapacitated to exercise control over the child,

(v) who does not have parent and no one is willing to take care of or
whose parents have abandoned him or who is missing and run away child and
whose parents cannot be found after reasonable enquiry,

(vi) who is being or is likely to be grossly abused, tortured or exploited
for the purpose of sexual abuse or illegal acts,

3s

३०

Yo

us

ebsites Ulsan

1
|
io
|

61 of 1985.

20 of 1958.

104 of 1956.

s

ie

26

as

je

3s

५0

3

(vii) who is found vulnerable and is likely to be inducted into drug abuse
or trafficking, पु जल

(viii) who is being or is likely to be abused for unconscionable gains;

(ix) who is victim of any armed conflict, civil commotion or natural
calamity;
(e) “children’s home” means an institution established by a State Government
or by voluntary organisation and certified by that Government under section 34;

(f) “Committee” means a Child Welfare Committee constituted under section
29;

(g) “competent authority” means in relation to children in need of care and
protection a Committee and in relation to juveniles in conflict with law a Board;

(0) “fit institution” means a governmental or a registered non-governmental
organisation or a voluntary organisation prepared to own the responsibility of a
child and such organisation is found fit by the competent authority;

(i) “fit person” means a person, being a social worker or any other person,
who is prepared to own the responsibility of a child and is found fit by the competent
authority to receive and take care of the child;

Gj) “guardian”, in relation to a child means his natural guardian or any other
person having the actual charge or control over the child and recognised by the
competent authority as a guardian in course of proceedings before that authority;

(0 “juvenile” or “child” means a person who has not completed eighteenth
year of age;

() “juvenile in conflict with law” means a juvenile who is alleged to have
committed an offence;

(m) “local authority” means Panchayats at the village and Zila Parishad at the
district level and shall also include a Municipal Committee or Corporation or a
Cantonment Board or such other body legally entitled to function as local authority
by the Government;

(a) “narcotic drug” and “psychotropic substance” shall have the meanings
respectively assigned to them in the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances
Act, 1985;

(०) “observation home” means | home established by a State Government or
by a voluntary organisation and certified by that State Government under section 8
as an observation home for the juvenile in conflict with law;

(p) “offence” means an offence. punishable under any law for the time being in
force;

(q) “place of safety” means any place or institution (not being a police lock up
or jail), the person incharge of which is willing temporarily to receive and take care
of the juvenile and which, in the opinion of the competent authority, may be a place
of safety for the juvenile;

(7) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;

(s) “probation officer” means an officer appointed by the State Government as
a probation officer under the Probation of Offenders Act, 1958;

(1) “public place” shall have the meaning assigned to it in the Immoral Traffic

५६ (Prevention) Act, 1956;

(a) “shelter home” means a home or a drop-in-centre set up under section 37;



Continuation
of inquiry in
respect of

juvenile who
has ceased to
be a juvenite,

Juvenile
Justice Board.

Procedure,
of, in relation
t Board.

4

(7) “special home” means an institution established by 2 State Government or
by a voluntary organisation and cértified by that Government under section 9;

(४) “special juvenile police unit” means a unit of the police force of a State
designated for handling of juveniles or children under section 63;

(0 “State Government”, in relation to a Union territory, means the Administrator s
of that Union territory appointed by the President under article 239 of the Constitution;

(y) all words and expressions used but not defined in this Act and defined in
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, shall have the meanings respectively assigned
to them in that Code.

3, Where an inquiry has been initiated against a juvenile in conflict with law ora lo
child in need of care and protection and during the course of such inquiry the Juvenile or
the child ceases to be such, then, notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or in any
other law for the time being in force, the inquiry may be continued and orders may pe
made in respect of such person as if such person had continued to be a juvenile or a child.

is

2 of 1974,

CHAPTER If

JUVENILE IN CONFLICT WITH LAW

4, (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, 2 of 1974.

the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute for a district
or 8 group of districts specified in the notification, one or more Juvenile Justice Boards for
exercising the powers and discharging the duties conferred or imposed on such Boards in ३७

relation to juveniles in conflict with law under this Act.

(2) A Board shall consist of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of
the first class, as the case may be, and two social workers of whom at least one shall be a
woman, forming a Bench and every such Bench shall have the powers conferred by the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, on a Metropolitan Magistrate or, as the case may be, 4 352 of 1974.
Judicial Magistrate of the first class and the Magistrate on the Board shall be designated
as the principal Magistrate.

(3) No Magistrate shall be appointed as a member of the Board unless he has
special knowledge or training in child psychology or child welfare and RO social worker
shall be appointed as member of the Board unless he has been actively involved in health, 30
education, or welfare activities pertaining to children for at least seven years.

(4) The term of office of the members of the Board and the manner in which such
member may resign shall be such as may be prescribed.

(5) The appointment of any member of the Board may be terminated after hoiding हि
inquiry, by the State Government, if— 3s

(0) he has been found guilty of misuse of power vested under this Act,

(४) he has been convicted of an offence involving moral turpitude, and such
conviction has not been reversed or he has not been granted full pardon in respect of
such offence,

(ii) he fails to attend the proceedings of the Board for consecutive three months Yo
without any valid reason or he fails to attend less than three-fourth of the sittings in
a year.

5. (7) The Board shall meet at such times and shall observe such rules of procedure
in regard to the transaction of business # its meetings, as may be prescribed,

(2) A child in conflict with law may be produced before an individual thember of ys
the Board, when the Board is not sitting.

5

(३) A Board may act notwithstanding the absence of any member of the Board, and
no order made by the Board shall be invalid by reason only of the absence of any member
during any stage of proceedings:

Provided that there shal be at least two memebrs includitig the principal Magistrate

& resent at the time of final disposal of the case,

(4) In the event of any difference of opinion among the members of the Board in the
interim or final disposition, the opinion of the tnajority shall prevail, bat where there is no
such majority, the opinion of the principal Magistrate shall prevail.

6. (1) Where a Board has been constituted for any district or a group of districts,

4 such Board shall, notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being

in force but save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, have power to deal exclusively
with all proceedings under this Act relating to juvenile in conflict with law.

(2) The powers conferred on the Board by or under this Act may also be exercised
by the High Court and the Court of Session, when the proceeding comes before them in
4° appeal, revision or otherwise.

7. (1) When any Magisirate not empowered to exercise the powers of a Board under
this Act is of the opinion that a person brought before him under any of the provisions of
this Act (other than for the purpose of giving evidence), is a juvenile or the child, he shall

without any delay record such opinion and forward the juveaile or the child and the record :

2@ of the proceeding to the competent authority having jurisdiction over the proceeding.

(2) The competent authority to which the proceeding is forwarded under sub-section
(4) shall hold the inquiry as if the juvenile or the child had originally been brought before
it.
8. (4) Any State Government may establish and maintain either by itself or under an
20° agreement with voluntary organisations, observation homes in every district or a group of
districts, as may be required for the temporary reception of any juvenite in conflict with
law during the pendency of any inquiry regarding them under this Act.
(2) Where the State Government is of opinion that any institution other than a
home established or maintained under sub-section (2), is fit for the temporary reception of
3° juvenile in conftict with law during the pendency of any inquiry regarding them under
this Act, it may certify such institution as an observation home for the purposes of this
Act,

(3) The State Government may, by rules made under this Act, provide for the

management of observation homes, including the standards and various types of services

3६ to be provided by them for rehabilitation and social integration of a juvenile, and the

circumstances under which, and the manner in which, the certification of an observation
home may be granted or withdrawn.

(4) Every juvenile who is not placed under the charge of parent or guardian and

is sent to an observation home shall be initially kept in a reception unit of the observation

Ye home for preliminary enquiries, care and classification for juveniles according to his age

group, such as seven to twelve years, twelve to sixteen years and sixteen to eighteen

years, giving due considerations to physical and mental status and degree of the offence
committed, for further induction into observation home.

9. (1) Any State Government may establish and maintain either by itself or under an
Yf agreement with voluntary organisations, special homes in every district or a group of
districts, as may be required for reception and rehabilitation of juvenile in conflict with

law under this Act.

(2) Where the State Government is of opinion that any institution other than a

home established or maintained under sub-section (), is fit for the reception of juvenile

$0 in conflict with law to be sent there under this Act, it may certify such institution as a
special home for the purposes of this Act.

Powers of
Javenile
Justice Board.

Procedure to
be foltowed
bya
Magistrate not
empowered
tinder the Act.

Observation
homes,

Special
homes,



6

(3) The State Government may, by mules made uader this Aci, provide for ibe
management of specia! homes, including the standards and various types of services jope
provided by them which are necessary for re-socialisation ofs juve 7 an
circumstances under which, and the manner in which, the cestification of a.spscial home

s
may be granted or withdraws.

(4) The rules made under sub-section (3) may also provide for the Classification and
separation of juvenile in conflict with law on the basis of age and the nature of offeaces
committed by them and his mental and physical status,

10, (2) As soon as a juvenile in conflict with law is apprehended by police, he shail

of jure a be placed under the charge of the special juvenile police unit or the * designated police go
conflict with — एल who shall immediately report the matter 10 a member of the Board.
Taw.

(2) The State Government may make mules consistent ‘with this Act,—

(i) to provide for persons through whom (including registered voluntary
organisations) any juvenile in conflict with law may be produced before the Board;

(ii) to provide the manner in which such juvenile may be sent to an observation Is
home.
Control of 11, Any person in whose charge a juvenile is placed in pursuance of this Act shall,
égstodian over while the order is ia force have the control over the juvenile as he would have if he were
juvenile. his parents, and shall be responsible for his maintenance, and the Juvenile shall continue
in his charge for the period stated by competent authority, notwithstanding that he is Ze
claimed by his parents or any other person.

12. (7) When any person accused of a bailable or non-bailable offence, and apparently

Bail of ६
i j ile, i i brought before a Board, such person
Juvenile. a juvenile, is arrested or detained or appears or is at Pet ०
शक notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of criminal Procedure, 1973 orin 2 of 1974.
any other law for the time being in force, be released on bail with or without surety but he 2६5
shall not be so released if there appear resonable grounds for believing that the release is
likely to bring him into association with any known criminal or expose him to moral,
physical or psychological danger or that his release would defeat the ends of justice.
(2) When such person having been arrested is not released on bail under sub-
section (7) by the officer incharge of the police station, such officer shall cause him to be 30
kept only in an observation home in the prescribed manner until he can be brought before
a Board.
(3) When such person is not released on bail under sub-section (2) by the Board
it shall, instead of committing him to prison, make an order sending him to an observation
home or a place of safety for such period during the pendency of the inquiry regarding 3~
him as may be specified in the order.
Information 13, Where a juvenile is arrested, the officer incharge of the police station or the
(0 parent, special juvenile police unit to which the juvenile is brought shall, as soon as may be after
guardian or the arrest, inform—
oft i j ile, i ind, of such arrest and ५०
officer (6) the parent or guardian of the juvenile, if he can be found, of su 7
direct him to be present at the Board before which the juvenile will appear; and
(b) the probation officer of such arrest to enable him to obtain information
regarding the antecedents and family background of the juvenile and other material
circumstances likely to be of assistance to the Board for making the inquiry.
be i -
Inquiry by 14. Where a juvenile having been charged with the offence is produced before : ug
Board Board, the Board shall hold the inquiry in accordance with the provisions of this Act an
मिल्क may make such order in relation to the juvenile as it deems fit:
juvenile,

— |

7

Provided that an inguiry wader this section sh:
four months from the date of its co
Board having regard to the circum
asons im writ

al be completed w:
mi, unless the period
१6 0886 and in special cas

3 pevied of

of th

on.

ical on inquiry that a juvertile has committed an offence,
ie contrary contained in any other law for the time
thinks so fi¢,—

(a) allow the juvenile te go home after advice or admonition following
ate Inquiry against and counselling to the parent or the guardian and the

(8) direct the juvenile to participate in group counselling and similar activities;
(2) order the juvenile to perform community service;

{@ order the parent of the juvenile or the juvenile himself to pay a fine, if he
is over fourteen years of age and earns money;

(2) direct the juvenile to be released on probation of good conduct and placed
under the cere of any parent, guardian or other fit person, on such parent, guardian
of other fit person executing a dond, with or at 'y, as the Board may requ
for the good behaviour and well-being of the juvenile for any period not exceeding
three years;

(0 direct the juvenile to be released on probation of good cond:
under the care of any fit institution for the good behaviour and well.
juvenile for any period not exceeding three years;

{g) make an order directing the juveniie to be sent to @ special home,—

(0) in the case of juvenile, over seventeen years but less than sighteon
years of age for a period of not less than two year

Gi) in case of any other juvenile for the period until he ceases to be a
jeveniie:
Provided that the Board may, if it is satisfied thar having regard to the nature of the

offence and the circumstances of the case it is expedient so to do, for reasons to be recorded,
reduce the period of stay to such period as it thinks fit.

(2) The Board shall obtain the social investigation report on juvenile either through
a probation officer or a recognised voluntary organisation or otherwise, and shall take into
consideration the findings of such feport before passing an order.

(3) Where an order under clause (व), clause (e) or clause (9) of sub-section (J) is
made, the Board may, if it is of opinion that in the interests of the juvenile and of the
public, it is expedient so to do, in addition make an order that the juvenile in conflict with
law shall remain under the supervision of a probation officer named in the order during
such period, not exceeding three years as may be specified therein, and may in such
supervision order impose such conditions as it deems necessary for the due supervision of
the juvenile in conflict with law:

Provided that if at any time aftérwards it appears to the Board on receiving a report
from the probation officer or otherwise, that the juvenile in conflict with law has not been
of good behaviour during the period of supervision or that the fit institution under whose
care the juvenile was placed is no longer able or willing to ensure the good behaviour and
well-being of the juvenile it may, after making. such inquiry as it deems fit, order the
juvenile in conflict with law to be sent to a special home,

(4) The Board shall while making 2 supervision order under sub-section ६2), explain
to the juvenile and the parent, guardian or other fit person or fit institution, as the case



‘Order that
may not be
passed against
Juvenile.

Proceeding
under Chapter
Vil of the
Code of
Criminal
Procedure not
competent
against
juvenile.

No joint
proceeding of
juvenile and
person not a
juvenile

Removal of
disqualification
attaching to
conviction,

Special
provision in
respect of

pending ०३४०७... 0 finds that the juvenile has committed

, 8

may be, under whdse care the juvenile has been placed, the terms and oot of te
order and shall forthwith fumish one copy of the supervision order to re jwvenae ma .
parent, guardian or other fit person or fit institution, as the case may be, न
any, and the probation officer. हि

16. (1) Notwithstanding anything te the contrary contained in any other हा for te s
time being in force, no juvenile in conflict with law shail be sentenced © ‘ an «
imprisonment, or committed to prison in default of payment of fine or in de:
furnishing security:

Provided that where a juvenile who has attained the age of sixteen years has committed
‘an offence and the Board is satisfied that the offence cormmitted is of so serious in nature fo
or that his conduct and behaviour have been such that it would not be in his interest oo
the interest of other juvenile in a special home to send him to such special home an

i thi is sui fficient, the Board,
f the other measures provided under this Act is suitable or’ su! ]
vray ord th law to be kept in such place of safety and in such

may order the juvenile in conflict wil .
manner as it thinks fit and shall report the case for the order of the State Government. 15

(2) On receipt of a report from a Board under sub-section (2), the State Govern
may make such arrangement in respect of the juvenile as it deems proper and my ore oe
such juvenile to be kept under protective custody at such place and on such conditions
it thinks fit:

Provided that the period of detention so ordered shali not exceed the maximum 9
period of imprisonment to which the juvenile could have been sentenced for the offence
committed, ; cole of Cimina

i ding anything to the contrary contained in the हे

एकल 1973 no proceeding shall be instituted and no order shall be passed against the 2 of 1974.
juvenile under Chapter VIII of the said Code. as

48, (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 223 of the Code of हमर 2त्राज4
Procedure, 1973 or in any other law for the time being in force, no juvenie .
charged with or tried for any offence together with a person who is not a juvenil a ;

juvenile is accused of an offence for which under section 223 of the ode ०;
crimes Provedre, 1973 or any other law for the time being in force, such juvenile and 302 of 1974.
any person who is not a juvenile would, but for the prohibition contained in : sone
(7), have been charged and tried together, the Board taking cognizance of that offer
shall direct separate trials of the juvenile and the other person.
any other Jaw, a juvenile who has
the provisions of this Act shall not 39°
f an offence under such law.

19. (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in
committed an offence and has been dealt with under
suffer disqualification, if any, attaching to a conviction ०! ,

qv irecting that the relevant records of suc

(2) The Board shall make an order directing 9
conviction shall be removed after the expiry of the period of appeal or a reasonable period
as prescribed under the rules, as the case may be.

20. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, all proceedings in respect of aye
juvenile pending in any court in any area on the date on which this Act comes into force

i i if thi if the
i .d in that court as if this Act had not been passed and ii
in that area, shall be continue: कह हा हल second. euch finding tke

instead of passing any sentence in respect of the juvenile, forward the juvenile to the
Board which shall pass orders in respect of that juvenile in accordance with the provisions ye

of this Act as if ithad been satisfied on inquiry under thisAct that a juvenile has committed
the offence.

ty

iS

20

ae

36

ESS

4e

os

8

21. (7) No report in any newspaper, magazine, news-sheet or visuel media ofvany
inquiry regarding 2 juvenile in conflict with law under this Act shall disclose the name,
address or school or any olber. particulars calculated to lead to the identification of the
juvenile nor shall any picture of any such juvenile be published:

Provided that for reasons to be recorded in writing the authority helding the inquiry
may permit such disclosure, if in its opinion such disclosure is in the interest of the
juvenile.

(2) Any person contravening the provisions of sub-section (7) shall be punishable
with fine, which may extend to one thousand rupees.

22, Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any other law for the
time being in force, any police officer may take charge without warrant of a juvenile in
conflict with law who has escaped from a special home or an observation home or from
the care of a person under whom he was placed under this Act, and shall be sent back to
the special home or the observation home or that person, as the case may be; and no
proceeding shall be instituted in respect of the juvenile by reason of such escape, but the
special home, or the observation home or the person may, after giving the information to
the Board which passed the order in respect of the juvenile, take such steps in respect.of
the juvenile as may be deemed necessary under the provisions of this Act.

23. Whoever, having the actual charge of or control over, a juvenile or the child,
assaults, abandons, exposes or wilfully neglects the juvenile or causes or procures him to
be assaulted, abandoned, exposed of neglected in a manner likely to cause such juvenile
orthe child unnecessary mental or physical suffering shall be punishable with imprisonment
for a term which may extend to six months, or fine, or with both.

24. (1) Whoever, employs or uses any juvenile or the child for the purpose or
causes any juvenile to beg shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may
extend to three years and shali also be liable to fine.

(2) Whoever, having the actual charge of, or control over, a juvenile or the child
abets the commission of the offence punishable under sub-section (7), shall be punishable
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year and shall also be liable to
fine.

25. Whoever gives, or causes to be given, to any juvenile or the child any intoxicating
liquor in a public place or any narcotic drug or psychotropic substance except upon the
order of duly qualified medical practitioner or in case of sickness shall be punishable
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and shall also be liable to
fine.

26. Whoever ostensibly procures a juvenile or the child for the purpose of any
hazardous employment keeps hirn in bondage and withholds his earnings or uses such
earning for his own purposes shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may
extend to three years and shall also be liable to fine.

27. The offences punishable under sections 23, 24, 25 and 26 shall be cognizable.

28. Where an act or omission constitute an offence punishable under this Act and
also under any other Central or State Act, then, notwithstanding anything contained in
any law for the time being in force, the offender found guilty of such offences shall be
liable to punishment only under such Act as provides for punishment which is greater in
degree.

Prohibition of
publication of
name, etc., of
juvenile
involved in any
poooeeding
under the Act.

Provision’ in
respect of
escaped
juvenile.

Punishment for
cruelty to
juvenile or
न

Employment
of juvenile of
child for
begging.

Penalty for
giving
intoxicating
liquor or
narcotic drug
or psychotropic
substance to
juvenile or
child,

Exploitation of
juvenile orchid
employee.

Special
offences.

Alternative
punishment.



10

CHAPTER Wi

(CHILD IN NEED OF CARE AND PROTECTION
jn Official Gasetts, constitute for

29, (£) The State Goverament may, by notificati

if

(2) The State Government may make rules consistent with this Act to provide for the
manner of making the report to the police and tc the Committee and the manner of send-
ing and entrusting the child to children’s home pending the enquiry.

कार

Chifd welfare t : setvicts, § in the notification, one or more Child Welfare 33. (/) On receipt of a neport under section 32, the Committee or any police officer inquiry.
Committee. every district or group of dis tricts, specified 0 हो the duties conferred on suck = or special juvenile police unit or the designated police officer shall hold an inquity in the
Committees for exercising a powers हे ७ and ction under this Act. prescribed manner and the Committee, on its own or on the report from any person or
Committees in relation to child in Rees of om ai pe . nd four other members as the & agency as mentioned in sub-section (J) of section 32, may pass an order to send the child |
(2) The Committee shall consist of : o ome a east one shail be a wornan and to the children’s home for speedy inquiry by a social worker or child welfare officer, 1
State Government may think fit oncening ‘Shildren. (2) The inquiry under this section shall be completed within four months of the
another 3 oe हा esate Chairperson and the members, and the tenure for which {6 receipt of the order or within such shorter period as may be fixed by the Committee:
(3) The qualifi oe che tbe such as may be prescribed. Provided that the time for the submission of the inquiry report may be extended by
they may be appointed sha a ber of the Committee may be terminated, after fe such period as the Committee may, having regard to the circumstances and for the reasons
(4) The a are ooo, nen हज @ \onnans ° recorded in writing, determine,
ding inqui: tate Government, li-— . eo C . + woe
holding aay. by the 6 guilty of misuse of power vested under this Act; (3) After the completion of the inquiry if the Committee is of the opinion that the
(i) he has been foun ‘eu y हि involving moral turpitude, and such S said child has no family or ostensible support, it may allow the child to remain in the
(i) he has been convicted of an जीरा i पं full ardon in respect of children’s home or shelter home til! suitable rehabilitation is found for him or till he
conviction has not been reversed or he has not been grante P ist attains the age of eighteen years.
such offence; : eedings of the Committee for consecutive duee _54. (7) The State Government may establish and maintain either by itself or in Children's
(iii) he fails to attend the proc he io to attend jess than three-fourth of the association with the voluntary organisations, children’s homes, in every district or group tomes.
months without any valid reason or he 48118 26 of districts, as the case may be, for the reception of child in need of care and protection
sittings in a year, कि during the pendency of any inquiry and subsequently for their care, treatment, education,
हि ;। i 081 have the है
1७७७ shall function as a Bench of Magistrates end s ४ an habilitation.
(5) The Commitee St ( Criminal Procedure, 1973 on a Metropolitan Magistrate 462 of 1976, training, development and rehabilitation.
powers conferred by the ad oF Magistrate of the first class. (2) The State Government may, by niles made under this Act, provide for the man-
or, as the case may be, a Judicial Magis ch times and shalt observe such rules of agement of children’s homes including the standards and the nature of services to be
Th H t at such time! हि § provided by them, and the circumstances under which, and the manner in which, the
ete. 30. (1) The Committee shall meet at 2 ed. as Dp | by न पु >
in vslaton 6 procedure in regard to the transation of business af iis meetings, as may be presen ind bs al certification of a children’s home or recognition to a voluntary organisation may be granted
Committee. (2) A child in need of care and protection may be produced before an eis nae or withdrawn.
‘ sherwi ommutics iS न नि 5 .
member for being placed in safe custody or otherwise when the 35. (7) The State Government may appoint inspection committees for the children’s inspection.
session. th व f the ittce homes (hereinafter referred to as the inspection committees) for the State, a district and
i inion arnong the members © Coramit मै i i
(3) In the event of any oiferenee of pinto ot the *najerity shall prevail but where 30 city, as the case may be, for such period and for such purposes as may be prescribed.
at the time of any interim decision, the op Chairperson shall prevail. (2) The inspection committee of a State, district or of a city shall consist of such
there is no such majority the opinion of the aurpot fi the Committee mey act,3e auraber of representatives from the State Government, local authority, Committee, voluntary
(4) Subject to the provisions हे sub-section (> | and no order made by the organisations and such other medical experts and social workers as may be prescribed.
हि हि 8 >
notwithstanding the abso ony ont ‘ot the absence of any member during any stage 36. The Central Government or State Government may monitor and evaluate the — Sociat
Committee shall be invalid by reason only BE functioning of the Children’s homes at such period and through such persons and institutions #diting.
f the ding. Pi ig P
e proceeding. be fli that G .
o छा हि 10०० shall have the final authosity to dispose of cases for the care, as may be specified by that Government.
Powers of 31. (2) The Commi है ॥ anid rehabilitation Of the children as well as to provide 35° 37. (1) The State Government may recognise, reputed and capable voluntary — shelter homes.
Committee. protection, treatment, devel Sot ५ of huntan rights. organisations and provide them assistance to set up and administer as many shelter homes
for their basic needs and protect ee Cited for any area, such Committes shall, for juveniles or children as may be required.
ittee has been constitul poo
2 Where 2 hing coatsined in any ‘other law for the time being in force but save Ue (2) The shelter homes referred in sub-section (/).shall function as drop-in-centres j
notwithstanding ve 5} srovided in this Act, have the power to deal exclusively with all for the children in the need of urgent support who have been, brought to such homes
ft a socedings under this ee relating to children in need of care and protection. Ye through such persons as are referred 'to in sub-section (/) of section 32.
| ..' ही 32, (7) Any child in'need of care and protection may be produced before the (3)As far as possible, the ghelter homes shall have such facilities as may be prescribed
i | : — ain | ction दे by the rules. .
: a before Committee by one of the following persons— , vice off y the rules. |
20000 1100 Committee. (0) any potice officer or special juvenile police unit or a designated police offiger: us 38. (7) If during the inquiry it is found that the child hails from the place outside the ‘Transfer.

jurisdiction of the Committee, the Committee shall order the transfer of the child to the '
competent authority having jurisdiction over the place of residence of the child.

(2) Such juvenile or the child shall be escorted by the staff of the home in which he
is lodged originally.

(ii) any public servant; -_ .

(iii) childline, a registered voluntary organisation or by such other vorniary ४६
organisation or an agency as may be recognised by the State Government, state

(iv) any social worker or a public spirited citizen authorised by the
Government; oF

{v) by the child himself.

So (3) The State Government may make rules to provide for the travelling allowance to
be paid to the child.

—



Restoration.

Process of
rehabilitation

39, (7) Restoration of and protection to a child shall be the a objective of any
children’s home or the shelter home. wp

(2) The children’s home or a shelter home, as the case may be, shall take such steps
as are considered necessary for the restoration of and protection to a child deprived of his
family environment temporarily or permanently where such child is under the care and s
protection of a children’s home or a shelter home, as the case may be.

(3) The Commitiee shalf have the powers to restore any child in need of care and
protection to his parent, guardian, fit person or fit institution, as the case may be, and give
them suitable directions.

Explanation.—For the purposes of this section “restoration of chilé” means te
restoration to—

(6) parents;

(6) adopted parents;

(c) foster parents.

CHAPTER IV
REHABILITATION AND SOCIAL REINTEGRATION

40. The rehabilitation and social reintegration of a child shall begin during the stay
of the child in a children's home or special home and the rehabilitation and social
reintegration of children shall be carried out alternatively by () adoption, (ii) foster care,

(ii) sponsorship, and (iv) sending the child to an after-care organisation. a0

41. (2) The primary responsibility for providing care and protection to children
shall be that of his farnily.

(2) Adoption shall be resorted to for the rehabilitation of such children as are
orphaned, abandoned, neglected and abused through institutional and non-institutional
methods. as

(3) In keeping with the provisions of the various guidelines for adoption issued from
time to time by the State Government, the Board shall be empowered to give children in
adoption and carry out such investigations as are required for giving children in adoption
in accordance with the guidelines issued by the State Government from time to time in
this regard. 3०

(4) The children’s homes or the State Government run institutions for orphans shall
be recognised as an adoption agencies both for scrutiny and placement of such children
for adoption in accordance with the guidelines issued under sub-section @®.

(5) No child shall be offered for adoption —

(a) until two memebrs of the Committee declare the child legally free for 3६5
placement in the case of abandoned children,

(9) till the two months period for reconsideration by the parent is over in the
case of surrendered children, and

(c) without his consent in the case of a child who can understand and express
his consent. yo

(6) The Board may allow a child to be given in adoption—
(a) to a single parent, and

(b) to parents to adopt a child of same sex irrespecitve of the number of living
biological sons or daughters,
a

13

42, (2) The foster care may be used for temporary placement of those infants who
are ultimately to be given for adoption.

(2) In foster care, the child may be placed in another family for a short or extended

period of time, depending upon the circumstances where the chfld’s owa parent usually

S visit regularly and eventually after the rehabilitation, where the children may return to
their own homes.

(3) The State Government may make rules for the purposes of carrying out the
scheme of foster care programme of children.

43. (1) The sponsorship programme may provide supplementary support to families,
10... 10 children’s homes and to special homes to meet medical, nutritional, educational and
other needs of the children with a view to improving their quality of life,

(2) The State Government may make rules for the purposes of carrying out various
schemes of sponsorship of children, such as individual to individual sponsorship, group
sponsorship or community sponsorship.

ii? 44, The State Government may, by rules made under this Act, provide—

(a) for the establishment or cecognition of after-care organisations and the
functions that may be performed by them under this Act;

(6) for a scheme of after-care programme to be followed by such after-care

organisations for the purpose of taking care of juveniles or the children after they

20 leave special homes, children homes and for the purpose of enabling them to lead an
honest, industricus and useful life:

(c) for the preparation or submission of a report by the probation officer or any
other officer appointed by that.Government in respect of each juvenile or the child
prior to his discharge from a special home, children’s home, regarding the necessity

oie and nature of after-care of such juvenile or of a child, the period of such after-care,
supervision thereof and for the submission of report by the probation officer or any
other officer appointed for the purpose, on the progress of each juvenile or the child;

(व) for the standards and the nature of services to be maintained by such after-
care organisations;

36 (e) for such other matters as may be necessary for the purpose of carrying out
the scheme of after-care programme for the juvenile or the child:

Provided that any rule made under this section shall not provide for
such juvenile or child to stay in the after-care organisation for more than three
years:

3s Provided further that a juvenile or child over seventeen years of age but less
than eighteen years of age would stay in the after-care organisation till he attains the
age of twenty years.

45. The State Government may make rules to ensure effective linkages between
various governmental, non-governmental, corporate and other community agencies for
Yo facilitating the rehabilitation and social reintegration of the child,

CHAPTER V

MISCELLANEOUS

46. Any competent authority before which a juvenile or the child is brought under

any of the provisions of this Act, may, whenever it so thinks fit, require any parent or

yg guardian having the actual charge of or control over the juvenile or the child to be present
at any proceeding in respect of the juvenile or the child.

Foster care.

Sponsorship.

After-care
organisation,

Linkages and
co-ordination,

Attendance of
parents or
guardian of
juvenile or
child.



Dispensing
with attendance
of juvenile or
child.

Commital to
approved place
of juvenile or
child suffering
from
dangerous
diseases and
his future
disposal.

Piesuinption
and
determination
of age.

Sending a
juvenile or
child outside
jurisdiction.

Reports to be
treated as
confidential.

Appeals.

14

47, If, at any stage during the course of an inquiry, a competent authority is satisfied
that the attendance of the juvenile or the child is not essential for the purpose of inquiry,
the competent authority may dispense with his attendance and proceed with the inquiry in
the absence of the juvenile or the child. रा

48, (7) When a juvenile or the child who has been brought befcre a competent डर
authority under thisAct, is found to be suffering from a disease requiring prolonged medical
treatment or physical or mental complaint that wilt respond to treatment, the competent
authority may send the juvenile or the child to any place recognised to be an approved
place in accordance with the rules made under this Act for such period as it may think
necessary for the required treatment. to

(2) Where 3 juvenile or the child is found to be suffering from leprosy, sexually
transmitted disease, Hepatitis B, open cases of Tuberculosis and such other diseases or is
of unsound mind, he shall be dealt with separately through various specialised referral
services or under the relevant laws as such.

A9, (1) Where it appears to a competent authority that person brought before it (57
under any of the provisions of this Act (otherwise than for the purpose of giving evidence)
is a juvenile or the child, the competent authority shal! make due inquiry so as to the age
of that person and for that purpose shall take such evidence as may be necessary (but not
an affidavit) and shall record a finding whether the person is a juvenile or the child or not,
stating his age as nearly as may be.

(2) No order of a competent authority shall be deemed to have become invalid
merely by any subsequent proof that the person in respect of | the order has been
made is not a juvenile or the child, and the age recorded by the competent authority to be
the age of person so brought before it, shall for the purpose of this Act, be deemed to be
the true age of that person. as

50. In the case of a juvenile or the child, whose ordinary place of residence lies
outside the jurisdiction of the competent authority before which he is brought, the compe-
tent authority may, if satisfied after due inquiry that it is expedient so to de, send the
juvenile or the child back to a relative or other person who is fit and willing to receive him
at his ordinary place of residence and exercise proper care and contro! over him, notwith- Je
standing that such place of residence is outside the jurisdiction of the competent author-
ity; and-the competent authority exercising jurisdiction over the place to which the juve-
nile or the child is sent shall in respect of any matter arising subsequently have the same
powers in relation to the juvenile or the child as if the original order had been passed by |_|
itself. 3¢

51. The report of the probation officer or social worker considered by the competent
authority shall be treated as confidential:

Provided that the competent authority may, if it so thinks fit, communicate the sub-
stance thereof to the juvenile or the child or his parent or guardian and may give such
juvenile or the child, parent or guardian an opportunity of producing such evidence as ६०
may be relevant to the matter stated in the report.

52, (1) Subject to the provisions of this section, any person aggrieved by an order
made by a competent authority under this Act may, within thirty days from the date of
such order, prefer an appeal to the Court of Session:

Provided that the Court of Session may entertain the appeal after the expiry of the ५६०
said period of thirty days if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient
cause from filing the appeal in time.

(2) No appeal shall lie from—

(a) any order of acquittal made by the Board in respect of a juvenile alleged to
have committed an offence; or

(b) any, qider made by a Committee in respect of a finding that a person is not
a neglected juvenile.

2e

$e

15

(3) No second appeal shall lie from any order of the Court of Session passed in
appeal under this section.

53. The High Court may, at any time, either of its awn motion or on an application
received in this behalf, call for the record of any proceeding in which any competent
authority or Court of Session has passed an order for the purpose of satisfying itself as to
the legality or propriety of any such order and may pass such order in relation thereto as it
thinks fit:

Provided that the High Court shall not pass an order under this section prejudicial to
any person without giving him a reasonable opportunity of being heard.

18 54. (1) Save as otherwise expressly provided by this Act, a competent authority
while bolding any inquiry under any of the provisions of this Act, shail follow such proce-
dure as may be prescribed and subject thereto, shall follow, as far as may be, the proce-
dure laid down in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 for trials in summons cases.

(2) Save as otherwise expressly provided by or under this Act, the procedure to be
is” followed in hearing appeals or revision proceedings under this Act shall be, as far as

Zot 1974. practicable, in accordance with the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.

55. (1) Without prejudice to the provisions for appeal and revision under this Act,
any competent authority may, on an application received in this behalf, amend any order
as to the institution to which a juvenile or the child is to be sent or as to the person under
whose care or supervision a juvenile or the child is to be placed under this Act:

Provided that there shali be at least two members and the parties or its defence
present during the course of hearing for passing an amendment in relation to any of its
order.

(2) Clerical mistakes in orders passed by a competent authority or errors arising
2€ therein from any accidental slip or omission may, at any time, be corrected by the compe-

tent authority either on its own motion or on an application received in this behalf.

ae

§6. The competent authority or the local authority may, notwithstanding anything
contained in this Act, at any time, ordéra child in need of care and protection or a juvenile
jn conflict with law to be discharged or transferred from one children's home or special
home to another, as the case may be, keeping in view the best interest of the child or the
juvenile, and his natural place of stay, either absolutely or on such conditions as it may
thiak fit to impose:

Provided that the total period of stay of the juvenile or the child in a children’s home
or a special home or a fit institution or under a fit person shall not be increased by such
transfer.

7. The State Government or the local authority may direct any child or the juvenile
to be transferred from any children’s home or special home outside the State to any other
children’s home, special home or institution of a like nature with the prior intimation to
the local Committee or the Board, as the case may be, and such order shall be deemed to

५9 be operative for the competent authority of the area to which the child or the juvenile is

sent. नि

30

3६

58. Where it appers to the competent authority that any juvenile or the child kept in
a special home or a children’s home or shelter home or in an institution in pursuance of
this Act, is suffering from leprosy or is of unsound mind or is addicted to any narcotic drug
or psychotropic substance, the competent authority may order his removal to a leper asylum
or mental hospital or treatment centre for drug addicts or to a place of safety for being
kept there for such period not exceeding the period for which he is required to be kept
under the order of the competent authority or for such further period as may be certified
by the medical officer necessary for the proper treatment of the juvenile or the child.

us

Revision.

Procedure in
inquiries,
appeats and
revision
procesdings.

Power to
amend orders.

Power of
competent
authority to
discharge and
transfer
juvenile or
child.

‘Transfer
between
children’s:
homes, under
the Act, and
juvenile homes,
of like nature
in different
parts of India.

Transfer of
juvenile or
child of
unsound mind
or suffering
from leprosy
or addicted to
drugs.



Release and
absence of
juvenile or
child on
placement.

Contribution
by parents.

Fond.

Central, State,
district and
city advisory
boards,

16

59, (7) When a juvenile or the child is kept in a children’s home or special home and
on a report of a probation officer or social worker or of Government or a voluntary
organisation, as the case may be, the competent authority may consider, the release of
such juvenile or the child permitting him to live with his parent or guardian or under the
supervision of any authorised person named in the order, willing to receive and take charge 57
of the juvenife or the child to educate and train him for some useful trade or calling or to
look after him for rehabilitation.

(2) The competent authority may also permit leave of absence to any juvenile or the
child, to allow him, on special occasions like examination, marriage of relatives, death of
kith and kin or the accident or serious illness of parent or any emergency of like nature, to 169
go on leave under supervision, for maximum seven days, excluding the time taken in
journey.

(3) Where a permission has been revoked or forfeited and the juvenile or the child
refuses or fails to return to the home concemed or juvenile to which he was directed so to
return, the Board may, if necessary, cause him to be taken charge of and to be taken back ts
to the concemed home.

(4) The time duriag which a juvenile or the child is absent from a concerned home
in pursuance of such permission granted under this section. shall be deemed to be part of
the time for which he is liable to be kept in the special home:

Provided that when a juvenile has failed to return to the special home on the gg
permission being revoked or forfeited, the time which elapses after his failure'so to return
shail be excluded in computing the time during which he is liable to be kept in the institution.

60, (I) The competent authority which makes an order for sending a juvenile or the
child to a children’s home or to a special home or placing the juvenile under the care of a
fit person or fit institution may make an order requiring the parent or other person Hable to 257
maintain the juvenile or the child to contribute to his maintenance, if able to do so, in the
prescribed manner according to income.

(2) The competent authority may direct, if necessary, the payment to be made to
poor parent or guardian by the Superintendent or the Project Manager of the home to pay
such expenses for the journey of the inmate or parent or guardian or both, from the home Ze
to his ordinary place of residence at the time of sending the juvenile as may be prescribed.

61. (J) The State Government or local authority may create a Fund under such name
as it thinks fit for the welfare and rehabilitation of the juvenile or the child dealt with
under this Act.

(2) There shall be credited to the Fund such voluntary donations, contributions or 36°
subscriptions as may. be made by any individual or organisation.

(3) The Fond created under sub-section (7) shall be administered by the State advisory
board in such manner and for such purposes as may be prescribed.

62. (1) The Central Government or a State Government may constitute a Central or
a State advisory board as the case may be, to advise that Government on matter relating to ५०७
the establishment and maintenance of the homes, mobilisation of resources, provision of
facilities for education, training and rehabilitation of child in need of care and protection
and juvenile in conflict with law and co-ordination among the various official and non-
official agencies concerned.

(2) The Central or State advisory board shall consist of such persons as the Central ५६०४
Government or the State Government, as the case may be, may think fit and shall include
eminent social workers, representatives of voluntary organisation in the field of child
welfare corporate sector, academicians, medical professionals and the concerned
Department of the State Government.

(3) The district or city level inspection committee constituted under section 35 of ६७
this Act shall also function as the district or city advisory boards.

2 of 1974,

17

63, (7) In order to enable the police officers who frequently or exclusively deal with
juveniles or are primarily engaged in the prevention of juvenile crime or handling of the
juveniles or children under this Act to perform their functions more effectively, they shatl
be specially instructed and trained.

Ss (2) In every police station at least one officer with aptitude and appropriate training
and orientation may be designated as the ‘juvenile or the child welfare officer’ who will
handle the juvenile or the child in co-ordination with the police.

(3) Special juvenile police unit, of which all police officers designated as above, to
handle juveniles or children will be members, may be created in every district and city to
10 co-ordinate and to upgrade the police treatment of the juveniles and the children.

64, In any area in which this Act is brought into force, the State Government or the
local authority may direct that a juvenile in conflict with law who is undergoing any
sentence of imprisonment at the commencement of this Act, shall, in lieu of undergoing
such sentence, be sent to a special home or be kept in fit institution in such manner as the

i$ State Government or the local authority thinks fit for the remainder of the period of the
sentence; and the provisions of this Act shall apply to the juvenile as if he had been
ordered by the Board to be sent to such special home or institution or, as the case may be,
ordered to be kept under protective care under sub-section (2) of section 16 of this Act.

65, Provisions of Chapter XXXII of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 shall, as
26 far as may be, apply to bonds taken under this Act.

66. The State Government may, by the general order, direct that any power exercisable
by it under this Act shall, in such circumstances and under such conditions, if any, as may
be prescrbed in the order, be exercisable also by an officer subordinate to that Government

or the local authority.

2 67. No suit or legal proceedings shall lie against the State Government or voluntary
organisation running the home or any officer and the staff appointed in pursuance of this
Act in respect of anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance
of this Act or of any rules or order made thereunder.

68% (7) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
30 rules to carry out the purposes of this Act.

(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers,
such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—

(0) the term of office of the members of the Board and the manner in which
such member may resign under sub-section (4) of section 4,

35° (ii) the time of the meetings of the Board and the rules of procedure in regard
to the transaction of business at its meeting under sub-section (J) of section 5;

(ii) the management of observation homes including the standards and various
types of services to.be provided by them and the circumstances in which and the
manner in which, the certification of the observation home may be granted or

uo withdrawn and such other matters as are referred to in section 8; ~

(iv) the management of special homes including the standards and various
types of services to be provided by them and the circumstances in which and the
manner in which, the certification of the special home may be granted or withdrawn
and such other matters as are referred to in section 9;

Ys (v) persons to whom any juvenile in conflict with law may. be produced before
the Board and the manner of sending such juvenile, to an observation home under
sub-section (2) of section 10;

Special
juvenile polic
unit.

Javenile in
conflict with
law undergo-
ing sentence at
commence-
ment of this
Act.

Procedure in
respect of
bonds.»
Delegation of
powers,

Protection of
action taken in
good faith.

Power to
make rules.



Repeal and
savings.

Powet to re~
move difficul-
ties.

18

(vi) matters relating tc removal of disqualification attaching to conviction of a
juvenile under section 19; .

(vii) the qualifications of the Chairperson and members, and the tenure for
which they may be appointed under sub-section (3) of section 29;

(viii) the time of the meetings of the Committee and the rules of procedure in
regard to the transaction of business at its meeting under sub-section (/) of section
30;

{ix) the manner of making the report to the police and to the Committee and

the manner of sending and entrusting the child to children’s home pending the enquiry
under sub-section (2) of section 32;

(x) the management of children’s homes including the standards and nature of
services to be provided by them, and the manner in which certification of a children’s
home or recognition to a voluntary organisation may be granted or withdrawn under
sub-section (2) of section 34;

(xi) appointment of inspection committees for children's homes, their tenure
and purposes for which inspection committees may be appointed and such other
matters as are referred to in section 35;

(aii) facilities to be provided by the shelter homes under sub-section (3) of
section 37;

(xiii) for carrying out the scheme of foster care programme of children undez
sub-section (3) of section 42;

(xiv) for carrying out various schemes of sponsorship of children under sub-
section (2) of section 43;

(xv) matters relating to after-care organisation under section 44;

(xvi) for ensuring effective linkages between various agencies for facilitating
rehabilitation and social integration of the child under section 45;

(xvii) the purposes arid the manner in which the Fund shall be administered
under sub-section (3) of section 61;

(xviii) any other'matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.

(3) Every rule made by a State Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before the Legislature of that State.

69. (1) The Juvenile Justice Act, 1986 is hereby repealed.

(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the said
Act shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this
Act.

70. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the
Central Government may, by order, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, remove
the difficulty:

Provided that-no such order shall be made after the expiry of the period of two years
from the commencement of this Act.

(2) However, order made under the section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is
made, before each House of Parliament.

(0

te

2

3e

53 of 1986.

3s

uo

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

A seview of the working of the Juvenile Justice Act, 1986 (53 of 1986) would indicate
that much greater attention is required to be given to children in conflict with law or those
in need of care and protection. The justice system as available for adults is not considered
suitable for being applied to a juvenile or the child. It is also necessary that the juvenite
justice system must be easily accessible to a juvenile or the child or any one on. their
behalf including the police, voluntary organisations, social workers, or parents and.
guardians, throughout the country. These is also an urgent need for creating adequate
infrastructure necessary for the implementation of the proposed legislation with a larger
involvement of informal systems specially the family, the voluntary organisations and the
community.

2. In this context, the following further proposals have been made:

(0 to lay down the basic principles for administering justice to a juvenile or
the child in the Bill;

(ii) to make the juvenile justice system meant for a juvenile or the child more
appreciative of the developmental needs in comparison to criminal justice system as
applicable to adults;

(iii) t0 bring the juvenile law in conformity with the United Nations Convention
on the Rights of the Child.

(iv) to prescribe a uniform age of eighteen years for both boys and girls;

() to ensure speedy disposal of cases by the authorities envisaged under this
Bill regarding juvenife or the child within a time limit of four months;

(vi) to spell out the role of the State as a facilitator rather than doer by involving
voluntary organizations and local bodies in the implementation of the proposed.
legislation; .

(vii) to create special juvenile police units with a humane approach through
sensitisation and training of police personnel;

(viii) to enable increased accessibility to a juvenile or the child by establishing
Juvenile Justice Boards and Child Welfare Committees and Homes in each district
or group of districts;

(éx) to minimise the stigma and in keeping with the developmental needs of
the juvenile or the child, to separate the Bilt into two parts—one for juveniles in
conflict with law and the other for the juvenile or the child in need of care and
protection;

(x) to provide for effective provisions and various alternatives for tehabilitation
and social reintegration such as adoption, foster care, sponsorship and aftercare of
abandoned, destitute, neglected and delinquent juvenile and child.

19



गाए: | >>

3. The Bill seeks to repeal and re-enact the Juvenile Justice Act, 1986 with a view to
achieving the above objects.

New Deut MANEKA GANDHI.
The 16th August, 2000.

Notes on Clauses

Clause 2. This clause defines various expressions used in the Bill, Most of the
definitions of the expressions used in the Bill are based on the definitions in the Juvenile
Justice Act, 1986. The scope of some of the definitions have been broadened and some
new definitions have been added taking into consideration the United Nations Convention
on Rights of Child (CRC) which has been ratified by the Government of India. Sub-claus¢
(e) defines “child in need of care and protection”, who was earlier defined as “neglected
juvenile” in the Juvenile Justice Act, 1986. The scope of child in need of care and protection
has been broadened taking into consideration various areas emerging for neglect of children,
Sub-ciause (7) has now prescribed uniform age for juvenile or child as a person who has
not completed his eighteenth year of age keeping in conformity with article 1 of the
Convention of Rights of Child. Sub-clause (m) defines the expression “juvenile in conflict
with law” who was earlier defined as “delinquent juvenile” in the Juvenile Justice Act,
1986. The expression “Juvenile in conflict with law” has been used for removing the
stigma attached with the word “delinquent” and make the law more child-friendly. Sub-
clause (n) defines “local authority” to bring in involvement of authorities, such as,
Panchayats at the village and Zilla Parishad at the District level and other authorities as
stated in that sub-clause for proper implementation of the proposed legislation. Sub-clause.
(x) defines “State Government” to include Union territories also,

Clause 3.— This clause provides the continuation of enquiry in respect of the juvenile
or the child who has ceased to be a juvenile in order to give him protection available under
this law.

Clauses 4 to 7.—These clauses provide for Juvenile Justice Board and procedure,
etc., to be followed by the Juvenile Justice Board, which was earlier known as Juvenile
Court. The reason for change in the terminology is to make the Bill more child-friendly
and do away with the words like courts, etc., in handling the children. Clause 4 provides
for constitution of Juvenile Justice Board. Clause 5 provides for procedure involved in
relation to the Board. Clause 6 provides for powers of Juvenile Justice Boards while clause
7 provides for the procedure to be followed by a magistrate who is not empowered under
this law. These clauses are primarily based on the Juvenile Justice Act, 1986.

Clause 8.—This ciause provides for establishment of observation homes by the
State Government for temporary reception of the juveniles in conflict with law during the
pendency of any enquiry regarding them under this Bill. The details regarding maintenance
and running of these homes, etc., have been provided in this clause. There was no clear
demarcation between the observation homes to be provided for delinquent and neglected
juveniles in the Juvenile Justice Act, 1986.

Clause 9,—This clause provides for establishment and maintenance of special homes
by the State Government for reception and rehabilitation of juveniles in conflict with law.
It also provides for certifying such other institutions as a special home by the State
Government other than a home established or maintained by the State Government.

Clauses 10 to £4.--These clauses provide for apprehension of juveniles in conflict
with law (clause 10), control of custodian over juvenile (clause 11), bail of juvenile (clause
12), information to parents or guardian or probation officer (clause 13) as also enquiry by
Board regarding the juvenile (clause 14). In these clauses specific involvement of
recognized voluntary organizations in dealing with juveniles in conflict with law has been
brought in. Sub-clause (2) of clause 12 specifies that child in conflict with law who is not
released on bail should only be kept in am observation home and not in police station or
jail. This is again a measure to protect the child's rights. Clause 14 also provides for

21



22

speedy disposal of cases within a time limit of 4 months with regard to handling the
enquiry concerning juveniles in conflict with law.

Clause 15.—This clause is based on section 21 of the Juvenile Justice Act 1986 and
deals with orders that may be passed regarding juveniles in conflict with law with special
emphasis on counselling to the parents, guardians and the juveniles and pasticipation of
juveniles in group counselling and in performance of community services. This concept
has been introduced to give more emphasis on reform of juveniles rather than punishing
them,

Clauses 16 and 17.—These clauses are based on section 22 of Juvenile Justice Act,
1986 and deals with the orders that may not be passed against juveniles. Clause 16 now
specifies the upper age limit of 16 years for a child who has committed an offence of
serious nature and also for keeping him in place of safety, which may be different from the
special homes meant for other juveniles. The cartier age limit for this purpose et 14
years. This age limit has been increased because of uniform age prescribed for juveni le or
child as 18 years. This is also a measure to segregate the juveniles who are in conflict

with law from those who are alleged to have committed serious offences.

Clause 18—This clause prescribes separate proceedings to be conducted for juvenile
and the person who is not a juvenile. This has been provided to ensure clear separation of
juveniles in conflict with law and an adult offender.

Clause 19.—This clause seeks to ensure the principle of not attaching any stigma or
disqualification and thereby allow a juvenile who had been in conflict with lew lead a
new life by ensuring that past secords do not influence his future and allows him a new

beginning.
Clause 20.—This clause brings in a special provision in respect of cases which are

pending against the juveniles on the date of enforcement of this Bill.
the juveniles’ right to privacy and confidentiality,

C 21,-- This clause protects ‘hori
Tause p by any authority

which needs to be protected through all the stages of proceedings

this Bill.
Clause 22.—This clause provides for protection of juveniles in conflict with law

who has escaped from either special home or observation home or from the custody of the
person. This measure tries to give the benefit of doubt to the escaped juvenile.

Clauses 23 to 28.—These clauses proyide for punishment to persons who exploit
the juvenile in different manners. ‘These provisions are based on sections 41 to 45 of he
Juvenile Justice Act, 1986. A separate provision has been brought in under clause ante
make all these offences cognizable. The reason for this is to deter exploitation and abuse

of children by providing for more severe punishment for exploitation and faster relief to
the exploited child.

Clauses 29 to 33.—These clauses provide for
c., to handle the child in need of care an ti ८
ee Juvenile Welfare Board to handle neglected juvenile. The change in ihe
terminology is to avoid confusion because Juvenile Justice Board has been विश हट
handling child in conflict with law whereas the committee is So vel the chil nneed oe
care and protection. Clause 29 provides for constitution of Child ‘Welfare comm ee and
appointment of members, etc. Clause 30 provides for Procedures involve in nt tion
committee. Clause 31 provides for powers of the Committee. Clause 32 provides for the
persons who have been authorized to produce any child in need of care and Protection:
Certain specific categories like public servant, childline or such other voluntary organise ion
recognized by the State Government, any social worker oF public-spirited citizen an 1 08
child himself have been authorized for this purpose. This concept has been prong ne
provide for bigger role for voluntary organisations and such other categories incl ng tbe
child himself so.that the child in need of care and protection does not suffer any neg!

Child Welfare Committee and
d protection, which was earlier

23

and is immediately taken care of without any delay. Clause 33 provides for various details
regarding enquiry in respect of child in need of care and protection and lays down specific
time limit of four months in which the enquiry is to be completed,

Clause 34—-This clause provides for establishment of children home by the State
Government for child in need of care and protection both for the reception during pendency
of any enquiry and subsequently for their care and rehabilitation. These homes were known
as Juvenile Homes in the Juvenile Justice Act, 1986 and the reason for change in terminology
is to make the Bill more child-friendly. It also provides for certification of homes for this
purpose, which can be run by voluntary organizations, provided the same is recognized by
the State Government.

Clause 35.—This clause provides for inspection to be carried out by Inspection
Committees for the children homes for the State, district and city including the constitution
of such Committees by the State Governments. The intention for constituting such
Committees is to constantly monitor and supervise the functioning of various children
homes being run and to ensure proper running of the same as may be prescribed from time
to time,

Clause 36.—This clause provides for social auditing of children homes both by the
Central Government and the State Governments through various persons and institutions.
The reasons for bringing in the Central Government along with the State Government is
because fifty per cent. of the fund for running of these homes is being provided by the
Central Government while the other fifty per cent. is being contributed by the State
Governments under the existing Scheme. This provision will go a long way in constantly
monitoring and evaluating the function of children homes for proper care and rehabilitation
of such children in need of care and protection and timely filling of any gaps in their
functioning.

Clause 37.—This clause introduces for setting up of shelter homes for children in
need of urgent support by reputed and capable voluntary organisation and recognition of
the same by the State Government. The idea is to take care of such children who are in
need of care and protection and do not have any shelter and are on the streets in absence of
family ties. These shelter homes can also be instrumental in providing care and rehabilitation
measures for such categories of children.

Clause 38.—This clause provides for transfer of the child to the competent authority
who have jurisdiction over the place of residence of the child in case the child has been
found in some other place which is not the normal residence of the child. The reason for
this clause is to ensure that a Child Welfare Committee which can understand the
background of the community and the society from which the child comes should deal
with such a child.

Clause 39.—This clause emphasizes on restoration of the child to his family, which
should be the prime objective of any children home or shelter home, This clause is being
introduced in the present Bill based on the principle that the best interest of the child can
be served when he lives in a family and that is of prime importance for any child. It has
also been provided in the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child. Such
restoration can be made to the parents or adopted parents or foster parents.

Clause 40.—This clause describes various alternatives to be made available to a
child for his rehabilitation and social re-integration. This has been provided to bring the
Jaw in conformity with the United Nations Convention on Rights of the Child. The main
principle behind this is to provide a family to such children who don’t have one and also
ensure their aftercare. These rehabilitation measures were not available to the child under
the Juvenile Justice Act, 1986.

Clause 41.—This clause provides for adoption as one of the methods for rehabilitation
of orphaned, abandoned, neglected and exploited children. This has been provided for



such categories of children who have no identity of their own and =| == would get an
identity of the adoptive parents. This clause Has been based on Article 21 of the United Nations
Convention on Rights of the Child and specific powers have been assigned to competent
authorities to give children on adoption and various procedures involved for the same,

Clause 42.—This clause provides for foster care as another alternative for
rehabilitation of child as a short term and temporary measure. This alternative has been
provided for infants who are in need of care and protection. it also empowers the State

Government to make rules for the purpose of carrying out foster care programmes for
such categories of children.

Clause 43.—This clause provides for yet another alternative for rehabilitation of a
juvenile or the child viz. sponsorship programmes. This clause also provides for various
options for sponsorship of such categories of children which can be individual sponsorship,
group sponsorship or community sponsorship to take care of various needs of the child in
need of care and protection while allowing them to stay with their own families,

Clause 44.—This clause provides for establishment and recognition of aftercare
organizations for carrying out aftercare programmes for rehabilitation of child in conflict
with faw and child in need of care and protection after they leave special homes or children
homes. This clause also provides for various procedural details regarding standards and
nature of services to be provided in such aftercare organizations and also prescribes the
age upto which a juvenile or the child could remain in such aftercare organizations.

Clause 45.—This clause empowers the State Governments to make rules for carrying
out various rehabilitation and social reintegration programmes including linkages and co-
ordinations between various agencies. The purpose of this clause is to obtain optimum
Tesults from the efforts made by various agencies, both governmental and non-governmental,
towards rehabilitation and social reintegration of juvenile or the child.

Clauses 46 and 47.—These clauses provide for procedures regarding attendance of
parents or guardians of juvenile or the child and dispense with the attendance of juvenile
or the child. The reason for these clauses is to ensure that at all stages from the initial

contact till disposition, extreme care is taken to avoid any harm to the sensitivity of juvenile
or the child.

Clause 48.—This clause provides for special care to be taken for the juvenile or the
child who is suffering from various physical and mental ailments and will respond to the

treatment. It is very important to take special care for such children to avoid any harm to
such category.

Clause 49.—This clause specifies procedures for presumption and determination of
age of a juvenile or the child for the purposes of this Bill and Protection available to the
order of the Competent Authority.

Clause 50.—This clause provides for specific provisions in case of the juvenile or
the child whose ordinary place of residence lies outside the jurisdiction of the Competent
Authority before whom he is brought and action has to be taken for his transfer to the
appropriate jurisdiction.

Clause 51.—This clause provides for the juveniles and the Children’s rights to privacy

and confidentiality at all stages of proceedings by the authorities under this Bill, which
needs to be protected.

Clauses 52 to 55.—These clauses deal with appeals, revision, etc. These are primarily
based on sections 37 to 40 of the Juvenile Justice Act, 1986,

Clauses 56 to $8.—These clauses empower the State Government and local authority
to discharge and transfer the special categories of juvenile or the child from one home to
another home or to specific treatment centres in casé the child is of unsound mind or
suffering from leprosy or addicted to drug.

25

Clause 59.-—This clause deals with release and absence of Juvenile or the said oo
placement under supervision of any responsible person who is willing to fee sve such
juvenile or the child for his education and vocational training. ‘This neo
provided to take care of proper rehabilitation in the best interest of the child,

Clause 60.—This clause empowers the Competent Authority हर make on order
requiring the parent cr other persons liable to maintain the. javenile or the dl m टिका
for the maintenance of the juvenile or the child. This has been हा es
parents and other concerned do not abandon such categories of children.

Clause 61.—This clause authorizes the State Goverament or local autho tern
a fund for the welfare and rehabilitation of children who are to be de ही bn der the Pe Pe wee
iaw, It also provides for other procedures regarding contribution and ax rnin tation शा
fund. This fund.can serve as a pool to be used for carrying out val
measures to be taken far proper upbringing of these children.

Clause 62.-~This clause empowers the Central Government or the State Government
to constitute Advisory Board to advise on the matters relating to establi

es including rebabilitative measures to be carried out for

maintenance of various hom also provides

is j ile in conflict with law. It
hii i # care and protection and juvenile in con! a. aioe
Ca eect and City level ‘advisory Boards which are the same as District and City level

Inspection Committees to be constituted under Clause 35.

Clause 63.—This clause provides for special Fuvenile Poles Unit fe ot cane

the police officers who frequently or exclusively deal with ines cor «| itd ¢ ae

imarily engaged in prevention of. juvenile crimes or handling o the jw’ eens
yi - a ining and designate them as Juvenile or the Child Welfare Officer. This

ie पका becane police system is the system, which is one of the major systems, which

comes in contact with these categories of children almost everyday, and their sensitization

towards such children is of utmost importance. _

Ci i vision for delinquent juvenile undergoing
sentence nsec the faveile fstice a 1986 and their status on the ae of commencement
of this Bill. This is for ensuring their protection under the propos: We.

Clause 65.—This clause makes the provision of Chapter XXX of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973 applicable to bonds taken under this Bill.

Clause 66.—This clause empowers the State Government to delegate its powers for
smooth implementation of the provisions of the Bill.

Clause 67.—This clause provides for protection actions taken in good faith by persons
responsible for the implementation of the provisions of the Bill.

Clause 68.—This clause deals with the powers of the State Govefnment to rake
ules. This clause is important for the Bill because the implementation of this law
rules.

be carried out by the State Governments. 7
Clause 69.—This is the usual clause of repeal and savings and repeals the existing
Juvenile Justice Act, 1986 which is being replaced by this Bill,
Clause 70.—This clause empowers the Central Government to remove the difficulties
arising out of the various provisions of this Bill.



FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM.

‘The proposed legislation aims at providing justice to juvenile or the child in the
spirit of the principle enshrined in this Bill, to make the justice system for juvenile or the
child more appreciative of the developmental needs in comparison to criminal justice
system as applicable to adults, spell out the role of the State as facilitator rather than doer
by involving voluntary organizations and local authorities in the implementation of this
Bill when enacted, and above all to bring it in conformity with the United Nations Con-
vention on the Rights of the Child. This legislation would be implemented largely by the
States and the Union territories who would utilize the existing infrastructure available
woter the Juvenile Justice Act, 1986. The emphasis would be to shift from institutional

ios to bring in the family and the community the task of care, protection, treatment,
development, rehabilitation and aftercare of juvenile in conflict with law and children in
need of care and protection.

The expenditure incurred on this by the States will be met out of their Tespective
Consolidated Funds to the extent of fifty per cent. while the remaining fifty per cent. will
be met by the Government of India from the Consolidated Fund of India as is being done
at present under a Plan Scheme in respect of homes, etc,, established under the Juvenile
Justice Act, 1986. Expenditure incurred on this account by Union territories will be met
out of the Consolidated Fund of India and it is expected to be of the same order as is being
incurred presently under the Juvenile Justice Act, 1986, which will be replaced by this
law. The total amount of the current Central share would be of the order of rupees eleven
crores for the States and of rupees One crore for the Union territories, both of recurring in
nature.

26

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 68 of the Bill empowers the State Government to make rules to carry out
the purposes of this Bill when enacted. Sub-Clause (2) of that clause enumerates various
matters in respect of which rules may be made. These matters relate to, among others
things, the procedure to be followed by a competent authority in holding sittings, inquiries
and mode of dealing with juveniles suffering from dangerous diseases and mental
complaints, certification, recognition of institutions as children homes, observation homes,
special homes and sheiter homes, management and inspection of various institutions set
up of recognized under this Bill; the qualifications of the Chairperson and members of the
Juvenile Welfare Board; the rules of procedure and transaction of business at the meetings
of the Board, the manner of making reports to the police and to the Child Welfare
Committees, appointment of Inspection Committees for children homes, their purpose
and tenure, facilities to be provided by various types of homes, schemes for foster care
programmes and other schemes of sponsorship of children, the matter relating to aftercare
organizations, ensuring linkages between various agencies for facilitating rehabilitation
and social integration of the child; and the manner in which and the purposes for which,
the Fund is to be administered.

2, The matters in respect of which rules may be made are matters of procedure or
detail. The delegation of legisiative power is, thus, of a normal character.

27



LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to consolidate and amend the law relating to juveniles in conflict with law and children in
need of care and protection, by providing for proper care, protection and treatment
by catering to their development needs, and by adopting a child-friendly approach |
in the adjadication and disposition of matters in the best interest of children and for
their ultimate rehabilitation through various institutions established under this
enactment.

ves cdi 55500

(Smet, Maneka Gandhi, Minister of State for Social Justice and Empowerment)

MGIP(PLU)MAND---2851LS— 18-08-2000.