Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 149 of 2017
THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017
By
DR. SANJAY JAISWAL, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend  The Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Act, 2017.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.  In section 41 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, after sub-section (2), the
following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
"(3) Notwithstanding anything in clause (b) of sub-section (1), no person, against
whom credible information regarding commission of an offence punishable under
Amendment
of section 41.
2 of 1974. 5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
section 498A of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 has been received, shall be arrested
unless it can be adduced from the credible information that an aggravated form of
cruelty as defined under clause (a) of Explanation  to section 498A of that Code has
been committed by that person:
Provided that the police officer shall, prior to arrest of a person, take reasonable
steps for reconciliation between the parties and await the outcome of the steps
taken for a period of thirty days.".
5
45 of 1860.

3
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Section 41 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (Cr. P.C.) provides for conditions
and restrictions for arresting a person without an order from the Magistrate and without a
warrant. However, in case of offences punishable under section 498A of the Indian Penal
Code, 1860 (IPC) dealing with 'cruelty by husband or relatives of husband', it is not easy to
satisfy the provisions of section 41 of Cr. P.C. Therefore, section 41 of Cr. P.C. is invoked time
and again erroneously to arrest a person guilty of an offence punishable under section 498A
of the I.P.C. As no hard and fast rule can be laid down for exercise of power under section 41
of Cr. P.C., it is suggestive that a balanced and sensitive approach should be taken by the
police officer prior to arrest of a person. The idea is not to dilute the importance of protection
of the life and liberty of women but to ensure a fair chance to the other party as well. The Law
Commission of India in its 243rd Report has already made recommendations which can go a
long way in preventing the alleged misuse of section 498A of the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend section 41 of Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973
(Cr. P.C.) with a view to put restriction on the arrest of a person guilty of committing an
offence of cruelty to a woman under section 498A of Indian Penal Code, 1860 unless the
credible  information received by the police officer proves the same.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SANJAY JAISWAL
July 5, 2017.

When police
may arrest
without
warrant.
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE, 1973
(2 OF 1974)
* * * *
41. (1) Any police officer may without an order from a Magistrate and without a
warrant, arrest any person—
(a) who commits, in the presence of a police officer, a cognizable offence;
(b) against whom a reasonable complaint has been made, or credible information
has been received, or a reasonable suspicion exists that he has committed a cognizable
offence punishable with imprisonment for a term which may be less than seven years
or which may extend to seven years whether with or without fine, if the following
conditions are satisfied, namely:—
(i) the police officer has reason to believe on the basis of such complaint,
information, or suspicion that such person has committed the said offence;
(ii) the police officer is satisfied that such arrest is necessary—
(a) to prevent such person from committing any further offence; or
(b) for proper investigation of the offence; or
(c) to prevent such person from causing the evidence of the offence
to disappear or tampering with such evidence in any manner; or
(d) to prevent such person from making any inducement, threat or
promise to any person acquainted with the facts of the case so as to
dissuade him from disclosing such facts to the Court or to the police
officer; or
(e) as unless such person is arrested, his presence in the Court
whenever required cannot be ensured, and the police officer shall record
while making such arrest, his reasons in writing:
Provided that a police officer shall, in all cases where the arrest of a
person is not required under the provisions of this sub-section, record the
reasons in writing for not making the arrest.
* * * *
2. Subject to the provisions of section 42, no person concerned in a non-cognizable
offence or against whom a complaint has been made or credible information has been received
or reasonable suspicion exists of his having so concerned, shall be arrested except under a
warrant or order of a Magistrate.
* * * *
E
XTRACTS FROM THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860
(45 OF 1860)
498A. Whoever, being the husband or the relative of the husband of a woman, subjects
such woman to cruelty shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to
three years and shall also be liable to fine.
Explanation.—For the purpose of this section, "cruelty" means—
Husband or
relative of
husband of a
woman
subjecting her
to cruelty.
4

5
(a) any wilful conduct which is of such a nature as is likely to drive the woman to
commit suicide or to cause grave injury or danger to life, limb or health (whether mental
or physical) of the woman; or
(b) harassment of the women where such harassment is with a view to coercing
her or any person related to her to meet any unlawful demand for any property or
valuable security or is on account of failure by her or any person related to her to meet
such demand.
* * * *

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend The Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
————
(Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—994LS(S3)—24-07-2017.