AS INTRODUCED IN Lok Sabha

Bill No. 149 of 2021

THE SPECIAL FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE FOR ANCIENT
MONUMENTS AND ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITES
AND REMAINS IN THE STATE OF
TAMIL NADU BILL, 2021

By
SHRI D.M. KATHIR ANAND, M.P.
A
BILL

to provide for special financial assistance to the State of Tamil Nadu to
meet the costs of repairs, renovations and preservation of ancient
and historical monuments and archaeological sites and remains
including excavation of new archaeological sites and
remains situated in the State of Tamil Nadu.

Br it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-second Year of the Republic
of India as follows:—

1. (/) This Act may be called the Special Financial Assistance for Ancient — Short title and

Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains in the State of Tamil Nadu commencement.
Act, 2021.


the 1७1 Witemt ete



wo

TO BE INTRODUCED IN 1.06 SaBHA

Bill No. 149 of 2021

THE SPECIAL FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE FOR ANCIENT
MONUMENTS AND ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITES
AND REMAINS IN THE STATE OF
TAMIL NADU BILL, 2021

By
SHRI D.M. KATHIR ANAND, M.P.
A
BILL

to provide for special financial assistance to the State of Tamil Nadu to
meet the costs of repairs, renovations and preservation of ancient
and historical monuments and archaeological sites and remains
including excavation of new archaeological sites and
remains situated in the State of Tamil Nadu.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-second Year of the Republic
of India as follows:—

1. (/) This Act may be called the Special Financial Assistance for Ancient
Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains in the State of Tamil Nadu
Act, 2021.

Short title and
commencement.


Definitions.

Financial
Assistance 10
the State of
Tamil Nadu.

Act not in
derogation of
any other law.

2

(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may,
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires “ancient monument”
means any structure, erection or monument, or any tumulus or place of
interment, or any cave, rock-sculpture, inscription or monolith which is of
historical, archaeological or artistic interest and which has been in existence
for not less than one hundred years and includes:—

(i) remains of an ancient monument;
(ii) site of an ancient monument;

(iii) such portion of land adjoining the site of an ancient monument as
may be required for fencing or covering in or otherwise preserving such
monument; and

(iv) the means of access to, and convenient inspection of, an ancient
monument.

3. There shall be paid such sums of moneys out of the Consolidated
Fund of India, every year, as Parliament may by due appropriation
provide, as special financial assistance to the State of Tamil Nadu to
meet the costs of repairs, renovations and preservation of ancient and
historical monuments and archacological sites and remains including
excavation of new archaeological sites and remains situated in the
State of Tamil Nadu, as may be undertaken by the State with the approval
of the Central Government.

4. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of
any other law for the time being in force.

20


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The State of Tamil Nadu is one of the most favourite destinations of tourists,
both domestic and foreign, famous for its rich ancient architecture, art, culture
and tradition, fairs and festivals worldwide. The different tourist destinations
attract the tourists because of various reasons including its ancient and historical
monuments and archaeological sites and remains.

At present, the Archaeological Survey of India is looking after the
maintenance and conservation of 242 centrally protected monuments/sites in
the State of Tamil Nadu. Besides more than 500 monuments and buildings
have been notified as protected monuments in the State of Tamil Nadu. These
monuments and archaeological remains of diverse nature are located in the
region since pre-historic times and are scattered from the Palaeolithic site at
Gudiyam in Tiruvallur District to the Microlithic or Mesolithic sites in Teri
Sand in Southern districts of Tirunelveli and Thuthukudi. There are splendid
array of Megalithic monuments, Pre-historic and historic monuments, the
exquisite stone architecture of the Pallavas, Cholas, Pandiyas and the Nayaks.
There are hundreds of archaic buildings constructed during the rule of Nawabs
of Arcot and the British. The great repertoire of ancient monuments and
plethora of ancient temples makes Tamil Nadu the greatest treasure of ancient
world. The grand Vellore Fort and the Jalakandeswarar temple complex situated
in my Vellore Parliamentary constituency is world renowned and attracts great
attention.

Taking care of the monuments is an important duty that devolves on the
respective State Government as well as the Central Government. It needs
adequate funds to engage people who can look after monuments, ensure that
the miscreants do not harm them, as also to get the damaged portion repaired
from expert designers and engineers. The Central Government must provide
adequate funds for each monument.

The proper upkeep and maintenance of ancient and historical monuments
and archaeological sites and remains in the State of Tamil Nadu shall boost
heritage tourism which will in turn increase employment, revenue generation
and local business in Tamil Nadu.

It is, therefore, necessary that the Central Government should provide
special financial assistance to the State of Tamil Nadu to meet the costs of
repairs, renovations and preservation of ancient and historical monuments and
archaeological sites and remains including excavation of new archaeological
sites and remains situated in the State of Tamil Nadu.

Hence this Bill.

New DELHI; D.M. KATHIR ANAND
November 22, 2021.

we


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 3 of the Bill provides that there shall be paid such sums of money
out of the Consolidated Fund of India, every year, as Parliament may by due
appropriation provide, as special financial assistance to the State of
Tamil Nadu to meet the costs of repairs, renovations and preservation of ancient
and historical monuments and archaeological sites and remains including
excavation of new archaeological sites and remains situated in the State of
Tamil Nadu, as may be undertaken by the State with the approval of the
Government of India.

The Bill, therefore, on enactment, will involve expenditure out of the
Consolidated Fund of India. As the sums of moneys which will be given to the
State of Tamil Nadu as special financial assistance by appropriation by law
made by Parliament will be known only after the plans to be implemented by
the State Government with the approval of Government of India are identified,
it is not possible at present to give the estimates of recurring expenditure,
which would be involved out of the Consolidated Fund of India at this stage.

No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be incurred from the Consolidated
Fund of India.


rr 9

pean



LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for special financial assistance to the State of Tamil Nadu to
meet the costs of repairs, renovations and preservation of ancient
and historical monuments and archacological sites and remains
including excavation of new archacological sites and
remains situated in the State of Tamil Nadu.

(Shri D.M. Kathir Anand, M.P)