1
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 149 of  2016
THE BACKWARD AREAS IN METROPOLITAN CITIES (BASIC
AMENITIES AND OTHER PROVISIONS) BILL, 2016
By
SHRI  GOPAL CHINAYY A SHETTY, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for basic amenities such as drinking water, electricity, roads, healthcare
services and sanitation facilities in backward areas in metropolitan cities and for
matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Backward Areas in Metropolitan Cities (Basic Amenities
and Other Provisions) Act, 2016.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases the Central Government;
(b) "backward area", in relation to a Metropolitan city, means an area having no
basic amenities;
(c) "basic amenities" include provision of drinking water, electricity, street
lighting, sewerage, toilet, drainage system, garbage disposal, sanitation, healthcare
facilities, educational facilities, recreational facilities, marketing facilities, transportation
facilities and access to public distribution system;
(d) "metropolitan city" means a city having population of ten lakhs or more,
comprised in one or more districts and consisting of two or more Municipalities or
Panchayats or other contiguous areas, specified by the appropriate Government by
public notification to be a Metropolitan city; and
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, within six months of the coming into force of this
Act, cause to be identified the backward areas in every metropolitan city in such manner, as
it may deem appropriate.
(2) For each backward area identified under sub-section (1), the appropriate Government
shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, designate an officer of the local body having
jurisdiction over the backward area, as competent authority to undertake such development
and other works in that backward area, as the Central Government may, in consultation with
the concerned State Government, from time to time, specify.
(3) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision, every competent
authority shall ensure the provision of the following facilities to the inhabitants of the
backward area under its jurisdiction —
(a) basic amenities in such manner as may be prescribed;
(b) financial assistance or vocational training for self-employment; and
(c) pucca housing.
4. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the State Governments for carrying out the purposes
of this Act.
5. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing, of the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two years from
the date of commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid
before each House of Parliament.
6. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
7. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force regulating, any of the matter dealt with in this Act.
Definitions.
Identification
and
development
of backward
areas.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Power to
remove
difficulty.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Act not to be
in derogation
of other laws.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
8. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.,
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid. as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Power to
make rules.
5
10

4
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
So far as the development is concerned, some areas in the country are very backward
including areas in the metropolitan cities like Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkata and Chennai. Some
areas of these cities are developed whereas some are immensely backward. Backward areas
in metro cities are not getting full advantage of the Central Schemes. At present, crores of
people in several metropolitan cities including Mumbai are living in backward areas in inhuman
conditions. Even basic facilities like drinking water, electricity, road, cleanliness and health
services are not available in these areas. People have no option but to live in such backward
areas.
Today, the need of the hour is all round development on priority basis of the backward
areas of Metro cities so that people living in these areas can be connected to the mainstream
of the country. This is possible only when the Central Government monitors the development
schemes in backward areas of metro cities and bears all the expenses to be incurred on such
development schemes, which shall ensure completion of development works in a time bound
manner and without any hindrance.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; GOPAL  CHINAYYA  SHETTY
May 5, 2016.

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for certain amenities like drinking water, electricity, street
lighting, sewerage, toilet, drainage system, garbage disposal, sanitation, healthcare facilities,
educational facilities, financial assistance for self-employment and pucca housing to the
backward persons living in metropolitan cities. Clause 4 provides that the Central Government
shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law, provide adequate funds to the State
Governments for carrying out the purposes of the Act. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will
involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees
one thousand crore is likely to be incurred as recurring expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees four hundred crore is also likely to be involved.

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of this Act. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
6

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for basic amenities such as drinking water, electricity, roads, healthcare
services and sanitation facilities in backward areas in metropolitan cities and
for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Gopal Chinayya Shetty, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—1365L(S3)—02.07.2016.