AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 149 of 2024
THE  COASTAL TOURISM DEVELOPMENT BOARD  BILL, 2024
By
DR. HEMANT VISHNU SA VARA, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for establishment of Coastal Tourism Development Board for the
Development of  Coastal tourism in the country and for matters
connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India
as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Coastal Tourism Development Board
Act, 2024.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “Board” means the Coastal Tourism Development Board constituted
under section 4; and
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
5
10
Definitions.

(b) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) The Central Government may, if it is of the opinion that an area has tourism
potential in view of its location, coastal environment, natural and cultural resources,
coastal and marine archaeology, sub-aquatic tourism and culinary traditions, by
notification in the Official Gazette, declare that area to be a coastal tourist destination.
(2) An area declared under sub-section (1) as coastal tourist destination shall be
developed by the Board as per international standards.
4. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in official Gazette, constitute
a Board to be known as the Coastal Tourism Development Board for carrying out the
purposes of this Act.
(2) The Board shall consist of—
(a) The Union Minister of Tourism who shall be Chairperson, ex-officio;
(b) The Union Minister of State in the Ministry of Tourism shall be Vice-
Chairperson, ex-officio;
(c) The Minister of Tourism of States representing each State shall as
ex-officio member;
(d) One member from each State having expertise in the field of tourism
development or coastal tourism to be nominated by the Central Government in
consultation with State Government.
(3) The nominated members shall hold office for a period of three years.
(4) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of
nominated members shall be such as may be prescribed.
5.(1)  The Central Government shall appoint the Secretary and the Chief Accounts
Officer, respectively, of the Board in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The Secretary and the Chief Accounts Officer shall exercise such powers
and perform such duties as may be specified by the Central Government.
(3) The Central Government shall provide such number of other officers and
staff to the Board as may be required for its efficient functioning.
6. (1) The headquarter of the Board shall be at New Delhi.
 (2) The Board shall have its State offices in every State capital or at such other
coastal area as it may deem fit for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
7. The Board shall meet at such times and places and shall observe such rules of
procedure in regard to the transaction of its business at its meetings, as may be
prescribed.
8. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in Official Gazette, constitute
a Fund to be known as the Coastal Tourism Development Fund for carrying out the
purposes of this Act.
(2) The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament
by law in this behalf, provide requisite sums to the Fund for carrying out the purposes
of this Act.
9. The objects of the Board shall be to —
(a) promote and develop coastal tourism in the country;
15
20
25
30
35
40
5
10
2
Constitution of
Coastal Tourism
Development
Board.
Constitution of
Fund.
Appointment
of Secretary
and Chief
Accounts
Officer and
other staff of
the Board.
Objectives of
the Board.
Headquarter
and other
offices of the
Board.
Declaration of
an area as
Coastal Tourist
Destination.
Meetings and
procedure of
the Board.

(b) improve and strengthen the existing infrastructure in and around coastal tourist
area, marine archaeology, subaquatic tourism and culinary traditions of coastal area;
(c) develop new coastal tourist destinations with all basic amenities;
(d) co-ordinate, support and interact with other departments and agencies for
streamlining services and amenities in and around coastal tourist destinations;
(e) issue guidelines for safety and security to tourists visiting in coastal tourist
area;
(f) facilitate and enhance the experience of the tourists;
(g)  prepare Master Plan for development of each Coastal Tourism destination;
and
(h) publish at least in one local newspaper having circulation in that area for
inviting objections and suggestions from general public for development of a master
plan of each coastal tourist destination.
10. The Board shall, as soon as may be, prepare a separate Master Plan for the
development of each coastal tourist destination:
Provided that the Board shall, before finalizing a Master Plan, take into consideration
all objections and suggestions from general public made under clause  (h) of section 9.
11. The Board shall—
(a) prepare a calendar of activities including annual coastal festival, beach fest,
melas, haats to be organized in the each forthcoming financial year for the development
of coastal tourism at different coastal areas/tourist destinations;
(b) advertise such activities as it considers necessary to promote tourism at
different coastal tourist destinations;
(c) interact once in three months with the stake holders including representatives
of the hoteliers, local authorities, police and the Tourism Department of the State
Government concerned for proper co-ordination to develop and strengthen coastal
tourism infrastructure in and around coastal tourist destinations in the area;
(d) provide amenities at such rate and in such manner to the visitors as may be
notified by the Central Government in this regard;
(e) provide such other amenities as it may deem fit for the development of coastal
tourist destination;
(f) recommend to the Central Government the measures to be taken for the
development of coastal tourist destinations; and
(g) maintain a website containing all essential information regarding the coastal
tourist destinations including hotels, beaches and heritage sites, water sports, cruise
on sea, tourist maps, help desk, district administration and tour operators with a view
to provide necessary information and help to the tourists.
12. (1) The Board shall prepare every year an annual report in such form and
manner, as may be prescribed by the Central Government, giving a full account of its
activities during the previous year, and copies of the report shall be forwarded to the
Central Government.
(2) A copy of the report forwarded under sub-section (1) shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is received, before each House of Parliament.
3
Annual Report.
Master Plan
for
Development
of tourist
destination.
Functions of
the Board.
15
20
25
30
35
40
5
10

13.  If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to it to be necessary or
expedient for removal of the difficulty:
(1) Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two
years from the date of the commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made,
be laid before each House of Parliament.
14. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules for carrying out the purposes of this  Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and  if,
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive
sessions aforesaid, both the Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have
effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however,
that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of
anything previously done under that rule.
Removal of
Difficulty.
Power to
make rules.
4
15
5
10

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Beaches in India are popular tourist destinations round the year. The coastal
areas of Mumbai, Palghar, Ratnagiri, Konkan, Sindhudurg, Visakhapatnam, Gujarat,
Chennai, Goa, Kerala, Odisha have gained significant attention from tourists
worldwide, leading to a substantial influx of visitors. The presence of these pristine
beaches not only serves as a source of income for many coastal communities but also
plays a crucial role in boosting the local economy. The coastal tourism industry in
India plays a big role of significant economic multiplier and becomes critical since
India has to grow at rapid rates and create jobs.
The objectives of coastal tourism development are to create employment
opportunities and bring about  socio-economic benefits to the community, particularly
in the interior and remote areas and to strive towards balanced and sustainable
development and preserve, enrich and promote India’s cultural heritage. One of the
major objectives is the preservation and protection of natural resources and
environment to achieve sustainable development. India offers geographical diversity,
world heritage sites and niche tourism products like cruises, adventure, medical,
eco-tourism, etc. Promotion programmes like Incredible India has spurred growth in
Tourists’ Arrivals and Employment.
India is currently ranked 39th in World Economic Forum’s Travel and Tourism
Development Index (2024). The Government has also said that the country’s tourism
sector will recover to the pre-pandemic level by end of 2024. Keeping present scenario
in view, the proposed board empowered by an Act is needed to cater to the demand of
coastal tourism development.
 Hence this Bill.
    NEW DELHI;           HEMANT VISHNU SA V ARA
July 22, 2024
5

6
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the constitution of the Coastal Tourism
Development Board by the Central Government. Clause 5 provides for appointment
of Secretary, Chief Account Officer and other staff of the Authority. Clause 6 provides
for headquarters and other offices of the Authority. Clause 7 provides for meetings
and procedure of the Authority. Clause 8 provides for constitution of a Coastal Tourism
Development Board Fund. Clause 11 provides for the development of coastal tourism
through advertisement, maintaining of website and providing amenities for
development of tourist destinations. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring
expenditure of about rupees five hundred crore will be involved per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees two hunderd crore is also likely to be
involved.

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGA TED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 14 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the
delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.
7

LOK SABHA
—————
A
BILL
to provide for establishment of Coastal Tourism Development Board for the
Development of coastal tourism in the country and for matters
connected therewith.
.
—————
(Dr. Hemant Vishnu Savara, M.P .)