As INTRODUCED In Lok SABHA ON

Bill No. 149 of 1986

er

‘THE DRUGS AND COSMETICS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1986

A
BILL
further to amend the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-seventh Year of the
Republic of India as follows:—

1. (1) This Act may be called the Drugs and Cosmetics (Amendment)
Act, 1986.

5 (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.

2. In section 26 of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 (hereinafter
referred to as the principal Act),—

(a) after the words “Any person”, the words “or any recognised
10 consumer association, whether such person is a member of that asso-
ciation or not,” shall be inserted:

(b) for the words “purchased by him”, the words “purchased by
him or it” shall be substituted;

(c) the following Explanation shall be added at the end, namely: —

15 ‘Explanation.—For the purposes of this section and section
32, “recognised consumer association” means a voluntary consu-
mer association registered under the Companies Act, 1956 or uny
other law for the time being in force.’,

Short

titie and
commence=
ment.

Amend-
taent of
section 26.


Amend-
ment of
section 32.

2

3. In section 32 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), after the words
“an Inspector”, the words “by the person aggrieved or by a recognised
consumer ‘association whether such person is a member of that association
or not” shall be inserted.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 is a consumer protection legisla-
tion, which is mainly concerned with the standards and purity of drugs
manufactured in this.country and control of the, manufacture, sale and
distribution of drugs. The Act at present does not confer any power on
the recognised Consumer Associations to draw legal samples and launch
prosecution.

2. To promote Voluntary Consumer Movement and to ensure involve-
ment of recognised Consumer Associations in the enforcement of this
Act, it is necessary to confer powers on them so that legal action can be
initiated by them in the Court on ‘the basis of हैंड; reports givén by the

_ Government Analyst.’ Accordingly, it is proposed to amend suitably
Section 26 and 32 of the Act to confer powers on such Consumer Associa-
tions in this regard.

3. Opportunity has been taken to explain the expression “recognised
Consumer Association” under the Act, so as to mean a Voluntary Con-
sumer Association registered under the Companies Act, 1956 or any other
law for the time being in force.

4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above object.

New Dex; P. V. NARASIMHA RAO
The 1st December, 1986.


Purchaser
of drug or
cosmetic
enabled to
obtain test
or analysis,

Cognizance
of offence.

ANNEXURE

Extracts from the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940
(23 of 1940)
कं * * *
26. Any person shall, on application in the prescribed manner and
on payment of the prescribed fee, be entitled to submit for test or analysis
to a Government Analyst any drug or cosmetic purchased by him and to

receive a report of such test or analysis signed by the Government
Analyst.

* 1 1] * * *
32. (1) No prosecution under this Chapter shall be instituted except
by an Inspector.

% के * * *


LOK SABHA on 2

A
BILL

further to amend the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940.

1 (Shri P. V. Narasinthka Rao,
Minister of Health and
Family Welfare)