AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
THE  DAM  SAFETY  BILL,  2018
——————
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
——————
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
CLAUSES
1. Short title, extent and commencement.
2. Application.
3. Definitions.
CHAPTER II
N
A TIONAL COMMITTEE ON DAM SAFETY
4. Constitution of  National Committee.
5. Functions of  National Committee.
6. Meetings of  National Committee.
CHAPTER III
N
ATIONAL DAM SAFETY AUTHORITY
7. Establishment of National Dam Safety Authority.
8. Functions of National Dam Safety Authority.
9. Officers and Employees of Authority.
CHAPTER IV
S
TATE COMMITTEE ON DAM SAFETY
10. Constitution of State Committee on Dam Safety.
11. Functions of State Committee.
12. Meetings of State Committee.
CHAPTER V
S
TATE DAM SAFETY ORGANISATION
13. Establishment of State Dam Safety Organisation.
14. Officers and employees of State Dam Safety Organisation.
CHAPTER VI
DUTIES AND FUNCTIONS IN RELATION TO DAM SAFETY
15. Surveillance and Inspection.
16. Vulnerability and hazard classification of dams.
17. Maintenance of log books.
Bill No. 149 of 2018

18. Records of dam failures and dam incidents.
19. Instructions on safety of specified dams.
20. Funds for maintenance and repairs.
21. Technical documentation.
22. Qualifications and experience of individuals responsible for safety of specified
dams.
23. Jurisdiction of State Dam Safety Organisation and  Authority.
24. Cost of investigation.
25. Construction or alteration of dams.
26. Initial filling of reservoirs.
27. Operation and maintenance.
28. Responsibility of owner of specified dam.
CHAPTER VII
S
AFETY, INSPECTION AND DA TA COLLECTION
29. Dam safety unit.
30. Inspection.
31. Instrumentations to be installed in every specified dam.
32. Establishment of hydro-meteorological station.
33. Installations of seismological station.
CHAPTER VIII
E
MERGENCY ACTION PLAN AND DISASTER MANAGEMENT
34. Obligation of owner of specified dam.
35. Emergency action plan.
36. Assistance to other disaster management authorities.
CHAPTER IX
COMPREHENSIVE DAM SAFETY EV ALUATION
37. Comprehensive dam safety evaluation.
38. Compulsory evaluation in certain cases.
39. Reports of comprehensive evaluation.
CHAPTER X
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES
40. Punishment for obstruction, etc.
41. Offences by Departments of Government.
42. Offence by companies.
43. Cognizance of offences.
C
LAUSES
(ii)

CHAPTER XI
MISCELLANEOUS
CLAUSES
44. Annual Report of safety status of specified dams.
45. Safety measures in respect of dams other than specified dams.
46. Safety measures in respect of dams located outside territory of India.
47. Act to have overriding effect.
48. Power to amend Schedules.
49. Power of Central Government to give directions.
50. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of National Committee on Dam Safety,
Authority and State Committee on Dam Safety.
51. Power of Central Government to make rules.
52. Power of State Government to make rules.
53. Power to make regulations by Authority.
54. Rules to be laid before Parliament and State Legislatures.
55. Power to remove difficulties.
THE FIRST SCHEDULE.
THE SECOND SCHEDULE.
THE THIRD SCHEDULE.
(iii)

THE  DAM  SAFETY  BILL, 2018
A
BILL
to provide for surveillance, inspection, operation and maintenance of specified dams for
prevention of dam failure related disasters  and to provide for institutional mechanism
to ensure their safe functioning and for matters connected therewith or incidental
thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the  Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Dam Safety Act, 2018.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.  Save as provided under this Act, this Act applies to the owner of every specified
dam,—
(a) being a public sector undertaking or institution or a body owned or controlled
by  the Central Government or a State Government or jointly by one or more
Governments, as the case may be; and
(b) being an undertaking or company or institution or a body other than those
owned or controlled by the State Government or the Central Government, as the case
may be.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Application.
Bill No. 149 of 2018
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5
10
15

2
3. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "alteration of dam" means alterations or repairs as may directly affect the
safety of the dam or reservoir;
(b) "annual report" means a report giving the activities of the  Authority and the
State Dam Safety Organisation and the safety status of the specified dams falling
under their jurisdiction during each financial year;
(c) "appurtenant structure" means the structure being—
(i) spillways, either in the dam or separate therefrom;
(ii) low level outlet structure and water conduits such as tunnels, pipelines
or penstocks, either through the dam or its abutments or reservoir rim;
(iii) hydro-mechanical equipment including gate, valve, hoist, elevators;
(iv) energy dissipation and river training structure; and
(v) other associated structures acting integrally with the dam or its reservoir
or reservoir rim;
 (d) "Authority" means the National Dam Safety Authority established under
section 7;
(e) "dam" means any artificial barrier and its appurtenant structure constructed
across rivers or tributaries thereof with a view to impound or divert water  which also
include barrage, weir and similar water impounding structures but does not include—
(a) canal, aquaduct, navigation channel and similar water conveyance
structures;
(b) flood embankment, dike, guide bund and similar flow regulation
structures;
(f) "dam failure" means any failure of the structure or operation of a dam which
leads to uncontrolled flow of impounded water resulting in downstream flooding,
affecting the life and property of the people and the environment including flora, fauna
and riverine ecology.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause, failure in the operation shall
mean such faulty operations of the dam which are inconsistent with the operation and
maintenance manual;
(g) "dam incident" means all such problems occurring to a dam that have not
degraded into failure, and includes—
(i) any structural damage to the dam and the appurtenant structure;
(ii) any unusual reading of any instrument in the dam;
(iii) any unusual seepage or leakage through the dam body;
(iv) any unusual change in the seepage or leakage regime;
(v) any boiling or artesian condition noticed below the dam;
(vi) any sudden stoppage or unusual reduction in seepage or leakage from
the foundation or body of the dam or any of its galleries;
(vii) any malfunction or inappropriate operation of gates;
(viii) occurrence of flood, the peak of which exceeds the available flood
discharge capacity of the dam or seventy per cent. of the approved design
flood;
Definitions.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
(ix) occurrence of flood, which resulted in encroachment on the available
freeboard, or the approved design freeboard;
(x) any unusual erosion in the near vicinity up to five hundred metres
downstream of the spillway or waste-weir; and
(xi) any other occurrence  which a prudent dam engineer may relate to dam
safety concerns;
(h) "dam safety unit" means a dam safety unit of any specified dam referred to in
section 29;
(i) "distress condition" means the occurrence or potential development of such
conditions in the dam or appurtenance or its reservoir or reservoir rim, which if left
unattended to, may impede the safe operation of dam for its intended benefits or may
pose serious risks to the life and property of people and the environment including
flora, fauna and riverine ecology;
(j) "documentation" means all permanent records including electronic records
concerning investigation, design, construction, operation, performance, maintenance,
major repair, alteration, enlargement and safety of dams and includes design
memorandum, construction drawings, geological reports, reports of specialised studies
simulating structural and hydraulic response of the dam, changes made in design and
drawings, quality control records, emergency action plan, operation and maintenance
manual, instrumentation readings, inspection and testing reports, operational reports
and dam safety review reports and other similar reports;
(k) "enlargement of dam" means any change in the scope of an existing dam or
reservoir, which raises water storage elevation or increases the volume of water
impounded by the dam;
(l)  "Government" means the Central Government or a State Government, as the
case may be;
(m) "inspection" means on-site examination of any component of a dam and its
appurtenant structure ;
(n) "investigation" means collection of evidence, detailed examination, analysis
or scrutiny of a specific problem pertaining to the dam and its appurtenant structure or
a part thereof and includes laboratory testing, in-situ testing, geological exploration,
model testing and mathematical simulation of the problem;
(o) "National Committee" means the National Committee on Dam Safety
constituted under section 4;
(p) "notification" means a notification published in the Official Gazette and the
term "notify" shall be construed accordingly;
(q) "operation of dam" means every element of the use, control and functioning
of the dam which may  primarily affect the storage, release of water and the structural
safety of the dam;
(r) "operation and maintenance manual" means the written instructions that
provide operation procedures, maintenance procedures, emergency procedures and
any other features necessary for the safe operation of dam;
(s) "owner of specified dam" means the Central Government or a State Government
or jointly by one or more Governments or public sector undertaking or local authority
or company and any or all of such persons or organisations, who own, control, operate,
or maintain a specified dam;
(t) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made by the Central Government or,
as the case may be, by the State Government;
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
(u) "regulations" means the regulations made by the Authority;
(v) "remedial measures" means such structural or non-structural measures,  as
may be required in relation to the specified  dam or appurtenant strucutre  or reservoir
or reservoir rim or catchment area of reservoir for the purpose of removing or mitigating
the distress condition of the specified dam;
(w) "reservoir" in relation to a dam shall mean any spread of water impounded
by a specified dam;
(x) "specified dam" means a dam constructed before or after the commencement
of this Act, which is,—
(i) above fifteen metres in height, measured from the lowest portion of the
general foundation area to the top of dam; or
(ii) between ten metres to fifteen metres in height and satisfies at least one
of the following, namely:—
(A) the length of crest is not less than five hundred metres; or
(B) the capacity of the reservoir formed by the dam is not less than
one million cubic metres; or
(C) the maximum flood discharge dealt with by the dam is not less
than two thousand cubic metres per second; or
(D) the dam has specially difficult foundation problems; or
(E) the dam is of unusual design;
(y) "State Committee" means the State Committee on Dam Safety constituted
under sub-section (1) of section 10;
(z) "State Dam Safety Organisation" means the State Dam Safety Organisation
established under section 13; and
(za) "vulnerability and hazard classification" means the system or systems of
classifying dams on the basis of their condition, location, damage or hazard potential.
CHAPTER II
N
ATIONAL COMMITTEE ON DAM SAFETY
4. (1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by notification,
appoint, there shall be constituted, for the purposes of this Act, a National Committee to be
known as the National Committee on Dam Safety consisting of the following members,
namely:—
(a) the Chairperson, Central Water Commission—Chairperson, ex officio;
(b) not exceeding ten representatives of the Central Government   not below the
rank of Joint Secretary to that Government  or equivalent dealing with matters relating
to dam engineering or dam safety, nominated by the Central Government—Members,
ex officio;
(c) not exceeding seven representatives of the State Governments of the level
of Engineer-in-Chief or equivalent by rotation, nominated by the Central
Government—Members, ex officio; and
(d) not exceeding three specialists in the field of dam safety and allied fields
nominated by the Central Government— Members.
Constitution
of National
Committee.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

5
(2) The National Committee shall be constituted within a period of sixty days from the
date of commencement of this Act, and shall be reconstituted for every three years thereafter.
5. (1) The National Committee shall discharge the functions as specified in the First
Schedule as may be necessary to prevent dam failure related disasters and to maintain
standards of dam safety.
(2) The National Committee may, in discharge of its functions, constitute such
sub-committees as it may consider necessary to assist it and the secretarial assistance to the
National Committee and the sub-committees shall be provided by the Authority.
(3) The knowledge and information collected or generated by the National Committee
shall be disseminated to all stakeholders by the Authority.
6. (1) The National Committee shall meet at such times and places and shall observe
such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings in the manner
as may be prescribed:
Provided that the National Committee shall meet at least twice in a year and at least one
meeting shall be held before the onset of the monsoon season.
(2) The National Committee may invite the representative of the owner of any specified
dam and such other experts in dam safety (including international experts) as it may consider
appropriate for the discharge of its functions.
(3) The expenditure incurred on the meetings of the National Committee shall be in
such manner as may be prescribed.
CHAPTER III
N
ATIONAL DAM SAFETY AUTHORITY
7. (1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may by notification,
appoint, there shall be established for the purposes of this Act, a National Dam Safety
Authority, within a period of sixty days from the date of commencement of this Act.
(2) The Authority shall be headed by an officer not below the rank of Additional
Secretary to the Government of India or equivalent to be appointed by the Central Government
who have knowledge of, and adequate qualification, experience and capacity in, dealing with
problems relating to the dam engineering and dam safety management.
(3) The headquarters of the Authority shall be at the National Capital territory of Delhi
and the Authority may establish offices at other places in India.
(4)  The Authority shall comply with such directions as may, from time to time, be given
to it by the Central Government.
8. (1) The Authority shall discharge such functions as specified in Second Schedule
as may be necessary to implement the policy, guidelines and standards evolved by the
National Committee for proper surveillance, inspection and maintenance of specified dams
and for such purposes, it shall have the power to enforce the attendance of any person and
call for any information as may be necessary.
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub-section (1), the Authority
shall make all endeavours to resolve any issue between the State Dam Safety Organisations
of States or between a State Dam Safety Organisation and any owner of a specified dam in
that State.
(3) Every decision of the Authority taken in respect of matters under this Act shall be
final and binding upon all the parties to the issue.
Functions of
National
Committee.
Meetings of
National
Committee.
Establishment
of National
Dam Safety
Authority.
Functions of
National Dam
Safety
Authority.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

6
9.  (1)  The Central Government shall, for the purpose of enabling the Authority to
perform functions under this Act, provide such number of officers  and other employees as
it may consider necessary:
Provided that the officers and other employees shall have such qualifications and
experience in the field of safety of dams including dam-design, hydro-mechanical engineering,
hydrology, geo-technical investigation, instrumentation, dam-rehabilitation or such other
fields as may be prescribed by the Central Government.
(2)  The functions, powers, terms and conditions of service of the officers and other
employees appointed under sub-section (1) shall be such as may be prescribed by the
Central Government.
CHAPTER  IV
S
TATE COMMITTEE ON DAM SAFETY
10. (1) With effect from such date as the State Government may, by notification,
appoint, there shall be constituted, for the purposes of this Act, a State Committee on Dam
Safety consisting of the following members, namely:—
(a) the Engineer-in-Chief or equivalent officer of the Department of the State
responsible for Dam Safety—Chairperson, ex-officio;
(b) technical and scientific officers of the rank of Chief Engineer, not exceeding
six persons, from such departments as may be decided by the State Government or
from such other organisations owning specified dams—Members;
(c) the Chief  Engineer or equivalent level  officer of each such upstream States
in cases where reservoir area of any of the specified dam of the State extends to
another State—Members;
(d) the Chief Engineer or equivalent level officer  of each such downstream State
in cases where flood release of any of the specified dam of the State flows to a
neighbouring State—Members;
(e) one  representative of the Central Water Commission not below  the rank of
Director to be nominated by the Chairman, Central Water Commission —Member;
(f) experts in the field of hydrology or dam designs, not exceeding three including
experts from engineering institutes—Members; and
(g) one representative of the Central Electrical Authority not below the rank
of Director to be nominated by the Chairman, Central Electricity Authority —
Member.
(2) The State Committee shall be constituted within a period of hundred and eighty
days from the date of commencement of this Act, and reconstituted for every three years
thereafter.
11. (1) The State Committee shall discharge such functions as specified in the Third
Schedule as may be necessary to prevent dam failure related disasters under this Act as per
the guidelines, standards and other directions on dam safety issued by the Authority.
(2) The State Committee, in discharge of its functions, shall be assisted by such
sub-committees as it may consider necessary, and the secretarial assistance to the State
Officers and
Employees of
Authority.
Constitution
of State
Committee
on Dam
Safety.
Functions of
State
Committee.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

7
Committee as well as its sub-committees shall be provided by the concerned State Dam
Safety Organisation.
12. (1) The State Committee shall meet at such times and places and shall observe
such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings as may be
prescribed by the State Government:
Provided that the State Committee shall meet at least twice in a year and at least one
meeting shall be held before the onset of the monsoon season.
(2) The State Committee may invite the representative of the owner of any specified
dam and such other experts in Dam Safety as it may consider appropriate, for the discharge
of its functions.
(3) The expenditure incurred on the meetings of the State Committee shall be in the
manner as may be prescribed by the State Government.
(4) The specialist members and other expert invitees who attend the meetings of the
State Committee or its sub-committees shall be paid such fees and allowances as may be
prescribed by the State Government.
CHAPTER  V
S
TATE DAM SAFETY ORGANISATION
13. (1) The State Government shall, for the purposes of this Act, by notification,
establish in the Department dealing with dam safety, a separate organisation, to be known as
the State Dam Safety Organisation, within a period of hundred and eighty days from the date
of commencement of this Act:
Provided that in States having more than thirty specified dams, the State Dam Safety
Organisation shall be headed by an officer not below the rank of Chief Engineer or equivalent,
and in all other cases, the State Dam Safety Organisation shall be headed by an officer not
below the rank of Superintendent Engineer or equivalent.
(2) The State Dam Safety Organisation shall be responsible to, and report to the
technical head of the Department dealing with Dam Safety.
(3) The organisational structure and work procedures of the State Dam Safety
Organisation shall be such as may be prescribed by the State Government.
(4) The administrative and other expenses of the State Dam Safety Organisation shall
be borne by the respective State Government.
14. (1) The State Government shall, having regard to the number of specified dams in
that State, provide such number of officers and employees to the State Dam Safety Organisation
as it may consider necessary for the efficient  functioning of the said Organisation:
Provided that the officers and employees shall have such qualifications and experience
in the field of dam safety including dam-design, hydro-mechanical engineering, hydrology,
geo-technical investigation, instrumentation, dam-rehabilitation or such other field as may
be prescribed by the State Government.
(2) The functions and powers of the officers and employees appointed under
sub-section (1) shall be such as may be prescribed by the State Government.
Establishment
of State Dam
Safety
Organisation.
Meetings of
State
Committee.
Officers and
employees of
State Dam
Safety
Organisation.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

8
CHAPTER VI
DUTIES AND FUNCTIONS IN RELATION TO DAM SAFETY
15. (1) Every State Dam Safety Organisation shall,—
(a) keep perpetual surveillance;
(b) carry out inspections; and
(c) monitor the operation and maintenance,
of all specified dams falling under their jurisdiction to ensure continued safety of such
specified dams and take such measures as may be necessary to address safety concerns that
are noticed with a view to achieve satisfactory level of dam safety assurance as per the
guidelines, standards and other directions on dam safety issued by the Authority and in
accordance with the regulations  made under this Act.
(2) The State Dam Safety Organisation, for the purpose of enabling it to make decisions
compatible with public safety, shall make or cause to be made such investigations and shall
gather or cause to be gathered such data as may be required for proper review and study of
the various features of the design, construction, repair and enlargement of dams, reservoirs
and appurtenant structures under their jurisdiction.
16. The State Dam Safety Organisation shall classify each specified dam under their
jurisdiction as per the vulnerability and hazard classification criteria in accordance with the
regulations made under this Act.
17. (1) Every State Dam Safety Organisation shall maintain a log book or database for
each specified dam under their jurisdiction recording therein all activities related to the
surveillance and inspection and all important events related to dam safety and with such
details and in such form as may be specified by  regulations.
(2) Every State Dam Safety Organisation shall furnish all such information to the
Authority as and when required by them.
18. (1) Every State Dam Safety Organisation shall report the event of any dam failure
under their jurisdiction to the Authority, and furnish any information as and when required
by them.
(2) Every State Dam Safety Organisation shall maintain the records of major dam
incidents of each specified dam under their jurisdiction, and furnish all such information to
the Authority as and when required by them.
19. (1) Every State Dam Safety Organisation shall render its instructions  to the owner
of a specified dam on the safety or the remedial measures required to be taken with respect to it.
(2) Every owner of specified dam shall comply with the instructions issued by the
State Dam Safety Organisation with regard to safety or remedial measures in relation to any
specified dam owned by it.
20. Every owner of specified dam shall earmark sufficient and specific funds for
maintenance and repairs of the specified dam and to implement the recommendations of the
State Dam Safety Organisation.
21. (1) Every owner of specified dam shall compile all technical documentations
concerning hydrology, dam foundation, structural engineering of dam, watershed upstream
of dam, and nature or use of land downstream of dam along with information on all resources
or facilities of economic, logistic or environmental importance which are likely to be affected
due to dam failure.
(2) Every owner of specified dam shall furnish all such information to the State Dam
Safety Organisation and the Authority as and when required by them.
(3) Every owner of specified dam shall equip its organisation with the state-of-the-art
information technology tools to store,  retrieve,  and distribute the data related to  dam safety
and dam performance.
Surveillance
and
Inspection.
Vulnerability
and hazard
classification
of dams.
Maintenance
of log books.
Records of
dam failures
and dam
incidents.
Instructions
on safety of
specified
dams.
Funds for
maintenance
and repairs.
Technical
documentation.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

9
22. Every individual responsible for safety of specified dams and all activities related
thereto shall possess such qualifications and experience and shall undergo such training as
may be specified by  regulations.
23. (1) Without prejudice to the provisions of this Act, all specified dams, shall fall
under the jurisdiction of the State Dam Safety Organisation of the State in which such dam is
situated in matters relating to dam inspections, analysis of information, investigation  reports
or recommendations regarding safety status, and remedial measures to be undertaken to
improve dam safety; and in all such matters, full co-operation shall be extended by the owner
of the specified dam:
Provided that where a specified dam is owned by a Central Public Sector Undertaking
or where a specified dam is extended over two or more states, or where the specified dam in
one State is owned by another state, then the  Authority shall be construed as the State
Dam Safety Organisation for the purpose of this Act:
Provided further that in all such dams where the Authority takes up the role of State
Dam Safety Organisation, the Governments of the States within the Jurisdiction of which
such dams are located shall have access to all information relating to these specified dams as
available with the Authority.
(2) The authorised representative of the Authority or concerned State Dam Safety
Organisation for the purposes of making any inspection or investigation necessary for the
implementation of the provisions of this Act, may enter upon any part of the specified dam or
its site as and when required and apply such investigation methods, as may be considered
necessary.
(3) After making inspection or investigation under sub-section (2), the representative
referred to in that sub-section is of the opinion that certain remedial measures are required to
be taken, he shall report such remedial measures to the officer-in-charge of such specified
dam and to the concerned State Dam Safety Organisation.
(4) The Authority and concerned State Dam Safety Organisation, in cases of specified
dams being found to be distressed on account of their age, degeneration, degradation,
structural or other impediments, shall suggest such remedial measures on such operational
parameters (including maximum reservoir level, maximum spillway discharge and maximum
discharges through other outlets) as it may consider necessary.
(5) Nothing contained in sub-sections (1), (2), (3) and (4) shall absolve the owner of
specified dam or any other authority or person from any of the responsibilities or obligations
entrusted upon it under the provisions of this Act and the provisions of
sub-sections (1), (2), (3) and (4) shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of any other
provision of this Act.
24. All the costs to be incurred by the Authority or State Dam Safety Organisation on
any form of investigation done including payment given to any consultant or expert, shall be
borne by the owner of the specified dam.
25. (1) Any construction or alteration of a specified dam shall be undertaken subject
to investigation, design and construction being done by such agencies as may be accredited
by the Authority or the State Government, as the case may be:
Provided that the Authority may disqualify any agency which violates any of the
provisions of this Act or the rules or regulations made thereunder.
(2)  Every agency referred to in sub-section (1) shall, for the purpose of designing or
evaluating the safety of the specified dam, make use of the relevant standard codes and
guidelines of the Bureau of Indian Standards, and furnish the reasons, if any departure is
made in the design or dam safety evaluation.
Qualifications
and experience
of individuals
responsible for
safety of
specified dams.
Jurisdiction of
State Dam
Safety
Organisation
and Authority.
Cost of
investigation.
Construction
or alteration
of dams.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

10
(3) Every agency referred to in sub-section (1) shall for the purpose of investigation,
design and construction employ such qualified, experienced and competent engineers, as
may be specified by the regulations.
(4) Every agency referred to in sub-section (1) shall,  for the purpose of approval of
dam design demonstrate the safety of the design, operational parameters and policies as per
the provisions of relevant codes and guidelines to the Central or the State Government, as
the case may be.
(5)  Every agency referred to in sub-section (1) shall, for the purpose of dam
construction, undertake such quality control measures, as may be specified by  regulations.
(6) The construction of any specified dam or the alteration or enlargement of any
existing specified dam shall be undertaken with the approval of such competent authority, as
may be specified by notification by the Central Government or the State Government, as the
case may be.
26. (1) Before initial filling of any reservoir of a specified dam, the agency responsible
for its design shall draw the filling criteria and prepare an initial filling plan, with adequate
time for monitoring and evaluating the performance of the dam and its appurtenant structures.
(2) Before initial filling of the reservoir is taken up, the State Dam Safety Organisation
shall inspect or cause to be inspected the specified dam either through its own engineers or
by an independent panel of experts, who shall also examine the initial filling programme and
prepare a detailed report thereof duly certifying the fitness of dam for filling.
27. (1) Every owner of the specified dam shall provide operation and maintenance
establishment for the specified dam, and shall ensure that sufficient number of trained
operation and maintenance engineers or technical persons are posted at each such dam.
(2) Every owner of the specified dam shall ensure that a well-documented operation
and maintenance manual is kept at each of the specified dams and are followed at all times.
28. Nothing contained in this Act shall be construed to absolve an owner of a specified
dam of the duties, obligations or liabilities incidental to the construction, operation,
maintenance and supervision of the dam or reservoir.
CHAPTER VII
S
AFETY, INSPECTION AND DATA COLLECTION
29. For each specified dam, the owner shall, within the operation and maintenance
establishment, provide a dam safety unit consisting of such competent levels of engineers
as may be specified by  regulations.
30. (1) Every owner of a specified dam shall undertake every year, through their dam
safety unit, a pre-monsoon and post-monsoon inspection in respect of each such dam.
(2) Without prejudice to sub-section (1), every owner of a specified dam shall inspect
or cause to be inspected every specified dam by the dam safety unit, during and after every
flood, earthquake or any other natural or man-made calamities, or if any sign of distress or
unusual behaviour is noticed in the dam.
(3) Every owner of a specified dam shall,—
(a) carry out all inspections referred to in sub-section (1) and sub-section (2) in
accordance with the guidelines and check-lists as may be specified by regulations;
(b) station, at each of the specified dam site throughout the monsoon period,
such engineers and other technical personnel, as may be decided, in consultation with
the State Dam Safety Organisation:
Provided that the engineers and other technical personnel shall be required to be
stationed at their respective dam sites during entire period of emergency following any
other natural or man-made calamity that may create distress conditions in the dam; and
Initial filling
of reservoirs.
Operation and
maintenance.
Responsibility
of owner of
specified dam.
Dam safety
unit.
Inspection.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

11
(c) forward the inspection report by the dam safety unit to the State Dam Safety
Organisation, which shall analyse the report and submit comments on the deficiency
and remedial measures, if any, to the owner of specified dam.
31. (1) Every owner of a specified dam shall have a minimum number of such
instrumentations at each specified dam, and installed in the manner as may be specified by
regulations for monitoring the performance of such dam.
(2) Every owner of the specified dam shall maintain a record of readings of the
instrumentations referred to in sub-section (1) and forward the analysis of such readings to
the State Dam Safety Organisation, in the form, manner and at such interval as may be
specified by  regulations.
32. (1) Every owner of a specified dam shall establish a hydro-meteorological station
in the vicinity of each specified dam capable of recording such data as may be specified by
regulations.
(2) Every owner of the specified dam shall collect, compile, process and store data
referred to in sub-section (1) at a suitable location.
33. (1) In the case of every specified dam, having a height of thirty metres or above or
falling under such seismic zone, as may be specified by  regulations, the owner of the
specified dam shall establish a seismological station in the vicinity of each such dam for
recording micro and strong motion earthquakes and such other data as may be specified by
regulations.
(2) Every owner of a specified dam shall collect, compile, process and store data
referred to in sub-section (1) at such suitable location and in such manner as may be
specified by regulations.
CHAPTER VIII
E
MERGENCY ACTION PLAN AND DISASTER MANAGEMENT
34. (1) Every owner of a specified dam, in respect of each specified dam, shall,—
(a) establish well designed hydro-meteorological network and an inflow
forecasting system;
(b) establish an emergency flood warning system for the probable flood affected
areas downstream of the dam;
(c) test or cause to be tested periodically the functioning of systems referred to
in clauses (a) and (b);
(d) install such scientific and technical instruments which are invented or adopted
from time to time for the purpose of ensuring dam safety and the life and property of
people downstream;
(e) make available the information relating to maximum anticipated inflows and
outflows including flood warning and an adverse impact of the same, if any, on persons
and property towards the upstream or downstream of the dam, to the concerned
district authorities and also make available the information in public domain; and
(f) render necessary assistance to the Authority in establishment and running of
the early warning system for the exchange of real time hydrological and meteorological
data and information related to the operation of reservoirs.
(2) Every owner of a specified dam, for each of its dam shall, carry out risk assessment
studies at such interval as may be specified by regulations and the first such study shall be
made within five years from the date of commencement of this Act.
Instrumentations
to be installed
in every
specified dam.
Establishment
of hydro-
meteorological
station.
Installations
of
seismological
station.
Obligation of
owner of
specified dam.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

12
35. (1) Every owner of a specified dam, in respect of each specified dam shall,—
(a) prepare emergency action plan before allowing the initial filling of the reservoir
and thereafter update such plans at regular intervals;
(b) in respect of the dam which is constructed and filled before the commencement
of this Act, prepare emergency action plan within five years from the date of
commencement of this Act and thereafter update such plans at regular intervals as may
be specified by regulations.
(2)  The emergency action plan referred to in sub-section (1) shall,—
(a) set out the procedures to be followed for the protection of persons and
property upstream or downstream of the specified dam in the event of an actual or
imminent dam failure or to mitigate the effects of the disaster;
(b) include therein,—
(i) the type of emergencies which are likely to occur in the operation of
any reservoir;
(ii) identification of the likely catastrophic flood in the event of any dam
failure, along with probable areas, population, structures and installations likely
to be adversely affected due to flood water released from the reservoir;
(iii) warning procedures, inundation maps and advance preparations for
handling efficiently and in the best possible manner the likely adverse situations
especially to avoid loss of human life;
(iv) such other matters which may having regard to the geographical
conditions, size of the specified dam and other relevant factors as may be
necessary.
(3) The emergency action plan under this section shall be put into action as and when
conditions arise which are hazardous or likely to be hazardous to a specified dam or potentially
hazardous to public safety, infrastructure, other property or to the environment.
(4) Every owner of the specified dam shall, while preparing and updating the emergency
action plan, undertake a consultation process with all disaster management agencies and
other departments of the State entrusted with disaster management and relief in the area
likely to be affected and owners of other dams in the immediate vicinity likely to be affected,
so as to bring coordination and transparency and allay any unwarranted fear on dam safety
issues.
36. Without prejudice to the provisions of this Act or liability of the owner of the
specified dam and other organisations and authorities under this Act, every owner,
organisation and authority shall render necessary assistance, if so required by any authority
under any other law for the time being in force to meet or mitigate any disaster or emergency
arising out of the specified dams.
CHAPTER IX
C
OMPREHENSIVE DAM SAFETY EV ALUATION
37. (1) The owner of specified dam shall make or cause to be made comprehensive dam
safety evaluation of each specified dam through an independent panel of experts constituted
as per  regulations for the purpose of determining the conditions of the specified dam and its
reservoir:
Provided that the first comprehensive dam safety evaluation for each existing specified
dam shall be conducted within five years from the date of commencement of this Act, and
thereafter  the comprehensive dam safety evaluation of each such dam shall be carried out at
regular intervals as may be specified by regulations.
Emergency
action plan.
Assistance to
other disaster
management
authorities.
Comprehensive
dam safety
evaluation.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

13
(2) The comprehensive dam safety evaluation shall consists of, but not be limited to,—
(a)  review and analysis of available data on the design, construction, operation,
maintenance and performance of the structure;
(b) general assessment of hydrologic and hydraulic conditions with mandatory
review of design floods as specified by  regulations;
(c) general assessment of seismic safety of specified dam with mandatory site
specific seismic parameters study in certain cases as specified by  regulations;
(d) evaluation of the operation, maintenance and inspection procedures; and
(e) evaluation of any other conditions which constitute a hazard to the integrity
of the structure.
38. The comprehensive dam safety evaluation referred to in section 37 shall be
compulsory in the case of,—
(a) major modification to the original structure or design criteria;
(b) discovery of an unusual condition at the dam or reservoir rim; and
(c) an extreme hydrological or seismic event.
39. (1) The owner of specified dam shall report the results of the dam safety evaluation
undertaken under section 37 or section 38 to the State Dam Safety Organisation.
(2) The reports referred to in sub-section (1) shall include, but not be limited to,—
(a) assessment of the condition of the structure based on the visual observations
and available data on the design, hydrology, construction, operation, maintenance
and performance of the structure;
(b) recommendations for any emergency measures or actions, if required, to
assure the immediate safety of the structure;
(c) recommendations for remedial measures and actions related to design,
construction, operation, maintenance and inspection of the structure, if required;
(d) recommendations for additional detailed studies, investigations  and analysis,
if required; and
(e) recommendations for improvement in routine maintenance and inspection of
dam, if required.
(3) Where the safety evaluations undertaken under section 37 or section 38, results in
recommendations for a remedial measure, the State Dam Safety Organisation shall pursue
with the owner of the specified dam to ensure that remedial measures are carried out in time,
for which the owner shall provide adequate funds.
(4) Where there is any unresolved matter emerging between an independent panel of
experts referred to in sub-section (1) of section 37 and the owner of the specified dam, the
matter shall be referred to the State Dam Safety Organisation, and, in case no agreement is
arrived at, the matter shall be referred to the Authority which shall render its advice and send
recommendations to the State Government concerned for implementation.
CHAPTER  X
O
FFENCES AND PENALTIES
40. Whoever, without reasonable cause,—
(a) obstructs any officer or employee of the Central Government or the State
Government, or a person authorised by the National Committee or the Authority or the
State Committee or the State Dam Safety Organisation in the discharge of his functions
under this Act; or
Compulsory
evaluation in
certain cases.
Reports of
comprehensive
evaluation.
Punishment
for
obstruction,
etc.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

14
(b) refuses to comply with any direction given by or on behalf of the Central
Government or the State Government or the National Committee or the Authority or the
State Committee or the State Dam Safety Organisation under this Act,
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year or with fine,
or with both, and if such obstruction or refusal to comply with directions results in loss of
lives or imminent danger thereof, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may
extend to two years.
41. (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a Department of the
Government, the head of the Department shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall
be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly unless he proves that the
offence was committed without his knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to
prevent the commission of such offence.
(2)   Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where an offence under
this Act has been committed by a Department of the Government and it is proved that the
offence has been committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any
neglect on the part of, any officer, other than the head of the Department, such officer shall
be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and
punished accordingly.
42. (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company or body
corporate, every person who at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and
was responsible to, the company, for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as
the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the contravention and shall be liable to be
proceeded against and punished accordingly:
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall render any such person liable to any
punishment provided in this Act, if he proves that the offence was committed without his
knowledge or that he exercised due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where an offence under
this Act has been committed by a company, and it is proved that the offence was committed
with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of any
director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary
or other officer shall also, be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be
proceeded against and punished accordingly.
Explanation.—For the purpose of this section—
(a) ‘‘company’’ means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association
of individuals; and
(b) ‘‘director’’, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.
43. (1) No court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under this Act, save
on a complaint made by the Central Government or the State Government or a person
authorised in this behalf by the National Committee or the Authority or the State Committee
or the State Dam Safety Organisation, as the case may be.
(2) No court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of
the first class shall try any offence punishable under this Act.
CHAPTER  XI
M
ISCELLANEOUS
44.  (1) Every State Dam Safety Organisation shall prepare annual report, within three
months of the expiry of the preceding financial year, of its activities and safety status of
specified dams in the State and such report shall be forwarded to the Authority and State
Government and that Government shall cause the same to be  laid before each House of the
Offences by
Departments
of
Government.
Offence by
companies.
Cognizance of
offences.
Annual report
of safety
status of
specified
dams.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

15
State Legislature, where it consists of two Houses or where such Legislature consists of one
House, before that House.
(2) Every State Dam Safety Organisation and every owner of a specified dam shall
provide to the Authority, documentation of the projects, report of enquiries into failure and
any other data, as and when required in such format and in such manner as may be decided
by the  Authority.
(3) The Authority, shall prepare a consolidated annual report of the dam safety activities
in the country and submit the same to the Central Government within six months of the expiry
of the preceding financial year and that Government shall cause the same to be laid before
each House of Parliament.
(4) The Authority shall forward its annual report on the safety status of specified dams
to the National Disaster Management Authority and also make available such report in
public domain.
(5) The State Dam Safety Organisation of each State shall forward their annual report
to the concerned State Disaster Management Authority and also make available such report
in public domain.
45. Every owner of the dam other than specified dams shall undertake such measures
as may be necessary to ensure dam safety and shall comply with such measures in accordance
with the regulations made under this Act.
46. Where a dam, including a dam created due to landslides or glacial moraine, is
located outside the territory of India and the  Authority suo motu or on receipt of information
from any person or organisation or authority or source prima facie is of the opinion that
measures are required to be taken to ensure safety of such dams and failure of which may
endanger the life and property of people located in India, it shall in writing submit an intimation
thereof to the Central Government indicating therein the likely damages which may arise due
to failure of such dams and the safety measures required to be taken in respect of such dam
and the Central Government shall take all suitable measures to mitigate any possible threat.
47. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
48. (1) If the Central Government is satisfied that it is necessary or expedient so to do,
it may, by notification, amend the First Schedule, the Second Schedule  or the Third Schedule
and thereupon the Schedules, shall be deemed to have been amended accordingly.
(2) A copy of every notification made under sub-section (1) shall be laid before each
House of Parliament as soon as may be after it is made.
49. The Central Government may give such directions, as it may consider necessary, to
the State Government where that Government is the owner of the specified dam and to the
owner of a specified dam in any other case for the effective implementation of the provisions
of this Act.
50. No act or proceeding of the National Committee, the Authority and the State
Committee shall be invalid merely by reason of—
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Authority; or
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a member of the Authority; or
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Authority not affecting the merits of
the case.
51. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules to carry out the
provisions of this Act.
Safety
measures in
respect of
dams other
than specified
dams.
Safety
measures in
respect of
dams located
outside
territory of
India.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to
amend
Schedules.
Power of
Central
Government
to give
directions.
Power of
Central
Government
to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Vacancies etc.,
not to
invalidate
proceedings of
National
Committee on
Dam Safety,
Authority and
State
Committee on
Dam Safety.

16
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the foregoing power, such rules may provide
for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the time and place of the meetings of the National Committee and the
procedure to be followed at such meetings under sub-section (1) of section 6, and the
expenditure incurred on the meetings of the National Committee under sub-section (3)
of section 6;
(b) the functions, powers,  and terms and conditions of service of other
officers and other employees of the Authority under sub-section (2) section 9;
(c)  any other matter which is to be or may be, prescribed or in respect of which
provision is to be made by the Central Government by rules.
52. (1) The State Government may, by notification, make rules to carry out the provisions
of this Act.
(2)  In particular, and without prejudice to the foregoing power, such rules may provide
for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the times and places of the meetings of the State Committee and the procedure
to be followed at such meetings under sub-section (1) of section 12;
(b) the expenditure incurred on the meetings of the State Committee under
sub-section (3) of section 12;
(c) the fee and allowances paid to the specialist members or expert invitee or the
State Committee or its sub-committees under sub-section (4) of section 12;
(d) the organisational structure and work procedure of State Dam Safety
Organisation under sub-section (3) of section 13;
(e)  the functions, powers,  and terms and conditions of service of the employees
of the State Dam Safety Organisation under sub-section (2) of section 14;
(f) the dam safety measures in respect of dams other than specified dams under
section 45;
(g) any other matter which is to be or may be, prescribed or in respect of which
provision is to be made by the State Government by rules.
53. (1) The authority on the recommendations of the National Committee may make
regulations consistent with this Act and the rules made thereunder to carry out the provisions
of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
regulations may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the standards and other directions for achieving the satisfactory level of
dam safety assurance under sub-section (1) of section 15;
(b) the criteria for vulnerability and hazard classification of specified dams under
section 16;
(c) the details pertaining to the maintenance of log books or data base under
sub-section (1) of section 17;
(d) the qualifications and experience of the individuals responsible for safety of
specified dams under section 22;
(e) the qualifications and experience of the engineers responsible for
investigation, design and construction of specified dams under sub-section (3) of
section 25;
(f) the quality control measures for the purpose of dam construction under
sub-section (5) of section 25;
(g) the level of competent engineers for the dam safety units under section 29;
Power of State
Government
to make rules.
Power to make
regulations by
authority.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

17
(h) the check-lists for inspection of specified dams under clause (a) of sub-section
(3) of section 30;
(i) the minimum number of set of instrumentations in the specified dams and the
manner of their installation under sub-section (1) of section 31;
(j) the data requirements of hydro-meteorological stations in the vicinity of
specified dams under sub-section (1) of section 32;
(k) the data requirements of seismological stations in the vicinity of specified
dams under sub-section (1) of section 33;
(l) the time interval of risk assessment studies to be carried out under
sub-section (2) of section 34;
(m)  time interval for updating the emergency action plan under clause (b) of
sub-section (1) of section 35;
(n) the time interval for the comprehensive safety evaluation of specified dams
under sub-section (1) of section 37;
(o) the mandatory review of design flood of existing dams under clause (b) of
sub-section (2) of section 37;
(p) the mandatory site specific seismic parameter studies of existing specified
dams under clause (c) of sub-section (2) of section 37;
(q) the measures as may be necessary to ensure dam safety by every owner of
dam other than specified dams under section 45;
(r) any other matter which is to be specified or in respect of which provision is
to be made by the National Committee by regulations.
54. (1) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both  the Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both  Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case  may  be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
(2) Every rule made by a State Government under this Act shall be laid as soon as may
be, after it is made, before the State Legislature, where it consists of two Houses, or where
such legislature consists of one House, before that House.
55. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty:
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of three years
from the date of commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid
before each House of Parliament.
Rules to be
laid before
Parliament
and State
Legislatures.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

THE FIRST SCHEDULE
[See section 5(1)]
Functions of National Committee on Dam Safety
1. for the purpose of maintaining standards of dam safety and prevention of dam
failure related disasters, evolve dam safety policies and recommend necessary regulations
as may be required;
2. act as a forum for exchange of views on techniques to be adopted for remedial
measures to relieve distress conditions in specified dams and appurtenant structures;
3.  analyse the causes of major dam incidents and dam failures and suggest changes in
the planning, specifications, construction, operation and maintenance practices in order to
avoid recurrence of such incidents and failures;
4. evolve comprehensive dam safety management approach as an integration of dam
safety evaluation, risk assessment and risk management for the desired level of safety
assurance; and also explore compensations, by means of insurance coverage for the people
affected by dam failures;
5.  render advice on any specific matter relating to dam safety which may be referred to
it by the Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be;
6.make recommendations on a request by the Central Government on safety measures
in respect of dams located outside the territory of India;
7. make recommendations on the rehabilitation requirements of ageing dams;
8. provide strategic supervision for such dam rehabilitation programmes that are
executed in States through Central or externally aided funding;
9. identify areas of research and development for dam safety and recommend for
provision of funds;
10. make recommendations on the coordinated reservoir operations of cascading dams;
11.  any other specific matter relating to dam safety which may be referred to it by the
Central Government.
18

THE SECOND SCHEDULE
[See section 8(1)]
FUNCTIONS OF NATIONAL DAM SAFETY AUTHORITY
1. for the purpose of maintaining standards of dam safety and prevention of dam
failure related disasters, discharge such functions as related to implementation of the policies
made by the National Committee including making regulations on the recommendations of
the National Committee;
2. resolve any issue between the State Dam Safety Organisations of States or between
a State Dam Safety Organisation and any owner of a specified dam in that State;
3.   provide the state-of-the-art technical and managerial assistance to the State Dam
Safety Organisations;
4. maintain a national level database of all specified dams in the country, including
serious distress conditions, if any, noticed therein;
5. maintain liaison with the State Dam Safety Organisations and the owners of specified
dams for standardisation of dam safety related data and practices, and related technical or
managerial assistance;
6. lay down guidelines and check lists for the routine inspection and detailed
investigation of specified dams and appurtenant structures;
7.   maintain the records of major dam failures in the country;
8. examine, as and when necessary, either through its own engineers or through a
panel of experts, the cause of any major dam failure, and submit its report to the National
Committee;
9. examine whenever required, either through its own engineers or through a panel of
experts, the cause of any major public safety concern in respect of any specified dam, and
issue appropriate instructions relating to  further investigations, operational parameters or
remedial measures;
10. lay down the uniform criteria for vulnerability and hazard classification of specified
dams in the country, and review such criteria as and when necessary;
11. give directions regarding maintenance of log books or database;
12. give directions regarding qualifications and experience requirements of individuals
responsible for safety of specified dams;
13. accord accreditations to the agencies that may be entrusted with the investigation,
design, construction and alteration of specified dams;
14. disqualify any agency for taking up investigations, design, construction or
alteration of specified dams, if it violates any of the regulations under this Act;
15. give directions regarding qualification and experience requirements of individuals
responsible for investigation, design and construction of specified dams;
16. give directions regarding quality control measures to be undertaken during
construction of specified dams;
17. lay down guidelines for preventive measures in the areas vulnerable to landslides
in the vicinity of a specified dam under construction;
19

20
18. give directions regarding competent levels of engineers in the dam safety units of
specified dams on the basis of vulnerability and hazard classification of such dams;
19. give directions regarding instrumentation requirements and manner of their
installation for monitoring the performance of specified dams;
20. give directions regarding data requirements of hydrometeorological stations in
the vicinity of specified dams;
21. give directions regarding data requirements of seismological stations in the vicinity
of specified dams;
22. give directions regarding time interval for the risk assessment studies of specified
dams on the basis of vulnerability and hazard classification of such dams;
23. give directions regarding time interval for updating the emergency action plans of
specified dams on the basis of vulnerability and hazard classification of such dams;
24. give directions regarding constitution of independent panel of experts for
comprehensive dam safety evaluation of specified dams;
25. give directions regarding time interval for the comprehensive safety evaluation of
specified dams on the basis of vulnerability and hazard classification of such dams;
26.  lay down guidelines for review of design floods of existing specified dams;
27. lay down guidelines for review of site specific seismic parameter studies of specified
dams;
28.  establishment of an early warning system incorporating appropriate framework for
the exchange of real time hydrological and meteorological data and information related to
operation of reservoirs by the owner of a dam;
29.  promote general education and awareness in relation to dam safety;
30.  provide secretarial assistance to the National Committee and its sub-committees;
31.  provide coordination and overall supervision of dam rehabilitation programmes
that are executed in States through Central or externally aided funding; and
32.  any other specific matter relating to dam safety which may be referred to it by the
Central Government.

THE THIRD SCHEDULE
[See section 11(1)]
FUNCTIONS OF STATE COMMITTEE ON DAM SAFETY
1. for the purpose of maintaining standards of dam safety and prevention of dam
failure related disasters, discharge such functions as may be necessary as per the guidelines,
standards and other directions issued by the Authority;
2. review the work done by the State Dam Safety Organisation;
3. establish priorities for investigations in case of specified dams under distress
condition;
4. in cases where investigations with respect to safety of any specified dam in the
State had already been undertaken, to order further investigations in relation to safety of
such specified dam and assign responsibilities for execution including the use of non-
departmental resources and association of independent experts, where necessary;
5. recommend the appropriate measures to be taken in relation to the safety of specified
dam which is under distress condition;
6. establish priorities among projects requiring remedial safety works;
7. review the progress on measures recommended in relation to dam safety;
8. assess potential implication of reservoir filling of a specified dam in the State on any
upstream State, and coordinate mitigation measures with such upstream States;
9. assess potential implication of failure of a specified dam in the State on any
downstream State, and coordinate mitigation measures with such downstream States;
10. assess probability of cascading dam failure, and coordinate mitigation measures
with all concerned, including bordering States;
11. recommend provision of funds for the purpose of planned and appropriately phased
rehabilitation of ageing dams in the State;
12. provide strategic supervision for such dam improvement and rehabilitation
programmes that are executed through State funding; and
13. any other specific matter relating to dam safety which may be referred to it by the
State Government.
21

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Dams are critical infrastructure constructed with large investment for multi-purpose
uses such as irrigation, power generation, flood moderation and supply of water for drinking
and industrial purposes. An unsafe dam may be a hazard to human life, ecology and public
and private assets (including crops, houses, buildings, canals and roads). Therefore, the
safety of dam is a matter of great concern to the general public and becomes a national
responsibility to take necessary steps to ensure the safety of dams.
2. The Government of India constituted a Standing Committee in the year 1982
under the Chairmanship of Chairman, Central Water Commission to review the existing
practices and to evolve unified procedure for safety of dams in India. The Standing
Committee in its report, dated the 10th July, 1986 recommended for unified dam safety
procedure for all dams in India and the necessary legislation on dam safety. Initial efforts
for dam safety legislation were directed towards enactment of appropriate legislation by
respective State Governments, and accordingly the State of Bihar enacted the Dam Safety
Act, 2006. However, some of the States favoured the idea of a uniform central legislation on
dam safety. The States of Andhra Pradesh and West Bengal adopted resolution in their
States for an Act of Parliament on Dam Safety. Accordingly, a Bill namely, the Dam Safety
Bill, 2010 was introduced in Lok Sabha on the 30th August, 2010, and was subsequently
referred to the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Water Resources for examination. The
Parliamentary Standing Committee submitted its recommendations in its Seventh Report
on Dam Safety Bill, 2010. Owing to significant modifications entailed in the Bill while
complying with the recommendations of the Parliamentary Standing Committee, the Ministry
of Water Resources decided to withdraw the said Bill and introduce the modified Bill.
Meanwhile, the term of the 15th Lok Sabha came to an end, and therefore the Dam Safety
Bill, 2010 lapsed with the dissolution of 15th Lok Sabha.
3. In view of the above, the proposed Dam Safety Bill, 2018 has been prepared for
coverage across whole of India incorporating the recommendations of the Parliamentary
Standing Committee providing for proper surveillance, inspection, operation and
maintenance of dams in India to ensure their safe functioning.
4. The proposed Dam Safety Bill, 2018, inter alia, provides for—
(a) constitution of the National Committee on Dam Safety to discharge functions
as may be necessary to prevent dam failure related disasters and to maintain standards
of dam safety and evolve dam safety policies and recommend necessary regulations;
(b) establishment of the National Dam Safety Authority as a regulatory body to
implement the policy, guidelines and standards for proper surveillance, inspection
and maintenance of specified dams and address unresolved points of issues between
the State Dam Safety Organisation of two States, or between the State Dam Safety
Organisation of a State and the owner of a dam in that State.  In certain cases, such as
dams extending in two or more States or dams of one State falling under the territories
of another State, the National Authority shall also perform the role of State Dam
Safety Organisation thereby eliminating potential causes for inter-state conflicts;
(c) constitution of the State Committee on Dam Safety by the State Governments
to  ensure proper surveillance, inspection, operation and maintenance of all specified
dams in that State and ensure their safe functioning;
(d) establishment of the State Dam Safety Organisation in States having
specified dams which shall be manned by officers with sufficient experience in the
field of safety of dams;
22

23
(e) an obligation upon every owner of a specified dam to establish operational
and maintenance set up to ensure continued safety of such dams; to earmark sufficient
funds for maintenance and repairs of the dams for undertaking pre-monsoon and
post-monsoon inspections and special inspections during and after floods, earthquakes,
etc.;
(f) an obligation upon the concerned State Dam Safety Organisation to keep
perpetual surveillance, carry out inspections and monitor the operation and
maintenance of specified dams under its jurisdiction to ensure their safety; to classify
each dam under their jurisdiction as per the vulnerability and hazard classification in
accordance with the regulations;
(g)  an obligation upon the National Dam Safety Authority to forward its Annual
Report to the Parliament and the National Disaster Management Authority and upon
the State Dam Safety Organisation to forward their Annual Reports on safety status of
dams to the concerned State Legislature and the State Disaster Management Authority.
5. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; NITIN JAIRAM GADKARI.
The  6th  August, 2018.

Notes  on clauses
Clause 1.—This clause provides for the short title, extent and commencement of
the proposed legislation.
Clause 2.—This clause relates to application of the proposed legislation and
provides that the provisions of the proposed legislation applies - ( a) to every owner of a
specified dam, being public sector undertaking or institution or a body owned or controlled
by the Central Government or a State Government or jointly by one or more Governments;
and  (b) to every owner of a specified  dam, being an undertaking or company or institution
or a body other than those owned or controlled by the State Government or the Central
Government.
Clause 3.—This clause defines various terms and expressions used in the proposed
legislation.
Clause 4.—This clause provides for the constitution of a National Committee to be
known as the "National Committee on Dam Safety". The composition of said Committee is
also specified in this clause.
Clause 5.—This clause provides for the functions of the National Committee. This
cluase further provides for powers to constitute sub-committee and for dissemination of
knowledge and information to all stakeholders.
Clause 6.—This clause provides for the procedure and manner of the meetings of
the National Committee on Dam Safety. This clause further provides that the National
Committee may invite the representatives of the owners of specified dams and such other
specialists or experts in Dam Safety, as it may consider appropriate, for the discharge of its
functions.  This clause also contains the provisions relating to the expenditure incurred on
the meetings of the National Committee.
Clause 7.—This clause relates to the establishment of the National Dam Safety
Authority and provides that the Central Government shall, for the purposes of the proposed
legislation, by notification, establish a National Authority of Dam Safety, within a period of
sixty days from the date of commencement of this Act. This clause further provides that the
National Authority of  Dam safety shall be headed by an officer not below the rank of
Additional Secretary to the Government of India or equivalent who have knowledge of, and
adequate qualification, experience and capacity in, dealing with problems relating to the dam
engineering and dam safety management. This clause also provides that headquaters of the
Authority shall be at Delhi and the Authority may eastablish offices at other places in India.
Clause 8.—This clause provides for the functions of the National Dam Safety Authority.
This clause provides that (1) the Authority shall discharge such functions as specified in the
Second Schedule as may be necessary to implement the policy, guidelines and standards
evolved by the National Committee for proper surveillance, inspection and maintenance of
specified dams and for such purposes, it shall have the power to enforce the attendance of
any person and call for any information as may be necessary; (2) the Authority shall make all
endeavours to resolve any issue between the State Dam Safety Organisations of States or
between a State Dam Safety Organisation and any owner of a specified dam in that State;
(3) every decision of the Authority taken in respect of matters shall be final and binding.
Clause 9.—This clause provides that the Central Government shall, for the purpose of
enabling National Dam Safety Authority to perform its functions under the proposed
legislation, provide such number of officers, and other employees as it may consider necessary.
This clause further provides that qualifications, experience, functions, powers and terms and
conditions of service of the employees shall be such as may be prescribed by the Central
Government.
24

25
Clause 10.—This clause provides for the constitution of a State Committee to be
known as the State Committee on Dam Safety on such date as the State Government may, by
notification, appoints.  This clause also provides that the State Committee on Dam Safety
shall consist of a Chairperson and other members.  This clause also provides that the State
Committee shall be constituted within a period of hundred and eighty days from the date of
commencement of this Act, and reconstituted for every three years thereafter.
Clause 11.—This clause provides that  the State Committee shall discharge such
functions as specified in the Third Schedule as may be necessary to prevent dam failure
related disasters as per the guidelines, standards and other directions on dam safety issued
by the Authority.  This clause further provides that State Committee shall be assisted by
such sub-committees as it may consider necessary and the secretarial assistance to the State
Committee and its sub-committees shall be provided by State Dam Safety Organisation.
Clause 12.—This clause provides that the State Committee shall meet at such times
and places and shall observe such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business
at its meetings as may be prescribed by the State Government provided that the State
Committee shall meet at least twice in a year and at least one meeting shall be held before the
onset of the monsoon season. This clause further provides that the State Committee may
invite the representative of the owner of any specified dam and such other experts in dam
safety as it may consider appropriate, for the discharge of its functions. This clause also
provides that the expenditure incurred on the meetings of the State Committee, such fees and
allowances to be paid to the specialist members and other expert invitees who attend the
meetings of the State Committee or its sub-committees shall be in the manner as may be
prescribed by the State Government.
Clause 13.—This clause provides that every State Government shall, by notification,
establish in the Department dealing with dam safety, a separate organisation, to be known as
the State Dam Safety Organisation, within a period of hundred and eighty days from the date
of commencement of this Act. This clause further provides that in States having more than
thrity specified dams, the State Dam Safety Organisation shall be headed by an officer not
below the rank of Chief Engineer or equivalent, and in all other cases, the State Dam Safety
Organisation shall be headed by an officer not below the rank of Superintending Engineer or
equivalent.  This clause also provides that the State Dam Safety Organisation shall be
responsible to, and report to the technical head of the Department dealing with dam safety.
This clause also provides that the organisational structure and work procedures of the State
Dam Safety Organisation shall be such as may be prescribed by the State Government and
that its administrative and other expenses shall be borne by the respective State Governments.
Clause 14.—This clause provides that the State Government shall, having regard to
the number of specified dams in that State, provide such number of officers and employees
to the State Dam Safety  Organisation as it may consider necessary for the efficient functioning
of the said Organisation. This clause further provides for qualifications and experience and
the functions and powers of the officers and employees.
Clause 15.— This clause relates to the surveillance and inspection and provides that
every State Dam Safety Organisation shall—  (a) keep perpetual surveillance;  (b) carry out
inspections; and  (c)  monitor the operation and maintenance of all specified dams falling
under their jurisdiction to ensure continued safety of such specified dams and take such
measures as may be necessary to address safety concerns that are noticed with a view to
achieve satisfactory level of dam safety assurance as per the guidelines, standards and other
directions issued by Authority and in accorance with the regulations made under this Act.
This clause further provides that the State Dam Safety Organisation for the purpose of
enabling it to make decisions compatible with public safety, shall make or cause to be made
such investigations and shall gather or cause to be gathered such data as may be required
for proper review and study of the various features of the design, construction, repair and
enlargement of dams, reservoirs and appurtenances under their jurisdiction.

26
Clause 16.—This clause provides that the State Dam Safety Organisation shall classify
each specified dam under their jurisdiction as per the vulnerability and hazard classification
creiteria, in accordance with the regulations made under this Act.
Clause 17.—This clause provides that every concerned State Dam Safety Organisation
shall maintain a log book or Data-base for each specified dam recording therein all activities
related to the surveillance and inspection and all important events related to the dam safety
and such other details as may be specified by regulations.  This clause further provides that
every State Dam Safety Organisation shall furnish all such information to the Authority as
and when required by them.
Clause 18.—This clause provides that every State Dam Safety Organisation shall
report the event of any dam failure under their jurisdiction to the Authority, and furnish any
information as and when required by them. This clause further provides that every State Dam
Safety Organisation shall maintain the records of major dam incidents of each specified dam
under their jurisdiction, and furnish all such information to the Authority as and when
required by them.
Clause 19.—This clause provides that every State Dam Safety Organisation shall
render advice to the concerned owner of a specified dam on the safety measures required to
be taken with respect to any dam. This clause further provides that  every owner of specified
dam shall comply with the instructions issued by the State Dam Safety Organisation with
regard to safety or remedial measures in relation to any specified dam owned by it.
Clause 20.—This clause provides that every owner of specified dam shall earmark
sufficient and specific funds for maintenance and repairs of the specified dams and to
implement the recommendations of the State Dam Safety Organisation.
Clause 21.—This clause provides that every owner of specified dam shall compile all
technical documentations concerning hydrology dam foundation, structural engineering of
dam, watershed upstream of dam, and nature or use of land downstream of dam along with
information on all resources or facilities of economic, logistic or environmental importance
which are likely to be affected due to dam failure.  This clause further provides that owner of
specified dam shall furnish all such information to the State Dam Safety Organisation and
Authority as and when required by them.
Clause 22.—This clause relates to qualifications and experience of individuals
responsible for safety of specified dams and provides that every individual responsible for
safety of specified dams and all activities related thereto shall possess such qualifications
and experience and shall undergo  such training as may be specified by regulations.
Clause 23.—This clause relates to the jurisdiction of the State Dam Safety Organisation
and National Dam Safety Authority and provides that all specified dams, shall fall under the
jurisdiction of the State Dam Safety Organisation of the State in which such dam is situated
in matters relating to dam inspections, analysis of information, investigation, reports or
recommendations regarding safety status, and remedial measures to be undertaken to improve
dam safety and in all such matters, full co-operation shall be extended by the owner of the
specified dam, provided that where a specified dam is owned by a Central Public Sector
Undertaking or where a specified dam is extended over two or more States, or where the
specified dam in one State is owned by another State, then, the Authority shall be construed
as the State Dam Safety Organisation for the purpose of this Act. This clause further provides
that in all such dams where the Authority takes up the role of State Dam Safety Organisation,
the Government of the States within the jurisdiction of which such dams are located shall
have access to all information relating to these specified dams as available with the Authority.
This clause also provides that the authorised representatives of the Authority or concerned
State Dam Safety Organisation for the purposes of making any inspection or investigation
necessary for the implementation of the provisions of this Act, may enter upon any part of
the specified dam or its site as and when required and apply such investigation methods, as
may be considered necessary  and  after making inspection or investigation  if  the

27
representative is of the opinion that certain remedial measures are required to be taken, he
shall report such remedial measures to the officer-in-charge of such specified dam and to the
concerned State Dam Safety Organisation.This clause also provides that the Authority and
concerned State Dam Safety Organisation, in cases of specified dams being found to be
distressed on account of their age, degeneration, degradation, structural or other impediments,
shall suggest such remedial measures on such operational parameters (including maximum
reservoir level, maximum spillway discharge and maximum discharge through other outlets)
as it may consider necessary. This clause also provides that nothing shall absolve the owner
of specified dam or any other authority or person from any of the responsibilities of obligations
entrusted upon it under the provisions of this Act and that the provisions of this  clause shall
be in addition to, and not in derogation of any other provision of this Act.
Clause 24.—This clause provides that all costs to be incurred by Authority or State
Dam Safety Organisation on any form of investigation done  including payments given to
the consultants and experts shall be borne by the owner of concerned specified dam.
Clause 25.—This clause provides that any construction or alteration of a specified
dam shall be undertaken subject to investigation, design and construction being done by
such agencies as may be accredited by the Authority or the State Government, as the case
may be provided that the Authority may disqualify any agency which violates any of the
provisions of this Act or the rules or regulations made thereunder.This clause further provides
that every agency for the purpose of designing or evaluating the safety of the specified dam,
make use of the relevant standard codes and guidelines of the Bureau of Indian Standards,
and furnish the reasons, if any departure is made in the design or dam safety evaluation. This
clause further provides that—(1) Agency shall for the purpose of investigation, design and
construction employ such qualified, experienced and competent engineers, as may be specified
by regulations; (2) Agency shall for the purpose of approval of dam design demonstrate the
safety of the design, operational parameters and policies as per the provisions of relevant
codes and guidelines to the Central or the State Government, as the case may be; (3) Agency
shall, for the purpose of dam construction, undertake such quality control measures, as may
be specified by regulations. This clause also provides that the construction of any specified
dam or the alteration or enlargement of any existing specified dam shall be undertaken with
the approval of such competent authority, as may be specified by notificaion by the Central
Government or the State Government, as the case may be.
Clause 26.—This clause provides that before initial filling of any reservoir of a specified
dam the agency responsible for its design shall draw the filling criteria and prepare a initial
filling plan, with adequate time for monitoring and evaluating the performance of the dam and
its appurtenance structures. This clause further provided that before initial filling of the
reservoir is taken up, the State Dam Safety Organisation shall inspect or cause to be inspected
the specified dam either through its own engineers or by an independent panel of experts,
who shall also examine the initial filling programme and prepare a detailed report thereof duly
certifying the fitness of dam for filling.
Clause 27.—This clause provides that every owner of the specified dam shall provide
operation and maintenance establishment for the specified dam, and shall ensure that sufficient
number of trained operation and maintenance engineers or technical persons are posted at
each such dam. This clause further provides that every owner of the specified dam shall
ensure that a well-documented operation and maintenance manual is kept at each of the
specified dams and are followed at all times.
Clause  28.—This clause provides that nothing contained in this Act shall be construed
to absolve an owner of a dam of the duties, obligations or liabilities incidental to the
construction, operation, maintenance and supervision of the dam or reservoir.
Clause 29.— This clause provides that for each specified dam, the owner shall, within
the operation and maintenance establishment, provide a dam safety unit consisting of such
competent levels of engineers as may be specified by regulations.

28
Clause 30.— This clause provides that every owner of a specified dam shall undertake
every year, through their dam safety unit, a pre-monsoon and post-monsoon inspection in
respect of each such dam. This clause further provides that every owner of a specified dam
shall inspect or cause to be inspected every specified dam by the dam safety unit, during and
after every flood, earthquake or any other natural or man-made calamities, or if any sign of
distress or unusual behaviour is noticed in the dam. This clause also provides that every
owner of a specified dam shall— ( a) carry out all inspections in accordance with the
guidelines  and check-lists as may be specified by regulations; ( b) station, at each of the
specified dam site throughout the monsoon period, such engineers and other technical
personnel, as may be decided, in consultation with the State Dam Safety Organisation provided
that the engineers and other technical personnel shall be required to be stationed at their
respective dam sites during entire period of emergency following any other natural or man-
made calamity that may create distress conditions in the dam; and (c) forward the inspection
report by the dam safety unit to the State Dam Safety Organisation, which shall analyse the
report and submit comments on the deficiency and remedial measures, if any, to the owner of
specified dam.
Clause 31.—This clause provides that every owner of a specified dam shall have a
minimum number of such instrumentations at each specified dam, and installed in the manner
as may be specified by regulations for monitoring the performance of such dam. This clause
further provides that every owner of the specified dam shall maintain a record of recordings
of the instrumentations and forward the analysis of such readings to the State Dam Safety
Organisation, in the form, manner and at such interval as may be specified by regulations.
Clause 32.—This clause provides that every owner of a specified dam shall establish
a hydro-meteorological station in the vicinity of each specified dam capable of recording
such data as may be specified by regulations. This clause further provides that every owner
of the specified dam shall collect, compile, process and store data at a suitable location.
Clause 33.—This clause provides that in the case of every specified dam, having a
height of thirty metres or above or falling under such seismic zone, may be specified by
regulations, the owner of the specified dam shall establish a seismological station in the
vicinity of each such dam for recording micro and strong motion earthquakes and such other
data as may be specified by regulations. This clause further provides that every owner of a
specified dam shall collect, compile, process and store data at such suitable location and in
such manner as may be specified by regulations.
Clause 34.—This clause provides that every owner of a specified dam, in respect of
each specified dam, shall — (a) establish well designed hydro-meteorological network and
an inflow forecasting system; ( b) establish an emergency flood warning system for the
probable flood affected areas downstream of the dam; (c) test or cause to be tested periodically
the functioning of systems; (d)  install such scientific and technical instruments which are
invented or adopted from time to time for the purpose of ensuring dam safety and the life and
property of people downstream; ( e) make available the information relating to maximum
anticipated inflows and outflows including flood warning and an adverse impact of the same,
if any, on persons and property towards the upstream or downstream of the dam, to the
concerned district authorities and also make available the information in public domain; and
(f) render necessary assistance to the Authority in establishment and running of the early
warning system for the exchange of real time hydrological and meteorological data and
information related to the operation of reservoirs. This clause further provides that every
owner of a specified dam, for each of its dam, shall, carry out risk assessment studies at such
interval as may be specified by regulations and the first such study shall be made within five
years from the date of commencement of this Act.
Clause 35.—This clause provides that every owner of a specified dam, in respect of
each specified dam, shall, —  (a) prepare emergency action plan before allowing the initial
filling of the reservoir and thereafter update such plans at regular intervals; (b) in respect of
the dam which is constructed and filled before the commencement of this Act, prepare

29
emergency action plan within five years from the date of commencement of this Act and
thereafter update such plans at regular intervals as may be specified by regulations. This
clause further provides that the emergency action plan referred to in sub-section (1) shall,—
(a) set out the procedures to be followed for the protection of persons and property upstream
of the specified dam in the event of an actual or imminent dam failure or to mitigate the effects
of the disaster; (b) include therein,—(i) the type of emergencies which are likely to occur in
the operation of any reservoir; (ii) identification of the likely catastrophic flood in the event
of any dam failure, along with probable areas, population, structures and installations likely
to be adversely affected due to flood water released from the reservoir; ( iii) warning
procedures, inundation maps and advance preparations for handling efficiently and in the
best possible manner the likely adverse situations especially to avoid loss of human life; (iv)
such other matters which may having regard to the grographical conditions, size of the
specified dam and other relevent factors as may be necessary. This clause also provides that
the emengency action plan shall be put into action as and when conditions arise which are
hazardous or likely to be hazardous to a specified dam or potentially hazardous to public
safety, infrastructure, other property or to the environment. This clause also provides that
every owner of the specified dam shall, while preparing and updating the emergency action
plan, undertake a consultation process with all disaster management agencies and other
departments of the State entrusted with disaster management and relief in the area likely to
be affected and owners of other dams in the immediate vicinity likely to be affected, so as to
bring coordination and transparency and allay any unwarranted fear on dam safety issues.
Clause 36.—This clause provides that every owner, organisation and authority shall
render necessary assistance, if so required by any authority under any other law for the time
being in force to meet or mitigate any disaster or emergency arising out of the specified dams.
Clause 37.—This clause provides that the owner of a specified dam shall make or
cause to be made comprehensive dam safety evaluation of each specified dam through an
independent panel of experts constituted as per regulations for the purpose of determining
the conditions of the specified dam and its reservoir provided that the first comprehensive
dam safety evaluation for each existing specified dam shall be conducted within five years
from the date of commencement of this Act, and thereafter the comprehensive dam safety
evaluation of each suh dam shall be carried out at regular intervals as may be specified by
regulations. The clause further provides that the comprehensive dam safety evaluation shall
consist of, but not be limited to — (a) review and analysis of available data on the design,
construction, operation, maintenance and  performance of the structure; ( b) general
assessment of hydrologic and hydraulic  conditions with mandatory review of design floods
as specified by regulations; (c) general assessment of seismic safety of specified dam with
mandatory site specific seismic parameters study in certain cases as may be specified by
regulations; (d) evaluation of the operation, maintenance and inspection procedures; and (e)
evaluation of any other conditions which constitute a hazard to the integrity of the structure.
Clause  38.—This clause provides that the comprehensive evaluation shall be
compulsory in the case of — ( a) major modification to the original or design criteria; ( b)
discovery of unusual condition at the dam or reservoir rim; and (c) after an extreme hydrological
or seismic event.
Clause 39.—This clause provides that the owner of a specified dam shall report the
results of the comprehensive safety evaluation to the State Dam Safety Organisation.  This
clause further provides that the comprehensive evaluation reports shall include, but not be
limited to — (a) assessment of the condition of the structure based on the visual observations
and available data on the design, hydrology, construction, operation, maintenance,
performance of the structure; (b) recommendations for any emergency measures or actions,
if required, to assure the immediate safety of the structure; (c) recommendations for remedial
measures and actions related to design, construction, operation, maintenance and inspection
of the structure, if required; (d) recommendations for additional detailed studies, investigations
and analysis, if required; and (e) recommendations for improvements in routine maintenance

30
and inspection of dam, if required.  This clause also provides that in case where the
comprehensive safety evaluation resulted in recommendations for a remedial measure, the
State Dam Safety Organisation shall pursue with the owner of the specified dam to ensure
that remedial measures are carried out in time, for which the owner shall provide adequate
funds and in case where there are unresolved points of issues emerging between an
independent panel of experts and the owner of the specified dams or concerned authorities,
as the case may be, the matter shall be referred to the State Dam Safety Organisation and in
case, no agreement is arrived at, the matter shall be referred to the Authority which shall
render its advice and send their recommendations to the State Government concerned for
implementation.
Clause 40.—This clause relates to punishment for obstruction, etc., and provides that
whoever, without reasonable cause, —  (a) obstructs any officer or employee of the Central
Government or the State Government, or a person authorised by the National Committee or
the Authority or the State Committee or the State Dam Safety Organisation in the discharge
of his functions under this Act; or ( b) refuses to comply with any dirction given by or on
behalf of the Central Government or the State Government or the National Committee or the
Authority or the State Committee or the State Dam Safety Organisation under this Act, shall
be punishable with imprisonment  for a term which may extend to one year or with fine, or
with both, and if such obstruction or refusal to comply with directions results in loss of lives
or imminent danger thereof, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may
extend to two years.
Clause 41.—This clause relates to offences by Departments of Government and
provides that where an offence under this Act has been committed by a Department of the
Government, the head of the Department shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall
be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly unless he proves that the
offence was committed without his knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to
prevent the commission of such offence. This clause further provides that where an offence
under this Act has been committed by a Department of the Government and it is proved that
the offence has been committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any
neglect on the part of, any officer, other than the head of the Department, such officer shall
be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and
punished accordingly.
Clause 42.—This clause provides that where an offence under this Act has been
committed by a company or body corporate, every person who at the time the offence was
committed, was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company, for the conduct of the
business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the
contravention and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly provided
that nothing in this sub-section shall render any such person liable to any punishment
provided in this Act, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or
that he exercised due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence. This clause
further provides that where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company,
and it is proved that the offence was committed with the consent or connivance of, or is
attributable to any neglect on the part of any director, manager, secretary or other officer of
the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also, be deemed to be
guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
Clause 43.—This clause relates to cognizance of offences and provides that no court
shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under this Act, save on a complaint made by
the Central Government or the State Government or a person authorised in this behalf by the
National Committee or the Authority or the State Committee or the State Dam Safety
Organisation, as the case may be. This clause further provides that no court inferior to that
of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of the first class shall try any offence
punishable under this Act.

31
Clause 44.—This clause provides that every State Dam Safety Organisation shall
prepare annual report, within three months of the expiry of the preceding financial year, of its
activities and safety status of specified dams in the State and such report shall be forwarded
to the Authority and State Government and that Government shall cause the same to be laid
before each House of the State Legislature, where it consists of two Houses or where such
Legislature consists of one House, before that House. This clause further provides that
every State Dam Safety Organisation and every owner of a specified dam shall provide to the
Authority, documentation of the projects, report of enquiries into failure and any other data,
as and when required in such format and in such manner as may be decided by the Authority.
This clause also provides that the authority, shall prepare a consolidated annual report of the
dam safety activities in the country and submit the same to the Central Government within six
months of the expiry of the preceding financial year and that Government shall cause the
same to be laid before each House of Parliament. This  clause also provides that the Authority
shall forward its annual report on the safety status of specified dams to the National Disaster
Management Authority and also make available such report in public domain and the State
Dam Safety Organisation of each State shall forward their annual report to the concerned
State Disaster Management Authority and also make available such report in public domain.
Clause 45.—This clause provides that every owner of the dam other than specified
dams shall undertake such measures as may be necessary to ensure dam safety and shall
comply with such measures in accordance with the regulations made under this Act.
Clause 46.—This clause provides that where a dam, including a dam created due to
landslides or glacial moraine, is located outside the territory of India and the Authority suo
motu or on receipt of information from any person or organisation or authority or source
prima facie is of the opinion that measures are required to be taken to ensure safety of such
dams and failure of which may endanger the life and property of people located in India, it
shall in writing submit an intimation thereof to the Central Government indicating therein the
likely damages which may arise due to failure of such dams and the safety measures required
to be taken in respect of such dam and the Central Government shall take all suitable measures
to mitigate any possible threat.
Clause 47.—This clause provides that the provisions of this Act shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force.
Clause 48.—This clause provides that if the Central Government is satisfied that it is
necessary or expedient so to do, it may, by notification, amend the First Schedule, the
Second Schedule or the Third Schedule and thereupon the Schedules, shall be deemed to
have been amended accordingly and acopy of every notification made under this clause
shall be laid before each House of Parliament as soon as may be after it is made.
Clause 49.—This clause provides that the Central Government may give such
directions, as it may consider necessary, to the State Government where that Government is
the owner of the specified dam and to the owner of a specified dam in any other case for the
effective implementation of the provisions of this Act.
Clause 50.—This clause relates to power of Central Government to make rules and
provides that the Central Government may, by notification, make rules to carry out the
provisions of this Act. In particular, and without prejudice to the foregoing power, such rules
may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— (a) the time and place of the
meetings of the National Committee and the procedure to be followed at such meetings and
the expenditure incurred on the meetings of the National Committee; ( b) the functions,
powers and terms and conditions of service of other officers and other employees of the
Authority; (c) any other matter which is to be or may be, prescribed or in respect of which
provision is to be made by the Central Government by rules.

32
Clause 51.—This clause relates to power of State Government to make rules and
provides that the State Government may, by notification, make rules to carry out the provisions
of this Act. Such rules may provide for all or any of the matters,—(a) the times and places of
the meetings of the State Committee and the procedure to be followed at such meetings;
(b) the expenditure incurred on the meetings of the State Committee; (c) the fee and allowances
paid to the specialist members or expert invitees of the State Committee or its sub-committees;
(d) the organisational structure and work procedure of State Dam Safety Organisation;
(e) the functions, powers, and terms and conditions of service of employees of the State Dam
Safety Organisation; (f) the dam safety measures in respect of dams other than specified
dams; (g) any other matter which is to be or may be, prescribed or in respect of which
provision is to be made by the State Government by rules.
Clause 52.—This clause provides that the Authority on the recommendations of the
National Committee may make regulations consistent with this Act and the rules made
thereunder to carry out the provisions of this Act and such regulations may provide for all or
any of the matters—( a) the standards and other directions for achieving the satisfactory
level of dam safety assurance; (b) the criteria for vulnerability and hazard classification of
specified dams; (c) the details pertaining to the maintenance of log books or data base; (d)
the qualifications and experience of the individuals responsible for safety of specified dams;
(e) the qualifications and experience of the engineers responsible for investigation, design
and construction of specified dams; (f) the quality  control measures for the purpose of dam
construction; (g) the level of competent engineers for the dam safety; (h) the check-lists for
inspection of specified dams; ( i) the minimum number of set of instrumentations in the
specified dams and the matter of their installation; ( j) the data requirements of hydro-
meteorological stations in the vicinity of specified dams; ( k) the data requirements of
seismological stations in the vicinity of specified dams; (l) the time interval of risk assessment
studies to be carried out; (m) time interval for updating the emergency action plan; (n) the
time interval for the comprehensive safety evaluation of specified dams; (o) the mandatory
review of design flood of existing specified dams; ( p) the mandatory site specific seismic
parameter studies of existing specified dams; ( q) the measures as may be necessary to
ensure dam safety by every owner of dam other than specified dams; ( r) any other matter
which is to be specified or in respect of which provision is to be made by the National
Committee by regulations.
Clause 53.—This clause provides that every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as
soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a
total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both the Houses agree in making any modification in the rule
or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule. This clause further provides that every rule made by a State Government
under this Act shall be laid as soon as may be, after it is made, before the State Legislature,
where it consists of two Houses, or where such legislature consists of one House, before
that House.
Clause 54.—This clause provides that if any difficulty arises in giving effect to the
provisions of this Act, the Central Government may, by order, published in the Official
Gazette, make such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may
appear to be necessary  or expedient for removing the difficulty provided that no order shall
be made under this section after the expiry of three years from the date of commencement of
this Act. This clause further provides that every order made under this clause shall, as soon
as may be after it is made, be laid before each House of Parliament.

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for constitution of a National Committee on Dam Safety
and clauses 5 and 6 of the Bill provide for functions and meetings of the National Committee
and expenditure thereof. In respect of which an indicative recurring expenditure of about
rupees seventy lakhs per annum is anticipated for meeting expenses of the National Committee
on Dam Safety. Clause 7 of the Bill provides for establishment and composition of the
National Dam Safety Authority and clauses 8 and 9 provide for functions and officers and
employees of the Authority and expenditure thereof. In respect which an indicative capital
expenditure of rupees thirty-three crore is anticipated for creation of building and
infrastructure facilities for the office of National Dam Safety Authority assuming availability
of the Government land. The indicative recurring expenditure for meeting the remuneration
of the National Dam Safety Authority's officers, staff, consultants, and other miscellaneous
expenses is rupees fourteen crore per annum.
The provisions of the Bill will not involve any other expenditure of recurring or
non-recurring nature.
33

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Sub-clause (1) of clause 50 empowers the Central Government to make rules for the
purpose of carrying out the provisions of the proposed legislation.  Sub-clause (2) specifies
the matters in respect of which such rules may be made.  These matters, inter alia, include —
(a) the times and places of the meetings of the National Committee on Dam Safety and the
procedure to be followed at such meetings under sub-section ( 1) of section 6; and the
expenditure incurred on the meetings of the National Committee under sub-section ( 3) of
section 6; (b) the functions, powers and terms and conditions of service of the employees of
the Authority under sub-section (2) of section 9; (c) any other matter which is to be or may
be, prescribed or in respect of which provision is to be made by the Central Government by
rules.
2.  Sub-clause (1) of clause 51 empowers the State Governments to make rules for
the purpose of carrying out the provisions of the proposed legislation. Sub-clause (2) specifies
the matters in respect of which such rules may be made.  These matters, inter alia, include —
(a) the times and places of the meetings of the State Committee and the procedure to be
followed at such meetings under sub-section (1) of section 12; (b) the expenditure incurred
on the meetings of the State Committee under sub-section (3) of section 12; (c) the fee and
allowances paid to the specialist members or expert invitees of the State Committee or its
sub-committees under sub-section ( 4) of section 12; ( d) the organisational structure and
work procedure of State Dam Safety Organisation under sub-section ( 3) of section 13;
(e) the functions, powers and terms and conditions of service of the employees of the State
Dam Safety Organisation under sub-section (2) of section 14;  (f) the dam safety measures in
respect of dams other than specified dams under section 45;  (g)  any other matter which is to
be or may be, prescribed or in respect of which provision is to be made by the State Government
by rules.
3.  Sub-clause (1) of clause 52 empowers the National Dam Safety Authority to make
regulations consistent with the proposed legislation and the rules made thereunder to carry
out the purposes of the proposed legislation.  Sub-clause (2) specifies the matter in respect
of which such regulations may be made.  These matters, inter alia, include— (a) the standards
and other directions for achieving the satisfactory level of dam safety assurance under
sub-section (1) of section 15;  (b) the criteria for vulnerability and hazard classification of
specified dams under section 16; (c) the details pertaining to the maintenance of log books or
data base under sub-section (1) of section 17; ( d) the qualifications and experience of the
individuals responsible for safety of specified dams under section 22;  (e)  the qualifications
and experience of the engineers responsible for investigation, design and construction of
specified dams under sub-section (3) of section 25;  (f) the quality control measures for the
purpose of dam construction under sub-section (
5) of section 25;  (g) the level of competent
engineers for the dam safety units under section 29;  ( h) the check-lists for inspection of
specified dams under clause (a) of sub-section (3) of section 30;  (i) the minimum number of
set of instrumentations in the specified dams and the manner of their installation under
sub-section (1) of section 31; (j) the data requirements of hydro-meteorological stations in
the vicinity of specified dams under sub-section (1) of section 32;  (k) the data requirements
of seismological stations in the vicinity of specified dams under sub-section ( 1) of
section 33; ( l) the time interval of risk assessment studies to be carried out under
sub-section (2) of section 34;  (m) time interval for updating the emergency action plan under
clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 35;  (n) the time interval for the comprehensive safety
evaluation of specified dams under sub-section (1) of section 37;  (o) the mandatory review
of design flood of existing specified dams under clause (b) of sub-section (2) of section 37;
(p) the mandatory site specific seismic parameter studies of existing specified dams under
clause (c) of sub-section (2) of section 37;  (q) the measures as may be necessary to ensure
dam safety by every owner of dam other than specified dams under section 45;  (r)  any other
34

35
matter which is to be specified or in respect of which provision is to be made by the National
Committee by regulations.
 4.  Sub-clause (1) of clause 53 provides that every rule made under this Act shall be
laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session,
for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the
session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both the Houses agree in making any
modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so,
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity
of anything previously done under that rule.
5.   Sub-clause (2) of clause 53 provides that every rule made by a State Government
under this Act shall be laid as soon as may be, after it is made, before the State Legislature,
where it consists of two Houses, or where such legislature consists of one House, before
that House.
6.   The matters in respect of which rules may be made by the Central Government
and the State Government are matters of procedure and administrative details and it is not
practicable to provide for them in the Bill itself.  The delegation of legislative power is,
therefore, of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for surveillance, inspection, operation and maintenance of specified dams for
prevention of dam failure related disasters and to provide for institutional mechanism
to ensure their safe functioning and for matters connected therewith or incidental
thereto.
————
(Shri Nitin Jairam Gadkari, Minister of Road Transport & Highway, Shipping,
Water Resources, River Development & Ganga Rejuvenation)
MGIPMRND—1578LS(S3)—09.08.2018.