THE HYDERABAD EXPORT DUTIES (VALIDATION) 
BILL, 1955 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABRA) 
A. 
BILL 
to validate the Levy and collection of certain duties on the export 
of goods from the State of Hyderabad. 
WHEREAS the State of Hyderabad was, before the commencement 
of the Constitution, levying duties, whether as fees or surcharges. 
on the export of certain goods from that State to other States; 
AND WHEREAS the said duties continued to be levied and collcct-
.~ ed for a certain period after the commencement of the Constitution; 
AND WHEREAS doubts have arisen with respect to the validity of 
the levy and collection of the s:lid duties; 
AND WHEREAS it is expedient in the public interest that the levy 
and collection of the said duties should be validated; 
10 BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Hyderabad Export Duties (Vali- Short title. 
dation) Act, 1955. 
2. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law or in any Validation of 
judgment, decree dr order of any court, all duties levied and collect- i::ta~ d:-
ed or purporting to have been levied and collected, whether as export n o~ 
fees or surcharges, under any notification as defined in sub-section =ra~ 
(2)-
(a) during the period between the 4th day of February, 
1945, and the commencement of the Constitution; and 

2 
(b) during the period between the commencement of the 
Constitution and the 30th day of September, 1954; 
in respect of the export fl'om the State of Hyderabad to other 
States of any goods mentioned in such notification, shall for all 
purposes be deemed to be and to have always been levied and 5 
collected in accordance with law, and accordingly-
(i) no suit or other proceeding shall be maintained or con-
tinued in any court for the refund of any duties so paid; and 
(ii) no court shall enforce any decree or order directing the 
refund of any duties so paid. 10 
<2) In this section,-
(a) 'notification' means a notification issued in exercise or 
purported exercise of the powers conferred by the Defence 
of Hyderabad Rules 1348F made under the Defence of Hydera-
bad Regulation 1348F; I~ 
(b) 'the State of Hyderabad' in relation to the period be-
fore the commencement of the Constitution means the corres-
ponding Indian State of the same name. 

3 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Under certain notifications issued by the Government of 
Hyderabad in exercise of the powers conferred upon it by the Defence 
of Hyderabad Regulation, 1348F, and the rules made thereunder, 
duties in the nature of permit fees or surcharges were being levied 
and collected on the export from the State of Hyderabad of certain 
-commodities specified in the said notifications, Although the Regu-
lation was not expressed to be operative for any specified period, the 
Hyderabad High Court, by a majority decision, held that the Regula-
tion should be deemed to have lapsed on the termination of the 
emergency, that is to say, on the 30th September, 1946, the date on 
which the Defence CIf India Act ceased to operate [Pannalal Lahoti v, 
-State of Hyderabad, A.I,R. (1954) Hyderabad 129], On the other 
hand, the aforesaid duties had at all material times been regarded by 
the Government of Hyderabad, not' as emergency duties, but as ordi-
nary Quties necessary in the public interest, and the said duties 
continued to be levied and collected after the commencement of the 
Constitution for so long as the agreement entered into with the Gov-
'ernment of India in pursuance of article 306 of the Constitution 
permitted such levy and collection. It has therefore become necessary 
to provide that the validity of the levy of these duties should not 
be questioned either on the ground that the relevant notifications 
-eeased to operate on the 30th September, 1946, . or on any other 
ground. Hence this Bill. ' 
G. B. PANT. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 25th March, 1955. 

LOK SABHA 
Ii 
BILL 
to validate the levy and collection of certain duties on the 
export of goods from the State of Hyderabad. 
The President has, in pursuance of cla.use (1) of artiole 11 T 
of the Constitution of India, recommended to Lok Sabha 
the introduotion of the Bill. 
M N. KAUL, 
Secretary. 
(Shri GOf)ind Ballabh Pant, 
Minister of Home Affairs) 
GIP.J-I.AD-J?34 L.8.-28-3-'5·- r.17O 