i _ 
/ 10K SABRA 
CORRIGENDA 
to 
TEE DEPOSIT INSURANCE CORFORATION ( 
MISCELLANEOUS PEOVISIONS) BILL, 19 
1 • Page 1 , in the L.)ng Title, -
\ for ''unde-r-st and:1ng n_ -~ 
, 
4, lines 12 2. 
i 
Page and 13, -
:for "in con s1 st an t It nad 
.-
1 (',-3. Page 9, line 
after "or" insert "t!1e" 
4 ... __ ,Pag&-'9~ Jine 47,-
after "or" jz sert "a" 
,. Page 10, line 3,-
.. 
"tmdertak1ug" 
":l.ncon si..sten t tI 
(1) 'in sti t;l1 t,inYl '~R.d' . ~ 04 ... _4~ 4. .. ~ .... -' ~ 
."'~ .- .. 
( i1) _.rt s:u...er~ 
6. Page 10, line 1 5, -
after "or" insert Ita" 
Magha 28, 1899 Saka) 
"and " 

, As INTRODUCED 'IN Wit 8ABHA ON 
2 1 FIB !918 
Bill No. It .... 
THE DEPOSIT INSURANCE ~ORPORATION (AMENDMEN'P AND 
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS) BILL, 1978 
BILL 
to prooide fM the acqu.isitiOn. and transfer of the "Uerstanding 01 the CT.; . 
GuaN'IIiee Ctwporation of India LWn.ited in .,.eier to gen,e better ~ , 
Med tor providing credit guarantee to commercial banks, and ju.r1Mr 
. to amend the Depoait ["""anee Corporation Act, 1961, and the Re.~, 
Bank at India. Act, 1934, and for 'lTl4ttera oon.nected tlwn'..witA or 
tftcidental thereto. 
J31 it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-ninth Year of the Rt!publfc: 
of India as follows:-
CHAPTER I 
Put.n.mlARY 
,.", .. :J1II-
~. $' 1. (1) This Act may be aalled the Deposit Insurance Cor,oratllon 
(Amendment and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act, 1978. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government 
auay, by notificatton in the Official Gazette, appoint, and difterent da1le8 
may be appointed for difterent provisions of this Act; and any reference 
10 in ally provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed u 
a reference to the commencement of that provision. 
Z. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(4) "Company" means the Credit Guarantee Corporation of India DeInl--
Linrlted, a. Company formed and registered under the Companies Act, UoDi. 
IS 1956, and having its registered office at Bombay; 
_ .~. J 
" . 

Undertak-
ina of the 
Company 
to YUtin 
u..Corpo-
ration. 
Meriel 
of the 
undertak-
lnI of the 
Company 
trlth the 
UDder-
tak1Da 
of the 
Corpora-
tioa. 
' .. ,.' 
..... If" >£ 
$. ' 
." I " 
2 • 
(b) "Corporation" means the ~posi'i. .i..i.;;urance Corporation 
establish~ tindel tub-section (1) of section 3 of the Deposit Insur-
ance Corporation Act, 1961; 
(c) "re-named Corporation" means the Corporation as re-named 
in accordance with the provisions of seotion 4; 5 
(d) words ann expressions used in this Act and not defined but 
defined in the Deposit Insurance Corporation Act, 1961. shall have 
the meanings respectively assigned to them in that Act. 
CHAPTER II 
ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF UNDERTAKING OF THE CREDIT GUARANTEE 
CORPORATION OF INDIA LIMITED 
3. (1) On the commencement of this Act. the undertaking of the 
Company shall stand transferred to. and shall vest in. the Corporation. 
10 
(2) The undertaking of the Company shall be deemed to include all 
assets, business. rights. powers. authorities and privileges and all property. IS 
movable and immovable. cash balances, reserve funds. investments. book 
debts and all other rights and interests in. or arising out of. such property 
as were, immediately before the commencement of this Act. in the owner-
sa JI88MS~, j .P!lwer or control of the Company, whether within 
Ol""eUiIIIie' ..... , ~ all books of account. registers, records and all other 20 
d~_ta of whatever nature relating thereto and shall also be deemed.. 
to I include all borrowings. liabilities and obligations of whatever kind I 
then subsisting of the Company in relation to its undertaking. 
4. (1) On the transfer to. and vesting in. the Corporation of the 
undertaking of the Company, such undertaking shall be deemed to have 25 
Idf111p4 with the unciertuiDg of the Corporatioa. . and. eonaequen1-. 
~ lD8I'geI.'.. \IIle COI'pOI'8tioa sDaill be Il'e-oamed 81 the- Deposit lDIw:aace 
arlI- -C'redlt GU8nIltee COIpOratiOll, and thereupon lilY F~ to the 
nt,ee .. lneur8ftee COl'pOAtkm or to the Credit GUU'Ul_ CorpQrMion 
47 ~ 
i 
ofl·I .... Lblltted. in the Deposit Insurance COl'POtaiiGn. Act, 1861, or in 30 "of 
any other law for the time being in force or in any ~_ OJ' GMler 
d'WP:a.weW in. fQI'ce immediately before such transfer and vesting. and ~ 
which either the Deposit Insurance Corporation or the Credit Guatlan~ 
Corporation of India Limited is a party or which is in favour of eltbet 
of them. shall be construed as a refler'eJlce to the Deposit Insurance and 35 
Credit Guarantee Corporation.:~ 
'j",");'l'~ohaD&e of name of the Depoeit tns\U'an.~e Corpqratlon. 1;Iy .. ;~ 
virtue of the prwisioes af IU \)..section (l), shall not-- '., 
{a). aftQCt aay right or obli~tion o.f that Corporation, 8ubsi$t.ing 
~tlely before the commeneement of the De.posi~ Insurance. 40 
. C8llJ1G1'8tion (AmatKlmeat and Mi8cellaneo.ul. Provisions) Act, 1978'L 
(bj Tender defectfYe any suit or other legal prooeeGiBg pen_, 
immediately before such commencement. by or against thatCo~ , 
ration in its former name; and 
.,~c), ~ect the institution or commencement of any suit or other 4S 
lecal proceeding which could have been instituted or comMenced, 
before such commencement. by or against the Corporation ift its 
, 'd 

~ name, and ~ery aueh suit or legal proceeding may be tn ... 
tvted or commenced, after the commencement Gf this Act, by Or 
;' : I again,tthe ~named Corporation. . .; , 
.. 5. (n Unless otherwise expreslly proVided by this Act, .n CbealBett, General 
eJfect of 
merger. 5 obligations anrt liabilities, nspeeti~ly, of the Corporation, or tlie 0Mw-
pany, and all contracts, deeds, bonds, agreements, guarantees, ~ndemni­
:tte!, powers of attorney; grants of legal representation and other Dilstru-
'merits of 'wbateftr nature subsisting or having effeet immediately ~ 
the commencement of this Act and to which either the corpora ... ·' .. 
10 th, Company is a party 0; which are in favour of either the Corporation or 
the I Company shan be of as tull force ,and eff~ against or in f{lvour 
flf th,e re-named Corporation, and may be enforced or acted upon as 
fd!,1y ant\ ~ectuany as if in place of the Corporation or the CMnpany, 
D'the case may be, the re-named Corporation had been a pariyfhereto 
J 5 or as if they had been issued in favour of the re-named Coyt>oTatron. 
'I I' "(2) 'If. immediately before the commencement of this Act, any suit, 
tq>~a~ or other proceeding of whatever nature, in rela,tion to any btia,mess 
of the undertaking of the Corporation or of the Comp!lny, inst1~ or 
preferred by or against the Corporation or the Company, is' pending, the 
20 same shall not abate, be discontinued or be in any way prejudicially affect-
~; 'b1 reason of the' tTansfer of the undertatiitg of the Compilfty 'to the 
tbrpotation or the merger of the undertaking of the' Compny wtfh the 
~~king of the Corpora~, or 01 anything eOntained In tIUa ' Act; bat 
the &tiit, appeal or oth~ ptO(teedirig may 'beCOftUnued, ~'nd'''' 
25 forced by or against the re-named Corporatioll;" ',. '~h 
•. (t') For the tNllSfer to; and lve!tttl1g in, the 'CorpOtatid, ''itader 
Mcli';n'3, of the tmdertakin-g of. the Company, the~shaU be ~Wri by,'tiIe 
COrporation to the Company an amount of rupees two crone. " 
" 
(2) The amount specified in. M..section (l) shall be given, in cas~ 
30 within thirty days from the commencement of this Act and such amount 
shall 'Carry tnt.Nat at the Il"ate of f011r per cent. per aJU:UlWl frem'>Illch 
co~mencement till the date on which the amount is paid to the Company:' 
Provided that if the amoont specified in aub-seetion (H is ~.wdthin 
seven days from the commencement of this Act, no lnteres.t.ahal1 be 
35 payable. 
7. (1) The Centrlal Government may, at any time after the commence-
ment of this Act. authoriSe a person or body of persons to ,take over the 
management of the affairs of the Company; and. when any person or 
~qdy of persons. is so authorised, it shaH be the duty of such pers()!l or 
40 b~tY of pe,rsons to brin,~ the operations of the C,mpany to ~ close. r~li.se 
the amount pavable to the Company under section 6. and distribute ~ 
atnount amonp,st the creditors of the Comnanv in duf" comse ofa"minfj: 
tr~tton and, if there is a surp1us. amonrr.;t the contrib~torie.s oft'h~ 
Companv 'in accordance with their rights and interests and. after SU~~ 
45 realisation and I'\istribution. to obtain an crder of the Central Government 
for the cHssolution of the Company. 
(2, Fbr the purposes of sub-s~c'tion (1). the person ot' bcidyof ~ 
authorised under that sub~section sh"n have such of the powers 'IIld 
Payment 
ot 
amount 
Powerot 
Central 
Govern-
ment to 
authorise 
a person 
or body 
of per-
sons 
to take 
over the 
manaae-
ment 
ot the 
Company. 

" tluties of the Ofticial Liquidator, appo~ted under the Companies Act. 
1956, as -.re necessary to give effect to the provEions of that sub-aection 
.. if the Company were being wound up by !.he court. and, for this 
purpose, the provisions of the Companies Act, 1956, shaD apply subject 
to the modification that for the word "Court", wherever it occurs, tlie , 
words "Central Government" shall be substituted. 
(3) When any person or body of persons is authorised by the Central 
Government under sub-section (1), to take over the management of the 
aftairs of the Company,-
lof 18M. 
«I) the provisions of the Companies Act, 1956, or of any other 
law for the time being in force or any instrument having effect by 
virtue of any such Act or other law shall, in so far as they are tneon-
sifltant with the provisions of this Act, cease to apply to, or in relation 
to, the Company; 
10 1 of 1901. 
'~ 
(b) all persons in charge of the management, including any I, 
person holding office as manager, director or secretary of the Copt-
pany, immediately before the authorisation of such person or body 
of persons, shall be deemed to have vacated their offices, as such. 
(4) As soon as the affairs of the Company have been wholly wound 
up, the person or body of persons, authorised under sub-section (1). 20 
lIhnll submit his or their duly audited final accounts to the Central 
Gevemment ann shall apply to that Government for orders as to the 
dissolution of the Company. 
(5) The Central Government shall, after hearing such person as it 
may think fit. and upon perusing the accounts as audited. if satisfied that 2, 
the affairs of the Company have been whonV' wound up, make an order 
that the Company be di!;so}ved from tne date of the order and the 
Company shall stand dissolved accordingly. 
(6) The Central Government may also make an or"er relating to-
(a) the application. subject to the provisions of the Companies 30 
Aet. 1956, of the balance in the hands of the person or body of persons 
authOriSed un~r sub-section (1); or 
(b) the payment of such balance into the general revenue 
account of the Central Gov~ment.; and 
(e) the disposal of the books and papers of the Company. 3' 
(7) A copy of the order made by thP. Central Government for the 
dI'lOtution of the Comoanv shall be filer! bv the ~re-named Corporatlon 
with the Re'dstrar of Companies within thIrtv days !rom the -date of 
sueh order and the ~strar of Companies shall 'Jlive effect to thP. said 
efter a8 if it were an order made by the COUl't for the 'dissolution of the 40 
Company. ", -, ---'-.- --. 
(3) The provisions of this section shall have effect notwithstanding 
-~g to the contrary contained in tb~ Companies Act, 1956, or in any 
other law for the time being in force, 
1 of 1958. 
.~ 
~: 
,.1.' .. , 
1 of 19M. 
I 

,,, 
~' 
, 1 
.-J:: : 
:' , 
r· 
~. 
5 
CHAPTER In 
AMl!NDMl!!NTS TO mVDmPOSIT INSURANCE CORPORATION ACT, 1961 
, ·8. On the J ~oll).lneDcement of this Act, the Deposit Insurance Corpo-
,...tioat ,Act, 1961, shall have effect subject to .the following amendments, 
S UIIleJ.y:~ • 
10 
20 
(1) in the long title, after the words "in::lurance of deposita", the 
words "and guaranteeing of credit facilities""hall be inserted: 
(2) in secti,OIl 1, in 8ub"section (1), tor the words ,"the Deposit 
Insurance Corporation", the words "the Deposit Insur~ce and Credit 
Guarantee Corporation~' shall be substituted; 
(3) in section 2,-r ., • 
, (i) in' clause (e), for the worda "the Deposit Insurance 
Corporation", the wards "the Deposit Insurance and Credit Gua-
rantee Corporation" shall be substituted; 
(ii) after clause (ee), the following clause shall {,e inserted, 
namely:-
• (eea) "credit institution" means all or any of the 
follOwing, namely:-
(i) a banking company; 
(ii) a cOIITesponding new bank; 
(iii) a Regional Rural'i)3ank; 
(tv) a co-operative bank; 
(v) a financial institution:': 
(iii) after clause (hh), the following clause shall be inserted, 
2S namely:-
• (hha) "financial institution" means any ilnancial insti-
.tution within the meaning of clause (c) of section 451 of 
the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934;'; 
(4) in section 3, after sub-section (1), the following sub-section 
30 shall be inserted, namely:-
35 
"(lA) Any reference in this Act to the Deposit Insurance 
Corporation shall, on and fmm the date on which Chapter II of 
the Deposit Insurance Corporation (Amendment and MDcel-
laneous Provisions) Act, 1978, comes into force, be construed as 
a reference to the Deposit InsuranCe and Credit GUarantee 
Corporation."; 
(5) in aection 4,-
(i) in sub-section (1), for the words "five crores", the words 
"fifteen crores" shall be substituted; 
(ii) in sub-section (2), for the words "authorised capital''', 
the words "i8sued capital" shall De substituted; 
Amend-
meot of 
the 
Depoett 
Insurance 
Corpora-
tion Act, 
1981. 

j, 
Cancella_ 
tion of 
relistra-
tion 
of an 
insured 
bank for 
non-pay-
ment of 
premium. 
G 
. 
(6) in section 6, in aUHlecUon (1) ,-
{i) for clause (a), the followin& clause shall be substituted, 
namely:-
,.,'J "(G' the Governor, fo.r the time being, of tlae BeIerve 
~ ~ >: Bank or, if the Resenoe Bank, in pW'SuaftQe ot the deC!leiob J 
of the Committee of the Central Board of Directors of ... 
Bank, nominates any Deputy Governor for the purpose, the 
Deputy Governor so nominated, who shaD be the 'Chairman 
of the Board;"; 
(iij after clause (a), the following clause shall be inserted, 10 
'ftame1y':-
"(e) four rUrectors, nominated by the Central Govern-
ment in consultation with the Reserve Bank, having special 
knowledge or practical experience in respect of accountancy, 
~tllZ'e al'ld rural economy, banking, co-operation, IS 
eeGIlemies, finance, Jaw or small ... cale industry «any other 
matter, the special kDowJedge of, and practical experience in 
which, is likely, ba the opinion 9f the Central Government, 
to be useful to the Corpocration;"; 
(7) in section 15,- 20 
(i) in sub-section (1), for the WOI'ds l'with the previOUS 
approval of the Central Government, be notified by the Corpo-
ration in the Official Gazette from time to time: ", the words 
"with the prntous approval of the Relerve Bank, be notified by 
the Corporation. ftrom time to time, to the insured banks and 25 
different rates may be notified for different categories of insured 
banks:" shall be subBtitated; 
(ii) in sub-section (I', fOl' the words Unot exceeding eight 
per cent. per annum as may be prescribed", the words "not 
eJtCealtng eight per cent. OV& and above the bank rate as may 30 
be prescribed" shall be substituted; 
{8~ ·lIfter section 15, the fe>llowing new sectiOl'l shall be inserted, 
aamelYI-
U15A. (1) The Corporation may cancel the registration of an 
insured bank if it fails to pay the premium for three consecutive 35 
periods: 
Provided that no such registration shall be cancelled except 
after giving to the :concerned bank ~ne month's n~tice in writing 
~aamg upon that bank to pay the .amount in def~\llt. 
. (2) The Corporation may restore the registration of a bank 40 
whOle r~gistratlon has been cancelled under sub-section (1), if 
the concerned bank requests the COl'poa'ation to restore the regis-
tration and pays all the amounts due by way of premia trom the 
date of default till the date of payment rogether with interest 
due thereon on the date of payment: 
Provided that the Corporation shall not restore the registra-
tion unless it is satisfied, 01'\ Qh'inspection of the concerned bank 
or otherwise. that it is eligible f.rt be registered as an insured 
bank."; 
45 

S 
10 
IS 
20 
35 
7 
(9) after Chapter III, -tlie following Chapter aIi~. be inserted, 
namely:- I' 
'CffAPTER III-A 
CREDIT GUARANTEE FUNCTIONS 
21A. (1) The Corporation may guarantee credit facilities 
giWll by any eredit institutiOn cci may also indemnify 'creClit 
institutions in respect of credit facilities gnnA;ed. ~ them. 
(J) TiM Board may, for the purpose of guM'anteeing credit 
taeWtia. 81"anted b-y credit institutions or inciemnifying credit 
instiiu-tions, frame O1'1e Ol' more seMmes in SI.W& fOrm and in such 
manner and containing such provisions as tllM! Board may, from 
time to time, deem fit. 
(3) The Board may l~y, on every credit institatiOD availin, 
itself of the guarantees or indemnities provif\ed by tu C~ 
ration, a fee at such rate or rates as may, with the previous 
aPFIroval of the Reserve Bank, be notified by the- Corporation to 
the <;redit institutions from time to time and ditferent rates may 
be notified for different categories of crooit, institutions, for 
different types of credit facilitie.s, for different areas where the 
credit facilities are utilised, or for different cate&ories of bene-
ficiaries of the credit facilities. 
B.%planation.-'·Credit facility" means any financial assist-
ance, incluciing a loan or advance, cash credit, overdraft, bUls 
pW'chaaqd QI' discounted, a term of w\almElIlt credit and any 
QUaramee other than a periafmance guarantee, gtanMd or issued 
in India by a credit institution at any of its offices in India. 
2'lB. The Corporation may act as agent for the Central 
Government, 
(i) in guaranteeing the due performance by any small-
scale industrial concern or other institution or undertaking 
or categories of institutions or undertakillgi appn>ved by the 
Central Government in this behalf, of its, or their, obligations 
to aay credit institution in respect of loans ann advances 
mad. or other credit facilities provided to it, or them, by 
aw:b credit institution. and. 
fii) in making, as such agent, of payments in connection 
with such guarantee. ' ; 
(10) for section 22, the following section shall be subsUtuted, 
namely:-
Guaran-
teein, of 
credit 
faciUtiea 
and ia-
demnity-
ing 
credit 
institu-
tions. 
Corpora.. 
tion to 
act as 
alent of 
Central 
Govern-
ment. 
"22. The Corporation shall maintain three fwlda, to be called, Funds ot 
respectively, the Deposit Insurance Fund, the Credit Guarantee Cor-
Fund and the General Fund."; poration. 
(11) in section 23.-
(i) in sub-section (1), in clause (d), after the worc\s 
''General Jl'uPld", tbe words "or the Credit Guarantee Fund" shall 
45 be inserted; 

.,~-t ' 
; ~ , 
Credit 
Quarao.. 
teel'und 
" 
.... 
, ' 
;. 
8 I I 
'" I 
'(if) in sub-section (2) ,- I 
(a) in clause (p), the word '~and", occurring at the eJl~ 
shan be omitted; II 
(b) in clause (c), the word "jand" shall be added at the end\ 
(c) after clause (c), the following claUle ahall ~ 
. ,inserte«l, namely: - I 
I 
Ie <d) to meet the whole or any part of the liabilityl 
on account of the depr-eciation in assets, eontributions l
l 
to ,staff superannuation and other funds_or other expen.ae'l 
incurred or to be incurred by the Corporation as maYI 
be decided by the Board,"; II 
(UI). ,after section 23, the following new section I1ialJ. be inserted, 
zaamel,;-
i'':; '~23A. (1) To the Credit Guarantee Fund shall be credited,-
(a) all amounts in the Reserve fOIl' unexpired Guarantee 
Risks maintainen by the Credit Guarantee Corporation of I 
India Limited, a company formed and registered under the I 
Companies Act, 1956, and having its registered office at Bom- I 
bay; I 
(b) all amounts received by the C()rporation as fees for i 
, iU&l'antees and indemnities taken over or given by it; I 
{e) all amounts receiven by the Corporation in respect II 
of guarantees and indemnities taken over or given by it; I 
I 
(d) all amounts transferred to that Fund trom tlie I 
Deposit Insurance Fund or the General Fund under section ~ 
~'and 'I , I 
• ! ~. .~., (e) all income arising from the investments made out of II 
that Ji'pnd. I 
(2') The said Fund shall be applied- II 
. ;, (a) to make payments in respect of guarantees and 3~1 
!Jldemnities taken over or issued by the C.or~a~on; I 
I 
(b) to meet any liability in (['espect of the amount refer- I 
rec\, ,to in clause (d) of SUb-section (1),; and II 
(c) to meet the whole or any part of the liability on I 
account of depreciation in assets, contributions, tq ~ and 3~ 
superannuation and other funds, or other expensesinc\11'I'ed I 
Or to be incurred by the Corporation, as may be decided by I 
the B08I1'd."· I 
'J .' I 
(13) 'in section 24,- I 
I 
(i) after the words and figures "of section 23", the words, ~ 
brackets, figures and letter "or in sub-section (1) of section 23A" I 
shall be inserted; and .. .. '1 1\ 
: (ii) for the. words "of that section", .the worda,' ft~s, 'brae- I 
ke1:s and letter "of section 23, or, as the case may .i!llu~section _\ 
(2) of section 23A" shall be substituted; 45 
I 

, 
i 
~3~1~1' 
~ f 
~ 
5 
10 
20 
25 
30 
3S 
,I 
40 '. 
ti4) in section 25, att~r the words "Deposit InsUirance Fund;', 
the words "or the Credit Guarantee Fund" shall be ftlserted; 
(15) after section 25, the following new section shall be inserted, 
namely:-
"25A Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the 
Board may-
(a) transfer any amount from the Deposit Insurance 
Fund to the Credit Guarantee Fund or from the Credit 
Guarantee Fund to the Deposit Insurance Funcl, or 
(b) utilise any money standing to t1)e credit of either 
• of the said Funds, for such purposes as it may think fit, if 
it fa satisfied that the balance in the Fund, after such transfer 
or utilization, will be adequate to meet any probable claim 
on that Fund."; 
(16) in section 26, in sub-section (1), after the wordS "Deposit 
Inslm'ance Fund", the words "or Credit Guarantee Fund" shall he 
inserted; 
(1 n for section 27, the following section shall bti substituted, 
namely:-
. "27. If, at any time, the amount available in the Deposit 
Insurance Funci or the Credit Guarantee Fund is insufficient to 
meet the requirements of that Fund, the Corporation may trans-
fer, on such terms and for such period as may be determined by 
the Baud with the approval of the Reserve Bank, from any· of 
the other two Funds, referred to in section 22, such amount as 
may be necessary to meet the requirements of the Deposit Insur-
ance Fund or the Credit Guarantee Fund, as the case may be."; 
(18) section 30 shall be re-numbered as sub-section (1) there-
of, and after sub-section (1) as so re-numbered, the following sub-
seCtion shall be inserted, namely:-
"(2) Notwithstanding anything containec\ in the Income-Tax 
Act, 1961, the Corporation shall not be liable to pay any tax 
under that Act on any of its income, profits or. gains for the 
period commencing from the first day of January, 1m, and end· 
ing with the commencement of the accounting yeafl during which 
Chapler U of the Deposit Insll4'ance Corporation (Amendment 
and Miscellaneous PrOVisions) Act, 1978, comes into force and 
for four accountihg years following that year.·'; 
(19) in section 34, in sub-section (1),-
.'('i) ilfterthe words "an insured bank", the words "or a credit 
insti~ution" shall be inserted; and 
"(ii) after the worcis "deposits in that bank", the wards "or 
the credit facilitIes granted by that credit institution, as the case 
may be," shall be inserted; 
4S (20) in section 35,-
(i) in sub-section (1), after the words "insured bank", the 
words "or credit institution" shall be inserted; and 
Amounts 
in one 
Fund may 
be trall~ 
terred to 
the other 
Fund Or 
may be 
utiliSed 
tor othel 
purposes. 
Advances 
from 
General 
Fund to 
the Depo-
sit Insur-
ance Fund 
or Credit 
Guaran-
tee. 
Fund. 

Ccgni-
zance and 
trial of 
offences. 
Amend-
ment of 
Act 2 of 
1934. 
\, 
iti 
• . 
tU) 'iIi' sub-~ction ' (2) ,_. , ' , " ' 
(a) after the words "insured bank", the words "or Ibredft 
institution shall be inserted; 
(b) after the worfls "the bank", the words "or the credit 
institution" shall be inserted; S 
, (21) in section 36,-
(i) in sub-section (1), after the word& "insured bank''', the 
words "or a credit institution" shall be il'1Serted~ 
(ii) in sub-section (3), for the words "neIther the bank 
inspected or investigated nor any other banlt", the words uneither 10 
the bank nor the credit institution as the case may be, inspected 
6r'fnVestigated, nor any other bank 011' credit institUtion" shall be 
~bstituied; 
(22) in section 38, after the words "instiren bank", the wotds 
"or credit institution" sliall be inserted: 15 
(23) section 39 shall be re-numbered as sub-section (1) of 
that section, and after sub-section (1), as so re-numbered, the foUow-
ing sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-
"(2) The Corporation shall observe, except as otherwise 
required by law, the practices and usages customary among the 20 
bankers, and, in particular, it shall not divulge any information 
relating to an insured bank or its customers or a credit institution 
or its customers except in cN-cumstances in which it is,in accord-
ance with law or practices or usages customary among bankerA, 
necessary or appropriate for the Corporation to divulge such 2S 
information." ; 
(24) for section 49, the following section shan be substituted, 
namely:-
"49. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973, no court shall take cogn.izanCe of any 30 2 of 
offence punishable under this Act except upon a complaint, in 
writin~, m~de by an officer of the Corporation, generally or 
spedally authorised in writing in this behaUby the Board, and 
no -court, inferior 'to the Court of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a 
Judic:Jal Magistrate of the first class, shall try any such offence. 3S 
(2) NotWithstanding anything contained in the Code of 2 of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973, a Magistrate may, if he sees reason 90 
to do, dispense with the personal attendance of the oiticer of the 
COII'pOration filing ~he complaint, but the Magistrate may, fn his 
discretion, at any stage of the proceedings, iUrect the personal 40 
attendance of the complainant."; 
: I· (,25) in the First Schedul~, for the words "peposit Insurance 
Corporation", wherever they occur, the words "nepo.it Insurance 
and Credit Guarantee COrPorationU shall be substituted. 
CHAPTER IV' 
,~ , , ' .. 
AMENDMENT TO THE RESERVE BANK OF INDIA A~ 1~34 , 
9. In the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, in section 17, in clause 
(llA) , sub-clause (a) shall be omitted. 
4S 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Deposit Insurance Corporation, a Corporation established under 
the DtW~t Insurance Corporation Act, 1961, transacts the business of 
insuring deposits with banks. The Credit Guarantee Corporation of India 
Ltd., a company registered under the Companies Act, 1956, trans~cts the 
business of guaranteeing and indemnifying of loans and advances granted 
by 'Ule commereial banks, co-operative banks and other financial in1;ti· 
tutions. The objectives of the two Corporations are cognate in that both 
seek to protect banks and depositors. The resources of the Deposit In-
surance • Corporation are relatively larger as compared to the risk carried 
by i~. The Credit Guarantee Corporation of India Ltd. have relatively 
smitHer resources. It' is considered advantageous to tran~fer the under-
taking of the Credit Guarantee ,corporation of India Ltd. to the Deposit 
Insuranc:e Corporation which will be renamed as the Deposit Insurance 
and Credit Guarantee Corporation. The Bill seeks to provide tor the 
acquisition by and transfer to the Deposit Insurance Corporation of the 
undertaking of the Credit Gu~antee p,o~ration of ·lndia Ltd. 
2. Opportunity has also been taken to inc1uri.e certain amendments to 
th~ ,P,~~ ln~~,n.c~ Cor,por,atWn Act, 1961~" which ~ considered 
necessary in the light of experience gained in t~e adIIJ,iriistratioD. of the 
Act. 
NEW 1>zLHI; H. M. PATEL; 
r,e l5t~p~~em~r, 1977. ... ,'! '1 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLES 117 AND 
., 274 OF THE CONSTITUTION OF'INDIA 
,fCepy of letter No. F. 6/9/74-BO. 1(1), dated the 9th February, 1978 
fr~ Sbri lJ. M. Patel. Minister of Finance to the Secretary, Lok Sabha.] 
The President having been informed of the subject matter of the pro-
posed Deposit Insurance Corporation (Amendment and Miscellaneous 
Provisions) Bill, 1978 recommends under article 117(1) read with article 
274(1) of the Constitution of India the introduction of the Bill in the 
Budget Session of Lok Sabha. 

ANNEXURE 
ExTRACTS FROM mE DEPOSIT INSURANCE CORPORATION A&r, 1961 
(47 OF 1961) 
An Act to provide for the establishment of a corporation for the purppse 
of insurance of deposits and {or other matters connected therewiijl 
or incidental thereto. 
• • • • • 
Short 1. (1) This Act may be called the Deposit InsuTance Corporation Act, 
title, 1961. :l 
extent and 
com. 
mence· 
ment. 
Deflni-
tion •. 
Capital 
of Corpo-
ration. 
• • • • • 
I. In this Ad, unless the context otherwise requires,-
• • • • • 
(e) "Corporation" means the Deposit Insurance Corporation 
established under section 3; 
• • • • • 
4. (1) The authorised capital of the Corporation shall be one crore 
of rupees but the Central Government may, in consultation with the 
Reserve Bank, increase such capital from time to time, so. however. that 
the total authorised capital shall not exceed five crores of rupees. 
(2) The authorised capital for the time being of the Corporation shall 
be fully paid-up and shall stand allotted to the Reserve Bank. 
• • • • • 
Board of 6. (1) The Board of diJrectors of the Corporation shall consist of the 
tlirectors. following, namely:-
(a) the Governor for the time being of the Reserve Bank, who 
shall be the Chairman of the Board; 
• • • • • 
Premium. 15. (1) Every insured bank shall, so 10n'lt as it continues to be regis-
tered, be liable to pay a premium to the Corporation on ito; deposits at 
such rate or utes as may, with the previous apprr'lval of the Central 
Government. be notified by the Corporation in the Official Gazette from 
time to time:~' . 
Provided that the prp.mium payable by . any insured bank fOl' any 
period shall not E'x('eed fifteen nave paise ner an.Dum for every hundred 
rupees (If thl' total amount of thp. denosits iTl th~t hlmk at the p.nd t.lf that 
period or. where its TP(!istration hAS b~n c'lnC'I;'l1pd during that period. on 
the date of its cancellation: 
Provided further that. where thp. re(!i'ltraHnn of flnv insu~ bank i'l 
cancelled under section 13 or under section 13C. such cancellation shall 
12 

.,. ..... , 
13 
not aifect the lIability of that b!nk for payment of premium for the 
period before such cancellation' and of any interest due under the provi~ 
!dons of this section. 
• • • • '. (3) If an insured bank makes any default in payment ef any amount 
of premium, it shall, for the perioc\ of such default, be liable to pay to 
the Corporation interest on such amount at such a:ate not exceeding 
eight per cent. per annum as may be prescribed. 
• • • • • 
3'4 The Corporation shall maintain two funds to be called rellpectively 
the Deposit Insurance Fund and the General Fund. 
23. (1) To the Deposit Insurance Fund shall be credited,-
• • • • • 
(d) all amounts transferred to that Fund from the General Fund 
under section 27; and 
• • • .. .. 
(2) The said Fund shall be applled-
• • • • -. 
• (b) to meet liability in ~spect of an advance taken under 
section 26; and I • 
(c) to meet Uabillty in respect of the amounts referred to in 
clause (d) of sub-section (1). -
K. All receipts of the Corporation other tlian those referred to in 
sub-section (1) of section 23 shan be credited to the General Fund and 
all payments bv the Corporation other than tnose referred to in sub-
section (2) of that section shaH be made out of that Fund. 
25. All moneys belon~inR' to the Deposlt Insurance Fund or the 
General Fund which may not for the time bein~ be required by the 
Corporation shall be invested in promissorv notes. stock or securitiefl of 
the Central Government and all other moneys ~h!\lJ be depos:ted with the 
Reserve Bank. 
26. (1) The Reserve Bank shall. from time to time. advance to the 
Corporation on a reQuest bv it such sum 0" sums $\"1 mav be reauired by 
the Corporation for tlie purposes of the Depl"Isit Insurance Fund: 
Provided that the total amount outstanding lit anv one time on account 
of such advances shall not exceed flve crores of rupees . 
• • • • • 
Funds 
of Corpo-
ration. 
Deposit 
Insurance 
Fund. 
General 
Fund. 
Invest_ 
ment. 
Advances 
by Re-
serve 
Bank. 
n. If at any time the amount available in the Deposit Insurance Fund Advance 
is insufficient to meet tne reauirements of that Fund. the Corporation from 
may transfer from the General Fund such amount as ~y be necessary General 
to meet the requirements of the Deoosit Insurance Fund on such terms ~~;:litO 
and for such period as may be determined by the Board with the approval Insurance 
of the Reserve Bank. • Fund . 
• • • • • 

Returns 
from in-
sured 
banks. 
Corpora-
tion to 
have 
acC4lf,jI tQ 
recor~. 
Inspec-
tion of 
insured 
banks by 
Reserve 
Bank. 
Reserve 
Bank to 
furnilh 
informa-
tion 
to Corpo-
ration, 
Cogni-
zance 
of off-
ences. 
14 
J4. (1) JiotwithsUndiDg. anytltiJ1g~tained in ;the Banking Regu-
latien Act 1949, or any other law f&r t8e time' being in force the Corpo-
ration ma~ at any time direct an insured ban~ to f~ish to it, WithiB 
such time as may be specified by the Corporation, such statements and 
ipfp,r,~tion relaHpg to the ci~~i\S in thj.t bank as the Co.rJ>Qt~U()~ fllay 
capside r lleCC$Si¥1'Y, or ell;pedieut to .obtain fpr ,the pur~ses of thl~A.Ct. 
. . . . .' 
35. (1) The Corporation shall bave free access to all such records of 
an insured bank perusal whereof may ~ppear to th~ Corporation ~9, be 
~essary for 'the discharge of its functions under this Act. 
(2) The Corporation may require any insured bank to furnish to it 
copies of any ()f the recorp.~ reierr.wd 1<> 4l sub-sectioPo (,1) a.Iild ~he llank 
shall ~ bound to comply with the requisition. 
, .. (1) The Corporation may for any of the purposes of' Ithis Act 
request the Reserve Bank to cause an inspection of the books arrd aceounts 
or an investigation of the affairs of an insured bank to be made and on 
such request the Reserve Bank shllll ~ause f $Ucb i.nsp~tiqn OIl' j~stl­
gation ,to be made l:?y one or mor~ of its omcers or through such other 
person or agency as the Reserve Bank may determine . 
• • • • .* 
($) . Wh~ Jln. iJl1m~ction Of iqve&t~gatiqn has beau .m4lde. ~4er this 
section, the Reserve Bank shall furnish a f!PPY Pi its ·r~port ~ the C~rP0-
ration and neither the bank inspected or investigated nor any other bank 
shan ,be entMled to be fUrBished with. a copty of such repol't . 
. ' 
• • • • 
38. The Reserve Bank !!thall, on a request in writing from the Corpo-
ration, fwmish to it any report or infor~atjon relating to an insurerl bank 
m~Oe Qr obtained bv it under or in pursuance of' the Reserve Bank' of 
India J\ct, 1934 or t~e Banking Regulation A,ct, 1949. . ..., 
•• • • • 
48. No court shall take co~izance of any (\offence punishable 'under 
tais Act ~pt, UpGR aeomJllaint in writinc made by an officer of the 
Corporation gellerally or sPeCially authorised in writmll ill lhis behalf 1>,,, 
the Board and no court inferior to that of a DrSSidency ma.,l{istrate or 'a 
magistrate of the fi.rst class shall try anv such offence. , ". . 
• • • • • 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
(See section 39) 
Declaration of fidelity and seCTecy 
I doherebv declare that I will faithfuliv. trulv and to the 'best of my 
skUl anc! abil1tv execute and perform 'the dutleR requirP.d of me all dire~­
tor, auditor.'Offtcer or other employee (as the ease mav be) of the 'DepOsit 
Insurance Corporation and which properly relate to the 'Offlce or position 
held by· me In the said Corporation'." -' 
10ol1949. 
2 of 1934. 
10 of 1949 

, . 
I further declare that I will not communicate or allow to be communi-
catefl to any person not legally entitled thereto any information relating 
to the affairs of the Deposit Insurance Corporation OIl' to the affairs of 
any person having any dealing with the said Corporation; nor will I 
allow any such person to inspect Or have access to any books orQ~u­
ments belonging to or in the possession of the Deposit Insurance Corpo-
ration and relating to the business of the said Corporation or the business 
of any person having any dealing with the said Corporation. 
Signed before me: (Signature) 
ExTRACf FROM THE REsERVE BANK OF INDIA AcT, 1934 
(2 OF 1934) 
• • • • 
1'1. The Bank shall be authorised to carry on and transact the several 
kinds of business hereinafter specified, namely:-
• • • • • 
(llA) the acting as agent for the Central Government,-
(a) in guaranteeing the due performance by any small-scale 
industrial concern, approved by the Central Government, of its 
obligations to any bank or other financial institution in respect 
of loans and aclvances made, or other credit facilities provided, 
to it by such bank or other financial institution and the making 
as such agent of payments in connection with such guarantee, and 
• • • • • 
Business 
whlch the 
Bank rna)' 
transact. 

i· 
,.'~ 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the acquisition and transfer of the undertaking of the 
Credit Guarantee Corporation of India Limited in order to serve 
better the need for providing credit guarantee to c(j"rillnercial banks, 
and further to amend the Deposit Insurance Corporation Act, 1961, 
and the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, and for matters connected 
therewith' or incidental thereto. 
.. ...-..,. .. ~-
(Shri H. M. Patel, 
Ministe,- of Finance.) 