BW No. If of 1957 
THE WEALTH-TAX BILL, 1957 
(As INTRODUCED IN l« SABHA) 

THE WEALTH-TAX BILL" IQS1 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUS. 
CHAPl'ER I 
PRIUUIlfAIlY 
CLAUIlDil 
, 
1. Short title, extent and eommeneement. 
2. Definitions. 
C!!API'ER II 
CHARGE OF WIIAL'l'H-TAX AND AIISftIi SU1I.JZCT TO .va •• _ 
3. Charge of wealth-tax. 
4. Net wealth to include certain assets. 
5. Exemptions in respect of certain assets. 
6. Exclusion of assets and debts outside India. 
7. Value of assets, how to be determined. 
CHAPTER III 
WEALTH-TAX AUTHOIIITmB 
8. Wealth-tax Officers. 
9. Appellate Assistant Commissioners o! Wealth-tax. 
10. Commissioners of Wealth-tax. 
U. Inspecting Assistant Commissioners of Wealth-tax. 
12. Wealth-tax Officers to be subordinate to the CommWsioll1r el 
Wealth-tax and the Inspecting Assistant Commillioner 01 
Wealth-tax. 
13. Wealth-tax authorities to follow orders, etc. of the Board. 
CHAPTER IV 
14. Return of wealth. 
15. Return after due date and amendment of A'tura. 
16. Assessment. 
17. Wealth escapine' assessment. 
18. Penalty for concealment. 

Cd) 
CHAPl'ER V 
LIUILlTY TO ASSESSMENT IN SPBClAL CASES 
Ouuas 
18. Tax of deceased person payable by legal representative. 
20. Assessment after partition of a Hindu undivided family. 
~1. Assessment when assets are held by courts of wards, admini5' 
trators-general, etc. 
2!. Assessment of persons not resident in India. 
CHAPTER VI 
APPEALS, REVISIONS AND REFERENCES 
23. Appeal to the Appellate Assistant Commissioner from orders 
of Wealth-tax Officers. 
24. Appeal to the Appellate Tribunal from orders of the Appellate 
Assistant Commissioners. 
25. Power of Commissioner to revise orderl of Wealth-tax Oftlcers 
in the interests of revenue. 
26. Appeal to;t th· ppellate Tribunal 
ment by Co ssioners. 
27. Reference to-- igh Court. 
from orders of enhance-. 
28. Hearing by High Court. 
29. Appeal to Supreme Court . 
. CHAPTER VII 
PAYMENT AND RECOVERY OF WEALTH-TAX 
30. Notice of demand. 
31. Recovery of tax and penalties. 
32. Mode of recovery. 
33. Liability of transferees of properties from assessees in certain 
cases. 
34. Restrictjons on registration of transfers of immovable property 
in certain cases. 
CHAPTER VITI 
MISCELLANJIOUS 
35. Rectification' of mistakes. 
36. Prosecutions. 
37. Power to take evidence on oath, etc. 
3&. Information returns and statements. 

39. Effect ot transfer of authorities on pendinl.proCMdin ... 
10. Computation of perioda of limitation. 
41. Service of notice. 
42. Prohibition of disclOlure of information. 
43. Bar of jurisdiction. 
44. Appearance before Wealth-tax· authorities by authoriled 
representativet. 
45. Act not te apply in certain cases. 
46. Power to make rules. 
THE SCHEDULE 

Btu No. 14 or 1951. 
tHE W~ALTH-TAX BILL, 1957 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
to prot)ide for the let)y of wealth-tax. 
CHAPTER I 
PlmLIMINARY 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Wealth-tax Act, 1957. 
(Z) It extends to the whole of India. 
(3) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 1st day of 
. April, 1957. 
Short title. 
atent IDd 
commence-
ment. 
5 Z. In this Act, unless the co1'ftext otherwise requires,- Definition&. 
(a) 'adviser' means a person appointed by the Central 
Government to exercise the functions of an adviser under sub-
section (10) of section 24; 
(b) 'Appellate Assistant Commissioner' means a person 
Ie empowered to exercise the functions of an Appellate Assistant 
Commissioner of Wealth-tax under section 9; 
(c) 'Appellate Tribunal' means the Appellate Tribunal 
appointed under section 5A of the Income-tax Act; 
(d) 'assessee' means a person by whom wealth-tax or any 
IS other sum of money is payable under this Act, and includes every 
person in respect of whom any proceeding under this Act has 
been taken for the assessment of the value of his assets; 
(e) 'assessment year' means the year for which tax is charge-
able under c;ection 3; I , 

(f) 'assets' includes property of every description, movablt! 
or immovable, but does not include-
(i) agricultural land and growing crops, grass or stand-
ina trees on such land; 
(ii) any building owned or occupied by a cultivator or S 
receiver of rent or revenue out of agricultural land: 
Provided that the building is on or in the immediate 
vicinity of the land and is a building which the cultivator or 
the receiver of rent or revenue by reason of his connection 
with the land requires as a dwelling-house or a store-hoUlie 10 
or an out-house; 
(iii) live-stock, tools and implements needed for the 
raising of agricultural produce; 
(iv) the right to any annuity or any interest in prop.erty 
where such annuity or interest is available to an assessee for IS 
a period not exceeding five years; 
(g) 'Board' means the Central Board of Revenue constituted 
under the Central Board of Revenue Act, 1924; .. of 1~2+ 
(h) 'Commissioner' means a person empowered to exercise 
the functions of a Commissioner of Wealth-tax under section 10; 20 
(i) 'company' means a company as defined in section 3 of th~ 
Companies Act, 1956, and includes a foreign company within tht! I of IP,," 
meaning of section 591 of that Act; 
(j) 'executor' means an eiecutor or administrator of the 
estate of a deceased person; :as 
(k) 'Income-tax Act' means the Indian Income-tax Act, 1922; II of 19U, 
(1) 'Income-tax Officer' means a person appointed to be an 
Income-tax Officer under the Income-tax Act; 
(m) 'Inspecting Assistant Commissioner of Wealth-tax' 
means a person empowered to be an Inspecting Assistant Com- 30 
missioner of Wealth-tax under section 11; 
(n) 'net wealth' means the amount by which the aggregate 
value computed in accordance with the provisions vf this Act of 
all the assets, wherev~r located, belonging· to the assessee on 
the valuation date, including assets required to be included in 35 
his net wealth as on that date under this Act, is in excess of the 
aggregate value of all the debts owed by the assessee on the 
valuation date other than debts which under section 6 are not 
to be taken into account; 

54 of 1953. 
(0) 'prescribed' means prescribed by rules made under this. 
Act; \ 
(p) 'principal officer', used with reference to a company, 
means the secretary, manager, managing agent 6r managing 
s director of the company, and includes any person connected 
with the management of the affairs of the company upon whom 
the Wealth-tax Officer has served a notice of his intention of 
treating him as the principal officer thereof; 
(q) 'valuation date', in relation to any year fer which an 
10 assessment is to be made under this Act, means the last day 
of the previous year as defined in clause (11) of section 2 of 
the Income-tax Act if an assessment were to be made under 
that Act for that year: 
IS 
\ 
20 
Provided that where in the case of an assessee there are 
different previous years under the Income-tax Act for different 
sources of income, the valuation date for the purposes of this 
Act shall be the last day of the previous year immediately pre-
ceding the year for which the assessment is to be made; 
(r) 'valuer' means a valuer appointed under section 4 of 
the Estate Duty Act, 1953; 
(8) 'Wealth-tax Officer' means the Income-tax Officer 
authorised to perform the functions of a Wealth-tax Officer 
under section 8. 
CHAPTER II 
205 CHARGE OF WEALTH-TAX AND ASSETS SUBJECT TO SUCH CHARGE 
3. Subject to the other provisions contained in this Act, there ~_~ 
shall be charged for every financial year commencing on and from 
the first day of April, 1957, a tax (hereinafter referred to as wealth-
tax) in respect of the .net wealth on the corresponding valuation 
30 date of every individual, Hindu undivided family and company at 
the rate or rates specified in the Schedule. 
,. (1) In computing the net wealth of an individual, there shall Ne~ wealth 
• to mclude 
be included,- certain 
(a) the value of assets which on the valuation date are assets. 
305 held-
(i) by his wife to whom such assets have been trans-
ferred by the individual, directly or indirectly, otherwise 
than for adequate consideration or in connection with an 
agreement to live separately, or 
40 (ii) by a minor child not being a married daughter to 
whom such assets have been transferred by the individual 
otherwise than for adequate consideration, or 

Exemption. 
in reapect of 
certain.uscts. 
(iii) by a person or association of persona to whom such 
assets have been transferred by the individual otherwise 
than for adequate consideration for the beneftt of the 
individual or his wife or minor child, or 
(iv) by a person or association of persons to whom such S 
assets have been transferred by the individual otherwise 
than under an irrevocable transfer; 
(b) where the assessee is a partner in a firm or a member of 
an association of individuals, the value of his interest in the 
assets of the firm or association determined in the prescribed 10 
manner. 
(2) Where the value of any assets is to be included in the net 
wealth of an assessee in accordance with clause (<<) of sub-section (1), 
there shall be deducted from such value any debts owing on the 
valuation date by the transferee mentioned in that sub-section in IS 
so far as such debts are referable to the assets. 
5. Wealth-tax shall not be payable by an assessee in respect of-
(i) any property held by him under trust or other legal 
obligation for religious or charitable purposes within India; 
(ii) the interest of the assessee in the coparcenary property 20 
of any Hindu undivided family of which he is a member; 
(iii) any works of art, archeological, scientific or art 
collections, books, manuscripts or heirlooms belonging to the 
assessee and not intended for sale; 
(iv) the right of the assessee to receive a pension or other as 
life annuity in respect of past service under an employer; 
(v) the rights under any' pa~nt or copyright belonging to 
the assessee: 
Provided that they are not held by him as assets of a 
business, profession or vocation and no income or benefit accrues 30 
to him therefrom; 
(vi) domestic animals and furniture, household utensils, 
wearing apparel, jewellery, provisions and other articles intended 
for the personal or household use of the assessee, subject to a 
maximum of twenty-five thousand rupees in value; 3S 
(vii) the right or interest of the assessee in any policy of 
insurance before the moneys covered by the policies actually 
become due and payable to the assessee; 
(viii) the tools and instruments necessary to enable the 
assessee to carryon his profession or vocation, subject to a 40 
maximum of two thousand pod dve hundred rupees in value; 

19 of 1925. 
5 
(ix) ten year treasury savings deposit certificates, fifteen 
year annuity certificates, deposits in post office savings banks, 
post ofBce caab certificates and post office national savings certi-
ficates held by the assessee; 
S (x) any deposit made by the assessee with the Government 
or in any security of the Government or of a local authority 
Dot specified in clause (ix) which the Central Government may, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, exempt from wealth-tax: 
Provided that the valu~ of any deposit or security so 
10 exetl\Pted shall be included in computing the net wealth of an 
assessee; 
IS 
(xi) the amount standing to the credit of an assessee, being 
a salaried employee, in any provident fund maintained by his 
employer to whioh the Provident Funds Act, 1925, applies or 
which is a recognised provident fund within the meaning of 
Chapter IXA of the Income-tax Act; 
(xii) the property received by an assessee from Governmel'lt 
in pursuance of any gallantry award instituted or approved by 
the Central Government. 
20 6. In computing the net wealth of an individual who is not a Bxcluaien.f 
citizen of India on the valuation date, or of a Hindu undivided family, d!be: :t~ 
or company not resident in India during the year ending on the side lnala. 
valuation date, the value of the assets and debts located outside 
India shall not be taken into account. 
25 Explanation I.-A Hindu undivided family shall be deemed to be 
resident in India during the year ending on the valuation date in 
all cases except where the control and management of its affairs 
during that year is situated wholly without India. 
Explanation II.-A company shall be deemed to be resident in 
30 India during the year ending on the valuation date if during that 
year the control and management of its affairs is situated wholly 
in India. 
7. (1) The value of any asset, other than cash, for the purposes Valueof 
of this Act shall be estimated to be the price which in the opinion:i:' J:w 3' of the Wealth-tax Officer it would fetch if sold in the open market tezmine4. 
on the valuation date. • 
40· 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) ,-
(a) where the assessee is carrying on a business for which 
accounts are maintained by him regularly, the Wealth-tax 
Officer may, instead of determining separately the value of each 
asset held by the assessee in such business, determine . the net 
32S LS-2 

Appellate 
AlliltaDt 
Commio.. 
lionen of 
Wealth-taL 
Ccnm;" 
Iionen of 
Wealth-tax. 
~ Commi .. 
lionen of 
Wealth-tax 
6 - .... 
value of the assets of the business as a whole having regard to 
the balance-sheet of such business as on the valuation date and 
making such adjustments therein as the circumstances of the 
case may require; 
(b) where the assessee carrying on the business is a S 
company not resident in India and a computation in accordance 
with clause (a) c:annot be made by reason of the absence of any 
separate balance-sheet drawn up for the affairs of such business 
in India, the Wealth-tax Officer may take the net value of the 
assets of the business in India to be that' proportion of the net 10 
value of the assets of the business as a whole wherever carried 
on determined as aforesaid as the income arising from the 
business in India during the year ending with the valuation date 
bears to the aggregate income from the business wherever IS 
arising during that year. 
CHAPTER III 
WEALTH-TAX AUTHORITIES 
S. Every Income-tax Officer having jurisdiction or exercISIng 
powers as such under the Income-tax Act in respect of any individual, zo 
Hindu undivided family or company shall perform the functions of 
a Wealth-tax Officer under this Act in respect of such individual, 
Hindu undivided family or company. ' 
9. The Board may empower as many persons as it thinks fit to 
exercise under this Act the functions of an Appellate Assistant 25 
Commissioner of Wealth-tax, and on being so empowered the 
Appellate Assistant Commissioners shall perform their functions in 
respect of such areas or such classes of persons as the Board may 
direct, and where such directions have assigned to two or more 
Appellate Assistant Commissioners the same area or the same classes 
of persons they shall perform their functions in accordance with 30 
such orders as the Board may make for the distribution and allocation 
of the werk to be performed. 
10. The Board may empower as many persons as it thinks fit to 
exercise under this Act the functions of a Commissioner of Wealth-
tax, and on being so empowered the Commissioners of Wealth-tax 35 
shall perform their functions in respect of such areas or such classes 
of persoIlS as the Board may direct, and where such directions have 
assigned to two or more Commissioners the same area or the same 
classes of' persons they shall have- concurreAt jurisdiction subject to 
such oiders, if any, as the Board may make for 'the distribution and 40 
allocation of the work to be performed. 
" 
11. The Commissioner of Wealth-tax may empower as many 
. persons as he thinks fit to exercise under this Act the' fUnctions of 
an Inspecting Assistarit Comm,issloner of Wealth-tax, 'ahd on- being 
so empowered the Inspecting Assistant Commissioners of Wealth-~ax 45 
shall perform their functions in respect of such areas or such classes 

, 
of persons 81 the Commissioner may direct, and where suah directions 
have assigned to two or more Inspecting Assistant Commissioners 
the same area or the same classes of persons they shall perform 
their functions in accordance With such orders as the Commissioner 
S may make for the distribution and allocation of the work to be 
performed. 
12. The Wealth-tax Officers shall be subordinate to the Com- Wealth-taX 
missioner of Wealth-tax and the Inspecting Assistant Commissioner ~~ 
of Wealth-tax within whose jurisdiction they perform their functions. ~!i~he 
lioner of 
Wealth-tax 
aad the ID!" 
pcc:ting AI-
liltlnt Com 
misaioner 
of Wealth. 
tax. 
jc 13. All officers and other persons employed in 
this Act shall observe and follow the orders, 
directions of the Board: 
the execution of Wealth-tax 
. t t' .:J authorities IDS ruc IOns ana to follow 
ordera, etc. 
of the 
Provided that no orders, instructions or directions shall be given Board. 
by the Board so as to interfere with the discretion of the Appellate 
IS Assistant Commissioner of Wealth-tax in the exercise of his appellate 
functions. 
CHAPTER IV 
AssESSMENT 
't . 
14. (1) Every person whose nElt wealth on the valuation date was ltetum en 
20 of such an amount as to render him liable to wealth-tax under this wealth. 
Act shall, before, the thirtieth day of June of the corresponding 
assessment year, furnish to the Wealth-tax Officer a return in the 
prescribed form and verified in the prescribed manner settins forth 
his net wealth as on that valuation date: ' 
2.5 Provided that for the assessment year commencing pn the first 
day of April, 1957, the return may be made at any time before the 
thirty-first day of December, 1957. 
(2) If the Wealth-tax Officer is satisfied that the net wealth of 
any person is of such an amount as to render him liable to wealth-
30 tax: ~der this Act, then, notwithstanding anything contained in 
su1>-section (1), he rnay serve a notice upon such . person requiring 
him to furnish within such period, not being less than thirty days, 
as may be specified in the notice, a return in the prescribed form 
and verified in the prescribed manner and setting forth such other 
35 particulars as may be required in the notice, the net wealth of such 
persOn as on the valuation date mentioned in the notice. 

Rctura 
afteT 
clue dltte 
and amen4-
mentof 
return. 
AIseaaeat. 
yeaJta 
--.r aSlOlllfte8t. 
(.9) The Wealth-tax Officer may, if he is satisfied that it 1& necef-
sary so to do, extend the date for the delivery of the return under 
this section. 
15. If any person has not furnished a return within the time 
allowed under section 14, or having furnished a return under that ~ 
section discovers any omission or a wrong statement therein, he ma, 
furnish a return or a revised return, as the case may be, at any time 
before the assessment is made. 
16. (1) If the Wealth-tax Officer is satisfied without requiring the 
presence of the assessee or production by him of any evidence that IC 
a return made under section 14 is complete, he shall assess the ne; 
wealth of the assessee and determine the amount payable by him as 
wealth-tax. 
(2) If the Wealth-tax Officer is not so satisfied, he shall serve a 
notice on the assessee either to attend in person at his office on a IS 
date to be specified in the notice or to produce or cause to be pro-
duced on that date any evidence on which the assessee may rely in 
support of his return. 
(3) The Wealth-tax Officer, after hearing such evidence as the 
person may produce and such other evidence as he may require on 20 
any specified points shall, by order in writing, assess the net wealth 
of the assessee and determine the amount payable by him as wealth-
tax. 
(4) For the purpose of making an assessment under this Act thE' 
Wealth-tax Officer may serve on any person, whether he has made a 2S 
return or not, a notice requiring him to produce or cause to be pre-
duced on a date specified in the notice such accounts, records or 
ether documents as the Wealth-tax Officer may require. 
(5) If any person fails to make a return in response to any noti(:e 
under sub-section (2) Gf section 14, or fails to comply with the terms 3C 
of any notice issued under sub-section (2) or sub-section (4), the 
WpJ;>lth-tax Officer shall make the assessment to the best of his judg-
ment and determine the amount payable by the person as wealth-tax 
on the basis of such assessment. 
17. If the Wealth-tax Officer-
(a) has reason to believe that by reason of the omission or 
failure on the part of the assessee to make a return of his ,n::t 
wealth under section 14 for any assessment year or to disclose 
fully and truly all material facts necessary for his assessment 
for that year, the net wealth chargeable to tax has eeeaped <40 
assessment for that year, whether by reason of under-assessmeat 
er aasesRment at too Iowa rate or otherwise; or 

(b) has, in consequence of any information in his possession, 
reason to believe, notwithstanding that there has been no such 
omiiision or failure as is referred to in clause (a), that the net 
wealth chargeable to tax has escaped assessment for any year, 
S whether by reason of under-assessment or assessment at too 
Iowa rate or otherwise; 
he may, in cases falling under clause (a) at any time, and in cases 
falling under clause (b) at any time within six years of the end of 
that assessment year, serve on the assessee a notice containing ull 
10 or any of the requirements which may be included in a notice under 
sub-section (2) of section 14, and may proceed to assess or re-assess 
such net wealth, and the provisions of this Act shall, so far as may be, 
apply as if the notice had issued under that sub-section. 
15 
18. (1) If the Wealth-tax Officer is satisfied that any person-
(a) has without reasonable cause failed to furnish the return 
of his net wealth which he is required to furnish under sub-section 
(1) or sub-section (2) of section 14 or section 17 or has without 
reasonable cause failed to furnish it within the time allowed and 
in the manner required; or 
20 (b) has without reasonable cause failed to comply with a 
notice under sub-section (2) or sub-section (4) of section 16; or 
(c) has concealed the particulars of his assets or deliberately 
furnished inaccurate particulars of his assets or debts; 
he may, by order in writing, direct that such person shall pay by way 
2, of penalty-
(i) in the case referred to in clause (a), in addition to the 
amount of wealth-tax payable by him, a sum not exceeding one-
and-a-half times the amount of such tax, and 
(ii) in the case referred to in clause (b) or clause (c), in addi-
30 tion to the amount of wealth-tax payable by him, a sum not ex-
ceeding one-and-a-half times the amount of the tax, if any, which 
would have been avoided if the net wealth.:returned by such 
person had been accepted as correct. 
(2) No order shall be made under sub-section (1) unless the persen 
35 concerned has been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard. 
(3) No prosecution for an offence under this Act shall be instituted 
in respect of the same facts in ...relation to which a penalty has been 
imposed under this section. 
(4) The Wealth-tax Officer shall not impose any penalty under 
40 this section without the previous approval of the Inspecting Assistant 
Commissioner of Wealth-tax. 
PCIIIlty for 
conClelllmeuI 

Tu of 
dec:eucd 
penon pay-
able by 
lepl rc-
preaentatift. 
AsIeIlDlCDt 
after parti-
tion of a 
Hindu un-
divided 
family. 
10 
CHAPl'ER V 
LIABILITY TO ASSESSMENT IN SPECIAL CASES 
19. (1). Where a person dies, his executor, administrator or other 
legal representative shall be liable to payout of the estate of the 
deceased person, to the extent to which the estate is capable of meet- 5 
ing the charge, the wealth-tax assessed as payable by such person, 
or any tax which would have been payable by him under this Act 
if he had not died. 
(2) Where a person dies without having furnished a return under 
the provisions of section 14 or after having f.umished a return which 10 
the Wealth-tax Officer has reason to believe to be incorrect or 
incomplete, the Wealth-tax Officer may make an assessment of the 
net wealth of such person and determine the wealth-tax payable 
by the person on the basis of such assessment, and for this purpose 
may, by the issue of the appropriate notice which would have had IS 
to be served upon the deceased person if he had survived, require 
from the executor, administrator or other legal representative of 
the deceased person any accounts, documents or other evidence which 
might under the provisions of section 16 have been required from 
the deceased person. 20 
(3) The provisions of section 15 shall apply to an executor, 
administrator or other legal representative as they apply to any 
person referred to in that section. 
zo. (1) Where, at thb time' of making an assessment, it is brought 
to the notice of the Wealth-tax Officer that a partition has taken as 
place among the members of a Hindu undivided family, and the 
Wealth-tax Officer, after inquiry, is satisfied that such partition has 
taken place, he shall make assessments on the net wealth of the un-
divided family as such for the assessment year or years including the 
year relevant to the previous year if the partition has taken place on 30 
the last day of the pr~vious year, and each member or group of 
members shail be liable jointly and severally for the tax assessed on 
the net wealth of the joint family as such. 
(2) Where the Weath-tax· Officer is not so satisfied, he may, 
by order, declare that such family shall be deemed for. the purposes 35 
of this Act to continue to be a Hindu undivided family liable to be 
assessed as such. . 
Alleument 21. (1) In the case of assets chargeable to tax under this Act 
:.e~Jdb'; which are held by a court· of wards or an administrator-general 
=. ~_ or an official trustee or any receiver or manager or any other person, 40 
m.!'!~ton by whatever name called, appointed under any order of a court to 1_-. etc. . 
manaie property on behalt of another, or any trustee appointN 

11 
under a trust declared by a duly executed instrument in writing, 
whether testamentary or otherwise (including a trustee und~r a 
valid deed of wakf), the wealth-tax shall be levied upon and 
recoverable from the court of wards, administrator-general, oftlcial 
S trustee, receiver, manager or trustee, as the case may be, in the 
like manner and to the same extent as it would be leviable upon 
and recoverable from the person on whose behalf the asseM are 
held, and the provisions of this Act shall apply accordingly. , 
(2) Nothing contained in sub-section (1) shall prevent either the 
10 direct assessment of the person on whose behalf the assets above 
referred to are held, or the recovery from such person of the tax 
payable in respect of such assets. 
(3) Where the guardian or trustee of any person being a minor, 
lunatic or idiot (all of which persons are hereinafter in this sub-
15 section included in the term 'beneficiary') holds any assets on behalf 
at such beneficiary, the tax under this Act shall be levied upon and 
recoverable from such guardian or trustee, as the case may be, in 
the like manner and to the same extent as it would be leviable upon 
and recoverable from any such beneficiary if of full age or sound 
:JO mind arid in direct ownership of such assets. 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, where 
the shares of the persons on whose behalf any such assets are held 
are indeterminate or unknown, the wealth-tax may be levied upon 
and recovered from the court of wards, administrator-general, official 
25 trustee, receiver, manag~r or other person aforesaid as if the persons 
on whose behalf the assets are held were an individual for the 
purposes of this Act. 
22. (1) Where the person liable to tax under this Act is not Aalel8llW1t 
resident in India, the tax may be levied upon and recovered from ~ r!.ir: 
30 his agent, and the agent shall be deemed to be, for all the purposes In India. 
of this Act, the assessee in respect of such tax. 
(2) Any person employed by or on behalf of a person referred 
to in sub-section (1) or through whom such person is in the receipt 
of any income, profits or gains, or who is in possession Or has 
35 custody of any asset of such person and upon whom the Wealth-tax 
Officer has caused a notice to be served of his intention of treating 
him as the agent of such person shall, for the purposes of sub-section 
(1), be deemed to be the agent of such person· 
Provided that no person shall be deemed to be the agent of 
40 another under this section unless he has had an opportunity of 
being heard by the Wealth-tax Officer as to his being treated as 
such. 

Appeal to 
the Appel-
late Allis-
tant Com-
millioner 
frQUl onlcn 
of Wea1th-
tax Ofticcn. 
12 
CHAPTER VI 
APPEALS, REVISIONS AND REFERENCES 
23. (1) Any person,-
(a) objecting to the amount of his net wealth determined 
under this Act; or 5 
(b) objecting to the amount of wealth-tax determined as 
payable by him under this Act; or 
(c) denying his liability to be assessed under this Act; or 
(d) objecting to any penalty imposed by the Wealth-tax 
Officer under section 18; or 10 
(e) objecting to any order of the Wealth-tax Officer under 
sub-section (2) of section 20; 
may appeal to the Appellate Assistant Commissioner against the 
assessment or order, as the case may be, in the presc.ribed form and 
verified in the prescribed manner. 15 
(2) An appeal shall be presented within thirty days of the receipt 
of the notice of demand relating to the assessment or penalty 
objected to, or the date on which any order objected to, is com-
mUnicated to him, but the Appellate Assistant Comm:ssioJler may 
admit an appeal after the exp:ration of the period aforesaid if he 20 
is satisfied that the appellant had sufficient cause for not presenting 
the appeal within that period. 
(3) The Appellate Assistant Commissioner shall fix a day and 
place for the hearing of the appeal and may from time to time adjourn 
the hearing. . \ 25 
(4) The Appellate Assistant Commissioner may, before disposing 
~f any appeal, make such further inquiry as he thinks fit or cause 
further inquiry to be made by the Wealth-tax Officer. 
(5) Any order passed by the Appellate Assistant Commissioner 
on appeal may include an order enhancing the assessment or 30 
penalty: 
Provided that no order enhancing the assessment or penalty shall 
be made unless the person affected thereby has been given· a 
reasonable opportunity of showing callie against such enhancement. 
(6) A copy of every order passed by the Appellate Assistaat 3' 
Commissioner under this section shall be forwarded to the appellant 
and the Commissioner . 
. -\I'peal to Z4. (1) Any assessee ebjecting to an order passed by an Appellate 
~ri~ Assistant Commissioner under section 23 may appeal to the Appellate 
from orders Tribunal within sixty days of the date on which he is served with 40 of the Appellate notice of such order. 
Asliatarlt 
Commit-
eieoen. 

13 " 
(2) The Commissioner may, if he is not satisfied as to the 
correctness of any order passed by an Appellate Assistant Com-
missioner under section 23, direct the Wealth-tax Officer to appeal 
to the Appellate Tribunal against such order, and such appeal may 
5 be made at any time before the expiry of sixty days of the date on 
which the order is communicated to the Commissioner. 
(3) An appeal to the Appellate Tribunal shall be in the prescribed 
form and shall be varified in the prescribed manner and shall, except 
in the case of an appeal referred to in sub-section (2), be accompanied 
10 by a fee of one hundred rupees. 
(4) The Appellate Tribunal may, after giving both parties to the 
appeal an opportunity of being heard, pass such orders thereon as 
it thinks fit, and any such orders may include an order enhancing 
the assessment or penalty: 
15 Provided that .no order enhancing an assessment or penalty shall 
be made unless the person affected thereby has been given a 
reasonable opportunity of showing cause against such enhancement. 
(5) where the appellant objects to the valuation of any immov-
able property, the Appellate Tribunal may, and if the appellant so 
20 requires shall, refer the question of disputed value to the arbitration 
of a committee consisting of a valuer and an adviser appointed by 
the Board in this behalf, and the Tribunal shall, so far as that 
question is concerned, pass its orders under sub-section (4) COD-
formably to the decision of the Committee: 
25 Provided that if there is a difference of opinion between the two 
members of the committee of arbitration, the matter shall be referred 
by the Tribunal to another valuer appointed by the Board and the 
\ 
decision of that valuer on the question of valuation shall be final. 
(6) The costs of any arbitration proceeding under sub-section (5) 
30 shall be borne by the Central Government or the assessee, as the 
case may be, at whose instance the question was referred to the 
Committee: 
Provided that where the assessee has been wholly or, partially 
successful in any reference made at his instance, the extent to which 
35 the costs should be borne by the assessee shall be at the discretion 
of the Appellate Tribunal. 
(7) A copy of every order passed by the Appellate Tribuna.1 
under this section shall be forwarded to the assessee and the 
Commissioner. 
<40 (8) Save as provided in section 27, any order passed by the 
Appellate Tribunal on appeal shall be final. 
325 LS-:l 

14 
(9) The provisions of sub-sections (5), (7) and (8) of section 5A 
of the Income-tax Act shall apply to the Appellate Tribunal in the 
discharge of its functions under this Act as they apply to it in the 
discharge of its functions under the Income-tax Act. 
(10) For the purposes of this section the Central Government 5 
shall draw up for every such area as may be prescri~ed a list of 
persons familiar with property values in that area, and any of these 
persons may be appointed to exercise the functions of an adviser 
under this section in relation to the area for which he is appointed. 
Power .of 25. (1) The Commissioner may call for and examine the record 10 
~m:u:~ r of any proceeding under this Act and, if he considers that any order 
~w~~~ passed therein by a Wealth-tax Officer is erroneous in so far as it 
~ ~cen is prejudicial to the interests of revenue, he may, after giving the 
:!::~ ~- assessee an opportunity of being heard and after making or causing 
revCDUe.:~ to be made such inquiry as he deems necessary, pass such orders IS 
thereon as the circumstances of the case justify, including an order 
enhancing or modifying the assessment or cancelling it, and directing 
a fresh assessment. 
(2) No order shall be made under sub-section (1) after the expiry 
of two years from the date of the order sought to be revised. 20 
(3) If in the course of any proceedings under this section a 
question arises as to the valuation of any immovable property, the 
Commissioner may, and if the assessee so requires shall, before 
passing any order under this section, refer the question of such 
valuation to the arbitration of a Committee consisting of a valuer 25 
. and an adviser appointed by the Board in this behalf, and the Com-
missioner shall, so far as that question is concerned, pass his order 
under this section conformably to the decision of the Committee. 
(4) The provisions of sub-sections (5), (6) and (8~ of section 24 
shall apply in relation to any such reference as they apply in rela- 30 
tlon io any reference made by the Appellate Tribunal under thai 
tection. 
Appel. \"0 26. (1) Any assessee objecting to an order of enhancement made 
*ri~ by the Commissioner under section 25 may appeal to the Appellate 
from orden Tribunal within sixty days of the date on which the order is com- 35 
of· ~ . t d h' mcot by munlca e to 1m. 
~=.- (2) An appeal to the Appellate Tribunal under suo-section (1) 
shall be in the prescribed fonn and shall be verified in the prescribed 
manner and shall be accompanied by a fee of rupees one hundred. 
(3) The Tribunal may, 'after giving the appellant an opportunity 40 
~ being heard, pass such order thereon as it thinks fit, and shall 
communicate any such order to the assessee and to the Commissioner. 

'15 
27. (1) Within nmety days of the date upon which he is served Reference 
with an order under section 24 or section 26, the . assessee may ~~ 
present an application in the prescribed form accompanied by a fee 
of one hundred rupees to the Appellate Tribunal requiring the 
S Appellate Tribunal to refer to the High Court any question of law 
arifling out of such order, and the Appellate Tribunal shall, if in its 
opinion a question of law arises out of such order, state the case 
for the opinion of the High Court. 
(2) An application under sub-section (1) may be admitted after 
10 the expiry of the period of ninety days aforesaid if the Tribunal 
is satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not presenting it 
within the said period. 
(3) If, on an application made under su.b-section (1), the Appellate 
Tribunal,-
IS (a) refuses to state a case on the ground that no question 
of law arises; or \ 
(b) rejects it on the ground that it is time barred; 
the applicant may, within three months from the date on which 
he is served with a notice of refusal or rejection,as the case may 
20 be, apply to the High Court, and the High Court may, if it is not 
satisfied with the correctness of the decision of the Appellate 
Tribunal, require the Appellate Tribunal to state the case to the 
High Court, and on receipt of such requisition the Appellate Tribunal 
shall state the case: 
as Provided that, if in any case where the Appellate Tribunal has 
been required by an applicant to state a case the Appellate Tribunal 
refuses to do so on the ground that no question of law arises, the 
applicant may, within thirty days from the date on which he receives 
notice of refusal to state the case, withdraw his application, and if 
30 he does so, the fee paid by him under sub-section (1) shall be 
refunded to him. 
(4) The statement to the High Court shall set forth the facts, 
the determina~ion of the Appellate Tribunal and the question of 
law which arises out of the case. 
35 (5) If the High Court is not satisfied that the case as stated is 
sufficient to enable it to determine the question of law raised thereby, 
it may require the Arpellate Tribunal to make such modification. 
therein as it may direct. 
(6) The High Court, upon hearing any such case, shall decide 
40 the question of law raised therein, and in doing so, may, if it think. 
fit, alter the form of the question of law and shall deliver judgment 
thereon containing the ground on which such decision is founded 
and shall send a copy of the judgment under the seal of the Court 

16 If 
and the signature of the Registrar to the Appellate Tribunal and 
the Appellate Tribunal shall pass such orders as are necessary to 
dispose ot the case conformably to such judgment. . 
(7) The costs' of any reference to the High Court shall be in the 
discretion of the Court. S 
(8) Section 5 of the Indian Limitation Act, 1908, shall apply to 9 of 1901. 
an application to the High Court undel' this section. 
~~by 28. When a case has been stated to the High Court under section 27, 
i&h un. it shall be heard by a Bench of not less than two Judges of the 
High Court and shall be decided in accordance with the opinion of 10 
such Judges or of the majority of sueh Judges, if any: 
Appeal to 
Supreme 
Court •• 
Notice of 
demand. 
Provided that where thete is no such majority, the Judges shall 
state the point of law upon which they differ and the case shall 
then be heard upon that point only by one or more of the Judges 
of the High Court, and such point shall be decided according to the IS 
opinion of the majority of the Judges who have heard the case, 
including those who first heard it. 
29. (1) An appeal shall lie to the Supreme Court from any judg-
~ent of the High Court delivered on a case stated under section 27 
in any case which the High Court certifies as a fit case for appeal :ao 
to the Supreme Court. 
(2) Where the judgment of the High Court is varied or reversed 
on appeal under this sectioR., effect shall be given to the order of 
the Supreme Court in the manner provi~ed in sub-section (6) of 
~~~ ~ 
(3) The High Court may, on application made to it for the exe. 
cution of any order of the Supreme Court in respect of any costs 
awarded by it, transmit the order for execution to any court sub-
ordinate to the High Court. 
CHAPTER VII 
PAYMENT AND RECOVERY OF WEALTH-TAX 
30. When any tax or penalty is due in consequence of any order 
passed under thir. Act, the Wealth-tax Officer shall serve upon the 
assessee or other person liable to pay such tax or penalty a notice 
30 
of demand in the prescribed form specifying the sum so payable 3S 
and the time witnin which it shall be payable. 
Reco9ery of' 31. (1) Any amount specifiied as payable in a notice of demand 
bIZ me! issued under section 30 shall be paid within the time, at the place, pcmaltica. 
and to the person mentioned in the notice, or if no time is so men-
tioned, then on or before the first day of the second month following 40 

1'1 
the date of service of the notice, and any assessee failing so to pay 
shall be deemed to be in default. 
(2) Where an asses~ee has been assessed in respect of assets 
located in a country outside India, the laws of which prohibit or 
5 restrict the remittance of money to India, the Wealth-tax Officer 
shall not treat the assessee as in default in respect of that part of 
the tax which is attributable to the assets in that country, and shall 
continue to treat the assessee as not in default in respect of that 
part of the tax until the prohibition or restriction of remittance is 
10 removed. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, where 
an assessee has presented an appeal under section 23, the Wealth-tax 
Officer may in his discretion treat the assessee as not being in 
default as long as such appeal is undisposed of. 
IS 32. The provisions of sub-sections (1), (lA), (2), (3), (4), (5), Mode of 
(SA), (6) and (7) of section 46 of the Income-tax Act shall apply "s if recovery. 
the said provisions were provisions of this Act and referred to 
wealth-tax instead of to income-tax, and to Wealth-tax Officer and 
Commissioner of Wealth-tax instead of to Income-tax Officer and 
20 Commissioner of Income-tax. 
33. (1) Where by reason of the provisions contained in section 4, Liability of . transterees 
the value of any assets transferred to any of the persons mentIoned of proper-
in that section have to be included in the net wealth of an individual, ties ftom. assessccs m 
the person in whose name such assets stand shall, notwithstanding certain C81e1. 
25 anything contained in any law to the contrary, be liable, on· the 
service of a notice of demand by the Wealth-tax Officer in this behalf, 
to pay that portion of. the tax assessed on the assesse~ as is attribut-
able to the value of the asset standing in his name as aforesaid: 
Provided that where any such asset is held jointly by more than 
30 one person, they shall be jointly and severally liable to pay the 
tax as is attributable to the val.ue of the asset so jointly held. 
(2) Where any such person as is referred to in sub-section (1) 
defaults in making payment of any tax demanded from him, he shall 
be deemed to be an assessee in default in respect of such sum, and 
3S all the provisions of this Act relating to recovery shall apply 
accordingly. 
3'- Where any document required to be registered under the Restric.tions 
provisions of clause (a), clause (b), clause (c) or clause (e) of sub- ti~nre:stra­
section (1) of section 17 of the Indian Registration Act, 1908, pur- transfers of . . h h . h . 1 immovable 
40 ports to transfer, assign, limit or extmgUls t e rIg t, tIt. e or prop~rty in 
interest of any person to or in any property other than agricultural certaiD <:aIel 
land valued at more than one lakh of rupees, no registering officer 

Rectification 
of mistakes. 
appointed under that Act shall register any such document, unless 
the Wealth-tax Officer certifies that-
(a) such person has either paid or made satisfactory pro-
vision for the payment of all existing or anticipated liabilities 
under this Act, or S 
(b) the registration of the document will not prejudicially 
affect the recovery of any existing or anticipated liability under 
this Act. 
CHAPTER VIII 
MISCELLANEOUS' 10 
35. At any time within four years from the date of any order 
passed by him, or it, the Commissioner, the Wealth-tax Officer, the 
Appellate Assistant Commissioner and the Appellate Tribunal may, 
on his, or its, own motion rectify any mistake apparent from the 
record and shall, within a like period, rectify any such mistake which 15 
has been brought to the notice of the Commissioner, the Wealth-tax 
Officer, the Appellate Assistant Commissioner or the Appellate Tri-
bunal, as the case may be, by an assessee: 
Provided that no such rectification shall be made which has the 
effect of enhancing the assessment unless the assessee has been 20 
given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in the matter. 
ProsecuUOIII. 36. (1) If a person fails without reasonable cause,-
(a) to furnish in due time any return mentioned in 
section 14; 
(b) to produce, or cause to be produced, on or before the date 25 
mentioned in any notice under sub-section (2) or sub-section (4) 
of section 16 such accounts, records and documents as are referred 
to in the notice; 
he shall, on conviction before a magistrate be punishable with fine 
which may extend to ten rupees for every day during which the 30 
default continues. 
(2) If a person makes a statement in a verification mentioned in 
section 14 or section 17 or section 20 or section 24 which is false, and 
which he either knows or believes to be false, or does not believe to 
be true,' he shall be punishable with simple imprisonment which 3S 
may extend to one year, or with fine which may extend to one 
thousand rupees, or with both. 
(3) A person shall not be proceeded against for an offence under 
this section except at the instance of the Commissioner. 
(4) . The Commissioner may either before or after the institution 40 
of proceedings compound any such offence. 

19 
Ezplanation.-For the purposes of this section, 'magistrate' means 
a presidency magistrate, a magistrate of the first class or a magistrate 
of the second class specially empowered by the Central Government 
to try offences under this Act. 
, 37. The Commissioner, the Wealth-tax Officer, the Appellate Assist- Power to 
ant Commissioner and the Appellate Tribunal shall, for the purposes ~eO:t~~ence 
of this Act, have the same powers as are vested in a court under the etc. 
5 .f 1901. Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, when trying a suit in respect of the 
following matters, namely:-
10 (a) enforcing the attendance of any person and examining 
him on oath; 
(b) requiring the djscovery and production of documents; 
(c) receiving evidence on affidavit; 
(d) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses; 
15 and any proceeding before the Commissioner, the Wealth-tax Officer, 
the Appellate Assistant Commissioner or the Appellate Tribunal shall 
be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the meaning of sections 
45 of 1160. 193 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code. 
38. Where for the purposes of determining the wealth-tax payable Intormation 
20 by any person, it appears necessary for the Wealth-tax Officer to returns and 
bt . t t . f t' f ' d' 'd I statements. o am any s a ement or m orma Ion rom any m IVl ua, company, 
firm, Hindu undivided family or other person, the Wealth-tax Officer 
may serve a notice requiring such individual, company, firm, Hindu 
undivided family or other person, on or before a date to be therein 
2S specified, to furnish such statement or information on the points spe-
cified in the notice, and the individual or the principal officer con-
cerned or the manager of the Hindu undivided family, as the case 
may be, shall, notwithstanding anything in any law to the contrary, 
be bound to furnish such statement or information to the ·Wealth-tax 
30 Officer, 
• 
39. Whenever in respect of any proceeding under this Act .my Effect of 
wealth-tax authority ceases to exercise jurisdiction and is succeeded tranhsfe,r, of 
, h" d" h h' aut orltJes by another who has and exerCIses suc JUrIS lcbon, t e aut onty !;o on pending 
succeeding may continue the proceeding from the stage at which ih~ proceedings, 
35 proceeding was left by his predecessor, 
40, In computing the period of limitation prescribed for an appeal Computation 
under this Act or for an application under section 27, the day on °Of( ~e~taodtl~ , , , liml OD. 
which the order complained of was made and the tune reqUISite for 
obtainiJll, a copy of such order shall be excluded. 

Service of 
notice. 
20 
41. (1) A notice or a requisition under this Act may be served on 
the person therein named either by post or as if it were a summons 
issued by a court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908. 
(2) Any such notice or requisition may, in the case of a firm ora 
Hindu undivided family, be addressed to any member of the firm or S 
to the manager or any adult male member of the family, and in the 
case of any other association of persons be addressed to the principal 
officer thereof. 
Pfr°dish~bclition 42. (1) Subject to the provisions contained in sub-section (2), the o osur~ 
o.f informa- provisions of section 54 of the Income-tax Act shall apply to all 10 
bon. accounts or in relation to statements, documents, evidence or affidavits 
given, produced or obtained in connection with or in the course of 
any proceeding under this Act as they apply to or in relation to similar 
particulars under that Act subject to the modification that the reler-
ence to 'any Income-tax authority' in clause (d) of sub-section (2) IS 
and to the 'Commissioner' in sub-section (5) of that Act shall be cons-
trued as a reference to 'any wealth-tax authority' and to the 'Commis-
sioner of Wealth-tax' respectively. 
• 
Bar of 
jurisdiction. 
Appearance 
before 
wealth-tax 
authorities 
by autr.ori-
sed repre-
seotati\les. 
(2) Nothing contained in section 54 of the Income-tax Act shan 
apply to the disclosure of any such particulars as are referred to in $) 
sub-section (1) to any person acting in the execution of this Act or 
the Income-tax Act or the Estate Duty Act, 1953, where it is necessary 34 of If531 
or desirable to disclose the same to him for the purpllS2 of this Act 
or any of the other Acts aforesaid . 
43. Save as otherwise provided in this Act, no suit shall lie in auy 25 
civil court to set aside or modify any assessment made under this Act, 
and no prosecution, suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against any 
officer of the Government· for anythini in good faith done or intended 
to be done under this Act. 
44. Any assessee who is entitled to or required to attend before any )0 
wealth-tax authority or the Appellate Tribunal in connection with 
any proceeding or inquiry under this Act, except where he is required 
under this Act to attend in person, may attend by a person authorised 
by him in writing in this behalf, being a relative of, or a person rei!.l-
larly employed by, the assessee or a legal practitioner or a chartered 3f 
accountant. 
Exp'lanation.-For the purposes of this section,-
(a) the expression, "a person regularly employed by the 
. assessee" includes any officer of a Scheduled Bank with which 

3 •• f 1,..9. 
10 of 1949. 
.. of 193'. 
I of 19,6. 
S 
21 
the assessee maintain" ..t current account or has other regular 
dealings; 
(b) "Chartered Accountant" means a Chartered Accountant 
as defined in the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949. 
45. The provisions of this Act shall not apply to- N:t not to 
apply in eel-
(a) a banking company as defined in section 5 of the tajD caiCl. 
~O 
Banking Companies Act, 1949; 
(b) an insurer within the meaning of the Insurance Act, 
1938; 
(c) any company formed and registered under the Companies 
Act, 1956, established with the object of financing, whether by 
way of making loans or advances to, or subscribing to the capital 
of, private industrial enterprises in India, in any case where tl)e 
Central Government has made or agreed to make to the company 
IS a special advance for the purpose or has guaranteed or agreed 
to guarantee tbe payment of moneys borrowed by the company 
from any institution outside India. 
48. (1) The Board may, by notification in the Official Gazette, P~er_,!! ma .. e nun. make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 
20 (2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of tht' 
foregoing power, rules made under this section may provide for-
(a) the manner in which the market value of any asset may 
be determined in cases where it is not easily ascertainable; 
(b) the form in which returns under this Act shall be made, 
2S and the manner in wh;ch they shall be verified; 
(c) the form in which appeals and applications under this Act 
may be made, and the manner in which they shall be verified; 
(d) the form of any notice of demand under this Act; 
(e) the areas for which lists of valuers may be drawn up; 
30 (1) any other matter which has to be or may be prescribed 
for the purposes of this Act. 
(3) The power to make rules conferred by this section shall on 
the first occasion of the exercise thereof include the power to give 
retrospective effect to the rules or any of them from a date not 
3S earlier than the date of commencement of this Act. 
(4) All rules made under this Act shall be laid before each House 
of Parliament as soon as may be after they are made and shall be 
subject to such modifications as Parliament may make durin6{ the 
f:lession in which they are so laid or the session immediately 
40 following. .:.. . I: ! 'I 
325 L.8."'" 

THE SCHEDULE 
(See section 3) 
41# Rates of Wealth-tax 
PART I 
(a) In the case of every individual:-
(i) on the first rupees two lakhs of net wealth 
(U) on the next rupees ten lakhs 'of net wealth 
(iii) on the next rupees ten lakhs of net wealth. 
. (iv) on the balance of net wealth 
(b) In the case of every Hindu undivided family:-
(i) on the ftrst rupees three lakhs of net wealth 
(ii) on the next rupees ten lakhs of net wealth 
(iii) on the next rupees ten lakhs of net wealth 
(iv) on the balance of net wealth 
PART II 
In the case of every company:-
(i) on the first rupees five lakhs of net wealth 
(ii) on the balance of net wealth 
Rate of tax 
Nil. 
i% 
1% 
H% 
Nil. 
.". 
1% 
H,. 
Nil. 
i% 
Rule 1.-Where the net wealth of an assessee includes the value 
of any asset on which wealth-tax is not payable, the amount of tax 
payable by the assessee shall be an amount bearing to the total 
amount of wealth-tax which would have been payable on the net 
wealth had no property been exempt the same proportion as the 
unexempted portion of net wealth bears to the net wealth. 
Rule 2.-Where the net wealth of an assessee, not being a com-
pany, in respect of any assessment year includes the value of any 
shares in a private company as defined in section 3 of the Companies 
Act, 1956, the wealth-tax payable by the assessee on his net wealth I of I"" 
for that assessment year, computed in accordance with the rates 
specifted above, shall be reduced by the amount, if any, by which 
the sum of the following, namely:-
(a) that portion of the wealth-tax payable by the assessee 
computed as aforesaid as bears to the whole amount of the tax, 
the same proportion as the value of the shares aforesaid includ-
ed in his net wealth bears to his net wealth, 
(b) that portion of the wealth-tax, if any, paid by the 
company in respect of the same asaessment year, as bears to the 
whole amount of the said tax, the same proportion IW the raid-up 
value of the shares included in the assessment of the 8888Ssee 
aforesaid bears to the aggregate paid-Up value of the share 
capital of the company as on the relevant valuation date, 
exceeds the amount calculated at the rate of 1·5 per cent. on the 
value of the shares included in his net wealth. 
22 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
~ 
The object of this Bill is to impose an annual tax on the net 
wealth of individuals, Hindu undivided families and companies. 
The proposed tax is an important constituent of an integrated tax 
structure which Government have been aiming at for some time. 
With Income-tax, Estate Duty and a tax on Capital gains already in 
existence and with the addition of the Wealth-tax and a tax on 
large personal expenditures (separately being proposed) the direct 
taxes will form a composite system made up of complementary 
elements. Apart from the fact that a composite tax system of this 
type helps to satisfy the criterion of the ability to pay, it is consistent 
with the avowed goal of the attainment of a socialistic pattern of 
society. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 15th May, 1957. T. T. KRISHNAMACHARI 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
This Bill proposes a levy of tax with effect from 1st April, 1957 
on the net wealth of individuals, Hindu undivided fam!lies and com-
panies. This is a new tax but the procedure for assessment and 
collection of this new tax is very much allied to that of taxes on 
income. It is, therefore, proposed that for the time being wealth-
tax be administered by the Income-tax Department and that no 
separate administrative machinery should be set up. The existing 
pressure of work on the Income-tax Department is, however, already 
quite heavy. This pressure is likely to increase further on account 
of the proposed lowering of the minimum taxable Umits. It will, 
therefore, be necessary to expand adequately the staff at various 
levels of the departmental cadres. 
The increase of personnel, along with incidental expenses of ad-
ministration, including payment of remuneration to valuers of im-
movable properties is estimated to cost Rs. 40 lakhs ultimately. 
Actual recruitment of staff will, however, be made as and when 
it is founli really necessary. 
Capital expenditure will be in respect of construction of office 
and residential accommodation. Such expenditure when incurred 
will form part of the requirements of the Income-tax staff. 

I. VOLUME OF WORK 
Number of "Persons" who will be liable to tax :-
(a) Indifliduals. 
(other than purely salary earners, 
having income of more than 
RI. 20,000 each-who are expect-
ed to have net wealth exceeding 
Rs. 2 IBkhs). 
(b) Hindu undivided families. 
(having income of more than 
Rs. 2S,OOO each-which are ex-
pected to have net wealth exceed-
ing Rs. 3 lakhs). 
(c) Companies. 
(with net worth exceeding Rs. S 
lakhs). 
Total number of companies as per regis-
ters (19$6). 
(.1 Companies with paid-up capital 
of above Rs. 5 lakhs (3076 in 1953) 4,000 
(ia) Companies with paid-up capital 
of RI. 3' 5 to 5 lakhs, which are 
likely to have adequate reserves to 
make them liable to wealth-tax. 3,000 
Less Insurance and banking 
companies included 
above 347 
Defunct companies 700 
26,000 
Total number of persons 36,000 

I. 
2. 
3. 
4· 
s· 
6. 
7· 
8. 
9. 
10. 
II. REQUIREMENT OF PERSONNEL AND FINANCE , . 
A. Officers 
No. Cost 
R •. 
No. of Commissioners of IDcomc-tax 3 3:K:aooo X 12 72,000 
No. of Inspecting Assistant Com-
missoners and Appellate Assistant 
Commissioners (8+12) 20 2OXI200XI2 2,88,000 
No. of Income-tax Officers taking the 
average disposal per Income-tax 
Officer per annum @ 300 120 120 X 500 X 12 7,20,000 
B. Staff 
No. of Inspectors 60 6oX250XI2 1,80,000 
No. of Supervisors . 23 23X3S0X 12 96,600 
No. of Head Clerks. 63 63X2S0:K12 1,89,000 
No. of U. D. Cs. 301 301 X ISO X 12 S>4I,8oo 
No. of L. D. Cs. 160 160XI2oXI2 2,30>400 
No. of Stenographers 23 23XISOXI2 41>400 
No. of Stenotypists 131 131 X 140 X 12 2,20,080 
say 
C. IncUUnral .~. 
Incidental ~es including Clan IV .taft' 
contingc:nacs and paymco.t of remuneration 
to valuer. estimated at • RI. 14~s 
RI. 40lakhs TOTAL 
26 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 46 of the Bill authorises the Central Board of Revenue to 
make rules with respect to matters like the manner in which market 
values of assets may be determined in cases where they are not 
easily determinable, the form in which returns may be made under 
the Act, the form in which appeals should be filed or notices ('Jf 
demand issued. The rule making power is thus of a normal 
character. 

LOK SABHA 
A. 
BILL 
to provide for the levy of wealth-tax. 
The President has, in pursuance of clauses (1) and (3) of 
article II7 of the Constitution of India, recommended to 
10k Sabha, the introduction and consideration of the Bill. 
M. N. KAUL, 
Secretary. 
(Shri T. T. Krishnamachtlri, 
Minister of Fintlnce.) 