As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA ON 
.-' S FEB 1379 
Bill No. 14 of 1979 
THE SUGAR UNDERTAKINGS (TAKING OVER OF MANAGEMENT) 
AMENDMENT BILL, 19'79 
A 
BILL 
to amend the Sugar Underta.kings (Taking Over of Management) Act,1978. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirtieth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Sugar Undertakings (Taking Over Short 
of Management) Amendment Act, 1979. title 
and. com-
S (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 31st day of menee· 
.!,anuary, 1979. ment. 
2. In section 3 of the Sugar Undertakings (Taking Over oi Manage-
ment) Act, 1978 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in sub-
SectiWl (1), in clause (b), for the words "purchased before that date", 
10 the following shall be substituted and shall be deemed always to have 
been substituted, namely:-
"purchased, at any time (whether in that sugar year or in any 
earlier sugar year or sugar years and whether before or after the 
commencement of this Act), before that date". 
Amend-
ment of 
section 3 
of Act 49 
ot 1978. 
3. Notwithstanding any judgment, decree or order (whether interim Valida-
15 or otherwise) of any court, anything or any action (including the issue tion. 

Repeal. 
by the Central Government of any notification declaring that the manage-
ment of any sugar undertaking shall vest in the Central Government OD 
and from the date specified in such notification) done or taken or pur-
ported to have been done or taken under section 3 o£ the principal Act or 
under the corresponding provisions of the Ordinance which was repealed 5 
by the principal Act, shall, for all purposes, be deemed to be and to have 
always been as validly done or taken as if such thing or action' (including 
the issue of such notification) had been done or taken under section 3 of 
the principal Act as amended by section 2 of this Act and accordingly-
(a) no suit or other proceeding shall be maintained or continued ro 
in any court against the Central Government or any person or autho-
rity whatsoever lor the restoration to the owner o£ the management 
of any sugar undertaking with respect to which such notification had 
been issued by the Central Government; 
(b) no court shall enforce any decree or order (including an in- 15 
terim order) for the restoration to the owner of the management of 
any sugar undertaking with respect to which such notification had 
been issued by the Central Government; and 
(c) every such notification shall be, and shan be deemed always 
to have been, valid, effective and enforceable by or on behaH of the 20 
Central Government in accordance with the tenor tJ1ereof and the 
provisions of the principal Act as amended by this Act. 
ExpZclnation.-Words and expressions used in this section which are 
defined in, or for the meanings of which provision has been made in, sec-
tion 2 of the principal Act shall have tne same meanings as under that 2S 
section. 
4. The Sugar Undertakings (Taking Over of Management) Amend-
ment Ordinance, 1979 is hereby repealed. 2 of 1979. 

1. 2. 
WK 
SABRA 
CORRIGENDA 
to 
THE 
SUGAR 
UNDERT)..KINGS 
(TAKING 
OV'.l.CR 
OF 
MANAGEMENT) 
.AMENDMENT 
BILL, 
1979 
(To 
bel 
As 
introduced 
in 
10k 
Sabha) 
Page 
3, 
line 
10,-
for 
"asti 
sfied 
II 
read 
"sati 
sfied" 
Page 
3, 
line> 
18,-
for 
"arreas" 
read 
"arrears" 
NEW 
DELHI; 
February 
17, 
1979 
i4agha 
28, 
i91JO 
, Sakal 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
For maintaining the continuity of production of sugar, f.or avoiding 
undue hardship to cane producing farmers who were not getting prompt 
payments for cane supplied. by them to the sugar factories and to best 
subserve the interests of aU sections of the people, the Sugar Undertakings 
(Taking Over of Management) Ordinance, 1978 was promulgated on the 
9th November, 1978. The Ordinance was replaced by the Sugar Under-
takings (Taking Over of Management) Act, f978 (49 of 1978). 
Under section 3 (1) (b) of the Ordinance, where the Central Govern-
ment is astisfied that on any date In any sugar year any sugar undertaking 
has, in relation to the cane purchased before that date for the purposes 
of the undertaking, arrears of cane dues to the extent of more than ten 
per cent, of the total price of the cane so purchased during the immediately 
preceding year, the Central Government may issue a notice to the owner 
of such sugar undertaking calling upon him, among other things, to show 
cause as to why the management of such undertaking should not be taken 
over by the Central Government. A view has been put forth that arrears 
of cane dues referred to in this provision refer only to the arreas of cane 
dues which will accrue in the current sugar year. It was always the 
intention of the Government that the arrears of cane dues £.or which action 
can be taken should relate to cane purchased not only in the current year 
but also in the previoUs years. If this interpretation is not accepted, then 
the very objective of the legislation to ensure prompt clearance of the 
accumulated cane arrears and thus avoid undue hardsffip to the cane-
producing farmers would not be met. It was considered desirable to am-
end section 3 (1) (b) of the Act to bring out Government's intention more 
specifically and beyond doubt, and to validate action already taken. 
As Parliament was not in session and immediate action was necessary, 
the Sugar Undertakings (Taking Over of Management) Amendment 
Ordinance, 1979 was promulgated by the President on the 31st January, 
1979, to achieve the above objects. 
The Bill seeks to replace the Ordinance. 
NEW DELHI; SURJIT SINGH BARNALA. 
The 14th Febnulry, 1979. 
3 

Vesting 
of mana-
gement 
of a 
sugar 
under-
taking in 
Central 
Govern-
ment. 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACT FROM THE SUGAR UNDERTAKINGS (TAKING OVER OF MANAGEMENT) 
ACT, 1978 
(49 OF 1978) 
• • • • • 
CHAPTER II 
TAXING OVER OF MANAGEMENT 
3. (1) Where the Central Government is satisfied-
• • • • • 
(b) that on any date in any sugar year any sugar undertaking 
has, in relation to the cane purchased. before that date for the pur-
poses of the undertaking, arrears of cane dues to the extent of more 
than ten per cent. of the total price of the cane purchased for the 
purposes of the undertaking during the immediately preCeding sugar 
year; and 
• • • • • 
the Central Government may issue a notice in such form and in such 
manner as may be prescribed to the owner or the manager o~ such sugar 
undertaking calling upon such owner or manager to report in writing 
within such time, not being less than five days, as may be specified in 
the notice, the circumstances under which such undertaking has so failed 
to commence or ceased to manufacture sugar or, as the case may be, 
clear the said arrears of cane dues and to show caUSe as to why the 
management of such undertaking should not be taken over by the Central 
Government under this Act. 
• • • • 
4 

LOK SABHA 
, " 'r- - '!' 
• BILL 
to amend the Sugar Undertakings 
Act, 1978. 
-- ". , , 
(Taking Over of Management) 
" ., 
J 
(Shri Sur;it Singh Barnala, 
Ministe7' of Agriculture 
find Irrigation) 