As INTRODUCED IN Log SABRA ON 
29TH FaaUARY, 1964 
THE FINANCE BILL, 1964 
A 
BILL 
Bill No. 14 of 1964 
t(l give effect to the financi41 propo.alB of the Central Government 
for the fift4nei4Z year 1964-65. 
BB it enacted by Parliament f.n the Fifteenth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Finance Act, 1964. 9hoI't 
(2) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, sections 3 to 55 shall ~~-::ce-
S be deemed to have come into force on the 1st day of April, 1964. meat. 
Z. (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-sections (2), (3), (4) and Income-
(5), for the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April, WI: IIDIi 
1964,- .. '~ lUper-taX. 
(a) income-tax shall be charged at the rates speclfted in 
10 Part I of the First Schedule and, in the cases to which Paragraphs 
A, B, C and E of that Part apply, shall be increased by 8 sur-
charge for purposes of the Union calculated in either case in the 
manner provided theretn; 
(b) super-tax shall, for the purposes of section 95 of the 
1881. IS Income-tax Act, 1961 (hereinafter referred to as the Income-tax 
Act), be charged at the rates specified in Part n of the F"U'St 
Schedule, and, in the cases to which Paragraphs A, B and C or 
that Part apply, shall be increased by a surcharge for }Surposes 
of the Union calculated In the manner provided therem. 
20 (2) In making any assessment for the assessment year com-
mencing on the 1st day of April, 1964,-
(a) where the total income of an aasessee, not being a 
company, includes any income chargeable under the head 
"Salaries", the income-tax payable by the assessee on that part 
2S of his total income which consists of such inclusion shall be an 
2236(B LS-l. ,!!, ·"'1-:~·'·~. ....~·a .. 

amount bearing to the total amount of income-tax payable 
according to the rates applicable under the operation of the 
Finance Act, 1963, on his total income the same proportion as 
the amount of such inclusion bears to his total income; 
(b) where the total income of an assessee, not bei.ng a S 
company, includes any income chargeable under the head 
"Salaries" on which super-tax has been or might have been 
deducted under the provisions of sub-section (1) of section 192 
of the Income-tax Act, the super-tax payable by the assessee on 
that portion of his total income which consists of such inclusion 10 
shall be an amount bearing to the total amount of super-tax 
payable according to the rates applicable under the operation 
of the Finanoe Act, 1963, on his total income the same proportion 
as the amount of such inclusion bears to hiJ total income. 
(3) In making any assessment· for the assessment year com- 15 
mencing on the 1st day of April, 1964, where the total income of a 
company, other than the Life Insuranee Corporation of India 
established under the Life Insurance Corporation Act, 1956, includes 
any profits and gains from life insurance business, the super-tax 
payable by it shall be the aggregate of the tax calculated- 20 
(i) on the amount of profits and gains from life insura1'lce 
business so included, at the rate applicable to the Life Insurance 
Corporation of India in accordance with Paragraph E of Part It 
of the First Schedule; and 
(ii) on the remaining part of its tdtal income, at the rate) 0 
applicable to the company on its total income. 
(4) In cases to which Chapter XII of the Income-tax Act applies, 
the tax chargeable shall be determined as provided in that Chapter, 
and with r,eference to the rates imposed by suh,.section (1) or the 
rates as specified in that Chapter, as the case may be. 35 
(5) (a) In respect of any assessment for the assessment year 
commencing on the 1st day of April, 1964-
(i) an assessee being an Indian company or any other 
company which has made the prescribed arraneements for the 
declaration and payment of dividends within India or an assessee 40 
(other than a company) whose total income includes any profits 
and gains derived from the export of any goods or merchandise 
out of India, shall be entitled to a deduction, from the amount of 
ineome-talt: and luper-tax with wbleh he 18 chargeable, of an 
amount equal to the 1ncom.e-tax and stiper-'ta:x calculated 45 
respectively at one-tenth of 'the average rate of ineome-tax and 
of the avera~e rate of luper-tax on the amount of such proftts 
and gains included in the total income; 
(ii) where an auenee c4 the type referred to in claUJe (0 
engaged in the manufacture of any articles in an industry so 
13 of 1983. 
13 ofl9D. 
31 ot It6l. 

3 
specified in the First Schedule to the Industries (Development 
and Regulation) Act, 1951 has exported after the 28th day of 650t 1881. 
February, 1963, such articles out of India, he shall be entitled, 
in aqdition to the deduction of tax referred to in clause (i), to 
S a fqrther deduction, frotp the amo~nt of tax with which he is 
chargeable for the assessment year, of an amount equal to the 
income-tax and super-tax calculated respectively at the average 
rate of income-tax and the average rete of super-tax on an 
amount equal to two ~J" cent. of the !Male proceecli rQCeiVJble by 
10 him in respect of luch elq)Qrtj 
(iii) wh,ere an ~Bessee of the type referred to in clause (i) 
eng~,ed m the tn~~ctUfe of any articl~ in an ind.ustry 
specift~ in the saiJi First Schedule Qas sold after the 28th day 
of February, 1~, luclt articles to any other person in India who 
IS himself has exported them out of India and evidence is produced 
before the Income-tax Oftlcer of such articles having been 80 
exported, the assessee shall be entitled to a deduction from 
the amount of income-tax and luper-tax with which h. 18 charge-
able for the assessment year of an amount equal to the income-
20 ~ and super-t~x calculated re,pec~vely et the ~v~"" ra~e of 
income-tax and the average rate of !Super-tax on ~ Sum equal 
to two per cept. of the sale proceeds receivable by him in respect 
of su~h articles from the exporter. 
(b) The total of the deductiom under thi. sub-:-eection IhJll in 
l S no case exceeci the .. ount of tncome-tax NUl IUpef-~ otherwise 
pay~ble by the ........ 
(c) )ioth£ng contained in lub-clause (it) and lUb-clause (iii) of 
clause (a.) shall apply,-
0) in rel8tiDla to--
30 (1) fuels, 
(Z) fertilisers, 
(3) photographic raw film .. ~ paper, 
"(4) textiles (including those dyed, printed or otherwise 
processed) made wholly or in part of jute, including j}1te 
3S twine and rope, 
(5) newsprint, 
(fil p~p--wood pulp, mef!hanical, cltcunic~l, in~u~g 
dissolving pulp, 
(7) sugar~ 
40 (8) vegetable oils and vanaspathi, 
(9) cement and gypsum proclucts, 

Amniit7 
depos11. 
Amend-
mental 
.ection 2. 
4: 
(10) arms and ammunition, apd 
(11) cigarettes, 
respectively specified in items 2, 18, 20, 23(2), 24(2), 24(5), 25, 
28, 35, 37 and 38 of the First Schedule to the Industries (Develop-
ment and Regulation) Act, 1951; or 5 850f1951. 
(ii) in relation to textiles specified in items 23 (1), 23 (3), 
23(4) and 23(5) of that Schedule where such textiles have been 
exported before the 1st day of March, 1964. 
(d) The amount of any profits and gains derived from the export 
of any goods or merchandise out of India in respect of which 10 
deduction of income-tax and super-tax is admissible under sub-
clause (i) of clause (a) shall be computed in accordance with the 
rules made by the Central Board of Direct Taus in this behalf. 
(6) In cases in whicll tax has to be deducted under sub-section (2) 
of section 192 and sections 193 to 195 of the Income-tax Act at the 15 
rates in force, the deduction shall be made at the rates specified in 
partm of the First Schedule. 
(7) For the purposes of this section, and of the rates of tax 
imposed thereby, and of section 3-
(i) the expressions "assessment year", "average rate of 20 
income-tax", "average rate of super-taX", "partner", "tax" and 
"total income" have, unless the context otherwise requires, the 
mean1nga respectively assigned to them under clauses (9), (10), 
(11), (23), (43) and (45) of section 2 of the Income-tax Act; 
(ti) the expression "earned income" has the same mea.ning 25 
as in section 2 of the Finance (No.2) Act, 1962. 20 ollH2. 
3. (1) For the assessment year commencing on the lit day: of 
April, 1964, annuity deposit shall be made by every person to whom 
the provisions of Chapter XXII-A of the Income-tax Act apply at 
the rates specified in the Second Schedule. 30 
(2) For the purpo&e8 of this section and the Second Schedule, 
the e:x:F.uons "adjusted total income", "annuity deposit" and 
"depositor" have the meanings respectively assigned to th~ under 
clauses (1), (5) and (6) of section 280B of the Income-tax Act. 
4. In section 2 of the Income-tax Act, in clause (24)- 35 
(0 after sub-clause (v), the following sub-clfuse shall be 
inserted, namely:-
"(va) the vahJe of any benefit or perquisite taxable 
under clause (tv) of section 28;"; 

I 
(ii) after sub-clause (vii), the following sub-clause shall be 
inserted, namely:-
.. (viii) any annuity due, or commuted value of any 
annuity paid, under the provisions of section 280D;". 
s S. In section 9 of the Income-tax Act, in the ExplanatiOfl. to Amend-
clause (i) of sub-section (1), the proviso to clause (b) shall be =~:f9, 
, omitted . 
10 
IS 
20 
3S 
•. In section 10 of the Income-tax Act,- Amend-mentof 
(i) in clause (4), after the words "in the case of a non- section I., 
resident,", ihe following worda shall be inserted, namely:-
"any income from interest on such securities as the 
emtra! Government may, by notification in. the Official 
Gazette, specify in this behalf, or"; 
(ii) in clause (6-),-
«1) in sub-clause (vii) «1), for the words "was approved 
. by the Central Government before the commencement of 
his service", the words "is approved by the Central Govern-
ment before the commencement of his service or within 
one year of such commencement" shall be substituted; 
(b) after sub-clause (viii), the follOWing sub-clause 
shall be inserted, namely:-
"(ix) any income chargeable under the head 
"Salaries" received by· Dr due to him during the thirty-
six,·months commencing from the date of his arrival in 
India for service rendered as a professor or other teacher 
in a University or other educational institution, and 
where any such individual continues to remain' in em-
ployment in India after the expiry of the thirty-siX 
months aforesaid and the tax on his income chargeable 
under the head "Salaries" is paid by the University 
or other educational institution concerned to the Central 
Government, the tax so paid for a period not exceeding 
twenty-four months following the expiry of the thirty-
six months 'aforesaid, proVided in either case the follow-
ing conditions are fulfilled, namely:-
(i) such individual was not resident in any of 
the four financial years immediately preceding the 
financial year in which he arrived in India; and 

Amencl-
meot of 
1eCtlon28. 
AmeDd-
IlleDt of 
leC'tion II. 
8 
(ii) ~ contract of service is approved by the 
Central Government-
(4) on or before the 1st day of October, 
1964, in the case of a professor or other teacher 
whose service commenced before the 1st day of S 
April, 1964; 
(b) before the commencement of his service 
or within one year of such commencement, in 
any other case;"; 
(iii) in sub-clauae (iv)(c) of ~use (15), for 10 
the words beginning with "in any cue" and ending 
with "its repayment", the following shall be 
substituted, namely:-
"to the extent to which such interest does 
not exceed the amount of iDtereIt oalculated at I, 
the rate approved by the Central Government 
in this behalf, having reprd to the terms of the 
Joan or debt and its repayment"; 
(iv) after claqse (26), the foUowm, clause shall 
btl msel1ed, ~ely: - 20 
"(27) any income derived from a business 
of livestock breeding, or poultry or dairy farm-
in~, which is assessable for the auessment year 
commencing Oil the 1st day of Ap~, 1116, 1988 
or 1967.". 25 
,. In aection 28 of the Income-tax Act, after clause (iii) and before 
Ezplaft4tion 1, the following claUle shall be inIerted, namely:-
"(iv) thEt v~ue of any ~eftt or ~~te, whether con-
vertible Wto ~nw Of not, ariJinf ~. p~ o.r the exercise 
of a Pl'Qf~cm,. H. 30 
.. In section 38 gf the In~ .. ~ Act,-
(I) after IUb-Hction (I), the following lulMIection ahall be 
lDIerte4, namely:-
"(lA) (4) An ~essee who, &tter ~ 3~lt day of March, 
1964, acquir~s any !Ship w!1ich pefore the <iate of acquisition 3. 
by him was used by any other perlOn Ihall,.ubject to the 
provislons of section 34, also be allowed 81 a deduction a IUDl 
by way of development rebate at such rate or rates u may 

s 
10 
25 
35 
7 
be prescribed, provided that the following conditions are 
fulftlled, namely:-
(i) such ship was not previous to the date of such 
acquisition owned at any time by any person resident in 
India; 
(ii) such ship is wholly used for the purposes of the 
business carried on by the assessee; and 
(iii) such other conditions as may be prescribed. 
(b) An assessee who instals any machinery or plant 
(other than office appliances or road transport vehicles) 
which before such installation by the asseaaee was used 
outside India by any other person Ihall, subject to the pro-
visions of section 34, alSo be allowed as a deduction a sum 
by way of development rebate at such rate or rates as may 
be prescribed, provided that the following conditions are 
fulfilled, namely:-
(i) such machinery or plant was not used in India 
at any time previous to the date of such installation by 
the as&eaeei 
(ii) it is imported in India by the asseuee from any 
country outside India; 
(tii) no deduction on account of depreciation or 
development rebate in respect of such machinery or 
plant has been allowed or is allowable under the previ-
sions of the Indian Income-tax Act, 1922 or this Act in 
Cottlputing the total income of any person for any period 
prior to the date of the installation of the machinery or 
plant by the assessee; 
(iv) such machinery or plant is wholly used for the 
purposes of the business carried on by the assessee; and 
(v) such other conditions as may be prescribed. 
(c) The development rebate under this Bub-section shall 
be allowed as a deduction in respect of the previous year in 
which the ship was 8ct1luired or the machinery or plant was 
installed or, if the ship, machinery or plant is· first put to 
UIe in the immediately succeeding previous year, then, in 
respect of that previous year."j 
(ii) for the worda, brackets and figure "under sub-section 
(1)" wherever they occur, the words, brackets,figures and letter 
"under sub-section (1) or sub-section (1A)" shall be substituted; 

Amend-
men\ of 
section 37. 
Amend-ment of section 40. 
8 
(iiO in sub-section (2), for the words "at the rate applicable 
thereto under that sub-section", the words, brackets, figures and 
letter "at the rate applicable thereto under sub-sectiOD. (1) or 
sub-section (lA), as the case may be," shall be substituted; 
(iv) in clause (b) of su~section (3), for the worda and 5 
figures "section 33 and section 34", the words and figures "this 
section and section 34" Shall be substituted; 
(v) after sub-section (4), the following sub-section shall be 
inserted, namely:-
"(5) The Central Govemment, if it considers necessary 10 
or expedient .a to do, may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, direet that the deduction allowable under this 
section shall Dot be allowed in reaped of a .hip acquired or 
machinery or plant tnstalled after such date, not being 
earlier than three years from the date of such notification, IS 
as may be specified therein.". 
t. In section 37 of the Income-tax Act, after sub-section (2), the 
following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-
"(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), 
any expenditure incurred by an asaeuee after the 31st day of 20 
March, 1964 on advertisement or on maintenance of any resi-
dential accommodation including any accommodation in the 
nature of a guest ho~ or in colllleCtion with travelling by an 
employee or any other person (including hotel expenses or 
allowances paid in connection with such travelling) shall be 2, 
allowed only to the extent, and subject to such conditions, if any, 
as may be prescribed.". 
10. lb section 40 of the Income-tax Act, in clause (c),-
(1) for sub-clause (Ui), the following sub-clause shall be 
substituted, namely: - 30 
"(iii) any expenditure which results directly or indirectly 
in the provision of any benefit or amenity or perquisite, 
whether convertible into money or not, to an employee 
(including any sum paid by ~ company in respect of any 
obligation which but for such payment would have been 3S 
payable by such employee), to the extent such expenditW1" 
exceeds one-fifth of the amount of salary payable to the 
employee for any period of his employment after the 29th day 
of February, 1964: 

Provided that in computing the aforesaid expend.iture 
any payment 'by way of gratuity or any sum referred to in 
clause (vii) of sub-section (1) of section 17 or in clause (v) of 
sub-se,ctiGn (2) of that section or the amount of any compen-
sation referred to in clause (i) or any payment referred to 
in clause (ii) of sub-section (3) of that section or any pay-
ment referred to in dau:;c (iv) <;>r clause (v) of sub-section 
(1) of section 36 shall not be taken into account."; 
(2) the eXlsting EJ..-planation shall be re-numbered as 
10 Explanation 1 and after Explanation 1 as so re-numbered, the 
following Explartation shall be inserted, namely:-
'Explanation 2.-In sub-clause (iii), the word "salary" 
shall have the meanin~ assigned to it in clause (h) of rule 2 
of Part A of the Fourth Schedule.'. 
15 11. In Chapter IV-D of the Income-tax Act, after section 44, the ~r~r:.OD 
following section shall be jnserted, namely: - section 
20 
30 ' 
35 
"44A. (1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary con-
,tamed in this Act, where the amount received during a previous 
year by any trade, p~ofessional or similar association from its 
members, whether by way of subscription or otherwise (not 
being temuneration received for rendering any specific services 
to :Such members) falls short of the expenditure incurred by such 
association during that previous year (not bein2 expenditure 
. deductibJ,e in computing the income under any other provision of 
this Act and not being in the nature of capital expenditure) solely 
for the purposes of protection or advancement of the common 
ihterests of its members, the amount so fallen short (hereinafter 
referred to as deficiency) shall, subject to the provisions of this 
section. be allowed as a deduction in computing the income of 
the association assessable for the relevant assessment year under 
the head 'Profits and gains of business or profession' and if there 
is no income assessable under that head or the deficiency allow-
able exceeds such lncome. the Whole or the balance of' the 
deficie~cy, as the case may be, shall be allowed as a deduction 
in computing the income of the association assessable for the 
~levant assessment year under any other head. 
, (2) In computing the income of the association for the 
izele'vant ,assessment 'year under sub-section (1), eftectshall first 
be' given to any other provision of this Act under which any 
40 :.' 'anowaDCe or loss in respect of any earlier assessment year is 
2238 (B) LS-2. 
44A. 
Special 
provision 
fordeduc-
tion in the 
case ot trade, pro. 
tesslonal or similar 
associe. 
lion. 

Amend-
ment of 
aection45. 
Amend-
ment of 
aection 52. 
10 
carried forward and set off against the income for the relevant 
assessment year. 
(3) The amount of deficiency to be allowed as a deduction 
under this section shall in no case exceed one-half of the total 
income of the association as computed before making any allow- S 
anCe under this section. 
(4) This section applies only to that trade, profellional or 
similar association the income of which or any part thereof is 
not distributed to its members except as grants to any associatien 
or institution affiliated to it:'. 10 
12. In the Income-tax Act, section 45 shall be re-Dumbered al 
sub-section (1) thereof and after sub-section (1) as so re-numbered, 
the following sub-sections shall be inserted, namely:-
"(2) Where any shares are distributed by a company to its 
equity shareholders by way of bonus, every shareholder receiv- IS 
ing such shares shall be chargeable to income-tax under the 
head 'Capital gains' in respect of such shares as if such shares 
were transferred by him at the fair market value on the date 
next following the expiry of the period of thirty days from the 
date of distribution: ao 
Provided that income-tax shall not be chargeable under this 
sub-section if such shares are includible in the .tock·in-uade 
of the assessee or if such shares are transferred by him before 
the expiry of the period aforesaid. 
(3) Nothing contained in sub-section (2) shall be deemed to 2S 
preclude the inclusion of any profits and pins arising from the 
transfer of any shares referred to in that sub-sectioa in the total 
income of the assessee for any previous year in which such 
shares are actually transferred by him.". 
13. In the Income-tax Act, section 52 shall be re-numbered as 30 
sub-section (1) thereof and after sUb-section (1) as so re-numbered, 
the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-
"(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-lection (1), 
if in the opinion of the Income-tax Officer the fair market value 
of a capital asset transferred by an usessee as on tile date of the 35 
transfer, exceeds the full value of the consideration declared by 
the assessee in respect of the traDBfer of such capital 8818t by 
an amount of not less than fifteen per CIQt. . of .Ute va1Ue .. 
, 

l1 
declared, the full value of t.he consideration for such capital 
.... t shall, with the previous approval of the Inspecting Assistant 
Commi8lioner, be taken to be its fair market value on the date 
of its tranlter.". 
S 14. In section 35 of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section (2), after Amend-
clause (iii), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely;- ~~ii~no~5. 
10 
15 
20 
"(iv) where the capital asset, being a share of a company, 
became the property of the assessee on any distribution by the 
company to its equity shareholders of shares by way of bonus 
and such asset is actually transferred after the expiry of thirty 
days referred to in sub-section (2) of section 45, means the fair 
market value of the asset on the date next following the expiry 
of the said thirty days; 
(v) where the capital asset, being a share or a stock of a 
company, became the property of the assessee on-
(CI) the co1l8OlidatiQn and. division of all or any of the 
share capital of the company into shares of larger amount 
than its existing shares; 
(b) the conversion of any shares of the company into 
atock; 
(c) the reconversion of any stock of the company into 
shares; 
(d) the sub-division of any of the shares of the company 
into shares of smaller amount; or 
as (e) the conversion of one kind of shares of the company 
into another kind, 
m.eans the cost of acq.uisition of the asset- calculated with 
reference to the cost of acquisition of the shares or stock from 
which such asset is derived.". 
30 15. In section 66 of the Income-tax Act, for the words and figures Amend-
35 
"sections 87 and 88", the words, figures and letter "sections 87, 87A ~~~~6. 
and 88" shall be substituted. 
16. After section 69 of the Income-tax Act, the following section Insertion 
of MW 
shall be inserted, namely :- section 
"6tA. Where in any financial year the assessee is found to 
be the owner of any money, bullion,. jewellery or other 
valuable arUcle and such money, bullion, jewellery or valuable 
69A. 
Un-
explained 
money, 
etc. 

Amend-
ment of 
lectlon86. 
Amend-
mentof 
aection 8'1. 
Insertion of new 
section 
R'7A. 
Rebate on 
educa-
tional 
expenses 
incertain 
cues. 
12 
article is not recorded in the books of account, if any, main-
tained by him for any source of income, and the assessee- offers 
no explanation about the nature and source of acquisition of the 
money, bullion, jewellery or other valuable article, or the explana-
tion offered by him is not, in the opinion of the Income-tax S 
Officer, satisfactory, the money and the value of. the b,ulllon, 
jewellery or other valuable article may be deemed· to be the:: 
income·of the assessee for such financial year.". 
17. In section 86 of the Income-tax Act, in clause (iii), for the 
words "income-tax has already been paid by the firm",tlle1words 10 
"income-tax is payable by the finn" shall be substituted.' , r 
18. In section 87 of the Income-tax Act,-
(i) in sub-section (3) ,-
(a) to clause (i), the following proviso shall be added, 
namely:- ~S 
"Provided that such individual has effected an 
insurance referred to in sub-clause (i) of clause (a) of 
sub-section (1) prior to the first day of March, 1964 and 
has paid any sum in the previous year to keep in force 
such insurance;"; 20 
(b) in clause (ii), after the words "any other indivi-
dual", the brackets, words and figure" (including an author, 
playwright, artist, musician or actor to wh0lp the .provision. 
of clause (i) do not apply)" shall be inserted; 
(ii) after sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be 25 
tnaerted, namely:- .. 
"(4) The amount of income-tax deductible under this 
saction, together with the amount of super-tax deductible 
under section 99A, shall not in any case exceed half the 
aggregate of the sums in respect of Which the deduction is 30 
allowed under this section.". 
19. After section 87 of the Income-tax Act, the following ~ttoQ 
shall be inserted, namely:-
"87A. Where an individual, being a reSident, who is not a 
citizen of India has exp~nded any sum in the previous year()l.\t 3S 
of his income chargeable to tax for the full-time educatiQIl ()~ - . 
his child wholly or mainly dependent onhtm antt whQ .s not 
more than twenty-one years of age at any University, 'college, 
school or other educat1onaljnstitutton situate iSs\' .,~t\urtry 'dutslde 
$ I 

13 
India, he shall be entitled to a deduction from the amount of 
income-tax on his total income with which he is chargeable for 
any assessment year, of an amount equal to the income-tax 
calculated at the average rate of income-tax on a sum-
(i) which, in the case of an individual who has one such 
child, shall not exceed two thousand rupees or twenty-five 
per cent. of his total income, whichever is less; and 
(ii) which, in the case of an individual who has more 
than one such child, shall not exceed four thousand rupees 
10 or twenty-five per cent. of his total income, whichever is 
~~ . 
20. In section 91 of the Income-tax Act, in clause (ii) of the Amend-ment of Explanation, for the words "any relief due under this section", the section 91. 
IS 
words "any relief due under this Chapter" shall be substituted. 
21. In section 99 of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section (1),-
(i) in clause (i), for the words "super-tax has already been 
paid by the firm", the words "super-tax is payable by the firm" 
shall be substituted; 
(ii) for sub-clause (iv), the following sub-clatiie shall be 
2.0 substituted, namely:-
"(iv) if the assessee is a company, any dividend received 
by it from an Indian company or a company which has 
made the prescribed arrangements for the declaration: and 
payment of dividends (including dividends on preference 
%5 shares) within India;". 
22. In Chapter XI-C of the Income-tax Act, before section 100, 
'the following sections shall be inserted, namely:-
"99A. Where under the provisions of section 87, an assessee 
is entitled to a deduction of income-tax in respect of any sum 
referred to in sub-section (1) of that section, he shall also be 
entitled, subject to the provisions of sub-section (4) of that 
section, to a deduction, from the amount of super-tax with which 
he is chargeable on his total income, of an amount equal to the 
super-tax calculated at the average rate of super-tax on such 
35 sum. 
99B. Where under the provisions of section 87 A, an 
individual, being a resident, who is not a citizen of India is 
entitled to a deduction of income-tax in respect of any sum 
referred to in that section, he shall also be entitled to a deduction. 
Amend-
ment of 
section". 
Insertion 
~!:am' 99A arid' 
99B~ 
Rebate on 
lifeinsur-
anee 
premia, 
annuities 
and,con-
tributiolUl 
to provi-
dent 
funds. etc. 
Rebate of 
super-tax 
in certain 
cues. 

Amend-
ment of 
section 
1M. 
Amend-
mentof 
seetion 
108. 
AJUD4. 
~tot 
Beetlon. 
10'7. 
IJ18lIriion 
of JUrW 
section 
I07A. 
Reduction 
of mini-
mum 
distribu-
tion in 
certain 
eaHI. 
14 
from the amount of super-tax with which he is chargeable on 
his total income, of an amount equal to the super-tax calculated 
h " at the average rate of super-tax on sue sum .. 
23. In aection 104 of the Income-tax Act,-
(i) in sub-section (1),- , 
(a) for the words, brackets and figures "sub-section (2) 
and of ~tiODl!l 105, 106 and 10'1", the words, fi«ures and letter 
"this section and of sections 105, 106, 107 and 107A" shall be 
substituted; 
(b) after the words "dividends by any company", the 10 
brackets and words "(not being an Indian company whOle 
business consists wholly in the manufacture or processing of 
goods or in mining or in the generation or distribution of 
electricity or any other form of power)" shall be substituted; 
(ii) after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be 15 
Inserted, namely:-
"(3) If the Central Govemment is of opinion that it is 
neceaary or expedient in the public interest so to do, it may, 
by notification in the Official Gazette and subject to such 
conditiOlli as may be specified therein, exempt any class of 20 
companies to which the provisions of this section apply from 
the operation of this section.". 
24. To section 106 of the Income-tax Act, the following proviso 
ahaU be added, uamely :-
"Provided that the period of limitation prescribed by this 25 
section shall not apply in a case where the compaay has made 
an application to the Board under section 107A .... 
25. In section 107 of the Income-tax Act, for the words "No.order 
shall be made", the words, brackets, figures and letter "Except, in 
cases where a decision is given by the Board under sub-section (4) 30 
of section l07A, no order shall be made" shall be substituted. 
2&. After section 107 of the Income-tax Act, the following section 
&hall be inserted, namely:-
uI07A. (1) If any company to which the provisions of section 
104 apply (not being an investment company) considers that 3S 
having regard to the current requirements for the development 
of its business, it would not be possible or advisable for it to 
declare or pay a dividend of an amount larger than that already 
declared or paid or proposed to be declared or paid by it, it 
may make an application to the Board for reduction of the 40 
attlount of the minimum distribution required under tlJAI Chapter. 

(2) Every application under sub-section (1) shall be In the 
prescribed form and shall be verified in the prescribed manner 
and shall be made within the period of twelve months referred 
to in sub-section (1) of section 104 or, where the Income-tax 
S Officer has served on the company a notice under sub-section (1) 
of section 105 of his intention to make an order under section 104, 
within thirty days of the receipt of such notice. 
(3) Every application under sub-section (1) shall be 
accompanied by a fee of one hundred rupees. 
)0 (4) If the Board is satisfied that a distribution equal to the 
statutory percentage of the distributable income of the company 
concerned would be unreasonable, it may reduce the amount of 
minimum distribution required of the company under this Chapter 
by such amount, not exceeding twenty per cent. of the statutory 
IS percentage of its distributable income, as it may consider fit and 
further determine the period within which such distribution 
shall be made. 
(5) The Board shall not reject an application made under 
sub-section (1) without givinl'l the company concerned an oppor-
20 tunity of being heard and its decision shall be final as respects 
matters concluded by it. 
(6) Where an application is made by the company after 
receipt ofa notice from the Income-tax Officer under sub-section 
(1) of section 105 and a further distribution is made in accord-
2, anee with the decision thereon of the Board, such further distri-
butiGDahall not be taken into account in deciding whether the 
provisions of section 104 apply in respect of the previous year in 
which the further distribution is made. 
(7) Where an application is made by a company under this 
so aection, the Income-tax Officer shall not make any order under 
section 104 until the decision is given by the Board on that 
application: 
Provided that where a company is required to make a distri-
bution or further distribution of its profits and gains in accord-
3S anee with the deeision of the Board and fails to make such 
distribution or further distribution within the period determined 
thereunder, the Income-tax Officer shall make an order under 
SleCtion 1M as if no reduction of the amount of minimum distribu-
tion had been made by the Board under this section. 
(8) If the Central Government is of opinion that it is 
'fteCeM8l'y or ~xpedient In the public interest so to do, it may, by 
tJotlftcation in the Official Gazette, declare that the provisions 

Amend-
mental 
IeCtloD 
108. 
Amend-ment al 
HCtion 
11". 
ii 
of this section shall not apply to any class of companies or in 
regard to the whole or any part of the profits and gains of any 
class of companies. 
(9) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 246, no 
appeal shall lie to the Appellate Assistant Commissioner against 5 
an order of the Income-tax Officer under section 104 in a case 
where a decision has been given by the Board. 
(10) The Board may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
direct that, subject to such conditions, if any, as may be specified 
in the notification, the powers exercisable by it under this seCtiOD JO 
shall also be exercisable by any Commissioner in respect of such 
companies or classes of companies as may be specified therein 
and thereupon in respect of such companies or classes of com-
panies the provisions of this section and sections 106 and 107 
shall have effect as if references in the said sections to the Board J5 
were references to such Commissioner.". 
27. In section 109 of the Income-tax Act,-
(a) for the words and figures "For the purposes of sections 
104 and 105", the words, figures and letter "For the purposes of 
sections 104, 105 and l07A" shall be substituted; 20 
(b) in clause (iii)-
(i) sub-clause (2) shall be omitted; 
(ii) in sub-clause (3), for the words "in any of the acti-
vities specified in the preceding clause", the words "in the 
manufacture or processing of goods or in mining or in the 25 
generation or distribution of electricity or any other form of 
power" shall be substituted. 
Z8. In section 114 of the Income-tax Act, in clause (b), for sub-
clause (ii), the fo1J.owing sub-clause shall be substituted, namely:-
"(ii) the amount of income-tax and luper-tax calculated on 30 
the amount of the net capital gains, if any, relating to capital 
&ssets other than short-term capital assets-
(1) in the case of capital gains relating to buildings or 
lands, or any rights in buildings or lands, at three40urtha 
of the average rate of income-tax and thr~fourths of the 35 
average rate of super-tax respectively, which would have 
been applicable to the total income, if the net capital gains, 
if any, relating to short-term capital assets and the amount 
of compensation or other payment aforesaid, if any, had not 
formed part of it, and· 40 
(2) in any other case, at one-half of the average rate of 
Income-tax and one-half of the average rate of BUper-tax 

10 
2$ 
3' 
IT 
zwpeetively [average rate of income-tax and average rate 
of luper-tax being computed for thiJ purpose in the same 
manner as for the purpose of IUb-clause (U) (1) of thia 
clause] : 
Provided that-
(t) where the total income doee not exceed the sum of 
twenty thoUl8lld rupees, the assessee shall be entitled to a 
deducticm from the amount of income-tax payable under 
lub..clause Oi) of this clause of a sum calculated at three-
fourths or, as the case may be, one-half of the average rate 
of income-tax referred to in the said SUb-claUle in respect 
of an amount not exceeding five thousand rupees of the capi-
tal gains relating to capital Uleta other than short-term 
capital Uleta; and 
(it) where· the total income exceeds the sum of twenty 
thousand rupees, the income-tax payable under sub-clauae 
(ii) of this clause ShallllOt exceed the aggregate of-
(1) the amount of income-tax which would have 
been payable in respect of capital gains relating to 
capital 811!18ts other than short-term capital useta if the 
assessee had been entitled to the deduction referred to 
in clause (i) of this proviso in the same manner as an 
ueel8ee whose total income does not exceed a IIWD of 
twenty thousand rupees; and 
(2) one-half of the amount by which the total income 
exceeds the sum of twenty thoUl8lld rupees; 
pI""". 
!t. In section 115 of the 'Income-tax Act, for clause (b), the 
following clause shan be substituted, namely:-
"(b) the amount of super-tax equal to the aggregate of-
(1) the amount of ItUper-tax calculated on the amount of 
capital gains relating to capital assets other'than short-term 
capital assets included in its total income-
(i) at the rate of fifteen per cent. on 10 much of the 
amount of such capital gains a8 relate to building. or 
lands or any rights in buildings or landa: and 
(ii) at the rate of five per cent. on the balance of 
such capital gains, if any; and 
(2) the amount of super-tax with which it would have 
been chargeable had its total income been reduced by the 
40 amount of capital gabu referred to in sub-clause en" 
2238 (B) L.S.-4. 

Substitu-
tion of 
new 
.eeticm 
for Me-
llon 132. 
POWerII of 
Harch 
aDd 
aelzure. 
11 
30. For IteCtion 132 &1 the IJ:lcome-tp Ad, the folJowing section 
allall be substituted, namely:-
"132. (1) Where the Commissioner, tacoD8equence of 
information in his possession, has reason to believe that-
(a) fitly perscm to whom _summona umJer suHection (1) , 
Of section 37 of t&e Indim Income-tax Ad, 192% or under 11 of 1922. 
sub-sectibn (1) of section 131 of this Act, or a notice under 
sub-sectian (4) of leetion 22 of the Indio meome-tax Act,-
1'922 or uDder sub-seetion (1) of seeman 141 of this Act was 
iSsued to produce, or taUlia to be produoed, my books of 10 
*ccowit or other documents has oDUtted or failed to produce, 
or cause to be produced, such boDks ttl. acOC!JW'lt or other 
documents as required by such IWIIlDlOBl or notice, or 
(b) any person to whtnn a surrtrtlb1lS or notle~ as afore-
aala has been or might be issued wtll not. at would not. I, 
produce or cause to be produeed lIllY bIIbki of account or other 
documents which Will be ~ful for, or Televant to, any 
proceeding eder the Indtliln Incomeo.tu: Act, 1922 or under 11 of 1922. 
this Act, or 
(c) any person is in possession of any articles or things 20 
including money wholly dlsproportionate to his known 
sources of income, partlcubrs of which \Vin be useful for, 
dr relevtirit to, any ~a UIlderthe Indian Income-tax 
Act, 1~2 or tht:s Act, 11 of 1922. 
he may authorise any InspectIng Assistant Commissioner or any 2' 
Tn'eom~tax officer to enter and search any bui~ding or place 
where he has reasoh 'to sus'Pect that such books of aCcount. other 
doetiments. articles 'tJr t'hin~ i1'lclucftng 'tntJtic!y are kept and if 
... a result of "the sea'rc:h sUch boekrs C1f aceeaM, toUter documents, 
articles or thin~ including money 'are fotmd, the Inspecting 30 
Assistant Commissioner or 'the lirelnne .... x OfBcer, u the case 
may be, may-
(i) seize 'any such boOb at account or o'ther documents; 
(it) place marks of identification on any such books of 
lecOlintor dt1ier doc:umellts or mue . or cause to be made 35 
extracts or copies therefrom; 
(iii) make a note or an tnventory,of any articles,or things 
including money found which, in his opinion, will be 
uRful for, or relevant to, any proceedJng undlltr.tbJs *tt. 

5 of laD&. 
10 
20 
30 
35 
tt 
(2) The 'books at account or oth,r documents seized under 
sub-section (1) shall not be re,t8ined by 'the Inspecttng&sistant 
Commissioner or the Income-tax Officer for. a period exceeding 
one hundred and eighty days from the date ~f the seizure unless 
the reasons for retammg the same are recorded by him in writing 
and the approval of the Commisisoner for such retention is 
obtained: 
Pr().vi~ that the c.omm!~~on~r .!~~all not ,authorise' the 
retention of the .boo.ks of ,ac.CQl,Plt Jmd otQer doc~ents f,or a 
penod exceedmg thirty days after all the proceedm~s under this 
Act in respect of the years for which the books of account or 
other documents are re1evut are completed. 
(3) The person from whose custody ~y boo.\ts of. a.cCC?~t or 
other documents are selZed under sub-sectlon (1) may make 
cqples thereof, or take extra"ts therefrom, in the presence of the 
lncome-~ Otticer or any other person authorlsed by 111m, at 
such place and time as the Income-tax Otticer may appomt in 
this behalf. 
(4) If a person lega¥y entitled to ~e books of account or 
other documents seized under sub-section (1) objects for any 
reason to the ~pproval gIven by theCommissloner under sub-
sec~on (2), he m~y make an applicatIon to Ule .Board statms 
therem the reasons for such objectJon and request~ for the 
return of the books of accoUllt or documents. 
(5) On receipt. of the application under sub-section ,(4) the 
,Boatd .lJl8y,~at~r giving. tile.'-:RpllC;!iDtan o~portwuty of b~iDg 
heard, pass such orders as it thmks .tit. 
(6) The provisiOns of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 
relating to searches shall apply, so far as may be, to searches 
under aubt-aectiDn; (1) ,01 t.bia .. ,MCtipn. 
(7) The Central Board -of Direct· Taxes may.make rules in 
relation to searches under this section.". 
, 3L.rAfter • section" :133:of the.. In~ . Act,.:U1e foUoVfi.pt ~ction Inael\ ''''D 
ctAall be-"ituJe1ted, ,Damely : - of nei. ! 
section 
133A. 
"133A. (1) Notwithstanding anything in any other provision, Power of 
an Income-tax Officer or' any Inspector of lncome-tax authorised s~q. 
by hlm in this behalf may enter-
(g). any place ,within, the llinits. of the, ~rea,.aigned to 
him"or 
40 (b) any place occupied by any person in rupeet of 
whom the Income-tax Officer exercise. jurisdiction, 

Omi.ioD 
ofMCti_ 
IS'7. 
Substitu-
tion of 
Dew .... 
tion for 
section 
ISS. 
DiaclOlUN 
ofinfor-
mation 
respec:ttnc 
all ....... 
Inaerttoa 
ofn.., 
aecUon 
140A. 
Self-
.... 
~ 
at which a business or profession Is carried on, whether such 
place be the principal place or not of such busineu or prof.llion. 
and require any proprietor. employee or any other person who may 
at that time and place be attending in any manner to or helping 
in the carrying· on of such business or profession to afford him , 
the necessary facility to inspect such books of account «!Ir other 
documents as he may require and which may be available at 
'such place, and on the inspection of such accounts or documents 
he may, if he so deems necessary, place marks of identification 
thereon or cause to be made extracts therefrom: 
Provided that the Income-tax Officer· or such Inspector of 
Income-tax may enter any place referred to in this section only 
during such hours as the place is open for the conduct of the 
business or the profession: 
10 
Provided further that while acting under this section the IS 
Income-tax Officer or such Inspector of Income-tax shall not 
remove or cause to be removed from the place which he baa 
entered any books of account or other documents. 
(2) If a person who under sub-section (1) is required to 
afford facility to the Income-tax Officer or such Inspector of 20 
Income-tax to inspect books of account or other documents either 
refuses or evades to do so, the Income-tax Officer shall have all 
the powers under sub-sections (l) and (2) of section 131 for 
enforcing compliance of the requirement made.". 
31. Section 137 of the Income-tax Act shall be omitted. 
33. For section 138 of the Income-tax Act, the following IeCtion 
shall be substituted, namely:-
"138. Where a person makes an application to the Com-
. missioner in the prescribed form and pays the prescribed fee 
for any information relating to any assessee in respect of any 
assessment made under this Act or the Indian Income-tax Act 30 , 
1922, the Commissioner may, if he is satisfied that there are no 
circumstances justifying its refusal, furniah or cause to be 
furnished the information asked for.". 
K. After aection 140 of the Income-tax Act, the followtne JeCtion 
shall be inserted, namely:- 35 
"14OA. (1) Where a return has been furniahed under 
section 139 and the tax payable on the basia of that return .. 
recJ,uced by any. tax already. paid under any proviaion of this 
11 of 1822. 

21 
Act exceeds five hundred rupees, the assessee shall pay the tax 
so payable within thirty days of fUrnishing the return. 
(2) After a provisional assessment under section 141 or a 
regular assessment under section 143 or section 144 has been 
~ made, any amount paid under sub-section (1) shall be deemed 
to have been paid towards the provisional assessment or regular 
assessment, as the case may be. 
(3) If any assessee fails to pay the tax or any part thereof 
in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (1), he shall, 
10 unless a provisional assessment under section 141 or a regular 
assessment under section 143 or section 144 has been made 
before the expiry of thirty days referred to in that sub-section, 
be liable, by way of penalty, to pay such amount as the Income-
tax Officer may direct, so however, that the amount of penal~y 
IS does not exceed fifty per cent. of the amount of such tax or part, 
as the case may be: 
Provided that before levying any such penalty, the assessee 
shall be given a reasonable opportunity of being heard,". 
35. Section 141A of the Income-tax Act shall be omitted. Omission 
of section 
141A. 
20 36. In section 156 of the Income-tax Act, after the words "any Amend-
other sum", the brackets, words, figures and letter "(including =~ri'f 
annuity deposit referred to in Chapter XXII-A)" shall be inserted. 156. 
37. In section 209 of the Income-tax Act, in sub-clause (iv) of Amend-
clause (a), for the words, brackets and letters "clauses (b) and =~ri'f 
25 (c) ", the words, brackets and letters "clauses (b), (c) and (d)" 209. 
shall be, and shall be deemed to have been, substituted, with effect 
from the first day of April, 1963. 
38. In section 246 of the Income-tax Act, in clause (0),- Amend-ment of 
(i) for sub-clause (i), the following sub-clauses shall be section 
ed 1 246, 
substitut ,name y :-
"(i) section 140A, or 
(ia) section 221, or"; 
(it) for sub-clause (v), the following sub-clauSlrll shall be 
substituted, namely:-
" (11) section 273, or 
(vi) section 280R.". 
39. In section 254 of the Income-tax Act, after sub-section (1), Amend-ment of the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely: - section 
"(IA) (a) Where the appellant' objects to the fair market 2M. 
value of a capital asset adopted under aection 52, the Appellate 

Tribunal ;I1\8Y, mdH the 'appellant so 'tequires, tihall, 1efer the 
question of the 'ciapUted ftlue to the 1U'bitration 'Of two valuers, 
one of whom shall be nominated by the appellant and the other 
by the respondent and the Appellate Tribunal shall, so far as 
that question is concerned, pass its orders under sub-section (1) S 
conformably to the decisicm of the valuers: 
Provided that where the appellant 'Or the respondent does 
not nOIDlnate any valuer within the time specified by the 
Appellate Tribunal or within such further time as the Appellate 
Trlbunal may allow, the Appellate Tribunal may nOIDlnate a 10 
valuer on his 'behalf: 
Provided further that if there is a difference of opinion 
between the two valuers, the matter shall be referred to a third 
valuer nominated by agreement, or failing agreement, by the 
Appellate Tribunal and the decision of that valuer on the IS 
question of valuation shall be final. 
(b) The valuers to whom a reference under this 5ub-section 
has been made by the Appellate Tribunal shall communicate 
their decision to the Appellate Tribunal within six months of 
the date ~of' s1.ieh ri!ierenceor -withm such further time as that 
20 
Tribunal may allow: 
ProVidM diat'if the' d~iSi:on 'of the valuers is not commtini-
, 'eated' within ; the period a1ore'i8id, the Appetlate Tribunal may 
order that the re'ference made under this SUb-section shall be 
deemed to be withdrawn and proceed to dispose- of the case 'on 
the evidence before it, including the report of either of the valuers 25 
. if any such report has been' submitted. 
(c) The extentto'-whichthe costa of arbitration p!'oceeelirtgs 
(including a case where a reference'is deemed to 'be witlheawn) 
ahall be borne by the appellant or the respondent shall.be .. at 
the discretion of the Appellate Tribunal. . 30 
(d) The valuers may, in disposing of· any matter referred 
to them for arbitration under this sub-section, hold or cause to 
be held such enquiry as they think fit and after . giving the 
appellant and the respondent ,an opportunity of being heard, 
make such decision as they think fit and shall communicate 35 
such decision in writing to the Appellate T-ribunal. 
(e) The valuers appointed Uhtier this . luJ>..seetion, while 
acting as such, shall have all powers of a Civil Court· woUe 
trying a suit under the Code of Civil ProCedure; 1908 in respect I 40 15 f 1808 
of the following mattera, namely:- 0 • 
. (if summoning and enforcing the attendance of any 
• pnon 'iDd eUriUnini him ot1Qatb; 

of lWO. 
II 
(ii~ DiMll.Jtt~ t~ ~Tle~ ~ ~~tiqq of 
documents; 
(iii) receiving evidence on ~davit; and 
(iv) issuing comIl)ission ~or e~~tio~ of witnesses 
S or documents. 
(f) Nothing in the Arbitration Act, 1940 shall apply tet 
arbitrations under this lUh-aection.". 
40. In section 271 of ~~. ~.ct, in sub-section (1),- :::f~f 
(i) in clause (c). the word "deliberately" shall be omitted; aection 
10 (ii) the fellowin.g E~ti011. shall be inserted at the end, 271. 
namely:-
ItB~lcma"""..-Wlw."e ijae WMI ~~e returned by 
any person is leAS ~ piQ~ty per c~~~. Qf ~~ total income 
(hereinafter in this Expla.natiQn referred ~o as the correct 
income) as assessed under section 143 or section 144 or 
section 147 (redueed by the expendUure inCUDred bona fide 
.". him for the purpose of making or earning any income 
included in the total income but which has been disallowed 
8S a deduction), '8UCh person shall, Wlless Jte proves that the 
failure to return the cOlnct income di4 cot _pse from 
.any baud or any gross or wilful neglect QD ~ part, be 
deemed to hav~ ~c~eQ. ~ particuJM& of ~meome or 
furnished in~cc\lrate ~JU"ticular8 of 8\1ch in.com~ for the 
purposes of clause (c) of this sub-section.". 
25 41. In section 277 of the Income-tax Act, for the words "punishable 
with simple imprisonment which may extend to six months, or 
wJtb fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both", 
the following shal'l be flubstltuted, namely:-
''punishable wjth .rJio,ro~ ~rl.so~e~t for a t~~ which may 
30 extend to two years: 
Provided that in the absence of s~c~l ~n9 adequate reuonl 
to the contrary to be recorded 1.n the judgment of the court, such 
imprisonment shall not:~ tor less than six months .... 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
2'lT. 
, .z. In ,~tiQn 278 ,ot .the In.cowe-~~x.ct, ~w~h.e words "punish. Amef~ 
35 .able ~th ~i~ ~p.Ii~onIIle..pt ~l1~c.h~y ~e~~~Ild to six months or =on 
with fine ~hi~h xuay ,e~ten.d to one ~hQ~d r\l~ or with both", 278. 
the following shall be substituted, n~ely:-
c~lUl.i~ble :w:ith~o~Qqs fplpriJ.~~~"t Jor ,a term which may 
~lCt~nd ,tp twoye~: 
~,pl'Ovidedit~l41;"""~~ ~eqW.and adequate reasons 
,to the ~ary ~ be r~'.Ql _Ule ~trOf the court, such 
imprisonment ~:>Qat ~be ,fpr ,.,~ ~ ~ontha. ... 

Omlsa1on 
ot IeCtiOD 
280. 
lDsertiOD 
ot new 
Chapter 
XXII-A. 
Persons 
to whom 
thia 
Chapter 
appliel. 
4S. Section 280 of the Income-tax Act shall be omitted. 
". In the Income-tax Act, after section 280, the followinl Chapter 
and sections shall be inserted, namely:-
"CHAPTER XXII-A 
ANNUITY DEPOSITS 
280A. The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to every 
person, heing-
(i) an individ1:l8l., who is a citizen of India, 
(ii) a Hindu undivided family, 
(iii) an unregistered tlrm., 
('11) an association of persons or a body of individuala, 
whether incorporated or not (other than a company or a 
co-operative society), and 
10 
(11) an artificial juridical person referred to in sub-
clause (11ii) of clause (31) of section 2 (other than a oorpD- IS 
ration established by a Central, State or Provincial Act): 
Provided that such person is a resident. 
280B. In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requirel,-
(1) "adjusted total income"-
(a) in relation to the assessment year commencing 20 
on the 1st day of April, 1964, means the amount of total 
income computed without making any allowance under 
section 2800 and reduced by the aggregate of the follow-
ing amounts, if any, included therein, namely:-
(i) any income char~eable under the head 35 
"Salaries" ; 
(ii) if the depositor is a partner of an unregis-
tered firm which is liable to make an annuity deposit 
for the relevant assessment year, the amount of his 
share in the profits and gains of the firm computed 30 
in the manner laid down in section 67; and 
(iii) if the depositor is a member of an associa-
tion of persqDS or a body of individuals (other than 
a Hindu undivided family or a firm) which Is Uable 
to make an annuity deposit for the relevant assess- 35 
ment year, the atr.ount which he is entitled to receiw 
from the 888OCiation or body; 

; 
I' 
(b) in relation to the assessment year comm enc1ng 
oil the 1st day of April, 1965, or any subsequent 8SSeSl-
ment year, means the amount of total income computed 
without making any allowance under section 2800 and 
reduced by the aggregate of the following amount&, 11 . 
any, included therein, namely:-
(i) any sum which under the provisions of sUb-
clause (vii) of clause (1) of section 17 is included 
in salary; 
(ii) any income chargeable under the head 
"Salaries" in respect of which the assessee can 
make an application fOl" the grant of relief under 
sub-section (1) of section 89; and 
(iii) the amount referred to in sub-cl.ause (a) (ii) 
or sub-clause (a) (iii) of this clause; 
(2) "advance deposit" means the annuity deposit requir&-
ed to be made in advance in accordance with the provisiODI 
of sections 280E to 2801; • 
(3) "advance tax" shall have the same meaning u in 
section 207; 
(4) "annuity" means any annual instalment of. principal 
and interest thereon payable by the Central Government 
under the provisions of section 280D; 
(5) "annuity deposit" means a deposit of money required 
2, to be made under the provisions of this Chapter; 
(6) "depositor" means a person to whom the proviaiona 
of this Chapter apply. 
280C. (1) Where any Central Act enacts that any person to Requlr .. 
whom the provisions of this Chapter apply shall make for any :e:im~~ 
30 assessment year an annuity deposit with the Central Govern· depomt. 
ment at any rate or rates, such person &hall make such deposit 
at that rate or those rates in accordance with, and subject to 
the provisions of, this Chapter in respect of the adjusted total 
income of the previous year or previQus years, as the case may 
3' be. 
(2) In respect of the adjusted total income in relation to 
which an annuity deposit is to be made under sub-section (1) t 
such deposit shall be made in advance in accordance with the 
provisiOns of sections 280E to 2801. 
280D. Subject to the provisions of this Chapter and any Repay .. 
scheme made thereunder, the Central Government shall repay ment. 
2218 (B) LS--a. 

Compu-
tation or 
advance 
depoeit. 
Order by 
Income-
tax 
omcer. 
28 
to the depositor the annuity deposit made in any year in ten 
annual equated instabnents of principal and interest at such rate 
as may be notified by the Central Government in the Official 
Gazette: 
Provided that nothing in this section shall prevent the S 
payment of any annuity at such commuted value thereof u 
may be provided in a scheme framed under section 280W, in 
any case in which the authority empowered to make such pay-
ment is sa~fied that genuine hardship will be caused unless 
such payment is made. 10 
280E. The amount of advance deposit to be made by a depo-
Bitor in the financial year shall be computed as follows:-
(a) (i) his total income for the latest previous year in 
respect of which he has been assessed by way of regular 
assessment shall first be ascertained; IS . 
(ii) the amount of income of the nature referred to in 
Sllbooclause (b) (i) or sub-c1ause (b) (ii) or sub-clause (b) (iiO 
of clause (1) of section~80B, if any, ~cluded in such income 
shall be deducted therefrom. and on. the ba1ace annuity 
deposit shall be calculated at the rates in force in the fiDancial ao 
year; 
(iii) the amount ,of annuity deposit calculated. in accord-
ance with sub-clause (ii) shall, subject to the provisions of 
clauses (b) and (c), be the advance deposit to be madej 
(b) in cases where an estimate of the adjust~ total 25 
income is sent by the depositor under sub-section (1) or sub-
section (2) or sub-section (3) of section 280H, the total income 
on .the basis of which such adjusted total income is 80 
estimated shall, for the purposes of calculation of advance 
deposit under this section, be substituted for the total income 30 
referred to' in clause (a); 
(c) in cases where the Income-tax Officer makes an 
amended order :referred to in sub-section (3) of section 280F 
on the basis of a provisional assessment, the total income on 
the paeis of which the relevant provisional assessment had 3S 
been made shall be substituted for the total income referred 
t.o in clause (a). 
280F. (1) Where a depositor has been previously asselled 
by way of regular assessment under this Act or Wlder the Indian 
Income-tax Act, 1922, the Income-tax Ofticer may, on or after the 40 11 ot lOU. 
1st day of April in the financial year, by order in writing, require 
him to make an advance deposit computed in accordance with the 
. provisions of section 280E. 

21 
(2) The notice of demand issued under seetlon 156 in pur-
luance of such order shall specify the instalments u1 which the 
advance deposit is to be made under section 280G. 
(3) If, after the making of an order by the Income·tax Officer 
under this section and before the 15th day of February of the 
financial year, a regular assessment or a provisional assessment 
under section 141 of the depositor (or of the registered firm of 
which he is a partner) is made in respect of a previous year 
later than that referred to in the order of the Income.tax 
10 Officer, the Income-tax Officer may make an amended order 
reqUiring such depositor to make in one instalment on the speci-
Aed date, or in equal instalments on the specified dates, if more 
than one, falling after the date of the amended order, the advance 
deposit computed on the basis of the adjusted total income 
I, calculated with reference to the tofal income detennined under 
the regular assessment or the provisional assessment aforesaid a. 
reduced by the deposit, if any, made in accordance with the 
original order. 
28OG. Subject to the provisions of section 280H, the provi- Instal-
slons of section 211 shall. so far as may be, apply in relation to mdents of . a vance advance deposit to be made by a depOSitor as they apply in rela- depolit. 
tion to advance tax payable by an assessee with the modification 
that reference therein to section 210 shall be construed al a refer-
eDCe to section 280F. 
280H. (1) If a depositor, who is required to mOe advance ~ 
deposit by an order under section 28OF, estimates atany time ~poa1tor. 
berore the last instalment is due that his adjusted total income 
for the period which would be the previous year for the imme-
diately fenvwing assessment year, is less than the income in 
respect of which he is required to make such deposit, and 
. aecordingly wishes to make a deposit of an amount less ilan the 
amount which he is so required to deposit, he may send to the 
Inc~me-kx Officer-
(i) an estimate of the ~adjusted total income of the said 
"previous year; 
(ii) an estimate of the .advance deposit to be made by 
him calculated in the manner laid dpwn in section 280E; 
and shall makesuch deposit as accords with his estimate in 
equal instalments on such of the dates specified in teetion 211 
04 as applied to advance deposit by section 280G as have not 
.~", .\". ~ .. . expired or in one sum if only the last of such dates has not 
expired, 

Auwty 
deposit 
on the 
basil 01. 
llelt-
---.... 
(2) The depositor may ~end a revised estimate ot the 
advance deposit to be made by him and adjust any excess or 
deficiency in respect of any inslalment already paid in a subse-
quent instalment or in subsequent instalments. 
(3) A depositor who has not previously been assessed by 5 
way of regular assessment under this Act, or under the Iridian 
Income-tax Act. 1922. shall, before the 1st day of March in each 11 filleD. 
financial year, if his total income of the period which would be 
the previous year for the immediately following assessment year 
is likely to exceed the minimum amount in relation to which 10 
annuity deposit is required {o be made under the provislons ot 
the Finance Act ot that year, send to the Income-tax Offtcer-
(i) an estimate of the adjusted total income of the said 
previous year; 
(ii) an esHmate of the advance deposit to be made by 1$ 
him calculated in the manner laid down in section 280E; 
and shall make such depo~it as accords with his estimate, on such 
of the dates specified under section 211 as applied to advance 
deoosit by section 280G as have not expired. by instalments 
which may be revi~ed according to sub-section "(2). ao 
(4) Every estimate under this section shall be sent in the 
prescribed form and verified in the prescribed manner. 
2801. Where part of the adjusted total income consists of any 
income of the nature of commission which is receivable periodi-
cally and is not received or adjusted by the payer in the depo- 3$ 
sitor'. account before any of the quarterly instalments of advance 
deposit become due, he may defer the making of advance depolit 
in respect of that part of his income to the date on which such 
income would be normally received or adjusted. and, if he doe. 
10, he shall communicate to the Income-tax Oftlcer the date to 30 
which the making of such deposit is deferred. 
280J. Where in respect of any assessment year, income-tax 
is payable on the basis of self-assessment under section 140A, the 
depositor shall, on or before the date on which tax under such 
assessment is payable, make an annuity deposit equal to the 3S 
amount, if any, by which the amount of annuity deposit required 
to be made on the basis of income returned exceeds the amount, 
if any. of the annuity deposit already made by him in respect 
of that auessment year. 
280K. At the time of making a provisional assessment UDder ... 
section 141 or a regular assessment. or as soon thereafter a. may 
11-, the Income-tax Officer shall, by order in writing, deterrs1me 

the amount of annuity deposit, if any, required to be made by provi-
the depositor on the basis of the income so assessed after taking ~~~:~ular 
into account the amount of annuity deposit, if any. already made ~s:~~-
by him in respect of that assesssment year. 
S 280L. (1) If the total income of a depositor for the previous Spec~al provisions year relevant to the assessment vear commencintr on the 1st day for the 
of April, 1964 (such total income being computed without making :::~iear 
any allowance under section 2800) exceeds fifteen thousand 1964-65. 
rupees and he does not furnish a return under section 139 before 
10 the 1st day of March, 1965 and no regular assessment under 
section 144 is made before the said 1st day of March, he shall 
send to the Income-tax Officer-
(i) an estimate of the adjusted ~otal income of the laid 
previous year; 
IS (ii) an estimate of annuity deposit to be made by him 
20 
35 
calculated in the manner laid down in section 280E; 
and shall make such deposit as accords with his estimate on or 
before the 31st day of March, 1965. 
(2) An estimate under this· section shall be sent in the pres-
cribed form and verified in the prescribed manner. 
280M. Where as a result of an order of re-assessment or ~~g:~f 
recomputation under section 147 or as a result of an order under annuity 
1 6 i 250 t' deDOsit In section 154 or section 155 or section 8 or sect on or sec Ion pursuance 
254 or section 260 or section 262 or section 263 or section 264, the off order 1 o appea. total income of a depositor is .enhanced or reduced, or the status etc. 
under which he is assessed is altered, or in the case of a firm, 
registration is granted or cancelled, the Income-tax Oftlcer shall 
compute or recompute the amount of annuity deposit to be made 
by such depositor, anci the .excess amount deposited, if any, shall 
be refunded in such manner as may be provided in a scheme 
framed under section 280W. 
280N. Where any unregistered firm is assessed under !tefunltd of • ' annu Y 
aIause (b) of sectIOn 183 for any assessment year, annuity deposIt deposit 
made by it in respect of that assessment year, if any, shall be :~ by 
refunded in such manner as may be provided in a scheme framed assedueci un er 
under section 280W. clause' 
(b) of 
section 
183. 
2800. (1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary con. ~::o~t~y 
tained in the provisions of this Act relating to the computation allowed a. , uity deduction of Income chargeable under any head of income, the ann in comput-
deposit required to be made under this Chapter shall, subject to ining total 
ed ctf in come. 
the provisiol'ls of lUb-section (2), be allowed as a d u on 

Annuity 
d it 
d:ti-
ble in 
eomputlDK 
ineome 
under 
t1)eMad 
"Salaries" 
for 
purpoees 
of section 
192. 
RoundinW 
off. 
~bmputing 'the total income assessable for the assessment year 
til respect of which the annuity deposit is required to be made. 
(~) If the adjusted total income of the depositor includes 
any income chargeable under the head "Salaries", the allowance 
under sub-section (1) shall be made in computing the income , . 
under that head, and if there is no incom~ chargeable under 
that head or the annuity deposit required to be made' exceeds 
such income, the whole or the balance of the annuity deposit 
requiTed to be made shall be allowed as a deduction in comput-
ing .earned income chargeable under any other head, and if there 10 
is no earned income chargeable under any other head or the 
whole or the balance of the annuity deposit required to be made 
e~oeeds such earned incom~, the whole or balance of the annuity 
deposit required to be made shall be allowed as a deduction in 
CGIIIpUttng any other income under any head. IS 
E:tp14nation.-In this sub-section, the expression "earned 
income" has the meaning assigned to it in the Finaace Act of 
the relevant year. 
280P. Any person responsible for paying any income charge-
able under the head "Salaries" to a resident shall, at the time 20 
of payment, deduct income-tax and super-tax Wlder section 192 
as if the estimated income referred to, in sub-section (1) of that 
section had been reduced by the amount of advance deposit, if 
any, to be made by the assessee at the rates in force in the 
financial year concerned in respect of such income, whether such 2, 
advance deposit has or has not been made. 
'28OQ. The amount of any deposit to be made under this 
Chapter shan be rounded off to the nearest multiple of five rupees 
lind where such amount contains a part of five rupees, then, if 
mdl part is two rupees and fifty naye paise or more, it· shall be 30 
increased to five rupees and if such part is less· than two rupees 
Ud fifty 1l8ye paise, it shall be ignored. 
28OR. (1) If any person who is liable to make an annuity 
'deposit under this Chapter fails to make such depOsit within the 
time specl'ft.ed therefor, the Income-tax Officer may direct that 3' 
the depositor shall pay by way of penalty an amount not exceed-
ing one-half of the annuity deposit which he is liable to make. 
(2) If the Income-tax Officer, in the course of any proceed-
ings in connection with the regular assessment is satisfied that 
any depositor- 40 
(4) has furnished under section 280H an estimate of 
advance deposit to be made by him which he knew or had 
reuon to believe to be untrue, or 

r'~- . 
(b) has without reUQUable cauH failed. to furnish an 
estimate of advance deposit to be made by him in accordaDCe 
with the provisions of sub-section (3) of section 280H, 
he may direct that such depositor shall pay by way of penalty 
, a iwn-
(i) which, in the case referred. to in clauae (4), shall not 
eJa:~ hall the amount by which the advance deposit 
actually made during the financial year immed.ia.tely prec:ed-
Ula the asseiSIDent year under the provisions of aection 280E 
10 to, 2801 fall$ short of-
(1) seventy-five per cent. of the annuity deposit 
required to be made on the basis of income assessed 
by way of regular aSsessment (such deposit being 
calculated at the rates in force in the financial year 
I, immediately preceding the assessment year), or 
30 
35 
(2) where a notice u.nder section 280F was issued 
to the depositor, the deposit required to be made there-
under. 
whichever is less; and 
(ii) which, in the case referred to in clause (b), ihall 
not exceed half the amount equal to the seventy-five per 
cent. referred to in clause (i) (1). 
(3) No order imposing a penalty under thia section shall be 
made unless the assessee has been heard, or has been given a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard. 
280S. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained 9tlW' 
in this Act, the provisions of this Act, other than those contained ~~trest 
in this Chapter or any scheme framed thereunder, relating to =70ns 
interest payable by the Central Government on refunds and of the Act 
interest payable by the assessee in default or those relating to ~~~I~ 
imposition of penalty shall not apply in relation to any sum due 
under this Chapter, 
280T, For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that ~e~~ 
any arrear of annuity deposit and any penalty imposed under of deposit 
this Chapter shall be recoverable in the manner provided in ~~altY. 
Chapter XVII-D for \he recovery of arrears of tax. 
280U. Any individual, being an author, playwright, artist, Spec~al 
, , t . add't' h t f 'ty prOVIsion. MUSIC18n or ac or, may, m llOn to t e amoun '0 annw for 
deposit required to be made by him in respect of any assessment au I thon. p a,.-year, mak.e a further deposit of an amount not exceeding fifteen wrights, 
per cent. of his adjusted total income assessable for that assess- ::l~anl 
ment year, and if he does so, the further deposit made by him, andacten. 

Special 
provisions 
relatinlto 
,ratuity. 
Annuity 
Deposit 
Scheme. 
• 
ahall, for the purposes of this Chapter, be included in the annui~ 
deposit required to be made by him. 
280V. Where the total income of a depositor assessable for 
any assessment year includes any gratuity chargeable under the 
head "Salaries", he may, in addition to the amount of annuity , 
deposit required to be made by him in respect of that assessment 
year, make a further deposit of an amount not exceeding fifty 
per cent. of the amount of such gratuity, and if he does so, the 
further deposit made by him, shall, for the purposes of this 
Chapter, be included in the annuity deposit required to be made 10 
by him. 
280W. (1) The Central Government shall, by notUication in 
the Official Gazette, frame one or more scheme or schemes to 
be called Annuity Deposit Scheme or Schemes in relation to 
deposits under this Chapter. 1$ 
(2) A scheme under sub-section (1) may provide for-
(a) the man,ner in which.the annuity depoaits shall be 
made; 
(b) the manner in which, and intervals at which. 
annuities shall be paid; and where an annuity deposit is 20 
recomputed under section 280M, the manner in which the 
excess or deficiency of annuity deposit may be adjusted; 
(c) the authority or authorities by or through whom 
such deposits may be collected or by whom annuities may 
be~~; ~ 
(d) the documents to be issued to persons by whom 
deposits have been made as evidence of such depOsits; 
(e) the accounts to be maintained with respect to such 
deposits and annuities and the officers by whom such accounts 
shall be maintained; 50 
(1) the nomination of any person to receive the annuity 
or any other sum due under this Chapter to any depositor 
in the event of his death and the c.anceliation or change of 
such nomination; 
(g) the issue of duplicate of any document issued as 3$ 
evidence of any such deposit in the event of loss or destruc-
tion of the original and the fee on the payment of which 
such duplicate may be issue'd; and 

(h) any other matti!l which may be necellUlI'y or proper 
for the e1fecttve implementation of the sch~. 
(3) The Ce~tral Governm~t may, by notiftcation in the 
Official Guette, add to, amend, vary or rescind any IIchmlQ 
framed under this Chapter. 
(4) Any .cheme framed under this Chapter shall be laid, 
as soon as may be, after it is framed before each H<>USe of 
Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days 
which may be comprised in one Hssion or in two 8uccessive 
10 sessions, and, if before the expiry of the session in which it is 
80 laid or the lession immediately following, both Houses agree 
in making any modification in any provision of the scheme or 
both Houses aaree that an.y prov~on in the scheme should not 
be made, that provision of the scheme shall thereafter have effect 
IS only in such modified form or be of no eftect, as the case may be; 
80 however that any such modification or annulment shall be 
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that provision.". 
45. For section 287 of the Income-tax Act, the -fJllowine section Substltu-
20 shall be substituted, namely:- tion of new sec-
tion for 
section 
287. 
11287. (1) If the Central Government is of opinion that it is Publlca-
neoeaaary or expedi.ent in the public interest to publish the :~~~a­
names of any usessees and any other particularll relating to any ~ reI-
proceedings under this Act in respect of such assesaees, it may assess!e.. 
2S cause to be published such names and particulars in such manner 
as it thinks fit. 
(2) No publication Wlder this section shall be made in 
relation to any penalty imposed, or any conviction for any 
offence connected with any proceedings, under this Aet until 
30 the time for pr.esenting an appeal to the Appellate Assistant 
Commissioner or to the ftrst Appellate Court, as the case may 
be, has e)l:pired without an appeal having been presented or the 
appeal, if presented, has been disposed of. 
Explanation.-In the case of a firm, company or other assa-
3S elation of persons, the names of the partners of the firm, 
directors, managing agents, secretaries and treasurers, or 
managers of the company, or the members of the association, 
as the case may be, may also be published if, in the opinion of 
~he Central Government, the circumstances of the case justify 
40 It.". 
DIe (B) x.,s.....&. 

Amend-
ment·of 
section 
293. 
Amend-ment of 
section 
295. 
Omission 
of the 
Fifth 
Schedule. 
Amend-ment of 
Act 34 of 
1953. 
Disclosure 
of infor-
mation respecting 
assess-
ments. 
46. Insectlon 293 of the Income-tax Act, after the words ull. 
against", the words "the Government or" shall be inserted.. 
47. In section 295 of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section (2), after 
clause (d), the following clause shall be inserted, namely :-
U (dd) the extent to which, and the conditions subject to 0 
which, any expenditure referred to in sub-section (3) of section 
37 may be allowed;". 
48. In the Income-tax Act, the Fifth Schedule shall be omitted. 
49. In the Estate Duty Act, 1953,-
(a) in section 5A, the following amendments shall be made 10 
and shall be deemed to have been made with effect from the 
23rd day of September, 1963, namely:-
(i) in sub-section (2), the word "Orissa" shall be 
omitted; 
(ii) in sub-section (3), the words "in the State of Orissa IS 
and" shall be omitted; 
(b) in section 33, in sub-section (I), after clause (m), the 
following clause 9hall be inserted, namely:-
"(11.) one house or part thereof exclusively used by the 
deceased for his reSidence, to the extent the principal value ao 
thereof does not exceed rupees one lakh 11 such house is 
situate in. a place with a population exceeding ten thousand, 
and the full principal value thereof in any other case."; 
(c) in section 34, in clause (a) of sub-sectiQD. (1), for the 
brackets, letters and word" (l) and (m) ", the brackets, letters 2S 
and word U (l), (m) and (11.)" shall be substituted; 
(d) in section 78, after the words "lie against", the words 
"the Government or" shall be inserted; -
(e) for section SQ, the following sections shall be substituted , 
namely:- 30 
"80. Where a person makes an application to the 
Controller in the prescribed form and pays the prescribed . 
fee for information relating to any assessment made under 
this Act, the Controller may, if he is satisfied that there are 
no circumstances justifying its refusal, furnish or cause to 35 
be furnished the information asked for. . 

5 
10 
35 
80A. (1) If the Central Government is of opinion that it Publica-
is necessary or expedient in the public interest to publish }~~tt~~ 
the names of any accountable persons and any other parti- respecting 
culars relating to any proceedings under this Act in respect :bl~unt­
of such persons, it may cause to be published such names persons. 
and particulars in such manner as it thinks fit. 
(2) No publication under this 8ection shall be made in 
relation to any penalty imposed under this Act until the 
time for presenting an appeal to the Appellate Controller 
has expired without an appeal having been presented or the 
appeal, if presented, has been disposed of."; 
(f) in the Second Schedule, for Part I, the following Part 
shall be substituted, namely:-
"PART I 
15 In the case of any property which passes or is deemed to pass on 
the death of the deceased-
Rate of duty 
(1) On the first Rs. 50,000 of the principal value 
of the estate Nil 
20 (2) On the next Rs. 50,000 of the principal value 
of the estate .. % 
(3) On the next Rs. 1,00,000 of the principal value 
of the estate 8 % 
(4) On the next Rs. 3,00,000 of the principal value 
25 of the estate 15 % 
(5) On the next Rs. 5,00,000 of the principal value 
of the estate 25 % 
(6) On the next Rs. 5,00,000 of the principal value 
of the estate .0 ~ 
30 (7) On the next Rs. 5,00,000 of the principal value 
35 
40 
of the estate 50 % 
(8) On the balance of the principal value of the 
estate 85 %". 
50. In the Wealth-tax Act, 1957,-
(a) in section 5, in sub-section (1), for clause 
following clause shall be substituted, namely:-
Amend-ment of 
(iv), the Act 27 of 
1957. 
"( iv) one house or part of a house belonging to the 
assessee exclusively used by him for residential purposes: 
Provided that where the value of such house or part, 
situate in a place with a population exceeding ten thousand, 

Publica-
tion of in-
formation 
reapectinJ assessees. 
'Diaelo-
.ureofin-
formation 
respectinl 
assesseea. 
31 
exeeed, one lakh of rupees, the amount that lhall not be 
included in the net wealth of an U8euee 1mdel' this section 
shall be one lakh of rupeea."; 
(b) Slection 42 shall be omitted; 
(c) for sections 42A and 42B, the foDowin. sections shall 5 
be substituted, namely:-
u42A. (1) If the Central Government is of opinion that it 
is necessary or expedient in the public interest to publiah the 
names of any assessees and any other particulars relating 
to any proceedings under this Act in respect of such 10 
al!lgessees, it maY' cause to be published such names and 
particulars in such manner as it thinks ftt. 
(2) No publication under this section 8hall be made in 
reiation to any penalty imposed, or any conviction for any 
offence connected with any proceedings, under this Act 15 
until the time for presenting an appeal to the Appellate 
Assistant Commissioner or to the first Appellate Court, as 
the case may be, has expired without an appeal having been 
presented or the appeal, if presented, has been disposef 
~ ~ 
42B. Where a person makes an application to the Com-
missioner in the prescribed form and pays the prescribed 
fee for any information relating to any assessee in respect 
of any assessment made under this Act, the Comtnissioner 2$ 
may, if he is satisfied that there are no circumstances justi-
fying its refusal, furnish or cause to be furtl18hed the 
information asked for."; 
(d) in section 43, after the words ''lie apbtst", the words 
''the Government or" shall be inserted; 
(e) in the Schedule, for Part I, the following Part shall be ao 
substituted, namely:-
'tpART I 
(a) In the case of every individual:-
Rate of ta% 
(i) on the first rupeH one lakh of net wealth 
(ti) on the next 'rupees four lakhs of net wealth 
(Ui) on the next rupees five lakhs of net wealth 
(iv) on the next rupees ten lakhs of net wealth 
(v) on the balance of net wealth 
Nil 35 
0·5 '% 
1·0 % 
2·0 " 2·5 % 

37 
(b) In the eaae of every Hindu undivided fam1ly:-
Rate of tax, 
(i) on the first rupees two lakhs of net wealth Nil 
(ii) on the next rupees three lakhs of net wealth 0·5% 
5 (iii) on the next rupees five Jakhs of net wealth 1'0% 
(tv) on the next rupees ten lakhs of net wealth 2·0% 
(v) on the balance of net wealth 2,5%". 
51. In the Expenditure-tax Act, 1957,- Amend-
ment of (i) in section 5,- Act211 of 
10 (1) for clause (g), the following clause shall be 1.1'7. 
substituted, namely:-
U (g) any expenditure incurred by the Ulellee in 
the purchase of books;"; 
(2) to clause (;), the following proviso shall be added, 
15 nar.nely:-
"Provided that the assessee is either chargeable to 
gift-tax under the Gift-tax Ac:t, 1958 in respect of such 
gift, donation or settlement, as the cue may be, or has 
deposited to the credit of the Central Government 
20 before the completion of his assesunent for the relevant 
assessment year under this Act, a sum of four per cent. 
of the moneys or the value of the property comprised 
in such gift or donation or settlement, as the case may 
be, by way of payment of expenditure-tax for the 
25 relevant assessment year, such payment being in 
addition to the amount of expenditure-tax with which 
he is otherwise chargeable under the provisions of this 
Act."; 
(3) clauaes (I) and (n) shall be omitted; 
30 (iO in section 6-
35 
(4) in sub-section (1)-
(1) sub-clause (ii) of clause (a) I and claue (e) 
shall be omitted; 
(2) for clause (d) I the following cla1.ll8 shall be 
IUbstituted, namely :-
"(d) four-fifths of any expenditure incurred by 
way of capital expenditure on the purchase of 
bullion, precious stones, jewellery, motor-cars and 

Publica-
tion of in-
formation 
respecting 
assessees. 
Disclo-
sure of j,n-
formation 
respecting 
auessees. 
I 
38 
other conveyances for the peESOnal use of the 
assessee or any of his ~ependants : 
Provided that where a deductioa as aforesaid is 
made, one-fifth of the said capital expenditure shall 
be deemed to be incurred by the assessee in each of , 
the four years succeeding the previous 'year in 
which the expenditure was incurred and no deduc-
tion shall be made under this clause in the assess-
ment for any succeeding year in respect of 
expenditure so deemed. to have been incurred in ~y 10 
earlier year;"; 
(3) clauses (e), (I), (g) and (h) shall be omitted; 
(4) in clause (i), the words, brackets and letters 
"to the extent to which such expenditure is not admis-
sible under clause (c) or clause (e) or clause (f) or 15 
olause (g)" shall be omitted; 
(5) clause (;) shall be omitted; 
(b) sub-section (2) and sub-section (3) shall be 
omitted; 
(iii) section 38 shall be omitted; 2.0 
(iv) for sections 38A and 38B, the following sections shall be 
substituted, namt'ly :-
"38A. (1) If the Central Government is of opinion that it 
is necessary or expedient in the public interest to pua1ish the 
names of any assessees and any other particulars relating to 2., 
any proceedings under this Act in respect of such assessees, 
it may cause to be published such names and particulars in 
such manner as it thinks fit. 
(2) No publication under this section shall be made in 
relation to any penalty imposed, or any conviction for any 30 
offence connected with any proceedings, under this Act until 
the time for presenting an appeal to the Appellate Assistant 
Commissioner or to the first Appellate Court, as the case may 
be, has expired without an appeal having been presented or 
the appeal, if presented, has been disposed of. 35 
38B. Where a penon makes an application to the Com-
missioner in the prescribed form and pays the prescribed 
fee for any information relating to any assessee in respect of 
any assessment made under this Act, the Commissioner may, 
if he is satisfied that there are no circumstaaces justifying its 40 
refusal, furnish or cause to be, furnished the information 
asked for."; 

s 
10 
15 
(v) in section 39, after the words "lie against", the words 
"the Government or" shall be inserted; 
(vi) for the Schedule, the following Schedule shall be lub-
stituted, namely;-
"THE SCHEDULE 
(See section 3) 
RATES OF EXPENDITURE-TAX 
In the case of every individual and Hindu undivided family, OB 
that portion of the taxable expenditur~ 
(.) which does not exceed Rs. 36,000 . Nil. 
\ii) which exceeds R.s. 36,000 but docs not exceed Rs. 48,000 s% 
\iis) which exceeds Rs. 48,000 but docs not exceed Rs. 60,000] 7' S% 
(if) which exceeds Rs. 60,000 but does not exceed Rs. 72,000 . 10% 
(f)) which exceeds Rs. 72,000 but docs not exceed Rs. 84,000 . IS% 
(VI) which exceeds Rs. 84,000 
Provided that in respect of any assessment for the financial year 
commencing on the 1st day of April, 1964 or 1965, this Schedule shall 
have effect as if for items (v) and (vi), the following item had been 
substituted, namely;-
20 (v) which exceeds Rs. 72,000 . . 15%.". 
52. In the Gift-tax Act, 1958,- Amend-
(a) in section 5, in clause (viii) of sub-section {l), for the !e~n:80:f 
words "rupees one lakh", the words "rupees fifty thousand" shall 1958. 
be substituted; 
2S (b) after section 6, the following section shall be inserted, 
namely:-
"6A. (1) NotWithstanding anything to the contrary Aggre,a-
contained in this Act, where an assessee has made taxable tion of 
gifts to the same donee during a previous year and during fo~~de 
30 anyone or more of the four previous years immediately pre- ~= 
ceding such previous year, the gift-tax payable by him for during a 
the relevant assessment year shall, subject to the provisioDi = 
of sub-section (2), be determined in the following manner, 
namely;-
3S (a) the value of the taxable gifts made to such a 
donee during anyone or more of the four previou. yean 

immediately preceding the previous year relevant to an 
assessment year shall be aggregated with the value of the 
taxable gifts made by the assessee during the relevant 
previoUS year and gift-tax shall be calculated on the 
aggregate value at the rate or rates specified in the $ 
Schedule; 
(b) from the amount of gift-tax calculated. under 
clause (a), there shall be deducted the aggregate 01-
(i) an amount which bears to the amount of gift-
tax calculated under clause (a) the same proportion 10 
as the value of any taxable gift made to such donee 
prior to the 1st day of April, 1963 included in the 
aggregate value referred to in clause (a)beara to 
8uch aggregate value; 
(ii) the amount of any gift-tax payable by the IS 
assessee for each of the four assessment years imme-
diately preceding the relevant aseeument· year in 
respect of the value of the taxable gifts made by him 
to the said donee after the 31st day of March, 1963, 
included in the aggregate value referred to in claule 20 
(4), 
and the balance shall be the amount of gift-tax payable 
by the assessee. 
E:%plaAation.-For the purposes of aub-clause (ii) of 
clause (b), the amount of gift-tax payable by an IllleSBee 25 
in respect of the value of taxable gifts made by him to 
the same donee for each of the four aesesament years 
immediately precedine the relevant asseaauent year 
means such propertion of the total amount of gift-tax 
payable by the asaessee for that asaeasment year as the 30 
value of any taxable gifts made by him after the 31st 
day of March, 1963, to such donee during the relevant 
previous year bears to the total value of the taxable gifts 
made by the assessee during that previous year. 
(2) The gift-tax payable by an auessee Ihall in no case 3S 
be less than the amount of the gift-tax which would be pay-
able by him without giving effect to the provisions of sub-
II8Ction (1)."; 

41 
(c) in section 32, to sub-section (2), the following proviso 
shall be, and shall be deemed always to have been, added, 
namely:-
"Provided that where as a result of an order under 
5 section 22, or section 23, or section 24, or section 25, or 
section 26, or section 28, or section 34, the amount on which 
interest was payable under this section had been reduced, 
the interest shall be reduced accordingly and the excess 
interest paid, if any, shall be refunded."; 
10 (d) in section 34, in sub-section (5), for the word and figures 
"section 33", the word, figures and letter "section 33A" shall be, 
and shall be deemed always to have been, suDstituted; 
(e) section 41 shall be omitted; 
(f) for sections 41A and 41B, the following sections shall be 
5 substituted, namely:-
"41A. (1) If the Cenl'ral Government is of opinion that Publica-
it is necessary or expedient in the public interest to publisb ~~~C:tf~~ 
the names of any assessees and any other particulars relating respecting 
to any proceedings under this Act in respect of such assessees, assessees. 
20 it may cause to be published such names and particulars in 
such manner as it thinks fit. 
(2) No publication under this section shall be made in 
relation to any penalty imposed, or any conviction for any 
offence connected with any proceedings, under this Act until 
25 the time for presenting an appeal to the Appellate Assistant 
Commissioner or to the first Appellate Court, as the case may 
be, has expired without an appeal having been presented or 
the appeal, if presented, has been disposed of. 
Explanation.-In the case of a firm, company or other 
30 association of persons, the names of {he partners of the firm, 
directors, managing agents, secretaries and treasurers, or 
managers of the company, or the members of the association, 
as the case may be, may also be published tf, in the opinion 
of the Cenfral Government, the circumsl'ances of the case 
35 justify it. 
41B. Where a person makes an application to the Com- Discloiin .. . h .. .ureo -mlSSloner In t e prescribed form and pays the prescribed l.ee formation 
for any information relating to any assessee In respect of any =::~~ 
assessment made under this Act, the Commissioner may, if 
40 he is satisfied that there are no circumstances justifying its 
refusal, furnish or cause to be furnished the information 
asked for."; 
2236(B) LS-5. 

Amend-
ment of 
Act 13 ot 
1983. 
Super 
profits 
tax not 
to be 
levied 
from 
latApril, 
11M14. 
Amend-
ment of 
Act 32: 
of 1 ... 
SlDcGaq_ 
on du.ti .. 
of cus-toms. 
(g) in section 42. after the words "lie against", the worda 
"the Government or" shall be inserted; 
(h) for the Schedule, the following Schedule shall be sub-
stituted. namely:-
"THE SCHEDULE 
[See section 3] 
RATBS OF GIn-TAX 
Rate of 
gift-tax 
5 
(!) On the first RI. 5,000 of the value of all tusble gifts 
(2) On the nest &S. 15,000 of the value of all taxable lifts 
(3) On the next RI. 25.000 of the value ofalltaable lifts 
(4) On the next RI. 1,00.000 of the value of all taxable gifts 
(S) OIl the J1ClIt as. 2,00,000 of the value of aU taxable gift! 
(6) On the balance of the value of all taxable gifts. 
4% 10 
8% 
IS% 
25% 
40% 
SO%N' 15 
53. Notwithstanding anything contained in section 13 of the 
l"inaDce (No.2) Act. 1"2. expenditure-tax shall be charged under the 20 of 1962 
Expenditure-tax Act, 1957 for every financial year commencing on or 29 of 1957 
after the 1st day of April, 1964, in respect of the expenditure incurred 
by an individual or Hindu undivided family. 2.0 
54. In Paragraph A of Part I of the First Schedule to the Finance 
Act, 1963, for clause (ii) of the proviso lo clause (c) under the heading 
"Surcharges on income.tax", the follOWing clause shall be, and shall 
be deemed always to have been, substituted. namely :-
U(ii) the additional surcharge shall in no case exceed one-half 2.S 
of the amount by which the residual income exceeds the limit 
specified below.". 
, 
51. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Super Profits Tax 
Act; lQ8S. super profitt tax shall not be charged for any assessment 14 of 1963 
year commencing on or after the 1st day of April, 1964, in respect of 30 
the chargeable profits of any company. 
56. The Indian Tariff Act. 1934 (hereinafter referred to as the Tariff 
Act) . shall be amended in the manQer. specified in the Third Schedule. 
57" (l) In the case of goods chargeable with a duty of customs 
which is specified in the First Schedule to the Tariff Act as amended 35 
by this AcT or any subsequent Act of Parliament, or in tbat Schedule 
read with any notification of the Central Government for the time 
being in force, there shall be levied and collected as an addition to, 

10 of 1897. 
52 of 1962. 
10 of 1897. 
52 of 1ge2. 
52 of 1962. 
43 
and in the same manner as, the total amount so chargeable, a sum 
equal to 10 per cent. of such amount: 
Provided that in computing the total amount so chargeable, any 
duty chargeable under section 2A of the Tari1f Act or section 58 
5 of this Act shall not be included. 
(2) Sub-section (1) shall cease to have effect after the 31st day of 
March, 1965 except as respects things done or omitted to be done 
before such cesser; and section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 
shall apply upon such cesser as if the said sub-section had ihen been 
10 repealed by a CentTai Act. 
58. (1) There shall be levied and collecte'cl, with effect from such Regula-
date as may be specified in this behalf by the Central Government by ~~!~ty 
notification in the Oflkial Gazette, on all goods mentioned in the First toms. 
SChedule to the Tariff Act as amended by this Act or any subsequent 
IS Act of Parliament, a regulatory duty of customs which ~all be-
20 
(a) 25 per cent. of the rate, if any, specified in the said First 
Schedule read with any notification issued under section 3A or 
sUb-section (1) of section 4 of the Tariff Act; or 
(b) 10 per cent. of the value of the goods as determined in 
accordance with the provisions of section 14 of the Customs' Act, 
1962, 
whichever is higher: 
PrOVided that different dates may be speCified by the Central 
Government for different kinds of goods. 
25 (2) Sub-section (1) shall cease to have effect after the 30th day of 
April, 1965 except as respects things done or omitted to be done before 
such cesser; and section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 shall apply 
upon such cesser as if the said sub-section had then been repealed by 
a Central Act. 
30 (3) The duty of customs leviable under this section in respect of 
any goods referred to in sub-section (1) shall be in addition to any 
other duty of customs chargeable on such goods under the Customs 
Act, 1962. 
(4) The provisions of the Customs Act, 1962 and the rules and 
35 regulations made thereunder, including those relating to refunds and 
exemptions from duties, shall, as far as may be, apply in relation to 
the levy and collection of the regulatory duty of customs leviable 
under this section in respect of any goods as they apply in relation 
to the levy and collection of the duties of customs on such ~ under 
40 that Act or those rwes and regulations. 
(5) Every notification issued under sub-section (1) shall, as soon as 
may be after it is issued, be placed before each House of Parliament; 

Amend-
ment of 
Act 1 of 
1949. 
Amend-mentol 
Act 1 of 
tU44. 
44 
59. In the Indian Tariff (Amendment) Act, 1949, in sections 4 and 5, 
for the figures "1964", the figures "1965" shall be substituted. 
80 .. In the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944 (hereinafter referred 
to as the Central Excises Act) ,-
" 
(1) in section 2, in clause (f) ,- S 
(i) the words beginning with "and the word 'manufac-
turer' "and ending with "are intended for sale" shall be 
omitted; 
(ii) after sub-clause (iii), the following sub-clause shall 
be inserted, namely:- 10 
"(iv) in relation to goods comprised in Item No. 18A 
of the First Schedllle, includes sizing, beaming, warping, 
wrapping, winding or reeling, or anyone or more of these 
processes, or the conversion of any form of the said goods 
into another fOI-m of such goods; IS 
and the word 'manufacturer' shall be construed accordingly 
and shall include not only a person who employs hired labour 
in the production or manufacture of excisable goods, but also 
any person who engages in their production or manufacture 
on his own account;"; 2C 
(2) in the First Schedule,-
(a) in Item No.4, under "II-Manufactured tobacco-", 
for the entries in the third column against sub-items 2 (iii) 
and 2 (iv) , the entries "Seven rupees and fifty naye paise" and 
"Four rupees and forty naye paise" shall, respectively, be 25 
substituted; 
(b) in Item No. 14, under "I", after sub-item (4), the 
following sub-item shall be inserted, namely:-
"(4A) Dh?ersed Organic pigments ordinarily 
use.! ~I)r the printing oftextiles, whetherin 
the form of powder, paste, or in emulsion. 
Two rupees and fifty naye paise 
per ki1osram."; 3C 
(c) after Item No. 14B, the following Item shall be 
inserted, namely :-
"1488. SODIUM SILICATE . Eight rupees per quintal"; 
(d) in Item No. 14F, in the second column,- 35 
(i) for sub-items (i), (ii) and (iii), the follOWing 
sub-item shall be substituted, namely:-
"(i) Preparations for the care of the skin includ-
ing beauty creams, vanishing creams, cold creams, 
make-up creams, r:leansing creams, skin foods and 40 

s 
10 
[5 
20 
30 
35 
45 
tonics, face powders, baby powders, toilet powders 
and talcum powders."; 
(ii) sub-item (iv) shall here-numbered as sUb-ltem 
(ii) ; 
(e) in Item No. 15, under "I", for sub-items (1), (2) and 
(3), the following sub-items shall be substituted, namely:-
"(I) Soap, household and laundry . Eighteen rupees per quintal. 
(~) Other sorts . Thirty-eight rupees per quintal."; 
(f) for Item No. 15A, the following Item shall be subs-
tituted, namely:-
"lsA. ARTIFICIAL OR SYNTHETIC 
RESINS AND PLASTIC MATERIALS, 
AND ARTICLBS THEREOF Twenty per cent. ad WJlor,,,,. 
(1) Artificial or synthetic resins and plastic materials in 
any form, whether solid, liquid or pasty, or as powder, 
granules or flakes, or in the form of moulding powders, the 
following, namely:-
(i) Condensation, Poly-condensation and Poly-
addition products, whether or not modified or poly-
merised, including Phenoplasts, Aminoplasts, Alkyds, 
Polyurethane, Polyallyl Esters and other Unsaturated 
Polyesters; 
(ii) Polymerisation and Copolymerisation products 
including Polyethylene and Polytetrahaloethylene, 
Polyisobutylene, Polystyrene, Polyvinyl chloride, 
Polyvinyl acetate, Polyvinyl Chloroacetate and other 
Polyvinyl derivatives, Polyamides, Polyacrylic and Poly-
methacrylic derivatives and Coumarone-Indene resins; 
and 
(iii) Cellulose acetate (including di-or tri-acetate), 
Cellulose acetate butyrate and Cellulose propionate, 
Cellulose acetate·propionate, Ethyl cellulose and Benzyl 
cellulose, whether plasticised or not, and plasticised 
Cellulose nitrate. 
(l) Articles made of plastics, all sorts, including tubes, 
rods, sheets, foils, sticks, other rectangular or profile shapes, 
whether laminated or not, and whether rigid" or flexible, in-
cluding layflat tub"ngs and Polyvinyl chloride sheets. 
Explanation.-For the purpose of sub-item (2), 'plastics' 
means the various arlificial or synthetic resins or plastic 
material included in sub-item (1) ."; 
(g) in Item No. 17, lor sub-items (l)to (10), the follow-
ing sub-items shall be substituted, namely:-
"(I) Cigarette tissue . . " . One rupee per kilogram. 
(~) Blotti11;l. toilet, target, tissue ?ther FiftJ oaJe paile per tilOlftDl, than cIgarette tissue, teleprmter,. 

(.... ,.~ ...... -
t)IIC!Wlktna, 1D8Difol4, bank, 
boad, art paper, chrome paper, 
tubaizedpaper,chequepaper, _amp 
paper, cartridF Piper. parchmcut. 
and coated board t{includiDi art 
board, chrome boi'rd and bOard 
for playing cards). 
(5) Pnnting and writil1l paper, peckina 
and wrappiDi paper, strawboard and 
plIl,p-board, including grey board, 
corrupted board, duplex and triplex 
boelds. other aerts. 
Thfo1y-five na~ paise per 
kilOCraDl. 
(4) All other kinds of paper and Pifty naye paiae per Idlogram."; 
paperboard not otherwite specified. 
s 
10 
(h) in Item No. 18, for the entry in the third column, the I.S 
mtry "Nme rupees per kilogram" shall be substituted; 
(i) for Item No. l8A, the following Item shall be substi-
tuted, namely:-
"l8A. COTTON TWIST, YARN AND THREAD, ALL 
SORTS, med or unsized, in all forms including skeins, 20 
hanks, cops, cones, bobbins, pims, spools, reels, cheeses, 
balls or on warp b~ms, in or in relation to the manufac-
ture of which any process is ordinarily carried on with 
the aid 1)f power-
(1»)Jf COWlts Z9 or more; 
(3) of counts less than 29 . 
One rupee per kilogram. 
Pifty naye paise per kilogram. 
.Explatultion.- (1) 'Count' means the size of grey 
yarn expressed as the number of 1000 metre hanks 
per one-half kilogram. 
25 
(2) For m.ultiple fold yarn, 'count' means the 30 
COWlt of the basic single yam."; 
(t) in Item No. l8B-
(a) for sub-item (l), the followinglub-item shall be 
substituted, namely:-
"(1) worsted yarn- 35 
(a) of 48s COWlts and more; Twenty per cent. ad fJolor"". 
(6) of leas than 48- counts. PifteeD per cent. ad N/qr""." ; 
(b) the followi,ng E:rpZanatio-n shall be inserted at 
the end, namely :-
,cErplanaffon.-'Count' means the size of Bingle 40 
yarn expressed as the number of 560 yard hanks per 
pound."; 

'k} wr Item No. 25, the following Item shall be substi-
tuUKl, nam~y:-
"~s. IRON IN ANY CRUDE FORM inchld- Forty-five rupees per metric: 
in, pig iron, ec:rap iron, molten iron or iron kIDDC." j 
5 cast in any other shape or size. 
10 
IS 
20 
30 
3S 
40 
(1) for Item No. 26, the following Item shall be substi-
tuted, namely :-
"26. STEEL INGOTS inc:ludins steel meltm, Fifty ruF.s per metric 
1Cr1U). toDDL j 
(m) in Item No. 26AA-
(i) for the entry in the third column against each of 
the sub-items (i) and (ia), the entry "Forty rupees per 
metric tonne plus the excise. du.ty for. the time being 
leviable on steel ingots" shall be substituted; 
(ii) for sub-items (ii) and (iii), the following sub-
ite~ shall be substituted, namely:-
"(UI Platea ad shcete (includina UJl(lC)8ted ODe huadred aad 6ftJ 
plates and sheets intended fordnning), ees per mctri4: tonne 
alllOrts, and hoops and Itrips, all sorts, the scise duty for the time 
other than &kelp. . insleviablcQIllUe1 iJJ8OlI. 
(in) Skelp. • One hundred and fifty rupee8.por 
metric: tonne IltIsthe excise duty 
for the tUne bcUaa Imibe 
on steel ingots."; 
(n) in Item No. 27, for the entry in the second column 
agajnst sub-item. (b), the entry "Manufactur~, the following, 
namely, plate;s, sheets, circles, strips and extruded shapes. and 
sections in any form or size." shall be substituted; 
(0) in Item No. 33B, for the entry in the seeond column 
against sub-item (i). the entl'Y "ID.llulated copper wires and 
cables, whether sheathed Of' tmSheatbed, any core of Which, 
Qot being one spec:iaUy dadgned' as a pilot core, haa a aectional 
area of less than S.· 0M5 square millimetres and wires and 
cables of ather metals and. alloys of not m~ than equivalent 
conductivity." shan be subftituted; 
(p) in Item No. 34,-
(i) after sub-item (3), the followillg sub-item shall 
be inserted, namely:-
"(;a) Tractors,including agricultural tracton. Ten per cent. ad fJalor",.." ; 
(ii) the following Explanation shall be inserted at 
the end, namely:-
<tE.xplanation.-For the purpOIeS of this Item, 
where a motor vehicle is mounted, fitted 'or fixed· with 

Special 
dutr of 
exclSe on 
certain 
goods. 
48 
any weight-lifting, earth moving and similar specia-
lised material handling equipment, then such equip-
ment other than the chassis shall not be taken into 
account."; 
(q) for Item No. 36, the fo1lowing Item shall be substi- S 
tuted, namely:-
"36. FOOTWEAR AND PARTS THEREOF in or in 
relation to the manufacture of which any process is ordi-
narily carried on with the aid of power. 
(I) Footwear . Ten per cent. ad fXJ/or",.. 
(.a) Parts of footwear . Fifteen per cent. tJd fla/or",.. 
Explanation.-'Footwear' includes all varieties of foot-
wear, whether known as boots, shoes, sandals, chappals, 
or by any other name.". 
10 
61. (1) When goods of the description mentioned in this section IS 
chargeable with a duty of excise under the First Schedule to the 
Central Excises Act, as amended by this Act or any subsequent Act 
of Parliament or under that Schedule read with any notification of 
the Central Government for the time being in force, are assessed te 
duty, there shall be levied and collected- 20 
(a) as respects goods comprised in Items Nos. 6, 8, 9, 14D, 
22A, 23A except sub-item (1) thereof, 23B, 28, 29, sub-items (2) 
and (3) of Item No. 31 and Item No. 32 of that Schedule, a special 
duty of excise equal to 10 per cent. of the total amount so 
chargeable on such goods; 2S 
(b) as respects goods comprised in Items Nos. 2, 3 (1), sub-
items I, II (2) and II (3) of Item No.4, Items Nos. 13, 14, 14F, 15, 
15A, 15B, 16, 16A, 17, 18A(2) , 21, 22, 23, 23A(1), 27, 30,,31(1),33, 
sub-items (1), (3a) and (4) of Item No. 34 and Item No. 37 of 
that Schedule, a special duty of excise equal to 20 per cent. of the 30 
total amount so chargeable on such goods; and ' 
(e) as respects goods comprised in Items Nos. 4 II (1), 18, 
18A (1), 18B, 20, 29A, 33A, sub-items (2) and (3) of Item No. 34 
and radiograms comprised in Item No. 37A of that Schedule, a 
special duty of excise equal to 331/3 per cent. of the total amount 3S 
so chargeable on such goods. 
(2) Sub-section (1) shall cease to have effect after the 31st day 
of March, 1965 except as respects things done or omitted to be done 
before such cesser; and section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 10 of 189' 
shall apply upon such cesser as if the said sub-section had then been 40 
repealed by 8 Central Act. 

(3) The duties of excise relerred to in sub-section (1) in respect 
of the goods specified therein shall be in addition to the duties of 
excise chargeable on such goods UDder the Central Excises Act or any 
other law for the time being in force and such special duties shall be 
S levied for purpoaes of the Union and the proceeds thereof ahall not 
be distributed among the States. 
(4) The provisions of the Central Excises Act and the rules made 
thereunder, including those relating to refunds and exemptions from 
dUties, shall, as far as may be, ,apply in relation to the levy and collec-
10 non of the duty of excise leviable, under this section in respect of any 
,goods as they apply in relation to the levy and collection of. the dutielt 
of excise on such goods under that Act or those rules. 
a. (1) There- shall be levied and collected., with eftect from such Bepla. 
date as may be specified in this behalf by the Central Government by =~:= 
'IS notification in the Official Gazette, on all goods mentioned in the First 
Schedule to tke, Central Excises Act as amended by this Act or any 
subsequent Act of Parliament, a regulatory duty of excise which shall 
be fifteen I per cent. of the value of the goods as determined in 
accordance with the provisions of section. 4 of the Central Excise. 
20 Act: 
,Provified that difterent dates may be specified by the Central 
Government for di1ferentkinds of goods. 
(2) Sub~section (1) shall cease to have e1fect after the 30th da)-
of April, 1965, except as respects things done or omitted to be done 
10 ot.1897. 25 before such ce~er; and section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 
shall apply upon such cesser as if the said sub-section had then been 
repealed by a Central Act. 
(3) The duties of excise referred to in sub-section (1) in respect 
of the goods specified therein shall be in addition to, the duties of 
30 excise chargeable on such goods, under the Central Excises Act or 
any other law for the time being in force and such regulatory duties 
shall be 'levied for purposes of the Union and the proceeds thereof 
shall not be distributed among the States. 
(4) The provisions of the Central Excises Act and the rules made 
35 thereunder, including those relating to refunds and exemptions from 
duties, shall, as far as may be, apply in relation to the levy and collec-
tion of the regulatory duty of excise leviable under this section in 
respect of any goods. as they apply in relation to the levy and collec-
tion of the 'duties of excise on such goods under that Act or thOle 
40 rules. 
m8 (B) LS--e. 

DiIconti-
nuanceot .aU duty. 
.ua.d-.-teaf 
Aat leof 
1 .... 
50 
(5) .Every notification issued under sub-section (1) shall, .. lOOn 
as may be after it is issued, be placed before each House of ParUament. 
63. For the year beginning on the first day of April, 1964, no duty 
under the Central Excises Act, or the Tariff Act shall be levied in 
respect of salt manufactured in, or imported into, India. 5 
M. In the Medicinal and Toilet Preparations (Excise Duties) Act, 
1955,-
(a) in section 2,-
(i) in clause (h), for the words and figures "and which 18 
a dangerous drug within the meaning of the Dangerous Drugs 10 
Act, 1930", the words "and includes all alkaloids of opium", 
shall be substituted; 
(ii) for clause (i), the following clause shall be subttt-
tuted, namely :-
"(i) 'opium' means- IS 
(i) the capsules of the poppy (Papaver somni-
ferum L), whether in their original form or cut, 
crushed or powdered and whether or not juice hal 
been extracted therefrom; 
(ii) the spontaneously coagulated juice of such 20 
capsules which has not been submitted to any mani-
pulations other than those necessary for packing and 
transport; and 
(iii) any mixture, with or without neutral 
materials, of any of the above forms of opium, 2S 
and includes any derivative of opium;"; 
(b) for the Schedule, the following Schedule shall be substi-
tuted, namely:-
Item 
No. 
"THE SCHEDULE 
(See section 3) 
Delcription of dutiable goods 
Medicinal Prwpa,at"ions 
Rate of cluty 
I. Allopathic Medicinal Preparariooa:-
(a) Medicinal preparations containina ak:ohol which are not capable of 35 
bein<; consumed .. ordinary aclobolic beveragea-
Ten per cent. ad ~ or ~ 
ODe aDd ten Dayc paiac per IitJ:e 
of the ItraIath of LmdOn proof 
'pirit, whidlever ia bigher. 40 

s 
10 
IS 
3.5 
4S 
Itmn 
No. 
11 
Deacription of dutiable goods 
(b) Others 
.(il) Medicinal preparations containi ng 
alcohol which are capable of beinl 
consumed as ordinary alcoholic 
beveraaes-
(fJ) Medicinal preparations which contain 
mown active ingttdientl in therapeutic 
quantities. 
(b) Others , 
Rate of my 
Rupee one and ten nayc 't:J: litre ofthestreoath of 
proof spirit. 
Ten per cent, till wrlorwft or rupees 
three and cia:htY-five uye ~ 
per litre of the ~ of 
London proof spirit, whichever 
'is higher 
Rupees fifteen and fifty uye peiIc: 
per litre 0 the atrcnItb· of 
London proof spirit. 
(iit) Medicinal preparationa not containing Ten per cent. ad fHIlorrtm. 
alcohol but contai' opium, IndiaD 
hemp or other narco~ or D.Il'COtic. 
.a. Medicinal prcparati.ODI in Ayurvedic. Unani or 
. other indigenous systems of medicine-
3· 
4· 
(I) Medicinal 'aJDta" sdf-gene-
rated alco~ notC!~~'e of~ 
consumed u ordinary alcoholic 
bevcraaa· (ii) Medicinal preparations containins self-
~ted alCohol which arc capable of 
being consumed u ordinary alcoholic 
(iii) ~ containing alcohol which arc 
. = !d~tion Or to which alcohol 
Nil. 
Thirty-eight naye paise per Iitrc 
of the strength of London proof' 
spirit. 
Rupees fifteen and fifty naye paiIe 
per Iitrc of the ItrcDIth of 
London proof spirit. 
(iv) Medic::iDal prepuatioDs not CQ!ll'llining Ten per cent. till fJfJ1Dmn. 
alcohol but containiug opium, Indian 
hemp, or other narcotic drug or narcotic. 
Homoeopathic preparations containing alcohol. 
Toi/#t~ 
Toilet preparations containins alcohol, or opium, 
Indian hemp, or other narcotic dt1Jl or DarCOtic. 
Rupees three and eiahty-ftve oaye 
paise per litre or the ItreDIth 
of London proof .pirit. 
Twenty-five per cent. till fJfJlt1rwm 
or rupees three and eilhty-fift 
~
' per litre of the 
8 of London proof spirit, 
whi vcr is higher. 
Explanation I.-'Patent or proprietary medicines' means any medi-
cinal preparation which bears either on itself or on its container or 
both, a name which is not speCified in a monograph in a Pharma-
copoeia, Formulary or other publications notified in this behalf by the 
So Central Government in the Official Gazette, or which is a brand name, 
that is, a name or a registered trade mark under the Trade and 
f3 of 19S8. Merchandise Marks Act, 1958 or any other mark such as a symbol, 

.\ 
• 
monogram, label, signature or invented worda or any writing wblch 
ia used in relation to that medicinal preparation for .the PurpoI8 at 
indicating or so as to indicate a connection in the course ot trade 
between the preparation and Borne person having the right either .. 
. proprietor or otherwise to use the name or mark with or without any 5 
indication of the identity of that person. 
Exp14nation II.-Where any article is chargeable. with duty at a 
rate dependent on the value of the article, such valueaball be deemed 
to he the value as determiD.ed in accordance with tae provisioDl of 
IIeCtion 4 of the Central Exetsesand Salt Aet, 1944. 
Explanation III.-'London proof spirit' means that mixture of ethyl 
alcohol and distWed water which at the temperature of 61 degreel 
Fahrenheit weichs exactly 12/13th parts of an equal measure of. cU.-
tilled water at the same temperature. 
1 of lM6. 
10 
Explanation IV.-Where in respect of any dutiable soodI the unit ·IS of assessment for the purpose of any duty under this Act iI a Hue 
of the strength of London proof spirit, the duty:lIIall·be·tae:reued-or 
reduced in such proportion as the strength of the dutiable goodI i8 
greater or less than that of the London proof Ipirit.". 
Amen.- 85. In the Compulsory Deposit Scheme Act, I., in aect10n '" ao men. at. Ad 11 of after sub-section (9), the following IUb-sectioDa ,Iballbe 1ruJerted 
lea. namely:-
"(9A) If any person has deposited any amount under the 
provisions of sub-section (3) or sub-section (4)·"hteh 11 in exeesa 
of the amount of additional surcharge payable by him, such 2S 
excess shall, on an application made by that person, be refunded 
to him with interest due thereon, in such manner as the Central 
Government thinks fit. 
(9B) If any person who is liable to pay advance tax under 
the Income-tax Act has made a deposit under the provisiolll ot·30 
aub-section (5) in the finmcial year commenciag .011 the ftrat day 
of April, 1963, the amount of such deposit ahall, on an application 
made by that person, be refunded to him with intere.t due 
thereon, in such manner as the Central Government thinks fit." 
Deehratton UMe;- the Provilional Collection Of 'rue. Act, 1931 35 
It II hereby declared that it is expedient in the publ1c tntere.tthat 
the provisions of clauses 56, 57, 59, 80, 61 and 64 of thia Bill tilall have 
immediate effect under the Provisional Collection of TU8I Act, 1931. 18.oU981. 

s 
53 
THI· J'lRST SCHIDDVL'8' 
(See lMCtion I) 
PAIt'I' I 
l~tAz and, ftf'Charge Oft itlClOfneoote« 
Partlf'NJPh A 
(i) In the case of every individual who is married and every Hindu 
undivided tamily whote total ineome does not exeeeG RI-. 20,000' fA 
either cue-
10 WbIa the 1DdJvtdual· hie DO 
cbIId wholly 01' maIDJy depc!n-
cleat on h1m 01' where the 
, Hmdu UDdtrided family hat 
I, r DO mJuor copacIDIf. 
Ra. 
(I) On the ftnt 3POO of total 
income 
(2) OD the sat 2.000 II 
20 '" On the oat a.,oo II 
W On.tbe Dat ,.000 tI 
(J) On the DIIItt 7.500 ., 
RI. RI. 
3.300 of toIIIl mcc... 3.dOo af'toeIImco.. Nil. 
I.?OO ... J...., '" 
•• II 
2.500 .. a,soo .. JO. 
,.000 II 
,,000 
II I'~ 
7.,00 .. 7.,00 II 30% 
(ii) In the case of every individual who is not married and every 
individual or Hindu undivided family whose total income in either 
25 case exceeds Rs. 20,000 and in the case of every unregistered firm or 
other association of persons or body of individuals, whether incorpo-
rated or not, or every artificial juridical person referred to in sub-
clause (vii) of clause (31) of section 2 of the Income-tax Act, not 
being a case to which any other Paragraph of this Part applies:-
30 (I) On 'tbe- fi1'It RI. 1,oGO of:tatal iDc:Iam. 
(2) Oa the DGt Ra. 4PlO of totIl iDcome 
(3) Oa the Dalt Rl.a.500 aCb::aliDcom. 
(4) On the'll_·" ',000 of toaal iDcIoDx 
(,) ()D the .at RI. 7.300 or total iDcoIIII 
,~ .... 8) CD .... 1Ia .... .,.'-- • 
Nil 
." 
1041 
r,,, 
20" 

Provided that for the purposes of this Paragraph-
(i) no income-tax shall be p~able on a total income which 
does not exceed the limit specified below; 
(ii) the income-tax payable shall in no case exceed half the 
amount by which the total income exceeds the said limit; 
(iii) the income-tax payable by an individual who is married 
or a Hindu undivided family whose total income exceeds in either 
case Rs. 20,000 shall not exceed the aggregate of-
(a) the income-tax which would have been payable if the 
total income had been Rs. 20,000; 
(b) half the amount by which the total income exceeds 
Rs.20,000. 
The limit aforesaid shall be-
S 
10 
(i) Rs. 6,000 in the caSe of every Hindu undivided family 
which as at the end of the previous year satisfies either of the IS 
following conditions, namely:-
(a) that it has at least two members entiUed to claim 
partition who are not less than eighteen years of age; or 
(b) that it has at least two members @titled to claim 
partition who are not lineally descended one from the other 20 
and who are not lineally descended from any other "living 
member of the family; 
(i'i) Rs. 3,000 in every other case. 
Surcharge on income-tax 
The amount of income-tax computed at the rates hereinbefore 25 
specified shall be increased by J. surcharge for purposes of the Union, 
which shall be equal to the aggregate of the sums computed as 
hereunder: -
(a) where the amount of the income other than earned 
income, if any, included in the total income exceeds Rs. 10,000, a 30 
sum calculated on the difference between the amount of income-
tax on the total income and the amount of income-tax on the 

10 
IS 
I 
whole 01 the earned income, if any, included in the total income 
if such earned income had been the total income. at the following 
rate, namely:-
(i) where the amount of the 
income other than the earned 
income, if any, included in the total 
income exceeds Rs. 10,000 but does 
not exceed Rs. 25,000. 
at the rate of 12·5%: 
Provided that the amount of surcharge payable under 
I 
this clause shall in no case exceed one-tenth of the amount 
by which the income other than the earned income exceeds 
Ri. 10,000; 
(ii) where the amount of the 
income other than the earned 
income, if any, included in the total 
income exc~ds Rs. 25,000 but does 
not exceed Rs. 75,000. 
at the rate of 15~: 
Provided that the surcharge payable under this clause 
shall in no case exceed the aggregate of the following sums, 
namely:-
(1) an amount calculated at the rate of twelve and a 
half per cent. on the amount of income-tax on an income 
of Rs. 25,000, if such income had been the total income 
(the income of Rs. 25,000 for this purpose being computed 
as if such income included income from various sources 
in the same proportion as the total income of the person 
concerned) ; 
(2) one-tenth of the amount by which the income 
other than the earned income exceeds Rs. 25,000; 
(iii) where the amount of the 
income other than the earned 
income, if any, mc1uded in the total 
income exceeds Rs. 75,000. 
at the rate of 17·5,.: 
Provided that the surcharge payable under this clause 
35 shall in no case exceed the aggregate of the fol1owin~ sums, 
namely:-
(1) an amount calculated at the rate of fifteen per 
cent. on the amount of income-tax on an iDccme 

Rio 75,000, if such income had been the total income 
(the income of Rs. 75,000 for this purpose being com-
puted 8S if such income included income from various 
lIOurcel in the same proportion as the total income of 
the person concerned); J 
(2) one-tenth of the amount by which the income 
other than the earned income exceeds RI. 75,000; 
(b) where lhe earned income included in the lota! income 
sceeda Rs. 1,00,000, a sum calculated at ten per cent. of the 
dtlference between the amount of income-tax which would have 10 
been payable on the whole of the earned income included in the 
total income, if such earned income had been the totalineome and 
the amount of income-tax payable on a total income of Rs. 1,00,000. 
P4ragraph B 
In the case of every local authority,-
Rate of income-taz 
On the whole of the total income 
Surcharge on income-tax 
•. 30% 
The amount ot income-tax computed at the rate hereinbefore spe-
cified shall be increased by a surcharge for purposes of the Union of 20 
five per cent. of the amount of income-tax. 
Paragraph C 
In f!"ISY case in which under the provisions of the Iilcome-tax Act 
income-tax is Jo be charged at the maximum rate,-
Rate of income-tax 
On the whole of the total income 
Surcharge on i1lcome-ta: 
'I1le amount of income-tax computed at the rate hereinbefore 
Spec1fted shall be increased by a surcharge for purposes of the Union 
of 17·5 per cent. of the amount of income-tax. 30 
Paragraph. D 
In the cue of every company,-
Rate of income-taz 
On the whole of the total income " 25%: 
Provided that a rebate at the rate of ten per cen~. on 10 much of 3! 
the total income u consists of dividends from an Indian company 
wILl. ill nat euch • company as is relelTed to Ul sect.iOD 108 of the 

&7' 
Income·tax Act and which is wholly or mainly engaged in the 
business of generation and distribution of electricity or of manu· 
future or produdion of anyone or more of the articles speclfled in 
the Uat in Part IV of this Schedule, shall be allowed in the case of 
S a company which has not made the prescribed arrangement. for the 
def4aution and payment of dividends within India. 
Paragraph E 
In the cue of every registered firm,-
Rates of income·tu 
10 (1) On the first Rs. 25,000 of total incom. 
(!) On the nm Re. 25,000 of total income 
(3) On the next Rs. 50,000 of total income 
(4) On the balance of total income 
Surcharge on income·tu 
Nil 
8% 
8% 
12% 
IS The amount of income-tax computed at the rates hereinbefore spe-
cified shall be increased by a surcharge for purposes of the Union 
equal to the sum of-
(i) twenty per cent. of the amount of income-tax payable by 
the firm on its income from any business carried on by 1t calcu-
20 lated at the average rate of income-tax applicable to its total 
income; and 
(ii) ten per cent. of the amount of income-tax payable by it on 
its income from all sources other than from any business carried 
on by it calculated at the averag~ rate of income-tax applicable 
2, to its total income. 
PART II 
Super""'ttJz ma.d mrch4rge on sup ... ·taz 
Paragraph. A 
In the case of eVery individual, Hindu undivided family, unregis-
30 tered firm or other association of persons or body of individuals, wae-
tDer incorporated or not, or every artificial juridical person referred 
to in sub-clause (vii) of clause (31) of section 2 of the Income-tax Act, 
not being a case to which any other Paragraph of this Part applies,-
Rates of super-tu 
35 (1) On the first Rs. 20,000 of total income 
(2) On the next Rs. 5,000 of total income 
(3) On the next Rs. 5,000 of total income 
(4) On the next Rs, 20,000 of total income 
(5) On the next Rs. 20,000 of total income 
40 (6) On the balance of Iotal income 
Nil 
10%} 
15% 
30% 
45% 
50% 

• 
Surcharge on super-taz 
The amount of super-tax computed at the rates hereinbefore speci-
tied shall be increased by a surchar~ for purposes of the Union, which 
shall be equal to the aggregate of the sums computed as hereunder:-
(a) where the amoWlt of income other than earned income, S 
if any, included in the total income exceeds Rs. 10,000, a sum cal-
culated on the difference between the amoWlt of super-tax on the 
total income and the amoWlt of super-tax on the whole of the 
earned income, if any, included in the total income if such earned 
income had been the total income, at the following rate, namely: - 10 
(.) where the amount of tho income other than the at tht rate of' I2' 5" 
earned mcome, if any, included in the total income exceeds 
RI. 10,000 but does not acccd RI. 25,000 : 
Provided that the amount of surcharge payable 
under this clause shall in no case exceed one-ci&hth 
of the amount by which the income other than the 
" earned income aceeds Rs. 10,000; 
(is) where the amount of income other than the earned at the rate of 15% 
income, if any, included in the total income exceed. 
RI. 25,000 but does not exceed RI. 75,000: 
Provided that the surcharge payable under this clause 
.hall in no case aceed the aggregate of the following awns, 
namely:-
(I) an amoW't calculated at the rate of twelve and 
a half per ccnL on the amount of super-tax on an 
income of RI. 25,000, if such income had been the total 
income (the income of RI. 25,000 for tbU purpoee 
being computed u if such income incIudcd iDcomt 
from various aourcea in the same proportion u the total 
income of the penon concerned); 
(2) one-eigluh of the amount by which tbe 
income other than the earned income acceds 
RI. 25,000; 
IS 
30 
(iii) where the amount of the income other than the at the,.....t' 11' ,% 
c&rnea income, if any, included in the total ioanne 35 
aceeds RI. 75,000: 
Provided that the surcharge payable under this clauIe 
.hall in no case exceed the aggregate of the following IWDI, 
namely:-
(I) an amount calculated at the ratc of fifteen per 
cent. on the amount of super-tax on an iDcome at 
RI. 75,000. if.uch income had been the total income 
(the income of RI. 75,000 for this PUlpOIe beiDt com-
puted u if such income included income from varioue 
sourcca in the same proportion u the total income 
of the penon concerned); 
• (2) onc-eighth of the amount by which the 
IDcome other than the earned income exceedi 
RI.75,000 ; 
(b) where the earned income included in the total income 50 
exceeds Rs. 1,00,000, a sum calculated at ten per cent. of the difter-
enee between th~ amoWlt of super-tax which would have been 

payable on the whole of the earned income included in the total 
income, if such earned income had been the total income and the 
amount of super-tax payable on a total income of Rs. I,OO~OOO. 
Paragraph B 
5 In the case of every local authority,-
Rate of super-tax 
On the whole of the total income .... 16% 
Surcharge on super-tax 
The amount of super-tax computed at the rate hereinbefore spec i-
10 fled shall be increased -by a surcharge for purposes of the Union of 
12i per cent. of the amount of super-tax. 
IS 
Paragraph C 
In the case of every association of persons being a co-operative 
S()ciety as defined in clause (19) of section 2 of the Income-tax Act,-
Rates of super-tax 
(1) On the f4'st Rs. 25,000 of total income 
(2) On the balance of total income 
Surcharge on super-tax 
Nil 
16% 
The amount of super-tax computed at the rates hereinbefore speci-
20 fied shall be increased by a surcharge for purposes of the Union of 
121 per cent. of the amount of super-tax. 
Paragraph D 
In the case of every company, other than the Life Insurance Cor-
poration of India established under the Life Insurance Corporation 
2S Act, 1956,-
Rates of super-tax 
On the whole of the total income 
Provided that-
.. 55%: 
(i) a rebate at the rate of 37'5 per cent. on the total income 
30 shall be allowed in the case of any company which-
la)- in respect of its profits liable to tax under the 
Income-ta" Act for the assessment year commencing on the 
1st day of April, 1964, has made the prescribed arrangements 
for the declaration and payment within India of the dividends 
35 payable out of such profits in accordance with the provisions 
of section 194 of that Act; and 

80 
(b) i. such a company al is referred to in section 108 of 
the Income-tax Act with a total income not exceediDI 
Rs.25,ooO; 
(ii) a rebate at the rate of 35 per cent. on 10 much of the total 
income as consists of profits and gains attributable to the bus1ne. S 
of generation and distribution of electricity or of manufacture 
or production of anyone or more of the articles specified in the 
list in Part IV of this Schedule; and at the rate of 30 per OIDt. on 
the balance of the total income shall be allowed in the cue of a 
company which satisfies condition (a) of the preceding clause 10 
and which is such a company as is referred to in seetlolll'08-of 
the Ineome-tax Act with a total income exceecUDg'RB. 25,'080; 
(iii) a rebate at the rate of 26 per cent. on so much of the 
total income as consists of profits and gains attributable to the 
business of generation and distribution of electricity or of 15 
manufacture or production of anyone or' more of the articlee 
specified in the list in Part IV of this Sehedule-; and at the rate-
of 20 per cent. on the balance of the total income shall be allowed 
in the case of a company which satisfies condition «I) of clause 
(0 and which is not such a company as is referred to in section ao 
108 of the Income-tax Act; 
(iv) a rebate at the rate of 30 per cent. on so much of the 
total income as consists of royalties received from an Indian con-
cern in pursuance of an agreement made by it with the Indian 
concern on or after the 1st day of April, 1961 and which.bas·heeD 2S 
approved by the Central Government; at the rate of 30 per cent. 
on so much of the total income as consists of fees for rendering 
technical services received from an Indian concern in pursuance 
of an agreement made by it with the Indian concern after 
the'29th day of'February, 1984 and which has been approved 'by ,0 
the Central Government; and at the rate of 15 per cent; on the 
balance of the total income shall be allowed in the case of any 
company not entitled to a rebate under any of the preceding 
clauses : 
Provided further that-
(i) the amount of the rebate under c!auae (l) or clause (ii) 
or clause (iii) of the preceding proviso shaD be reduced by the 
sum, if any, equal to the amount or the aggrepteof:tbe amounts; 
as tl.e case may be, computed as hereunder:-
(ca) on-the aggregate of the BUmS com~ in the at the'nte of 100% 
manner provided in clause (i) of the second proviso to Para-
Rl'aph D of Part II of the Fint Schedule to the Finance 
Act, X963 as reduced by the amount, ifany, which is deemed 
to have been taken into account, in accordance with clause 
(is) of the said proviso, for the P'¥P08e ofreduc:lng tbe!feHte' 
mentlond in clause (I) of the I8id p:oviso to nil; 
35 
18 of IM8. 
.. , 

(6) on the AmoWlt repreaentina the face value of any at the rate of 121% 
, .... ·IIban. or. the &1DOWlt of any bonus isaw:d to itl 
shareholden c1uriDl the previous year with a view to 
iacreaeint the paic1-up capiWJ aac1 
, (C) in addition, in the case of a company referred to in 
ctlause (t) or clause (ii) or clause (iii) of the preced.in& 
proviso (being such an IRdian company as is not referred to 
in section 108 of the Income-tax Act and whose businesa 
consists wholly in the manufacture or processing of gooda 
10 or in mining or in the generation or distribution of electricity 
en: any other form of power or any company as is referred to 
in secti~ 108 of the said Act) which has declared or 
distributed to its shareholders during the previous year any 
dividends other than dividends on preference shares-
20 
3S 
, rc.-
(A) in' the case of a company which since the date 
of·the commencement of its activities has declared or 
distributed any dividends for the first time during the 
previous year or anyone of the four previous years imme-
diately preceding such previous year -
Ii on that part.of thr:Aividcn~s other than.divi-~at_ the rate of 7 ,% 'icDds on preferencc awares which cxcecQa 10 per 
ccnt. of the paid .. "p capital - _. 
(B) in any other case -
on the whole atDOWlt of the dividends other at the rate of 7' ,% 
than dividends on preference shares 
(ii) where the sum arrived at in accordance with clause (0 
of this proviso exceeds the amount of the rebate arrived at in 
accordance with clause (i) or clause (ii) or clause (iii), as the 
caaemay be, of the preceding proviso, only 80 much of the 
amounts of reduction mentioned insub-clauaes (a), (b) and (c) 
of clause (i) of th.is.proviao as is sufficient, in that order, to reduce 
-the,rebate to nil sball be deemed to have been taken into account 
for the purpose : 
Provided further that the super-tax payable by a company, 
tile total income of which exceeds rupees twenty-five thousand, 
Ihall not exceed the aggregate of-
(4) the lUper-tax which would have been payable by 
the company if its total income had been Rs. 25,000 (the 
income of Ra. 25,000 for thiS purpose being computed as if 
such income included income from various sources in the 
same proportion as the total income of the company); and 
(b) fifty-five per cent. of the amount by which its total 
income exceeds rupees twenty-five thousand. 
J:zplanatWn..-For the purposes of this paragraph, where a part of 
., the Income of a CQIIlpany Is not included in its total income because 

62 
it is agricultural income, the amount declared or distributed as 
dividends (other than dividends on preference shares), the amount 
representing the face value of any bonus shares and the amount of 
any bonus issued to its share-holders shall each be deemed to be 
such proportion thereof as the sum specified in clause (a) bears to 5 
the sum specified in clause (b), such sums being-
(a) the average amount of the total income of the company 
in the five previous years in which it has been in receipt of tax· 
able income immediately preceding the relevant previous year; 
and 10 
(b) the average amount of the total profits and gains (exclud-
ing capital receipts) of the company.for the five previous years 
referred to in clause {a) reduced by such allowances as may be 
admissible under the Income-tax Act but which have not been 
taken into account by the company in its profit and loss accounts IS 
for the said five previous years. 
Paragraph E 
In the case of the Life Insurance Corporation of India established 
under the Life Insurance Corporation Act, 1956,-
Rate of super-tax 
On the whole of its profits and gains from life 
insurance business 22'5% 
PART ITI 
Rates for deduction of tax at source in certain cases 
20 
In every case in which under the provisions of sub-section (2) of 2S 
section 192 and sections 193 to 195 of the Income-tax Act, tax is to be 
deducted at the rates in force, deduction shall be made from the 
income subject to deduction, at the following rates:-
I. In the case of a person other than a com-
pany-
(a) where the person is resident-
r(i) on the income from divi-
dends payable by an Indian com-
pany or a company which has 
made the prescribed arrangements 
for the declaration and payment of 
dividends within India; . . 
Income-tax 
Rate of Rate of 
income- surcharge 
tax 
18% 
Super-tu 
)<a<,.r I Rate of 
sUPCr-tRX surch 
3S 
Nil Nil 40 
31 of 1856. 

s 
10 
15 
20 
25 
(iI) on any other income 
(exc1udmg interest payable on any 
security of the Central Govern-
ment issued or declared to be in-
come-tax free, and interest payable 
on any security of a State Govern-
ment issued' income-tax free, the 
income-tax whereon is payable by 
the State Government); . . 
(6) where the person is not resident 
in India- .1 
(i) 01\ the whole income 
(excluding interest payable on any 
security of the Central Govern-
ment il8ued!or declared to be in-
come-tax free, and interest payable 
on any security of a State Govern-
ment issued income-tax free, the 
income-tax whereon is payable by 
the State Government) ; 
~ia) on "the income from inte-
relt payable on any security of the 
Central Government issued or 
declared to be income-tax free and 
interest payable on any security of 
a State Government issued income-
tlX free. the income-tax·whereon 
is payable by the State Government. 
88 
Income-taX 
Rate o. f I Rate of income- surcharge 
taX 
Super-tax 
Rate of 1 RIte of 
super-tax I .urcharae 
zs% ""37% Nil Nil 
4'37% Super-tax and sur-
charge on super-tax 
in accordance with 
the provisions of 
clause (b) of sub-
section (I) of section 
Il3 of the Income-
tax Act. 
Nil. Nil. 
.... 
Super-tax and sur-
charge on super-tax 
in accordance with 
the provisions of 
claule (b) of sub-
section (I) of aection 
113 of the Income-tax 
Act • 
I ..... of ' .... of mcome-tIX auper-taJ: 
3S 2. In the cae of a c:ompany-
45 
so 
SS 
(0) where the company is either an Indian company or a com-
pany which baa made the 1lftICribed arrangements for the 
dedaradonand payment o( dividends within India,-
(I) em the whole income (excludina interest payable on any 
eecur:lty of the Central Government issued or declared 
to be income-tax free, and interest payable on any 
security of a State Government issued income-tax 
free, the income-taX whereon ia payable by the State 
Governmeat); and 
(if) on -the whole Income (excluding dividends payable 
by an Indian company or any other company which 
DIll baa made the prelcribed arrangements for the declara-
. • tion and payment of dividends within India); 
(t) where the company is neither an Indian company nor a 
company which has made the prescribed arrangements 
fOl' the declaration and payment of dividend. within 
India,-
('1 oa the income from dividends payable by an Indian 
company which is not such a company IS is referred 
to in aec:tiem loB of the Income-tax Act and which 
2S% 
5% 

·.M 
it wholly or maiDly cappd in the buainCSl of 
scncratioo and distribution of electricity' or of 
m.nqfjtcture or production of anyone or J:Il(ft of the 
articles Ipcc:ifIed in the list In . Part IV of this. Schedule; 
(ia) on the income from dividendi payable by any orher 
Indian company or any company which hal made .he 
prelcribed arrangements for the declaration and pay-
ment of dividendi within.India; 
(a.) on the lDOOme nom royalties payable b>: ~ Indian 
concern in pursuance of an agreement which II made 
by it with the Indian c:oncern on or after the 1St ~ of 
April. 1961 and which baa been approved by the Ceo-
tral GoVemment; 
(ill) on the income from fees for rcncleriDg tcchnicalecr-
'rices received from an Indian concern -:L~ af an egreement made by it with the amcerD 
after the 29th day of February, 1964.and wbich 
his been approved .by the Central Gommncnt; . 
(fJ) OIl the income from interest paya\?le on any security 
of the Central Government wued or dedUed to be 
iname-tax free and intcmt payable on any security 
of • State Government iaaued income-tax free. the 
income-tax whereon is pa)Bble by the Stlte Goftm-
meDt;and 
PART IV 
List of articles 
I 
Rate ot I Rate of 
iDcoIDe-tu IUPer-tu 
Nil 
3S% 
Nil. 
Nil. 10 
as" IS 
(l) Iron and steel (metal), ferro-alloys and special .teelI. 30 
(2) Aluminium, copper, lead and zina. 
(3) Coal, lignite, iron ore and bauxite. 
(4) Industrial machinery specified under the· heading -'S.' Industrial 
Machinery", sub-heading "A. Major items of Specialised equipment 
used in specific industries", of the First Schedule to the Industries .,35 
(Development and ,Regulation) Act, 1951. 65 ot 19~1 
(5) Boilers and steam generating plants, steam engines and 
turbines and internal combustion engines. 
(6) Equipment for the generation, tranamission.and distribution of 
electricity, including ·transformers. 40 
(7) Machine tools, precision tacHs, dies and jigs. 
(8) Tractors and earth-moving machinery. 
(9) Steel castings and .forgmga. 
(10) Cement and refractcm.. 

,(J1.) Fertllilell8. 
(12) Paper and pulp. 
(13) Tea, coffee and rubber. 
(14) Component parts of the articles mentioned in items NOI. (4), 
S(5), (6) and (8), that is to say, such parts .as are euential fer the 
working of the machinery referred to initemsaforeuidend hP.e 
been given for that purpose some special shape or quality which 
would -not be e.entiat for their use for aay other' purpose and are 
in complete ftnished .form and ready 'for fltment. 
10 
THE SECOND SCHEDUIJ1: 
(See .JeCtion 3) 
Rates of Annuity ~ .' 
(i) In the case of any depositor whale total1nccae dOM 
IS not exceed Rs. 15,000. NiL 
(ii) In the ease of any depositor whose total income ezceedl 
Rs. 15,000 but does not ~ceed B.s. 20;000-
5 per cent. of the adjusted total income: 
Provided that the annuity deposit to be made shall in DO cue 
~ exceed half the amount by which the total income exceeds RI. 15,000. 
(iii) In the case of a depositor whose total Income exeeedl 
Rs. 20,000 but does not exceed R1I. 40,000-
71 per cent. of the adjusted total income: 
Provided that the annuity deposit to be made shall in DO eue 
2s;ezceed 'the aggregate of the following SUDlI, ndlely :-
(a) an amount calculated at five per cent. on 10 mueh 01. the 
adjusted total income as does not exceed RI. 20,000; 
(b) one-half of the amount by whiCh the total income 
exceeds Rs.20,000. 
30 (iv) In the case of a depositor whose total income u:eeecb 
Rs. 40,000 but does not exceed Rs. 70,000-
3$ 
10 per cent. of the adjusted total income: 
'j Providea that the annuity deposit to be made ihall in ftO eue 
exceed the aggr~gate of the following sums, namely:-
(a) an amount calculated at seven and a half per cent. on 10 
.' much of the adjusted ·total income as does not .exceed Ra. 4O,oooj 
.. (b) one-half of the amot.D1t 'bv 'Which tbe total income 
exoeeds Rs. 40,000. 

(,,) In the case of a depositor whose total income exeeedl 
Re.70,OOO-
121 per cent. of the adjusted total income: 
Provided that the annuity deposit to be made shall in DO cue 
exceed the aggregate of the following sums, namely :- S 
(4) an amount ealculated at ten per cent. on 80 much of the 
adjusted total income as does not exceed Rs. 70,000; 
(b) one-half of the amount by which the total income 
exceeds Rs. 70,000.' 
Ezplan.ation.-In this Schedule, "total income" means total income 10 
computed in the manner laid down in the Income-tax Act without 
making any allowance under section 2800 of that Act. 
THE THIRD SCHEDULE 
(See section 56) 
.'J " 
PART I 
In the First Schedule to the Tariff Act,-
(i) in Item No. 28 (34),-
(1) for the entry in the fourth column against sub-item 
">( •... ' . (a), the entry "70 per cent. ad valorem" shall be substituted; 
' .. 
(2) for· the entry in the fourth column against sub-Item 20 
(b), the entry "80 per cent. ad valorem" shall be substituted; 
and 
(ii) in Item No. 63 (32) ,-
(1) for the entry In the fourth column against sub-item 
(a), the entry "Rs. 50·00 per tonne pl1U 25 per cent. a, 
ad "alorem." shall be substituted; 
(2) for the entry in the fourth column against sub-Item 
. (b), the entry "Rs. 84·00 per tonne plUl 25 per cent. " VGIo-
,.em" shall be substituted. 

87 
PiCtaiiiitill1 rate or duty 
if the article it the 
Nime olartk:le Namn:tSf Standard 
produce orm'md"~J)uratiod 
tuft of of 
duty rate of ~ 
duty The ABritiah Ptive 
United Colony ,. .. 
Kina- oIdIe1J dom 
,. .... , 
• 2 3 4 , 6 7 
...... x::t ::;.,.~ to the Tariff Ac:t, for J~ No" 8(~), the ~~ ~~.~ bt 
.• tI(,a) PruiD. dried (lilted aud 
II III otbu kiDda) 
DOt om. wile apeciIeII-
(d) A&mar+-
ao 
(.) witboat sbeII , . Preferen- Ra,430' 00 
tIal perqWntal, 
Revenue. 
(6) ID the IbeD-
(,) 10ft IbeII. . Pref'eren- Ra. 2,0'00 
till per quintal. 
ReftDuc. 
(ia) bud IbeIl. • Preferm- RI.I40'oo 
tIal Re- per quintal. 
veaue.; 
(B) DMea. dry, m:hJdina 
" .. 1-
~) Sbekra or ShIkcrII. Preferen- R.a. 7S'00 SMiaa mel BramJ. till Re- per qUintal. 
vmue. 
~) ICapbpa, Cbharra, Preferen- RI. 50'00 pe .. 
~ SuId, Sod, till Re- quintal, 
0mIai IIDd BbatDi. wenuc. 
RI, SO'OO per ,. quintal _ 
10 per 
CleDt. tid 
fJIIiInwI. 

~n 
68 
I 2 
• 4 S 6 , 
(~'~r 
Pzefereo- R.I. IS'oo RI.IS·oo 
till perquhuaL quiDcal 
.... ~or Revenue • CIO per' 
JMttID&, • cent. ad S fJa/or-.. 
C.,' JIInIcbio mati-
CN with IbtU. Preferen- Ra.3OO·oo Ra.200·oo 
tillite- per quintal. per quintal J 
ftSl1IC4 lu£I'!S: 10 cent. va-
1I1r"", 
Ra • .$oo·oo .'1 (J, ........ • Preferen- RI. SOO·OO ".,., till per quintal. 
Cquintal Rncauc. IQp;r IS 
oeDt. Qd 
--. 
~R";"" 
CN Red, IncbU", QuI. Pftferen· RI.loo·oo RI.loo·oo 
dIIIIi.-4J..1Dwa, ill tia1 per quintal. pcl'qaiotal 20 .u II - .. ,. CIODtai- R-. "IS 10 per , 
-.. cent. ad 
fJQ1or-.. 
(j) BIIIdt • iDdudiDa black Prd'eren- RI. 130'00 Ra.130· 00 
MoaIcca, in all tial per quintal. ... 2S I**iDP IDI1 COIltainen., Revmue. J: 10 per 
cent • ad 
..... 
(,) AD ~. Wclu- Pre!eren- RI~2CIO'CIO RI.2oo·00 
per quintti. . tal 30 = ~-:ca aDd daI C~ .> •• ,:.::.~ Revenue. cent. ad 
fNJlorIm. 
(P)~ . Preferen- 60 per ceftt. so percent .•. • tial adWllorlm. odtlGlDr .... 35 Revenue. 
'.< 

STATEMtNr OF OB.t:ECTS ANt> R!ASONS 
The object of thia Bill is to give efteet to the ftnmcial pro]llOl8k 
of the Central Government for the financial year 1964-45 aIlCi· to . 
provide for certain connected matters. The Bill, inter· aUG, PfOPC*B 
to make certain categeries of assessees liable to aDIluity· depomt. 
T!iis is with a view to augment the resources of the naUoa· f.' 
national development. The Notes on claU1e8 explain the varioua; 
proviatoM contained in the BtD. 
NBW DIua; 
T_ *h FebruClrv, 1904. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDEB ARTICLES 111 
AND 274 OF THE CONSTITUTION or INDIA 
(Copy of letter No. F. 3(16)-B/64, dated the 29th February, 19M 
from Shri T. T. Krishnamachari, Minister of Finance to the Secre.-
tary, Lok Sabha.] 
The President having been informed. of the subiect matW 0.1. tb. 
proposed Bill, reeommends under article 117(1) ani (3) reed. W'itA, 
artix:le 274(1) of the Constitution of India, the introductiw of the 
Flnance Bill, 1964 to the Lok Sabha and· alIo reeommenda to the 
Lok: Sabha the consideration of the Bill. 
• • • • • 

ivotes on clauses 
Clause 2 prescribes the rates of income-tax, super-tax and 
surcharge thereon for the assessment year 1964-65 and also the rates 
'at which tax.is to be deducted at source from salaries, interest on 
securities, dividends and other. income during the financial year 
1964...fi5.In the case of individuals, Hindu undivided famili-. 
UIU'eg!stered firms, associ&tions of persons, etc.; the slab structure 
&ad" the basic rates of income-tax and super-tax applicable for the 
assessment year 1963-64 have been replaced by a new slab structure 
and rates of tax. The various surcharges on income-tax and super .. 
tax (including the additional surcharge on income-tax) leviable for 
the assessment year 1963-64 have also been substituted by a lingle 
surcharge on income-tax and on super-tax for purposes of the UIlian, 
which will be leviable where the .earned income exceeds Ra. 1 lakh 
or where the unearned income "exceeds Rs. 10,000. 
~ the case of registered firms also, a single revised rate schedule 
of income-tax has been prescribed for all regis~red finns, irrespec-
tive of the number of partners in such a firm. However,the rate 
of Union 8ur~harge on income-tax payable by registered firma 
remains the same as for the assessment year 1963-64. 
In the case of companies, the rate of income-tax remains the same 
sa for the assessment year 1963-64. However, companies which 
declare and pay their diVidends outside India, i.e., foreign companies 
will be entitled to a rebate of income-tax of 10 per cent. of me 
amOUl'lt of dividends received by them from an Indian company in 
which the public is not substantially interested and which is carryina 
on the business of generation ~d distributi~n of electricity or iI 
wholly or mainly engaged in the manufacture or production of any 
one or more of the articles specified in the list in Part IV of the Firat 
Schedule to the Bill. 
Some changes have been made in the rates at which super-tax 
will be payable by companies. In the case of Indian companies and 
other companies which declare and pay dividends in India, the 
changes are, briefly, as follows. Companies in which the public are 
substantially interested and whose total income does not exceed 
Rs. 25,000 will be charged to super-tax at 17·5 per cent. as compared 
with the rate of 20 per cent. for the assessment year 1963-64. In the 
case of companies in which the public ar~ substantially interested 
and whose total income exceeds Rs. 25,000 the normal effective rate 
of lUper-tax will be 25 per cent. as for the assessment year 1963-84. 

However, 'if such a company derives any ineome from the generation 
and distribution of electricity or from the production of anyone or 
more of the articles in the basic industries specified in Part IV of 
the First Schedule to the Bill, the super-tax payable by it in respect 
of such income will be 20 per cent. only. In the case of companies 
In which the public is not substantially interested, the effective rate 
of super-tax is proposed to be increased from 25 per cent. (which 
was applicable for the assessment year 1963-64) to 35 per cent. 
However, if any such company derives income from the generation 
and distribution of electricity or from the production of any of the 
articles specified in the list in Part IV of the First Schedule to the 
Bill, the super-tax payable on such income will, be only 29 per cent. 
Further, in the case of companies other than those which are required 
to make a compulsory distribution of dividends under terms of 
~tion 104 of the Income-tax Act, a provision has been made for 
charging an extra amount of super-tax calculated at 7· 5 per cent. 
of the whole amount of dividends on equity capital, distributed by 
them during the previous year relevant to the assessment year 
1964-65. However, in the case of a new company which since the 
commencement of its activities declar.ed its first dividend not earlier 
than the period of five consecutive previous years (including the 
relevant previous year), this super-tax will be calculated only on 
that amount of the dividends which exceeds 10 per cent. of its paid 
up equity capital. 
In the case of companies which have not made the prescribed 
arrangements for the declaration and payment of dividends within 
Indi&, the rate of super-tax has been increased from 38 per cent. 
(applicable for assessment year 1963-64) to 40 per cent. However, 
it has been provided that on their income by way of royalties and 
fees for rendering technical services, received from an Indian 
concern under an agreement approved by the Central Government, 
the rate of super-tax will be only 25 per cent. 
~me changes have also been made in the rates of deduction of 
tax at source, specified in Part III of the First Schedule to the Bill. 
In the case of shareholders who are r,esident in India, the rate of 
deduction of income-tax will be 20 per cent. as compared with 25 per 
cent. for the financial year 1963-64. In the case of companies, there 
will be no deduction of super-tax from their income by way of 
dividends, as it is proposed to introduce a provision in the Income-tax 
Act exempting inter-corporate dividends from super-tax. 
The provision in the Finance Act, 1963 for a rebate of 10 per cent. 
of the income-tax and super-tax on income derived from the export 

.of..,. or 1Ilerchendlae outlide India and .lao tile rebate of iDcome-
tax aDd luper-tax to manufacturers on 2 per cent. of their exports 
or ...... 'inJndia for export is proposed to be continued. However, 
'tlleaeeond-mentioned concession would not apply in respect· of 
.'iLILjiiDt't of eertain articles such as arms and ammunition, photographic 
lfilms, newaprint, etc., and would be newly extended to ~portsillade 
'after'the 29th day of February, 1964 of non-jute textiles. 
Clatue 3 prescribes the rates at which annuity deposits in respect 
of the assessment year 1964-65 and advance annuity deposits for 
the financial year 1964-65 will be required to be made by individuals, 
Hindu undivided families, unregistered firms, associations of persons, 
etc. under the provisions sought to be Introduced by clause:.f4 of the 
]Sm. 
Clatlole4 aeeks to amend clause (24) of section 2 of the IJacome-tax 
·Act. Theae amendments are consequential to the amendments, to 
tbelJlcome.tax Act under clauses 7 and 44 of the Bill. 
CZatue5 seeks to omit the proviso to clause (b) of the Explanation 
to sub-section (1) of ~tion 9 of the Income-tax Act. The eftect of 
this will be that a Don-resident who derives any income from 
~haBtng 'goods in India and exporting them will not be liable ,to 
tax on such ineome. 
CZatue 6 seeks to amend section 10 of the Lucome-tax Act. The 
effect of these amendments will be as follows: A non-resident will 
. be exempt from tax on his income from interest on such securities 
as have been approved in this behalf by the Central Government. 
A foreign tectmioian win be eligible for exemption from tax on 
bisaalary income even though his contract of service has been 
epproved by the Central Government after the date of his arrival 
in India within a period of one year from such date. 
Visiting professors and teachers of foreign nationality teaching 
in any university or educational institution in India under an 
approved programme will also be entitled to eXlelllption from 1ax 
on their salary income under the same conditions as foreign 
technicians . 
. ilitherto, 11 non .. 1'eI1dent eould be exempted from tax on the 
irtterest '1!eOetved by him from an industrial undertaking in India 
in respect -of loans or credit facilities granted by the non-resident 
to the said industrial undertaking for purchase of capital plant and 
machinery, etc. ibroad, only If the full rate of interest stipulated in 
t11e agreement between the two parties waaapprovedby the Central 

73 
Government. The proposed amendment, will enable the grant of 
exemption to the non-resident where the Central Government has 
approved in this behalf a lower rate of interest than that which has 
been stipulated in the agreement. The amount of interest to be 
exempted will be the sum calculated at the lower rate of mterest 
approved by the Central Government. 
Assessees who derive income from a business of livestock breeding 
or poultry or dairy farming will be exempt from tax in respect of 
any such income assessable for the three assessment years 1965-66, 
1966-67 and 1967-68. 
Clause 7 seeks to amend section 28 of the Income-tax Act to 
provide that the value of any benefit or perquisite, whether con-
vertible into ~oney or not, received by an assessee from any person 
in exercise of his business or profession will be assessable as the 
assessee's income under the head "profits and gains of business or 
profession". 
Clause 8 seeks to amend section 33 of the Income-tax Act. The 
effect of these amendments will be as follows: Assessees who acquire 
a second hand ship from a person not resident in India or import 
second hand machinery from a country outside India, for the purpose 
of their business, after 31st March, 1964, will, subject to certain 
conditions, be entitled to development rebate in respect of such 
assets at such rate or rates as may be prescribed by the Central 
Board of Direct Taxes in the Income-tax Rules. The Board is also 
authorised to lay down any other conditions for the grant of such 
development rebate in the said rules. 
It will also be open to the Central Government to direct by issue 
of a notification in the Official Gazette, that the deduction of 
development rebate shall not be admissible in respect of a ship 
acquired or machinery or plant installed after the period specified 
in the notification,-such period being not less than three years from 
the date of issue of the notification. 
ClauBe 9 seeks to insert a new provision in section 37 of the 
Income-tax Act to the eft,ect that any expenditure incurred by an 
assessee after 31st March, 1964 on advertisement, maintenance of 
any residential accommodation, travelling (including hotel expenses 
or allowances paid in connection with travellfng) shall be allowed 
only to the extent and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed 
by the Central Board of Direct Taxes in the Income7tax Rules. 
Clause 10 seeks to substitute sub-clause (iii) of clause (c) of 
section 40 of the Income-tax Act by a new provision. It provides 
2236 (B) LS-B. 

'14 
for the disallowance in the assessment of a company, of any expendi-
ture incurred by it after 29th February, 1964 on the provision of 
any perquisite for its employ,ees to the extent such expenditure 
exceeds one-fifth of the salary of an employee. It has been p~.ovided 
that certain payments such as contributions by a company to an 
approved superannuation fund or gratuity fund or to a recognised 
provident fund will not be taken into account in computing such 
expenditure. 
Clame 11 seeks to insert a new section 44A in Chapter IV of the 
Income-tax Act, providing that in the case of a trade, professional 
or similar association which does not distribute any part of its 
income to its members, the amount of any deficit (excess of expendi-
ture incurred for the advancement of the common Interest of the 
members of the association concerned over receipts from the 
members) win be allowed to be deducted from the assessable income 
of the association to the extent of 50 per cent. of such income. 
Clame 12 seeks to introduce a new provision in section 45 of the 
Income-tax Act under which an assessee who holds any equity shares 
as an investment and receives any bonus shares will be liable to be 
charged to income-tax under the head "Capital gains" in respect of 
such bonus shares, as if he had transferred the said shares at their 
fair market value after the expiry of 30 days from the date of issue 
of the said shares. 
Clame IS seeks to introduce a new provision in section 52 of the 
Income-tax Act providing that if in the opinion of the Income-tax 
Oftlcer the fair market value of a capital asset as on the date of its 
transfer by an assessee exceeds the full value of consideration for 
It a~ declared by the assessee by an amount not less than 15 per cent. 
of such declared value, the capital gains in respect of such asset 
"hall be computed with reference to such fair market value. Before 
laking action in accordance with this provision, the Income-tax 
Uftlcer is required to obtain the approval of the Inspecting Assistant 
Commissioner of Income-tax concerned. 
Clause 14 seeks to amend section 55 of the Income-tax Act. Under 
one of the new provisions (which is consequential to the amendment 
of section 45 of the Income-tax Act by clause 12 of this Bill), the 
'cost of acquisition' of bonus shares in the case of an equity share-
holder who transfers such shares after the expiry of 30 days from 
the date of their issue will (for the purpose of computing any capital 
gafns arising on such transfer) be taken to be their fair market value 
as on the 31st day from the date on which the said shares were issu.ed 
to hfm. 

Under the other new provision, the 'cost of acquisition' to an 
assessee of any share received by him from a company in lieu of his 
original holdings on the reorganisation of its share capital, or con-
version or reconversion of its stock or shares into shares or stock 
or conversion of one kind of shares into another kind, etc. will be 
calculated with reference to the cost to the assessee of the ori~l 
shares or stock held by ~he assessee. 
Clause 15 seeks to amend section 66 of the Income-tax Act. This 
amendment is consequential to the introduction by clause 19 of this 
Bill of a new section 87 A in the Income-tax Act. 
Clau.se 16 seeks to introduce a ~w section 69A in the Income-tax 
Act providing that if an assessee is not able to explain satisfactorily 
the source of any money, bullion, jewellery 01' valuable article found 
to be owned by him in any financial year, the money and the value 
of such jewellery, etc. may be deemed to be his income for such 
financial year. 
Clau.se 17 seeks to amend section 86 of the Income-tax Ad. The 
amendment is of a clarificatory nature. 
Clause 18 seeks to amend section 87 of the Income-tax Act. Gne 
of the new provisions is that in the case of musicians, playwrighti, 
artists, etc. the higher limits of the sums paid as life insurance 
premia, contributions to provident fund, etc. qualifying for rebate 
of tax will be applicable only to persons who have taken a life 
insurance policy prior to 1st March, 1964. In any other case, the 
usual limits laid down for individuals will apply. 
Another provision is that the amount of the rebate of income-tax 
together with the amount of rebate of super-tax (sought to be provided 
under clause 22 of this Bill) in respect of sums paid by an assessee 
as life insurance premia, contributions to provident fund, etc., shall, 
cumulatively, be limited to 50 per cent. of the total amount of the 
sums qualifying for the rebate. 
CZause 19"seeks to introduce a new sectiQJl 87A in Chapter VIII-A 
of the Income-tax Act. It provides that a resident individual who 
is not a citizen of India and whose children (not above 21 years in 
age) are receiving education in a foreign country will be entitled 
to a rebate of income-tax on the amount spent by him on the 
education of such children. The amount qualifying for the rebate is 
limited to Rs. 4,000 (Rs. 2,000 for each such child up to two children) 
or 25 per cent. of the total income whichever is less. 

Clause 20 seeks to amend clause (ii) of the Ezpla1l4ticm to 
section 91 of the Income-tax Act. The amendment is of a clariflcatory 
nature. 
Clause 21 seeks to make two amendments to. section 99 of the 
Income-tax Act. One of the amendments is of a clariflcatory nature. 
The effect of the other amendment is that companies will not be 
liable to pay super-tax on any dividends received by them from an 
Indian company or a company which h$a made the prescribed 
arrangements for the declaration and payment of dividends within 
India. 
Clause 22 seeks to introduce a new section 99A in Chapter XI-C 
of the Income-tax Act. This provides for the allowance of a rebate 
of super-tax to individuals and Hindu undivided families on so much 
of the sums paid by them as life insurance premia, contributions to 
a provident fund, deposits in the Post Office under the 'Cumulative 
Time Deposits' Scheme etc. which qualify for a rebate of income-tax 
under section 87 of the Income-tax Act. 
Clause 23 seeks to make three amendments to section 104 of the 
Income-tax Act. 
The first one of these is consequential to the amendment under 
clause 26 of this Bill. The next one excludes from the requirement 
of compulsory distribution of dividends such Indian companies (in 
w:pich the public are not substantially interested) whose business 
consists wholly in the manufacture or processing of goods or in 
mining or the generation or distribution of electricity or any other 
form of power. The third one enables the Central Government to 
exempt (by issue of a notification in this behalf) any class of 
companies in which the public are not substantially interested from 
the requirement of compulsory distribution of dividenda. 
Clause 24 seeks to amend section 106 of the Income-tax Act. 
The amendment is consequential to the insertion of a new section 
10VA in the Income-tax Act under clause 26 of this Bill. 
Clause 25 seeks to amend section 107 of the Income-tax Act. 
'ntis amendment is consequential to the amendment under clause 26 
of this Bill 
Clause 26 seeks to introduce a new section 107A in the Income-
tax Act. "This enables a cODlpany in which the public are not 
substantially interested to make an application to the Central Board 
of Direct Taxes for a reduction of the minimum amount of compul-
sory distribution of dividends required of it under section 104 of 

the Act, if the company considers that due to the current require. 
ments for the development of its business, it would not be advisable 
or possible for it to distribute any dividend larger than that which 
has been declared or is proposed to be declared by it. The Central 
Board of Direct Taxes are authorised to reduce the minimum 
amount of compulsory distribution by an amount not exceeding 
20 per cent of the statutory percentage of the distributable iD.come 
of the company. 
C£Q.uBe 27 seeks to amend section 109 of the Income.tax Act. The 
amendments are consequential to the insertion of section 107A 
under clause 26, and the exclusion of Indian companies (in which 
the public are not substantially interested) engaged in the manu-
facture or processing of goods, or mining, etc. from the purview of 
section 104 (vide clause 23 of this Bill). 
CZause 28 seeks to amend section 114 of the Income.tax Act. The 
effect of thi~ is that in respect of long-term capital gains (i.e., gains 
other than 'short-term' capital gains) relating to lands or bulldings, 
tax will be charged in the case of assessees other than companies at 
75 per cent. of the average rate of income-tax and super-tax appli-
cable to their total income. In respect of other long-term capital 
gains, tax will be charged on such asaessees at 50 per cent. of the 
average rate of income.tax and super-tax applicable to their total 
income. 
Clause 29 seeks to amend section 115 of the Income-tax Act. 
The effect of this amendment is that in the case of a company whose 
total income includes any long-term capital gains (i.e., capital gains 
relating to capital assets held for more than one year), super-tax on 
long-term capital gains relating to any buildings or lands or any 
rights in buildings or lands will be chargeable at 15 per cent. and 
on any other long-term capital gains it will be chargeable at 5 per 
cent. 
Clause 30 seeks to substitute the proviSions of section 132 of the 
Income-tax Act. Under the new provisions, if the Commissioner 
of Income-tax has reason to believe (from information in his 
possession) that an assessee has failed to produce the books of 
account or documents required to be produced by him, or is not 
likely to comply with a requisition for the production of boob of 
account or doeuments relevant for the proceedings under the 
Income.tax Act, or has money or any other articles disproportionate 
to his mown sources of income (particulars whereof would be 
relevant for proceedings under the Income-tax Act), he may then 

authorise the Inspecting Assistant Commissioner or the Income-tax 
Officer to make a search for any such books of· account or documents 
in any premises and seize them and also to make an inventory 
of the articles or things (including moneys) referred to above. 
Clause 31 seeks to introduce a new section 133A in the Income-
tax Act, enabling the Income-tax Officer or any Inspector of Income-
tax authorised by him in this behalf to enter an assessee's place of 
business and to inspect any books of account and documents, to 
make extracts thereof and to place identification marks thereon. 
Clause 32 seeks to omit section 137 of the Income-tax Act, which 
prohibits the disclosure of any information contained in the assess-
ment records of an assessee. 
Clause 33 seeks to substitute the proviSions of section 138 of the 
Income-tax Act. Under the new provision, any member of the 
public may make an application to the Commissioner of Income-tax 
in the prescribed form, accompanied by the prescribed fee for the 
supply to him of information relating to any assessee. The Com-
missioner is authorised to supply the information asked for if he is 
satisfied that there are no circumstances justifying its refusal. 
Clause 34 seeks to insert a new section 140A in the Income-tax 
Act, requiring assessees who haw furnished their returns of income 
to pay the tax due on the basis of that return (as reduced by any 
tax paid previously) within one month from the date of furnishing 
the return. The liability to pay the tax on self-assessment basis 
arises only where the tax payable on the basis of the return exceeds 
five hundred rupees. If an assessee does not pay the tax within the 
said period, he will be liable to a penalty not exceeding 50 per cent. 
of the tax which was payable. 
Clause 35 seeks to omit section 141A of the Income-tax Act. 
Clause 36 seeks to amend section 156 of the Income-tax Act. The 
amendment is consequential to the amendment sought to be made 
under clause 44 of this Bill. 
Clause 37 seeks to amend section 209 of the Income-tax Act. The 
amendment is purely of a drafting nature. 
Clause 38 seeks to amend section 246 of the Income-tax Act to 
provide an assessee, the right of an appeal to the Appellate Assistant 
Commissioner against an order by the Income-tax Officer imposing 
a penalty for a default in payment of tax due on self-assessment or 
a default in respect of making an annuity deposit. 

Clause 39 seeks to amend section 254 of the Income-tax Act to 
enable an assessee in whose case capital gains have been computed 
with reference to the fair market value of a capital asset as on the 
date of its transfer (vide clause 13 of this Bill) to have any dispute 
relating to the valuation re(erred to valuers for arbitration, at the 
stage of appeal before the Appellate Tribunal. 
Clause 40 seeks to amend section 271 of the Income-tax Act to 
provide that where the income returned by an assessee is less than 
90 per cent. of the assessed income, the assessee shall be deemed to 
have concealed his income or furnished inaccurate particulars 
thereof and be liable to penalty accordingly, unless he furnishes 
evidence to prove his bona fides in the matter. 
Clause 41 seeks to amend section 277 of the Income-tax Act 
relating to punishment of a person on conviction for making a false 
statement in any declaration, etc. made in proceedings under the 
Income-tax Act. It substitutes for the existing provision for simple 
imprisonment for 6 months or a fine of Rs. 1,000 or both, a provision 
for rigorous imprisonment for a minimum term of 6 months (unless 
there are adequate reasons to the contrary recorded in the judg-
ment) and a maximum term of two years. 
Clause 42 seeks to amend section 278 of the Income-tax Act 
relating to punishment of a person on conviction for abetment of a 
false return, etc. on the same lines as stated in the notes on clause 41 
of this Bill. 
Clause 43 seeks to omit section 280 of the Income-tax Act relating 
to punishment of a public servant for disclosing any particulars, the 
disclosure of which is prohibited by section 137 of the Act. This is 
consequential to omission of section 137 of the Act under clause 32 
of this Bill. . 
Clause 44 seeks to introduce a new Chapter XXII-A in the 
Income-tax Act, containing provisions regarding annuity deposits 
by resident assessees. The persons liable to make the annuity 
deposits will be individuals who are citizens of India, Hindu undivid-
ed families, unregistered firms, associations of persons (other than 
a company or a co-operative society) and artificial juridical persons 
. excluding corporations established by a Central, State or Provincial 
Act. Annuity deposits will be required to be made, compulsorily, in 
respect of the assessment year 1964-65 and subsequent assessment 
years. Assessees will also be required to make deposits in advance 
in each financial year in respect of the income assessable for the 

80 
assessment year next followIng that financial year. The amount of 
the annuity deposits will be calcUlated on the "adjusted total 
income" of an assessee at the rates prescribed in the Second 
ScMdule to this Bill. The term 'adjusted total income' means the 
total income reduced by arrears of salaries, balances in a provident 
fund transferred to the credit of an employee participating in a 
recognised provident fund and share of income from an unregistered 
firm or an· association of persons where such firm or association is 
liable to mab an annuity deposit. In addition, in respect of the 
assessment year 1964-65, the full amount of salary income earned 
during the previous year will be excluded in computing the afore-
said 'adjusted total income' for determining the amount of the 
annuity deposit required to be made for the said assessment year. 
This is because salary income earned during the financial year 1963-
64 is assessable for the assessment year 1964-65 under the provisions 
of the Finance Act, 1963 [vide sub-clause (2) of clause 2 of this Bill]. 
Under the provisions of the Second Schedule to this Bill, an 
assessee whose total income does not exceed Rs. 15,000 is not liable 
to make any deposit. 
Annuity deposits will be repayable to assessees in 10 equated 
annual instalments together with interest thereon at the rate or rates 
notified by the Central Government in the Official Gazette. 
The amount of the annuity deposit which an assessee is liable to 
make for an assessment year will be allowed as a deduction in 
computing his total income under the Income-tax Act for that 
assessment year. The amount of annuity due to a depositor in any 
year will be included in his total income for that year. 
In respect of income assessable for the aBBe&Bment year 1984-65, 
the deposits are required to be made latest by the 31st March, 1985. 
Advance annuity deposits are required to be made within the time 
allowed by the Income-tax Officer in the notice issued by him to the 
assessee in this behalf. 
In deducting tax at source from salary income, the calculation 
will be made after deducting from such income the amount of 
lUll\uity deposit which the aS8essee is liable to make. 
If annuity deposits are not made within due time, the asseasee 
will be liable to a penalty not exceeding 50 per cent. of the amount 
which he was liable to deposit. Any arrears of this deposit· are 
liable to be recovered under the provisions of the Income-tax Act 
like any arrears of tax. 

Tlfe .~k,J Gove1'l}Jnent bas .been empowered to frame a schem., 
)rl~1\ing detalledprovisi9ns for the impJementatiQn of the scheme of 
: annuity deposits. The scheme will, inter alia, contain provi~J~)o1I 
as to the manner in which and intervals at which annuities shall be 
paid, the authorities by or through whom deposits wm be collected 
or by whom annuities may be issued, etc. 
Clause 45 seeks to substitute the provisions of section 287 of the 
Income.tax Act. It enables the Central Government to pubUsti the 
names of any assessees or any particulars relating to assessment 
. ,proceedings in their case if it. considers it necessary or expedient, 
in the public interest, to do so. It provides that such pubUcation as 
.t'espects imposition of a penalty or a conviction for an offence con-
iIleCted with proceedings under the Income-tax Act, can be made 
(only after the expiry of the time for filing or the disposal of the. first 
;~ppeal Illed against such penalty or conviction. 
C-1ause 48 seeks to am~nd section 293 of the I~come-tax Act. 
TPiB amen~e~t is of a drafting nature . 
. ClQ.ulJe 47 seeks to amend section 295 of the Income-tax ,Act 
.. iwhfch enables the Board to frame rules for carrying out the 
purposes of the Income-tax Act.· The amendment is consequential 
to .the proposed amendment to section 37 of the Income-tax' Act 
. ,. ~derclause 9 of this Bill. 
Clause 48 seeks to omit the Fifth Schedule to the Income-tax 
r. ,Act. This is consequential to the proposed amendment to section 99 
.: of .the Income-tax Act exempting companies from super-tax. on 
their income from dividends (vide clause 21 of this :sm). 
Clame 49. seeks to amend the Estate Duty Act, 1953. 
,. Sub-clause (a) seeks to amend section 5A of the Act. The' effect 
,of thiA amendment is that estate duty will be leviable in respect, of 
. agricultural lands situate in the territories compriled in the State 
, ,of Orissa~ ,-The amendment Is being made in view of the Resolution 
d.teci,23rd September, 1963 passed by the.- State Legislature under 
terms of article 252 of the Constitution authorising the Parliament 
I tD r~gulate.lDatters specified in the Estate-Duty Act in relation to 
., .. ~cultur~ lands, sit1.~ated in the. State of Orissa. The amendment 
will take effect from 23rd September, 1963. 
c' Su.b-c~cuues (b) and (c) seek to amend sections 33 and Sf of the 
Act •.. These~endments will.have the effect of exempting ~m 
.. ~~te duty th~ ,principal ,value of one bouse or part of a house 
r' exclusively r used . by. the .. deceNed for hi. residence. If such. bou .. 
. ~),"(B)~. .. 

i. lim-ted i. a pla.e with. population exeeedini 10,Ooe, the aDleuat 
to be excluded under the.. provisions from the principal value eI. 
the estate of the deceased will be limited to Rs. 1 lakh. 
Sub-dame (d) seeks to amend section 78 of the Act. 'l'hi. 
amendment i. consequential to the amendment under lub-claUie 
(e). 
'!ub-clau.e (e) seeks to substitute section 80 of the Act by two. 
~tions, namely, sections 80 and 80A. The effect of this amendment 
il that the prohibition on the disclosure of information contained ill 
the records of estate duty proceedings under the existing section 80 
of the Act will be abolished. Any member of the public who make. 
an application to the Controller for information relating to any 
usessment made under the Act will be enabled to obtain the infor-
mation if the Controller is satisfied that there are no circumstance. 
justifying its refusal. The Central Government will also be enabled 
to publish the narr.es of any accountable persons and any other 
particulars 'relating to any proceedings under the Act if it considen 
such publication to be necessary or expedient in the public interest. 
However, the publication under this provision in respect of any 
penalty imposed under the Act can be made only after the expiry 
of the time for making an appeal to the Appellate Controller or 
after the disposal of an appeal presented before him, as the case may 
be. . - .- r;-""""'" 
Sub-dame (1) seeks to substitute the rate schedule of estate 
duty contained in Part I of the Second Schedule to the Act by a new 
rate schedule. 
Clau~e 50 seeks to amend the Wealth-tax Act, 1957. 
Sub-clau,e (a) seeks to exempt from wealth-tax the value of 
ene house or part of a house belonging to the assessee and exclusive-
ly used by him for residential purposes. If such house is situated in 
a place with a population exceeding 10,000 and the value thereof 
exceeds RI. 1 laIm, the amount to be exempted will be limited to 
Rs. l1akh. 
Sub-clau,e (b) seeks to omit section 42 af the Act which pro-
hibits the disclosure of information cOl'ltained in any record of pro-
eeedings under the Act. 
Sub-clause (c) seeks to substitute section 42A of the Act by a 
new provision enabling the Central Government to publish the 
name of any assessees and any particulars relating to any proceed-
ings under the Act in respect of such assessees if it considers it 
necessary or expedient in the public interest to do io. However, 

II 
the publication of any information u to any penalty imposed or an, 
conviction for any offence relating to any proceedings under the 
Act can be made only after the expiry of the time-limit for makin. 
the first appeal or the disposal of the first appeal, u the case may 
be. 
This clause also seeks to substitute section 42B of the Act by • 
new provision enabling the Commissioner to supply to any member 
of the public at his request any information relating to any assessee 
in respect of any assessment made under the Act, if the Conunia-
aioner is satisfied that ~here are no such circUlIlitances justifyin. 
the refusal of such information. 
Sub-clause (d) seeks to amend section 43 of the Act. The amen'-
ment is consequential to the amendment u.nder sub-clause (c). 
Sub-clause (e) seeks to substitute the rate schedules of wealth-
tax contained in Part I of the Schedule to the Wealth-tax Act bJ 
new rate schedules for individuals and Hindu undivided femilies. 
Clause 51 seeks to amend the Expenditure-tax Act, 1~57. 
Sub-clause (i) seeks to omit some of the provisi01l.l contained in 
• .etion 5 of the Act relating to exemptiona of certain type. or itema 
of expenditure from expenditure-tax. 
Sub-cZause (ii) seeks to amend section 6 ot the Act relating ~ 
the deductions to be made in computing the taxable expenditure. 
Some of the items of deductions under this section, such as expen-
diture on marriages and the basic allowance admissible to indivi-
duals and Hindu undivided families are sought to be omitted. 
Sub-clause (iii) seeks to omit section 38 of the Act which 
prohibits the disclosure of information contained in the record 8f 
any proceedings under the Expenditure-tax Act. 
Sub~Zause (iv) seeks, inter alia, to substitute the provisioIll 
contained in section 38A of the Act by new provisi01l.l enabling the 
Central Government to publish the names of any assesseea or anT 
particulars relating to any proceedings in their cases under the Act 
if it considers it necessary or expedient in the public inte~t to do 
80. Such a publication in respect of any penalty imposed 01' any 
conviction for any offence under the Act can be made only after the 
expiry of the time limit for filing the first appeal or the disposal of 
the first appeal, as the case may be. 
lt also seeks to substitute the provisions contained in section 38B 
of the Act by a new provision enabling the Commissioner to supply 
to any member of the public, at his request, any informatioa 
relatin, to any ....... in r .. peet of any ..... lIUent made ¥lui .. 

"..: '-J "" . r-'----1'· : 
II f r . . ... 
\h~ .. AC~_ .. "SU;ehhU.~ima"~on will be -!iUppUt:d if the CommflijJoiu!r '1.' 
aatiJfied. that ther,e . are no circums~ces justifyine 'Its refulail.' 
... ..' 
,SuQ...cIo"~e (v) seeks to amend section 39 of the Act. Thia 
~ .• nent is consequential to the amendment under lub-clause (i~). 
Su.b-ctatue (vi) seeks to substitute the rate schedule of eXpjendi"! 
tare-tax contained in the Schedule to the -, Act by a new raitt 
schedule. For the assessment years 1964-65 and 1965-66, the, 
maximum rate of expenditure-tax will be. 16 per ceat. -and. 11 
will be attracted on taxable expenditure exceeding RI. 72,000. From· 
the uaessment year 196&;67 onwarda, the IT'J~imll~ ~.a~_ wiU. .. ~ 
20 per cent. which will be attracted, Qll taxa,Qle exp~ndit\ll'e ~xce.e.rr 
~ Rs. 84,000. Under the revised rate schedule, the first ~. 36,000 
of taxable expenditure will not be chargeable to expenditurHalt. 
This exemption takes the place of the basic allowance available to 
individuals and Hindu undivided families under clause (h) 'If 
liiection 6'(1) of the Aet which is sought to be witb,drawn by the 
amendment under sub-clause (ii) above. 
C1a1Ue 52 seeks to amend the Gift-tax Act, 1~58 . 
.. Sub.-clamt {a) seeks to amend clause (viii) at secUWl 5 (It of 
the Act.' -The effect -of this is thJtt the exemption ill respect of gifW 
by- an 'individual- to his or her spouse, will be reduced: .. from; ... il:ut-
existing maxhnum of· RI. 1 .lakh in value in the a,eereeate in one or 
more previous years to RI. 50,000. 
Su.b-c1au.se (b) seeks to insert a new secUon 6Ain tJle Aet. ~p 
effect of this is that where an assessee has made 1.axapJe gifts, ,to y\, 
&ame donee during the relevant previous year and during any, one 
or more of the four previous years immediately precedilig IUch 
previous year, the value of the taxable gifts made to the aame done.-
during the said four years will be aggregated with the value of the 
tax'able gifts made by the assessee during the relevantprevioua 
year. The value of taxable gifts· made to the same donee in the 
t!arlier years before lst April, 1963 will be taken into account in the 
assessment of the assessee only for rate purposes. Taxable gifts 
made to the same donee in the earlier years after 1st April, 1963 will 
be taken into account both for rate purposes and charging 'gift-tax 
tmthe assessee for the relevant assessment year, but any gift-tax 
paid by the assessee tor any earlier assessmelilt year in respect of 
the value (jf such taxtl'ble -gift to the same donee will be allowed as • 
deduction in computini the aa&e1le8" liability to iift-tax. 

·1 
. Sub-clause (c) seeks to aIIlend sub-section (2) of sectioa 12 of 
the Act relating to the charging of simple intere."t at " per cent. pal' 
annuin from an assessee who fails to pay the gift tax deuwnciad 
from him during the period allowed in the notice of demand. The 
effect of the amendment is that if the amount on which interest wu 
payable under the aforesaid sub-section has been reduced on an 
appeal, reference or revision or an order of rectification of a mia-
~e, the interest payable by the assessee shall be t'educed 
accordingly. 
Sub-clause (d) seeks to amend sub-sectiQn (5) of aeetion 34 of 
the Act. This amendment is of a drafting nature. 
Sub-clause (e) seeks to omit section 41 of the Actwh!ch prohibita 
~he disclosure, of information contained in any record of any pro-
ceedings relating to gift-tax. 
Sub-clause (f) seeks, int~r alia, to substitute section41A of the 
Giii~tax Act by a new provision, enabling the Central Govel1unent 
to p~biish the names of any assessees and' any parti~illars relating to 
any proceedings under this Act in respect of such asselsees if it 
,consid,ers it necessary or expedient in the public intere.t to do so. 
HoWever, such publication as to any penalty imposed or 'any con vic-
{ • .' I 
"on for any offence connected with any proceedings' lUld~r this 4ct 
~an be made only after the expiry of the t'ime limit for filing the 
first appeal against the perialty or conviction or of the disposal of 
the first appeal, as the case may be. 
lt also seeks to substitute section 41B of the Act' by' a"n!w''Pro-
vision enablihg the Commissioner to supply to' any member· of- the 
public at his request any information relating to any . ~ ,in 
res,Pect of any assessment made under the Act, if the Commissioner 
is satisfied that there are no circumstances justifying the refusal vi 
iuch information. 
Sub-clause (g) seeks to amend section 42 of the Act. Thia amend-
ment is consequential to the amendment under sub-clause (f). 
Sub-claUse (h) seeks to substitute the SChedule to·'the',Act con-
taining the rate schedule of gift-tax by a new rate st!hedule. 
Clause 53 seeks to revive the levy of expenditure-tax under the 
Expenditure-tax Act, 1957 with effect from the 1st April, lQ64. ' 
Clause 54 seeks to amend, retrospectively, the proYisiOll"eOAWn-
ed iA. paragraph A of Part I of the First Schedule to the FiBance 
ACt, "1963 rela~g to marginal relief in respect of the levy of addi-
*'oDal iW'charie on income-tax. 

Cla1l.le 55 seeks to provide that super profits tax under the Super 
Profits Tax Act, 1963, shall not be charged (or any assessment year 
commencing on or after 1st April, 1964 in respect of the chargeable 
profits of any company. 
Clause 56, read with the Third Schedule. seeks to increale the 
ba.ic import duties on certain items. The changes are:-
(i) the duty on caustic soda is proposed to be raised from 
40 per cent. (Standard) and 30 per cent. (Preferential} 
to 80 per cent. (Standard) and 70 per cent. {Preferen-
tial) . The intention is to restore the incidence of duty 
which was reduced with effect from 1st September, 1I~6J 
because of a reduction in the tariff value; 
(11) the duty on high carbon or spring steel wire i. propOMd 
to be raised by 20 per cent. ad valorem as a measure of 
assistance to the indigenous manufacturers; and 
(iii) in the case of fruits dried (salted and all other kind.) , 
not otherwise specified, specific rates of duty are bein& 
proposed for the major varieties, while maintaining the 
preferential margin of 10 per cent. This will facilitate 
their assessment to duty. As regards other varieties, th~ 
duty is proposed to be raised from 50 per cent. (Standard) 
and 40 per cent. (Preferential) to 60 per cent. (Standard) 
and 50 per cent. (Preferential). 
Clau.se 57 leaD to continue up to the 3l1t day of March, l~el Ule 
exiJting lurcharge on customs duties. 
Clau.se 58 leeks to continue up to the 30th day of April, 1~5 the 
existing provision for the levy of a regulatory duty of custOml. 
Cla1l.le 59 aeeks to maintain for another year the ,tatu.s quo in 
re,ard to commitment. under the General AiI'eement on Tari1f1 
and Trade. 
ClaUi. 60-
Sub-cla1l.le (1) (i) teek. to make certain change.·in the deftnitiOli 
of manufacture. 
Sub-clause (1) (ii) seeks to bring certain operatiolll in relatioa 
to cotton yam under excise control. 
Sub-clauae (2) (a) seeks to modify the rite. of duty on oeriaia 
yalue eategories of cigarettes. 
Sub-clause (2) (b) seeks to raise the rate of duty on 'OWperMd 
el', .. i. piament.' ordinarily uaed in textile prlntin,. 

8' 
",ub·elau" (J) (c) Neb to levy duty on 'Sodium IIllieat.' . 
.!ub·clau.e (2) (d) makes certain changes in the tariff deeeriptioa 
ef the item relating to Cosmetics and toilet preparations. 
Sub-clause (2) (e) seeks to reduce the number of sub-item. under 
thi. item to two and also to make consequential change. in the 
existing rates of duty. 
Sub-claUle (2) (f) seeks to recast the tariff description of the Itna 
relating to Plastics to maKe its scope more precise 
Sub·clause (2) (g) seeks to reduce the number of sub·ltems from 
ten to four and to re·group the varieties of paper and board 
accordingly. 
Sub-claule (2) (h) leeks to raise the rate of duty on rayon and 
synthetic fibres and yarn. 
Sub-cZause (2) (0 seek. to re-deftne cotton yarn and to raiN the 
rate of duty thereon. 
Sub-clause (2) (j) seeks to increa .. the rate of duty on worlted 
woollen yarn of higher counts. 
Sub·cZause (2) (k) seeks to make some changes in the tarH! 
description of Item 25 relating to Iron making it more comprehensive 
and also to raise the duty thereon. 
Sub-clause (2) (1) seeks to modify the tariff description of St .. l 
Ingots making it more comprehensive and also to raise the rate of 
duty thereon. 
Sub-clau.e (2) (m) seeks to make some changes in the tariff de.-
cription and re-grouping of the fiat products of Iron and Steel and to 
increase the duty on semi-finished steel and manufactured steel in 
the fonn of bars, rods, plates, sheets, etc. 
Sub-clause (2) (n) seeks to make the tariff description of Item J7 
more comprehensive by including therein extruded shapes and 
sections of Aluminium. 
Sub-clauae (2) (0) seeks to make some changes in the tari1f des-
cription of electric wires and cables assessable at the higher rate. 
Sub-clawe (2) (p) seeks to amend Item 34 providing for a separate 
sub-item for Tractors and clarifying that certain specialised material 
handling equipment will pay duty only on the chassis. 
Sub-clause (2) (q) seeks to make some changes in the tarUf de,-
cription of Item 36 relating to Footwear. 

88 
CI&UII 61 seeks to levy a special duty of excise up to the 311t day 
of March, 1965, on certain goods chargeable with a duty of exciH 
''ID'lSer the Central·Excises Act. 
Clause 62 proposes to re-enact up to the 30th day of April, 1985, 
'tiIe'pewer'to leyy a regulatory d.uty of ' ,Excise at the rate of lG per 
,,,tient .. ot'the value 'of the goods. 
Clause 63 like section 29 of the Finance Act, 1963, providet that 
.... t "'aU be duty !-fee for another year. 
Clause 64 seeks to amend the definition of the terms 'Narcotic 
,'dftg" uti 'Opium' .so as to make ·it self-contained for the purPQBe of 
levy of !duty un~er the Medicin.al and Toilet Preparations (Exc;ise 
Duties) Act. It also seeks to replace the existing Schedqle to ~lrl. 
" _actmant·.so. as' to prescribe higher rates of puty for Allopathic 
preparations not containing known active ingr~dients in ther~utic 
,quantities and which are capable of being consumed as ordinary 
alcoholic beverages in order to treat them on par with certain similar 
Ayurvedic preparations and to charge to duty all medicinal prepa-
'-rations' containing opium, Indian hemp or other narcotic drugs 
irrespective of whether they are patent or proprietary or not. 
Clause 65."7"Following the amendment in clause 54 re,garding 
the amount of additional 9urcharge payable for 1963-64, this ~lause 
provides for the refund of the Compulsory Deposit in excess of the 
> -additional IUrcharge payable for that year. 
It also allows the option to claim 8 refund of the Compulsory 
Deposit relating to the advance tax paid in 1963-64 for the assessment 
, -year' f96fJ65. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
INCOME-TAX 
Some of the provisions contained in the Finance Bill, 1964 wil 
result in an increase in the workload on the Income-tax Department. 
Instances of these provisions are the proposed introduction of tht 
Annuity Deposit Scheme in the case of individuals, Hindu undivided 
families, unregistered firms, etc. whose total income exceeds Rs. 15,000. 
charging of tax on capital gains in respec~ of bonus shares on accrual 
basis, amendment of certain provisions of the Income-tax Act with 
a view to strengthening the existing machinery for countering tax 
evasion, the re-introduction of the levy of expenditure-tax and the 
reduction in the basic exemption limit from Rs. 2 lakhs and Rs ... 
lakhs to Rs. 1 lakh and Rs. 2 lakhs in the cases of individuals and 
Hindu undivided families respectively for the purpose of levy of 
wealth-tax. 
The aforesaid measures will necessitate the employment of an 
additional number of officers and other staff. The expenditure 011 
this account together with the incidental expenses on administratioa 
Is estimated at about Rs. 10 lakhs as indicated herein below. 
Requirement of per,onn.el and finance: 
No. Annual cmolumcntB Coet 
-----------_-t, .. 
I.Offarl-
Commissioner of IDCIOII1e-tax 
Aaaistant Commiaaioaen . 
I.acome-tax Of&m (el. I) 
II. SIqjJ-
IDipectoB 
Sapcrviaon 
HeIdderb 
Steaqrapben . 
Upper DivWoa acrb 
Steno-typiatl • 
Lower DiviIioB Cab 
III. IrDtMnMl ..... 
1DcldeD1a1 GI**' iDcIucIiaI a.. IV.taft' . 
2tae<B) LS-lO. 
, 
40 
30 
, 
23 
6 
170 
40 
53 
I X RI. 30>401) 
, )( RI. 140400 
40 x RI. S>4Ol) 
20 X RI. 2,880 
S x RI. 40320 
23 )( RI. 3,000 
6 x RI. 1,800 
. 170 )( RI.. 1,100 
40 x"" 1,680 
53 x RI. I.SOO 
TOTAL 
or .. y 
RI. 
57#» 
21,600 
69,000 
lo,ICIo 
3.06~ 
67,21OtJ 
'791500 
1,rJOIJOO 
Jo,ao,lOO 
Iopopt/O 

The Bill seeks to bring certain operations like sizing of cotton 
,.m with the aid of power or wr~g or winding it on beams, 
conea, ~ bobbins, etc. u~~ QciJ!e purview. It also seeks to 
eaiulnce the suroharges leviable on certain varieties of cotton fabrics 
OIl account of the different processes undergone by them. These and 
retain other changes would mean some addition to the volume of 
work. Further, the Bill seeks to levy a fresh duty on Sodium Silicate 
of which there are upwards of one hundred factories, all of which 
would have to be brought ullder ex~ control. 
All this will necessitate the employment of some additional std. 
The increase in staff together with incidental expenses of acimini ... 
tration is estimated to cost Rs. 4 lakhs. 
Requirements oj personnel and :finance: 
A. O/f~s :~ No. Annual emoluments Colt 
Rt. RI. 
1. Deputy Collector'll 2 2XI~ 3Q,QI;)D 
2. Auistant CoUc:cton .. .. x UIo 3~'~Q 
3· Sup.inteqcle:gt1-
CIus I . 
" 
4 x 8,110 3,.,20 
CIaa II 4 4·x,. ~ 
StIII/-
0,. Supdts. (Executive) ae 20 x ',77' 1.1",co 
lIpccton 20 20 x 3,746 74t920 
07. Supdta. (M) .. .. X .710 1M40 
~~tJPim 10 10 x 2,ooM ..., 
C. ~:~~JV. ~ 
TOTAL ~ 
A. .. .. --. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
New section 280W proposed to be inserted by clause 44 provides 
that the Central Government shall, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, frame one or more schemes to be called annuity deposit 
scheme or schemes in relation to annuity deposits. The various 
matters which among others may be provided for in the scheme have 
been specified in items (a) to (g) of sut-section (2) of that new 
section. Clause (dd) of sub-section (2) of section 295 inserted by 
clause 47 empowers the Board to determine the extent to, and the 
conditions subject to, which any expenditure r~erred to in sub-seetion 
(3) of section 37 may be allowed. 
The aforesaid matters are matters of procedure and administrative-
detail. It is hardly practicable for these matters of detail or proce-
dure to be provided in the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative 
power is of a normal character. 
81 

LOKSABHA 
A 
BILL 
to give effect to the financial proposals of the Central 
Government for the financial year 1964-65. 
(Shri T. T. KrishtUltnachilri. 
Minister of FitUlnce.) 