Bip No. 14 c! Y'~ 
THE RELIGIOUS TRUSTS BILL, I~O 
(As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA 
ON 28TH MARCH, 1960) 

THE RELiGIOUS TRUSTS BILL, 1960 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CHAPTER I 
CLAUSU 
1. Short title, extent and commencement. 
2. Definitions. 
CHAPTER U 
THE COMMISSIONER AND OTHER AtrrIIOBlTIa 
3. Appointment of Commissioner and other authorities. 
4. Advisory Board. 
CHAPTER UI 
Powus AND DtTTIES OF THE COMMIS8IORD 
5. General powers and duties of Commiaioner. 
6. Application for registration of religious tru8tB. 
7. Inquiries for registration. 
S. Entries in register. 
9. Amendment of register. 
10. Special provision for religious trusts registered under any 
other ell{lctment. 
11. Budgets of religious trusts. 
12. Maintenance of accounts. 
13. Investment of trust money. 
14. Audit of accounts. 
15. Inspection and returns. 
16. Alienation of immovable property. 
17. Power to detennine the object to which trust-property maD 
be applied where the object has ceased to exist or is incap-
able of achievement. 
(i) 
2IU(B) LS-' 

(11) 
18. Power of COmn:)issioner to settle. sc~eD.le8 for proper adminis-
tration of religious trusts. . . . ." . .. 
19. Power of Commissioner when trusts are managed. 
20. Power to remove. trustees in certain other. circumstancea. 
2l. Power to appoint trustee when vacancy occurs. 
CHAPTER IV· 
MISCELLANJ:Ot1~ 
22. Procedure and powers at inquiries under the Act. 
23. Appeals. 
24. Trustee to carry out orders of Commissioner and execution 
of such orders. 
25. Offences and penalties. 
26. Contributions. 
27.,rumi,s~ing of copies of extracts from register. 
28. Finality of orders. 
29. Jurisdiction of civil courts barred in respect of certain 
matters. 
30. Notice· of certaIn suits to be given to the Commissioner. 
3l. Protec-tiop 'of a~tion taken in good faith. 
32. Comrni=»sicner, etc., to ~ public servants. 
33. Power to give directions. 
34. Act not to apply to certain classes of trtJsts. 
35. Power to exempt. 
36. PowertQ malle rules. 
37. Repeal. 

Bill No. 11 of leo 
THE RELIGIOUS TRUSTS BILL,196o 
(As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
to protricM for the better supervision and adm.inistration of certain 
religious trusts. 
BB it enacted by Parliament in the Eleventh Year of the Republic 
of India· as follows:-
CHAPI'ER I 
PimLIMINARY 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Religious Trusts Act, 1960. Short title, 
eldlent and 
COIJUDeJIce-
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu !Dent. 
and Kashmir. 
(3) It shall come into force in a State on such date as the State 
";: Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
Z. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "Commissioner" means the Commissioner of Religious 
fO' Trusts appointed under sub,:,section (1) of section 3 anQ inc}l..ldes 
a cmputy Commissioner or an assistant Commissioner appointed 
. under sub-section (2) of that section; . 
(b) "manager", in relation to 8 religious trust, means a 
. perSCID who, either aione or in association with any other person, 
.. administers or deals with. the trust-property; 
. .. , 

'.. ; ~! • -. ' 
;. 
, -
2 
(c) ICperson interested", in relation to a religious trust, 
mema-
(i) any person who has a right to worship or to perform 
any rite, or to attend at the performance of any worship 
or rite in any religious institution connected with such trust, • 
or to participate in any religious or charitable ministra-
tion made under such trust, 
(ii) the founder or any descendant of the founder of 
sueh trust, and 
(iii) the trustee; 
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under thil 
Act; 
10 
(e)lCreUgious trust" me8D8'any express or constructive trust 
existing or created for public purpose, of a re~giQUs natu~e, 
whether associated with purposes of a cnaritable nature-or riot, IS 
but does not include a private endowment for religious purposes 
ta which the pubHe are not inter4Wed:r - , ' .~ ~' _ ,," " , .. 
(I) ''trustee'' means a person in whom' either aItJiie" or in 
association with any other person the trust-property is vested, 
and includes a manager; '" 20 
(g) "trust-property" means ,any movable or immovable 
property forming the subject matter of a religious trust. 
.. ' .', ...• ;'" I 
CHAPTER II 
TIlE COMMISSIONER AND ornER AUTHORITmS' 
~ I. (1) The State GoYermnent may, by notiicatiOll in the OfBetal 25 
....... cr ancl Gazette, appoint a person to Be the Commissioner of Religious Trusts 
1::-..... for the State for exeretsing the powers conferred, and' 'pe:tfotming 
the duties imposed, on him by or under this Act. 
(2) The State Government may also, byU.ce nOtfftcafiem,· appofD't' 
18 many deputy Commissioners or assistant C~sst~" as it 30 
thinks fit, and every such deputy Commissioner or assistant Com-
m'uSoner 1Ihal1. aubject to the general superinten~ence .and control 
of the Commissioner, perform his functions wlthin Such,local limits 
as may be specifted in the lUItiftcation; and in the, dis$arge _of these 
functions, a deputy Commissioner or an assistant' Commissioner 35 
Ihall have and shall exercise the same powers as the Commissioner. 

3 
. t3l A, penon shall not be qualified for appointment as the Com-
mJaioner under sub-section (1) unless he is, or has been, a district 
tudge or is quaWled for appointment as a Judge of a High Court. 
t. (I) The State Government may, by notification in the Official ~:::rY 
S Gazette, constitute an Advisory Board consisting of such number of 
members. not exceeding ten, as it thinks 8.t, to advise the State 
Government in relation to the administration of religious trusts. 
tJ) Tile memben of the Advisory Board shall be chosen from 
UDOaIIt me or more of the fonowing categories of persons, 
~o 1WI1el7:-
. 
(a) memben of the State Legislature and members of 
, ParU8ment rePi'elentfng the State; . . 
IS 
(b) persons connected with religious activities in the State; 
(c) pusons connected with so~ charitable or educational 
activities in the State; ·and 
(d) persons having special knowledge of administration, 
ftnance or law. 
(3) The Commisioner shall be an ex officio member of the 
""; AdvUol'J' Board. 
20 (4) The State Government shall nominate a m~mber o~ the 
Advisory Board to be the Chairman thereof. 
(5) The number of persons to be appointed as membera· frottl 
,each of the categories specified in sub-section (2), the functions of, 
tile procedure to be fonowed in the discharge of their functions by, 
:..as tfte term of oftlee of, and the manner of IDling casual vacanCies 
amcmg, the members of the Advisory Board shall be such as may be 
, prescribed. 
CHAPTER TIl 
PoW1:RS a\HD DUTIES OF THE COMMISSIONDl 
30 .1. (l) Su~ to the Provisions of this Act, the' Commissioner General 
may do all meh thin·. as m~y be reasonable and necessary to en~u.re =~~ of and 
Ulat all religious trusts withm his jurisdiction are properly admmlS- Commil-
-taed aDd that the income thereof is duly appropriated and applied eioner. 
r;::- to the objects of such trusts and in acordance .with the purposes 
35 for which such trusts were founded or for which they exist, so far 
as the obj'eeW wad pm: pMeS can- be- ascertained. -

4 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of; sub-
section (1), the powers and duties of the Commissioner shall ,~ 
(a) ~o maintain a record containing full information l'e1atbig 
to the origin, nature, extent, income and objects of all religious 
trusts in the State; 
(b) to ensure that the accounts of religious trustaare 
properly maintained and audited; 
(c) to ensure that the income from every trust property is 
properly applied to the objects of the religious 'trust and tbt 
surplus is invested in accordance with the provisions of this Actl io 
(d) to give directions, wherever necess8ry, ,for the proper 
administration of any religious trust in accordance with'th' law 
governing such trust and the wishes of the founder" in so far 
as such wishes can be ascertained; , 
(eo) to settle schemes of management for religious trusts in I, 
accordance with the provisions of this Act; '.' " 
. , 
(f) to perform the functions imposed on t~e Commis~oner 
by or under this Act; ." : 
(g) generally do all such acts as may be n~essary for ~e 
proper supervision and better administration of religious trusts. ~ 
Applic~on 8. (1) It shall be the duty of the trustee of every religiQus~st 
~~;eof:~ to make an application to the Commissioner for the registration of 
OUi tnJIlr. the trust. ' .. ; i', m. ~ 
. , . ':' 
(2) SUCR application shall be made in writing~ in such form and 
manner, and accompanied by such fee, as may be prescribed .and 25 
shall, as far as may be, contain the following particulars, namely:-
(a) the designation by which the religious trust is or shall 
be known or the name of the trust; 
(b) the names and 'addresses of the trustees and 
manager; 
(c) the mode of succession to the office of the trustee; 
the 
.. 
(d) the movable and immovable properties" fo~ing, the, , 
subject matter of the trust and a description thereof ~,~~t 
for their identification;' 
(e) the a:pprciximat~ value of tlie movable an.d imm~b~~ 35 
trust-property; . ,. . ..... '. :,::' ~.~ 
(1) the gross annual income from' such proJ)el'tY;. 

" 
5 • <'. 
(g) an estimate of the expenses annually incurred in 
: connection, with such, religious trust; 
(h) such other particulars as may be prescribed. 
(3) Every application shall be accompanied by a copy of the 
$ trust deei or, if no such deed has been executed or a copy thereof 
cannot be obtained, the application shall contain full particulars, as 
far-as they are known to the applicant, of the origin, nature and 
object of the trust. 
(4) Every application under this section shall be signed and 
10 verified by the applicant in the manner provided in the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908, for the signing and verification of pleadings. 
IS 
20 
(5) The Commissioner may require the applicant to supply such 
further particulars or information relating to the trust as the Com-
, missioner may consider necessary . 
. (6) Every application for registration shall be made-
(a) in the case of a religiOUS trust existing at the com-
mencement of this Act, within six months from such commence-
ment; and 
(b) in the case of a religious trust created atter such com-
mencement, within six months from the date of the creation of 
the trust. 
7. (1) On receipt of an application under section 6, the Com- IDquidel f<r 
missioner shall, in the prescribed manner, make such inquiries as rcailtutlon 
. he- thinks fit in respect of the application and the correctness of the 
a5 particulars therein and may, in particular, make an inquiry in res-
pect of all or any of the following matters, namely:-
35, .-
. , , " 
. (a) whether there is a trust and whether such trust is a 
religious trust; 
(b) whether any property is the property of such trust; 
(c) whether the whole or any substantial portion of the 
trust-property is ~ituated within his jurisdiction; 
(d) the names and addresses of the trustees and the 
. manager; 
(e) the mode of succession to the office of the trustee; 
(f> ~e o,rigiD, nature and object of such trust; 
,(g) the gross average annual income and expenditure of 
~"~;,, . 
(h) any other matter which may be prescribed. 

6 
(2) If, on an application made to him by a person interested in 
a: religious trust or otherwise, the Commissioner hUreuDna to be-
lieve that there is any re1igous tnBt whicll should be· ft!Iistered 
under this Act, he may make such inquiries as he thinks 8t in respect 
of the matters mentioned in sub-section (1), but no such inquiry , 
shall be made without giving the trustees an opport\Ddtyof being 
heard. 
(3) On the completion of an inquiry under this aection, the Com-
missioner shall record his findings with reasons tbere10r in ~t 
of the matters mentioned. in sub-section (1) and make an order in 10 
relation to the religious trust. 
Bntrid in 8. (1) The Commissioner shall maintain a r~ of relijioua 
rePtcr. trusts in such form and containing such particulars as may be pres-
cribed. . 
(2) When an order for the registration of a relJaioua truIt is I' 
made under section 7, the Commissioner shall cause entries in respect 
thereof to be made in the register in accordance with the ftndinp 
recorded under that section. 
AmendmcQt 9. (1) Where any change occurs in any of the entries reeorded 
of rePtcr. in the register maintained under section 8, the trustee shall, 'within 20 
ninety days from the date of the occurrence of such chu,e, send a 
report to the CoIl1m.bsioner in the prescribed form giving notice of 
the change. 
Special PrO-
Vilion for 
reUlioUi 
trulU redI-
cered uniicr 
anyotbcr 
enactment. 
(2) On receipt of a report under BUb-section (1) or otherwise, 
the Commissioner may hold an inquiry f~ aacertainiD& whether UJ.Y 2, 
change has occurred in any of the entries recorded in the l"efPater 
in relation to a religious trust. 
(3) If the Commissioner, after holding such an inquiry, is satU-
fled that a change has occurred in any of the entries recorded in the 
register in relation to a religious trust, he may make an order to JO 
that eftect and shall cause entries in the register in respect of ,that 
trust to be amended accordingly. 
10. (1) Where any religious trust has been registered in 8 State 
before the commencement of this Act under any other enactment 
relating to trusts in force in that State, the religious trust aha1l be 5$ 
deemed to have been registered under this Act u from ·aaeb com-
mencement. 
(2) The Commissioner shall issue a notice to the trustee of such 
a religious trust for the purpose of recording entries relating thereto 
in the register maintained under section 8 and the eoml'lllMloner-40 

7 
may, after making such inquiry as he thinks fit. record his ftndinas 
with reasons therefor in respect of the matters mentioned in sub-
lection (1) of section 7 and make an order in relation to the trust 
and the provisions of sections 7 and 8 shall, as far as may be, apply 
5 to such order. 
11. (1) The trustee of every religious trust shall prepare every Budaetl of 
year, in such form and within such time as may be prescribed, a =IUI 
budget of the estimated income and expenditure of such trust for 
the next financial year and shall forthwith send a copy thereof to 
10 the Commissioner: 
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall apply to a reIigioUi 
trust having an annual income of less than five thousand rupees. 
(2) The Commissioner may, after giving notice to the trustee in 
the prescribed manner and after considering his representation. if 
IS any, make such alterations or modifications in the budget as the 
Commissioner thinks fit. 
(3) Nothing contained in sub-section (2) shall be deemed to 
authorise the Commissioner to Il'estrict or prohibit the observance 
of any religious practice or the performance of any act in pursuance 
20 of any religious belief to. alter or modify any budget in a manner 
or to an extent inconsistent with the wishes of the founder of the 
trust so far as such wishes can be ascertained or with the provisions 
of this Act. 
12. (1) The trustee of every religious trust shall keep regular Mslatenance 
25 accounts in such form and containing such particulars as may be pres- ofa.xoUDII. 
cribed. 
(2) The accounts kept under sub-section (1) shall be balanced 
each year on the 31st day of March or such other day as may be fixed 
by the Commissioner in the case of any particular trust, having 
30 r€g'.lrd to the circumst3nces thereof. 
(3) For the purpose of ensuring the proper maintenance of 
accounts of any religious trust, the Commissioner may. after con-
sulting the trustees of the religious trust, appoint a person to keep 
accounts for the trust: 
35 Provided that no such appointment shall be made in respect of 
a trust having an annual income of less than twenty-five thousand 
rupees. 
13. (1) Where the whole or any portion of the trust-property ~ •• 
consists of money which cannot be applied immediately or at an early ::.:: 
2134 (B) L8-1. 

as 
date to the purposes of the religious trust or where there fa a lurplua 
in the funds of the religious trust after meeting all lawful expenditure 
in connection with such trust, the trustee shall be bound, subject 
to any direction contained in the deed of trust, to invest the money 
or the surplus in the following securities and in no others. namely:- S 
(a) securities of the Central Government or State Govern-
ment; 
(b) stocks, shares or debentures of companies, the interest 
or dividend on which has been guaranteed by the Central Gov-
ernment or any State Government; and 10 
(c) debentures or other securities for money issued by or on 
behalf of any local authority or corporation in exercise of the 
powers conferred by any Central Act or any Provincial or State 
Act: 
Provided that the Commissioner may. by general or special order, r" 
permit the trustee to invest the money or the surplw in any other . 
manner consistent with the trust deed or purpose of the religious 
trust. 
(2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall affect any investment made 
before the commencement of this Act. 20 
A.tltof 14. (1) The accounts of every religious trust having an ~ual 
-=couna. income of not less than five thousand rupees shall be audited annual-
ly by an auditor to be appointed by the Commissioner, after con-
sultation with the trustees, from among such chartered accountants 
within the meaning of the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949, as have 1C Slef 194" 
been approved in this behalf by the State Government. 
(2) The l.1oudito:r ~ have. access to the accounts, books. vQuchefit 
documents and other records relating to such trust in the possession 
or control of the trustee and may, by written notice, require the 
attendance before him of any person responsible for the preparation 30 
of the accounts to enable him to obtain such information as he may 
consider necessary for the proper conduct of the audit. 
(3) The auditor shall in his report ~pecify all cases of irregular, 
illegal or improper expenditure or failure or omission to recover 
moneys or other property belonging to the religious trust or of loss 3S 
or waste of money or other property thereof and state whether such 
expenditure, failure, omission, loss or waste was caused in conse-
quence of a breach of trust or misapplication of tnIIt-property or any 
m.ber miIconduct on the part of the truetee 01' MY Mber pezwoa. 

9 
(4) Within a month of the completion of the audit, th~ auditor 
shall prepare a report on the accounts audited and shall submit the 
same to the Commissioner and deliver a copy thereof to the trustee 
concerned. 
S (5) The cost of the audit of the accounts shall be borne by the 
State Government. 
15. (1) The Commissioner or any officer authorised by him by a IDipection 
general or special order shall have power- and Ie ...... 
(a) to enter upon and inspect, or cause to be entered upon 
10 and inspected, any trust-property; 
(b) to call for or inspect any book, records, correspondence, 
plans, accounts or title deed relating to a religious trust in the 
possession or control of the trustee: 
Provided that in entering upon any trust-property as aforesaid, 
I, reasonable notice shall be given to the trustee and due regard shall 
be had to the religious practices or usages, if any, of the trust. 
(2) The trustees of every religious trust shall, within such time 
or such extended time as may be fixed by the Commissioner, furnish 
to him such returns, statistics, accounts or other information as the 
20 Commissioner may, from time to time, require. 
16. No transfer by a trustee of any immovable property of a AUenltlon of 
religious trust by way of sale, mortgage, gift or exchange or by way =;::,.. 
of lease for a term exceeding three years shall be valid, unless it is 
made with the previous sanction of the Commissioner: 
25 Provided that no such sanction shall be given unless the Com-
missioner is of opinion that the transfer is necessary or beneflcial to 
the religious trust. 
17. (1) Where on an application made in this behalf by two or Pawer to 
more persons interested in a religious trust or otherwise, the Com- :!~~ to 
30 missioner is of opinion that any object of the religious trust ha6 which tnIR 
ceased to exist or is incapable of achievement, he may, after issuing ~r.~ II)-
notice in the prescribed manner to the trustees of such trust and to pli~ where the object such other persons as may appear to him to be interested therein, hu ceued 
hold an inquIry into the matter and if after such inquiry, the Com- !O emit er 
35 missioner is satisfied that it is necessary so to do, he may, by order :f:t::~ 
direct that the property or income of the trust or so much of the ment. 
property or Inoome thereof as was previously expended on or applied 
to that object shall be applJed to any other object which shall be 
similar or as nearly as practicable sfmnar to the origfnal object. 

10 
(2) In making an order under this section in relation to a religious 
trust, the Commissioner shall have due regard to the original inten· 
tion of the founder of the trust or the object for which the religious 
trust was created and the wishes of the trustees or persons interested 
in the trust and no order shall be made directing the application J 
of the trust-property or any income thereof to any purpose other 
than a religious purpose recognised by the religion to which the trust 
belongs. 
~::i n. 18. (1) Where on an application made in this behalf by two or 
... to lC~e more persons interested in a religious trust or otherwise, the Com- 10 
~ ... for missioner is of opinion that, in the interest of the proper administra-... _.,_r au· 
aWttr-tion tion of the religious trust, a scheme should be settled for it, the Com-
::':'iliOUl missioner may, after issuing notice in the prescribed manner to the 
trustee of such trust and to such other persons as may appear to the 
Commissioner to be interested therein, hold an inquiry into the 1 S 
matter in the prescribed manner and if, after such inquiry, the Com· 
missioner is satisfied that it is necessary or desirable so to do, he may, 
by order, settle a scheme for the administration of the religious trust. 
(2) The Commissioner may also, in like manner and subject to 
the like conditions, modify any scheme settled under this section or 20 
under any other law or substitute another scheme in its stead. 
(3) Every scheme settled, modified or substituted under this 
section shall be in accordance with the law governing the trust and 
shall not be contrary to the wishes of the founder of the trust, so far 
as such wishes can be ascertained. 25 
Power .r It. (1) Where on receipt of any report of the auditor in respect 
=oner of a religious trust or on an application made in this behalf by two 
wben truatl or more persons interested in the trust or otherwise, the Commis-
~miJllUn- sioner has reasons to believe that the affairs of the religious trusts 
are being mismanaged or that the trustee is neglecting or failing to ~o 
discharge the obligations imposed on him by the deed of trust, the 
Commissioner may, after issuing notice in the prescribed manner to 
the trustee of such trust and to such other persons as may appear 
to the Commissioner to be interested therein, hold an inquiry into 
the matter in such manner as may be prescribed. 3S 
(2) If after holding such an inquiry, the Commissioner t~ 
I8tilfted-
(a) that the trustee has neglected or failed to discharge the 
obllgations imposed on him by the deed of trust or that the 
affairs 0: the religious trusts have not been managed tn 40 

II 
accordance with the terms of the trust, or have otherwise been 
mismanaged, or 
(b) that any trustee is guilty of mis-appropriation of trust 
property, 
S the Commissioner may, without prejudice to any other action that 
may be taken against the trustee, make an order giving directions 
to the trustee for the discharge of the obligations imposed on him by 
the deed of trust or for the proper management of the trust, or 
removing the trustee from his office, or directing the trustee to pay 
10 to the trust fund such amount not exceeding the amount of loss 
caused to the trust as the Commissioner thinks fit. 
20. Notwithstanding anything contained in the deed of a religious Pewer to 
tru t th C '. ft " t" th 'b d lCmOYe tna-S , e ommlSSlOner may, a er Issumg no Ice m e presCfl e .tee. in ccr-
manner to the trustee of such trust and holding such inquiry as he tai.) ,·ther 
I S thinks fit, by order remove the trustee from his office, if the Com- ~~~UIDIlm­
missioner is satisfied that the trustee-
(a) has been convicted more than once of an offence punish-
able under this Act; or 
(b) has been convicted of an offence of criminal breach of 
2. trust or any other offence involving moral turpitude. 
21. (1) When there is a vacancy in the offlce of trustee of a reU- Pow~r to 
gi d appolr.t ous trust an there is no one competent to be appointed as trustpF' trUStee wbea 
under the tenns of the deed of such trust or where there is a bonn fide Yac:anc1 
dispute as to the rhtht of any person to act as trustee or where there occurs. 
25 is a vacancv caused by the removal of the trustee under section 19 
or section 20, the Commissioner may, after issuing notice in the 
prescribed manner to such nerson as appellrs to him to be interested 
in the tru~ Rnd holdinl! such inquiry as hp. thinks fit, apooint a npw 
trustee to fill the vl'lcancy. wherever possible. in accordllnce with the-
3- terms of the trust deed or custom or usage relating to such matter. 
(2) In AppOinting a tnlc:tee under Rub-spction (1), the Commis-
sioner shall, as fltr as posslhle, select a person of the religious deno-
mination or section to which the trust belongs, 
(3) When 8 trustee haR been TPmnved from his offtce bv an ol'df!T 
35 made under s~tlon 19 or section 20. the Commis!'lioner may dfrE"Ct the 
tru!'ltee to deliver possession of truc;t-propertv to the new trustee nr 
where the new tru'ltee hqg not bF'en .lI.oo"lfnted. to any peT"on 
authorised by the Commissioner in thf8 behalf pending luch appoint.. 
ment. 

freet-dare 
.rd PO"~ 
.. t i.,qui,is 
u:ldcr thl! 
A,-t. 
APpeall. 
Trustee to 
carry out 
ordcrl of 
Coal-
• ialionet 
.nd eKeD-
tion oflucb 
orclcrl. 
la 
CHAPTER IV 
MISCELLANEOUS 
ZZ. (1) Subject to any rules that may be made under thta Act, 
every inquiry made thereunder shall be held, as nearly as may be, 
in accordance with the procedure applicable under the Code of 5 
Civil Procedure, 1908, to the trial of suits. 5 ~ 1905. 
(2) The Commissioner shall, for the purpose of holding an 
inquiry under this Act, have the same powers as are vested in a civil 
court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, when trying a 8uit, S .r Isol. 
in respect of the following matters, namely:- 10 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person 
and examining him on oath; 
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document; 
(c) the reception of evidence on affidavits; 
(d) requisitioning any public record from any court or office; IS 
(e) issuing any commission for the examination of witnesses; 
(f) any other matter which may be prescribed. 
%3. An appeal shall lie to the High Court from every order of 
the Commissioner made under this Act within a period of sixty 
days from the date of the order: 20 
Provided that the High Court may entertain the appeal after 
the exp;ry of the said period, if it is satisfied that the appellant was 
prevented by sufficient cause from preferring the appeal in time. 
24. (1) Every trustee shall carry out all directions which may 
from time to time be issued to him by the Commissioner under a, 
any of the provisions of this Act . 
(2) An order made under this Act shall, on an application made 
;n this behalf by the Commissioner, be enforced by a civil court 
having local jurisdkt10n in the same manner as a decree of such 
court. 
25. (1) If any person-
(a) fails to apply for the registration of a religious trust 
within the time specified in sub-section (6) of section 6; or 
(b) furnishes or causes to be furnished to the Commissioner 
any return, stattstics, aecounts or othel" tnfonna.tion which he 3' 
kn'OW5, or has reasons to believe, to be falsej or 

13 
(c) obstructs the Commissioner or any officer in the exerc1se 
of his power under clause (a) or clause (b) of sub-section (1) 
of section 15; 
he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one thousand 
, rupees. 
(2) No court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable 
under sub-section (1) except upon a complaint in writing made by 
the Commissioner. 
(3) No court inferior to that of a presidency magistrate or a 
10 magistrate of the first class shall try an offence punishable under 
this Act. 
26. (1) For the purpose of defraying the expenses in connection Contrlbta-
with the administration of this Act, the trustee of every religious doni. 
trust registered under this Act shall pay annually to the State 
I, Government, in such manner and within such time as may be 
prescribed, such contributions by way of fees, not exceeding three 
per cent. of its gross annual income, as the State Government may, 
from time to time, determine. 
(2) If any amount payable as contribution under sub-section 
20 (1) is not paid within the time prescribed, the Commissioner may 
issue a certificate for the amount due to the Co~lector who shall 
proceed to recover the same in the same manner as an arrear of 
land revenue. 
27. (1) The Commissioner may, on an application made to him Purriahlna 
2S in this behalf by any person, furnish to the applicant copies of any ~~~~ of 
extract from the register maintained under sect:on 8, on payment rllilt.:r. rolla 
of such fee as may be prescribed and subject to such conditions as 
may, from time to time, be determined by the Commissioner. 
(!) Such copies may be certified in the manner provided in 
I or ,I,... 30 section 76 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872. 
28. Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, every p I:... r . . lnru.s 0 order made by the CommISsIOner shall be final and shall not be o~ 
called in question in any suit, application or proceeding. 
29. (1) NotWithstanding anything contained in any oth~r law for Jurildl.D 
35 the time being in force, no civil court shall entertain' any suit or of civil 
proceedings in so far as it relates to any question or matter which l~u:~~ 
the Commissioner is empowered by this Act to decide. certain 
m. cc.:rI. 
(2) No civil court shall entertain a suit for the enforcement of 
• right on behalf of a religious trust unle98 such trust has been 
40 regiBtered under uu. Act. 

14 
(3) The provisions of sub-section (2) shall also apply to a claim 
of set off or other proceeding to enforce a right on behalf of • 
religious trust which has not been registered. 
Rotlce.r 30. (1) In every suit or proceeding (except in suits instituted 
~~~~ by a trustee for the recovery of arrears of rent and proceedings in 5 
to the Com- execution of decrees passed in such suits) in respect of any religious 
lIliUioller. trust or property belonging to such trust, whether instituted by a 
Prot-ctlon 
of action 
11Uli'l 
,ood faith. 
trustee or by any other person, the court shall issue a notice of the 
institution thereof to the Commissioner. 
(2) The Commissioner may apply to the court in which any such 10 
suit or proceeding as is referred to in sub-section (1) is pending, to 
be added as a party to the suit or proceeding and shall thereupon 
be added as a party thereto. 
(3) If the notice required under sub-section (1) to be issued to 
the Commissioner in respect of any suit or proceeding is not issued, IS 
the decree or order passed in such suit or proceeding shall, if the 
Commissioner makes an application to the court in this behalf, be 
aet aside. 
31. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie 
against the State Government or the Commissioner or any deputy 20 
or assistant Commissioner or any officer authorised by the Com-
missioner in respect of anything which is in good faith done or 
intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or any rules or orders 
made thereunder. 
c.mmil- 32. The Commissioner and all deputy Commissioners and 25 
Ilo:ter. et-= •• assistant Commissioners shall be deemed to be public servants to t. pubUc 
l:rYointi. within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code. 45 of 11160. 
Power 10 33. The State Government may, from time to time, give to the 
liTe dine- Commissioner in writing such general or special directions on ques-
tloua. tions of policy as it thinks fit, and the Commissioner shall, in the 30 
performance of his functions under this Act, comply with such direc-
tions. 
At:C1ICIt_ 
apply to 
certl1a 
cl.-fIl 
........ 
34. The provisions of this Act shall not apply t~ 
(a) any Sikh GurdWW'a to which the Sikh Gurdwaras Act, Punjab Act 
1925, appUes;or 35 VW.c 193' • 
(b) the Durgah Khawaja Saheb, Ajmer, to which the Durgah 
Khawaja Saheb Act, 1955, applies or to any other wakf as defined 36.f 19". 
in the Wakf Act, 1954, or in any Provincial or State Act relatina ap of 1"4. 
to walds in any State; or 
(c) any religious trust existing or created for the beneft.t of 40 
CArla~ Jew. or Pam. or any IIICtion thereof. 

15· 
35. The State Government may, by notification in the Official Power to exempt. 
Guzette, exempt any religious trust or class of religious trusts to 
which any special enactment applies from the operation of all or any 
of the provisions of this Act. 
S 36. (1) The State Government may. by notification in the Official Pt>~er tOt ma"e ru ~. 
Gazette, make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the follow-
ing matters, namely:-
10 (a) the functions of, the procedure to be followed by, the 
number and terms of office of, and the manner of filling <:usua! 
vacancies among, the members of, the Advisory Board; 
(b) the form and manner of making application for the regis-
tration of religious trust and the particulars it may contain; 
15 (c) service of notices and orders under this Act; 
(d) the procedure to be followed by the Commissioner in 
holding uny inquiry under this Act and the powers of a civil 
court which may be vested in the Commissioner; 
(e) the levy and collection of fees in respect of any applica-
20 tion under this Act for registration of religious trusts and supply 
of copies of extracts from the register maintained under section 
8; 
(f) the form of the register of religious trusts maintained 
under section 8 and particulars it may contain; 
25 (g) the form in which and the time within which the budget 
in respect of a religious trust :tnGy be prepared; 
(h) the form and manner in which accounts of a religious 
trust may be maintained and the particulars it may contain; 
(i) the time at which and the manner in which the accounts 
3Cl of a religious trust may be audited; 
(j) the form and manner in which any report, return. 
Ittatistics or other information may be furnished to the Commis--
simler by any trustee under this Act; 
(k) the manner in which, and the time within which, contri-
;:IS bution hi to be paid by the trustee of a religious trust; 
(l) the form and manner in which copies of extracts from 
the register of religious trusts may be furnished; 
(m) any other matter which is to be', or may be, prescribed. 
2124 (B) LS-3. 

16 
37. The following enactments, namely:-
(i) The Religious Endowments Act, 18ti:i; 
(ii) The Charitable Endowments Act, 1890; 
(iii) The Charitable and Religious Trusts Act, 1920; 
(iv) Section 92 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908; 
shall not apply to any religious trust to which this Act applies. 
20 of 1863. 
601 1890. 
14 of 1920. 
s S of 1908. 

I 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The problem of ensuring better supervision of public religious 
trusts has been engaging the attention of Government for some time 
past. There are no doubt some Provincial or State Acts in regard to 
this motter but it is considered desirable to have a comprehensive 
Central law on,the subject. 
2. As the law would be administered by State Governments and 
as conditions vary from State to State, it is not proposed to make any 
detailed provisions regarding the administrative machinery. The Bill 
merely contemplates the appointment of n Commissioner and certain 
other officers by the State Governments. It also seeks to provide for 
the constitution of an Advisory Board but the State Governmenta 
1ave been empowered to make rules regulating the composition and 
functions of the Advisory Board. 
3. The Bill seeks to deal with certain basic points such as regis-
tration of trusts, maintenance of proper accounts, submission of 
reports and inv'2stment of funds which are essential for the proper 
administration of trusts. In order to ensure a proper and efficient 
management of the trusts, it is proposed to vest the Commissioner 
with certain necessary powers. He should have powers to scrutinise 
the budget of every religious trust having an annual income of not 
less thun Rs. 5,000 and to appoint auditors for the audit of every such 
trust. He should also be empowered to appoint an accountant in 
respect of every religious trust having an annual income of not less 
than Rs. 25,000. It would also be necessary to vest him with powers 
to inspect trust property and call for returns and reports from 
trustees. When the object of any trust fails, the Commissioner should 
have power to apply the doctrine of cypres. When any trust is mis-
managed, he should be vested with powers to settle a scheme for the 
proper administration of the trust and also to remove a trustee and 
appoint a new trustee under certain circumstances. It is also pro-
posed that the trustees should be required to obtain the sanction of 
the Commissioner for alienation of immovable property forming 
part of any trust. It would also be necessary to make a 
specific proviSion in the Bill that an appeal would lie to the High 
Court from every order of the Commissioner and it is considered. that 
this would be a sufficient £IJfeguard against any arbitrary exercise of 
'powers by the Commissioner. It is also proposed that every trust 
17 

18 
should pay such contribution by way of fees, not exceeding three per 
cent. of its gross annual income, as the State Government may from 
time to time determine. 
4. The present Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 
NEW DELHI; A. K. stIN. 
The 10th March, 1960. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Cleuse 36 of the Bill empowers the State Government to make 
rules to carry out the purposes of the Act. The matters in respect of 
which such rules may be made have been specified therein. They 
relate, inter alia, to the form and manner of making applications for 
registration of religious trusts, service of notices and orders, the levy 
and collection of fees in respect of applications, the form of the 
register, the form and Ill'3nner in which accounts of a religious trust 
may be prepared and the audit of such accounts, the form and manner 
in which reports and returns have to be submitted and l"arious Gther 
incidentul matters. They also relate to the functions of the Advisory 
Board and the procedure to be followed by it. All these matters are 
of a routine or administrative character. 
2. The delegation of legislative power is thus of a normal 
character. 
19 
2tUiR) LS-4. 

.... 
LOK SABHA 
A 
BILT. 
to provide for the better supervision and administration of 
certain religious trusts. 
(ShriAsoke K ... ';'en, Minister of Law.) 