Cv H,. J. GE;' IDA 
to 
THE C~MPT~LLE,{ ,\i'J[) AllDr Tvt{-GE~JEKAL 'S ~DUTIES, PIoMERS 
AND Cvl~D=. TI\.Jt~S vi: SERVIl;E) A'··IEi',,['jl,.ENT 
BILL, 1 <;~4 
Lly be lA.5_ . inj;_r2.PJL~~£L..~nJ.,~ ~J.P.bh a 7 
l. Page 2, line 8 ,-
aft·er " as" i ns~£.1 "the" ---
2. Page 2. line 23.-
aftc,!: " as" iD.ssr.t "the" 
3. Page 2, line 40 ,-
Jor " and and" ~ " and" 
l\jEV~ DELHI; 

As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA ON 
it [f MAR lS84 
Bill No. 14 of 1984 
THE COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR-GENERAL'S (DUTIES, 
POWERS AND CONDITIONS OF SERVICE) 
AMENDMENT BILL, 1984 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Comptroller and Auditor-General's (Duties, 
Powers and Conditions 'df Service) Act, 1971. 
BE it enacted /by Parliament in the Thirty-fifth Yea~ of the Republic 
of India as foUows:-
1. This Act may be called the Comptroller and Auditor-General's Short 
(Duties, POWE!!'S and Conditions of Se.rvice) Amendment Act, 1984. title. 
5 2. In the Comptroller and Auditor-General's (Duties, Powers and Amend-
Conditions Of Service) Act 1971 (hereinafter refer.red to as the ment of 
56 of 1971. principal Act), in section 6: after sub-section (6), the following sub- section 6. 
sections shall be inserted, namely:-
"(6A) Notwithstanding anything contamed in the fOl'egoing 
10 provisions of this section a person referred to in sub-R,'·ction (1) who 
dc.IJtS otlice [whefber in any IINInner specified in sub-section (8) or 
by resignationJ as the Comptroller and Auditor-General after . the 
commen«ment of the Comptroller and Auditor·(ienMlI's (Duties, 

Amend-
mentor 
.action 
14. 
2 
Powers and Conditions of Service) Amendment Act, 1984, shall, on 
sucll eJ,emission, be entitled to-
(a) the peli,ion to whicb he would have been entitled undu 
the rules of the Service to which he belonged by reckoning his 
.. senke as tbe Comptroller and Audilor-Gcneral a~ confiouingi 
apJirond service cOlmtin~ for pension in su:h Service; and 
,(b) a sprcial pension of seven hundred mpecs per annum iftl 
respect of each completr-d year of service as Comptroller and 
Auditor·General: 
Provided that the aggregate of the amollnts payable to him under 10 
clause (a) and chose :(b) of this sub-section shan in no cas,! exc('ed a . 
sum of twenty thousand and four hundred rupees per annum. 
(68) Notwithstanding aaydalng contained in the foregoing pro-
viIIOIIS of this seetlon a penon referred to in sub-section (3) who 
demi~ office rwhether in any manner specified in sub·s~cfi'lD (8) Or 15 
by reslpatlon] 88 tbe Comptroller and Auditor-General after the 
, . commencement of the Comptroller and Auditor.General's (Duties, 
Powers and Conditions of Service) Amendment Act. 1984, shaD, on 
.. ell demission, be entitled ~ 
(a) the pension payable to him in respect of any previous 20 
service under Govemment; and 
(b) a special pemion of seven hundred rupees per annum 
in sr.spect of each ccmpleted year of servi('e as Comptroller and 
Auditor·General. 
Pnmdt!tl that the a~gregate of the amounts pavable to hhn under 25 
e1auie (a) and clause (b) of this s~section shall in no case exceed • 
.... ,.f twenty thousand and four hundred ruPf',"S per annum, and such 
sum shall. include the apregate Of an otber pension", if any, payable 
to him and the commuted portion, if any, of his pension,". 
3, Sectiollj 14 cf the principal Act shall be ;renumbered as sub-'section 30 
(1) thereof and-
(a.) in the Explo.nation to sub-section (1) as so renumbered,-
(i) for the words "rupees five 1akhs", the words "rupees 
twenty-five lakhs" shall be 'Substituted; 
(ii) for the words "this section", the words "this sub-section" 35 
shall be substituted; 
(b) after suh-section (1), a'S so :renumbered the following sub-
sections shall be inserted, namely:- ' . 
"(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), 
the Comptroller and and Auditor-General may' with the. p.revious 40 
approval of the President or the Governor of a State or the 
Administrator of a Union territory having a Legh>lative 
Assembly, as the case may be, audit all receipts and expenditure 
of any bO,dy or authority wh~re the grants or loans to such body 
or authorlty f~om the, Consol1d,ated Fund of India or of any State 
or of any Umon ter;rltor~ haVIng a Legislative Assembly a th 4j 
case may be in a financial year is not less th'ln rupe'$ on's e, , . .. - e crore, 

3 
(3) Where the .receipts and expenditure of any body or 
authority are, by virt.ue of the fultUment of the conditions 8petl-
fied in sub-section (1) or sUb-section (2), audited by the Comp-
troller and Auditor-General in' a financial year, he shall continue 
5 to audit the receipts and expenditure of that body or authwity 
for a further period of two years notwithstanding that the condi-
tions specified in 'Sub-section (l) Or sub-section (2) are not 
fulfilled during any of the two subsequent years.". 
4, After section 19 of the p.rincipal Act, the following section shall be 
10 inserted, namely:-
'19A. (1) The reports of the Comptroller and Auditor-GeI).el:a1. 
in relation to the accounts of a Government company or a corporation 
.referred to in section 19, shall' be submitted to the Government or 
Government'S concenwd. 
(2) The Central Government shall cause every report received 
by it under sub-section (1) to be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
received, before each House of Parliament. 
(3) The State Gove.rnment shall cause every report received by 
it under sub-ISeCtion (1) to the laid, as soon as may be afterl It is 
received, before the Legislature of the State. 
Explanatlion.-For the purposes of thi'i) section "Goverrunent" or. 
"State Gove.rnment", in relation to a Union territory having' a Legis-
lative Assembly, means the Administrator of the Union territory.'. 
Insertion 
ofMW 
section 
leA. 
Layin,of 
reporta in 
relation to 
accounts of 
Govern-
ment 
com. 
panies and 
corpora-
tiona. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Comptroller and Auditor-General's (Duties, Powers an~ .Condi-
tions of Service) Act, 1971 was enacted to determine the condltlons of 
service of the Comptroller and Auditor-General and prescribe his dutiea 
and powers. The Act was amended' in 1976 mainly for the purpose of 
making the necessary provision for .relieving the Comptroller and A~ditor­
General from the responsibility for compiling' accounts. In the light of 
the changed circumstances and expe.!ience gained from the working of 
the provisions of the Act, it is considet'ed necessary to make certain 
further amendments. 
2. While the provisions as to ipension payable to officers of Govern-
ment have been modified, the pension payable to the Comptroller and 
Auditor-Gener'al remains the same as fixed in 1971. It is accordingly 
p.roposed to provide that subject to a maximum of Rs. 20,400/- per annum, 
a serving officer appointed as a Comptroller and Auditor-General will 
be entitled by way of pension to an amount equal to the aggregate of 
the pension admis.;ible to him in the service to which he belonged by 
treating his service as Comptroller and Auditor-General as continued 
approved service for this purpose and a special pension calculated at the 
rate of Rs. 700/- per annum for each completed year of service as Comp-
troller and Auditor-General,. It is also proposed to provide that 
subject to the aforesaid maximum of Rs. 20,400/- per annum, a .retired 
officer appointed as a Comptroller and Auditor-General will be entitled 
by way of pension to the aggregate of the pension admissible to him 
under the rules governing the service to which he belonged and a special 
pension calculated at the rate of Rs. 700/- per annum for each completed 
year of service as Comptroller and A uditor-General. These revised pro-
visions as to pension will be applicable only in the case of persons 
demitting office as Comptroller and Auditor-General (on completing the 
term Or attaining the age of 65 years or on ground of ill health or bY' 
resignation) after the commencement of the proposed legislation (vide 
clause 2 of the Bill). 
3. At present, under section 14 of the Act, the Comptroller and Auditor-
General is required to aUdit the receipts and ex.penditure of a body or 
authority which is substantiaHy financed by grants or loans from the 
Consolidated Fund of India or of any State or of any Union territory 
having a Legislative Assembly. According to the Explanation to that 
section, where the grant or loan to a body or authority from the Conso-
lidated Fund of India or o:e any State or of any such Union territory i'S 
not less than Rs. 5 lakhs and the amount of such grant or loan is not 
less t~n. seventy-five per cent., of the total expenditure of t4at body 'or 
authonty, such body or author1t,/ is deemed to be substantially financed 
b~ 'Such gran~ or loan. It is proposed to enhance the limit specified in 
thlS ExplanattOn from Rs. 5 lakhs to RD. 25 lakhs. It is also proposed to 
provide that the Comptroller and Auditor-General may, with the approval 

5 
of the President or Govemor or Administrator, undertake aUdit of the 
receipt and expeB.diture of a body or authority which is in receipt of Gov-
ernment grant or loan of rupees one crore or more in a year, though this 
may be less than 75 per cent. of the total expenditure of that body or 
authority. It is further proposed to provide that where a body or authority 
cOmes within the purview of the audit of the Comptroliler and Auditor-
\ General in any year by reason of the tests in the Expla'nGtion and new 
sub-section (2) being complied in its case, the Comptroller and Auditor-
General shall continue to audit the recetpts and expenditW'e of such body 
or authority for the succeeding two years also even if such body or 
authority fails to comply with the tests pro\ ided in the said Explanation 
and new sub-section (2) in efther or both of. those years (vide clause 3 of 
the Bill). 
4. The present opportunity is being availed of to include in the Act 
a provision for the laying of audit reports of the Comptroller and Auditor-
General in relation to the accounts of Government companies or corpora-
tions referred to in section 19 of the Act before Parliament or, as the 
case may be, the Legislature of the State concerned (vide clause 4 of the 
Bill) . 
S. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 
NEW DELHI,' PRANAB MUKHERJEE. 
The 27th February, 1984. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF 
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter dated 27 February, 1984 from Shri Pranab Kumar 
Mukherjee, Minister of Finance to the Secretary-General, Lok Sabha.] 
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the Bill 
to amend the Compt;roller and Auditor-General's (Dutie'S, Powers 'and 
Conditions of Service) Act, 1971, recommends under article 117(1) Of the 
Constitution tor the introduction of the BillJ in and under article 117(3) , 
of the Constitution for the consideration of the Bill by Lok Sabha. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
!Clause·2 of the Bill proposes to amend section 6 of the Act by inserting 
sutrse<rnbns (6A) and(SB). The proposed sub-section (6A) ·provides 
that a person, who before his Slppointment as Compt.roller and Auditor-
General, was in service of Government, on demitting offic~ as Compt.roller 
and Auditor-General, will be entitled to an aggregate pension not exceed .. 
ing Rs. 20,400/- per annum. The proposed sub-section (6B) provides that 
a person who before assuming office as Comptroller and Auditor-General 
was in receipt of pension for previous service under Government will 
be entitled to a special pension of Rs. 700/- per annum for each com-
pleted year of service as Comptroller and Auditor-General subject to 8 
maximum aggregate pension of Rs. 20,400/- per annum. In terms oj 
the existing sub-section (2) and sub-sectionl (3) of section 6 of the Act, 
the maximum pension admissible to the Comptroller and Auditor-General 
is Rs. 18,000/. per annum. The Bill if enacted, will, therefore entail on , , 
the basis of the existing rate of normal service pension, an a.dditional 
expenditure (charged) of Rs. 2,400/- per annum from the Com;olidated 
Fund of India. 
2. The .Bill does not involve any other expenditure whether recurring 
or non-recurring. 
" . • 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACT FROM THE COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR-GENERAL'S (DuTIES, 
POWERS AND CONDITIONS OF SERVICE) AcT, 1971 
(56 OF 1971) 
• • • • • 
14. Where any body or authority is substantially financed by grants 
or loans from the Consolidated Fund of India or of any' State o.r of any 
Union territory having a Legislative Assembly, the Comptroller and 
Auditor-General shaM., subject' to the provision's of any law for the time 
being in force applicable to the body or authority, as the case may be, 
audit all receipts and expenditure of that body or authority and to report 
on the receipts and expenditure audited by him. 
Explanation.-Where the grant or loan to a body or authority from 
the Consolidated Fund of India or of any State or of any Union territory 
having a Legislative Assembly in a financial year is not less than rupees 
five lakhs and the amount of such grant or loan is not less than seventy-
five p~r cent. of the total expenditure of ihat body or authority, such 
body or authority shall be deemed, for the pullpOSes of this section, to 
be substantially financed by such grants or loans, a! the case may be • 
• • • • • 
7 
Audito! 
receipts 
and ex-
penditu:e 
of bodies 
or autho-
'dties 
I 
substan-
tially 
financed 
from 
Union or 
state 
Revenues. 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Comptroller and Auditor-Gene,ral's (Duties, PoW'era 
and Conditions of Service) Act, 1971. 
(Shri Pranab Ku.mcr Mukher;ee, 
Minister Of Fmance.) 