1
THE  MARTYRS (PAYMENT OF ADEQUATE COMPENSATION)
BILL, 2015
By
SHRI DEEPENDER SINGH HOODA, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for payment of adequate compensation by the Central Government to the
dependents of deceased personnel of the Indian Armed Forces, Paramilitary
Forces, Central Armed Police Forces and the State Armed Police Forces,
who sacrifice their lives in the line of duty.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Martyrs (Payment of Adequate Compensation)
Bill,  2015.
(2) It shall come into force on such date  as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title
and
commencement.
Bill No. 112  of  2015
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) ‘‘Central Armed Police Forces” mean the Border Security Force, Central Reserve
Police Force, Central Industrial Security Force, Indo-Tibetan Border Police and the
Sashastra Seema Bal and shall include such other Central Armed Police Forces as may
be notified by the Central Government;
(b) ‘‘dependent” in relation to a martyr shall include his spouse, son, unmarried
daughter, parents, minor brother, unmarried sister, widowed sister, widowed daughter,
widowed daughter-in-law, minor child of a pre-deceased son, minor child of a pre-
deceased daughter if no parent of that child is alive and paternal grandparent;
(c) ‘‘Indian Armed Forces” means the Indian Army, the Indian Navy, the Indian
Air Force and the Indian Coast Guard;
(d) ‘‘martyr” means a person serving in the Central Armed Police Forces, Indian
Armed Forces, Paramilitary Forces and State Armed Police Forces and who dies in the
performance of his duties, which shall include death on duty in a specified high altitude
or in inaccessible border posts on account of natural disasters and extreme weather
conditions;
(e) “Paramilitary Forces” mean the Assam Rifles, and the Special Frontier  Force
and shall include such other Paramilitary Forces as may be notified by the Central
Government; and
(f) “State Armed Police Forces” mean State police units constituted for dealing
with serious law and order situations requiring a higher level of armed expertise and
known by the names like Special Armed Police, Armed Constabulary, Provincial Armed
Constabulary or Pradeshik or State Military Police.
3. (1) The Central Government shall pay to the dependents of every martyr such
amount of money as compensation as it may deem adequate to enable the dependents to
sustain a dignified life:
Provided that the compensation to be paid to the dependents shall, in no case, be less
than fifty lakh rupees.
(2) The Central Government shall, from time to time, revise the amount of compensation
in accordance with the cost of living.
(3) For the purpose of computing the amount of compensation under sub-section (1),
the Central Government shall take into account the following factors, namely:—
(i) age of the martyr;
(ii) total period of service for which the martyr had been recruited;
(iii) period of service completed by the martyr;
(iv) period of service left; and
(v) number of dependents of the martyr.
4. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of that the session immediately following the session or
the successive sessions aforesaid, both the Houses agree in making any modification in the
rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have
effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any
such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
Definitions.
Central
Government
to pay
adequate
compensation
to the
dependents of
martyrs.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The Indian Armed Forces, Paramilitary Forces, the Central Armed Police Forces and
the State Armed Police Forces, despite being under the control of different bodies such as
the Ministry of Defence, the Home Ministry and the respective State Governments, are all
called upon to render variety of services connected with maintaining law and order in the
country. Many of these forces are deployed to combat insurgents, naxals, maoists, Jehadi
or such other violent forces having fissiparous tendency. They are also often deployed in
unison of local police and as part of the same contingent performing the same duties. This
has often resulted in laying down of their life in the line of duty.
No amount of compensation ever prescribed can meet the true spirit of their sacrifice or
hope to even partly compensate the loss caused to their dependents. It is felt that there is no
clear cut transparent compensation norms and common benchmark for determining the amount
to be paid to dependents of martyrs. This has resulted in varying degrees of ex-gratia
payment to their families. The differences in payouts have raised a serious debate over
uniformity in compensation amounts. In case of both, a policeman or armed forces personnel,
there is no parity in the relief amount given to their families, despite both having made the
supreme sacrifice under the same and/or similar circumstances. This raises a question on
Government's policy on compensation to the dependents of martyrs.
This Bill, therefore, seeks to prescribe a minimum uniform amount as compensation to
be paid to the families and dependents of martyrs in order to enable them to live a dignified
life.
N
EW DELHI; DEEPENDER  SINGH  HOODA.
March 12, 2015.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides that the Central Government shall pay adequate
compensation to the dependents of martyrs. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that an annual recurring
expenditure of about rupees five hundred crore  is likely to be incurred from the Consolidated
Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees  one hundred crore  is also likely to be
incurred.
4

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 4 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
5

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for payment of adequate compensation by the Central Government to the
dependents of deceased personnel of the Indian Armed Forces, Paramilitary Forces,
Central Armed Police Forces and the State Armed Police Forces, who
sacrifice their lives in the line of duty.
————
(Shri Deepender Singh Hooda, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—75LS(S3)—20-04-2015.