21 .f 1' •. 
.;.:, 
As IN'l'ftOI)U(i:IlD IN LoItSAlHA ON. 
~ MAR 19S! 
Bill No. 14 of J'" 
THE TEA (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1969 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Tea Act, 1953· 
• 
BI: it enaeted by Parliament in the Twentieth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Tea (Amendment) Act, 1969. Short 
title. 
Z. In the Tea Act, 1953 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), Insertion 
5 after section 26, the following section shall be inserted, namely: - of new 
section 
26A. 
"2IA. The Central GoverDDlent may, after due appropriation Grants 
made by Parliament b,. law ill this behalf, pa,. to the Board 'y W., and loans 
of puts or loans IAlCh sums of mODey as the Central Govemmeat by the 
may COIlSider D4tees88l'7." Centra] Govern-
ment to 
the Board. 
10 3. In section 27 of the principal Act, in sub.-aection (1), after clause (a), Amend-
the followina clAuee shall be inserted, namely:- ment of 
IleCtfon 
"(44) any sum of money that may be paid to the Board by way 27. 
of grantB or loane under section 26A;". 

Amaad-
meDtot 
uet10n 
41. 
2 
t. :. section 48 of the priD.cipal Act, for sub-section (3), the follow-
ing sub-section shall be substituted, namely:-
\, 
.• (3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid as soon as 
may be after it is made before each House of Parliament while it 
is in session for a total period. of thirty days which may be comprised 5 
in one session or in two successive sessions, and if, before the expiry 
of the session in which It is so laid or the seaion immediately follow-
ing, both Rouses agree in making any modification in the rule or both 
Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall there-
after have e1fect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as 10 
the case may be; so, however, that any such modiJication or annul-
ment shall be without prejudice to the nUdity of anything previously 
done under that rule .... 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Tea Act, 191>3 (29 of 1953), which came into force on the 1st April, 
1954 seeks to provide for the control by the Union Government of the ... I 
tf,:$ indU3try and for that puq>ose to establish a Tea Board. The Act .l80 
J~eek& to levy a tiuty of excise on tea produced in India. Section 10' of 
the Act sets out the various m~aiures which the Tea Boud might, t.n"d,er 
the (;ontrol of the Central Government, take for the development of the 
tea industry. In pursuance of the provilions of this section, the Tea 
Board has been operating schemes through which it advances 10118 ~ 
loans to the lea :ndustry for undertaking extenllions or replantationa. A 
ICheme for the supply of tea machinery to the tea estatel on bire-pur-
chue terms is also heiDg operated. These schemes are ftnanced by loans 
*.iv.need by the Central Government to the Tea Board. It has also been 
~tly decided, on a review of the requirements of the tea industry for 
.. tenn development, to assist this tndU8try with a 8Ulbtddy fGr re-
plantation of old overaged bushes with a view to ensuring a de.tnbte 
level of replantation. 'Mlere is no provision in the Act for the Tea Board 
recelving either grants-in-aid or loans of the kind that are being advan.ced 
to it by the Central Government. It is, therefore, considered necessary 
to amend the Tea Act, 1953, to enable the Tea Board to receive grant. or 
loans from the Central Government for financing schemel for the deve-
lopment of the tea industry and also to credit such moneys to the Tea 
Fund to which the net proceeds of the ces~ are credited and from which 
the expenses of the Board are met. 
2. The present Bill is intended to enable the above objects to be 
achieved. 
3. Opportunity is being taken to substitute sub-section (3) of section 4Q 
of the Act relating to the laying at the rules before each House of ParlIa-
ment to bring it into conformity with the present pattern. 
CHOWDHURY RAM SEWAK. 
Naw Da.HI; 
The 19t1t February, 1969. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF 
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
rCopy of letter No. 8(3)-Plant(A) 188, dated the 18th February, 1_ 
from Chowdhary Ram Sewak, Deputy Minister of Foreign Trade ad 
Supply to the Secretary, Lot Sebba.] 
The President having been informed of the Tea (Amendment) BtU, 
1969, recommends, under article 117(1) and (3) of the eon.titution of 
Tndia. the introduction and conslderatton 01. the Bm in the Lok Sabha. 
3 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 2 of the Bill provides for grants or lo~ to be made by tbe 
Central Government to the Tea Board since the cess collected· under 
section 25 of the Tea Act, 1953, is not sufficient to meet the cost of the 
development schemes of the tea industry, such as Tea Plantation Finance 
Scheme, Tea Machinery Hire-Purchase Scheme and the Tea Plantation 
Subsidy Scheme. These grants or loans by the Central Government are 
intended to ensure that the activities of the Tea Board do not receive 
a set-back. The exact amount which may be paid by way of grants or 
loans will vary from year to year. During 1968-69, a proviSion of Rs. 130 
lakhs for granting loans and a provision of Rs. 5.75 lakhs for gran tine 
subsidy under the Replantation Subsidy Scheme have been accepted. 
For 1969-70, the proVisions accepted for granting loans and subsidy are 
respectively Rs. 116 lakhs and Rs. 43.60 lakhs. It is estimated that a 
provision of about the same order will be required annually thereafter. 
Since the provisions of new section 26A are pennissive and not mandatory, 
it is possible for the Central Government to regulate the expenditure. In 
,any case no such expenditure will be incurred without due appropriation 
made by Parliament from time to time in this behalf. 
4 

ANNEXURE 
ExTRACTS FROM THlI TIIA Aer, 1953 
(29 OF 1953) 
• • • • 
27. (1) There shall be formed a Fund to be called the Tea Fund, and Consti-
there shall. be credited thereto- tution 
of Fund. 
(a) the proceeds of the cess made over to the Board by the 
Central Government; 
• • 
ft. (1) • • 
• • 
• • 
• 
• • 
• 
. . 
• 
• power 
of 
Central 
(3) All rules Wlder this Act shall, as soon as they are made, be laid Govern-
before both Houses of Parliament. ment 
to make 
• • • • • fUJetI. 
5 

LOK SABHA 
---
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Tea Act, 1953-
(SlIf'i ChOfJilhury Ram Ser.oak, Deputy 
Minister in the Ministry of Foreign 
Trade and Supply) 