As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA ON 
2 2 fi.b 1966 
Bill No. 14 of 1966 
THE IMPORTS AND EXPORTS (CONTROL) 
AMENDMENT BILL, 1966 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Imports and Exports (Control) Act, 194'1. 
BE it enact€d by Parliament in the Seventeenth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Imports and Exports (Control) Short 
Amendment Act, 1966. title. 
5 2. In section 1 of the Imports and Exports (Control) Act, 1947 
(hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in sub-section (3), for 
the figures "1966", the figures "1971" shall be substituted. 
Amend-
meat of 
section 
1. 
3. In section 3 of the principal Act, for sub-section (2), the foUow- Amend_ 
ing SUb-section shall be substituted, namely:- meat of 
section 3. 
10 cc (2) All goods to which any order under sub-section 
(1) applies shall be deemed to be goods of which the import 

Substitu-
tion of 
new sec-
tion 'for 
section 5. 
Peralty. 
2 
or export has been prohibited under section 11 of the Customs 
Act, 1962, and all the provisions of that Act shall have effect ~ 
accordingly." . 
4. For section 5 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
substituted, namely: - 5 
"5. If any person contraven~s or attempts to contravene, or 
abets a contravention of, any order made or deemed to have been 
made under this Act or any condition of a licence granted 
under any such order, he shall, without prejudice to any confisca-
tion or penalty to which he may be liable under the provisions 10 
of the Customs Act, 1962, be punishable with imprisonment for 52\ 
a term which may extend to two years and also with fine: . 
Provided that in the absence of special and adequate rea-
sons to the contrary to be recorded in the judgment of the Court. 
such imprisonment shall not be for less than six months.". 15 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Imports and Exports (Control) Act, 1947 will cease to have 
effect on the 31st day of March, 1966, from which date there will be 
no legislative sanction far the continuance of import and export 
controls. 
2. The need for the Central Government to have legislative powers 
to control the foreign trade of the country is as great today, as it was 
in 1947. The country is embarking on an ambitious Fourth Five 
Year Plan. The defence requirements also are much more than in 
the past. The need to conserve foreign exchange is, therefore, 
imperative and the position needs to be controlled closely and conti-
nuously to ensure optimum utilisation of available foreign exchange 
resources for the purchase of goods required to sustain industriali-
sation, to protect the indigenous industry and to meet essential 
requirements of defence and export-oriented industries. On the 
export side, it is necessary to ensure healthy practices in our foreign 
trade and to safeguard the interest of the country in respect of items 
primarily required for home consumption particularly in the present 
emergency. 
3. The Bill accordingly seeks to continue for another five years 
that is, up to 31st March, 1971, the powers at present vested in the 
Central Government for control and regulation of imports and 
exports under the aforesaid Act. 
4. The Bill also seeks to amend section 5 of the Act to make pro-
vision for a minimum penalty in pursuance of the recommendations 
of the Committee on Prevention of Corruption. 
5. Opportunity has been taken to make certain changes in the 
Act, consequential on the repeal of the Sea Customs Act, 1878 and 
the enactment of the Customs Act, 1962 in its place. 
NEW DELHI; MANUBHAI SHAH. 
The 14th February, 1966. 
3 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
The Imports and Exports (Control) Amendment Bill, 1966 seeks 
to extend the life of the existing Imports and Exports (Control) 
Act, 1947 by another five years from 31st March, 1966. The Import 
and Export Trade .Control Organisation is an existing Organisation 
and it is proposed to continue this Organisation for the extended 
period of the Act. The revised estimated expenditure on this Organ-
isation for the year 1965-66 is Rupees one crore eleven lakhs four 
thousand seven hundred and the budget estimate proposed for this 
Organisation for the year 1966-67 is Rupees one crore nineteen 
lakhs eighty-two thousand one hundred. It is not possible at the 
present stage to indicate precisely the likely extra expenditure that 
will be incurred on this Organisation for the years subsequent to 
1966-67, except to say that it is likely to be more or less on the same 
pattern. In any case, no expenditure will be incurred without due 
appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf. 

18,8. 
1878. 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE IMPORTS AND EXPORTS (CONTROL) ACT, 1947 
18 OF 1947 
3. (1) * • • • • Powers to 
(2) All goods to which any order under sub-section (1) applies 
shall be deemed to be goods of which the import or export has been 
prohibited or restricted under section 19 of the Sea Customs Act, 
1878 and all the provisions of that Act shall have effect accordingly, 
except that se:tion 183 thereof shall have effect as if for the word 
"shall" therein the word "may" were substituted. 
* • • '" • 
prohibit 
or restrict 
imports 
and ex-
ports. 
5. If any person contravenes or attempts to contravene, or· abets Penalty. 
a contravention of, any order made or deemed to have been made 
under this Act or any conditio~ of a licence granted under any such 
order, he shall, without prejudice to any confiscation or penalty to 
which he may be liable under the provisions of the Sea Customs Act, 
1878, as applied by sub-section (2) of section 3, be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or with 
fine, or with both. 
* • • • • • 
5 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
funher to amend the Impons and Expons (Control) Act, 1947. 
(Shrz" Manubhai Shah, 
Mt'nt'ster of Commerce.) 