8m No. Ii of 1'$1 
THE UNTOUCHABILITY (OFFENCES) BILL, 1954 
(As INTRODUCED IN THE HOUSE OF PEOPLE) 
A 
BILL 
to prescribe puni$hment for the practice of untouchabiUty· or the 
enforcement of any disabiUty arising therefrom. 
BE it enacted by Parliament as follows:-
1. Short title, extent and commeneement.-(l) This Act may be 
called the Untouchability (Offences) Act, 1954. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu 
and Kashmir. , 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Govern-
ment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
2. Deflnltions.-In this Act, unless the context otherwise 
requires,-
(a) 'hotel' includes a refreshment room, a boarding house, a 10 
lodging house, a coffee house and a cafe; 
(b) 'place' includes a hOllse, building, tent and vessel; 
(c) 'place of public entertainment' includes any place to which 
the public are admitted and in which an entertainment is provid-
ed or held. l' 
Explanation.-'Entertainment' includes any exhibition, per-
formance, game, sport and any other form of amusement; 
(d) 'place of public worship' means a place, by whatever name 
known, which is used as a place of public religious worship or 
which is dedicated generally to or is used generally by persons 20 
of any religious denomination or any section thereof for the per-
formance of any religious service or for offering prayers therein; 
and includes all lands and subsidiary shrines appurtenant or 
attached to any such place; 
(e) 'shop' means any premises where goods are sold either 2, 
wholesale or by retail or both, and includes a laundry, a hair 

5 
cutting saloon and any other place where services are rendered 
to customers; 
</> 'untouchable' means a member of a Scheduled Caste as 
defined in clause (24) of article 366 of the Constitution, and in-
cl}J4es any other person who by custom or usage is regarded as 
...JIl 'untouchable' by any community or section thereof. 
Explanation I.-A member of a Scheduled Caste shall not cease 
to be such member if he resides in any locality other than the loca-
lity specified in relation to him in any public notification issued or 
10 any law made by Parliament under article 341 of the Constitution. 
15 
Explanation II.-A member of a Scheduled Caste who has been 
converted from the Hindu religion to any other religion shall, not-
withstanding such conversion, be deemed to be an 'untouchable' for 
the purposes of this Act. 
3. Right of untouchables to enter places of public worshlp.-Every 
place of public worship shall be open to every untouchable for wor-
ship and for the performance of any religious service or for offering 
prayers therein in the same manner and to the same extent as it is 
20 open to any other person belonging to the. arne religious denomina-
tion or to the same section thereof as the unto~hable, and every 
such untouchable shall be entitled to bathe in or use the waters of 
any sacred tank, well, spring or water-course in the same manner 
and to the same extent as other persons belonging to the same rell-
gio~~ _ ~omination or any section thereof as the untouchable are 
25 enti~ to. 
30 
35 
45 
t. Removal of social dlsabllitles ou untouchabl •. -No untouch-
able shall on the ground only that he is an untouchable.-
(a~)' eligible for office under any authority constituted 
under a aw; or 
(b e subject to any disability, liability, restriction or con-
dition with regard to-
(i) access to any shop, public restaurant, hotel or any 
place c1f public entertainment; 
(ii) the practice of any profession or the carrying on of 
any occupation, trade or business; . 
(iii) the use of, or access to, any river, stream, spring, 
well, tank, cistern, water-tap or other watering place, or any 
bathing ghat, burial or cremation ground, any sanitary con-
venience, any road or passage, or any other place of public 
resort, which other members of the public have a right to 
use or have access to; 
'(iv) the use of, or access to, any place used for a charit-
able or a public purpose maintained wholly or partly out of 
State funds or dedicated to the use of the general public or 
to the use generally of persons belonging to the same religious 
denomination or to the same section thereof as the untouch-
able; 
(v) the enjoyment of any benefit under a charitable trust 
created for the benefit of the public generally or for the 
benefit of persons belonging to the same -religious denomina-
tion or to the same section thereof as the untouchable; 

3 
(vi) the use of, or access to, any public conveyance 1icenS-
ed to ply for hire, by any authority constituted under any 
law. 
5. Prohibition against refusal to admit untouchables to hospltab, 
etc.-No person shall refuse admission to an untouchable on the ground 5 
only that he is an untouchable to any hospital, dispetlSary or educa-
tional institution or any hostel attached to any educational institu-
tion where such hosgital, dispensary, institution or hostel is estab-
lished or maintained for the benefit of the public or for the benefit 
generally of persons belonging to the same religious denomination l'lO 
or to the same section thereof as the untouchable. , 
6. Prohibition against' refusal to sell goods or render servl~ to 
untogchables No person shall refuse to sell any goOds or reuse 
to' render any service in the ordinary course of business to any un-
touchable on the ground only that he is an untouchable. 15 
7. IJmltation of jurlscUctlon of clvll eourts.-(l) No civil court 
shall' enterta:n or continue any suit or proceeding or shall pass an 
order or decree or execute wholly or partially any order or decree, 
if the claim involved in such suit or proceeding or if the passing elf 
such .order or decree or if such execution, would in any way be in- 20 
consistent with the provisions of this Act. 
(2) No court shall in adjudicating any I1J.atter or executing any 
order recognise any custom or usage imposing any civil disability on 
any untDuchable on the ground only that he is an untouchable. 
8. Penaltles.-(l) Whoever-
(i) prevents an untouchable from exercising any right con-
ferred by this Act; or 
(ii) molests or obstructs or causes or attempts to cause 
obstruction to an untouchable in the exercise of any such right; 
m ~ 
(iii) prevents any person by reason of his being an untouc,h-
able, from having access to dr using any of the places referred 
to in sub-clauses (i), (iii) and (iv) or any conveyance referred to 
in sub-clause (vi) of clause (b) of section 4. or from enjoying any 
benefit under a charitable trust referred to in sub-clause (v) 35 
of clause (b) of the said section: or . 
(iv) ~ntravenes any of the provisions of section 5 or section 
" shall be punishable with imprisonment wh'ich may extend to six 
months or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees or with 40 
both. 
(2) Whoever-
(a) denies to any f.erson belonging to his community or .any 
class or section thereo . any right or privilege to which such per-
son would be entitled as a member of such community, class or 45 
section; or 

.. 
(b) votes at a meeting of such community, class or section 
in favour of a decision regarding the ex-communication of, or im-
position of any other social disability on, such person, 
on the ground that such person has refused to practise untouchability 
S according to the cust9m or usage of the community, class or st>ction, 
as the case' may be, or that such person has done any act in further-
ance of the objects of this Act shall be punishable with imprisonment 
which may extend to six months or with fine which may extend to 
five hundred rupees or with both. 
10 (3) Whoever abets an offence under this section shall be punished 
with the punishment provided for the offence. 
9. Offenees by companles.-(l) If the person committing an 
offence under this Act is a company, every person, who at the time 
the offence was committed was in charge of, and was responsible to, 
IS the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well 
as the company, shall be deemed to be guilo/ of the offence and shall 
be lia~le to be proceeded against and pUnIshed accordingly: 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render 
any such person liable to any punishment, if he proves that the offence 
20 was committed' without his knowledge or that he exercised atl due 
diligence to prevent the commission of such offence. 
(2) Notwithstanding '9nything contained in sub-section (1), where 
an offence under this Act has been committed by a company and it is 
proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or con-
2S nivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any direc-
tor or manager l secretary or other officer of the company, such di-
rector, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be 
guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and 
punished accordingly. 
)0 Exptanation.-For the purposes of this section,-
(a) 'company' means any body corporate and includes a firm 
or other association of individuals; and 
. (b) 'director' in relation to a firm means a partner in the firm. 
10. Cancellation or suspension of Hcenees In certain cases.- When 
15 a person who is convicted. of an offence under section 6 holds any 
licence under any law for the time being in force in respect of any 
profession, trade, calling or employment in relation to which the 
offence is committed, the court trying the offence may, without pre-
judice to any other penalty to which such person may be liable under 
40 section 8, direct that the licence shall stand cancelled or be suspended 
for such period as the court may deem fit, and every order of thl' 
court so cancelling or suspending a licence shall have effect as if it 
had been passed by the authority competent to cancel or suspend the 
licence under any suc~ law. 
Explanation.-In this section 'licence' inc]udes a pennit or II per-.. , mission. . 
11. Resumption or suspension of grants made by Government.-
Where the manager or trustee of a place of public worship which is 

5 
in receipt of a grant of land or money from the Government is con-
victed of an offence under this Act and such £onviction is not revers-
ed'or quashed in any appeal or revision, the Government may, if in 
their opinion the circumstances of the case warrant such a course, 
direct the suspension or resumption of the whole or any part of such 5 
~~ , 
12. Act tooverrlde other laws.-Save as otherwise expressly pro-
vided in this Act, the provisions 9f this Act shall have effect notwith-
standing anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law 
for the time being in fOIce, or any custom or usage or any instrument 10 
having effect by virtue of any such law or any decree or order of any 
court or other authority. . 
13. OtIences under this Act ~gnlsable.-Notwithstanding anythin& 
contained in the Code of CrilT!inal Procedure. 1898 (Act V of 1898), 
all offences under this Act shall be cognisable. IS 
14. Repeal.-The enactments specified in the Schedule are hereby 
repealed to the extent to which they or any of the provisions con-
tamed therein correspond or are repugnant to this Act or to any of 
the provisions contained herein. 
THE SCHEDULE 
(See section 14) 
1. The Bihar Harijan (Removal of Civil Disabilities) Act, 1949 
(Bihar Act XIX of 1949). 
2. The Bombay Harijan (Removal of Social Disabilities) Act. 1946 
20 
(Bombay Act X of 1947). 25 
3. The Bombay Harijan Temple Entry Act, 1947 (Bombay Act 
XXXV of 1947). 
4. The Central Provinces and Berar Schedl.1led Castes (Removal of 
Civil Disabilities) Act, 1947 (Central Provinces Act XXIV of 1947). 
5. The Central Provinces and Berar Temple Entry Authorisation lO 
Act, 1947 (Central Provinces Act XLI of 1947). 
6. The Madras Removal of Civil Disabilities Act, 1938 (:M:adraR 
Act XI of 1938). 
7. The Orissa Removal of Civil Disabilities Act, 1946 (Orissa Act 
XI of 1946). is 
8. The Orissa Temple Entry Authorisation Act. 1948 (Orissa Act 
XI of 1948). 
9. The East Punjab (Removal of Religious and Social Disabilities) 
Act, 1948 (East Punjab Act XVI of 1948). 
10. The United ,Provinces Removal of Social Disabilities Act. 1947 40 
(U.P. Act XIV of 1947). 
11. The West Bengal Hindu Social J;>isabilities Removal Act. 1948 
(West Bengal Act XXXVII of 1948). 
12. The Hydepabad Harijan Temple Entry Regulation, 1358F (No. 
LV of 1358 Fasli). 45 

6 
13. The Hyderabad Harijan (Removal of Social Disabilities) Regu-
lation, 1358F (No. LVI of 1358 Fasli). 
14. The Madhya Bharat Harijan Ayogta Nivaran Vidhan, Samvat 
2005 (Madhya Bharat Act No. 15 of 1949). 
5 15. Th~ Mysore Removal of Civil Disabilities Act, 1943 (Mysore 
Act XLII of 1943). 
16. The Mysore Temple Entry Authorisation Act, 1948 (Mysore 
Act XIV of 1948). 
17. The Saurashtra Harijan (Removal of Social Disabilities) Ordi-
10 nance (No. XL of 1948). 
18. The United State of Travancore-Cochin Removal of Social Dis-
abilities Act (Travancore-Cochin Act VIII of 1125). 
19. The Coorg Scheduled Caste (Removal of Civil and Social Dis-
abilities) Act, 1949 (Coorg Act I of 1949). 
15 20. The Coorg Temple Entry Authorisation Act. 1949 (Coorg Act 
II of 1949). 

7 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Under article 17 of the Constitution, untouchability is abolished 
and its practice in any form is forbidden. The enforcement of any 
disability arising out of untouchability shall be an offence punishable 
in acco\,dance with law. As no Central law exists c;>n the subject, a 
law has to be enacted by Parliament as required by sub-clause (ii) 
of clause (a) of article 35 of the Constitution and the Bill has been 
prepared in pursuance of this requirement. 
It is not possible to define untouchability and, therefore, the scheme 
of the draft Bill is to make express provisions with respect to the 
more common forms of untouchability which are practised in India. 
The special features of this Bill as compared with the existing State 
laws on the subject are that~ 
(a) the Bill is not confined to Hindus; 
(b) an untouchable shall not cease to be an untouchable if 
he resides in any locality other than the locality mentioned in 
relation to him under the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order,. 
1950; . 
(c) whoever takes any part in the ex-communication of, or 
imposition of any social disability on, any person who refuses to 
practise untouchability or does any act in furtherance of the 
objects of this new law will also be guilty of an offence; 
(d) in addition to the normal penalty for an offence, the 
Court may also cancel or suspend any licence in respect of pny 
profession, trade, calling or employment when an offence is com-
mitted under this law dW'illS the course of any such profession, 
trade, calling or employment. 
Offences under this new law are to be cognisable. 
K. N. KATJU 
NEW DELHI; 
The 19th December, 1953, 

HOUSE OF THE PEOPLE 
, 
IS_ • 
A 
llIl~l. 
to prescribe punishment for the practice of untouchability or 
the enforcement of any disabiHty arisjng therefrom. 
(Shri Kailas Nath Katju, 
Minister for Home Affairs) 