!. ') L_. 3. 
IDK 
~ABHA 
CORRIGENDA 
to 
THE 
EiAST 
PUUJ 
AB 
lJRBAN 
REl~ 
T 
RES 
TRICTION 
(CHANDIGARH 
AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 
1977 
(To 
be/As 
introduced 
in 
lDk 
Sabha) 
Page 
1, 
line 
8,-
!Q£ 
'IC 
andi 
garh 
" 
read 
'Chandi 
garh 
" 
Page 
5, 
line 
26 
,-
:for 
"on" 
read 
"in" 
Page 
6, 
line 
9.,-
:for 
"posse 
sion" 
read 
"po 
s se 
s sion 
" 
NEW 
DELHI; 
April. 
J 
'l 
1977 
Chai 
tra 
11 
,u1899 
(Saka) 

East 
Punjab 
Act III 
or 1849. 
BIll No. 14 of 1977 
THE EAST PUNJAB URBAN RENT RESTRICTION 
(CHANDIGARH AMENDMENT) BILL, 1977 
A 
BILL 
Iuf1MT to «mend the Ecat ]lun;ob Urba.n Rent Remiction Act. 1948. CIS in 
force in the Union territorrl· Otf ~h. 
Bz it enacted. by Par)tament in the Twenty-eighth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
1. (I) This Act may be ealled the East Punjab Urban Rent Restric- Short 
HOD (Cbandfgarh Ainendment) Act, 19'17. title 
and 
, (2) It shall be deemed to have corne into torce on the 17th day of COID-
menca. 
tneDt. 
December, 1976. 
~ hl section 2 of the East Punjab Urban Rent Restriction Act, 1949, Amend-
81m force in the Union territory of Candigarh (hereinafter refemKi to ment of 
as the principal Act), in clause (h), for the worda "the Schedule to this section •• 
10 Aet .. , the words and figure "Schedule I to this Act" shall be substituted. 
I' 
S. In !eetion 13 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (3), the foUowing E~Z4MtiOn aball be inserted 
at, the end, namely:-
'E:!!pl4ft4tion..-For the purposes of th.fa sub-eectton, "residen-
tial building" includes 8 scheduled buildiDg.'; 

Insertion 
of new 
lectiGn 
13A. 
ltiJht to 
recov .. 
imme-
., diate 
pones-
sian of 
reaiden.. 
tialor 
schedul-
ed bUild-
ing to 
acc.rue 
to certain 
penona. 
(b) after sub-section (4), the following 8ub-aection ahall be Ill· 
sel1ed, namely:-
Ie t4A) ~Where a landlord who, having evicted any tenant from 
a residential or a scheduled building in pursuance of an order 
made under section 13A,- , 
(4) does not occupy it, or 
(b) within a period of three years from the date of. luch 
eviction of the .enant, lets out, without obtaining the writtt'n 
permission of the Controller for so doing, the whole or 1U'1 
part of such residtUltial or scheduled building, to any perIOD 10 
other than the tenant evicted from it, 
the evicted tenant may apply to the Controller for an order 
directing that the possession of such residential. Of scheduled 
building or, as the case may be, part thereof, &hall be restored 
to him and the Controller shall make an order accordingly.". IS 
4. After section 13 of the principal Act, the following IleCtion shall be 
illSerted, namely:-
"13A (1) Where a landlord who, being a person in occupation of 
any residential builcU.ng allotted to him by the Central Government 
or any local authority, is required by, or in pursuance of, any general 20 
. or sP,t!~ Ci)rder made by that Government or authority, to vacate 
, .. , ...... I.' ........ ill buildIng, or in default, to incur certain obligations, 
OJI 'the gro~:~t he,.OWBs,.iD tlta Wnlon territory of OhaildiJarh, a 
resideij.tial ora s,*eduledbuilding either in his own name or in the 
name of 'his wife or dependent Child, there shall accrue, on and from zS 
the date of such order, to such landlord, notwithstanding anything 
contained elsewhere in this Act or in any other law for the time being 
in force or in any contract (whether express or implied), custom or 
~ to· .the· contrary, a right to recover immediately ~tbe pb8l!l1II10D 
of any resideDtial'~.'scheclu1ad'buildiDg let out by 'him: SO 
Provided that nothing in tbis aection shall be CODBkued as 4OJl-
ferrlDg aright 'on a landlord ownin& in the Union terr1f09·'ot 
Chandigarh two or more residential or scheduled buildinp, whether 
in hif own uame Of, in the name of 1Ws wife or depencieat child; to 
recover the po8sesaWn of more than ODe residential or 1Chedu1acl 35 
building and it shall be lawful for such ludlord to indicate the real-
dential or scheduled building. possession of which he intends to 
recover: 
Provided further that where any residential or scheduled buJ1d. 
ing corit~ Jl101'e than ODe residential unit, nothing in this seCtion ~ 
1tfial1' be . eonstrued as' conferring a right on the landlord to recover 
.' posse.sion of more than such Dttmber of residential unit.·.. :.re 
. suftlclent' 1.orhis own use and occupation, and for this' putpoIe. it 
shall be lawful for the landlord to ind'icate the residential unit or 
units, the possession of which he intends to recover. ' .' 4$ 
(I) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Act 
or in any ether law for the time being in forCe Or m any cOntract, 
,custom or .. to b contrary. where'the .),ndJGI'd, 'exerciaes the 
rilbt of recovery CODferred ODIUmby' tub .eat.ioD (1), DO COIDpena-

10 
I,' 
3 
tlon shaD be, payable by him to the ten8llt or any.person claiming 
tbnnlgh or under him and no claim for such compensation shall be 
entertaiD.ed by any cOurt, tribunal or other authority: 
'PrOvided that where the lancllordhad received,-
(4) any rent in advance from the tenant, he shall. Within • 
period of ninety days from the date of recovery of possession of 
the residential or scheduled building by him, refund to the tenant 
such amount as represents the rent payable for the unexpired 
portion of the contract, agreement or lease; 
(b) any other payment, he shall, within the period 'aforesaid, 
refund to the tenant a sum which shall bear the same proportihn 
to the total amount so received, as the unexpired portion of the 
contract or agreement or lease bears to the total period of con-
tract or agrec.>ment or lease: 
Provided further that, if any default is made in making anr re-
fund as aforesaid, the landlord shall be liable to pay' simple interest 
at the rate of six per cent. per annum on the amount, which he lias 
omitted or failed to refund.". 
5. After section 18 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be 
20 inserted, namely:-
.aI8A. Section 18B or' any rule made thereunder shall ha\1e 'efrtoet 
ll,OtwfthstandJng anything incOnsistent therewith contained elsewhere 
in Ws Act or in any other law for the time being in force. 
laB. (1) Every application by a landlord for the recovery of 
as . posseasion of any residential or acheduled· building OIl the ground 
speclfted in section 13A shall be dealt with in accordance with the 
pi'Oeedure specifted in this section. 
(2) The Controller shall issue summons, in relation to every 
application referred to in sub-section (1), in thefonnspecifled in 
30 . Schedule II to this Act 
(3) (4) The Controller shalt, in addition to, and sbnuJtaneousl~' 
with, the issue of RUmmons for serviCe on the tenant, also direct the 
summons to be served by registered post, Acknowledgment due, 
addressed to the tenant or his agent empowered to accept the seorvice • 3' at the place where the tenant or his agent actuallv and voluntarily 
tesJdes or carries on bUsiness or personally works for gafn and may, 
if the circumstances of the case so require, also direct the publfcatfon 
of the summons in a newspaper circulating in the locality in which 
tle tenlU'lt is last known to have resided or carried OD busin~s or 
personally worked for gain. 
(b) When an acknowledgment purporting to be signed by the 
tenant or his agent is received by the Controller or the registered 
article containing the summons Is received back with an endorse-
merIt purporting to have been made by a postal employee to the 
45 dfect that the tenant or his agent had refused to take delivery of 
the regtstered article, the Controller may declare that there hu been 
'" 8 valid service of summons. 
Insertion 
of n'ew 
section!' 
.1BA and 
18B. 
~tion 
l8B 
to have 
over-
riding 
eft'ecl. 
Special 
proce_ 
dure for 
dispolkd 
of appli-
cations 
for 
eviction 
on the 
ground 
of bona 
fide 
require-
ment .. 

Amend. 
mentor 
seetlOD 
19. 
4 
(4) The tenant OD whom the summons is duly served (whether 
in the ordinary way or by registered post) in the form specified in 
Schedule n to tlUs Act sball not contest the prayer for eviction from 
the residential or scheduled building unleSs he files an affidavit stat.-
ing the grounds on which he seeks to contest the application for S 
eviction and obtains leave from the Controller as hereinafter pro-
vided; and in default of his appearance in pursuance of the summons 
or his obtaining such leave, the statement made by the landlord in 
the application for eviction shall be deemed to be admitted by the 
tenant and the applicant shall be entitled to an order for eviction 10 
on the ground aforesaid. 
(5) The Controller shall give to the tenant leave to contest the 
application if the affidavit filed by the tenant discloses such facts u 
would disentitle the landlord from obtaining an order for the recovery 
of possession of the residential or scheduled building on the ground 15 
specified in section 13A. 
(6) Where leave is granted to' the tenant to contest the applica-
tion, the Controller shall commence the hearing of the application 
as early as practicable. 
(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the Con- ~o 
troller shall. while holding an inquiry in a proceeding to which this 
section appUes, follow the practice and procedure of a Com of Small 
Causes including the recording of evidence. 
(8) No appeal or second appeal shall lie against an order tor the 
recovery of possession of any residential or scheduled building made a5 
by the Controller in accordance with the procedure specified in thll 
aectlon: 
Provided that the High Court may, for the purpose of sattsfytng 
Itself that an order made by the Controller under this sectlon Is 
accordtug to law, call for the records of the case and pass such order 30 
in respect thereto as it thinks fit. 
(9) Where no application has been made to the High Court for 
revision, the Controller may exercise the powers of review in aceord. 
&Dee with the provisions of Order XLVII of the First Schedule to 
the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908. 35 50t 1908. 
(10) Save as otherwise provided in this section, the procedure 
for the disposal of an application for eviction on the ground speclfted 
in section 13A shall be the same as the. procedure for the dispoaal of 
appUcations by Controllers.". 
8. In section 19 of the prinCipal Act. after sub-section (2), the follow. 40 
Jng sub-sectton shall be inserted, namely:-
It (2A) A landlord who, having evicted a tenant from a residen-
tial or a scheduled building in pursuance of an order made under 
section 13A, does not occupy it or lets it out In contravention of the 
provisions of sull-section (4A) of section 13, shall be punishable with 45 
. imprisonment for a t~rm which play extend to two years and wtth 
fiDe.". 

'r.. The existing Schedule to the principal Act shall be numbered 88 
Schedule I thereof and, after the Schedule as so numbered, the following 
Schedule shall be added, namely:-
"SCHEDULE II 
[See section 1SB] 
.1"ORM 01' Sl1KMOKS IN A CASE WHERE RECOVERY OF POSSESSION 01' USmENTIAL 
OR SCHEDt1LED BlJIU)ING IS PM TED FOR ON THE GROUND SPECIFIED IN SECTION 
13A OF THE EAST PuNJAB URBAN R.F.NT RESTBICTION ACT, 1949. AS IN FORCB 
IN THE UNION TERRITORY OF CW.NDIGARH 
10 To 
[Name, description and place of residence of the ~nant.] 
WHEREAS o8hri has file.:! an application (8 copy 
of which is.annexed) ·for your eviction from (here insert the pard-
culaI'R of the residential or scheduled building) on the ground 
specifled in section 13A of the East Punjab Urban Rent Restriction 
ActO 1949, as in force in the Union territory of Chandigarh; 
You are hereby summoned to appear before the Controller 
within ftfteen days of the service hereof and to obtain the leave of 
the COJttroller to contest the application for eviction on the ground 
aforesaid; in default whereof, the applicant will be entitled at any 
time aft.er the expiry. o£ the said period of fifteen days to obtain an 
order' f(no. your eviction from the said residential or scheduled build-
ing. 
Lea,-. to appear and contest the application may be obtained 
on an application to the Controller supported by an affidavit as is 
referred to on sub-~ection (5) of section 18B of the said Act. 
GiVeD under my hand and seal. 
This day o~ 19. 
Controller. 
Addition 
of 
Schedule 
II. 
8. (1) 'Ihe East Punjab Urban Rent Restriction (Chandigarh Amend- Repeal 
1. of 1m. 30 ment) Ordinance, 1976 is hereby repealed. and 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken 
under the principal Act, as amended by the said Ordinance, shall be 
deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions 
of the principal Act as amended by this Act. 
saving. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
In accordance with a recent decision of the Central Government, 
persons' owning houses in Chandigarh were required to vacate, by the 
20th January, 19'17, Government- accommodation allotted to them, failing 
which they were required to pay rent at an enhanced rate. In order to 
avoid hardship to such persons, it was considered necessary to amend 
the East Punjab Urban Rent Restriction Act, 1949, as in force in the 
Union territory of Chandigarh, to give such persons the right to recover 
possesion o~ their own houses immediately through a special procedure. 
2. Under the aforesaid Act, residential buildings ·used by lawyers, 
architects, dentists, engineers, veterinary surgeons or medical practitioners 
for residential-cum-business purposes are categorised as "scheduled 
buildings". The tenants of such buildings are protected from ·evlction 
even if the landlord requires it for bonCl fide personal use. ThII 
anomalous position was creatin~ hardship to landlords. It was, therefore, 
considered necessary to amend the Act so that the landlord of a seheduled 
building becomes entitled to recover such building for bOM ~ pehsonaJ 
use. Since Parliament was not in session and was a180 not Ukely to eome 
into .-on before 20th January, 1977, the af~d amendinents 'were 
made by an Ordinance promulgated by' the Pres1dent on 17th DeCember, 
1976. 
3. This :Elm seeks to replace the Ordinance. 
NEW DI:LHI; CHARAN SINGH. 
The 31st MClrch, 1977. 
6 

ANNEXURE 
EX'l'BACT FROM THE .EAST PuNJAB URBAN RENT RESTRICTION ACT, 1949. 
(EAsT PuNJAB A£T No. III OF 1949) 
• • • • 
2. In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or Deft. 
context,- • nitJona. 
• • • • 
(h) "scheduled building" means a residential buildlng which :Is 
being used by a person engaged in one or more of the professions 
specified in the Schedule to this Act, partly for hJ.a business and partly 
for his residence; 
• • • • 

LOK SABtiA 
A 
BILL 
fll:rthef> to amend the East PunjAb Urban Rent Restriction Act, 1949, 
CII in force in the Union Territory 0/ ChamligArh. 
(Shri Charan SIn.gh, Minister of H011I.e Affair,) 