THE FINANCE BILL, 1987 
(AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 

1HE FINANCE BDL, 1987 
ARRANGEMENT OF O.AUSES 
CHAPTER I 
PRElJMINAlty 
CLAUSES 
1. Short title and commencement 
CHAP'JERn 
RATES OFINCDME-TAX 
2. Income-tax. 
3. Amendment of section 2. 
4. Amendment of secUoa 10. 
S. Amendment d aection lOA 
6. Amendment of section n. 
7. Amendment of leClion 32AB. 
8. Amendment of lCCtion 33AB. 
9. Amendment of section 36. 
10. Amendmc::Dt of sectioa 43B. 
11. Insertion of new section 44BB. 
12 Insertion of new section 44BBA. 
13. Amendment of section 45. 
14. Amendment of section 47. 
IS. SubstilUtioa of new section for section 48. 
16. Amendment of section 49. 
17. Omission of sectioa 52. 
18. Amendment of aec:tioa 53. 
19. Amcndmc:ot of aec:tion 54. 
21>. Amendment of section S4B. 
21. Amendment of aec:tion S4D. 
22. Amendment of aec:tion 54E. 
23. Amcadmeol of aec:tion 54F. 
214. Insenion of new aecIions S4G and 54H. 
25. Amendment of aec:tion 55. 
26. Amendmc:ot of aec:tion 56. 
n. Amendment of aectioa 51. 
28. Amendment of aec:tioa 10. 
29. SubstilUlion of new section for section 71. 
30. Amendment of aectioa 72. 
31. SubstilUtion of new section for lICCIion 74. 
CHAPI'ERm 

CLAUSES 
32 Amendment of sectim ROC. 
33. Amendment of section 8OCC. 
34. Insertion of new seetion SOCCA. 
35. Amendment of seelion 800. 
36. Amendment of.seelion BO-O. 
n. Amendment of seelion 8ORRA. 
38. Omission of section 8OT. 
39. Amendment of seelionBOU. 
40. Omission of CbapIer V1B. 
41. Omission of 0Iaptt:r XI. 
42 Omissim of seclion 115. 
43. InserIion eX new 0I8pIa' XIIB. 
44. Amendment of seelion ISS. 
45. AmendmC21t of seclion 192. 
46. Amcndmentofseelionl94. 
47. Amendmentofseelion 194A. 
48. Amendment of seclion 194D. 
49. In8ertim of new section 194E. 
so. Amcndmentofseelion 195. 
51. Insertion of new seelion 195A. 
S2. Amendment of seclion 197. 
(ii) 
53. Amendment of seclions 198,200,203,204 and 205. 
54. AmendmentofseeIiOllI99. 
55. Amendment of seelim 202. 
S6. Amendment of seclion 203. 
st. lnscrtion of new seclion 203A. 
S8. Substibllion of new section for seetion 206. 
59. Substibltion of new section for section 245A. 
60. Amendment of seclim 2458. 
61. lnscrtion of new seclions 2458A to 245BD. 
62 Amendment of seclion 24SC. 
63. Amendment of seclion245D. 
64. Amendment of seclion 24SE. 
65. AmendmC21t of section 24SF. 
66. Amendment of seclion 24SH. 
(iI. Insertion of new section 245HA. 
68. Amendment of section 245K. 
(I). Omission of seetion 245M. 
70. In&eI1ion of new seclion 2128B. 
71. Amcndmenl of seclion 273B. 
72. Omission of seelion 280ZA. 
73. Omission of sections 285 and 286. 
74. Amendment of seelion 293. 
75. Amendment d Elcwnlh Schedule. 
76. Consequential amendments. 
77. AmeDdmeat of aeclion 2. 
78. Amendment of IICCIion 5. 
79. SubllilUlion of new secIioa for section 22A. 
In Ameadmenl of IICCIiaa 228. 
81. Iuedion of new seelioal22BA to 22BD. 
82. AmendmenI of IIC'JCIion 22C. 
83. Amend .... of IICCIiaa 220. 
14. Ameodment of ICCIkm 22B. 
85. Amendmeat of IOCIion 22F. 
86. Ameadmeat of IICCIion 2m. 
Wealth-tax 

(iii) 
CLAUSES 
87. Insertion of new section 22HA. 
88. Amendment of section 22K. 
89. Omission of section 22M. 
90. Amendment of section 31. 
91. Amendment of section 43. 
Gift - tax 
92. Amendment of section 2. 
93. Amendment of section 42. 
CHAPT'ERIV 
INDIRFCI' TAXFS 
Customs 
94. Amendment of Act 51 of 1975. 
95. Auxiliary duties of customs. 
96. Amendment of Act I of 1944. 
97. Amendment of Act 5 of 1986. 
98. Special duties of excise. 
99. Amendment of Act 58 of 1957. 
CHAPTER V 
FORFJGN EXCHANGE CONSERVAllCJ'1l (I1{AVFL) TAX 
100. Extent and commencement. 
101. Definitions. 
102. Foreign exchange conservation (travel) tax. 
103. Power to exempt. 
lOt Penalties. 
105. Protection of action taken in good faith. 
1(X). Power to ~e rules. 
107. Rules and notifications to be laid before Parliament. 
l~. Amendment of Act 47 of 1974. 
100. Amendment of Act 62 of 1986. 
THE FIRST SCHEDUlE. 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE. 
THE THIRD SCHEDULE. 
THE R>URTH SCHEDULE. 
CHAPTER VI 
MlSCEl..LANFDUS 

AS INTRODUCED IN LOX: SABRA 
ON 21TH FEBRUARY, 1987. 
Bill No.14 of 1987 
THE FINANCE BILL, 1987 
A 
BIlL 
to give effect to the financial proposals of the Central Government for the 
financial year 1987-88. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the lbirty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as foDows:-
CHAPTER I 
PREuMlNARy 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Finance Act, 1987. 
5 (2) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, sections 2 to 93 shall be deemed to have come 
into force on the 1st day of April, 1987. 
CHAP1ERIT 
RA11!SCFHndB-TAX 
Q ""6-n'01. 
2. (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-sections (2) .xl (3), for the assessment year Income -tax. 
10 commencing on the 1st day of April, 1987, income-tax shall be charged at the rares specified in 
Part I of the First Schedule. 
(2) In the cases to wfiich Sub-Paragraph lor Sub-Paragraph IT of Paragraph A of Part I of 
the First Schedule applies, where the assessee has, in the previous year, any net agricultural 
income exceeding six hundred rupees, in addition to total income, and the total income 
15 excccds,-
(i) in a case to which the said Sub-Paragraph I applies, eighteen thousand rupees, and 
(a) in a case to which the said Sub-Paragraph IT applies, twelve thousand rupees, 
then,-
(t4I the net agricultural income shall be taken into account, in the manner provided in 
7{) clause (b) [that is to say, as if the net agricultural income were comprised in the total 
income after.-
(;) in a case to which the said Sub-Paragraph I applies, the frrst eighteen thousand 
rupees. and 
(ii) in a case to which the said Sub-Paragraph IT applies, the frrst twelve thousand 
rupees. 
of the total income but without being liable to tax], only for the purpose of charging 
income-laX in respect of the total income; and 

2 
(b) the income-tax chargeable sbaU be calculafed u follows:-
(i) the IOIal income and abe net aaricullllr8l iDcome sha1l be aggregated and the amount 
of income-tax sbaU be detrnnincd in respect of the aggregate income at the rates specified 
in Sub-Paragraph I or, u the case may be, Sub-Paragraph n of the said Paragraph A, as if 
such aggregate income were abe IOI8l income; S 
(ii) the net agricultural income sha1l be incn:ased,-
(A) in a case to which the said Sub-Paragraph I applies, by a sum of eighteen 
thousand rupees; and 
(B) in a case to which the said Sub-Paragraph II applies, by a sum of twelve 
thousand rupees. 10 
and the amount of income-tax sball be detennined in respect of the net agricultural 
income as so increased at the rates specified in Sub-Paragraph lor, as the case may be, 
Sub-Paragraph II of the said Paragraph A, as if the net agricultural income as so increased 
were the total income; 
(iii) the amount of income-tax determined in accmlance with sub-clause (i) shall be IS 
reduced by the amount of income-tax determined in accordance with sub-clause (ii) and 
the sum so arrived at shall be the income-tax in respect of the total income. 
(3) In cases to which the provisions of Chaptes xn or Chapter XII-A or sub-section (1 A) 
of section 161 or section 164 or section 164A or section 167A of the Income-tax Act, 1961 430f 1961. 
(hereinafter referred to as the Income-tax Act) apply, the tax chargeable shal1 be detennined as 20 
provided in that Chapter or that section, and with reference to the rates imposed by sub-section 
(1 ) or the rates as specified in that OIapter or section, as the case may be. 
(4) In cases in which tax has to be deducted under sections 193, 194, 194A, 194B, 194BB, 
1940,I94E and 195 of the Income-tax Act at the rates in force, the deduction shall be made at 
the rates specified in Part II of the Farst Schedule. 2S 
(5) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (6), in cases in which income-tax has to be 
calculated under the fU"St proviso to sub-section (5) of section 132 of the Income-tax Act or 
charged under sub-section (4) of section 172 or sub-section (2) of section 174 or section 175 
or sub-section (2) of section 176 of the said Act or deducted WIder section 192 of the said Act 
from income chargeable under the head "Salaries" or deducted under sub-section (9) of section 30 
80E of the said Act from any payment referred to in the said sub-section (9) or in which the 
"advance tax" payable under Chapter XVII-C of the said Act has to be computed, at the rate or 
rates in force, such income-tax or, as the case may be, "advance tax" shall be so calculated, 
charged, deducted or computed at the rate or rates specified in Part III of the First Schedule: 
Provided that in cases to which the provisions of Chapter XII or Chapter XII-A or sub- 35 
section (lA) of section 161 or section 164 {X" section 164A or section 167A of the Income-tax 
Act apply, "advance tax" shall be computed with reference to the rates imposed by this sub-
section or the rates as specified in that Chapter or section, as the case may be. 
(6) In the cases to which Sub-Paragraph I or Sub-Paragraph II of Paragraph A of Part III of 
the First Schedule applies, where the assessee has, in the previous year or, if by virtue of any. 40 
provision of the Income-tax Act, income-tax is to be charged in respect of the income of a 
period other than the previous year, in such other period, any net agricultpral income exceeding 
six hundred rupees, in addition 10 tota1 income and the totaI income exceeds,-
(i) in a case to which the said Sub-Paragraph I applies, eighteen thousand rupees, and 
(ii) in a case to which the said Sub-Paragraph II applies, twelve thousand rupees, 
then, in calculating income-tax under the fIrst proviso 10 sub-section (5) of section 132 of 
the Income-tax Act or in charging income-tax under sub-section (2) of section 174 or 
45 

5 
10 
3 
section 175 or sub-section (2) of section 176 of the said Act or in computing the "advance 
tax" payable under Chapter XVII-C of the said Act, at the rate or ."8teS in force,-
(a) the net agriCUltural income shall be taken into account, in the manner provided in 
clause (b) [that is to say, 8.'i if the net agricultural income were comprised in the total 
income after,-
(i) in a case to which the said Sub-Paragraph I applies, the first eighteen thousand 
rupees,and 
(ii) in a case to which the said Sub-Paragraph n applies, the frrst twelve thousand 
rupees, 
of the total income but without being liable to tax], only for the purpose of calculating, 
charging or computing such income-tax or, as the case may be, "advance tax" in respect of 
the totaI income; and 
(b) such income-tax or, as the case may be, "advance tax" shall be so calculated, charged 
or computed as follows:-
15 (i) the total income and the net agricultural income shall be aggregated and the 
20 
amount of income-tax or "advance tax" shall be determined in respect of the aggregate 
income at the rates specified in Sub-Paragraph I or, as the case may be, Sub-Paragraph II 
of the said Paragraph A, as if such aggregate income were the total income; 
(ii) the net agricultural income shall be increased, -
(A) in a case to which the said Sub-Paragraph I applies, by a sum of eighteen 
thousand rupees; and 
(B) in a case to which the said Sub-Paragraph II applies, by a sum of twelve 
thousand rupees, 
and the amount of income-tax or "advance tax" shall be determined in respect of the net 
25 agricultural income as so increased at the rates specified in the said Sub-Paragraph lor, as 
the case may be, the said Sub-Paragraph n, as if the net agriCUltural income as so 
increased were the total income; 
(iii) the amount of income-tax or "advance tax" detc:rmined in accordance with sub-
c1awJe (i) shall be ~ by the amount of income-tax or, as the case may be, "advance 
30 tax" detamined in accordance with sub-clawJe (ii) and the sum so arrived at shall be the 
income-tax or, as the case may be, "advance tax" in respect of the IOtal income. 
35 
40 
(l) For the purposes of this section and the First Schcdule,-
(a) "company in which the public are substantially interested" means a company 
within the meaning of clause (18) of section 2 of the Income-tax Act, and includes a 
subsidiary of such company if the whole of the share capital of such subsidiary company 
has been held by the parent company or by its nominees throughout the previous year; 
(b) "domestic company" means an Indian company, or any other company which, in 
respect of its income liable to income-tax under the Income-tax Act for the assessment 
year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1987, has made the p-escnbed arrangements for 
the declaration and payment within India of the dividends (including dividends on 
preference shares) payable out of such income in accordance with the provisions of 
section 194 of the Act; 
(c) "insurance commission" means any re.mmeration. or rew.-d, whether by way of 
commission or odaerwise, for soliciting or procuring insurance business (including 
buIiDeaa relating to the continuance. renewal or revival of policies of insurance); 

Allmdlllflll 
of!ledioo2 
4 
~ "inVestmeDt company" means a company whose gross total income (as defmed in 
section 80B of the Income-tax Act) cmsists mainly of income which is chargeable under 
the heads "Interest on securities". "Income from house property", "Capital gains" and 
"Income from other 1OUI'CClS"; 
(e) "net agricultural income", in relation to a person, means the total amount of S 
agricultural income, from whatever soun:e derived. of that person compured in acc<X'dance 
with the rules contained in Part IV of the Fust Schedule; 
(f) "laX-free security" means any security of the Central Govmunent issued or declared 
to be income-laX free, 01' any security of a Slate Government issued income-tax free, the 
income-laX whereon is payable by the State Government; 
(g) "trading company" means a company whose business consists mainly in dealing 
in goods or merchandise manufactured, produced or procossed by a person other than that 
company and whose income atuibutable to such business included in its gross total 
income (as defmed in section 80B of the Income-tax Act) is not less than fifty-one per 
cent of the amount of such gross total income; 
10 
(Irj all other words and expressions used in this section or in the First Schedule but 15 
not defmed in this sub-section and defined in the Income-tax Act shall have the meanings 
respectively assigned to them in that Act 
CHAM'ERm 
DIROCr TAXES 
Income-tax 
3. In section 2 of the Income-tax Act,-
(a) in clause (22), with effect from the 1st day of April, 1988,-
(i) in sub-clause (e), f(X' the words", being 8 person who has a subslantial interest in 
the company,", the words and brackets "or to any concern in which such shareholder is a 
member or a partner and in which he has 8 substantial interest (hereafter in this clause 
referred to as the said concem)" shall be substibltod; 
(ii) in sub-clause (ii), after the words "8 shareholder", the words "(X' the said concern" 
shall be inserted; 
(iii) after ExplQ1lQtion 2, the following Explanation shall be inserted, namely:-
'Explanation 3.- For the purposes of this clause,-
(a) "concern" means a Hindu undivided family, or a ftrm or an association of 
persons or 8 body of individuals or 8 company; 
(b) a person shall be deemed to have a subslantial interest in 8 concern, other 
than a company, if he is. at any time during the previous year, beneficially entitled 
to not less lhan twenty per cent. of the income of such concern;'; 
(b) in clause (24), aft& sub-clause (u), the following sub-clause shall be inserted wilh 
effect from the 1st day of April, 1988. namely:-
"(x) any sum received by the assessee from his employees as contributions to any 
provident fund or superannuation fund or any fund set up under the provisions of the 
Employees' Slate Insurance Act, ]948 or any other fund for the welfare of such 
employees;" : 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
34 of 1948. 

10f1956. 
40fl882 
s 
(c) afta'clause (29), the following clauses sbaIl be inserted with effect from the 1st day 
of April. 1988. namely:-
'(29A) "long-term capital asset" means a capital asset which is not a short-tenn 
capital asset; 
(29B) "long-term capital gain" means capital gain arising from the transfer of a long-
5 tenn capital asset;'; 
10 
15 
25 
30 
35 
(d) afta' clause (36), the following clause shall be inserted. namely:--
'(36..4) "public sector company" means any corporation established by or under any 
Central. State or Provincial Act or a Government company as dermed in section 617 of 
the Companies Act, 1956;'; 
(e) in clause (42A), before the Explanation, the following proviso shall be inserted 
with effect from the 1st day of April, 1988. namely:-
'Provided that in the case of a share held in a company, the provisions of this clause 
shall have effect as if for the words "thirty-six months". the words "twelve months" had 
been substituted.'; 
(f) after clause (42A), the following clause shall be inserted with effect from the 1st 
day of April, 1988, namely:-
'(428) "short-term capital gain" means capital gain arising from the transfer of a 
short-term capital asset;';, 
(g) in clause (47) with effect from the 1st day of April, 1988,-
(i) in sub<lause (iv), the word "or" shall be inserted at the end; 
(U) after sub<lause (iv), the following sub-clauses and Explanation shall be 
inserted. namely:-
'(v) any transaction involving the allowing of the possession of any immovable 
property 10 be taken or retained in part performance of a contract of the nature referred 
to in section S3A of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882; or 
(vi) any transaction (whether by way of becoming a member of. or acquiring shares 
in, a co-operative society, company or other association of persons or by way of any 
agreement or any arrangement or in any other manner whatsoever) which has the effect 
of II'8nsferring, or enabling the enjoyment of, any immovable property. 
ExplaMtion.- For the purposes of sub<lauses (v) and (vi), "immovable property" 
shall have the same mearung as in clause (d) of section 269UA;'. 
4. In section 10 of the Income-tax Act,--
(a) afk2-clause (lOB), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:-
H(lOC) any payment received by an employee of a public sector company at the time 
of his vohmtary retirement in accordance with any scheme which the Centta1 Government 
may, having regard 19 the economic viability of such company and other relevant 
cUcumstancca. approve in this behalf;"; 
(b) in clause (15),-
(i) in sub<lause (ii),-
(A) in the opening paragraph. for the words, brackets and figures "the Post Office 
Savings Bank (Cumulative Time Deposits) Rules, 1959". the words and figures "the 
ArnadrJauof 
sedion 10. 

6 
Post Office Cumulative Ttme Deposit Rules, 1981" shall be substituted and shall be 
deemed to ha'le been substituted with effect from the 1st day of April, 1983; 
(B) in the proviso. for the words. brackets and figures "in item (3) in the TabJe 
below rule 3 of the Post Office Savings Banks Rules, 1965", the words and fJgUl'es "in 
item 6 in the Table below rule 4 of the Post Office Savings Account Rules. 1981" S 
shall be substituted and shall be deemed to have been substituted with effect from the 
1st day of April. 1983; 
(ii) in sub-clause (iv). af~ item (g) and the Explanalion thereto. the following 
item shall be inserted, name1y:-
"(h) by any public sector company in respect of such bonds or debentures and 
subject to such conditions, including the condition that the holder of such bonds or 10 
debentures registers his name and the holding with that company. as the Central 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf;"; 
(c) in clause (17).-
(i) in sub-clause (i). the word "and" shall be omitted and shall be deemed to have 
been omitted with effect from the 1st day of April. 1986; 
(ii) for sub-clause (ii). the following sub-clauses shall be substituted and shall be 
deemed to have been substituted with effect from the 1st day of April. 1986, namely:-
"iii) any allowance received by any person by reason of his membership of 
Parliament under the Members of Parliament (Constituency Allowance) Rules. 1986; 
15 
(iii) all other allowances not exceeding six hundred rupees per month in the 
aggregate received by any person by reason of his membership of any State Legislature 20 
or of any Committee thezeof. which the Central Government may. by notification in 
the Official Gazette. specify in this behalf;". 
Arnen:knmtof 5. In section lOA of the Income-tax Act. in the Explanation occurring at the end. after 
sectim lOA clause (ii). the following clause shall be inserted and shall be deemed to have been inserted 
with effect from the 1st day of April. 1981. namely:-
'(iii) "manufacture" includes any-
(a) process. or 
(b) assembling. or 
(e) recording of programmes on any disc. tape. perforated media or other information 
storage device.'. 
25 
6. In section 27 of the Income-tax Act. for clause (iii). the following clauses shall be 
substituted with effect from the 1st day of April. 1988. namely:- 30 
"(iii) a member of a co-operative society. company or other association of persons to 
whom a building or part thereof is allotted or leased under a house building scheme of the 
society. company or association. as the case may be. shall be deemed to be the owner of that 
building or part thereof; 
(iiia) a person who is allow.ed to take or retain possession of any building or part thereof 35 
in part performance of a conb:act of the nature referred to in section 53A of the Transfer of 
Property Act. 1882. shall be deemed to be the owner of that building or part thereof; 
(iiib) a person who acquires any rights (excluding any rights by way of a lease from 
month to month or for a period not exceeding one year) in or with respect to any building or 
part thereof, by virtue of any such transaction as is referred to in clause (f) of section 
269UA, shall be deemed to be the owner of that building or part thereof;". 40 
40f 1882. 

19 of 1953. 
70f1964. 
5 
10 
7 
7. In section 32AB of the Income-tax Act.-
(a) in sub-section (1 ).-
(i) for the words "deduction of". the words. brackets and figures "deduction (such 
deduction being allowed before the loss. if any. brought forward from earlier years is set 
off under section 72) of' shall be substituted; 
(ii) the following proviso shall be inserted at the end, namely:-
"Provided that where such assessee is a fmn. or any association of persons or any 
body of individuals. the deduction under this section shall not be allowed in the 
computation of the income of any partner, or as the case may be. any member of such 
fmn. asSOCiatiO;l of persons or body of individuals. "; 
(b) in sub-section (2). for clause (ii). the following clauses shall be substituted, 
namely:-
'(ii) "new ship" or "new aircraft" includes a ship or aircraft which before the date of 
acquisition by the assessee was used by any other person, if it was not at any time 
previous to the date of such acquisition owned by any person resident in India; 
15 (iii) "new machinery or plant" includes machinery or plant which before its 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
installation by the assessee was used outside India by any other person, if the following 
conditions are fulftlled. namely:-
(a) such machinery or plant was not. at any time previous to the date of such 
installation by the assessee, used in India; 
(b) such machinery or plant is imported into India from any country outside India; 
and 
(c) no deduction on account of depreciation in respect of such machinery or plant 
has been allowed or is allowable under this Act in computing the total income of any 
person for any period prior to the date of the installation of the machinery or plant by 
the assessee; 
(iv) "Tea Board" means the Tea Board established under 'section 4 of the Tea Act, 
1953;'; 
(c) in sub-section (3), in clause (a). for the words "as increased by an amount equal to 
the depreciation, if any, debited in the audited profit and loss account; and", the following 
shall be substituted, namely:-
"as increased by the aggregate of -
(;) the amount of delRCiation; 
(ii) the amount of incom~tax paid (X" payable, and provision therefor; 
(iii) the amount of surtax paid or payable under the Companies (Profits) Surtax 
Act, 1964; 
(iv) the amounts carried to any reserves, by whatever name called; 
(v) the amount or amounts set aside to provisions made for meeting liabilities, 
contingenci~ or commitments; 
(vi) the amount by way of provision for losses of subsidiary companies; and 
(vii) the amount (X" amounts of dividc:21ds paid (X" propo8ed. 
if any debited to the profit and loss account; and as reduced by any amount (X" amounts 
withdrawn from reserves or provisions. if such amounts are credited to the profit and loss 
account; and"; 
Arra&1ul2ttof 
.am32AB. 

An eD IIrn 
ofsectim. 
33AB. 
AAdDlIenc:l 
sectim.36. 
8 
(d) after sub-section (5), the fonowing sub-sections shall be inserted, namely:-
'(SA) Any amount standing to the credit of the assessee in the deposit account shall 
not be allowed to be withdrawn before the expiry of a period of five years from the date of 
deposit except for the purposes specified in the scheme and in the circumstances specified 
below:-
(a) closure of business; 
(b) deadt of an assessee; 
(c) partition of a Hindu undivided family; 
(d) dissolution of a finn; 
(e) liquidation of a company. 
(5B) Where any amount standing to the aedit of the assessee in the deposit account is 
utilised by the assessee for the purposes of any expenditure in connection with the 
eligible business or p-ofession in accordance with the scheme, such expenditure shall not 
be allowed in computing the income chargeable under the head "Profits and gains of 
business or profession".'; 
(e) in sub-section (6),-
(i) for the words "is not utilised in accordance with the scheme", the words "is not 
utilised in accordance with, and within the time specified in, the scheme" shall be 
substiblted; 
(ii) the wmds "within that previous year," shall be omitted. 
5 
10 
15 
8. In section 33AB of the Income..tax Act, in sub-section (5), for the words, figures and 20 
letters "assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1986, and the four assessment 
years next following that assessment year", the words, figures and letters "assessment years 
commencing on the 1st day of April, 1986 and the 1st day of April, 1987" shall be substituted 
with effect from the 1st day of April, 1988. 
9. In section 36 of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section (J), after clause (v), the following 
clause shall be inserted with effect from the 1st day of April, 1988, namely:-
'(va) any sum received by the assessee from any of his employees to which the 
provisions of sub-clause (x) of clause (24) of section 2 apply, if such sum is credited by 
the assessee to the employee's account in the relevant fund or funds on or before the due 
date. 
2'; 
Explanalion.-. For the purposes of this clause, "due date" means the date by which the 
assessee is required as an employer to credit an employee's contribution to the employee's 30 
account in the relevant fund under any Act, rule. order or notification issued thereunder or 
under any standing order. award, contract of service or otherwise:. 
10. In section 43B of the Income-tax Act, before the Explanation, the following provisos 
AmcmnIDc:l shan be inserted with effect from the 1st day of April. 1988. namely:-
sectim. 438. 
"Provided that nothing contained in this section shall apply in relation to any sum 
referred to in clause (a) which is actually paid by the assessee on or before the due date 
applicable in his case for furnishing the return of income under sub-section (J ) of section 
139 in respect of the previous year in which the liability to pay such sum was incurred as 
aforesaid and the evidence of such payment is furnished by the assessee along with such 
return: 
35 
Provided further that no deduction shall, in respect of any sum referred to in clause 
(b). be allowed unless such sum has actually been paid during the previous year on or 40 
before &he due date as defined in the ExplmtoJion below clause (va) of sub-section (1) of 
section 36.". 

5 
9 
11. In the Incom~tax Act, after section 44B, the following section shall be inserted and lnsa1inoCnew 
shall be deemed to have been inserted with effect from the 1st day of April, 1983, namely:-- seam44BB. 
'44BB. (1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in sections 28 to 41 and 
sections 43 and 43A, in the case of an asaesscc engaged in the business of providing services 
or facilities in connection with, or supplying plant and machinery on hire used, or to be 
used, in the prospecting for, or extraction or production of, minecal oils, a sum equal to ten 
per cenL of the aggregate of the amowlts specified in su1>-section (2) shall be deemed to be 
the profits and gains of such business chargeable. to tax under the head "Profits and gains of 
business or profession": 
Provided that this su1>-section shall not apply in a case where the provisions of section 42 
SJ1rial povisinb' 
= pins in 
CXlIII1!1C1i::t. 
wilhlhe 
b.IsinI:Is oC 
~ 
de., oC miruaI 
oils. 
10 or section 44D or section lISA or section 293A apply for the purposes of computing 
profits or gains or any other income referred to in those sections. 
15 
20 
(2) The amounts referred to in sub-section (J) shall be the following, namely:-
(a) the amount paid or payable (whether in or out of India) to the assessee or to any 
person on his behaff on account of the provision of services and facilities in connection 
with, or supply of plant and machinery on hire used or to be used in the prospecting for, 
or extraction or production of, mineral oils in India; and ' 
(b) the amount received or deemed to be received in India by or on behalf of the 
assessee on account of the provision of services and facilities in connection with, or 
supply of plant and machinery on hire used or to be used in the prospecting for, or 
extraction or production of, mineral oils outside India. 
Explanation.- For the purposes of this section,-
(;) "plant" includes ships, aircraft, vehicles, drilling units, scientific apparatus and 
equipment, used for the purposes of the said business; 
(ii) "mineral oil" includes petroleum and natural gas.'. 
12. In the Income-tax Act, after section 44BB (as directed to be inserted by clause 11), the ImeJtmoC 
2.'; following section shaD be inserted with effect from the 1st day of April, 1988, namely:- newSl.'dim 
30 
'44BBA. (1) Notwithstanding anything to the conlfarY contained in sections 28 to 43A, 
in the case of an assessee, being a non-resident, engaged in the business of operation of 
aircraft, a sum equal to five per cent. of the aggregate of the amounts specified in sub-
section (2) shall be deemed to be the profits and gains of such business chargeable to tax 
under the head "Profits and gains of business or profession". 
(2) The amounts referred to in sub-section (J) shall be the following, namely:-
44BBA 
Spx:iaI 
povisiat fer 
axnJUing 
pofiIs&n1 
gainsoC!he 
~of 
ClpCI'lIIioo of 
aiaaIl. in !he 
~oflDl­
(a) the amount paid or payable (whether in or out of India) to the assessee or to any ~. 
person on his behalf on account of the carriage of passengers, live-stock. mail or goods 
from any place in India; and 
(b) the amount received or deemed to be received in India by or on behalf of the 
assessee on account of the carriage of passengers, live-stock, mail or goods from any 
35 place outside India.'. 
40 
13. In section 45 of the Income-tax Act, with effect from the 1st day of April, 1988,-
(a) in sub-section (1), for the figures, letters and word "54E and 54F", the figures, 
lellers and word "54E, 54F, 54G and 54H" shall be substituted; 
(b) after sub-section (2). the following sub-sections shall be inserted, namely:-
'(3) The profits or gains arising from the transfer of a capital asset by a person to a 
firm or other association of persons or body of individuals (not being a company or a co-
Amcmrnentof 
&edion45. 

10 
operative society) in which he is or becomes a partner or member, by way of capital 
contribution or otherwise. shall be chargeable to tax as his income of the previous year in 
which such transfer takes place and. for the purposes of section 48, the amount recorded in 
the books of account of the flttn, association or body as the value of the capital as~et 
shall be deemed to be the full value of the consideration received or accruing as a result of .5 
the transfer of the capital asset. 
(4) The profits or gains arising from the transfer of a capital asset by way of 
distribution of capital assets on the dissolution of a fmn or other association of persons 
or body of individuals (not being a company or a co-operative society) or otherwise, shall 
be chargeable to tax as the income of the fmn, association or body, of the previous year 10 
in which the said transfer takes place and, for the purposes of section 48, the fair market 
value of the asset on the date of such transfer shall be deemed to be the full value of the 
consideration received or accruing as a result of the transfer. 
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1). where the capital gain 
arises from the transfer of a capital asset. being a transfer by way of compulsory 
acquisition under any law, or a transfer the consideration for which was determined or 
approved by the Central Government or the Reserve Bank of India, and the compensation 
or the consideration for such transfer is enhanced or further enhanced by any court, 
tribunal or other authority. the capital gain shall be dealt with in the following manner, 
namely:-
(a) the capital gain computed with reference to,the compensation awarded in the 
fll'St instance or, as the case may be, the consideration determined or approved in the 
first instance by the ·Central Government or the Reserve Bank of India shall be 
chargeable as income under the head "Capital gains" of the previous year in which the 
transfer took place; and 
(b) the amount by which the compensation or consideration is enhanced or further 
enhanced by the court, tribunal or other authority shall be deemed to be income 
chargeable under the head "Capital gains" of the previous year in which such amount is 
received by the assessee. 
Explanation.- For the purposes of this sub-section,-
(i) in relation to the amount referred to in clause (b). the cost of acquisition and 
the cost of improvement shall be taken to be nil; 
(it) the provisions of this sub-section shall apply also in a case where the transfer 
took place prior to the lst day of April, 1988; 
15 
20 
25 
30 
(iii) where by reason of the death of the person who made the transfer, or for any 35 
other reason. the enhanced compensation or consideration is received by any other 
person. the amount referred to in clause (b) shall be deemed to be the income, 
chargeable to tax under the head "Capital gains", of such other person.'. 
AlnaDnlDd 14. In section 47 of the Income-tax Act. clause (ii) shall be omitted with effect from the 
~41. 1st day of April. 1988. 40 
SubstilutK:mof 15. For section 48 of the Income-tax Act, the following section shall be substituted with 
~leCIimb effect from the 1st day of April. 1988. namely:-
sedDl48. 
Moded 
ampDIDl 
m 
dI:daim. 
'48. (1) The income ch.arpble under the head "Capital gains" shall be computed.-
(a) by deducting from the full value of the consideration received or accruing as a 
result of the transfer of the capital asset the following amounts, namely:-
(i) expenditure incurred wholly and exclusively in cannection with such transfer; 
(Ii) the COIl of acquisition eX the asset and the COlt of any ~t thereto; 

11 
(b) where the capital gain arises from the transfer of a long-term capital asset 
(hereafter in this section referred to, respectively, as long·trrm capital gain and long-term 
capiL'l1 asset) by making the funher deductions specilir.d in sub-section (2). 
(2) The deductions referred to In clause (b) of sub-section (l) are the following, 
5 namely:-
10 
15 
20 
2'i 
30 
3S 
40 
(a) where the amount of long-term capital gain arrived at after making the deductions 
under clause (a) of sub-section (l) does not exceed ten thousand rupees, the whole of 
such amount; 
(b) in any other case, ten thousand rupees as increased by a sum equal to,-
(i) in respect of long-term capital gain so arrived at relating to capital assets, being 
buildings or lands or any rights in buildings or lands or gold, bullion or jewellery,-
(A) in the case of a company, ten per cenl. of the amount of such gain in excess 
of ten thousand rupees; 
(B) in the case of any other assessee, fifty per cenl. of the amount of such gain 
in excess of ten thousand rupees; 
(ii) in respect of long-term capital gain so arrived at relating to other capital 
assets,-
(A) in the case of a company, thirty per cen~. of the amount Qf such gain in 
excess of ten thousand rupees; 
(B) in any other case, sixty per cenl. of the amount of such gain in excess of ten 
thousand rupees: 
Provided that where the long-term capital gain relates to both categories of capital 
ac;scl~ referred to in sub-clauses (i) and (ii), the deduction of ten thousand rupees shall 
be allowed in the following order, namely:-
(1) the deduction shall first be allowed against long-term capital gain relating to the 
assets mentioned in sub-clause (i); 
(2) thereafter, the balance, if any, of the said ten thousand rupees shall be a1lowoo 
as deduction against long-term capital gain relating to the assets mentionoo in sub-
clause (ii), 
and the provisions of sub-clause (ii) shall apply as if references to ten thousand rupees 
therein were references to the amount of deduction allowed in accordance with clauses (1 ) 
and (2) of this proviso: 
Provided further that, in relation to the amount referred to in clause (b) of sub-section 
(5) of section 45, the initial deduction of ten thousand rupees under clause (a) of this 
sub-section shall be reduced by the deduction already allowed under clause (a) of section 
80T in the assessment for the assessment year commencing on the ]st day of April. 
]987. or any earlier assessment year or, as the case may be, by the deduction allowed 
under clause (a) of this sub-section in relation to the amount of compensation or 
consideration referred to in clause (a) of sub-section (5) of section 45 and references to 
ten thousand rupees in clauses (a) and (b) of this sub-section shall be construed as 
references to such reduced amount, if any. 
(3) The deductions specified in sub-section (2) shall be made also for the purposes of 
computing any loss under the head "Capital gains" in so far as it pertains to any long-
term capital asset and, for this purpo~. any reference in that sub-section to the amount of 

12 
long-term capital gain arrived at after malting the deductions under clause (a) of sub-section 
(1) shall be construed as reference to the amount of loss arrived at after making the said 
deductions.' . 
Amendment 16. In section 49 of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section (1 ). in clause (iii). for sub-clause 
of section 49. (b). the following sub-clause shan be substituted with effect from the 1st day of April. 1988, 5 
namely:-
Omission of 
section 52. 
Arnerdment 
of section 53. 
Amendment 
of section 54. 
"(b) on any distribution of assets on the dissolution of a finn, body of individuals, or 
other association of persons, where such dissolution had taken place at any time before the 
1st day of April, 1987, or". 
17. Section 52 of the Income-tax Act shall be omitted with effect from the 1st day of 10 
April, 1988. 
18. In section 53 of the Income-tax Act, with effect from the 1st day of April, 1988,-
(a) in the opening paragraph,-
(i) after the words "assessee being an individual", the words "or a Hindu undivided 
family" shall be inserted; 15 
(it) for the words and brackets "capital asset (other than a short-tenn capital asset)", 
the words "long-term capital asset" shall be substituted; 
(b) the following Explanation shall be added at the end. namcly:-
"Explanation.- In this section and in sections 54, 54B, 54D, 54E, 54F, 54G and 
54H, references to capital gain shall be construed as refercnces to thc amount of capital 20 
gain as computed under clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 48.". 
19. In section 54 of the Income-tax Act, with effect from the 1st day of April, 1988,-
(a) in sub-section (1 ).-
(i) for the words "Where, in the case of an assessee being an individual", the words, 
brackets and figure "Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2). where. in the case of an 25 
assessee being an individual or a Hindu undivided family" shall be substituted; 
(li) the Explanation at the end shall be omitted; 
(b) for sub-section (2). the following sub-section shall be substituted. namely:-
"(2) The amount of the capital gain which is not appropriated by the assessee towards 
the purchase of the new asset made within one year before the date on which the transfer 30 
of the original asset took place, or which is not utilised by him for the purchase or 
construction of the new asset before the date of furnishing the return of income under 
section 139, shall be deposited by him before furnishing such return [such deposit being 
made in any case nol later than the due date applicable in the case of the assessee for 
furnishing the return of income under sub-section (1) of section 139] in an account in 35 
any such bank or institution as may be specified in, and utilised in accordance with, any 
scheme which the Central Government may, by notif1C8lion in the Official Gazette, frame 
in this behalf and such return shall be accompanied by proof of such deposit; and, for the 
purposes of sub-section (1), the amount, if any, already utilised by the assessee for the 
purchase or consuuction of the new asset together with the amount so deposited shall be 40 
deemed to be the cost of the new asset: 

13 
Provided that if the amount deposited under this sub-section is not utilised wholly or 
partly for the purchase or construction of the new asset within the period ~ified in 
sub-section (1). Ihen,-
(i) the amount not so utilised shall be charged wider section 45 as the income of 
the previous year in which the period of three years from the date of the transfer of the 
original asset expires; and 
(ii) the assessee shall be entitled to withdraw such amount in accordance with the 
scheme aforesaid. 
ExplanaJion.- Where any amount becomes chargeable under section 45 in accordance 
10 with the proviso to this section, then,-
15 
20 
15 
30 
(a) for the purposes of the deductions to be made under clause (b) of sub-section 
(1) of section 48, the initial deduction of ten thousand rupees under sub-section (2) of 
that section shall not be admissible; and 
(b ) nothing contained in section 53 shall apply in relation to such amount.". 
20. In section 548 of the Income-tax Act, with effect from the 1st day of April, 1988,-
(a) in sub-section (1). for the words "Where the capital gain arises", the words, braclcets 
and figure "Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2). where the capital gain arises" shall 
be substituted; 
(b) for sub-section (2). the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:-
"(2) The amount of the capital gain which is not utilised by the assessee for the 
purchase of the new asset before the date of furnishing the return of income under section 
139, shall be deposited by him before furnishing such return [such deposit being made in 
any case not later than the due date applicable in the case of the aSsessee for furnishing 
the return of income under sub-section (J) of section 139] in an account in any such 
bank or institution as may be specified in, and utilised in accordance with, any scheme 
which the Central Government may,.by notification in the Official Gazette, frame in this 
behalf and such return shall be accompanied by proof of such deposit; and, for the 
purposes of sub-section (1). the amount, if any, already utilised by the assessee for the 
purchase of the new asset together with the amount so deposited shall be deemed to be the 
cost of the new asset: 
Provided that if the amount deposited under this sub-section is not utilised wholly or 
partly for the purchase of the new asset within the period specified in sub-section (1). 
then,-
(i) the amQunt not so utilised shall be charged under section 45 as the income of 
35 the previous year in which the period of two years from the date of the transfer of the 
original asset expires; and 
40 
(ii) the assessee shall be entitled to withdraw such amount in accordance with the 
scheme aforesaid. 
Exp/anation.- Where any amount becomes chargeable under section 45 in accordance 
with the proviso to this sub-section, then, for the purposes of the deductions to be made 
under clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 48, the initial deduction of ten thousand 
rupees under sub-section (2) of that section shall not be admissible.". 
21. In section 540 of the Income-tax Act, with effect from the 1st day of April, 1988,-
Amendment 
of section 
54B. 
Amendment 
of section 
b Ie .540. 
(a) in sub-section (1). for the words "Where the capital gain arises", the words, rac ets 45 and figure "Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), where the capital gain arises" shall 
be substituted; 

Amadmont 
ol-=cion 
54P. 
14 
(b) for 8Ub-section (2). the following sub-section shall be substituted. namely:-
"(2) The amount of the capital gain which is not utilised by the assessee for the 
purchase or construction of the new asset before the date of furnishing the return of 
income under section 139. shall be deposited by him before furnishing such return [such 
deposit being made in any case not later than the due dme applicable in the case of the s 
assessee for furnishing the return of income under sub-section (1) of section 139] in an 
account in any such bank or institution as may be specified in. and utilised in accordance 
with, any scheme which the Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, frame in this behalf and such return shall be accomp::micd by proof of such 
deposit; and, for the purposes of sub-section (1). the amount, if any, already utilised by 10 
the assessee for the purchase or construction of the new asset togcther with the amount so 
deposited shall be deemed to be the cost of the new asset: 
Provided that if the amount depositf'.d under this sub-section is not utilised wholly or 
partly for the purchase or construction of the new asset within the period specified in 
sub-scction (I), then,-
(;) the amount not so utilised shall be charged under section 45 as the income of the 
previous year in which the period of three years from the date of the transfer of the 
original asset expires; and 
(ii) the assessee shall be entitled to withdraw such amount in accordance with the 
15 
scheme aforesaid 20 
ExplanaIion.~ Where any amount becomes chargeable under section 45 in accordance 
with the proviso to this sub-section, then, for the purposes of the deductions to be made 
under clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 48, the initial deduction of ten thousand 
rupees under sub-section (2) of that section shall not be admissible .... 
n. In section 54E of the Income-tall. Act, with effect from the 1st day of April. 1988.-
(a) in sub-section (1). for the words "capital asset, not being a short-term capital asset", 
the words "long-term capital asset" shall be substituted; 
(b) in sub-section (2). for the words "capital assets other than short-term capital assets", 
the words "long-term capital assets" shall be substituted; 
(c) sub-sections (3). (4) and (5) shall be omitted; 
(t!) sub-section (6) shall be renumbered as sub-section (3). and in that sub-section as so 
renumbered, the words, brackets. letters and figure "or clause (a) or clause (b) of sub-
section (3)" shall be omitted. 
13. In section 54F of the Income-tax Act, with effect from the 1st day of April, 1988.-
(a) in sub-section (1 ).-
(i) for the words "Where. in the case of an assessee being an individual". the words. 
brackets and figure "Subject to the provisions of sub-section (4). where. in the case of an 
assessee being an individual or a Hindu undivided family" shall be substituted; 
(ii) after the words "penod of one year before or", the words "two years" shall be 
30 
35 
inserted; 40 
(iii) in the EzpIanaJion,-
fA) clause (i) shall be omitted; 

15 
(8) in clause (ii). the brackets and figures "(ii)" shall be omiued; 
(b) in sub-section (2). for the words "one year", the words "two years" shall be 
substituted; 
(c) after sub-section (3). thl~ folluwing sub-sectIon shall be inserted. namcly:-
5 "(4) The amount of tilt.: lIet consideration which is not appropriatcd by the assessee 
towards the purcha~c of the new a~set made within onl: year before the dalc on which the 
transfer of thc original asset took place, or which is not utilised by him for the purchase 
or construction of the new asset bcfore the date of furnishing the return of income under 
section 139, shall be d..:posilCd by him before furnishing such return [such deposit being 
10 made in any case not latcr than the due date applicable in the case of the assessee for 
furnishing the return of income undcr sub-section ( I) of section 139] in an account in 
any such bank or institution as may be specified in, and utilised in accordance with, any 
scheme which the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazetle, frame 
in this behalf and such return shall be accompanied by proof of such deposit; and, for the 
15 purposes of sub-section (1). the amount, if any, aL'eady utilised by the assessee for the 
purchase or construction of the new asset together with the amount so deposited shall be 
deemed to be the cost of the new asset: 
Provided that if the amount deposited under this sub-section is not utilised wholly or 
partly for the purchase or construction of the new asset within the period specified in sub-
20 section (1). then,-
(i) the amount by which -
(a) the amount of capital gain arising from the transfer of the original asset not 
charged under section 45 on the basis of the cost of the new asset as provided in 
clause (a) or, as the case may be. clause (b) of sub-section (1). 
25 exceeds 
(b) the amount that would not have been so charged had the amount actually 
utilised by the assessee for the purchase or construction of the new asset within the 
period specified in sub-section ( I ) been the cost of the new asset, 
shall be charged under section 45 as income of the previous year in which the period of 
30 three years from the date of the transfer of the original asset expires; and 
(ii) the assessee shall be entitled to withdraw the unutilised amount in accordance 
with the scheme aforesaid. 
Explanation .- Where any amount becomes chargeable under section 45 in accordance 
with sub-section (2) or sub-section (3) or the proviso to this sub-section, then, for the 
35 purposes of the deductions to be mad,: unJcr clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 
48, the initial deduction of len thousand rupees under sub-section (2) of that section shall 
not be admissible.". 
24. After section 54F of the Income-laX Act. the following sections shall be inserted with Insertion of 
effect from the 1st day of April, 1988, namely:- new sections 54Gand54H. 
40 
45 
'54G. (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2). where the capilal gain arises from 
the transfer of a long-tenn capital asset, being machinery or plant or building or land or any 
rights in building or land used for the purposes of the business of an induslrial undertaking 
situate in an urban area, effected in the course of, or in consequence of, the shifting of such 
industrial undertaking (hereafter in this section referred to as the original asset) to any area 
(other than an UIban area) and the assessee has within a period of one year before or three 
years after the da1e on which die transfer took pIace.-
(a) purchased new machinery or plant for the pwposcs.of business of the induslrial 
undc:r1aking in the area to which Ibe said uncIea1akina is shifted; 
Ext;mptio~ of 
captalgams 
on transfer of 
assets in cases 
of shiftina of 
industria[ 
~ area. 

16 
(b) acquired building or land or constructed building for the purposes of his business in 
the said area; 
(c) shifted the original asset and transferred the establishment Of such undertaking 10 such 
area; and 
(d) incurred expenses on such oth~ purpose as may be specified in a scheme framed by 5 
the Ccnttal Government for the purposes of this section, 
·then, instead of the capital gain being charged to income-tax as income of the previous year 
in which the transfer took place, it shall be dealt with in accordance with the following 
provisions of this section, that is 10 say,-
(;) if the amount of the capital gain is greater than the cost and expenses incurred in 10 
relation to all or any of the purposes mentioned in clauses (a) to (d) (such 'cost and 
expenses being hereafter in this section referred to as the new asset), the difference 
between the amount of the capital gain and the cost of the new asset shall be charged 
under section 45 as the income of the previous year; and for the purpose of computing in 
respect of the new asset any capital gain arising from its transfer within a period of three 15 
years of its being purchased, acquired, constructed or transferred, as the case may be, the 
cost shall be nil; or 
(ii) if the amount of the capital gain is equal to, or less than, the cost of the new 
asset, the capital gain shall not be charged under section 45; and for the purpose of 
computing in respect of the new asset any capital gain arising (rom its transfer within a 20 
period of thrcc years of its being purchased. acquired. constructed or transferred, as the case 
may be, the cost shall be reduced by the amount of the capital gain. 
Explanalion.- In this sub-section, "urban area" means any such area within the limits 
of a municipal corpordtion or municipality as the Central Government may, having 
regard to the population, concentration of industries. need for proper planning of the area 25 
and other relevant factors. by general or special order. declare to be an urban area for the 
purposes of this sub-section. 
(2) The amount of capital gain which is not appropriated by the assessee towards the 
cost and expenses incurred in relation to all or any of the purposes mentioned in clauses 
(a) to (d) of sub-section (1) within one year before the date on which the transfer 
30 of the original asset took place, or which is not utilised by him for all or any of the 
purposes aforesaid before the date of furnishing the return of income under section 139, 
shall be deposited by him before furnishing such return [such deposit being made in any 
case not later than the due date applicable in the case of the assessee for furnishing the 
return of income under sub-section (1) of section 139] in an account in any such bank or 
institution as may be specified in. and utilised in accordance with. any scheme which the 35 
Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, frame in this behalf and 
such return shall be accompanied by proof of such deposit; and. for the purposes of sub-
section (1). the amount. if any. already utilised by the assessee for all or any of the 
purposes aforesaid together with the amount so deposited shall be deemed to be the cost 
of the new asset: 
Provided that if the amount deposited under this sub-section is not utilised wholly or 
partly for all or any of the purposes mentioned in clauses (a) to (d) of sub-section (1 ) 
within the period specified in that sub-section. then.-
(j) the amount not so utilised shall be charged under section 45 as the income of 
40 
the previous year in which the period of three years from the date of the transfer of the 45 
original asset expires; and 
(ii) the assessee shall be entitled to withdraw such amount. 

17 
Explanatwn.- Where any amount becomes chargeable under section 45 in accordance with 
the proviso to this sub-section, then, for the purposes of the deductions to be made under 
clause (b) of sub-section (J) of section 48, the initial deduction of len thousand rupees 
under sub-section (2) of that section shall not be admissible. 
54H. The capital gains arising from the transfer of a capital asset, being shares in a 
company, to any such public sector company, as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, specify, shall be exempt from the tax chargeable under 
section 45.'. 
25. In section 55 of the Income-tax Act, with effect from the 1st day of April, 1988,-
10 (a) in sub-section (J), in clause (b), for the words ' "cost of any improvement", in 
15 
20 
relation to a capital asset,-', the following shall be substituted, nameIy:-
, " cost of any improvement" ,-
(1) in relation to a capital asset being goodwill of a business shall be taken to be 
nil; and 
(2) in relation to any other capital asset,-'; 
(b) in sub-section (2), for the opening portion, the following shall be substituted, 
namely:-
'For the purposes of sections 48 and 49, "cost of acquisition",-
(a) in relation to a capital asset, being goodwill of a business,-
(j) in the case of acquisition of such asset by the assessee by purchase from a 
previous owner, means the amount of the purchase price; and 
(jj) in any other case, shall be taken to be njl; 
(b) in relation to any other capital a~set,-'. 
26. In section 56 of the Income-tax Act, in sub-scction (2), after clause (ib), the 
2<; following clause shall be inserted with effect from the 1st day of April, 1988, namely:-
'(jc) income referred 10 in sub-clause (x) of clause (24) of section 2, if such income is 
not chargeable 10 income-tax under the head "Profits and gains of business or profession";'. 
Excmptioo of 
capital gains 
on lnInSfer of 
shares to 
public sector 
companies. 
Amendment 
of section 55. 
Amendment 
of section 56. 
27. In section 57 of the Income-tax Act, after clause m, the following clause shall be Amendment of section 57. inserted, with effect from the 1st day of April, 1988, namely:-
30 'ria) in the case of income of the nature referred to in sub-clause (x) of clause (24) of 
section 2 which is chargeable to income-tax under the head "Income from other sources", 
deductions, so far as may be, in accordance with the provisions of clause (va) of sub-section 
(1) of section 36;'. 
28. In section 70 of the Income-tax Act, with effect from the 1st day of April, 1988,· 
35 (a) in sub-section (1 ),-
(i) the brackets and figure "( J)" shall be omitted; 
(ii) the words 'other than "Capital gains" , shall be omitted; 
(b) sub-section (2) shall be omitted. 
Amendment 
of section 70. 

Subi;tilUtion of 
new section 
for 5CCtion 7l. 
SCI off ofloss 
from one 
~aaainst 
income from 
another. 
Amendrnmt 
of aec:rian 72. 
Subltiaem f:A 
new sec:Iion 
for section 74. 
Losses under 
the head 
"Capilal 
gains". 
Amendmau 
oflOClicn 
SOC. 
18 
29. For section 71 of the Income-tax Act, the following section shall be substituted with 
effect from die 1st day of April, 1988, namely:-
"71. Where in respect of any assessment year, the net result of the computation under any 
head of income is a loss, the assessee shall, subject to the provisions of this Chapter, be 
entided to have the amount of such loss set off against his income, if any, assessable for 5 
thai assessment year under any olher head.". 
30. In section 72 of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section (J ), the portion beginning with 
the words "where the assessee" and ending with the words "of that section or" shall be 
omitted with effect from the 1st day of April, 1988. 
31. For section 74 of the Income-tax Act, the following section shall be substituted 10 
with effect from the 1st day of April, 1988, namely:-
74. (1) Where in respect of any assessment year, the net result of the computation under 
the head "Capital gains" is a loss to the assessee and such loss cannot be or is not wholly 
set off against income under any other head of income in accordance with the provisions of 
section 71, so much of the loss as has not been so set off or, where he has no income under 15 
any other head, the whole loss shall, subject to the other provisions of this Chapter, be 
carried forward to the following assessment year, and-
(a) it shall be set off against income, if any, under the head "Capital gains" assessable 
for that assessment year; and 
(b) if the loss cannot be wholly so set off, the amount of loss not so set off shall be 20 
carried forward to the following assessment year, and so on. 
(2) No loss shall be carried forward under this section for more than eight assessment 
years immediately succeeding lhe assessment year for which the loss was first computed. 
(3) Any loss computed under the head "Capital gains" in respect of the assessment year 
commencing on the 1st day of April, 1987, or any earlier assessment year which is carried 25 
forward in accordance with the provisions of this section as it stood before the 1st day of 
April, 1988, shall be dealt with in the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 
1988, or any subsequent assessment year as folIows:-
(a) in so far as such loss relates to short-term capital assets, it shall be carried forward 
and set off in accordance with the provisions of sub-sections (1) and (2); 30 
(b) in so far as such loss relates to long-term capital assets, it shall be reduced by the 
deductions specified in sub-section (2) of section 48 and the reduced amount shall be carried 
forward and set off in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (1) but such carry 
forward shall not be allowed beyond the fowth assessment year immediately succeeding the 
assessment year for which the loss was fll'St computed.'. 35 
32. In section SOC of the Income-tax Act, with effect from the 1st day of April, 1988,-
~ in sub-section (2), for clause (h), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:-
'(h) where the assessee is an individual or a Hindu undivided family or where the 
assessee is an association of persons or a body of individuals consisting, in either case, 40 
only of husband and wife governed by the system of community of property in force in 
the Union lerritorics of Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Goa. Daman and Diu. any sums paid 
in the previous year by such assessee out of his or its income chargeable to 1aX,-
(;) as subscription to any such security of the Central Government as that 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in 1his behalf: or 45 

19 
(ii) for the purposes of purchase or construction of a residential house property the 
construction of which is completed after the 31st day oJ March, 1987, and the income from 
which is chargeable to tax 1Dldel' the head "Income from house property" (or which would, if 
it had not been used for the assessee's own resi~"have been chargeable to tax under 
s that head), where such payments are made towards or by way of - . 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
(a) any instalment or part payment of the amount due under any self-fmancing 
or other scheme of any development authority, housing board or other authority 
engaged in the construction and sale of house property on ownership basis; or 
(b) any instalment or part payment of the amount due to any company or c0-
operative society of which the assessee is a shareholder or member towards the cost 
of the house property allotted to him; or 
(c) re-payment of the amolDlt borrowed by the assessee from-
(1) the Central Government or any State Government, or 
(2) any bank, including a co-operative bank, or 
(3) the Life Insurance Corporation, or 
(4) any public company formed and registered in India with the main object 
of carrying on the business of providing long-term finance for construction or 
purchase of houses in India for residential purposes which is approved for the 
purposes of cmuse (viii) of sub-section (1) of section 36, or 
(5) any company in which the public are substantially interested or any co-
operative society, where such company or co-operative society is engaged in the 
business of financing the construction of houses, or 
(6) the assessee's employer where such employer is a public company; 
(d) stamp duty, registration fee and other expenses for the purpose of transfer of 
such house property to the assessee, 
but shall not include any payment towards or by way of -
(A) the admission fee, cost of share and initial deposit which a . shareholder of a 
company or a member of a co-operative society has to pay for becoming such share-
holder or member; or 
(B) the cost of the land. except where the consideration for the purchase of the 
house property is a composite amount and the cost of the land alone cannot be 
separately ascertained; or 
(C) the cost of any addition or alteration to. or renovation or repair of. the 
house property which is carried out after the issue of the completion certificate in 
respect of the house property by the authority competent to issue such certificate or 
after the house property or any part thereof has either been occupied by the assessee 
or any other person on his behalf or been let out; or 
(D) any expenditure in respect of which deduction is allowable under the 
provisions of section 24; , ; 
40 (b) in sub-section (4), in clause (ii), for the words. brackets. leuer and figure 
"referred to in clause (g) of sub-section (2)". the words. brackets. letters and figure 
"refOTed to in clause (g) or clause (h) of sub-section (2)" shall be substituted; 

Amendment 
of section 
SOCC. 
20 
(c) after sub-section (6) and the ExplanaJ;ons below that sub-section, the following 
sub-sections shall be inserted, namely:-
'(7) In the case of an assessee referred to in clause (h) of sub-section (2), -
(a) where any sums specified in sub-clause (ii) of that clause, with reference to 
which the deduction under sub-section (1) has been allowed are refunded to or received 5 
back by the assessee in any previous year (hereinafter referred to as the relevant 
previous year), then,-
(i) no deduction shall be allowed to the assessee under sub-section (1) with 
reference to any of the sums, specified in that sub-clause, paid in the relevant 
previous year; and 
(ii) the aggregate amount of the deductions so allowed in respect of the previous 
year or previous years preceding the relevant previous year shall be deemed to be the 
income of the assessee of the relevant previous year and shall be chargeable to tax 
under the head "Income from other sources"; 
10 
(b) where the house property referred to in sub-clause (ii) of that clause is 15 
transferred by the assessee before the expiry of five years from the end of the financial 
year in which possession of such property is obtained by him, then,-
(i) no deduction shall be allowed to the assessee under sub-section (1) with 
reference to any of the sums, specified in that sub-clause, paid in the previous year 
in which the transfer is so made; and 20 
(ii) the aggregate amount of the deductions allowed under sub-section (J ) with 
reference to the sums specified in that sub-clause in respect of the previous year or 
previous years preceding the previous year referred to in sub-clause (i) of this 
clause shall be deemed to be the income of the assessee of the previous year in 
which the transfer is made and shall be chargeable to tax under the head "Income 2;i 
from other sources"; 
(c) where the aggregate of any sums specified in sub-clause (ii) of that clause 
exceeds an amount of ten thousand rupees. a deduction under sub-section (1) shall be 
allowed with reference to so much of the aggregate as does not exceed an amount of ten 
thousand rupees. 30 
(8) In this section,-
(a) "Life Insurance Corporation" means the Life Insurance Corporation of India 
established under the Life Insurance Corporation Act, 1956; 31 of 1956. 
(b) "public company" shall have the same meaning as in section 3 of the 
Companies Act, 1956; 35 1 of 1956. 
(c) "transfer" shall be deemed to include also the transactions referred to in clause 
(j) of section 269UA.'. 
33. In section 80CC of the Income-tax Act,-
(a) in sub-section (3). ill clause (c). for the words, figures and letters "the 1st day of 
April, 1987", the words, figures and letters "the lst day of April, 1990" shall be substituted; 40 
(b) in suh-section (5), for the words "five years", the words "three years" shall be 
substituted. 

S 
10 
IS 
20 
30 
21 
34. In the Income-tax Act. after section SOCC, the following section shall be inserted lnNrtianof 
with effect from the 1st day of April, 1988, namely:- new aectim BOCCA. 
"SOCCA. (1) Where an assessee, being-
(a) an individual, or 
(b) a Hindu undivided family, or 
(c) an association of pezsons or a body of individuals consisting, in either case, only 
of husband and wife governed by the system of community of property in force in the 
Union tmitories of Dadra and'Nagar Haveli and Goa. Daman and Diu, 
has in the previous year deposited out of his income chargeable to taX any amount in 
accordance with such scheme as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, specify in this behalf (hereafter in this section referred to as the National Savings 
Scheme), he shall, in accordance with, and subject to, the provisions of this section, be 
allowed a deduction in the computation of his total income of an amount equal to fifty per 
cent. of so much of the deposits (excluding interest accrued and credited to the assessee's 
account) as do not exceed the amount of'twenty thousand rupees in the previous year. 
(2) Where any amount standing to the credit of the assessee under the National Savings 
Scheme in respect of which a deduction has been allowed under sub-section (1) together 
with the interest accrued on such amount is withdrawn in whole or in part in any previous 
year, an amount equaito fifty per cent of the amount so withdrawn shall be deemed to be 
the income of the assessee of that previous year in which such withdrawal is made and shall, 
accordingly, be chargeable to tax as the income of that previous year. 
ExplanaJion .- For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that interest on the 
deposits made under the National Savings Scheme shall not be chargeable to tax except in 
the manner and to the extent specified in sub-section (2) .". 
35. In section 80G of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section (5), in clause (i). for the 
words, brackets, figures and letter "or clause (23C)", the words, brackets, figures and letters "or 
clause (23AA) or clause (23C)" shall be substituted with effect from the 1st day of April, 
1988. 
36. In section 80-0 of the Income-tax Act, with effect from the 1st day of April, 1988,-
(a) in the opening paragraph,-
(i) the portion beginning with the words "or having been received in convertible 
foreign exchange outside India" and ending with the words "and dealings in foreign 
exchange," shall be omitted; 
(ii) for the words "so received in, or brought into, India", the words "so received in 
Amerulment 
of section 
8OG. 
Amendment 
of section 
80-{). 
35 India" shall be substituted; 
(b) after the second proviso, the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:-
"Provided also that such income is received in India within a period of six months 
from the end of the previous year, or where the Commissioner is satisfied (for reasons to 
be recorded in writing) that the assessee is, for reasons beyond his control, unab~e ~o do 
40 so within the said period of six months, within such further period as the Commissioner 
may allow in this behalf."; 
(c) in the Explanation, for clause (ii), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:-
'(ii) "foreign enterprise" means a person who is a non-resident.'. 

Amendment 
ofsectim 
SORRA. 
Omission of 
section sur. 
Amadrnent 
ofsectim 
SOU. 
22 
37. In section 80RRA of the Income-tax Act. in sub-section (1). for the words "of an 
amount equal to fifty per cent. thereof'. the following shall be substituted with effect from the 
1st day of April. 1988. namely:-
"of an amount equal to,-
(i) fifty per cent of the remuneration; or 
(ii) seventy-five per cent. of such remuneration as is brought into India by, or on behalf 
of, the assessee in accordance with the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1973, and any rules 
made thereunder, 
whichever is higher". 
5 
38. Section 80T of the Income-tax Act shall be omitted with effect from the 1st day of 10 
April, 1988. 
39. In section 80U of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section (1). for the words "ten thousand 
rupees", the words "ftfteen thousand rupees" shall be substituted with effect from the 1st day of 
April, 1988. 
Omission of 40. Chapter VIB of the Income-tax Act shall be omitted with effect from the 1st day of 15 
Chapter VIB. April, 1988. 
Omission of 
ChaptcrXI. 
41. Chapter XI of the Income-tax Act shall be omitted with effect from the 1st day of 
April, 1988. 
Omission of 42. Section 115 of the Income-tax Act shall be omitted with effect from the 1st day of 
section 115. April, 1988. W 
Insertion of 
newChapter 
XIIB. 
Special 
povisDIs 
relating to 
certain 
companies. 
43. In the Income-tax Act, after Chapter XIIA, the following Chapter shall be inserted 
with effect from the 1st day of April, 1988, namely:-
'CHAPTER XIm 
SPECIAL PROVISIONS RFLA TING TO CERTAIN COMPANIES 
115J. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other provision of this Act, where 25 
in the case of an assessee being a company. the total income. as computed under this Act in 
respect of any previous year relevant to the assessment year commencing on or after the 1st 
day of April. 1988 (hereafter in this section referred to as the relevant previous year) is less 
than thirty per cent. of its book profit, the total income of such assessee chargeable to tax 
for the relevant previous year shall be deemed to be an amount equal to thirty per cenl of 30 
such book profit. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section, "book profit" means the net profit as 
shown in the profit and loss account for the relevant previous year prepared in accordance 
46 of 1973. 
with the provisions of Parts II and III of the Sixth Schedule to the Companies Act, 1956, as 1 of 1956-
increased by -
(a) the amount of income-tax paid or payable, and the provision therefor; or 35 
(b) the amOlUlts carried to any reserves, by whatever name called; or 
(c) the amount or amounts set aside to provisions made for meeting liabilities, 
contingencies or commitments; or 
(d) the amount by way of JXOvision for loss of subsidiary companies; or 
(t) the amount or amounts of dividends paid or proposed; or 40 

23 
(f) the amount or amounts of expenditure relarable !O any income to which any of the 
provisions of Chapter m applies, 
if any such amount is debited to the profit and loss account, and as reduced by,-
(i) the amount or amounts withdrawn from reserves or provisions; or 
5 (ii) the amount or amounts of income to which any of the provisions of Chapter m 
applies, 
if any such amount is credited to the profit and loss account. 
(2) Nothing contained in su~section (1) shaD affect the determination of the amounts 
in relation to the relevant previous year to be carried forward to the subsequent year or years 
10 under the provisions of sub-section (2) of section 32 or sub-section (3) of section 32A 
or clause (ii) of su~section (1) of section 72 or section 13 or section 14 or sub-section 
(3) of section 14A or su~section (3) of section 80J:. 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 
44. In section 155 of the Income-tax Act, su~section (12) shall be omitted with effect 
from the 1st day of April, 1988. 
45. In section 192 of the Income-tax Act, with effect from the 1st day of June, 1981,-
(a) after sub-section (1), the following sub-sections shall be inserted, namely :-
'(2) Where, during the fmancial year, an assessee is employed simultaneously under 
more than one employer, or where he has held successively employment under more than 
one employer, he may furnish to the person responsible for making the payment referred 
to in sub-section (1) (being one of the said employers as the assessee may, having regard 
to the circumstances of his case, choose), such details of the income under the head 
"Salaries" due or received by him from the other employer or employers, the tax deducted 
at source therefrom and such other particulars, in such form and verified in such manner 
as may be prescribed, and thereupon the; person responsible for making the payment 
referred to above shall take into account the details so furnished for the purposes of 
making the deduction under sub-section (1 ). 
(2A) Where the assessee, being a government servant or an employee in a public 
sector undertaking, is entitled to the relief under sub-section (1) of section 89, he may 
furnish to the person responsible for making the payment referred to in sub-section (1), 
such particulars, in such form and verified in such manner as may be prescribed, and 
thereupon the person responsible as aforesaid shall compute the relief on the basis of such 
particulars and take it into account in making the deduction under sub-section (1 ). 
(2B) Where an assessee who receives any income chargeable under the head "Salaries" 
has, in addition, any income chargeable under any other head of income (not being a loss 
under any such head) for the same financial year, he may send to the person responsible 
for making the payment referred to in sub-section (1) the particulars of such other 
income and of any tax deducted thereon under any other provision of this Chapter, in 
such form and verified in such manner a .. may be prescribed, and thereupon the person 
responsible as aforesaid shall take such other income and the tax, if any, deducted thereon 
also into account for the purposes of making the deduction under sub-section (1): 
Provided that this sub-section shall not in any case have the effect of reducing the tax 
deductible from the income under the head "Salaries" below the amount that would be so 
deductible if the othcr income and the tax dcducted thereon had not been taken into 
account.'; 
(b) in sub-section (3), after the words, brackets and figure "in sub-section (J)", the 
words, brackets, figures and letters "or sub-section (2) or sub-section (2A) or sub-section 
(2B)" shall be inserted. 
ArnaKImmt 
of sectim 155: 
Amrndmenl 
of section 192. 

24 
AmelldnllllOl '"" In aecdoo 194 of die Incomo-ux Act, in the rust proviso, in clause (bJ, for the wmIs 
of IeCIion 194. "one thousand rupees", the words "two thousand five hundred rupees" shall be substituted with 
·effect from the 1st day of June, 1987. 
Amendmau 
ofsectim 
194A. 
Amendment 
of sectiOn 
194D. 
Inrertion of 
new section 
194E. 
Other 
incomes. 
47. In section 194A of the I:lcome-tax Act, with effect from the 1st day of June, 1987,-
(a) in sub-section (1), after the proviso, the following Explanation shall be inserted, S 
namdy:-
'Explanalioll. - For the purposes of this section, where any income by way of interest 
as aforesaid is credited to any account. whether called "Interest payable account" or 
"Suspense account" or by any other name, in the books of account of the person liable to 
pay such income, such crediting shall be deemed to be credit of such income to the 10 
account of the payee and the provisions of this section shall apply accordingly.'; 
(b) in sub-section (3), in clause (i), for the words "one thousand rupees", the words 
"two thousand five hundred rupees" shall be substituted. 
48. In section 1940 of the Income-tax Act. after the proviso. the following proviso shall 
be inserted with effect from the 1st day of June, 1987, namely :-
"Provided further that no deduction shall be made under this section in a case where the 
amount of such income or, as the case may be, the aggregate of the amounts of such income 
credited or paid or likely to be credited or paid during the financial year to the account of. or 
to. the payee. does not exceed five thousand rupees.". 
15 
49. After section 1940 of the Income-tax Act, the following section shall be inserted with 20 
effect from the 1st day of June. 1987, namely ;-
'l94E. (1) Any person. not being an individual or a Hindu undivided family. who is 
responsible for paying to a resident any income by way of -
(a) fees for professional services, or 
(b) royalty. or 
(c) fees for technical services, or 
(d) rent, or 
(e) commission (not bein!; insurance commission referred to in section 194D) or 
brokerage. or 
2S 
(f) payments for goods supplied to Government or any local authority or any 30 
corporation or body established by or under a Central. State or Provincial Act or any 
company. 
shall. at the time of credit of such income to the account of the payee or at the time of 
payment thereof in cash or by the issue of a cheque or draft or by any other mode. whichever 
is earlier. deduct income-tax thereon at the rates in force: 35 
Provided that no deduction shall be made under this section -
(A) from any payments made as aforesaid before the 1st day of June. 1987; or 
(B) where the amount of such income or, as the case may be, the aggregate of the 
amounts of such income credited or paid or likely to be credited or paid during the financial 
year by the pel'SOn referred to in this sub-section to the account of. or to. the payee, does not 40 
exc:eed-
,Ii) five thousand rupees, in the case of fees for professional services referred to in 
clause (a); or 
(ii) five thousand rupees, in the case of royalty or fees for technical services 
referred 10. respectively. in clause (b) and clause (c); or 
4S 

25 
(iii) thirty-six thousand rupres, in the case of rent referred to in clause (d); or 
(iv) five thousand rupees, in the case of commission or brokerage referred to in clause 
(e); or 
(v) one hundred thousand rupees, in the case of payment for goods referred to in 
5 clause (f). 
(2) In this section, -
(a) "professional services" means services rendered by a person in the course of 
carrying on a legal, medical, engineering or architectural profession or the profession of 
accountancy or technical consultancy or interior decoration or such other profession as is 
10 notified by the Board for the purposes of section 44AA; 
15 
20 
2'i 
30 
35 
40 
(b) "royalty" shall have the same meaning as in Explanation 2 below clause (vi) of 
sub-section (1 ) of section 9; 
(c) "fees for technical services" shall have the same meaning as in Explanation 2 
below clause (vii) of sub-section (1) of section 9; 
(d) "rent" means any payment, by whatever name called, under any lease, sub-lease, 
tenancy or any other agreement or arrangement for the use of any land or any building 
(including factory building), together with furniture, fittings and the land appurtenant 
theteto, whether or not such building is owned by the payee, and which is chargeable to 
income-tax as the income of the payee under the head "Income from house property" or 
"Income from other sources"; 
(e) "commission or brokerage" includes any payment received or receivable, directly 
or indirectly, by a person acting on behalf of another person for services rendered (not 
being professional services) or for any services in the course of buying or selling of 
goods or in the course of any transaction relating to any asset, valuable article or thing. 
Exp/anaJion.- For the purposes of this section, where any income as aforesaid is credited 
to any account, whether called "Suspense account" or by any other name, in the books of 
account of the person liable to pay such income, such crediting shall be deemed to be credit 
of such income to the account of the payee and the provisions of this section shall apply 
accordingly.'. 
SO. In section 195 of the Income-tax Act, with effect from the 1st day of June, 1987,-
(a) for sub-section (1). the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:-
'( J) Any person responsible for paying to a non-resident, not being a company, or to 
a foreign company, any interest (not being interest on securities) or any other sum 
chargeable under the provisions of this Act (not being income chargeable under the head 
"Salaries"or dividends) shall.at the time of credit of such income to the account of the 
payee or at the time of payment thereof in cash or by the issue of a cheque or draft or by 
any other mode, whicheva is earDia, deduct income-tax thereon at the rates in force. 
Explanation. - For the purposes of this section, where any interest or other sum as 
aforesaid is credited to any account, whether called "Interest payable account" or 
"Suspense account" or by any other name; in the books of account of the person liable to 
pay such income, such crediting shall be deemed to be credit of such income to the 
account of the payee and the provisions of this section shall apply accordingly.'; 
(b) in sub-section (2),-
45 (i) for the words "by general or special order". the words "in the prescribed manner" 
shall be substirutcd; 
Ammdme:nt 
of sectioo 195. 

Insertion of 
new section 
195A. 
Income 
JlI!Yable "net 
ofux". 
Amendment 
of section 197. 
Amendment 
of sections 
198.200. 
203,204 IIIld 
205. 
Amendment 
of section 199. 
Amendment 
of section 202. 
26 
(il) the following proviso shall be inserted at the end, namely :-
"Provided that this sub-section shall not apply to any payment to a foreign company 
by way of interest referred to in clause (v). or royalty referred to in clause (vi). or fees 
for technical savices referred to in clause (vii). of sub-section (1) of section 9.". 
51. After section 195 of the Income-tax Act, the following section shall be inserted with 
effect from the 1st day of June, 1987, namely :-
"195A. Where, under an agreement or other arrangement, the tax chargeable on any 
income referred to in the foregoing provisions of this Chapter is to be borne by the person 
by whom the income is payable. then. for the purposes of deduction of tax under those 
provisions such income shall be increased to such amount as would, after deduction of tax 
thereon at the rates in force for the fmancial year in which such income is payable, be equal 
to the net amount payable under such agreement or arrangement". . 
52. In section 197 of the Income-tax Act. with effect from the 1st day of June, 1987,-
(a) in sub-section (1 ).-
(i) for the words "Where. in the case of any income of any person other than a 
company", the words, brackets. figure and letter "Subject to rules made under sub-section 
(2A). where, in the case of any income of any person other than a company" shall be 
substituted: 
(ii) in clause (a). for the figures and letter "194D", the figures and letters "194D, 
194E" shall be substituted: 
(b) after sub-section (2). the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely :-
"(2A) The Board may, having regard to the convenience of assessees and the interests 
5 
10 
15 
20 
of revenue, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules specifying the cases in 
which, and the circumstances under which, an application may be made for the grant of a 
certificate under sub-section (J ) and the conditions subject to which such certificate may 2S 
be granted and providing for all other matters connected therewith.". 
53. In sections 198,200,203,204 and 205 of the Income-tax Act. after the figures 
and letter" 194D", the word, figures and letter", section 194E" shall be inserted with 
effect from the 1 st day ofJ une, 1987. 
54. In section 199 of the Income-tax Act. with effect from the 1st day of June, 30 
1987,-
• (a) after the figures and letter "194D", the word, figures and letter ", section 194E" 
shall be inserted: 
(b) for the words "made for the immediately following assessment year under this Act", 
the words "made under this Act for the assessment year for which such income is assessable" 35 
shall be substituted. 
55. In section 202 of the Income-tax Act, with effect from the 1st day of June, 1987,-
(a) for the words "levy tax", the words "recover tax" shall be substituted: 
(b; after the figures and letter "I94D", the word, figures and letter", section 194E" shall 
be~ ~ 
Ammdrnent 56. In section 203 of the Income-tax Act. for the portion beginning with the words "shall, 
of section 203. at the time of credit" and ending with the words "dividend to a shareholder", the following shall 

27 
be substituted with effect from the 1st day of June, 1987, nameIJ:~ 
"shall, within such period as may be ~bed from the time of credit or payment of the 
sum, or, as the case may be, from the time of issue of a cheque or warrant for payment of 
any dividend to a shareholder". 
5 berticnof 57. In the Income-tax Act, after section 203, the following section shall be inserted with neWleCtim effect from the 1st day of June, 1987, namely:- 203A. 
10 
"203A. (1) Every person deducting tax in accordance with the provisions of sections 
192 to 194, section 194A, section 194B. section 194BB, section 194C, section 1940. 
section 194E and section 195, if he has not been allotted any tax-deductioo account number. 
shall within such time as may be prescribed, apply to tl ~ Income-tax Officer for the 
allotment of a tax- deduction account number. 
(2) Where a tax-deduction acc-ount number has been allotted to a person, such person 
shall quote such number,-
(a) in all challans for the payment of any sum in accordance with the provisions of 
15 section 200; 
(b) in all cenificates issued in accordance with the provisions of section 203; 
(c) in all the returns delivered in accordance with the provisions of sections 206, 206A 
and 206B to any income-tax authority; and 
(d) in all other documents pertaining to such transactions as may be prescribed in the 
20 interests of revenue.". 
25 
30 
58. For section 206 of the Income-tax Act. the following section shall be substituted with 
effect from the 1st day of June, 1987. namely:-
"206. The prescribed person in the case of every office of Government, the principal 
officer in the case of every company. the prescribed person in the case of every local 
authority or other public body or association. every private employer and every other person 
responsible for deducting tax under the foregoing provisions of this Chapter shall prepare, 
within the prescribed time after the end of each financial year, and deliver or cause to be 
delivered to the prescribed income-tax authority. such returns in such form and verified in 
such manner and setting forth such particulars as may be prescribed.". 
59. For section 245A of the Income-tax Act. the following section shall be substituted 
with effect from the 1st day of June, 1987, namely :-
'245A. In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires.-
(a) "Bench" means a Bench of the Settlement Commission; 
(b) "case" means any proceeding under this Act for the assessment or re-assessment of any 
35 person in respect of any year or years. or by way of appeal or revision in connection with such 
assessment or re-assessment, which may be pending before an income-tax authority on the date 
on which an application under sub-section (1) of section 24SC is made: 
Provided that where any appeal or application for revision has been preferred after the expiry 
of the period specified for the ftling of such appeal or application for revision under this Act 
40 and which has not been admitted. such appeal or revision shall not be deemed to be a 
proceeding pending within the meaning of this clause; 
(c) "Chairman" means the Chairman of the Settlement Commission; 
(d) "income-tax authority" means an income-tax authority specified in section 116; 
T ax-decluction 
-=oounl 
number. 
Subslitution of 
new section 
forsectim 
206. 
Pmms 
dcductin& lax 
tofumish 
JftICrlbed 
'rewms. 
Subslitutian of 
new aection 
for section 
245A. 
Definitions. 

Amendment 
ofsoction 
2458. 
Insertion of 
new sections 
2458AlO 
245BD. 
Juri!dicIm 
and powers of 
Settlement 
Commission. 
Vice-
Chairman 10 
leta 
CJWrmanor 
ID dischlr&e 
his functions in 
certain 
circums-
tances. 
28 
(e) "Member" means a Member of the Settlement Commission, and includes the 
Chairman and a Vice-Chairman; 
(f) "Settlement Commission" means the Income-tax Settlement Commission 
constituted undez section 245B; 
(g) "Vice-Chairman" means a Vice-Chairman of the Settlement Commission.'. 5 
60. In section 245B of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section (1). the brackets and words 
'(hereafter in this Chapter referred to as "the Settlement Commission")' shall be omitted with 
effect from the 1st day of June, 1987. 
61. After section 245B of the Income-laX Act, the following sections shall be inserted 
with effect from the 1st day of June, 1987, namely:-
"245BA. (1) Subject to the other provisions of this Chapter, the jurisdiction, powers and 
authority of the Settlement Commission may be exercised by Benches thereof. 
(2) Subject to the other provisions of this section, a Bench shall be presided over by the 
Chairman or a Vice-Chairman and shaU consist of two other Members: 
(3) The Bench for which the Chainnan is the Presiding Officer shall be the principal 15 
Bench and the other Benches shall be known as additional Benches. 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (1) and (2). the Chairman 
may authorise the Vice-Chairman or other Member appointed to one Bench to discharge also 
the functions of the Vice-Chairman or, as the case may be, other Member of another Bench. 
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing provisions of this section, and 20 
subject to any rules that may be made in this behalf, when one of the persons constituting a 
Bench (whether such person be the Presiding Officer or other Member of the Bench) is 
unable to discharge his functions owing to absence, illness or any other cause or in the 
event of the occurrence of any vacancy either in the office of the Presiding Officer or in the 
office of one or the other Members of the Bench, the remaining two persons may function 25 
as the Bench and if the Presiding Officer of the Bench is not one of the remaining two 
persons, the senior among the remaining persons shall act as the Presiding Officer of the 
Bench: 
Provided that if at any stage of the hearing of any such case or matter, it appears to the 
Presiding Officer that the case or matter is of such a nature that it ought to be heard of by a 30 
Bench consisting of three Members, the case or matter may be referred by the Presiding 
Officer of such Bench to the Chainnan for transfer to such Bench as the Chairman may deem 
fit. 
(6) Subject to the other provisions of this Chapter, the places at which the principal 
Bench and the additional Benches shall ordinarily sit shall be such as the Central 35 
Government may. by notification in the Official Gazette, specify. 
245BB. (1) In the event of the occurrence of any vacancy in the office of the Chairman 
by reason of his death, resignation or otherwise, the Vice-Chairman or, as the case may be, 
such one of the Vice-Chairmen as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, authorise in this behalf, shall act as the Chainnan until the date on which a 40 
new Chairman, appointed in .accordance with the provisions of this Chapter to fill such 
vacancy, enters upon his office. 
(2) When the Chairman is unable to discharge his functions owing to absence, illness 
or any other cause, the Vice-Chairman or, as the case may be, such one of the Vice-
Chairmen as the Centtal Government may, by notification in the Official Gazeue, authorise 45 
in this behalf, shall discharge lIle functions of the Chairman until the date on which the 
Chairman resumes his duties. 

5 
10 
15 
29 
24SBC. On the application of the assessee or the Corr.missioner and after notice to 
them, and after hearing such of them as he may desire to be heard, or on his own motion 
without such notice, the Chairman may transfer any case pending before one Bench, for 
disposal, to another Bench. 
245BO. If the Members of a Bench differ in opinion on any point, the point shall be 
decided according to the opinion of the majoritY, if there is a majority, but if the Members 
are equally divided, they shall state the point or points on which they differ, and make a 
reference to the Chairman who shall either hear the point or points himself or refer the case 
for hearing on such point or points by one or more of the other Members of the Settlement 
Commission and such point or points shall be decided according to the opinion of the 
majority of the Members of the Settlement Commission who have heard the case, including 
those who first heard it" . 
62. In section 245C of the Income-tax Act, with effect from the 1st day of June, 1987,-
(;) in sub-section (1), for the proviso, the following proviso shall be substituted, 
namely:-
"Provided that no such application shall be made unless, -
(a) the assessee has furnished the return of income which he is or was required to 
furnish under any of the provisions of this Act; and 
(b) the additional amount of income-tax payable on the income disclosed in the 
20 application exceeds fifty thousand rupees."; 
2.'5 
30 
35 
40 
(ii) for sub-sections (1B) and (IC), the following sub-sections shall be subslituted, 
namely: -
"(1 B) Where the income disclosed in fhe application relates to only one previous 
year,-
(i) if the applicant has not furnished a return in respect of the total income of that 
year (whether or not an assessment has been made in respect of the total income of that 
year), then, except in a case covered by clause (iii), tax shall be calculated on the 
income disclosed in the application as if such income were the total income; 
(ii) if the applicant has furnished a return in respect of the total income of that year 
(whether or not an assessment has been made in pursuance of such return), tax shall be 
calculated on the aggregate of the total income returned and the income disclosed in the 
application as if such aggregate were the total income; 
(iii) if the proceeding pending before the income-tax authority is in the nature of a 
proceeding for re-assessment of the applicant under section 147 or by way of appeal or 
revision in connection with such re-assessment, and the applicant has not furnished a 
return in respect of the total income of that year in the course of such proceeding for 
re-assessment, tax shall be calculated on the aggregate of the total income as assessed 
in the earlier proceeding for assessment under section 143 or section 144 or section 
147 and the income disclosed in the application as if such aggregate were the total 
income. 
(1 C) The additional amount of income-tax payable in respecl of the income disclosed 
in the application relating to the previous year referred to in sub-section (1 B) shall be, -
(a) in a case referred to in clause (i) of that sub-section, the amount of tax 
45 calculated under that clause; 
(b) in a case referred to in clause (U) of that sub-section, the amount of tax 
calculated under that clause as reduced by the amount of tax calculated on the total 
income returned for that year; 
Powcrof 
Owirmanro 
transfer cases 
fromooe 
Benchro 
another. 
Decisionrobe 
by majcrity. 
Amendment 
ofsectim 
245C. 

Amendmenl 
of section 
2450. 
Amendmenl 
of section , 
245E. 
Amendment 
of sec lion 
245F. 
Amendmenl 
ofscction 
245H. 
Insertion of 
ncwsection 
245HA. 
Power of 
Settlemenl 
Commission 
30 
(c) in a case referred to in clause (iii) of that sub-section, the amount of tax calculated 
under that clause as reduced by the amount of tax calculated on the total income assessed in 
the earlier proceeding for assessment under section 143 or section 144 or section 147.". 
63. In section 2450 of the Income-tax Act, with effect from the 1st day of June, 1987,-
(a) after sub-section (4), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely :-
"(5) Subject to the provisions of section 245BA, the materials brought on record 
before the Settlement Commission shall be considered by the Members of the concerned 
Bench before passing any order under sub-section (4) and, in relation to the passing of 
such order, the provisions of section 245BO shall apply."; 
(b) in sub-section (6), for the words "tax or penalty", the words "tax, penalty or 
interest" shall be substituted; 
(c) in sub-section (8), after the words "passed by the Settlement Commission", the 
words, brackets and figures "and nothing contained in the proviso to sub-section (1) of 
section 186 shall apply to the cancellation of the registration of a firm required to be made 
in pursuance of any such directions as aforesaid" shall be inserted. 
64. In section 245E of the Income-tax Act, for the proviso, the following proviso shall be 
substituted with effect from the 1st day of June, 1987, namely:-
"Provided that no proceeding shall be r~-opened by the Settlement Commission under this 
section if the period between the end of the assessment year to which such a proceeding 
5 
10 
15 
relates and the date of application f~r settlement under section 245C exceeds nine years.". 20 
6S. In section 245F of the Income-tax Act, with effect from the 1st day of June, 1987,-
(a) in sub-section (3), the words "or by way of advance tax" shall be omitted; 
(b) sub-sections (5) and (6) shall be omitted. 
66. In section 245H of the Income-tax Act, with effect from the 1st day of June, 1987,-
(a) in sub-section (1), the following proviso shall be inserted at the end, namely :- 2S 
"Provided that no such immunity shall be granted by the Settlement Commission in 
cases where the proceedings for the prosecution for any such ,offence have been instituted 
before the date of receipt of the application under section 245C."; 
(b) after sub-section (1 ), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely :-
"( lA) An immunity granted to a person under sub-section (1) shall stand withdrawn 30 
if such person fails to pay any sum specified in the order of settlement passed under sub-
section (4) of section 2450 within the time specified in such order or within such further 
time as may be allowed by the Settlement Commission, or fails to comply with any 
other condition subject to which the immunity was granted and thereupon the provisions 
of this Act shall apply as if such immunity had not been granted."; 35 
(c) in sub-~tion (2), the words "has not complied with the conditions subject to 
which the immunity was granted or that such person" shall be omitted. 
67. After section 245H of the Income-tax Act, the following section shall be inserted with 
effect from the 1st day of June. 1987, namely :-
"245HA. (1) The Settlement Commission may, if it is of opinion that any person who 40 
made an application for settlement under section 245C has not co-operated with the 

31 
Settlement Commission in the proceedings before it, send the case back to the Inoome-tax 
Officer who shall thereupon dispose of the case in acccxdance with the provisions of this Act 
as if no application undtz section 24SC had been made. 
(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1). the Income-cax OffICeI' shall be cnti1Jed to use 
all the materials and other information produced by the assessee before the Settlement 
Commission or the results of the inquiry held or evidence recorded by the Settlement 
Commission in the course of the proceedings before it as if such materials, information, 
inquiry and evidence had been produced before the Income-tax OffICCl' or held or recorded 
by him in the course of the proceedings before him. 
10 (3) For the pwposes of the time-limit under sections 149, 153, 154, ISS and 231 and 
for the pwposes of payment of interest under sections 243 and 244, in a case referred to in 
sub-section (1). the period commencing on and from \he date of the application to the 
Settlement Commission under section 245C and ending with the date of receipt by the 
Income--tax Officer of the ordtz'of the Settlement Commission sending the case back to 
15 the Income-tax Officer shall be excluded; and where the assessee is a farm, for the 
pwposes of the time--limit for cancellation of regisb'ation of the farm under sub-section 
(1) of section 186, the period aforesaid shall. likewisr., be excluded.". 
68. In section 245K of the Income--tax Act, with effect from the 1st day of JWle,'1987.-
(a) in clause (ii). the word "or" shall be added at the end; 
AmnIrnent 
ofleClion 
24.51(. 
20 (b) aftez clause (li), the following clause shall be inserted, namely ;-
"(iii) the case of such person is sent back to the Income-tax Officer by the Settlement 
Cnmmission under section 245HA. n. 
Omission of 69. Section 245M of the Income-tax Act shall be omitted with effect from the 1st day of section 245M. 
June. 1987. 
25 70. In the Income-tax Act. after section 272B, the following section shall be inserted with Insertiooof 
30 
effect from the lst day of June. 1987. namely:- tleWleCbm 
2128B. 
"272BB. ( 1 ) If a person fails to comply with the provisions of section 203A. he shall. 
on an order passed by the Income-tax Officer. pay. by way of penalty. a sum which may 
extend to five thousand rupees. 
(2) No order under sub-section (1) shall be passed unless the person on whom the 
penalty is proposed to be imposed is given an opportunity of being heard in the matter. n. 
'P~for 
failure 10 
.-I., '!h di;''''),~ 
f ~ o sectKm 
203A. 
71. In section 273B of the Income-tax Act. for the words. figures and letter "section 272B Amendment 
of section or". the words. figures. letters and brackets "section 272B or sub-section (1) of section 272BB 273B. 
or" shall be substituted with effect from the 1st day of June. 1987. 
35 72. Section 280ZA of the Income-tax Act shall be omitted with effect from the 1st day of Omismnof section 
April. 1988. 28CTZA. 
73. Sections 285 and 286 of the Income-tax Act shall be omitted with effect from the 1st ~2fJ 
day of June. 1987. and 286. 
74. In section 293 of the Income-tax Act, the word "assessment" shall be omitted and Amendment 
40 shall be deemed to have been omitted with effect from the 1st day of March, 1987. ofsccti6n 293 
75. In the Eleventh Schedule to the Income-tax Act, with effect from the 1st day of April, ~=::t 
1988, - Schedule, 
(a) in item 5. the following Explanation shal! be inserted at the end, namely ;-
'Explanation.- "Blended flavouring concentrates" shall include, and shall be deemed 
45 always to have included, synthetic essences in any fonn. ': 

32 
(b) in item 22, in the Explanation. for the words ", for data processing and for 
transmission and reception of messages", the words. brackets, figures and leltCrs "and for data 
processing (not being computers within the meaning of section 32AB)" shall be substituted. 
Consequential 76. The following amendments (being amendments of a consequential nature) shall be 
amendmenlS. made in the Income-tax Act, - 5 
(a) (i) in section 32A, in the Explanation below sub-section (2B). clause (b ) shall be 
omitted; 
(ii) in section 54E. in Explanation 1 below sub-section (1). in clause (d ), the 
Explanation shall be omitted; 
(iii) in section 80L, in sub-section (1). in clause (ii). the Explanation shall be 10 
omitted; 
(iv) in section 193. in the proviso, in clause (iib). the Explanation shall be omitted; 
(b) with effect from the 1st day ofJune, 1987,-
(i) in section 272A, in sub-section (2). in clause (a). for the words. figures and 
letter", section 285, section 285S or section 286", the words, figures and letter "or 15 
section 285S" shall be substituted; 
(ii) in the Fourth Schedule, in Part S, -
(J) for the figures and brackets "206(2) ", in the heading at the beginning, the 
figures "206" shall be substituted; 
(2) in rule 7, the words. brackets and figure "sub-section (J ) of' shall be omitted; 20 
(e) with effect from the 1st day of April, 1988.-
(i) in section 2, in clause (18), in sub-clause (b), in item (8). in sub-item (e). for 
the words, brackets, letter and figures "where such subsidiary company fulfils the 
conditions laid down in clause (b) of section 108", the words "if the whole of the share 
capital of such subsidiary company has been held by the parent company or by its 25 
nominees throughout the previous year" shall be substituted; 
(ii) in clause (il) of sub-section (4) of section lOA. in clause (i) of the Explanation 
below section 44C, in sub-section (2) of section 75, in clause (b) of sub-section (2) of 
section 77. in section 80, in sub-section (3) of section 139, in clause (iv) of sub-
section (2) of section 141A, in sub-clause (iv) of clause (b) of sub-section (1) of 
section 143, in sub-section (4) of section 155, and in section 157, for the words, 30 
brackets and figures "sub-section (l) of section 74", the words, brackets and figures "sub-
section (1) or sub-section (3) of section 74" shall be substituted: 
(iii) in section 41. in sub-section (5). the words 'or under the head "Capital gains'" 
shall be omitted; 
(iv) in section 73, in the Explanation occurring at the end, for the words, brackets 35 
and figures "other than an investment company, as defined in clause (il) of section 109", 
the words 'other than a company whose gross total income consists mainly of income 
which is chargeable under the heads "Interest on securities", "Income from house 
property", "Capital gains" and "Income from other sources" , shall be substituted; 
(v) in section 155, in sub-section (lOA), for the words "capital asset, not being a 
short-teon capital asset", the words "long-tenn capital asset" shall be substituted; 
(vi) in section 236A ,-
40 
(1) for the words, braclcets and figures "In the case of an institution or fund referred 
to in clause (iii) of sub-section (2) of section 104", the words "Where seventy-
five per cent. of the share capital of any company is throughout the previous year 4S 

27ofl957. 
33 
beneficially held by an institution <X' fund established in India for a charitable pwpose 
the income from dividend whereof is exempt under ICI.;tion 11" shall be substituted; 
(2) for the words"by such a company as is refemd to in the said clause", the words 
"by such company" shall be substituted.; 
5 (vii) in section 246, in sub-section (2), in clause (a), the words and figures "or an 
order under section 104, made against the assessee, being a company" shall be omitted~ 
(viii) in section 280ZB, in Explanation 2, clause (a) shall be omitted. 
Wealth-tax 
77. In section 2 of the Wealth-tax Act, 1957 (hereinafter referred to as the Wealth-tax Act), Amendment 
10 in clause (m), the following Explanation shall be inserted at the end, with effect from the 1st ohection2 
day of April, 1988, namely :-
"Explanation.- A building or part thereof referred to in clause (iii), clause (iiia) or 
clause (iiib) of section 27 of the Income-tax Act shall be includible in the net wealth of the 
person who is deemed under the said clause to be the owner of that building or part thereof;". 
15 78. In section 5 of the Wealth-tax Act, in sub-section (1), after clause (xxva), the Amendment 
following clause shall be inserted with effect from the 1st day of April, 1988, namely :_ of section 5. 
"(xxvb) any deposits made under the National Savings Scheme referred to in section 
80CCA of the Income-tax Act;". 
79. For section 22A of the Wealth-tax Act, the following section shall be s'Jbstituted with Sumtitutionof 
20 effect from the 1st day of June. 1987, namely:- ~~ 
'22A. In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, -
(a) "Bench" means a Bench of the Settlement Commission; 
(b) "case" means any proceeding under this Act for the assessment or re-assessment 
of any person in respect of any year or years, or by way of appeal or revision in 
connection with such assessment or re-assessment. which may be pending before any 
Wealth-tax authority on the date on which an application under sub-section (1) of section 
22C is made: 
Provided that where any appeal or application for revision has been preferred after the 
expiry of the period specified for the filing of such appeal or application for revision 
22A. 
Defmitions. 
30 under this Act and which has not been admitted, such appeal or revision shall not be 
deemed to be a proceeding pending within the meaning of this clause; 
35 
40 
(c) "Chairman" means the Chairman of the Settlement Commission; 
(4) "Member" means a Member of the Settlement Commission, and includes the 
Chairman and a Vice-Chairman; 
(e) "Settlement Commission" means the Income-tax Settlement Commission 
constituted under section 245B of the Income-tax Act; 
(j) "Vice-Chairman" means a Vice-Chairman of the Settlement Commission; 
(g) "Wealth-tax authority" means an income-tax authority specified in section 116 of 
the Income-tax Act who is treated as a Wealth-tax authority under section 8.'. 
80. In section 22B of the Wealth-tax Act, in sub-section (1), the brackets and words Amendment 
'(hereafter in this Chapter referred to as "the Settlement Commission ")' shall be omitted with of section 
effect from the 1st day of June, 1987. 22B. 

Insertimlof 
new sections 
22BAto 
22BD. 
Compositim 
of the 
Settlement 
Commission. 
Vice-
ChainnlllllO 
aetas 
Chainnanor 
to discharge 
his funclioos in 
certain 
circum-
stances. 
Power of 
Chainnmto 
transfer cues 
from one 
Bench 10 
another. 
Dccisiootobe 
by majority. 
34 
81. After section 22B of the Wealth-tax Act, the following sections shall be inserted. with 
effect from the 1st day of June. 1987, namely :-
"22BA. (1) Subject to the other provisions of this Chapter. the jurisdiction. powers 
and authority of the Settlement Commission may be exercised by Benches thereof. 
(2) Subject to the other provisions of this section, a Bench shall be preside4 over by 5 
the Chairman or a Vice-Chairman and shall consist of two other Members. 
(3) The Bench for which the Chairman is the Presiding Officer shall be the principal 
Bench and the other Benches shall be known as additional Benches. 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (1) and (2), the Chairman 
may authorise the Vice-Chairman or other Member appointed to one Bench to discharge 10 
also the functions of the Vice-Chairman or, as the case may be. other Member of another 
Bench. 
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing provisions of this section, 
and subject to' any rules that may be made in this behalf, when one of the persons 
constituting a Bench (whether such person be the Presiding Officer or other Member of 15 
the Bench) is unable to discharge his functions owing to absence, illness or any other 
cause or in the event of the occurrence of any vacancy either in the office of the Presiding 
Officer or in the office of one or the other Members of the Bench, the remaining two 
persons may function as the Bench and if the Presiding Officer of the Bench is not one of 
the remaining two persons, the senior among the remaining persons shall act as the 20 
Presiding Officer of the Bench: 
Provided that if at any stage of the hearing of any case or matter, it appears to the 
Presiding Officer that the case or matter is of such a nature that it ought to be heard by a 
Bench consisting of three Members, the case or matter may be referred by the Presiding 
Officer of such Bench to the Chairman for transfer to such Bench as the Chairman may 2.'i 
deem fit 
(6) Subject to the other provisions of this Chapter, the places at which the principal 
Bench and the additional Benches shall ordinarily sit, shan be such as the Central 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify. 
22BB. (1) In the event of the occurrence of any vacancy in the office of the 30 
Chairman by reason of his death, resignation or otherwise, the Vice-Chairman or, as the 
case may be, such one of the Vice-Chairmen as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, authorise in this behalf. shall act as the Chairman 
until the date on which a new Chairman, appointed in accordance with the provisions of 
this Chapter to fill such vacancy, enters upon his office. 35 
(2) When the Chairman is unable to discharge his functions owing to absence, illness 
or any other cause, the Vice-Chairman or, as the case may be, such one of the Vice-
Chairmen as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
authorise in this behalf, shall discharge the functions of the Chairman until the date on 
which the Chairman resumes his duties. 40 
22BC. On the application of the assessee or the Commissioner and after notice to 
them. and after bearing such of them as may desire to be heard, or on his own motion 
without such notice, the Chairman may transfer any case pending before one Bench. for 
disposal. to another Bench. 
22BD. If the Members of a Bench differ in opinion on any point. the point shall be 45 
decided according to the opinion of the majority. if there is a majority, but if the 
Members are equally divided, they shall state the point or points on which they differ. and 
make a reference to the Chairman who shall either hear the point or points himself or 

.5 
3S 
refer the case for hearing on such point or points by one or mo~'e of the other Members of the 
Setdement Commission and such point or points shall be decided according to the opinion of 
the majority of the Members of the Settlement Commission who have heard the case, 
including those who rU'St heard it" . 
82. In section 22C of the Wealth-tax Act. with effect from the 1st day of June, 1987,-
(;) in sub-section (1 J. the fonowing proviso shall be inserted at the end, namely :-
"Provided that no such application shall be made unless the assessee has furnished the 
return of wealth which he is or was required to furnish under any of the provisions of this 
Act"; 
10 (ii) for sub-sections (JB) and (JC), the following sub-sections shall be substituted, 
namely:-
n(JB) Where the wealth disclosed in the application relates to only one previous year,-
(i) if the applicant has not furnished a return in respect of the net wealth of that 
15 year (whether or not an assessment has been made in respect of the net wealth of that 
year), then, except in a case covered by clause (iii), wealth-tax shall be calculated on 
the wealth disclosed in the application as if such wealth were the net wealth; 
• 
20 
(il) if the applicant has furnished a return in respect of the net wealth of that year 
(whether or not an assessment has been made in pursuance of such return), wealth-tax 
shall be calculated on the aggregate of the net wealth returned and the wealth disclosed 
in the application as if such aggregate were the net wealth; 
(iii) if the proceeding pending before the wealth-tax authority is in the nature of a 
proceeding fa- re-assessment of the applicant under section 17 or by way of appeal or 
revision in connection with such re-assessment, and the applicant has not furnished a 
return in respect of the net wealth of that year in the course of such proceeding for re-
2.5 assessment, wealth-tax shall be calculated on the aggregate of the net wealth as 
assessed in the earlier proceeding for assessment under section 16 or section 17 and the 
wealth disclosed in the application as if such aggregate were the net wealth. 
30 
( 1 C) The additional amount of wealth-tax payable in respect of the wealth disclosed 
in the application relating to the previous year referred to in sub-section (1 B) shall be,-
(a) in a case referred to in clause (i) of that sub-section, the amount of wealth-tax 
calculated under that clause; 
(b) in a case referred to in clause (ii) of that sub-section. the amount of wealth-
tax calculated under that clause as reduced by the amount of wealth-tax calculated on 
the net wealth returned for that year; 
3.5 (c) in a cue refemd to in clause (iii) of that sub-section, the amount of wealth-
40 
tax calculated under that clause as reduced by the amount of wealth-tax calculated on 
the net wealth ISscssed in the earlier proceeding for assessment under section 16 or 
section 17.", 
83. In section 22D of the Wealth-lax ACt, with effect from the lst day of June, 1987,-
(a) afta' sub-scctim (4), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely :-
H(S) Subject to the provisions. of section 22BA, the marerials brought on record before 
the Sealement Commission shaD be considered by the Members of the concerned Bench 
before passing any order undeI' sub-section (4) and, in relation to the passing of such 
order, the provisions of IeCtion 22BD shall apply.-; 
Amaldment 
of section 
22C. 
Amendmalt 
ofaection 
220. 

36 
(b) in sub-section (6). for the words "laX or penalty", the words "laX, penalty or 
interest" shall be substituK 
Amendment 84. In section 22E of the Wealth-tax Act, for the proviso, the following proviso shall be 
of section substituted with effect from the lst day of June, 1987, namely :-
22E. 
Amendment 
of section 
22F. 
Amendment 
of section 
22H. 
I n'lCrt.ion of 
ncwscction 
22HA. • 
Power of 
Settlement 
Cornmissim 
toserdacue 
bade to the 
Wealth-tax 
Offia!r if !he 
UICIIIOe does 
nat 00-
~te. 
"Provided that no proceeding shall be re-opened by the Settlement Commission under this .5 
section if the period between the end of the assessment year to which such a proceeding 
relates and the date of application for seuIement under section 22C exceeds nine years.". 
85. In section 22F of the Wealth-tax Act, sub-sections (5) and(6) shall be omitted with 
effect from the 1st day of June, 1987. 
86. In section 22H of the Wealth-tax Act, with effect from the 1st day of J one, 1987,-
(a) in sub-section (1). the following proviso shall be inserted at me end, namely :-
"Provided thal no such immunity shall be granted by the Settlement Commission in 
cases where the proceedings for the prosecution for any such offence have been instituted 
before the date of receipt of the application under section 22C."; 
10 
(b) after sub-section (1 ). the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely :- 1.5 
"(1 A) Nt immunity granted to a person under sub-section (1) shall stand withdrawn 
if such person fails to pay any sum specified in the order of settlement passed under sub-
section (4) of section 220 within the time specified in such order or within such further 
time as may be allowed by the Settlement Commission, or fails to comply with any 
other condition subject to which the immunity was granted and thereupon the provisions 20 
of this Act shall apply as if such immunity had not been granted."; 
(c) in sub-section (2). the words "has not complied with the conditions subject to 
which the immunity was granted or that such person" shall be omiued. 
87. After section 22H of the Wealth-lax Act, the following section shall be inserted with 
effect from the lst day of June, 1987, namely :_ 15 
"22HA. (1) The Settlement Commission may, if it is of opinion that any person who 
made the application for settlement under section 22C has not co-operated with the 
Settlement Commission in the proceedings before it, send the case back to the Wealth-laX 
Officer who shall, thereupon, dispose of the case in accordance with the provisions of this 
Act as if no application under section 22C had been made. 30 
(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1). the Wealth-tax Officer shall be entitled to use 
all the materials and other information produced by the assessee before the Settlement 
Commission or the results of the inquiry held or evidence recorded by the Settlement 
Commission in the course of the proceedings before it as if such materials, infonnation, 
inquiry and evidence had been produced before the Wealth-tax Officer or held or recorded by 
him in the course of the proceedings before him. 35 
(3) For the purposes of the time-limit under sections 17A, 32 and 35 and for the 
purposes of payment of interest under section 34A, in a case referred to in lub-section (1). 
the period commencing on and from the date of the application to the Setdement 
Commission undel'section 22C and ending with the dare of receipt by the Wealth-tax OffICeI' 
of the order of the Setdement Commission sending the case back 10 the Wealth-laX Officer, «) 
shall be excluded. " . 
88. In section 22K of the Wealth-tax Act, with effect from the 1st day of June. 1987.-
(a) at the end of clause (U), the word "or" shall be insertaI; 

37 
(b) Ifter cIIUIe (U), Ibe foIIowina c __ ..... be m.nect, nameIy:-
"(Ut) the cue of.., IUCb perDI is lent bact to abe Wealdl-lax Officer by the Seulemmt 
Commiuion under IDC1ion 22HA,". 
19. Section 22M of the Wealth-tax Act shall be omiued with effect from the 1st day of ~of 
oS JWte, 1987. 1ICCian22M. 
90. In section 31 of the Wealth-tax Act, in sub-section (2A).-
(oJ in the opening portion,-
(i) for the words "the Board may", the words "the Commissioner may" shall be 
substituted ; 
10 (ii) for the words "interest payable by an assessee", the words "interest paid or 
payable by an assessee" shall be substituted and shall be deemed to have'been substituted 
with effect from the 1st day of October, 1984; 
(iii) for the words ", on the recommendation made by the Commissioner in this 
behalf, it is satisfied that". the words "he is satisfied that" shall be substituted; 
15 (b) for clauses (i) and (ii). the following clauses shall be substituted and shall be 
deemed to have been substituted with effect from the 1st day of October. 1984, namely:-
"(i) payment of such amount has caused or would cause genuine hardship to the 
assessee; 
(U) default in the payment of the amount on which interest has been paid or was 
20 payable under the said sub-section was due to circumstances beyond the control of the 
assessee; and". 
AmcnIhenl 
ollOCIion 31. 
91. In section 43 of the Wealth-tax Act, for the words "any ~sessment made", the words Amendment 
"any order made" shall be substituted and shall be deemed to have been substituted with effect ofsec1ion43. 
from the Ist day of March, 1987. 
25 Gift-lOX 
18 of 1958. 92. In section 2 of the Gift-tax Act, 1958 (hereinafter referred to as the Gift-tax Act). in Amendment 
clause (xii), the following Explanation shall be inserted at the end, with effect from the 1st ofsection2 
day of April, 1988, namely:-
"Explanation.- A transfer of any building or part thereof referred to in clause (iii), clause 
30 (uia) or clause (iiib) of section 27 of the Income-tax Act by the person who is deemed 
under the said clause to be the owner thereof made voluntarily and without consideration in 
money or money's worth, shall be deemed to be a gift made by such person;". 
93. In section 42 of the Gift-tax Act, for the words "any assessment made", the words Amendment 
"any order made" shall be substituted and shall be deemed to have been ~ubstituted with effcct of section 42. 
35 from the lst day of March, 1987. 
CHAPTER IV 
INDIRFL7 TAXES 
Customs 
94. The Customs Tariff Act, 1975 (hereinafter referred to as the Customs Tariff Acl). shall ~l 
40 be amended in the manner specified in the Second Schedule. 1975. 
95. (1) In the case of goods mentioned in the First Schedule to the Customs Tariff Act, Auxilimy 
or in that Schedule, as amended from time to time, there shall be levied and collected as an duties of 
auxiliary duty of customs an amount equal Lo fifty per cent. of the value of the goods as CUSIOlm. 

Amendment 
of Act 1 of 
1944. 
Amendment 
of Act 5 of 
1986. 
Special duties 
of excise. 
Ammdment 
of Act 58 of 
1957. 
38 
determined in accordance with the provisions of section 14 of the Customs Act, 1962 
(hereinafter refmed to as the Customs Act). 
(2) Sub-section (1) shall cease to have effect after the 31st day of March, 1988, except 
as respectS things done or omitted to be done before such cesser; and section 6 of the General 
Clauses Act, 1897, shall apply upon such cesser as if the said sub-section had then been 5 
repealed by a Central Act 
(3) The auxiliary duties of customs refmed to in sub-section (1) shall be in addition to 
any duties of customs chargeable on such goods under the Customs Act, or any other law for 
the time being in force. 
(4) The provisions of the Customs Act and the rules and regulations made thereunder, 10 
including those relating to refunds and exemptions from duties, shall, as far as may be, 
apply in relation to the levy and collection of t"e auxiliary duties of customs leviable under 
this section in respect of any goods as they apply in relation to the levy and collection of the 
duties of customs on such goods under that Act or those rules and regulations, as the case 
~k ~ 
96. In section 37 of the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944 (hereinafter referred to as the 
Central Exc~ Act), in sub-section (2), after clause (zvia). the following clause shall be 
inserted, namely:-
"(mb) provide for the giving of credit of sums of money with respect to raw materials 20 
used in the manufacture of excisable goods;". 
97. The Central Excise Tariff Act, 1985 (hereinafter referred to as the Central Excise Tariff 
Act), shall be amended in the maMer specified in the Third Schedule. 
98. (1) In the case of goods chargeable with a duty of excise under thc Central Excises 
Act, as amended from time to time, read with any notification for the time being in force 25 
issued by the Central Government in relation to the duty so chargeable (not being a 
notification providing for any exemption for giving credit with respect to, or reduction of duty 
of excise under the said Act on such goods equal to, any duty of excise under the said Act, or 
the additional duty under section 3 of the Customs Tariff Act. already paid on the raw material 
or component parts used in the production or manufacLure of such goods), there shall be levied 30 
and collecled a special duty of excise equal to ten per cent. of the amount so chargeable on such 
goods. 
(2) Sub-section (1) shall cease to have effect after the 31st day of March, 1988, except 
as respects things done or omitted to be done before such cesser; and SCftion 6 of the General 
52 of 1962 
100f1897. 
Clauses Act, 1897, shall apply upon such cesser as if the said sub-section had then been 35 lOof1897. 
repealed by a Central Act 
(3) The special duties of excise referred to in sub·section (1) shall be in addition to any 
duties of excise chargeable on such goods under the Central Excises Act, or any other law for 
the time being in force. 
(4) The provisions of the Central Excises Act, and the rules made thereunder, including 40 
those relating to refunds and exemptions from duties, Shall, as far as may be, apply in relation 
to the levy and collection of the special duties of excise leviable under this section in respect of 
any goods as they aPPly in relation to the levy and collection of the duties of excise on such 
goods under that Act or those rules, as the case may be. 
99. The Additional Duties of Excise (Goods of Special Importance) Act, 1957 (hereinafter 45 
referred to as the Additional Duties of Excise Act), shall be amended in the manner specified in 
the Fourth Schedule. 

46 of 1973. 
46 of 1973. 
46 of 1973. 
39 
CHAPI'ER V 
FOREIGN EXCHANGECONSFRVATION (fRA VEL) TAX 
100. (1) This Chapter extends to the whole of India. 
commence-
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification menlo 
S in the Official Gazette, appOint 
101. In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires,- Definitions. 
10 
15 
(a) "authorised dealer" means a person for the time being authorised under section 6 of 
the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act. 1973 to deal in foreign exchange; 
(b) "dealing", in relation to foreign currency, means purchasing or selling foreign 
currency; 
(c) "foreign currency" means any currency other than Indian currency in the form of 
notes, coins or travellers cheques; 
(d) "foreign exchange" means foreign currency; 
(e) "foreign travel" means a travel. the whole or any part of which is outside India; 
(f) "money changer" means a person for the time being authorised under section 7 of the 
Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1973 to deal in foreign currency; . 
(g) words and expressions used but not defined in this Chapter shall have the 
meanings assigned to them in the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1973. 
101. (1) With effect from the date of commencement of this Chapter, there shall be 
20 levied on all foreign exchange released for any foreign travel by any person, a tax [hereafter in 
this Chapter referred to as the foreign exchange conservation (travel) tax] at the rate of fifteen 
per cent. of the rupee equivalent of the amount of foreign exchange released. 
(2) In accordance with the rules made 'under this Chapter, the foreign exchange 
conservation (travel) tax shall be collected by the authorised dealer or money changer and paid 
25 to the credit of the Central Government. 
Foreign 
exchange 
~alion 
(travel) tax. 
103. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Chapter, the Central Government may, Power ID 
by notification in the Official Gazeue, and subject to such conditions and limitations as may exempt. 
be specified therein, exempt wholly or to such extent as may be specified in the notification, 
any release of foreign exchange for any foreign travel or class or category of foreign travel from 
30 the payment of tax leviable under this Chapter if that Government is satisfied that it is 
necessary or expedient so to do, having regard to the purposes of the foreign travel and any 
other special circumstances. 
104. (1) Every person intending to undertake a foreign travel and holding foreign Penalties. 
exchange in relation to which the tax payabl~ under this Chapter has not been paid shall, in 
3S addition to his liability to pay the tax, be liable to pay a penalty not exceeding twice the 
amount of the tax he would have paid under the provisions of this Chapter. 
(2) Any penalty under this section may be adjudged, collected and paid t<? the ~redit of the 
Central Government by such authority and in such manner as may be specified 10 the rules 
made under this Chapter. 
lOS. No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie a~ainst l;he Central ~overnment and no 
suit or prosecution or other legal proceeding shall he agalOst any officer of the Central 
Government. ex' of the State Government or against a~y authorised deal~ or money changer for 
anything in good faith done or intended to be done 10 pursuance of thIS Chapter or the rules 
made thereunder. 
ProtecI.im of 
action taken in 
good failh. 

Power to 
mike rules. 
Rules III¥l 
mIificaOOns to 
be laid before 
Parliamenl. 
Amendment 
of Act 47 of 
1974. 
Amendment 
of Ad. 62 of 
1986. 
40 
106 •. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make 
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Chapter. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules 
may provide for - . 
(a) the collection of the foreign exchange conservation (ttavel) tax, the authorities by S 
whom adjudication of penalties or other functions under this Chapter shall be discharged, the 
manner in which such tax or penalties due under this Chapter shall be payable, the manner 
in which such tax or penalties shall be collected and paid to the credit of the Central 
Government and the procedure for claiming refund of any amount.-paid under this Chapter; 
(b) the JXOCCdure for adjudication of penalties; 
(c) appeals against orders made under this Chapter, the manner in which and the time 
within which such appeals may be preferred and the fees payable therefor; 
10 
(d) the returns and other particulars and information which may be required to be 
furnished for the purposes of this Chapter, the persons or authorities by or to whom or 
which, and the intervals at which, such returns, particulars and information shall be 15 
furnished; 
(e) any other matter which is to be, or may be, provided for by rules under this Chapter. 
107. Every rule made under this Chapter and every notification issued under section 103 
shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made or issued before each House of Parliament while 
it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in 2() 
two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the rule or notification or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made 
or the notification should not be issued, the rule or notification shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified fonn or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 25 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously 
done under that rule or notification. 
CHAP1ER VI 
MIscEllANF.ous 
108. In the Schedule to the Oil Industry (Development) Act, 1974, - 30 
(a) in SI. No. r relating to crude oil, for the entry in column 3, the entry "Rupees one 
thousand per tonne." shall be substituted; 
(b) in S1. No.2 relating to natural gas, for the entry in column 3, the entry "Rupees 
three hundred per thousand cubic metres." shall be substituted. 
109. In the Customs and Excise Revenues Appellate Tribunal Act, 1986, in section 5, 35 
after sub-section (3), the following Explanation shall be inserted, namely:-
"ExpltJNJlion.-For the purposes of sub-section (3). in computing the period during 
which a ~rson has been a member of the Indian Customs and Central Excise Service, 
Group 'A. there shall be included any period during which the person has been a member of 
the Indian Customs Service Class I, or the Central Excise Service Class I, as the case may 40 
be, of the Indian Revenue Service immediately before the constitution of the Indian 
Customs and Central Excise Service. Group 'A'.". 
Declaration under the Provisional Coll-:ction of Taxes Act, 1931. 
It is hereby dec1al.u1 that it is expedient in the public interest that the provisions of clauses 
94, 95, 97, 98, 99 and 108 of this Bill shall h.we immediate effect under the Provisional 
Collection of Taxes Act. 1931. 160C 1931. 

5 
41 
1HE FIRST SCHEDULE 
(5'« section 2) 
PART I 
INcoME-TAX 
Paragraph A 
Sub-P01YJ81"oph I 
In the case of every individual or Hindu undivided family or WU'egistered fmn or other association of persons or body of 
individuals. whether incorporated or not, or every artifICial juridical peROP referred to in sub-clause (vii) of clause (31) of 
section 2 of the Income-tax Act, not being a case to which Sub-Paragraph II of this Paragraph or any other Paragraph of 
10 this Part applies.-
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 
Rates of income-tax 
(1) where the total income does not exceed Rs. 18.000 
(2) where the total income exceeds Rs. 18.000 but does 
not exceed Rs. 25.000 
(3) where the total income exceeds Rs. 25,000 but does 
not exceed Rs. 50.000 
(4) where the total income exceeds Rs. 50,000 but does 
not exceed Rs. 1,00.000 
(5) where the total income exceeds Rs. 1.00.000 
Nil; 
25 per cent. of the amount by which the total income 
exceeds Rs. 18.000; 
Rs. 1,750 plus 30 per cent of the amount by which the 
total income exceeds Rs. 25,000; 
Rs. 9,250 plus 40 per cent of the amount by which the 
total income exceeds Rs. 50,000; 
Rs. 29.250 plus 50 per cent. of the amount by which the 
total income exceeds Rs. 1,00,000. 
Sub-Paragraph II 
In the case of every Hindu undivided family which at any time during the previous year has at least one member whose 
total income of the previous year relevant to the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April,1987 exceeds 
Rs. 18.000.- Rates of income-tax 
(I) where the total income does not exceed Rs. 12,000 
(2) where the total income exceeds Rs. 12,000 but does 
not exceed Rs. 20,000 
(3) where the total incom~exceeds Rs. 20.000 but does 
not exceed Rs. 40,000 
(4) where the total income exceeds Rs. 40.000 but does 
not exceed Rs. 60,000 
(5) where the total income exceeds Rs. 60.000 but does 
not exceed Rs. 1,00,000 
(6) where the total income exceeds Rs. 1,00,000 
Nil; 
2S per cent. of the amount by which the total income 
exceeds Rs. 12,000; 
Rs. 2,000 plus 30 per cent. of the amount by which the 
total income exceeds Rs. 20,000; 
Rs. 8,000 plus 40 per cent of the amount by which the 
total income exceeds Rs. 40,000; 
Rs. 16,000 plus 50 pet cent. of the amount by which the 
total income exceeds Rs. 60,000; 
Rs. 36,000 plus S5 per cent. of the amount by which the 
total income exceeds Rs. 1,00.000. 
Parograph B 
In the case of every co-operative society,-
Rates of income-tax 
(1) where the total income does not exceed Rs. 10.000 
(2) where the total income exceeds Rs. 10,000 but does 
not exceed Rs. 20,000 
(3) where the total income exceeds Rs. 20,000 
15 per cent. of the total income; 
Rs. 1.500 plus 25 per cent of the amount by which the 
total income exceeds Rs. 10.000; 
Rs. 4,000 plus 40 per cent. of the amount by which the 
. total income exceeds Rs. 20,000. 
In the case of every registered fltTTl, not being a case to which Sub-Paragraph II of this Paragraph applies,-

(1) where the total income does not exceecl Rs. 10,000 
(2) where the total income exceeds Rs. 10,000 but does 
not exceed Rs. 25,000 
42 
Nil: 
S per cent. of· the amount by Which. the lOW income 
exceeds Rs. 10,000; 
(3) where the total income exceeds Rs. 25,000 but does 
not exceed Rs. SO,OOO 
(4) where the total income exceeds Rs. SO,OOO but does 
not exceed Rs. 1,00,000 
~s. 7!50 pi"" 7 per cent. of the amount by which the total • 
InCOme exceeds Rs. 25,000; 5 
Rs. 2~00 pi"" IS per cent of the amount by which the 
(5) where the total income exceeds Rs. 1,00,000 
total mcome exceeds Rs. SO,OOO; 
Rs. 10,000 pi"" 24 per cent of the amount by which the 
total income exceeds Rs. 1,00,000. 
Sub-Pamgraph n 
In the case of every registered fmn whose lOW income includes income dtzived from a profession carried on by it and the 10 
income so included is not less than fifty-one per cent. of such total inc:ome,-
Rales of incomlt-tax 
(1) where the IOtal income does not exceed Rs. 10,000 Nil; 
(2) where the total income exceeds Rs. 10,000 but does 4 per cent. of the amount by which the toW income 15 
not exceed Rs. 25,000 exceeds Rs. 10,000; 
C3) where the tocal income exceeds Rs. 2S,000 but does Rs. 600 plus 7 per cent of the amount by which the 
not exceed Rs. SO,OOO lOW income exceeds Rs. 25,000; 
(4) whue the IOtal income exceeds Rs. 50,000 but does Rs. 2,350 pi"" 13 per cent of the ameunt by which the 
not exceed Rs. 1,00,000 IOtal income exceeds Rs. SO,OOO; 
(!5) where the toW income exceeds Rs. 1,00,000 Rs. 8oBSO pi"" 22 per cent. of the amount by which the 20 
total income exceeds Rs. 1.00,000. 
Explanalio1l.- F(X' the purposes of this Paragraph, "registered fum" includes an unregistered fum assessed as a registered 
fum under clause (b) of section 183 of the Income-tax Act. 
P~D 
In the case of every local authority ,-
Rau ofincOmlt-tax 
On the whole of the toW income 50 percent. 
PtragrapIt E 
In the case of a company,-
Rates of incomlt-tax 
I. In the case of a domestic company ,-
(1) where the company is a company in which the 
public are substantially intrzested 
(2) where the company is not a company in which 
the public are substantially interested -
(i) in the case of a trading company (X' an 
investment company 
(ii) in any other case 
II. In the case of a company other than a domestic 
company,-
(i) on so much of the IOtal income as consists of-
(a) royalties received from Government or an 
Indian concern in pursuance of an agreement made by 
it with the Government or the Indian concern after 
the 31st day of Malch, 1961 but before the 1st day of 
April, 1976, or 
so per cent. of the toW income; 
60 per cent. of the toW income; 
55 per cent. of the IOtal income. 
25 
30 
3S 
40 
4S 
50 

5 
43 
(b) fees for rendering technical services received 
from Governmetlt or an Indian concern in pursuance 
of an agreement made by it with the Government or 
the Indian concern after the 29th day of February, 
1964 but before the 1st day of April, 1976, 
and where such agreement has, in either case. been 
approved by the Central Government 
(ii) on the balance. if any. of the total income 
PART II 
50 per cent; 
65 per cent 
RATES R>R DEDUCTION OFT AX AT SOURCE IN CERT AlN CASES 
In every case in which under the provisions of sections 193, 194, 194A, 194B. 194BB, 194D, 194E and 195 of the 
Income-tax Act, tax is to be deducted at the rates in force. deduction shall be made from the income subject to deduction at 
10 the following rates:-
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
I. In the case of a person other than a company -
(a) where the person is resident in India -
(i) on income by way of interest other than "Interest 
on securities" 
(ii) on income by way of winnings from lotteries and 
crossword puzzles 
(iii) on income by way of winnings from horse races 
(iv) on income by way of insurance commission 
(v) on income by way of interest payable on 
(A) any security, other than a tax-free security, of the 
Central or a State Government; 
(8) any debentures or other securities for money issued 
by or on behalf of any local authority or a corpo-
ration established by a Central. State or Provincial 
Act; 
(e) any debentures issued by a company where such 
debentures are listed on a recognised stock exchange 
in India in accordance with the Securities Contracts 
(Regulation) Act,1956 and any rules made thereunder; 
(vi) on income by way of rent -
(A) where the rent payable exceeds Rs. 36,000 but does 
not exceed Rs. 48,000 
(B) on the balance, if any 
(vii) on income by way of payments received from the 
Central Government or a State Government or any 
local authority or any corporation or body established 
by or under a Central, State or Provincial Act or any 
company. for supply of goods 
(viii) on any other income (excluding interest payable on a 
tax-free security) 
Rate of income-tax 
10 per cent.; 
40 per cent.; 
40 per cent.; 
10 per cent.; 
10 per cent.; 
10 per cent.; 
20 per cent.; 
5 per cent.; 
20 per cent.; 

(b) where the penon is not reaiden~ in India -
(i) in the cue of a non-~t IndBt -
(A) 011 inveatment income and long-term Capital pins 
(8) on income by way of inllereSt payable on a tax-free 
secmity 
(C) on income by way of rent -
(1) where the rent payable ~ceeds Rs. 36,000 but does 
not exceed Rs. 48,000 
(2) on the balance, if amy 
(1) on income by way of payments received from die 
Central Government or a Slate Government or any 
local authority or any caporation or body established 
by or under a Central, State or Provincial Act or any 
company. for supply of goods 
(E) on the whole of othez income 
(a) in the case of any other pezson -
(A) on income by way of interest payable on a tax-free 
security 
(8) on income by way of rent -
(J) where the rent payable exceeds Rs. 36,000 
but does not exceed Rs. 48,000 
Rate of income-IIIX 
20 per cent.; 
IS percenL; 
10 
10percenL, 
'or 
income-tax in respect of the income at the 
rates preacribed in Sub-Paragraph I of Para- 15 
JI'1IPh A of Part III of this Schedule, if such 
income had been the total income, 
whicheYer is higher, 
20 per cent., 
or 
incomc-IIIX in respect of the income at the 
rates preacribed in Sub-Paaqraph I of Para-
JrIPh A 01 PIn m of IIIiI Scbedule, if such 
mcome .. been die ... income, 
whiche~ is higher, 
S percent, 
or 
20 
25 
income-tax in respect of the income at the 
rates prescribed in Sub-Paragraph I of Para-
graph A of Part III of this Schedule, if such 30 
income had been the total income, 
whichever is higher; 
income-tax at 30 per cent of the &J:I'Iount of 
income, 
or 
income-tax in respect of the income at the 35 
rates prescribed in Sub-Paragraph I of Para-
paph A of Part III of this Schedule, if such 
mcome had been the total income, 
whichever is highe'Z; 
40 
IS percent; 
45 
10 per cent, 
or . 
income-tax in respect of the income at the 
rates prescribed in Sub-Paragraph I of Para-
JfIPh A of Part III of this Schedule, if such SO 
Income had been the total income, 
whichevez is higher; 

5 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 
50 
4S 
12) 011 ihO 1ilIIIDii, if any 
(C) on income by way of pltymenu received from me 
CellII'Il Government ~ State Government ~ any 
local authority ~ any corporation ~ body esaab-
lished by or under a Cenlral, Stale or Provincial 
Act or any company, for supply of goods 
(D) on the whole of the other inA,me 
2. In the case of a company -
«(.4) where the company is a domestic company-
(;) on income by way of interest other than "Interest on 
securities" 
(ii) on income by way of fees for professional services 
(iii) on income by way of royalty 
(iv) on income by way of fees for technical services 
(v) on income by way of commission or brokerage 
(excluding insurance commission) 
(w) on income by way of rent-
(A) where the rent payable exceeds Rs. 36,000 but does 
not exceed Rs. 48,000 
(B) on the balance, if any 
Rat.e of jocome-fII 
2OpercenL; 
~ 
income-tax in respect of the income at &he 
18101 prescribed in Sub-Parqraph I of Para-
araph A of Put In of this Schedule, if such 
income had been the total income, 
whichever is higher; 
S par cent., 
~ 
income-tax in respect of the income at the 
rates prelCribed in Sub-Paragraph I of Para-
Jl'aph A of Part III of this Schedule, if such 
lIu:orDe had been the total income, 
whichever is higher; 
income-tax at 30 per cent. of the 
amount of income, 
or 
income-tax in respect of the income at the 
rates prescribed in Sub-Paragraph I of Para-
Jf8ph A of Part III of this Schedule, if such 
IDcorne had been the total income, 
whichever is higher; 
20 per cent; 
25 percent; 
25 percent; 
25 per cent.; 
25 percent; 
10 percent; 
20 per cent.; 
(wi) on income by way of payments received from the Central 5 per cent.: 
Government or a State Government or any local authority or 
any corporation or body established by or under a Central, State 
or Provincial Act or any company for supply of goods 
(viii) on ~ny other income (excluding interest payable on tax-free 21. 5 per cent; 
secunty) 
(b) where the company is nol a domestic company -
(i) on income by way of dividends pltyable by any domestic 25 per cent; 
company 
(ii) on income by way of interest payable by Government or an 25 per cent; 
Indian concern on moneys borrowed or debt incurred by 
Government or the Indian concern in foreign currency 
(iii) on income by way of royalty payable by Government or an 30 per cent; 

46 
Indian conCC'nl in pursuance of an agreement made by it with the 
Government (X' the Indian concern after the 31st day of March, 
1976, where such royalty is in consideration for the transfer of 
all or any rights (including the granting of a licence) in 
respect of copyright in any book on a subject referred to in the 
poviso to sub-section (lA) of section 115A of the Income-
tax Act, to the Indian concern 
(iv) on income by way of royalty [not being royalty of the nature 
referred to in sub-item (b) (iji) ) payable by Government or an 
Indian concern in pursuance of an agreement made by it with 
the Government or the Indian concern and which has been 
approved by the Central Government,-
(A) where the agreement is made after the 31st day of March, 
1961 but before the Ist day of April, 1976 
(B) where the agreement is made after the 31st day of March, 
1976 
(v) on income by way of fees for technical services payable by 
Government or an Indian concern in pursuance of an agreement 
made by it with the Government or the Indian concern and 
which has been approved by the Central Govemment-
(A) where the agreement is made after the 29th day of February, 
1964 but before the Ist day of April, 1976 
(8) where the agreement is made after the 31 st day of March. 
1976 
(vi) on income by way of interest payable on a tax-free security 
(vii) on any other income 
50 per cent.; 
30 per cent.; 
50 percent; 
30 per cent.; 
44 per cent.; 
6~ percent. 
Rate of income-tax 
• 
Expkmation.- For the purposes of this Part, "investment income". "long-tenn capital gains" and "non-resident Indian" 
shall have the meanings assigned to them in Chapter XII-A of the Income-tax Act. 
PART III 
RAlliS RR CAl..CULAllN(H~ CliARGING INCDME-TAXIN CERTAIN C'ASES. DEDUCIlNG IN<X>ME-TAX ffiOM INCDME OIARGEABU: UNDER 
1HEHEAD"S.AURlES" CR ANYPA YMFNfREFERREDTOIN~DN C1)OFSOCIDNIlCEAND<DMPlJl1II.U"ADV AfoCETAX" 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
In cases in which income-tax has to be calculated under the flJ"St proviso to sub-section (5) of section 132 of the 
Income-tax Actor charged under sub-section (4) of section 172 or sub-section (2) of section 174 or section 175 or sub- 35 
section (2) of section 176 of the said Act or deducted under section 192 of the said Act from income chargeable under the 
head "Salaries" or deducted under sub-section (9) of Section 80E of the said Act from any payment referred to in the said 
sub-section (9) or in which th~ "advance tax" payable under Chapter XVII-C of the said Act has to be computed, at the 
rate or rates in force, such income-tax or, as the case may be. "advance tax" [not being "advance tax" in respect of any 
income chargeable to tax under Chapter XII or Chapter XII-A or sub-section (lA) of section 161 or section 164 or section 
164A or section 167A of the Income-tax Act at the rates as specified in that Chapter or section], shall be so calculated. 40 
charged, deducted or computed at the following rate or rates:-
POTagraph A 
SuJ;.POTagraph I 
In the case of every individual or Hindu undivided family or uruegistered fum or other association of persons or body of 
individuals, whether incorporated or not, or every artificial juridical person referred to in sub-clause (vii) of clause (31) of 
section 2 of the Income-tax Act, not being a case to which Sub-Paragraph n of this Paragraph or any other Paragraph of 
this Part applies,-
Rates o/income-tax 
(1) where the total income does not exceed Rs. 18,000 
(2) where the tolal income exceeds Rs. 18,000 but does 
not exceed Rs. 25,000 
Nil; 
2S per cent. of the amount by which the total income 
exceeds RI. 18,000; 
45 
so 

(3) where the total income exceeds Rs. 25,000 but does 
not exceed Rs. 50,000 
(4) where the total income exceeds Rs. 50,000 but does 
not exceed Rs. 1,00,000 
(5) where the total income exceeds Rs. 1,00,000 
47 
Rs. 1,750 plus 30 per cent of the amount by which the 
total income exceeds Rs. 25,000; 
Rs. 9,250 plus 40 per cent of the amount by which the 
total income exceeds Rs. 50,000; 
Rs. 29,2SO plus 50 per cent. of the amount by which the 
total income exceeds Rs. 1,00,000. 
Sub-Paragraph II 
In the case of every Hindu undivided family which at any time during the previous year has at least one member whose 
total income of the previous year relevant to the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1988 exceeds 
10 Rs. 18,000,-
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
Rates of income-tax 
(1) where the total income does not exceed Rs. 12,000 
(2) where the total income exceeds Rs. 12,000 but does 
not exceed Rs. 20,000 
(3) where the total income exceeds Rs. 20,000 but does 
not exceed Rs. 40,000 
(4) where the total income exceeds Rs. 40,000 but does 
not exceed Rs. 60,000 
(5) where the total income exceeds Rs. 60,000 but does 
not exceed Rs. 1,00,000 
(6) where the total income exceeds Rs. 1,00,000 
Nil; 
25 per cent. of the amount by which the total income 
exceeds Rs. 12,000; 
Rs. 2,000 plus 30 per cent of the amount by which the 
total income exceeds Rs. 20,000; 
Rs. 8,000 plus 40 per cent. of the amount by which the 
total income excee(Js Rs. 40,000; 
Rs. 16,000 plus 50 per cent. of the amount by which the 
total income exceeds Rs. 60,000; 
Rs. 36,000 plus 55 per cent. of the amount by which the 
total income exceeds Rs. 1,00,000. 
Paragraph B 
In the case of every co-operative society ,-
Rates o/income-tax 
(1) where the total income does not exceed Rs. 10,000 
(2) where the total income exceeds Rs. 10,000 but does 
not exceed Rs. 20,000 
(3) where the total income exceeds Rs. 20,000 
15 per cent of the total inCome; 
Rs. 1,500 plus 25 per cent. of the amount by which the 
total income exceeds Rs. 10,000; 
Rs. 4,000 plus 40 per cent. of the amount by which the 
total income exceeds Rs. 20,000. 
Paragraph C 
Sub-Paragraph I 
In the case of every registered fmn, not being a case to which Sub-Paragraph II of this Paragraph applies,-
Rates of income-tax 
(1) where the total income does not exceed Rs. 10,000 Nil' 
(2) wh~ the total income exceeds Rs. 10,000 but does 5 Per cent. of the amount by which the total income 
not exceed Rs. 25,000 exceeds Rs. 10,000; 
(3) wh~ the total income exceeds Rs. 25,000 but does Rs. 750 plus 7 per cent. of the amount by which the total 
not exceed Rs. 50,000 income exceeds Rs. 25,000; 
(4) wh~ the total income exceeds Rs. 50,000 but does Rs. 2,500 plus 15 per cent of the amount by which the 
not exceed Rs. 1,00,000 total income exceeds Rs. 50,000; 
(5) where the total income exceeds Rs. 1,00,000 Rs. 10,000 plus 24 per cent of the amount by which the 
total income exceeds Rs. 1,00,000. 
Sub-ParogropII n 
In the case of every registered fmn whose total income includes income derived from a profession carried on by it and 
4S the income so included is not less than flfty-one per cent. of such total income,-
RaJes of ;ncoIM-tax 
(1) w~ the total incanc does not exceed Rs. 10,000 
(2) whete the IOt8l income aceeds Ra. 10,000 but does 
not exceed Rs. 25,000 
Nil,' 
4 per cent. of the amount by which the toW income 
exceeds Rs. 10,000; 

(3) w~ the tolal income exceeds RI. 25,000 but does 
not exceed Rs. 50,000 
(4) whore the lOlal income exceeds RI. SO,OOO but does 
not exceed Rs. 1,00,000 
48 
Rs. 600 pilU 7 por cont. of the amount by which the toW 
inc~ oxccedi RI. 25,000; 
RI. 2,3SO plus 13 per cenL of the amount by which the 
total income exceeds Rs. 50,000; 
(5) where the total income exceeds Rs. 1,00.000 Rs. 8,8S0 plus 22 per cent. of th.e amount by which the 5 
total income oxceeds Rs. 1,00,000. 
ExplQllQlioa.- For the purposes of Ibis Paragraph, "registered fInn" includes an unregistered fum assessed as a registered 
fum under clause (b) of section 183 of the Income-tax Act. 
parogroplt D 
In the case of every local authorilY,-
Rate oj'illCome-tax 
On the whole of the total income 
In the case of a company,-
Rates of income-tax 
I. In the case of a domestic company,-
(1) where the company is a company in which the public are substantially 
interested 
(2) INhere the company is not a company in which the public are 
substantially interested -
(i) in the case of a trading company or an investment company 
(ii) in any other case 
II. In the case of a company other than a domestic company,-
(i) on so much of the total income as consists of-
(a) royalties received from Government or an Indian concern in 
pursuance of an agreement made by it with the Government or the 
Indian concern after the 31st day of March, 1961 but before the lst 
day of April, 1976, or 
(b) f=- for renderins technical services received from Government 
or an Indian concern in pursuance of an agreement made by it with 
the Govomment or the Indian concern after the 29th day of February, 
1964 but before the 1st day of April, 1976, 
4Uld where such qrcement has, in either case, been approved by the 
Central Government 
(ji ) on the balance, if any, of the total income 
PART IV 
[See section 2(7)(,) ] 
50 per cenl. 
50 per cent of the total income; 
60 per cent. of the total income; 
55 per cent. of the total income. 
RULBS R)R COMPUTATION Of NET AGRICULTURAL INCOME 
Rid, 1. -Aaricultural income of the nature referred to in sub-clause (a) of clause (1) of section 2 of the Income-tax Act 
10 
15 
30 
35 

49 
shall be computed IS if it were income chargeable to income-tax under that Act under the head "Inc:!ome from otht"l'SOlD'Ces" 
and the provisions of sections S7 to S9 of that Act shall, so far as may be, apply accordingly: 
Provided that sub-section (2) of section 58 shall apply subject to the modification that the reference to section 40A 
therein shall be construed 88 not including a reference to sub-sections (3) nl (4) of section 40A. 
5 Rule 2. -Agricultural income of the .. bn'e referred to in sub-clause (b) or StJb.c1ause (c) of clause (1) of section 2 of 
the Income-tax Act [other than income derived Cram .. y building required as a dwelling house by the receiver of &he rent or 
revenue or the cultivator or the recei~ of rent-in-kind referred to in the said sub-clause (c) ] shall be computed as if it were 
income chargeable to income-tax under that Act under the head "Profits and gains of business or profession" and the 
provisions of sections 30, 31, 32, 34, 36, 37, 38,40, 40A [other than sub-sections (3) and (4) thereof], 41, 43 and43A 
10 of the Income-tax Act shall, so far as may be, apply a:cordingly. 
Rule 3. -Agricultural income of the .. tore referred to in sub-clause (c) of clause (1) of section 2 of the Income-tax 
Act, being income derived from any building required as a dwelling house by the receiver of the rent or revenue or the 
cultivator or the receiver of rent-in-kind referred to in the said sub-clause (c) shall be computed as if it were income 
chargeable to income-tax under that Act under the head "Income from house property" and the provisions of sections 23 to 
15 27 of that Act shall, so far as may be, apply accordingly: 
Provided that sub-section (2) of the said section 23 shall apply subject to the modifications that the references to 
"total income" therein shall be construed as references to net agriCUltural income and that the words, figures and letter "and 
before making any deduction under Chapter VI-A" shall be omitted. 
Rule 4. -Notwithstanding anything contained in any other provisions of these rules, in a case where the assessee 
20 derives income from sale of tea grown and manufactured by him in India, such income shall be compulCd in accordance 
with rule 8 of the Income-tax Rules, 1962, and sixty per cent of such income shall be regarded as the agricultural income 
of the assessee. 
Rule 5. -Where the assessee is a partner or a registered fum or an unregistered firm assessed as a registered fum under 
clause (b) of section 183 of the Income-tax Act, which in the previous year has any agricultural income, or is a partner of 
25 an unregistered fmn which has not been assessed as a registered fum under clause ( b) of the said section 183 and which in 
the previous year has either no income chargeable to tax under the Income-tax Act or has total income not exceeding the 
maximum amount not chargeable to tax in the case of an unregialrftd finn but has any agricultural income, then, the 
agriculbU'a1 income or lou of the finn shall be computed in accordance with theIe rules and his share in the airicultural 
income or loss of the fum shall be compuled in the manner laid down in sub-section (l), sub-section (2) and sub-section 
30 (3) of section 67 of the Income-tax Act and the share so compulCd shall be regm-ded as the agricultural income or loss of 
the 1S8eS8ee. 
Rule 6. -Where the assessee is a member of an association of persons or a body of individuals (other than a Hindu 
undivided family, a company or a finn) which in the previous year has either no income charpable to tax under the 
Income-tax Act Or has total income not oxceedina the maximum amount not cflarpable to tax in the cue or an association 
35 of persons or a body of individuals (other than altindu undivided family, a company or a fum) but has any I8ricultural 
income, then, the agricultural income or loss of the association or body shall be computed in accordance with these rules 
and the share of the assessee in the agricultural income or loss so compulCd shall be re,arded as the qricultural income or 
lOllS or the ...... 
Rult 7. -Where the result of the computation tor the previous year in respect of any source of agricultural income is a 
40 loss, such loss shall be set ofT apinsl the income of the assessee, if any, for that previous ytar from any other source of 
aartculbnl income: 
Provided that where the assessee ill a partner of an unregistered finn which has not been assessed as a registered fum 
underclalBe (b) of 8eCtion 183 of the lncome-tax Act or is a member of an lSSOCiation of persons or a body of individuals 
and the share of the IBseS8ee in the agricultural ihcome of the finn, association or body, .. the case may be, is a loss, such 
45 loss shall not be let ofT against any ihCome of Ihe aaessee from any other source of agricultural income. 
Rult 3. -Any sum payable by 1he 8sSeS8ee on lCCOunt or any tax levied by the State Government on the qricultural 
income shall be deducted in eomPUtina the ipicultura1 income. 
Rul,9. -(1) Where the •••• ee .... ill the JIrevious yeti ~vant Ib die assessment year commencing on the 1st day of 

, 
m 
so 
April, 1987, any agriculbJral income and the net resulL of the computation of the agriculbJral income of the assessee for 
anyone or more of the previous years relevant to the assessment years commencing on the 1st day of April, 1979 or the 
1st day of April, 1980 or the 1st day of April, 1981 or the 1st day of April, 1982 or the 1st day of April, 1983 or the 1st 
day of April, 1984 or the 1st day of April, 1985 or the 1st day of April, 1986, is a loss, then, for the purposes of sub- S 
section (2) of section 2 of this Act,-
(;) the loss so computed for the previous year relevant to the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1979 
to the extent, if any, such loss has not been set off against the agricultural income for the previous year relevant to the 
assessment yew commencing on the 1st day of April, 1980 or the 1st day of April, 1981 or the 1st day of April, 1982 or 
the 1st day of April, 1983 or the 1st day of April, 1984 or the 1st day of April, 1985 or the 1st day of April. 1986. 
(ii) the loss so computed for the previous year relevant to the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 10 
1980. to the extent, if any. such loss has not been set off against the agricultural income for the previous year relevant to 
the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1981 or the 1st day of April. 1982 or the 1st day of April, 1983 
or the 1st day of April, 1984 or the 1st day of April, 1985 or the 1st day of April, 1986, 
(iii) the loss so computed for the previous year relevant to the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April. 
I 1981. to the extent, if any, such loss has not been set off against the agricultural income for the previous year relevant to IS 
the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1982 or the 1st day of April. 1983 or the 1st day of April. 1984 
or the 1st day of April, 1985 or the lst day of April, 1986, 
(iv) the loss so computed for the previous year relevant to the assessment year commencing on the lst day of April, 
, 1982, to the extent, if any, such loss has not been set off against the agricultural income for the previous year relevant to 
the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1983 or the 1st day of April, 1984 or the 1st day of April, 1985 2D 
or the 1st day of April, 1986, 
(v) the loss so computed for the previous year relevant to the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April. 
1983, to the extent, if any, such loss has not been set off against the agricultural income for the previous year relevant to 
/ the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1984 or the 1st day of April, 1985 or the 1st day of April, 1986, 
(vi) the loss so computed for the previous year relevant to the assessment year commencing on the lst day of April. 2S 
1984. to the extent, if any, such loss has not been set off against the agricultural income for the"previous year relevant to 
I the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1985 or the 1st day of April, 1986, 
(vii) the loss so computed for the previous year relevant to fhe assessment year commencing on the lst day of April, 
1985, to the extent, if any, such loss has not been set off against the agricultural income for the previous year relevant to 
the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1986, and 30 
(viii) the loss so computed for the previous year relevant to the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 
1986, 
shall be set off against the agricultural income of the assessee for the previous year relevant to the assessment 
year commencing on the 1 st day of April, 1987. 
I (2) Where the as~ssee has. in the previous year relevant to the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 3S 
1988 or. if by virtue of any provision of the Income-tax Act, income-tax is to be chitrged in respect of the income of a 
period otheJ' than that previous year, in such othez period, any agricultural income and the net result of the computation of 
the agricultural income of the assessee for anyone or more of the previous years relevant to the assessment years 
commencing bn the 1st day of April, 1980 or the 1st day of April, 1981 or the 1st day of April. 1982 or the 1st day of 
April, 1983 or the 1st day of April, 1984 or the 1st day of April. 1985 or the 1st day of April, 1986 or the 1st day of 40 
April, 1987, is a loss, then, for the purposes of sub-section (6) of section 2 of this Act,--
(i) the loss so computed for the previous year relevant to the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 
1980, to the extent, if any, such loss has not been set Qff against the agricultural income for the previous year relevant to 
the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1981 or the 1st day of April, 1982 or the 1st day of April, 1983 
or the 1st day of April, 1984 or the 1st day of April. 1985 or the 1st day of April, 1986 or the 1st day of April, 1987, 45 
(ii) the loss so computed for the previous year relevant to the asessment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 
1981, to the extent, if any. such loss has not been set off against abe agricultural income for the previous year relevant to 

'1 
the aaeasmeal ye&l CCIIlIIIeDCing OIl the lit day d April. 1982 QI' abe lit ddy of Apil, 1983 QI' abe lit day of Apil. 1984 
or the III day of April. 198' 01' the 1st day of April. 1986 QI' the lit day of April. 1987. 
(iii) the loss so computed for the previous year relevant to the usessmau year commencina OIl abe 1st day of April. 
1982. to the extent, if any. such loss hu not been set off apinst the agricultural income for the previous year !devant to 
s the assessment year commencing OIl the 1st day d April. 1983 or the 1st day of April. 1984 or die 1st day of April, 1985 
or the 1st day of April, 1986 01' the 1st day of April. 1987. 
(N) the loss 10 computed for the previous year relevant to the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April. 
1983. to the extent, if any. such loss has not been set off against the agricultural income for the previous year !devant to 
the assessment year commencing on the lst day of April. 1984 or the 1st day of April. 1985 or the III day of Apil. 1986 
10 or the 1st day of April. 1987. 
(v) the loss so computed for the preVIOUS year relevant to the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 
1984. to the extent, if any. such loss has not been set off against the agricultural income for the previous year !devant to 
the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1985 or the 1st day of April, 1986 or the 1st day of April. 1987, 
(vi) the loss so computed for the previous year relevant to the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 
15 1985, to the extent, if any, such loss has not been set off against the agricultural income fOl' the previous year !devant to 
the assessment year commencing on the Ist day of April. 1986 or the 1st day of April. 1987, 
(vii) the loss so computed for the previous year relevant to the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April. 
1986, to the extent, if any, such loss has nol been set off against the agricullUral income for the previous year !devant to 
the assessment year commencing on the lst day of April, 1987, and 
20 (viii) the loss so computed for the previous year relevant to the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April. 
1987, 
shall be set off against the agriCUltural income of the assessee for the previous year relevant to the assessment year 
commencing on the 1st day of April, 1988 or the period aforesaid 
(3) Where a change has occurred in the constitution of a fum, nothing in sub-rule (1) <X' sub-rule (2) shall entitle the 
25 firm to set ofT so much of the loss proportionate to the share of a retired or deceased partner computed in the IIl8I1Jle'l' laid 
down in sub-section (1), sub-section (2) and sub-section (3) of section 67 of the Income-tax Act as exceeds his share of 
profits, if any, of the previous year in the fum, or entitle any partner to the benefit of any portion of the said loss 
(computed in the manner aforesaid) which is nOl apportionable to him. 
(4) Where any person deriving any agricultural income from any source has been succeeded in such capacity by IDOlbet 
30 person, otherwise than by inheritance, nothing in sub-rule (1) or sub-rule (2) shall entitle any person. other than the 
person incWTing the loss, to have it set off undcz sub-rule (1) or, as the case may be, sub-rule (2), 
21 111m. 
35 441119111 
16111981. 
14111982. 
11 1119Kl 
21111984. 
32111985. 
23111986. 
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in this rule, no loss which has not been determined by the Income-
tax Officer under the provisions of these rules or the rules contained in Part IV of the FU'St Schedule to the 
Finance Act, 1979, or of the First Schedule to the Finance (No.2) Act, 1980. or of the rU'St Schedule to the 
Finance Act, 1981, or of the First Schedule to the Finance Act, 1982. or of the First Schedule to the Finance 
Act, 1983, or of the First Schedule to the Finance Act, 1984, or of the First Schodulc to the Fmance Act, 1985. 
or of the First Schedule to the Finance Act, 1986, shall be set off under sub-rule (1) or, as the case may be, 
sub-rule (2). 
40 Rule 10. -Where the net result of the computation made in accordance with these rules is a loss, the loss so computed 
shall be ignored and the net agricultural income shall be deemed to be nil. 
Rule 11. -The provisions of the Income-tax Act relating to procedure for uscssment (including the provisions of 
section 288A relating to rounding off of income) shall. with the necessary modifications, apply in relati~n to the 
computation of the net agricultural income of the assessee as they apply in relali90 to the assessment of the total mcome. 
Rule 12. -For the purposes of computing the net agricultural income of the assessee, the Income-tax Officer sba1l have 
the same powers as he has under the Income-tax Act for the purposes of assessment « the total income. 

52 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE 
(5« section 94) 
PART I 
In the First Schedule to the Customs Tariff Act,-
(;) in Chapter 27. in sub-heading No. 2709.00. for the entry in column (4). the entry "50% plus Rs. 1.000 per 5 
tonne" shall be substituted; 
(ii) in Chapter 28. in sub-heading Nos. 2801.10. 2801.20. 2801.30. 2802.00. 2803.00. 2804.10. 2804.21. 
2804.29. 2804.30. 2804.40. 2804.50. 2804.61. 2804.69. 2804.70. 2804.80. 2804.90. 2805.11. 2805.19. 2805.21. 
2805.22.2805.30. 2805.40. 2806.10. 2806.20. 2807.00. 2808.00. 2809.10. 2809.20. 2810.00. 2811.11. 2811.19. 
2811.21.2811.22.2811.23.2811.29.2812.10. 2812.90.2813.10.2813.90.2814.10.2814.20.2815.11.2815.12. 10 
2815.20.2815.30.2816.10.2816.20.2816.30.2817.00. 2818.10. 2818.20. 2818.30. 2819.10. 2819.90. 2820.10. 
2820.90. 2821.10. 2821.20. 2822.00. 2823.00. 2824.10. 2824.20. 2824.90. 2825.10. 2825.20. 2825.30. 2825.40. 
2825.50.2825.60. 2825.70. 2825.80. 2825.90. 2826.11. 2826.12. 2826.19. 2826.20. 2826.30. 2826.90. 2827.10. 
2827.20.2827.31. 2827.32.2827.33.2827.14: 2827.35. 2827.36. 2827.37. 2827.38. 2827.39. 2827.41. 2827.49. 
2827.51.2827.59.2827.60.2828.10.2828.90.2829.11. 2829.19. 2829.90. 2830.10. 2830.20. 2830.30. 2830.90. 15 
2831.10.2831.90.2832.10.2832.20.2832.30.2833.11. 2833.19. 2833.21. 2833.22. 2833.23. 2833.24. 2833.25. 
2833.26.2833.27. 2833.29, 2833.30. 2833.40.2834.10.2834.21.2834.22. 2834.29. 2835.10. 2835.21.2835.22. 
2835.23. 2835.24. 2835.25. 2835.26~ 2835.29. 2835.31. 2835.39. 2836.10. 2836.20. 2836.30. 2836.40. 2836.50. 
2836.60.2836.70. 2836.91. 2836.92. 2836.93.2836.99.2837.11.2837.19. 2837.20. 2838.00. 2839.11. 2839.19. 
2839.20.2839.90.2840.11. 2840.19. 2840.20. 2840.30, 2841.10. 2841.20. 2841.30. 2841.40, 2841.50, 2841.60, aJ 
2841.70, 2841.80, 2841.90, 2842.10, 2842.90. 2843.10, 2843.21, 2843.29, 2843.30, 2843.90, 2844.10, 2844.20, 
2844.30, 2844.40, 2844.50, 2845.10, 2845.90, 2846.10, 2846.90, 2847.00, 2848.10, 2848.90, 2849.10, 2849.20, 
2849.90, 2850.00 and 2851.00, for the entry in column (4), the entry "80% pillS Rs. 25 per Kg." shall be 
substituted.; 
(iii) in Chapter 29,-
(1) in sub-heading Nos. 2901.10, 2901.21, 2901.22. 2901.23, 2901.24, 2901.29, 2902.11 and 2902.19, for the 
entry in column (4) , the entry "80% plus Rs. 25 per Kg." shall be substituted.; 
(2) in sub-heading Nos. 2902.20 and 2902.30, for the entry in column (4), the entry "50% plus Rs. 10 per Kg." 
shall be substituted.; 
(3) in sub-heading Nos. 2902.41, 2902.42 and 2902.43, for the entry in column (4), the entry "80% plus Rs.25 30 
per Kg." shall be substituted: 
(4) in sub-heading No. 2902.44, for the entry in column (4), the entry "50% pillS Rs. 10 per Kg." shall be 
substituted.; 
(5) in sub-heading No. 2902.50, for the entry in column (4), the entry "80% pillS Rs. 25 per Kg. " shall be 
substituted.; 
(6) in sub-heading No. 2902.60, for the entry in column (4), the entry "50% plus Rs. 10 per Kg." shall be 35 
substituted.; 
(7) in sub-heading Nos. 2902.70,2902.90,2903.11,2903.12,2903.13,2903.14, 2903.15, 2903.16, 2903.19, 
2903.21, 2903.22, 2903.23, 2903.29,2903.30, 2903.40, 2903.51, 2903.59. 2903.61, 2903.62, 2903.69, 2904.10, 
2904.20, 2904.90, 2905.11, 2905.12, 2905.13, 2905.14, 2905.15, 2905.16, 2905.17, 2905.19, 2905.21, 2905.22, 
2905.29, 2905.31, 2905.32, 2905.39, 2905.41, 2905.42, 2905.43, 2905.44, 290S.49, 2905.50, 2906.11, 2906.12, 40 
2906.13, 2906.14, 2906.19, 2906.21, 2906.29, 2907.11, 2907.12, 2907.13, 2907.14, 2907.15, 2907.19, 2907.21, 
2907.22, 2907.23, 2907.29, 2907.30, 2908.10, 2908.20, 2908.90, 2909.11, 2909.19, 2909.20, 2909.30, 2909.41, 
2909.42, 2909.43, 2909.44, 2909.49, 2909.50, 2909.60, 2910.10, 2910.20, 2910.30, 2910.90, 2911.00, 2912.11, 
2912.12, 2912.13, 2912.19, 2912.21,2912.29,2912.30,2912.41,2912.42, 2912.49, 2912.50, 2912.60. 2913.00, 
2914.11,2914.12,2914.13 and 2914.19, for the entry in column (4). the entry" 80% plus Rs. 25 per Kg." shall be 45 
substituted.; 
(8) in sub-heading No. 2914.21, for the entry in column (4). the entry "150% pillS Rs. 15 per Kg." shall be 
substituted.; 
19) in sub-heading Nos. 2914.22. 2914.23, 2914.29, 2914.30. 2914.41. 2914.49, 2914.50 and 2914.61. for the 

5 
10 
15 
20 
53 
entry in column (4), the entry "80" pillS Rs. 25 per Kg." shall be substituted; 
(10) in sub-heading No. 2914.69, for the entry in column (4), the entry "ISO" pillS Rs. 15 per Kg." shall be 
substituted; . 
(ll) in sub-heading Nos. 2914.70, 2915.11, 2915.12, 2915.13, 2915:21, 2915.22, 2915.23, 2915.24, 2915.29, 
2915.31, 2915.32, 2915.33, 2915.34,2915.35, 2915.39, 2915.40, 2915.50, 2915.60, 2915.70, 2915.90, 2916.11, 
2916.12, 2916.13, 2916.14, 2916.15, 2916.19, 2916.20, 2916.31, 2916.32, 2916.33, 2916.39, 2917.11, 2917.12, 
2917.13,2917.14,2917.19,2917.20,2917.31, 2917.32, 2917.33,2917.34 and 2917.35, for the entry in column (4), 
the entry "~plllS Rs. 25 per Kg." shall be substituted; 
(12) in sub-heading No. 2917.36, for the entry in column (4), the entry "150% pillS Rs. 15 per Kg."shall be 
substituted; 
(13) in sub-heading No. 2917.37, for the entries in columns (4) and (5), the entries "150% pillS Rs. 15 per Kg." 
and "140% plus Rs. 15 per Kg." shall, respectively, be substituted; 
(14) in sub-heading Nos. 2917.39,2918.11,2918.12,2918.13,2918.14, 2918.15, 2918.16, 29.18.17, 2918.19, 
2918.21, 2918.22, 2918.23, 2918.29, 2918.30, 2918.90, 2919.00, 2920.10, 2920.90, 2921.11, 2921.12, 2921.19, 
2921.21,2921.22,2921.29 and 2921.30, for the entry in column (4), the entry "80% plus Rs. 25 per Kg." shall be 
substituted; 
(15) in sub-heading Nos. 2921.41, 2921.42 and 2921.43, for the entry in column (4), the entry "150% plus Rs.15 
per Kg." shall be substituted; 
(16) in sub-heading No. 2921.44, for the entry in column (4), the entry "80% plus Rs. 25 per Kg." shall be 
substituted; 
(17) in sub-heading No. 2921.45, for the entry in column (4), the entry "150% plus Rs. 15 per Kg." shall be 
substituted; 
(18) in sub-heading Nos. 2921.49 and 2921.51, for the entry in column (4), the entry "80% plus Rs. 25 per Kg." 
shall be substituted; 
2~ (19) in sub-heading No. 2921.59. for the entry in column (4), the entry "150% plus Rs. 15 per Kg." shall be 
30 
35 
40 
45 
substituted; 
(20) in sub-heading Nos. 2922.11, 2922.12. 2922.13, 2922.19, 2922.21, 2922.22,2922.29.2922.30.2922.41, 
2922.42 and 2922.49, for the entry in column (4). the entry "80% plus Rs. 25 per Kg." shall be substituted; 
(21) in sub-heading No. 2922.50, for the entry in column (4), the entry "150% plus Rs. 15 per Kg." shall be 
substituted; 
(22) in sub-heading Nos. 2923.10,2923.20, 2923.90, 2924.10, 2924.21 and 2924.29. for the entry in column (4), 
the entry "80% plus Rs. 25 per Kg." shall be substituted; 
(23) in sub-heading No. 2925.11. for the entry in column (4), the entry "Rs. 75 per Kg." shall be substituted; 
(24) in sub-heading Nos. 2925.19, 2925.20, 2926.10, 2926.20. 2926.90, 2927.00. 2928.00, 2929.10, 2929.90, 
2930.10, 2930.20, 2930.30. 2930.40. 2930.90, 2931.00,2932.11. 2932.12, 2932.13, 2932.19, 2932.21, 2932.29, 
2932.90, 2933.11. 2933.19, 2933.21. 2933.29, 2933.31, 2933.39, 2933.40, 2933.51, 2933.59, 2933.61 and 
2933.69, for the entry in column (4); the entry "80% plus Rs. 25 per Kg." shall be substituted: 
(25) in sub-heading No. 2933.71, for the entries in columns (4) and (5), the entries "150% plus Rs. 15 per Kg." 
and "140% plus Rs. 15 per Kg." shall. respectively. be substituted: 
(26) in sub-heading Nos. 2933.79, 2933.90, 2934.10. 2934.20, 2934.30, 2934.90 and 2935.00, for the entry in 
column (4). the entry "80% plus Rs. 25 per Kg." shall be substituted. 
(27) in sub-heading Nos. 2936.10, 2936.21. 2936.22. 2936.23, 2936.24, 2936.25. 2936.26, 2936.27. 2936.28, 
2936.29 and 2936.90. for the entries in columns (4) and (5). the entries "80% plus Rs. 25 per Kg." and "74% plus 
Rs. 25 per Kg." shall. respectively. be substituted; . 
(28) in sub-heading Nos. 2937.10. 2937.21. 2937.22. 2937.29. 2937.91, 2937.92 and 2937.99, for the .entries in 
columns (4) and (5). the entries "80% plus Rs. 25 per Kg." and "70% plus Rs. 25 per Kg." shall. respecbvely. be 
substituted; 
(29) in sub-heading Nos. 2938.10. 2938.90. 2939.10. 2939.21, 2939.29 and 2939.30, for the entry in column 
(4). the entry "80% plus Rs. 25 per Kg." shall be substituted; 
50 (30) in sub-heading Nos. 2939.40 and 2939.50, for the entries in columns (4) and(5). the entries "80% pluS 

54 
Rs. 25 per Kg." and " 70% pillS Rs. 2S per Kg." shall, respectively, be substituted; 
(31) in sub-heading Nos. 2939.60,2939.70,2939.90 and 2940.00, for the entry in column (4), the entry "80% 
plus Rs. 25 per Kg." shall be substituted; 
(32) in sub-heading Nos. 2941.10,2941.20,2941.30,2941.40,2941.50 and 2941.90, for the entries in columns 
(4) and (5), the entries "80% pillS Rs. 25 per Kg." and "74% pillS Rs. 25 per Kg." shall, respectively, be S 
substituted; 
(33) in sub-heading No. 2942.00, for the entry in column (4), the entry" 80% pillS Rs. 25 per Kg." shall be 
substituted; 
(iv) in Chapta' 32,-
(1) in sub-heading Nos. 3201.10, 3201.20 and 3201.30, for the entry in column (4), the entry "50% pillS Rs. 10 10 
per Kg." shall be substituted; 
(2) in sub-heading No. 3201.90, for the entries in columns (4) and (5), the entries "80% plus Rs. 25 per Kg." and 
"10% pillS Rs. 25 per Kg." shall, respectively, be substituted; 
(3) in sub-heading Nos. 3202.10 and 3202.90, for the entry in column (4), the entry "80% pillS Rs. 25 per Kg." 
shall be substituted; 15 
(4) in sub-heading Nos. 3203.00, 3204.11, 3204.12, 3204.13, 3204.14, 3204.15, 3204.16, 3204.17, 3204.19, 
3204.20, 3204.90, 3205.00, 3206.10, 3206.20, 3206.30, 3206.41, 3206.42, 3206.43, 3206.49, 3206.50, 3207.10, 
3207.20,3207.30,3207.40,3208.10,3208.20,3208.90, 3209.10,3209.90,3210.00,3211.00,3212.10,3212.90, 
3213.10,3213.90,3214.10 and 3214.90, for the entry in column (4), the entry "150% pillS Rs. 15 per Kg." shall be 
substituted; al 
(5) in sub-heading Nos. 3215.11, 3215.19 and 3215.90. for the entry in column (4), the entry "100% pillS Rs.25 
per Kg." shall be substituted; 
(\1) in Chapter 33, in sub-heading Nos. 3301.11. 3301.1.2, 3301.13. 3301.14, 3301.19, 3301.21, 3301.22, 
3301.23, 3301.24. 3301.25, 3301.26, 3301.29, 3301.30, 3301.90, 3302.10, 3302.90, 3303.00. 3304.10, 3304.20. 
3304.30, 3304.91, 3304.99, 3305.10,3305.20, 3305.30, 3305.90, 3306.10, 3306.90, 3307.10, 3307.20, 3307.30, 25 
3307.41, 3307.49 and 3307.90, for the entry in column (4), the entry "150% pillS Rs. 25 per Kg." shall be 
substituted; 
(vi) in Chapter 34, -
(1) in sub-heading Nos. 3401.11, 3401.19 and 3401.20, for the entry in column (4), the entry "150% plus Rs. 15 
per Kg." shall be substituted; 30 
(2) in sub-heading Nos. 3402.11, 3402.12, 3402.13 and 3402.19, for the entries in columns (4) and (5), the 
entries "100% pillS Rs.2S per Kg." and "90% plus Rs. 25 per Kg." shall, respectively, be substituted; 
(3) in sub-heading Nos. 3402.20, 3402.90, 3403.11, 3403.19, 3403.91 and 3403.99, for the entry in column (4), 
the entry "150% pillS Rs. 15 per Kg." shall be substituted; 
(4) in sub-heading Nos. 3404.10, 3404.20 and 3404.90, for the entry in column (4), the entry "100% pillS Rs. 15 35 
per Kg." shall be substituted; 
(5) in sub-heading Nos. 3405.10, 3405.20, 3405.30, 3405.40, 3405.90, 3406.00 and 3407.00, for the entry in 
column (4), the entry "150% plus Rs. 15 per Kg." shall be substituted; 
(vii) in Chapter 35, in sub-heading Nos. 3501.10, 3501.90, 3502.10, 3502.90, 3503.00, 3504.00, 3505.10, 
3505.20,3506.10,3506.91,3506.99,3507.10 and 3507.90, for the entry in column (4), the entry "100% pillS 40 
Rs. 2S per Kg." shall be substituted; 
(,,;u) in Chapter 38,-
') in sub-heading No. 3801.10, for the enmes in columns (4) and (5), the entries "80% pillS Rs. 25 per Kg." and "10% 
plus Rs. 25 per Kg." shaD, respectively, be substituted; 
!) in sub-heading Nos. 3801.20, 3801.30 and 3801.90, for the entry in column (4), the entry "80% pillS Rs. 25 per <IS 

55 
Kg." shall be substituted; 
(3) in sub-heading No. 3802.10, f(W the entries in columns (4) and (5), the entries "80% pilLS RI. 25 pez Kg." and 
"70% pilLS Rs. 25 pez Kg." shall, respectively, be subsIitut.cd; 
(4) in sub-heading Nos. 3802.90, 3803.00, 3804.00, 3805.10, 3805.20, 3805.90, 3806.10, 3806.20, 3806.30, 
5 3806.90, 3807.00, 3808.10, 3808.20, 3808.30, 3808.40, 3808.90, 3809.10, 3809.91, 3809.92,3809.99, 3810.10, 
3810.90,3811.11,3811.19,3811.21,3811.29 and 3811.90, for the entry in column (4), the entry "80% pilLS RI.25 
per Kg." shall be subBtiwfed; 
(5) in sub-heading No. 3812.10, for the entries in columns (4) and (5), the entries "80% pilLS Rs. 25 per Kg." and 
"70% pilLS Rs. 25 per Kg." shall, respectively, be substiwted; 
10 (6) in sub-heading Nos. 3812.20, 3812.30, 3813.00 and 3814.00, for the entry in column (4), the entry "80% 
plus Rs. 25 pc7 Kg." shall be substiblted; 
(l) in sub-heading Nos. 3815.11 and 3815.12, for the entries in columns (4) and (5), the entries "80% plus 
Rs. 25 per Kg." and "70% pilLS Rs. 25 pc7 Kg." shall, respectively, be substiblted; 
(8) in sub-heading Nos. 3815.19,3815.90,3816.00,3817.10,3817.20,3818.00, 3819.00, 3820.00, 3821.00, 
15 3822.00, 3823.10, 3823.20, 3823.30, 3823.40, 3823.50, 3823.60 and 3823.90, for the entry in column (4), the entry 
"80% plus Rs. 25 per Kg." shall be substituted: 
(ix) in Chapter 39,-
(1) in sub-heading Nos. 3901.10, 3901.20, 3901.30, 3901.90, 3902.10, 3902.20, 3902.30, 3902.90, 3903.11, 
3903.19,3903.20,3903.30 and 3903.90, for the entry in column (4), the entry "150% pilLS RI. 25 per Kg." shall be 
20 substituted; 
(2) in sub-heading Nos. 3904.10,3904.21 and 3904.22, for the entry in column (4), the entry "200% pilLS Rs. 15 
per Kg." shall be substituted; 
(3) in sub-heading Nos. 3904.30, 3904.40, 3904.50, 3904.61, 3904.69, 3904.90, 3905.11, 3905.19, 3905".20, 
3905.90, 3906.10, 3906.90, 3907.10, 3907.20, 3907.30, 3907.40 and 3907.50, for the entry in column (4), the entry 
2.'i "150% plus Rs. 25 pc7 Kg." shall be substiblted; 
(4) in sub-heading No. 3907.60, for the entry in column (4), the entry "200% pilLS Rs. 15 per Kg." Shall be 
substituted; 
(5) in sub-heading Nos. 3907.91, 3907.99, 3908.10, 3908.90, 3909.10, 3909.20, 3909.30, 3909.40, 3909.50, 
3910.00,3911.10,3911.90,3912.11,3912.12,3912.20, 3912.31, 3912.39, 3912.90, 3913.10, 3913.90, 3914.00, 
30 3915.10,3915.20,3915.30,3915.90, 3916.10, 3916.20, 3916.90, 3917.10, 3917.21, 3917.22, 3917.23, 3917.29, 
3917.31,3917.32,3917.33 and 3917.39, for the entry in column (4), the entry "150% pilLS Rs. 25 per Kg." shall be 
substituted; 
(6) in sub-heading Nos. 3918.10, 3918.90, 3919.10, 3919.90, 3920.10, 3920.20,3920.30, 3920.41, 3920.42, 
3920.51,3920.59, 3920.61, 3920.62, 3920.63, 3920.69, 3920.71, 3920.72, 3920.73, 3920.79, 3920.91,3920.92, 
35 3920.93,3920.94,3920.99,3921.11,3921.12,3921.13,3921.14,3921.19 and 3921.90, for the entry in column (4), 
the entry "150% plus Rs. 25 per Kg." shall be substituted; 
(x) in Chapter 72,-
(1) in sub-heading Nos. 7206.10 and 7206.90, for the entry in column (4), the entry "50% plus Rs. 3,000 per 
tonne" shall be substiblted; 
40 (2) in sub-heading Nos. 7207.11, 7207.12, 7207.19 and 7207.20, for the entry in column (4), the entry "70% 
plus Rs. 3,500 per tonne" shall be substiwted; 
(3) in sub-heading Nos. 7208.11, 7208.12, 7208.13, 7208.14, 7208.21, 7208.22, 7208.23, 7208.24, 7208.31, 
7208.32,7208.33,7208.34,7208.15,7208.41, 7208.42. 7208.43, 7208.44,7208.45, 7208.90, 7209.11, 7209.12, 
7209.13, 7209.14, 7209.21, 7209.22, 7209.23, 7209.24, 7209.31. 7209.32, 7209.33, 7209.34. 7209.41, 7209.42, 
45 7209.43, 7209.44 and 7209.90, for the entry in column (4). the entry "80% pilLS Rs. 5,000 per tonne" shall be 
substituted; 
(4) in sub-heading Nos. 7210.11, 7210.12, 7210.20, 7210.31, 7210.39, 7210.41 and 7210.49, for the entry in 

56 
column (4), the entry "80% plus Rs. 7,000 per tonne" shall be substituted; 
(5) in sub-heading No. 7210.50, for the entry in column (4), the entry "100% plus Rs. 7,000 per tonne" shall be 
substituted; 
(6) in sub-heading Nos. 7210.60, 7210.70 and 7210.90, for the entry in column (4), the entry "80% plus 
Rs.7,OOO per tonne" shall be substituted; 5 
(7) in sub-heading Nos. 7211.11, 7211.12, 7211.19, 7211.21, 7211.22, 7211.29, 7211.30, 7211.41, 7211.49 and 
7211.90, for the entty in column (4), the entry "80% plus Rs. 5,000 per tonne" shall be substituted; 
(8) in sub-heading Nos. 7212.10, 7212.21, 7212.29, 7212.30 and 7212.40, for the entty in column (4), the entry 
"80% plus Rs. 7,000 per tonne" shall be substituted; 
(9) in sub-heading No. 7212.50, for the entty in column (4), the entry "100% plus Rs. 7,000 per tonne" shall be 
substituted; 
(10) in sub-heading No. 7212.60, for the entry in column (4), the entry "80% plus Rs. 7,000 per tonne" shall be 
substituted; 
IO 
(11) in sub-heading Nos. 7213.10 and 7213.20, for the entry in column (4), th~ entry "100% plus Rs. 5,000 per 15 
tonne" shall be substituted; 
(12) in sub-heading Nos. 7213.31,7213.39,7213.41 and 7213.49, for the entry in column (4), the entry "60% 
plus Rs. 5,000 per tonne" shall be substituted; 
(13) in sub-heading Nos. 7213.50, 7214.10, 7214.20 and 7214.30, for the entry in column (4), the entry "100% 
plus Rs. 5,000 per tonne" shall be substituted; 20 
(14) in sub-heading Nos. 7214.40 and 7214.50, for the entry in column (4), the entry "60% plus Rs. 5,000 per 
tonne" shall be substituted; 
(15) in sub-heading Nos. 7214.60 and 7215.10, for the entry in column (4), the entry ")00% plus Rs. 5,000 per 
tonne" shall be substituted; 
(16) in sub-heading Nos. 7215.20 and 7215.30, for the entry in column (4), the entry "60% plus Rs. 5,000 per 25 
tonne" shall be substituted; 
(17) in sub-heading Nos. 7215.40 and 7215.9(\, for the entry in column (4), the entry "100% plus Rs. 5,000 per 
tonne" shall be substituted; 
(18) in sub-heading Nos. 7216.10,7216.21,7216.22, 7216.31, 7216,32, 7216.33, 7216.40, 7216.50, 7216.60 
and 7216.90, for the entry in column (4), the entry "80% plus Rs. 5,000 per tonne" shall be substituted; 30 
(19) in sub-heading Nos. 7217.11, 7217.12, 7217.13, 7217.19, 7217.21, 7217.22, 7217.23 and 7217.29, for the 
entry in column (4) , the entry "50% plus Rs. 5,000 per tonne" shall be substituted; 
(20) in sub-heading Nos. 7217.31, 7217.32, 7217.33 and 7217.39, for the entry in column (4), the entry "80% 
plus Rs. 5,000 per tonne" shall be substituted; 
(21) in sub-heading Nos. 7218.10,7218.90,7219.11,7219.12,7219.13,7219.14,7219.21, 7219.22, 7219.23, 35 
7219.24, 7219.31, 7219.32, 7219.33, 7219.34, 7219.35, 7219.90, 7220.11, 7220.12, 7220.20, 7220.90, 7221.00, 
7222.10, 7222.20, 7222.30, 7222.40 and 7223.00, for the entry in cOlumn (4), the entry "300% plus Rs. 25,000 
per tonne" shall be substilUted; 
(22) in sub-heading Nos. 7224.10, 7224.90, 7225.10, 7225.20, 7225.30, 7225.40, 7225.50, 7225.90, 7226.10, 
7226.20, 7226.91, 7226.92, 7226.99, 7227.10, 7227.20, 7227.90, 7228.10, 7228.20, 7228.30, 7228.40, 7228.50, 40 
7228.60, 7228.70, 7228.80, 7229.10, 7229.20 and 7229.90, for the entry in column (4), the entry "80% plus 
Rs. 25,000 per tonne" shall be substituted; 
(xi) in Chapter 98, -
(1) after NOTE 6, the foUowing NOTES shall be inserted, namely:-
"7. Heading No. 98.06 does not covel' : 

57 
(a) Ball or roller bearings of heading No. 84.82; 
(b) Bearing housings of sub-heading Nos. 8483.20 and 8483.30; 
(c) Parts of machillC'l)' of heading No. 84.71; and 
(~ Any other JIlI't of machinery which the Central Government may, having regard to its nature of being a part 
5 having general application. notify in the Official Gazeue in this behalf. 
10 
15 
8. Goods which answC7 to the description of both the heading No. 98.01 and the heading No. 98.06 are to be 
classified under the heading No. 98.01."; 
(2) in suh-heading No. 9801.00, for the entty in column (4), the cotty "60%" shall be substituted. 
PART II 
Heading No. Sub-heading No. Description of article Rate of duty 
SDntsirl Preferential 8JPJIS 
(I) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
In the First Schedule to the Customs Tariff Act, in Chapter 98. after heading No. 98.05, the following heading shall 
be inserted, namely :-
"98.06 9806.00 PARTS OF MACHINERY, EQUIP-
MENTS, APPLIANCES, INSTRU-
MENTS,AND ARTICLES OF 
CHAPTERS 84, 85.86,89 AND 90 
150% 

sa 
THE 1lDRD SCHEDULE 
(Sao! IecIioa 97) 
PART I 
In the Schedule to the Centtal Excise Tariff Act,-
(1) in Chapter 4, in su~hcading No. 0403.10, for the entry in column (4), the entry "20%" shall be substituted; S 
(2) in Chapta' 9, in su~heading No. 0903.10, for the entry in column (4), the entry "IS'll" shall be substituted; 
(3) in Cbaptcr IS, in sub-beading No. 1504.00, for the entry in column (4), the entry "Rs. 1,900 per tonne" shall 
be substituted; 
(4) in Chapter 19,-
(oJ in su~heading Nos. 1901.19 and 1901.90, for the entry in column (4), the entry "20%" shall be substituted; 10 
(b) in su~heading No. 1903.10, for the entry in column (4), the entry "IS'll" shall be substituted; 
(e) in sub-heading No. 1904.10, for the entry in column (3), the entry"- Put up in unit containers and ordinarily 
intended for sale" shall be substituted; 
(5) in Chapter 21, in sub-heading No.2106.11, for the entry in column (4). the entry "25% plus Rs. 20 per 
kilogram" shall be substituted; 15 
(6) in Chapter 22,-
(t,f in sub-heading No. 2201.11, for the entry in column (4), the entry "25 paise" shall be substituted; 
(b) in sub-heading No. 2201.12, in column (4), for the figures and word" 10 paise". the figures and word "25 
paise" shall be substituted; 
(c) in sub-heading No. 2201.19, for the entry in column (4), the entry "60%" shall be substituted; 
(cO in sub-heading No. 2201.90. for the entry in column (4), the entry "IS'll" shall be substituted; 
(t) in sub-heading No. 2202.11, for the entry in column (4), the entry "50 paise" shall be substituted; 
(j) in sub-heading No. 2202.12. for the entry in column (4), the entry "55 paise" shall be substituted; 
(g) in sub-heading No. 2202.13, for the entry in column (4), the entry "65 paise" shall be substituted; 
20 
(h) in sub-heading No. 2202.14, in column (4), for the figures and word "45 paise", the figures and word "65 25 
paise" sball be substituted; 
(i) in sub-heading No. 2202.19, for the entry in column (4), the entry "75%" shall be substituted; 
(7) in Chapter ?A,-
(aJ aft« NOTE 3, the following NOTE shall be inserted, namely:-
'4. In this OIapttz, the expression "cut-tobacco" means the prepared or processed cut-~size tobacco which is 30 
generally blended or moisturised to a desired extent for use in the manufacture of machine-rolled cigarettes.'; 
(b) in heading No. 24.04, in column (3), for the words "-Smoking mixtures for pipes and cigarettes", the words 
.. -Smoking mixtwes for pipes and cigareucs; cut-tobacco" shall be substituted; 
(8) in Chapter 28, in sub-heading No. 2817.10, for the entry in column (4), the entry "IS'll" shall be substituted; 
(9) in Cha.pta" 34, in sub-heading Nos. 3401.20 and 3402.90, for the entry in column (4), the entry "25%" shall be 35 
substituted; 

59 
(10) in Chapter 35, in sub-heading No. 3506.00, for the entry in column (4), the entry "40%" shall be substituted; 
(11) in Chapter 39, in sub-heading No. 3907.80, in column (3), for the word "Polybutyl", the word "Polybutylene" 
shall be substituted; 
(12) in Chapter 40,-
5 (a) in sub-heading Nos. 4006.10 and 4008.21, for the entry in column (4), the entry "Rs.12 per kilogram" shall 
10 
J5 
be substituted; 
(b) in sub-heading No. 4010.90, for the entry in column (4), the entry "35%" shall be substituted; 
(13) in Chapter 42, in sub-heading No. 4201.10, for the entry in column (4), the entry "35%" shall be substituted; 
(14) in Chapter 44,-
(a) in sub-heading Nos. 4406.10, 4406.20, 4406.90, 4407.10 and 4407.90, for the entry in column (4), the entry 
"20%" shall be substiblted; 
(b) in sub-heading Nos. 4408.10 and 4408.20, for the entry in column (4) • the entry "30%" shall be substituted; 
(15) in Chapter 45, in sub-heading No. 4501.00. for the entry in column (4), the entry "15%" shall be substituted; 
(J6) in Chapter 48.-
(0) in sub-heading No. 4802.20. in column (4), for the abbreviation and figures "Rs. 575". the abbreviation and 
figures "Rs. 600" shall be substituted; 
(b) in sub-heading No. 4802.91, in column (4), for the abbreviation and figures "Rs. 1,700", the abbreviation and 
figures "Rs. 1,800" shall be substituted; 
(c) in sub-heading No. 4802.99, in column (4), for the abbreviation and figures "Rs. 1,300", the abbreviation and 
20 figures "Rs. 1.400" shall be substiblted; 
(d) in sub-heading No. 4803.00, in column (4), for the abbreviation and figures "Rs. 1,430", the abbreviation and 
figures "Rs. 1,550" shall be substituted; 
(e) in sub-heading Nos. 4804.19, 4804.29 and 4804.30, in column (4), for the abbreviation and figures 
"Rs.I. 700", the abbreviation and figures "Rs. 1,800" shall be substituted; 
25 (f) in sub-heading No. 4805.30, in column (4), for the abbreviation and figures "Rs. 2,000", the abbreviation and 
30 
35 
figures "Rs. 2.150" shall be substituted; 
(g) in 'sub-heading No. 4805.90, in column (4), for the abbreviation and figures "Rs. 1,550" , the abbreviation 
and figures "Rs. 1,600" shall be substiblted; . 
(It) in sub-heading Nos. 4806.10 and 4806_20. in column (4). for the abbreviation and figures "Rs. 2,200", the 
abbreviation and figures "Rs. 2,300" shall be substituted; 
(i) in sub-heading No. 4806.90. in colwnn (4), for the abbreviation and figures "Rs. 1,930", the abbreviation and 
figures "Rs. 2,000" shall be subs&ituted; 
OJ in sub-heading Nos. 4807.10 and 4807.99, in column (4), for the abbreviation and figures "Rs. l,SSO", the 
abbreviation and figures "Rs. l,fI.X)" shaU be substituted; 
(kJ in sub-heading Nos. 4808.10 and 4808.90, in column (4), for the abbreviation and figures "Rs. l,sSO", the 
abbreviation and figures "Rs. l,fI.X)" shall be substiblted; 
(l) in sub-heading Nos. 4809.10,4809.20 and 4809.90, for the entry in colwnn (4), the entry "40% " shall be 
substilUtcd; 
(III) in IUb-~J No. 4810.10, in column (4), for the abbreviation and figures "Rs. 1,700", the ablRviation 
40 and figura "Ra. 1.800" ahal1 be aubsciblted; 
(II) in aub-headiq No. 4810.20. in column (4), for the abbreviaIicln and figures "Rs. 2,200", the abbreviaIion and 
fiprea "Ra. 2.300" alIaU be aubsdlUlcd: 

60 
(0) in sub-heading No. 4810.90, in column (4), for the abbreviation and figures "Rs. 1,930", the abbreviation and 
figures "Rs. 2,000" shall be substimted; 
(p) in sub-heading Nos. 4811.10 and 4811.20, in column (4), for the abbreviation and figures "Rs. 1,550", the 
abbreviation and figures "Rs. 1,600" shall be substituted; 
(q) in sub-heading No. 4811.31, for the entry in column (4), the entry "10% plus Rs. 1,600 per tonne" shall be 5 
substimted; 
(r) in sub-heading Nos. 4811.39 and 4811.40, in column (4), for the abbreviation and figures "Rs. 2,200", the 
abbreviation and figures "Rs. 2,300 " shall be substimted; 
(s) in sub-heading No. 4811.90, in column (4), for the abbreviation and figures "Rs. 1,930", the abbreviation and 
figures "Rs. 2,000" shall be substimted; 10 
(l) in sub-heading No. 4812.00, for the entry in column (4), the entry "15%" shall be substimted; 
(Il) in sub-heading No. 4813.00, in colmon (4), for the abbreviation and figures "Rs. 2,200", the abbreviation and 
figures "Rs. 2,300" shall be substimted; 
(v) in sub-heading No. 4814.00, in column (4), for the abbreviation and figures "Rs. 2,500", the abbreviation and 15 
figures "Rs. 2,700" shall be substimted; 
(w) in suh-heading No. 4815.00, for the entry in column (4), the entry "15%" shall be substituted; 
(x) in sub-heading No. 4816.00, for the entry in column (4), the entry "40%" shall be substituted; 
(y) in sub-heading Nos. 4817.10, 4817.20 and 4817.90, in column (4), for the abbteviation and figures 
"Rs.l,550", the abbreviation and figures "Rs.l,600" shall be substimted; 
(17) in Chapter 49, in heading No. 49.01, in column (3), for the words "PRODUcrS OF THE PAPER PRINTING 
INDUSTRY", the words "PRODUcrS OF THE PRINTING INDUSTRY" shall be substituted; 
(18) in Chapter 52.-
(~ in sub-heading Nos. 5206.20 and 5207.20, in column (4), for the words, abbreviation and figures "sub-heading 
Nos. 5206.31 to 5206.39 and 5206.90", the words, abbreviation and figures "sub-heading Nos. 5206.31 to 5206.36 
20 
and 5206.91 to 5206.94" shall be substituted; 25 
(b) in sub-heading Nos. 5207.90 and 5208.19, for the entry in colmon (4), the entry "Fifty per cent. of the duty 
leviable under sub-heading Nos. 5206.31 to 5206.36 and 5206.91 to 5206.94, as the case may be, depending upon the 
average COlDl1 of yam in the fabric and the value per square metre of the fabric" shall be substituted; 
(c) in sub-heading Nos. 5208.22 and 5208.29, in column (4), for the words, abbreviation and figures "sub-beading 
Nos. 5206.31 to 5206.39 and 5206.90", the words, abbreviation and figures "sub-heading Nos. 5206.31 to 5206.36 30 
and 5206.91 to 5206.94" shall be substituted; 
(t:O in sub-heading Nos. 5211.10 and 5211.20, for the entry in column (4), the entry "Nil" shall be substimted; 
(19) in Chapter 54,-
((41 in sub-heading No. 5404.91, for the entry in column (4), the entry "Rs. 21.12 per kilogram" shall be 
substituted; 3S 
(b) in sub-heading No. 5404.92, for the entry in column (4), the entry "Rs.13.77 per kilogram" shall be 
substihlled; 
(c) in sub-heading No. 5404.93, for the entry in column (4), the entry "Rs. 9.86 per kilogram" shall be 
substituted; 
(4 in sub-heading No. 5404.94, for the entry in column (4), the entry "Rs. 8.18 per kilogram" shall be 40 
subatiblwl; 
(e) in sub-heading No. 5404.95, for the entry in column (4), the entry "Rs. 6.95 per kilogram" shall be 
substiluwl; 

61 
(f) in sub-heading No. 5404.96, for the entry in column (4), the entry "Rs. 4.71 per kilogram" shall be 
substiblted; 
(g) in sub-heading No. 5404.97, for the entry in column (4), the entry "JU. 3.08 per kilogram" shall be 
substiblted; 
5 (h) in sub-heading No. 5409.10, for the entry in column (3), the entry "- Of value not exceding rupees len per 
10 
square metre" shall be substituted; 
(;) in sub-heading No. 5409.20, for the entry in column (3), the entry "- Of value exceeding rupees len but not 
exceeding rupees twenty per square metre" shall be substiblted; 
(j) in sub-heading No. 5409.30, for the entry in column (3), the entry" - Of value exceeding rupees twenty but 
not exceeding rupees twenty-five per square metre" shall be substituted; 
(k) in sub-heading No. 5409.40, for the entry in column (3), the entry" - Of value exceeding rupees twenty-five 
but not exceeding rupees ruty per square metre" shall be substiblted; 
(l) in sub-heading No. 5409.50, for the entry in column (3), the entry" - Of value exceeding rupees rlfty but not 
exceeding rupees one hundred per square metre" shall be substiblted; 
15 (m) in sub-heading No. 5409.60, for the entry in column (3), the entry" - Of value exceeding rupees one hundred 
20 
per square metre" shall be substiblted; 
(n) sub-heading No. 5409.70 and the entries relating thereto shall be omitted; 
(20) in Chapter 55, -
(a) sub-heading Nos. 5511.27 and 5511.28 shall be renumbered as sub-heading Nos. 5511.26 and 5511.27 
respectively; 
(b) sub-heading Nos. 5512.27 and 5512.28 shall be renumbered as sub-heading Nos. 5512.26 and 5512.27 
respectively; 
(2/) in Chapter 59,-
(a) in sub-heading No. 5901.10, for the e~try in column (4), the entry "10% " shall be substiUJted; 
2') (b) in sub-heading Nos. 5902.10, 5902.20 and 5902.30, for the entry in column (4), the entry "Rs. 10 per 
)0 
35 
40 
kilogram" shall be substituted; 
(c) in sub-heading No. 5903.11, for the entry in column (4), the entry "30% plus the duty for the time being 
leviable on base fabrics, if not already paid" shall be substituted; 
(d) in sub-heading No. 5903.19, in column (4), for the abbreviation and figure "Rs. 6", the abbreviation and 
figure "Rs. 7" shall be substiUJted; 
(~) in sub-heading No. 5903.21, for the entry in column (4), the entry "30% plus the duty for the time being 
levtable on base fabrics, if not already paid" shall be substituted; 
if) in sub-heading No. 5903.29, in column (4), for the abbreviation and figures "Rs. 7.50", the abbreviation and 
figures "Rs. 8.50" shall be substituted; 
(~) in sub-heading No. 5903.91, for the entry in column (4), the entry "30% plus the duty for the time being 
leViable on base fabrics, if not already paid" shall be substituted; 
(h) in sub-heading No. 5903.99, in column (4), for the abbreviation and figure "Rs. 8", the abbreviation and figure 
"Rs. 9" shall be substituted; 
(;) in sub-heading Nos. 5905.10 and 5905.20, for the entry in column (4), the entry "10%" shall be substituted; 
U> in sub-heading No. 5908.00, for the entry in column (4), the entry "30%" shall be substituted; 
(22) in Chapter 64,-
(~ in sub-heading No. 6401.11, for the entry in column (4), the entry "20%" shall be substituted; 
(b) in sub-heading No. 6401.91, for the entry in column (4), the entry "20%" shall be substituted; 

62 
(c) in sub-heading No. 6402.00, for the entry in column (4), the entry "IS"" shaD be substiwted; 
(23) in Chapter 68,-
(a) in sub-heading No. 6801.10, for the entry in column (4), the entry "20%" shall be substiwled; 
(b) in sub-heading No. 6802.00, for the entry in column (4), the entry "20"" shall be substiwted; 
(c) in sub-heading Nos. 6804.10, 6804.20, 6804.30 and 6804.90, for the entry in column (4), the entry 5 
ft25%ft shall be substituted; 
(dJ in sub-heading No. 6805.10, for the entry in column (4), the entry "25"" shall be substiwted; 
(~) in sub-heading No. 6806.10, for the entry in column (4), the entry "25"" shall be substiwted; 
(f) in sub-heading No. 6806.90, for the entry in column (4), the entry "20%" shall be substiwted; 
(g) in sub-heading No. 6807.00, for the entry in column (4), the entry "20%" shall be substituted; 
(24) in ChapIer 69,-
(a) in sub-heading Nos. 6901.00, 6902.10, 6902.90, 6903.10, 6903.90 and 6904.10, for the entry in column (4), 
the entry "IS'll" shall be substiwted; 
(b) in sub-heading No.. 6908.10, for the entry in column (4), the entry "40%" shall be substiwted; 
(c) in sub-heading No. 6909.10, for the entry in column (4), the entry "20%" shall be substituted; 
(dJ in sub-heading No. 6909.20, for the entry in column (4), tM entry "40"" shall be substituted; 
(25) in Chapter 10,-
(a) in sub-heading No. 7002.10, in column (4), for the abbreviation and figures ftRs. 3.75ft , the abbreviation and 
figures "Rs. 10" shall be substituted; 
10 
15 
(b) in sub-beading No. 7002.20, in column (4), for the abbreviation and figures "Rs. 3.50", the abbreviation and a> 
figures "Rs. 10" shall be substituted; 
(c) in sub-heading No. 7003.00, in column (4), for the abbreviation and figures "Rs. 3.75", the abbreviation and 
figures "Rs. 10" shall be substituted; 
(dJ in sub-heading No. 7004.10, for the entry in column (4), the entry ft4O% plus Rs. 50 per millimetre thickness 
or part Ihc:nlof per square mette" shall be substituted; 25 
(~) in sub-heading No. 7004.20, for the entry in column (4), the entry "50% plus Rs. SO per millimetre thickness 
or part Ihc:reof per square metre" shall be substituted; 
(f) in sub-heading No. 7006.90, for the entry in column (4), the entry "40% pllLf Rs. IS per millimetre thickness 
or part tbereof per square metre" shall be substituted; 
(26) in 0Iapb:r 14, in sub-heading No. 7405.90, for the entry in column (4), the entry "20%" shall be substiwted; 30 
(17) in Cl1apta" 83, in sub-heading No. 8312.12, for the entry in column (4), the entry ft20" plus Rs.l00 per 
cantaincr''' sI;tall be substiwted; 
(28) in CbapIa" 85,-
(a) in sub-beading No. 8501.00, for the entry in column (4), the entry "25"" shaI1 be substiwted; 
(b) in sub-headins No. 8506.00, for the entry in column (4). the entry "35"" shall be substiwted; 
~ in IUb-Iading No. 8539.00, for the entry in coIwnn (4), the entry "3S" pillS Rs. 10 per lamp" 
shaI1 be suIJItjb*'" 
35 

63 
PARTll 
Heading No. Sub-heading No. Description of goods Rate of duty 
(1) (3) (4) 
In the Schedule to the Central Excise Tariff Act.-
5 (1) in Chapter 19. for sub-heading Nos. 1902.10. 1902.20 and 1902.90. the following sub-headings shall be 
substituted. namely :-
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
"1902.10 -Put up in unit containers and ordinarily intended for sale 15% 
1902.90 
(2) in Chapter 24.-
Nil"; 
(a) after sub-heading No. 2404.12. the follOwing sub-heading shall be inserted. namely ;-
"2404.13 - ~ut-tobacco 10 paise per kilogram"; 
(b) for sub-heading Nos. 2404.41 and 2404.42. the following shall be substituted. namely:-
'- Clewing tobacco includinll preparations commonly known as 
"Khara Masa1a". "Kimam". Ii"Dokta". "Zarda". "Sukha" and "Surti": 
2404.41 -Bearing a lnnd name 20%'; 
(e) for sub-heading Nos. 2404.51 and 2404.52. the following sub-heading shall be substituted. 
namely;-
"2404.50 -Snuff of tobacco 20%"; 
(3) in Chapter 28. for heading No. 28.29, the following heading shall be substituted, namely:-
"28.29 CHLORATES AND PERCm.ORAlES; BROMA lES AND 
PERBROMA TES; IODATES AND PERIODA lES 
2829.10 
2829.90 
-Potassium Chlorate 
-Other 
Rs. lOOper kilogram 
15%"; 
(4) in Chapter 34. for sub-heading Nos. 3401.11 and 3401.12, the following sub-heading shall be substituted. 
namely:-
"3401.10 
(5) in Chaptes 52.-
-Soap in any fonn 25%"; 
(oJ for sub-heading Nos. 5206.32, 5206.33, 5206.34. 5206.35 and 5206.36. the following sub-
headings shall be substiwted, namely :-
"520632 - Of value exceeding rupees five but not exceeding 
rupees ten per .square metre 
520633 - Of value exceeding rupees ten but not exceeding 
rupees fifteen per square metre 
520634 - Of value exceeding rupees fifteen but not exceeding 
rupees twenty-five per square metre 
520635 - Of value ~mpees lWCIIly-five but not 
exceeding rupees per square mcIrC 
5206.36 - Of value exceeding rupees fifty per square mcb'e 
(b) for sub-lading Nos. 5206.37, 5206.38. 5206.39 IIId 5206.90, 
the following sub-Iwdi .... sbaIl be substituted. lIIIIICIIy :-
20 paise per square metre 
50 paise per square metre 
80 paise per square metre 
8% 
8%"; 

64 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
"-Other fabrics: 
5206.91 - Of value not exceeding rupees fifteen per square metre so paise per square metre 
5206.92 - Of value exceeding rupees fifteen but not exceeding 
rupees twenty-five per square metre 80 paise per square metre 
5206.93 
5206.94 
-- Of value exceeding rupees twenty-five but not 
exceeding rupees fifty per square metre 
- Of value exceeding rupees fifty per square metre 
(c) for heading No. 52.09. the following I}eading shall be sub~tituted. namely:-
"52.09 corrON FABRICS.-
~ WOVEN. 
5209.10 
5209.20 
(b) SUBJECI'ED TO THE PROCESS OF BLEACHING. 
MERCERISING, DYEING. PRINTING. WAlER-
PROOFING, SHRINKPRooFING, ORGANDIE 
PROCESSING OR ANY OTIIER PROCESS OR ANY 
TWO OR MORE OF THESE PROCESSES. 
(c) CONTAINING (i) COlTON. AND (ii) POL YESlER 
STAPLE FIBRE OR POLYESTER FILAMENT 
YARN. OR BOTH (BlIT NOT CONTAINING 
ANY 01lffiR lEX1U..E MATERIAL), AND 
(cO IN WHICH THE PROPORTION OF POL YESlER 
STAPLE FIBRE OR FILAMENT YARN OR 
BOTH IS MORE THAN 40% BY WEIGHT OF 
THE TOTAL FIBRE CONTENT 
- Of value not exceeding rupees twenty-five per 
square metre 
- Of value exceeding rupees twenty-five 
per square metre 
8% 
8%"; 
Nil 
Nil"; 
(d) for sub-heading Nos. 5210.20 and 5210.30. die following sub-heading shall be substituted. namely :-
"5210.20 - Of value exceeding rupees twenty-five per square metre Nil"; 
(6) in Chapter 54. for sub-heading NO. 5412.30. the following sub-headings shall be substituted. namely :-
"5412.30 
541240 
OJ in Chapter 55,-
- Of value exceeding rupees fifty but not exceeding 
rupees one hundred per square metre 
- Of value exceeding rupees one hWldred per 
square metre. 
(a) for heading No. 55.08. the following heading shall be substituted, namely :-
"55.08 FABRICS OF MAN-MADE STAPLE FIBRES, 
EXCLUDING FABRICS COVERED UNDER 
HEADING NOS. 55.11 AND 55.12,-
~ WOVEN ON LOOMS OTHER THAN HANDLooMS, AND 
(b) SUBJECrED TO THE PROCESS OF BLEACHING, 
DYEING. PRINTING. SHRlNKPRooFING, SlENTERING, 
HEAT-SEITING, CREASE-RESISTANT 
PROCESSING OR ANY OTHER PROCESS 
OR ANY TWO OR MORE OF THESE PROCESSES 
WITII THE AID OF POWER OR STEAM 
Nil 
Nil"; 
5 
10 
15 
21) 
30 
35 
40 
4S 

65 
(1) (2) 0) (4) 
5508.10 - Of value not exceeding rupees ten per square metre Nil 
5508.20 - Of value exceeding rupees ten but not exceeding rupees 
twenty per square metre Nil 
5508.30 - Of value exceeding rupees twenty but not exceeding 
rupees twenty-five per square metre Nil 5 
5508.40 - Of value exceeding rupees twenty-five but not 
exceeding rupees fifty pel" square metre Nil 
5508.50 - Of value exceeding rupees fifty but not exceeding 
rupees one bundred per square metre Nil 
JO 5508.60 - Of value exceeding rupees one hundred per square metre Nil "; 
(b) for sub-heading No. 5511.13, the following sub-headings shall be substituted, namely :-
"551 ~.13 -- Of value exceeding rupees fifty but not exceeding 
rupees one hundred per square metre 
Nil 
551l.I4 -- Of value exceeding rupees one hundred pel" square metre Nil "; 
15 (c) for sub-heading No. 5511.29, the following sub-headings shall be substituted, namely:-
"551128 
5511.29 
-- Other fabrics of value exceeding rupees fifty but 
not exceeding rupees one hundred per square metre 
-- Other fabrics of value exceeding rupees one hundred 
per square metre 
Nil 
Nil "; 
20 (d) for sub-heading No. 5512.13, the following sub-headings shall be substituted, namely :-
2'i 
30 
35 
40 
"5512.13 
5512.14 
-- Of value exceeding rupees fifty but not exceeding 
rupees one hundred per square metre 
-- Of value exceeding rupees one hundred per square metre 
Nil 
Nil "; 
(e) for sub-heading No. 5512.29, the following sub-headings shall be substituted, namely :-
"5512.28 
5512.29 
-- Other fabrics of value exceeding rupees fifty but 
not exceeding rupees one hundred per square metre 
-- Other fabrics of value exceeding rupees 
one hundred per square metre 
Nil 
Nil" ; 
(8) in Chapter 69. for sub-heading No. 6906.10. the following sub-heading shall be slJbstituted. namely ;-
"6906.10 - Glazed tiles 50%"; 
(9) in Chapter 84. after sub-heading No. 8414.10. the following sub-heading shall be inserted. namely ;-
"8414.20 - Electric fans 
(10) in Chapter 85. for heading No. 85.40, the following shall be substituted, namely ;-
"85.40 THERMIONIC. COLD CATHODE OR PHOTO-
CATHODE VALVES AND TUBES (FOR EXAMPLE. 
V ACUUM OR VAPOUR OR GAS FIl.LED VAL YES AND 
TUBES. MERCURY ARC RECTIFYING VALVES AND ruBES, 
CA THODE-RAY TUBES, TELEVISION CAMERA ruBES) 
-Cathode-Ray television picture tubes: 
8540.11 
8540.12 
8540.90 
--colour 
-Black and White 
- 0IhrI' 
15% plus 
Rs.l00 per fan"; 
Rs. 6001- per tube 
Rs. 150/- per tube 
15%.". 

66 
TIlE FOURTH SCHEDULE 
(See section 99) 
PART I 
In the First Schedule to the Additional Duties of Excise Act,-
(1) in sub-heading No. 1701.39, for the entry in column (4), the entry "Rs. 36 per quintal" shall be substituted; 5 
(2) in heading No. 24.04, in column (3), in the portion occurring before sub-heading No. 2404.11, for the words 
"-Smoking mixtures of tobacco for pipes and cigarettes", the words "-Smoking mixtures of tobacco for pipes and 
cigarettes; cut-tobacco" shall be substituted; 
(3) sub-heading No. 2404.32 shall be renumbered as sub-heading No. 2404.~9; 
(4) in sub-heading No. 5206.20, in column (4), for the wonts, abbreviation and figures "sub-heading Nos. 5206.31 ]() 
to 5206.39 and 5206.90", the wonts, abbreviation and figures "sub-heading Nos. 5206.31 to 5206.36 and 5206.91 to 
5206.94" shall be substituted; . 
(5) in sub-heading No. 5206.32, for the entry in column (3), the entry "- Of value exceeding rupees five but not 
exceeding rupees ten per square metre" shall be substituted; 
(6) in sub-heading No. 5206.33, for the entry in column (3), the entry "- Of value exceeding rupees ten hut not 15 
exceeding rupees flfteen per square metre" shall be substituted; 
(7) in sub-heading No. ~206.34, for the entry in column (3), the entry "-- Of value exceeding rupees fifteen hut 
not exceeding rupees twenty-five per square metre" shall be substituted; 
(8) in sub-heading No. 5206.35, for the entry in column (3), the entry "-- Of value exceeding rupees twenty-five 
but not exceeding rupees fifty per square metre" shall be substituted; 
(9) in sub-heading No. 5206.36, for the entry in column (3), the entry "-- Of value exceeding rupees fifty per 
square metre" shall be substituted; 
(10) in sub-heading No. 5207.20, in column (4), for the words, abbreviation and figures "sub-heading Nos. 
5206.31 to 5206.39 and 5206.90", the words, abbreviation and figures "sub-heading Nos. 5206.31 to 5206.36 and 
5206.91 to 5206.94" shall be substituted; 
(11) in sub-heading Nos. 5207.90 and 5208.19, for the entry in column (4), the entry "Fifty per cent of the duty 
leviable under sub-heading Nos. 5206.31 to 5206.36 and 5206.91 to 5206.94, as the case may be, depending upon the 
average count of the yarn in the fabric and the value per square metre of the fabric" shall be substituted; 
25 
(12) in sub-heading Nos. 5208.22 and 5208.29, in column (4), fpr the words, abbreviation and figures "sub-
heading Nos. 5206.31 to 5206.39 and 5206.90", the words. abbreviation and figures "sub-heading Nos. 5206.31 to 30 
5206.36 and 5206.91 to 5206.94" shall be substitu~; 
(13) in sub-heading Nos. 5211.10 and 5211.20, for the entry in column (4), the entry .. J5%" shall be substituted; 
(14) sub-heading Nos. 5511.27 and 5511.28 shall be renumbered as sub-heading Nos. 5511.26 and 5511.27 
respectively; 
(15) sub-heading Nos. 5512.27 and 5512.28 sball be renumbered as sub-heading Nos. 5512.26 and 5512.27 3S 
respectively. 

10 
15 
20 
2'; 
30 
35 
(3) 
67 
PARTU 
In the FU'St Schedule 10 the Additional Duties o( Excise Act.-
(1) after sub-heading No. 2404.12, the (ollowing sub-heading shall be inselted, namely :-
"2A04.l3 -- cut-tobacco 
(2) for sub-heading Nos. 2404.41 and 2A04.42, the following shall be substituted, namely:-
'-Chewing IObacco including preparations commonly known 
as "KharaMasala", "IGmam","Dokta", "Zarda",,"Sukha" and "Surti": 
2A04.41 -- bearing a brand name 10%'; 
(3) for the portion occurring aftez sub-heading No. 2404.49 and sub-heading Nos. 2404.51 and 2404.52, the 
following sub-heading shall be substituted, namely :-
"2404.50 -Snuff of tobacco 10%"; 
(4) for sub-heading Nos. 5206.37,5206.38,5206.39 and 5206.90, the following sub-headings shall be substituted, 
namely:-
.. - Other fabrics: 
5206.91 -- Of value not exceeding rupees fifteen pet square metre 
5206.92 -- Of value exceeding rupees fifteen but not exceding rupees 
twenty-five pet square metre 
5206~93 - Of value exceeding rupees twenty-five but not exceeding 
rupees flfty per square metre 
5206.94 -Of value exceeding rupees flfty per square metre 
(5) for heading No. 52.09, the (oUowing heading shall be substituted. namely :-
"52.09 COlTON FABRICS,-
(a) WOVEN, 
(b) SUBJECTED TO THE PROCESS OF BLEACHING, 
MERCERISING, DYEING, PRINTING, WATER-
PROOFING, SHRINKPROOFING,ORGANDIE 
PROCESSING OR ANY OTHER PROCESS 
OR ANY '!WO OR MORE OF THESE PROCESSES, 
(c) CONTAINING (i) COTION, AND (ii) POLYESTER 
STAPLE FIBRE OR POLYESTER FD..AMENT 
YARN, OR BOTH (BUT NOT CONTAINING 
ANY OTHER TEX'rn..E MATERIAL), AND 
(d) IN WIDCH THE PROPORTION OF POLYESTER 
STAPLE FIBRE OR FD..AMENT YARN OR BOTH 
IS MORE THAN FORTY PER CENT. BY WEIGHT 
OF THE TOTAL FIBRE CONTENT 
10% plus Rs. 5 pet 
square metre 
10% plus Rs. 5 per 
square metre 
10% plus Rs. 5 per 
square metre 
10% plus Rs. 5 per 
square metre~; 

(~l) ________ ~~=) ________ ~(3~) __________________________ ~~~) ____ __ 
5209.10 
5209.20 
- Of value not exceeding rupees twenty-five per square metre 10% plus Rs. 5 
per square metre 
- Of value exceeding rupees twenty-five per square metre 10% plus Rs. 5 
per square metre"; 
(6) for sub-heading Nos. 5210.20 and 5210.30, the following sub-heading shall be substituted, namely :-
"5210.20 - Of value exceeding rupees twenty-five per square metre 
(7) for heading No. 54.09, the following heading shall be substiblted, namely :-
"54.09 
5409.10 
5409.20 
5409.30 
5409.40 
540950 
5409.00 
FABRICS OF MAN-MADE FILAMENT YARN 
(INCLUDING FABRICS OBTAINED FROM 
MATERIALS OF HEADING NOS. 54.06 AND 
54.07 BUT EXCLUDING FABRICS COVERED 
UNDER HEADING NO. 54.12),-
(a) WOVEN ON LOOMS OrnER mAN 
HANDLOOMS, AND 
(b) SUBJECTED TO rnE PROCESS OF 
BLEACHING, DYEING, PRINTING, SHRINK-
PROOFING, STENTERING. HEAT-SETTING. 
CREASE-RESISTANT PROCESSING OR ANY 
OrnER PROCESS OR ANY TWO OR MORE 
OF THESE PROCESSES WITH THE AID OF 
POWER OR STEAM 
- Of value not exceeding rupees ten per square metre 
- Of value exceeding rupees ten but not exceeding rupees 
twenty per square metre 
- Of value exceeding rupees twenty but not exceeding rupees 
twenty-five per square metre 
- Of value exceeding rupees twenty-five but not exceeding 
rupees fifty per square metre 
- Of value exceeding rupees fifty but not exceeding rupees 
one hundred per square metre 
- Of value exceeding rupees one hundred per square metre 
10% plus Rs. 5 
per square metre"; 
10% plus Rs. 5 
per square metre 
10% pllLf Rs. 5 
per square metre 
10% plus Rs. 5 
per square metre 
10% plus Rs. 5 
per square metre 
15% 
20%"; 
(8) for sub-heading No. 5412.30. the following sub-headings shall be substituted. namely :-
"5412.30 - Of value exc=Iing rupees fifty but not exceeding rupees 
one hl.lDdred per square metre 15% 
5412.40 - Of value exceeding rupees one hundred per square metre 20%"; 
(9) for heading No. 55.08, the following heading shall be substituted, namely :-
"55.08 FABRICS OF MAN-MADE STAPLE FIBRES 
(EXCLUDING FABRICS COVERED UNDER 
HEADING NOS. 55.11 AND 55.12),-
~ WOVEN ON LOOMS cmmR mAN HANDLOOMS, 
AND 
5 
10 
15 
30 

Q) 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
69 
(2) (3) 
S508.10 
S508.20 
S508.3O 
S508.40 
SS08.50 
S508.60 
(b) SUBJECTED TO THE PROCBSS OF BLEACHING, 
DYEING, PRINTING, SHRlNKPROOFING, STENTERING, 
HEAT-SETIING, CREASE-RESISTANT PROCBSSING 
OR ANY OlllER PROCESS OR ANY 1WO 
OR MORE OF THESE PROCESSES 
WITH THE AID OF POWER OR STEAM 
- Of value not exceeding rupees ten per square metre 
- Of value exceeding rupees ten but not exceeding rupees 
twenty per square metre 
- Of value exceeding rupees twenty but not exceeding 
rupees twenty-five per square metre 
- Of value exceeding rupees twenty-five but not exceeding 
rupees fifty per square metre 
- Of value exceeding rupees fifty but not exceeding rupees 
one hundred per square metre 
- Of value exceeding rupees one hundred per square metre 
(4) 
10% plus Rs. S per 
square metre 
10% plus Rs. S per 
lKluare metre 
10% plus Rs. 5 per 
square metre 
10% plus Rs. 5 per 
!quare metre 
IS% 
20%"; 
(10) for sub-heading No. 5S11.13, the following sub-headings shall be substituted, namely :-
"5511.13 -- Of value exceeding rupees fifty but not exceeding rupees one 
hundred per square melle 15% 
5S11.14 -- Of value exceeding rupees one hundred per square metre 20%"; 
(11) for sub-heading No. 5511.29, the following sub-headings shall be substituted, namely:-
"5511.28 - Other fabrics of value exceeding rupees fifty but not exceeding rupees 
one hundred per square metre 15% 
5S11.29 ~ fabrics of value exceeding rupees one hun~ per square metre 20%"; 
(12) for sub-heading No. 5512.13, the following sub-headings shall be substituted, namely :-
"5512.13 --Of value exceeding rupees fifty but not exceeding rupees one 
hundrM per square melle IS% 
S512.14 - Of value exceeding rupees one hundred per square metre 20%"; 
(13) for sub-heading No. 5512.29, the following sub-headings shall be substituted. namely ;-
"S512.28 -- OdlCl' fabrics of value exceeding rupees fifty but not 
exceeding rupees one hundred per sqwe metre IS% 
5S12.29 - Odler fabrics of value exceeding rupees one hundred 
per square metre 20%". 

STAlEMENT OF 0BJECrS AND REASONS 
The object of the Bill is to gi~ effect to the financial p-oposaIs « abe 
Central Government for the financial year 1987-88. The notes OIl clauses 
explain the various provisions contained in the Bill. 
NEwDEun; RAllV GANDHI. 
The 28th February, 1987. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTIQ..ES 117 AND 
274 OF THE CONSTIn.mON OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. F. 3(1)-B(O)/87, dated the 28th February, 1987 from 
Shri Rajiv Gandhi, Prime Minister and Minister of Finance, to the 
Secretary-General, Lok Sabha.] 
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the 
proposed Bill, recommends under clause (1) of article 117, read with 
clause (1) of article 274, of the Constitution of India, the introduction of 
the Finance Bill, 1987, to the Lok Sabha. 
2. The Bill will be introduced in the Lok Sabha immediately after the 
presentation of the Budget on the 28th February, 1987. 
, 

71 
NQteson~s 
Clause 2. read with the First Schedule to the Bill. seeks to prescribe die rates at which income-Lax is 10 be levied on 
income chargeable to laX for the assessment year 1987-88. Further. it lays down the raJes at which Lax is to be deducted at 
source during the financial year 1987-88 from incomes subject 10 such deduction under the Income-tax Act; and the rates at 
which "advance tax" is to be paid and tax is to be calculated and charged in special cases for the fmancial year 1987-88. 
Rates of incoml!-taxfor the asses~nl year 1987-88: 
Parl I of the First Schedule 10 the Bill specifies the rates of income-tax on incomes liable 10 lax for the assessment year 
19R7-RR. These rates are the same as those specified in Part III of the First Schedule to the Finance Act. 1986 for the 
purposes of deduction of Lax at source from "Salaries" and for computation of "advance tax" payable during the financial 
year 19~6-~7. 
{(ares for deduction of tax at source during the financial year 1987-88 from incoml! other than "Salaries": 
Parl II of the First Schedule to the Bill specifies the rales at which income-tax is to be deducted at source during the 
financial year 1987-88 from incomes other than "Salaries" and retirement annuities under section SOE(9) of the Income-tax 
Act. 
During the financial year 1987-88. certain new cat.egories of incomes will be subject to deduction of tax at source. 
I ncomes earned by any person who is resident in Inelia, inter-aJia, by way of fees for professional services. royalty. fees for 
technical services. commission or brokerage paid by persons other than individuals and Hindu undivided families. will now 
he I iahle to deduction of Lax 3t source if such incomes exceed certain monetary limits. The rate of deduction of tax on these 
incomes is proposed at twen':y per cent. in the case of any person who is resident and who is not a company. In the case of 
such incomes accruing to domestic companies. the rate of deduction of tax at source is proposed at twenty-five per cent. In 
the case of such incomes accruing to any person who is not a resident and who is not a company. the rate of deduction of 
lax is proposed at thirty per cent. or the income-tax in respect of the income computed at the rates prescribed in Sub-
Paragraph I of Paragraph A of Part III of the First Schedule. as if such income had been the total income, whichever is 
higher. 
I ncome by way of rent will also be subject to deduction of tax at source if. such rent is paid by persons other than 
individuals and Hindu undivided families. The rate of deduction of tax at source on the income earned by any person who is 
a resident in India or a domestic company is proposed at ten per cent. if such income exceeds thirty-six thousand rupees but 
docs not exceed forty-eight thousand rupees. The rate of deduction of laX in such cases is proposed at twenty per cent in a 
case where income by way of rent exceeds forty-eight thousand rupees. In case of a person who is not resident in India and 
who is nol a company. the Lax deductible at source will be the tax at these rates or the income-tax as computed at the rates· 
prescribed in Sub-Paragraph I of Paragraph A of Part III of the First Schedule. whichever is higher. 
Payments made by any Government or a local authority or a public sector corporation or any company to any person 
resident in India or a domestic company for supply of goods will be subject to deduction of tax at source at the rate of five 
per cent. In the case of such income accruing to any person who is not a resident and who is not a company. the rate of 
deduction of tax is proposed at five per cent. or income-tax computed at the rates prescribed in Sub-Paragraph I of Paragraph 
A of Part III of the First Schedule as if such income had been the total income. whichever is higher. 
In the case of any company which is not a domestic company. the rates of deduction of tax at source in respect of 
dividends payable by any domestic company or interest or royalty or fees for technical services or interest payable on tax-
free security remain unchanged. The rate of deduction of tax in respect of any other income accruing to such a company is 
proposed to be retained at sixty-five per cent 
Rates for deduction of tax at SOUTce from "Salaries" and retireml!nt annuities, computation of "advance tax" and charging of 
income-tax in special cases during the financial year 1987-88: 
Part III of the First Schedule to the Bill specifies the rates·at which income-tax is to be deducted at ~ou~ from 
"Salaries" and retirement annuities referred to in section SOE(9) of die lDcome-tax Act and also the rates at which advance 
tax" is to be paid and income-tax is to be calculated or charged in tpIICIa1 eases for the fmancial year 1987-88. 
The basic rates of income-tax are the same as those specifild in Part I of the First Schedule 10 the Bill for the assessment 
of income liable to tax for the assessment year 1987-88. 
Clause 3 seeks 10 amend section 2 of the Income-tax Act reIadna· flO definitions. 
Under the existing provisions of sub-clause (e) of clause (22) of ~ti~ 2. any payment by way of advance or loan b~ a 
company, not being a company in which the public are substanlillly Interested. to a shareholder who has substanlJal 

TJ. 
inIrzest in the company, is incIucIible • a tlvidend. 
SuIH:lause (a) of this elaule ... to IeCUIe dIIt Illy payment by way of advance or loan to any shareholder or to any 
concern in which the sbareboIder is a member' or a partna' and in which he has a substantial interest shall be includible as 
dividend. 
The expression "CODCeIIl", for the purpoaes of this provision, means a HiDdu undivided family or a finn or an association 
of persons or a body of individuals or a company. Further, a penon shall be deemed to have a substantial interest in a 
concern, other than a COIDpmy, if such penoD is at any time during the previous year benefICially entitled to not less than 
twenty per cenL of the income of such concern. In relation to a company, the provisions of clause (32) of section 2 will 
apply. 
Sub-clause (b) seeks II) insert a new sub-clalDe (x) in clause (24) of dais acction. 
1be ploposed amtndlDent seeks 10 provide that lilY sum received by the assessee from his employees as contributions to 
any fund for the welfare eX such employees will be included in the income of the asscsscc. 
Sub-clause (c) seeks to insert two new clawa (29A) and (29B). 
New clause (29A) seeks 10 define "long-tam capital asset" to mean a capital asset which is not a short-term capital asset 
New ciausc (29B) seeks to define the expression "long-term capital gain" as a capital gain arising from the transfer of a 
long-tam capital asset. 
Sub-clause (d) seeks 10 insert a new clause (36A) in this section with effect from the 1st day of April, 1987. 
The proposed amendment seeks to define "public sector company" to mean any corporation established by or under any 
Centtal, Stale or Provincial Act or a Government company within the m~g of section 617 of the Companies Act, 
1956. 
Sub-clause (e) seeks to amend clause (42A) of this section. 
Under the existing provisions, a "short-tam capital asset" means a capital asset held by an assessee for thirty-six months 
or Jess, immediately preceding the dale eX its transfer. 
The proposed amendment seeks to provide that in the case of a share held in a company, the share shall be treated as a 
short-tenD capital asset if it is held by the a.aeasee f(X' twelve months (X' less, immediately preceding the date of its transfer. 
SUb-c1ause (f) of, this clawJe seeks to insert a new clause (428) in this section which defines the expression "short-term 
capital gain" to mean capital pin arising from the uansfer of a short-term capital asset. 
Sub-<:Iausc (g) of this clause seeks to insert two new sub-clauses in clause (47) of this section which deals with the 
defmition of the upeaiw "anmsfel"". Sub-clauIe <v) refen to any transaction involving the allowing of the possession of 
any immovable poperty to be 1Ikal or rcIained in part pcrlormaocc of a contract of the nature referred to in section S3A of 
the Tnmsfer of Property Act, 1882 to be' a anmsfer, while sub-clause (VI) includes any transaction which has the effect of 
transferring (X' enabling the enjoyment of lilY immovable ploperty also as a transfer. 
lbe expression "immovable poperty", occwring in these two new sub-<:Iauses, will have the same meaning as in clause 
(d) of section 269UA of the AcL 
These amendments [ ada tban amendment by sub-dause (d)) will take effect from 1st April, 1988 and will, accordingly, 
apply in relalion to the ISICssment yell 1988-89 and subIequeol years. 
Clause 4 seeks 10 amend section 10 eX die 1ncom,..18X Act 
Sub-claule <a) of this clauIe poposes to insert a new cIauIe (t0C) in dlis IeCtion. Under the proposed amendment, any 
payment received by III employee of a public sect« comjJany • the time of hiI voIunrary nlCiarlDlellt in accordance with Illy 
scheme which the Ccottal Government may, baviDa repnf 10 the ecmomic viability of the public sector company and pthcr 
relevant circumstances, approve in this behalf. Ihall be exempt from laX. 
This amendment will like effect from 1. April. 1987 and will, 8CCOIdin&ly. apply in relation to the assessment year 
1987-88 and subsequent yem. 

73 
Sub-clause (b) seeks to amend clause (IS) of Ibis ICeD. 
Under the existing provisions, interest on deposits in the Post OffICe Savings Banks and bonus in respect of deposits 
under the Post Office Savings Bank (Cumulative Time Deposits) Rules, 1959 aJe exempt from tax. Similarly, interest in a 
Public Account of the nature refmed to in item (3) in the Table below rule 3 of the Post Office Savings Banks Rules, 1965 
is exempt up to a specified limit. The Post OffICe Savings Bank (Cumu1ative Tune Deposits) Rules, 1959 and the Post 
Office Savings Banks Rules, 1965 we:e substituted by the Post Office Cwnulative Time Deposit Rules, 1981 and the Post 
Office Savings Account Rules, 1981, respectively. The proposed amendments in sub-clause (i) of this clause seek to 
substiblte references to these rules currently applicable, for the refermces to the rules which are no 10ngc7 in force. 
These amendments will take effect retrospectively from 1st \April, 1983, and will, accordingly, apply in relation to the 
8SS(:ssment year 1983-84 and subsequent years. 
Sub-clause (ii) seeks to insert a new item in suh-clause (iv) of clause (IS) Qf Ibis section. 
This amendment seeks to provide that interest payable by public sector companies on certain specified bonds and 
debentures will not form part of the assessee's totafincome subject to such conditions, including the condition that the 
holder of such bonds or debentures registers his name and his holding with that company, as may be specified by the 
Central Government by notification in the OffICial Gazeuc. 
This amendment will take effect from 1st April, 1987 and will, accordingly. apply in relation to the assessment year 
1987-88 and subsequent years. 
Sub-clause (c) seeks to amend clause (17) of this section. 
Under the existing provisions, daily allowance received by Memlx7s of Parliament and memlx7s of any State Legislature 
or committees thereof is exempt from tax. In addition, in the case of Members of Parliament, all other allowances, not 
exceeding twelve hundred and fifty rupees per month, and in the case of members of State Legislature. an amount not 
exceeding six hundred rupees per month, as may be notified by the Central Government in the Official Gazeue, are exempt 
from tax. The proposed amendment seeks to provide that in the case of Members of Parliament any allowance received 
under the Members of Parliament (Constituency Allowance) Rules. 1986 shall, in addition to the daily allowance, be 
exempt from income-tax. 
This amendment will take effect retrospectively from 1st April. 1986 and will, accordingly. apply in relation to the 
assessment year 1986-87 and subsequent years. 
Clause 5 seeks to amend section lOA of the Income-tax Act relating to special provision in respect of newly established 
industrial undertakings in free trade zones. 
Under the existing provisions of the section. any profits and gains of an industrial undertaking engaged in the 
manufacture or production of articles or things in a free trade zone are exempt from tax for a certain number of years. The 
proposed amendment seeks to clarify that the manufacturing activity will also include the activities of processing, 
assembling or recording of programmes on any disc, tape. perforated media or other information srorage device for the 
purposes of the said provisions. 
This amendment will take effect retrospectively from 1st April, 1981 and will, accordingly, apply in relation to the 
assessment year 1981-82 and subsequent years. 
Clause 6 seeks to amend section 27 of the Income-tax Act which defmes "owner of house property". 
The amendment seeks to enlarge the meaning of "owner of building" given in clause (iii) by providing that a person who 
eom.es to have control over the property by virtue of the transactions as are referred to in clause (t) of sub-section (2) of 
sechon 269U A, will also be deemed to be the owner of the property. The amendment also seeks to enlarge the applicability 
of this clause to a eompan~ or other association of persons. _ 
This amendment will take effect from 1st April, 1988 and Will, accordingly, apply in relation to the assessment year 
1988-89 and subsequent years. 
Clause 7 seeks to amend section 32AB of the Income-tax Act relating to Investment deposit account 
Sub-clause <a) seeks to amend sub-section (1) of section 32AB to clarify that the deduction under that sub-section shall be 
allowed in respect of the profits and gains of eligible business or profession compqted before loss, if any. brought forward 
from earlier years is set off under section 72 of the Income-tax Act Further, in a case where the eligible business or 
profession is carried on by a finn or an association of persons or a body of individuals, deduction shall not be allowable in 
the case of its partner or member. 

74 
Sub-clause (b) seeks to inJen definition of tho terms "new sbip", "new airaIft", "new machinery or plant" and "Tea 
Board". 
Sub-clausc (c) seeks to amend sub-section (3) to clarify Ibat tho profits of eligible business or profession as computed in 
accordance with the provisions of clause (a> of sub-section (3) sba1I be the profilS before deducting, i~r alia, the amount 
of income-tax paid or payable or any provision therefc:r if such amounts are debited 10 the profit and loss account 
Sub-clause (d) sects to insat new sub-sections (SA) and (SB). It is proposed 10 provide that amounts deposited in 
accordance with the schemes framed or approved lIJlCb" sub-&eedon (I> sball not be penniucd to be withdrawn before the 
expiry of a period of five years from the dale of deposit except in cases of (a) closure of business, (b) death of the assessee. 
(c) partition of a Hindu undivided family, (d) dissolution of a finn, (e) liquidation of a company and (0 in such other 
circumstances as may be specified in the scheme. 
The proposed sub-section (SB) seeks 10 clarify that where any expenditure in respect of which a deduction is allowable 
under other provisions of the Income-tax Act. is met wholly or partly by utilising the amounts standing 10 the credit of the 
assessee in the deposit account. in respect of which a deduction is alJowed under sub-section (1) of seedon 32AB, then such 
expenditure shall be reduced by the amounlS so utilised. 
Sub-clause (e) amends sub-section (6) to provide that the amount standing 10 the credit of the assessee in the deposit 
account may be utilised in accordance with, and within the time specified in, the scheme. 
These amendments will take effect from 1st April, 1987 and will, accordingly, apply in relation to the assessment year 
1987-88 and subsequent years. 
Clause 8 seeks to amend sub-secdon (5) of section 33AB of the Income-tax Act relating to Tea Development Account. 
The proposed amendment seeks to provide that the provisions of the section shall apply only in relation to asses."ment 
years 1986-87 and 1987-88. 
This amendment will take effect from 1st April, 1988. 
Clause 9 seeks to insert a new clause (va) in sub-section (1) of section 36 of the Income-tax Act relating to certain 
deductions allowed under the Act. 
The proposed amendment seeks to provide that deductions in respect of any sum received by the assessee as contribution 
from his employees towards any welfare fund of such employees will be allowed only if such sum is credited by the 
assessee to the employee's account in the relevant fund on or before the due date. "Due date" for the purposes of this section 
will mean the date by which the assessee is required as an employ« to credit such contribution to the employee's account in 
the relevant fund under the provisions of any law or term of contract of service or otherwise . 
This amendment will take effect from lst April, 1988 and will, accordingly, apply in relation to the assessment year 
1988-89 and subsequent years. 
Clause 10 seeks to amend section 43B of the Income-tax Act tclating to allowability of certain expenses only on actual 
payment. 
It is proposed to insert two provisos. The fmt proviso seeks to provide that the seetion shall not apply to any sum 
referred to in clause (a) if the sum is actually paid on or befCK the date on which the return of income is due to be furnished 
under sub-section (1) of section 139 for the previous year in which the liability to pay such sum was incurred. The second 
proviso seeks to provide that no deduction shall be allowed in regard to the sum tcferred to in clause (b) unless such sum 
has actually been paid during the previous year on or before the due date. The due date for the purposes of this proviso shall 
be the due date as under Explanation to clause (va) of sub-section (1) of section 36. 
This amendment will take effect from 1st April, 1988 and will, accordingly, apply in relation to the assessment year 
1988-89 and subsequent years. 
Clause 11 seeks to insert a new section 44BB in the Income-tax Act 
Under the proposed provisions, the income of an assessee engased in the business of providing services and facilities in 
connection with, or supplying plant and machinery on hire used or to be used in, the exploration for and exploitation of 
mineral oils will be detennined at 10% of the aggregate of certain amounts. The amounts in respect of which the 
provisions will apply would be the amounts paid or payable to the assessee or to any person on his behalf, whether in or 
out of India, on account of the provision of services or facilities in connection with, or the supply of plant and machinery 
on hire used or 10 be used in the exploration for and exploitation of mineral oils in India. The amount will also include the 
amounts received or deemed to have been received in India by or on behalf of the asaessee on account of such services or 

75 
facilities or die supply of plant and machinery on hire in respect of the explaration for IIlC1 exploitation of mineral oils 
outside India. 
This amendment will take retrospective effect from 1st April, 1983 and will, accordingly, apply in relation to the 
assessment year 1983-84 and subsequent years. 
Clause 12 seeks to insert a new section 44BBA in the Incom~tax Act to provide for detennination of income at a flat 
rate of reuipts in the case of a non-resident engaged in the business of opmIlion of airaaft. 
Under the existing provisions, the income of a non-resident engaged in the business of operation of aircraft is computed 
after allowing deductions for all expenses and statutory deductions like depreciation, eIC. The new section seeks to provide 
that the income from such business shall be computed at a flat rate of five pu cenL of the amount received or receivable by 
or on behalf of the assessee for carriage of passengers, live-stock, mail or goods from any place in India and the amount 
received or deemed to be received in India on account of such carriage from any place outside India. 
This amendment will take effect from 1st April, 1988 and will, accordingly, apply in relation to lbe assessment year 
1988-89 and subsequent years. 
Clause 13 seeks to amend section 45 of the Income-tax Act relatin,8 to capitai gains. 
Sub-clause (a) seeks to amend sub-section (1) to include reftzences to new sections 54G and S4H. 
Sub-clause (b) seeks to insert new sub-sections (3), (4), (5) and an Explanation. New sub-sections (3) and (4) seek to 
provide that profits or gains arising from the transfer of a capital asset by a partner to a fmll or by a member to an 
association of persons or body of individuals shall attract capital gains tax. New sub-section (5) seeks to provide that the 
initial compensation awarded or determined or approved on compulsory acquisition of property shall be deemed to be 
assessee's income of the previous year in which the transfer took place. In case any enhanced compensation is received 
subsequently, the compensation so received will be charged to tax as capital gains of the year in which such amount is 
received. 
Explanation to this section clarifies, inter alia, that in case of enhanced compensation received, the cost of acquisition 
and improvement shall be taken to be nil. It also seeks to clarify that if due to the death of the original transferee or for 
any other reason enhanced compensation is received ,by any other person, it shall be deemed to be the income of the actual 
recipient 
These amendments will take effect from 1st April, 1988 and will, accordingly, apply in relation to the assessment year 
1988-89 and subsequent years. 
Clause 14 seeks to omit clause (ii) of section 47 of the Income-tax Act relating to transactions not regarded as transfer. 
Under the existing provisions, any distribution of capital assets on the dissolution of a fmn, body of individuals or other 
association of persons is not regarded as a transfer. Consequent upon the amendments being made to section 45, the 
provisions of clause (ii) of section 47 are being omitted. 
This amendment will take effect from 1st April, 1988 and will, accordingly, apply in relation to the assessment year 
1988-89 and subsequent years. 
Clause 15 seeks to substitute a new section for section 48 relating to mode of computation and deductions. 
Under the existing provisions, capital gain is computed by deducting from the consideration received as a result of the 
transfer of the capital asset, expenditure incurred in connection with such transfer, the cost of acquisition of the asset and the 
cost of improvement thereto. In addition to the aforesaid deductions, section 80T provides for certain deductions in respect 
of long-term capital gains arising on transfer of a capital asset by a non-corporate assessee. In case of a corporate assessee, 
concessionai treatment in respect of long-term capital gains is allowed, not by way of deduction, but through lower rates of 
tax prescribed in section 115. 
Statutory deductions or concessions, as the case may be, hitherto available in sections 80T and 115, are being 
incorporated in section 48 itself. Also.a uniform system of deductions from long-term capital gains arising to non-
corporate as well as corporate assessees is being adopted in place of lowec rates of tax for corporate assessees as at present 

. ~ 
Sin~ the statuUX'y deductions are being incorporated in section 48 itself, the present sections 801' and 115 are being 
onuued. 
~ub-~tion ~ the fle:.W sectiQn enumerates deductions already Jlvailable in the exjsting sectionJor .COIDp'uting .the 
~ll:lt!.Iams. It provldes that m the case of long-term capital gams, further deducbons as specified 10 sub-setlion 
{:t} willDe alIo 
Sub-section (2) provides the rates of stablUX'y deduction in respect of long-term capital gains as under:-
1. Non-corporate assessees 
2. Corporate assessees 
The deductions mentioned above will be in addition to the threshold deduction of Rs.I0,OOO which shall be allocable 
to all assessees. . 
The first proviso to sub-section (2) lays down the 0I'lb of deductions in a case where the long-term capital gains 
relate to real estate, gold, bullion or jewellery as well as any other asset. 
The second proviso provides that in relation to the amount received as enhanced compensation, the initial deduction 
of ten thousand rupees allowable under sub-section (2) win be reduced by the deduction already allowed under clause (a) 
of section 80T in the assessment for the assessment year 1987-88 or any earlier assessment year or by the deduction 
allowed under clause (a) of the new sub-section (2). 
Sub-section (3) pro,-;ides that long-term capital loss where it exceeds Rs.lO,OOO shall be scaled down by the same 
percenlage of deduction as is applicable to long-term capital gains. 
These amendments will take effect from 1st April, 1988 and will, accordingly, apply in relation to the assessment 
year 1988-89 and subsequent years. 
Clause 16 seeks to amend section 49 of the Income-tax Act relating to determination of cost with reference to certain 
modes of acquisition. 
Under the existing provisions, where the capital asset becomes the property of the assessee on any distripution of 
assets on the dissolution of a ftrm, body of individuals or other association of persons, the cost of acquisition of assets 
is deemed to be the cost for which the previous owner of the property acquired it, subject to certain adjustments relating 
to improvements, etc. 
Under the proposed amendment, the aforesaid provisions will apply only if the dissolution takes place any time 
before the 1st April, 1987. 
This amendment will take effect from 1st April, 1988. 
Clause 17 seeks to omit section 52 of the Income-tax Act relating to consideration for transfer in cases of 
uncb'statemenL 
This amendment will take effect from 1st April. 1988. 
Clause 18 seeks to amend section 53 of the Income-tax Act relating to exemption of capital pin arising on sale of a 
residenti8l house belonging to an individual if the consideration does not exceed Rs.2 lakhs. If the consideration 
exceeds Rs.2lakhs, capital gain would be exempted proportionaIdy. 
Under the proposed amendment, this benefit which is at pruent available to individuals only, is being exaended to 
Hindu undivided families also. Further, an Explanation is .... inIenBd to the effect that refermc:es to capil8l gain in 
certain sections specified in the Explanation shall"be COIIIUUed as refercnccs to the amount of capital pin as computed 
undez new section 48(1)(8). 
These amendments will take effect from 1st April, 1988 and will, accordingly, apply in relation to the assessment 
. year 1988-89 and subsequent yean. 
Clause 19 leeks to amend section 54 of the Income-IB Act reladng 10 exemption of ClPital pins on the lI'IDSfer of 
8 reaidential house. 

77 
Under tbe existing provisiona. if an lllellee. being an individual, lI'IDIfen bis residential boule aiYinl rile 10 capilli 
gains and purclwel a residential boule within one year before (]I' two yean after the date of sucb Il'IIIIfer (]I' COIIIII'UcIi a 
residential house within three yalII after tbal dare, the capital pin is exempted 10 the extent such pin bas been utiliJed for 
the aforesaid pmpoees. 
Unckl the propoaed 8II1eIJdment of sub-aectim (1) by sub-clawle (a), the exanpdon is beina exlalded to HiDdu undivided 
families also. The ExplDNllioIl below sub-aeclion (1), which defines Rlong_tam capilli asset" for JIUIPOICI of Ibis aection, 
is being omitted, as the dcfiniDon is being shifted to section 2. 
Existing sub-aection (2) relating 10 computation of capital gains in the case of enhanced compensation received m . 
compulsory acquisition is being substituted. The enbanced C<IIlpensation is DOW propoaed to be I8Xed as the income of abe' 
year in which such compensation is received. This has been incorporated in aectioo 45. 
The new sub-aection (2) povides Ihat where the amount of capital gain is not appI'OIIiat.ed or utilised by the aaeaee for 
purchase orconsauction of the new residential house before the date for furnishing the return of income, it shall be 
deposited by him on or before the due date of furnishing the return of income, in an accoimt with a bank or institution 
specified in, and utilised in accordance with, any scheme framed by the Central Government in this regard. The amount 
already utilised for purchase or construction, of the new house together with the amount so deposited shall be deemed to be 
the amount utilised for the purchase of a new house. 
The proviso to sub-section (2) provides that if the amount deposited is not utilised fully for purchase or construction of 
n.ew house within the period stipulaled in sub-section (I), then the amount not so utilised shaU be tn:ated as the capital pin 
of the previous year in which the period of three years from the date of transfer of original8llet expires. It further provides 
that the assessee shall be entitled to withdraw such amount in accadance with the aforesaid scheme. ExpIQllQlioIl to the 
proviso provides that where any amount becomes chargeable to tax by virtue of the proviso, the initial deduction of ten 
thousand rupees shall not be allowed, nor shall the benefit of exemption under section S3 be admissible. 
These amendments will take effect from 1st April, 1988 and will, accordingly, apply in relation to the assessment year 
1988-89 and subsequent years. 
Clause 20 seeks to amend section S4B of the Income-tax Act, relating to exemption of capital gains arising from uansfcr 
of land used for agricultural purposes. 
Under the existing provisions, if an ~ transfers land used for agricultural purposes giving rise to capital gains and 
purchases any other land used for agricultural purposes, within two years after the date of such transfer, the capilli pin is 
exempt to the extent sueh gain has been utilised for the aforesaid purchase. 
The proposed amendments, apart from amending sub-section (1) to make its provisions subject to the provisions of sub-
section (2), substitutes the existing sub-section (2) dealing with enhanced compensation and provides for the deposit of the 
capital gain in a scheme to be framed by the CenttaI Government, on the same lines as detailed in the norcs on sub-section 
(2) of section S4. 
These amendments will take effect from lst April, 1988 and will, accordingly, apply in relation to the assessment ytar 
1988-89 and subsequent years. 
Clause 21 seeks to amend section S4D of the Income-tax Act, relating to capital gaihs on compulsory acquisition of land 
and building forming part of an induslrial undenaking. 
Un~r the.existing ~visions, if,the tranSfer is by way of col\l~~lsory acq~tion of any land or building, fon:ning ~ 
of an mdustrial undertaking belongang to the aslessee and such 1aiid or buildina was used for the purpose of the mdustrial 
undertaking for at least two years preceding the date of transCe)'8fld the assessee has.,purchased any other land or building 
within a period of three years after that date or constructed a building within that ~ for the pwposes of shifting or re-
establishing the said undenaIcing or seuing up another industrial undertaking, the capilllll gain is exempt to the extent such 
gain has been utilised for the aforesaid purposes. 
The proposed amendments, apart from amending sub-section (I) to make its provisions subject to the provisions of sub-
section (2), substitutes the existing sub-section (2) dealing with enhanced compensation, and provides for the deposit of the 
capital gain in a scheme to be framed by the CenttaI Government, on the same lines as dcIailed in the notes on sub-section 
(2) of section S4. 

78 
'I'hese uncndmencs will1lte effect from 1st April. 1988 and wi1l.ICCOIdinglY. apply in relalion to the asscasmcnt year 
1988-89 and ~ubsequent yean. 
Clause 22 seeks to amend Iection 54B of abe Income-tax Act reJadng to exemption from capital pin on transfer of 
capiJal UICU in CCI1Iin cases. 
Under the tmisting provisioas. c:epiIal pins arisina on lrID8fer of lilY long-term capital asset are tmempt if the full value 
of the c:onsidenlion is invested or deposited in ... y of die specified ...,.. within a period of six months from the date of 
such cransfer. In CIIC only a part of consideration is 10 investtld or deposited. a proportiOlllle part of capital pin will be 
exempt from laX. Where Illy Jona-trrm capiJallIIICt is compuJaorily acquirallJld the compcnsatim aW8lded is subsequendy 
euhanc:ed. abe additional oompensaDon is exeDlpiM from tax if it is invested by the assessee in specified assets within six 
months from the date of receipt of additional compcnSItion. 
Sub-daules (a), (b) and (d) mate amendmenl5 of cxmequential ~ in sub-sections (I), (2) and (6). 
Sub-clawJe (c) OlDies sub-aections (3), (4) and (5) dealing with Ie-investment ci enhanced compensation. Consequendy, 
the benefit awilable on re-invesancnt will not be awilable in respect of additimal compensatim received. 
TheIle amendments will take effect from 1st April, 1988 and will, accordingly, apply in relation to the assessment year 
1988-89 and subsequent years. 
Clause 23 seeks to amend section 54F of the Income-tax Act relating to capilal gains on transfer of a long-tmn capital 
asset other than a house property. 
uDder the existing provisions, if an Ulessee ~g an individual, transfers any long-term capital asset other than a 
residen1ial boule, giving rise to capilal pins and purchues a residential boule within one year before or after the dale of 
sucb llUlfer or consII'UCts a residential boule within Ibree yean after that dare, the entire capital pin is exempt, if the cost 
of the new boule is not less than the net considtzalion received on bWlSfer. If die 00Il of the new house is less than the net 
consideration received, the cempUon from Iong-cam eipital gain is granted propcxtionatcly. 
Sub-clause (a) (1) .as to amend sub-section (1) to extend the benefit of exemption to a Hindu undivided family also. 
Further, sub-clauses (a> (ii) and (b) seek to amend sub-sections (1) and (2) to increase the period of one year after the date of 
transfer for purchase of another residential house to two years. 
Sub-clause (c) insens a new sub-section (4) to deal with deposit of the net consideration under a scheme to be framed by 
the Central Government, on the same lines as detailed in the notes on sub-section (2) of section 54. 
These amendments will take effect from 1st April, 1988 and will, accordingly, apply in relation to the assessment year 
1988-89 and subsequent years. 
ClaUJe 24 seeks to insert two new sections 54G and 54H in the Income-tax AcL 
The new IleCtion 540 provides for exemption of capital gains on transfer of assets in cases of industtial undertaking 
shifting from urban area. Sub-section (1) provides that if .. asaeuee transfers a long-term capital asset in the nature of 
machinery. plant, building or land used for the purposes of the business of the industrial undertaking situated in an urban 
area in COIlDCCUon with the shifting of such undertaking to a non-urban area, and within a period of one year before or three 
yean after the date of transfC'Z, purchases new machinery or plant and acquires land or building or constructs building for the 
purposes of his business in the area to which the undertaking is shifted or incurs expenses on shifting the original asset and 
transferring the establishment of the undertaking to such area and incurs expenses on such other purposes as mJlY be 
specified in a scheme framed by the Centtal Government, the capital gain shall be exempt to the extent such gain has been 
utilised for the aforesaid purposes. 
ExpIaMIion to sub-section (I) defmes "urban area" on the lines of the definition in section 280Y. 
Sub-section (2) contains proviJions dealing with deposits of the capital gain in a scheme to be framed by the Centtal 
Government OIl the same lines as detailed in the notes on sub-section (2) of aection 54. 
The new IICCIion S4H provides for exemption of capital gains arising from ttansfer of shares in a company,lO any public 
sectoI' company. may be specified by the Central Government by a nctification in the OffICial Gueue. 
These amendmeatl will take effect from lst April, 1988 and will, accordingly, apply in relation to the assessment year 
1988-89 and subIcquent years. 
CIauIe 2S -*' 10 IIIIeftd IeC1ion SS, providin. for meanin. of the expressions "adjUSted", "coat of any improvement" 
and -COIl of acquisition-. 

79 
Sub-clause (a) ICCkI to amend cllule (b) of "'lOeb (1) of tbia 1OCtion, wbicb Jives Ibc I'DeUinJ of the expn:saion 
"cost of any improvement", to provide that in relltion to a capiwauet beiDa aoodwill of a busiDea Ibc "cost of any 
improvement" shall be liken to be 1Iil. ' 
Sub-c1ause (b) seeks to amend sub-lcctioo (2) which Jives the meaning of Ihc CltJRllsion "cost of acquisition" to provide 
that in idation to a capital asset being goodwill of a business, the "cost of acquisition" shaD be Ibc purchue price in case 
the assessee purchased such goodwill and in any 0Iha" case it shaD be 1Iil. 
These amendments will tate effect from 1st April. 1988 and will. accordingly, apply in relation to the assessment yra 
1988-89 and subsequent years. 
Clause 26 seeks to amend section 56 of the Income-tax Act relating to income from other SOUl'CCS. 
The proposed amendment seeks to provide that income of the nature referred 10 in sub-clausc (x) of clause (24) r1 section 
2 (relating to certain contributions received by the assessee as an employer from his employees) will be chargeable to 
income-tax under the head "Income from other sources". if such income is not chargeable to income-tax under the head 
"Profits and gains of business or profession". 
This amendment will take effect from lst April. 1988 and will. accordingly. apply in relation 10 the assessment year 
1988-89 and subsequent years. 
Clause 27 seeks to amend section 57 of the Income-tax Act relating 10 certain deductions. 
The proposed amendment seeks to proVide that in the case of income of the nature referred 10 in sulKlause (x) of clausc 
(24) of section 2, which is chargeable to income-tax under the head "Income from 'other sources", deductions shall be 
allowable in accordance with the provisions of clause (va) of sub-section (1) of sectiOll36. 
This amendment will take effect from 1st April. 1988 and will, accordingly. apply in relation 10 the assessment year 
1988-89 and subsequent years. 
Clauses 28 10 30 seek to amend the following sections of the Income-tax Act,-
(i) section 70 relating to set off of loss from one source against income from another source under the same head of 
income; 
(ii) section 71 relating to set off of loss from one head against income from another head; 
(iii) section 72 relating 10 carry forward and set off of business losses. 
The said amendments purport to treallosses arising on transfer of long-term capital assets. after they are scaled down by 
the same percentage of deduction as the long-term capital gains. as any other losses. so that they can be set off against 
income under any other head in the same year and if not fully set off may be carried forward 
These amendments will take effect from 1st April, 1988 and will, accordingly, apply in relation to the assessment year 
1988-89 and subsequent years. 
Clause 31 seeks to substitute a new section for the existing section 74 of the Income-tax Act dealing with losses under 
the head "Capital gains". 
Under the existing section 74. there are separate provisions for carry forward of unabsorbed losses relating to short-term 
capital assets, which can be carried forward for ei~ht subsequent years ~ set off only ~ainst capital g~ relating 10 short-
term capital assets. and unabsorbed losses re~ung to "OIlg-~ ca~)Ita1 assets. which ~ be earned forward for four 
subsequent succeeding years and set off only agamst capital galDS relating 10 long-term capital asse~. 
Under the proposed provisions of sub-sections (1) and (2). this distinCti.OIl between.the ~ forward ~f.short-term capital 
losses and long-term capital losses is sought to be removed and all capltallosscs (lDcludmg losses ansmg on transfer of 
long-term capital assets, after they are scaled down by the ~e ~tage .of ~ucti~, as ':he long-term capital gains) are 
to be carried forward for eight succeeding years and set off only agalDst caplW gaIDS, if any, m those years. 
New sub-section (3) lays down the manner in which the capitall~ relating !O the period prior to the date of coming 
into effect of the new section will be treated for carry forward and set off m succeeding years. 
This amendment will take effect from 1st April. 1988 and will, accordingly, apply in relation to the assessment year 
1988-89 and subsequent years. 
Clause 32 seeks to amend section 80C of the Income-taX Act relating to deductions in respect of life insurance premia. 
contributions 10 provident fund, etc. 

80 
Under the proposed amendment. any payment made by the assessee towards the cost of purchase or construction of a 
residential house property construction of which is completed after 31st March. 1987 wiD qualify for deduction WIder sub-
section (1) of section SOC. The deduction will be allowable in respect of the payments made up to rupees ten thousand 
dlU'ing the previous year and will be subject to the monetary limits mentioned in sub-section (4) of section 8OC. The 
deduction will be allowable in the case of individuals. Hindu Wldivided families and certain categories of associations of 
persons m bodies of individuals. 
The payments in respect of which the deduction wiD be illowable under the proposed provisions wiD be any payment by 
way of instalment or part payment of the amount due under any self-fllWlCing or other schemes of any development 
authorities. housing board or other similar authority; or any instalment (X' part payment of the amount due to any company 
or co-operative society. The deduction wiD also be allowable in respect of repayment of loans borrowed by the assessee 
from Government or any bank or the Life Insurance Corporation of India and certain categories of institutions engaged in 
the business of providing long-term fmance for construction or purchase of houses in India. Any repayment of a loan 
borrowed from the emplo¢· will also be covCl'Cd. if the employer happens to be a public company. Stamp duty, 
registration fee and other expenses fm the purposes of transfer shall also be covered. 
Payment towards cost of a house property wiD not. however, include admission fee or cost of share or initial depbsit or 
the cost of land (except where the consideration for the purchase of the house property is a ~omposite amount and the cost 
of the land cannot be separately ascertained) or the cost of any addition. alteration, cu:. Payment towards any expenditure in 
respect of which a deduction is allowable WIder the provisions of section 24 will also not be included in payments towards 
the cost of purchase or construction of a house property. 
In a case where the house property in respect of which a deduction has been allowed WIder the aforesaid provisions, is 
transferred by the assessee before the expiry of five years from the end of the financial year in which the possession of such 
property is obtained by him, then no deduction will be allowable under the aforesaid povisions in respect of the previous 
year in which the transfer is made and the aggregate amoWlt of deductions allowed under the aforesaid provisions in the 
earlier assessment years shall be chargeable to tax WIder the head "Income from other sources" of the previous year in which 
such transfer takes place. . 
These amendments will take effect from 1st April. 1988, and will, accordingly, apply in relation to the assessment year 
1988-89 and subsequent years. 
Clause 33 seelcs to amend sub-sections (3) and (5) of section 80CC of the Income-tax Act relating to deduction in respect 
of investment in certain new shares. 
Under the existing provisions, a deduction is allowable, within limits, in respect of acquisition of cenain shares offered 
for subscription to the public before 1st April, 1987. 
The proposed amendment seeks to extend the concession by three years by providing that the deduction will be allowable. 
subject to the satisfaction of other conditions, in respect of the shares offered for subscription before lst April, 1990. It is 
also proposed to reduce the period of holding the shares from five years to three years. 
These amendments will take effect from 1st April. 1987. 
Clause 34 seeks to insert a new section 80CCA in the Income-tax Act relating to deduction in respect of deposits in 
accordance with such scheme as may be specified (hereafter referred to as the National Savings Scheme). 
Under the proposed provisions, deduction shall be allowed in the case of an assessee being an individual, a Hindu 
Wldivided family and certain categories of associations of persons or bodies of individuals. A deduction shall be allowable 
in relation to the deposits made in the National Savings Scheme. The deduction shall be restricted to flfty per cent. of so 
much of the amount deposited as does not exceed twenty thousand rupees. 
Sub-section (2) seeks to provide that in case any withdrawals (together with intetelt accrued thereon) are made from the 
National Savings Scheme, an amooot equal to flfty pee cent. of the amount in respect of which deduction has been allowed 
shall be deemed to be the income of the assessee for the previous year in which such withdrawal is made. Interest accruing 
on the amount so deposited will be taxable only in the year of withdrawal in accordance with this sub-section (2). 
This amendment will take effect from 1st April. 1988 and will, accordingly, apply in relation to the assessment year 
1988-89 and subsequent years. 
Clause 35 seeks to amend sub-section (5) of section BOG of the Income-tax Act relating to deduction in respect of 
donations made to certain institutions or funds established in India. 

81 
Under the existing ~ cbJations made to institutions or fundi eslablisbed for chIriI8ble purposes in India qualify 
for deduction within limilB. 
The plOpoaed amendment lOeb to provide tIJIl donations made 10 any ReJimcnIll Fund or Non-Public Fund established 
~ Irmed forces of the UnioD for the weffin of the .,. and present members of such forces or their dependants shall 
qualify for deduction subject to the limits and conditions laid down in section 8OG. 
This amendment will take effect from 1st April, 1988 and will, accordingly, apply in relation to the ISlCSS1Dent year 
1988-89 and subsequent years. 
Clause 36 seeks to amend section 80-0 of the Income-tax Act relating to deduction in respect of royalties, etc., from 
certain foreign enterprises. 
Under the existing provisions, where the income of an UIesIIeC includes any sum received as royally, commission, fees 
or any similar payment from the Government of a foreign State or a foreign entelprise, a deduction of an amount equal to 
fifty per cent. of the income so received or receivable is allowed subject to the condition that such amount is received or 
receivable in convertible foreign exchange in India, or if received or receivable outside India is brought into India in 
accordance with the law in force in this regard. ExpIanaJiOIl (u), howev«, provides that if any amount of income is used 
outside India, in the manner approved by the Reserve Bank of India, such amount will be deerned'to have been brought into 
India 
The proposed amendment seeks to provide that the deduction under the section will be allowed onlr if the amount has 
been brought into India within a period of six months from the end of the relevant ~vious year or within such an extended 
period as may be allowed by the Commissioner after taking into account the difficulties of the assessee in getting the 
amount remitted to India within the stipulated period of six months. 
The proposed amendment also seeks to make a clarificatory amendment to provide that "foreign enterprise" will mean a 
person who is a non-resident 
These amendments will take effect from 1st April, 1988 and will, accordingly, apply in relation to the assessment year 
1988-89 and subsequent years. 
Clause 37 seeks to amend section 80RRA of the Income-tax Act relating to deduction in respect of remuneration received 
for services rendered outside India 
Under the existing provisions, a deduction of an amount equal to fifty pet cent. of any remuneration received by an 
individual who is a citizen of India is allowed, if such remuneration is received by him in foreign exchange from any 
employer for any Sel'Vice rendered by him outside India. 
The proposed amendment seeks to provide that a deduction of fifty per cent of the remuneration received by the usessee 
or seventy-five per cent of such remuneration as is brou$ht into India by or on behalf of the assessee in accordance with the 
Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1973, whichever is high«, wiD be allowable. 
This amendment will take effect from Ist April, 1988 and will, accordingly, apply in relation to the assessment year 
1988-89 and subsequent years. 
Clause 38 seeks to omit section 80T of the Income-tax Act, relatinJ to deductions in respect of long-term capital gains 
in the case of assessees other than companies. These deductions are bemg incorporated in section 48. 
This amendment will take effect from Ist April, 1988 and will, accordingly, apply in relation to the assessment year 
1988-89 and subsequent years. 
Clause 39 seeks to amend section SOU of the Income-tax Act relating to deductions in cases of totally blind or physically 
handicapped persons by increasing the present deduction ofRs. 10,000 to Rs. 15,000. 
This amendment will take effect from Ist April, 1988 and will, accordingly, apply in relation to the assessment year 
1988-89 and subsequent years. 
Clause 40 seeks to omit section 80VV A of the Income-tax Act relating to restriction on certain deductions in the case of 
companies with effect from 1st April, 1988. 
Clause 41 seeks to omit Chapter XI of the Income-tax Act (containing sections 104 to 109) relating to additional 
income-tax on undistributed profits. 
Under the existln,- provisions of sections 104 to 109, additional income-tax is le~b~e on certain closc:ly held 
companies, if they fail to distribute a specified percentage of their distributable ~fits IS diVl~. These sections are 
beinJ omitted and appropriate amendments are being made in the definition of dividend in aectiOll2~22) (e) to extend its 
applacation to payments made to any shareholder or to any concern in which a shareholder has subllanbal mtcrest. 

82 
This amendment will take effect from 1st April. 1988 and will. accordingly. apply in relation to the assessment year 
1988-89 and subsequent years. 
Clause 42 seeks to omit section 115 of the Income-tax Act relating to tax on capital gains of companies. as the 
provisions of this section have been incaporatcd in a modifted form in section 48. 
This amendment will take effect from 1st April. 1988 and will. accordingly. apply in relation to the assessment year 
1988-89 and subsequent years. 
Clause 43 seeks to insert a new Chapter XllB containing special povisions relating to certain companies. 
Under the proposed amendments. in the case of any company. whose total income as computed under the other 
provisions of the Income-tax Act in respect of any previous year is less than thirty per cent. of its book profit. the total 
income of such assessee chargeable to tax shall be deemed to be an amOlUlt equal to thirty per cenL of such book profit. 
For the purposes of the aforesaid provision. "book profit" means the net profit as shown in the profit and loss account 
for the relevant previous year prepared in accordance with the provisions of Parts II and m of the Sixth Schedule to the 
Companies Act. 1956. subject to certain adjustments. 
It has also been provided that the aforesaid provision shall not affect the detennination of the amounts to be carried 
forward to the subsequent year or years under the provisions of sub-section (2) of section 32. or sub-section (3) of section 
32A or clause (ii) of sub-section (1) of section 72 or section 73 or section 74 or sub-section (3) of section 74A or sub-
section (3) of section 80J. 
This amendment will take effect from 1st April. 1988 and will. accordingly. apply in relation to the assessment year 
1988-89 and subsequent years. 
Clause 44 seeks to omit sub-section (12) of section 155 of the Income-tax Act relating to amendment of an assessment 
in which deduction under section 8~0 has not been allowed on certain groun4s. 
This amendment is consequential to the amendment proposed to section 80-0 and will take effect from 1st April, 1988 
and will. accordingly, apply in relation 10 the assessment year 1988-89 and subsequent years. 
Clause 45 seeks to insert new sub-sections (2), (2A) and (2B) in section 192 of the Income-tax Act, relating to deduction 
of tax at source from salaries. 
Sub-section (2) provides for deduction of tax at source by an employer (as the assessee may choose) from the aggregate 
salary of an employee who is or has been in receipt of Salary from more than one employer in the same year. 
Sub-section (2A) provides that in a case where a Government servant or an employee of a public sector undertaking 
receives arrears of salary, the deduction of tax at source be made after allowing relief under sub-section (1) of section 89 
under a procedure to be prescribed in this regard 
Sub-section (2B) enables an assessee having income under the head "Salaries" in addition to income under any other head 
to furnish in the prescribed manner the details of total income to his employer who shall deduct out of salary payment the 
tax due on total income subject to the conditions prescribed in that sub-section. 
Sub-clause (b) of this clause makes a consequential amendment in sub-section (3) to incorporate a reference to new sub-
sectiOllS (2). (2A) and (2B). 
These amendments will take effect from 1st June, 1987. 
Clause 46 seeks to amend section 194 of the Income-tax Act relating to dividends. 
Under the existing provisions. no tax is required'to be deducted at source in respect of any payment of dividend, if such 
dividend is paid by an account payee cheque, and the amount of such dividend or the aggregate amolDlts of such dividend paid 
or plyable to the shareholder during the rmancial year does not exceed one thousand rupees. The proposed amendment seeks 
to raise the afolesaid monetary limit to two thousand five hundred rupees. 
This amendment will take effect from 1st June, 1987. • 
Clause 47 seeks td amend section 194A of the Income-tax Act. relating to deduction of tax at source from interest other 
than interest on securities. 
Sub-clause (a) seeks to amend sub-section (1) to insert an Explanation deeming credits to "Interest payable account". 
J 

83 
"Suspense account" or any 0_ account as credits 10 the account of payee for the purpose of deduction of lax at source. 
Sub-clause (b) seeks 10 amend clause (i) of sub-section (3). Under the existing provisions, no lax need be deducted at 
source if the aggregate amount of interest does not exceed one thousand rupees. This limit is sought to be raised 10 two 
thousand five hundred rupees. 
These amendments will take effect from 1st June, 1987. 
Clause 48 seeks to amend section 194D of the Income-tax Act, relating to deduction of tax at source from insurance 
commission, 10 provide that no tax be deducted at source where the aggregate amount of insurance commission payable in a 
year does not exceed five thousand rupees. 
This amendment will take effect from 1st June, 1987. 
Clause 49 seeks to insert a new section 194E in the Income-tax Act 
The new section provides for deduction of tax at source on payments beyond specified amounts of fees for profcs:)ional 
services, royalty, fees for technical services, rent, commission, brokerage and for supply of goods to Government, local 
authority, corporation, etc. 
Sub-section (1) enumerates the types of payments which will be subjected to deduction of tax at source at the time these 
are credited to the payee's account, etc., and the amounts in relation to which no deduction will be necessary. 
Sub-section (2) defines certain expressions for the purposes of the section. 
This section will not apply when payments are made by individuals and Hindu undivided families. 
These amendments will take effect from 1st June, 1987. 
Clause 50 seeks to amend section 195 of the Income-tax Act, relating to deduction of tax at source on certain payments 
to non-residents. 
Sub-clause (a) seeks to substitute a new sulY--section (1) which provides for exclusion of salary from the puyiew of the 
section, as such deductions are taken care of by section 192. Further, this sub-section provides that the person responsible 
for making the payment 10 a non-resident shall deduct tax at source either at the time of payment or at the lime of crediting 
the amount to the account of the non-resident, whichever is earlier. 
The Explanation seeks to secure that for the purposes of sub-section (1), any amount credited to "Interest payable 
account" or "Suspense account" or any other account as moneys payable to non-resident shall be deemed to be a credit for 
the purpose of tax deduction at source. 
Sub-clause (b) (i) seeks to amend sub-section (2) 10 provide that the Income-tax Officer may determine the proportion of 
sum chargeable to tax in the prescribed manner. 
Sub-clause (b) (ii) seeks to insert a proviso to exclude certain types of payments, viz. ,interest, royalty and fees for 
technical services from the provisions of sub-section ·(2). 
These amendments will ~e effect from 1st June, 1987. 
Clause 51 seeks to insert a new section 195A in the Income-tax Act to provide for the manner of grossing up of income 
for computing the tax deductible at source in a case where the laX is to be bome by the payer. 
This amendment will take effect from 1 Sl June, 1987. 
Clause 52 seeks to amend section 197 of the Income-tax Act relating to grant of certifICate for deduction of tax at lower 
rate. 
Sub-clause (a) amends sub-section (I) which is consequential to the insertion of new su~section (2A) in this section and 
the insertion ofnew section 194E. 
Sub-clause (b) seeks 10 insert new sub-section (2A) which enables the Board to make rules for prescribing a procedure in 
regard to issue of ceztificate by the assessing officers as prescn"bed in sub-section (1) authorising not to deduct tax at source 
or deduct the same at a 1o~ rate. 
These amendments will take effect from 1st lune. 1'987. 

84 
Clause S3 seeks to amend sections 198. 200. 203. 204 and lOS of the lncome-tax Act to incorporaIc a reference 10 new 
section 194E. 
This amendment will lake effect from 1st June. 1987. 
Clauses S4 and S5 seek to amend sections 199 and 202 of the Income-tax Act. consequential to the insertion of new 
section 194E in the Act. 
Tbcse amendments will take effect from 1st June. 1987. 
Clause 56 seeks to amend section 203 of the Income-tax Act relating to ccrtificare for tax deducted. 
Under the existing provisions. any person ~ible for deduction of tax at source in accordance wiab the povisioDs of 
the Act is required. at the time of credit or payment of the amount or at tHe time of issue of warrant of the sum to issue a 
certificare that the tax has been deducted. and specifying the amount deducted and any other particulars as may be prescribed 
in the rules. 
The amended provisiOD seeks to provide that the certiflcate shaI1 be issued within such time limit as may be prescribed in 
the rules. 
This amendment will lake effect from 1st June. 1987. 
Clause 57 seeks to insert a new section 203A in the Income-tax Act. 
The proposed new section seeks to provide that every person deducting tax at source in accordance with the provisions of 
Chapter XVll-B, in respect of any payment made by him and who has not been allotted tax-deduction account numbez, shall 
apply to the income-tax authority for the allotment of a tax-deduction account numbez. The tax-deduction account number 
so allotted shall be quoted in all challans for payment of any sum under section 200, in all certifICates issued under section 
203, in all the prescribed returns filed in accordance with the provisions of sections 206, 206A and 206B and in all other 
documents pertaining to such ttansactions which the Board may p-escribe in abe rules. 
This amendment will take effect from ] st June, 1987. 
Clause 58 seeks to substitute a new section for section 206 of the Income-tax Act relating to furnishing of prescribed 
returns by a person paying salaJy. . 
The new section enables the Board to prescribe the fonn, time-limit and procedure for submission of such returns. 
This amendment will take effect from 1st June, 1987. 
Clause 59 seeks to substitute a new section for section 245A of the Income-tax Act. relating to defmitions for the 
purposes of Chapter XIXA of the Act. The new section amends the existing definition of "case" to exclude time-baned 
appeals or revisions. It also defmes "income-tax authority" and other expressions. 
1beseamendments will take effect from IstJune,1987. 
Clause 60 seeks to amend section 245B of the Income-tax Act relating to the Income-tax Settlement Commission by 
omitting cenain words in view of the defmition of Settlement Commission included in section 245A. 
This amendment will take effect from IstJune. 1987. 
Clause 61 seeks to insert new sections 245BA to 245BD. as a consequence of amendment of section 245B by the 
Taxation Laws (Amendment and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act, 1986, providing for additional Benches of the Settlement 
Commission. 
Sub-section (I) of section 245BA confers jurisdiction. powers and authority of the Settlement Commission to its 
Benches. 
Sub-section (2) provides that a Bench of the Settlement Commission shall be presided over by the Chairman or the Vi<»-
Chairman and shaD include two oIher Memben. 
Sub-section (3) provides that the Bench presided over by the Chairman shaD be the principal Bench and ada Benches 
shall be known as addiIionaI Benches. 

85 
Sub-section (5) secures functioning of a Bench in certain situations wheze the Presiding Officer or one of the other 
Members is unable to discharge his functions. 
Sub-section (6) provides for notification by the Central Government of the location of the additional Benches of the 
Setdement Commission. 
New section 24SBB provides for appoinbnent of acting Chainnan in certain situations. 
New section 245BC empowers the Chainnan to transfC2' cases from one Bench to another. 
New section 245BD provides that if the Members of a Bench differ on any point, the opinion of the majority sball 
prevail. Where the Membo's are equally divided they shall state the point of diffe'SCllCe and make a reference to the 0Iairman 
who shall hear the point himself or refer the case for hearing to one or more Members of the Settlement Commission and 
the point of difference shall be decided according to the opinion of the majaity of the Membo's who have heard the case, 
including those who first heard it 
These amendments will take effect from 1st June, 1987. 
Clause 62 seeks to amend section 245C of the Income-tax Act relating to application for settlement of cases. 
Sub-clause (i) seeks to substitute the proviso to sub-section (1) to provide that the assessee shall furnish the return of 
income which he is or was required to furnish under any of the provisions of the Act before an application can be made 
undC2' section 245C. 
Sub-clause (ii) seeks to substitute new sub-sections (lB) and (lC). Sub-sections (IB) and (lC) provide for the manner of 
computation of additional amount of income-tax payable in relation to the income disclosed in the application for 
settlement 
These amendments will take effect from 1 st June, 1987. 
Clause 63 seeks to amend section 2450 of the Income-tax Act relating to the procedure on receipt of application by the 
Settlement Commission. 
Sub-clause (a) inserts new sub-section (5) which is consequential to the amendment of section 2458 of the Act by the 
Taxation Laws (Amendment and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act, 1986, which provides for constitution of more than one 
Bench of the Settlement Commission. 
Sub-clause (b) seeks to amend sub-section (6) to provide for the payment of interest by the assessee in addition to tax and 
penalty. 
Sub-clause (c) seeks to amend sub-section (8) to provide that the time-limit laid down in section 186 for cancellation of 
registration will not apply. 
These amendments will take effect from 1st June, 1987. 
Clause 64 seeks to amend section 245E of the Income-tax Act relating to power of the Settlement Commission to re-
open completed proceedings. 
Under the existing proviso to section 245E, the Settlement Commission cannot re-open any proceeding after the expiry 
of a period of eight years from the end of the assessment year to which such proceeding relates. 
It is proposed to provide that no proceeding relating to any assessment year shall be re-opened by the Settlement 
Commission if the period between the end of the assessment year to which such a proceeding relates and the date of 
application for settlement under section 245C exceeds nine years. 
This amendment will lake effect from 1st June, 1987. 
Clause 65 seeks to amend section 245F of the Income--t.ax Act relating to powers and procedure of the Settlement 
Commission. It is proposed to omit the words "or by way of advance tax" in sub-section (3). Sub-sections (5) and (6) are 
being omitted as consequential to insertion of new section 245BA. 
These amendments will take effect from 1 st June, 1987. 
Clause 66 seeks to amend section 24SH relating to power of the Settlement Commission to grant immunity from 
prosecution and penalty. 

86 
Sub-clause (a) inserts a proviso to sub-section (1) to preclude the Settlement Commission from granting immunity from 
prosecution in cases where prosecution has been launched prior to the date of receipt of application for settlement under 
section 245C. 
Sub-clause (b) inserts new sub-section (IA) which provides that an immunity granted by the Settlement Commission to 
any person shall stand withdrawn on failure of such person to pay taxes, etc., within the time allowed as per the order of 
settlement or on failure of such a person to comply with any other condition subject to which the immunity is granted. 
These amendments will take effect from 1 st June, 1987. 
Clause 67 seeks to insert a new section 245HA in the Income-tax Act relating to powers of the Settlement Commission 
to send a case back to the Income-tax Officer in case the assessee does not co-operate with the Commission. Under the 
existing provisions, the Settlement Commission does nol possess such powers. 
Sub-section (1) provides that where the Settlement Commission is satisfied that the assessee has not co-operated in the 
proceedings before it, it will.have the power to send the case back to the Income-tax Officer who will then make the 
assessment in the ordinary manner as if no application had ever been made before the Settlement Commission. 
Sub-section (2) provides that in a case referred to in sub-section (1), the Income-tax Officer can, for the purposes of 
making the assessment, use any material or other information produced before the Settlement Commission. 
Sub-section (3) provides that where a case has been sent back to the Income-tax Officer, the period commencing on and 
from the date of application to the Settlement Commission and ending with the date of receipt by the Income-tax Officer of 
the order of the Settlement Commission shall be excluded in computing the time limits under the Act. 
These amendments will take effect from 1 st June, 1987. 
Clause 68 seeks to amend section 245K of the Income-tax Act relating to bar on subsequent application for settlement in 
certain cases, by inserting clause (iii) to provide that the assessee whose case is sent back by the Settlement Commission to 
the Income-tax Officer on account of non-co-operation shall not be entitled to make any further application to that 
Commission. 
These amendments will take effect from 1st June, 1987. 
Clause 69 seeks to omit section 245M of the Income-tax Act relating to eligibility of certain persons to make 
application to the Settlement Commission despite having filed appeal to the Appellate Tribunal, as the existing provisions 
are no longer necessary . 
This amendment will take effect from 1st June, 1987. 
Clause 70 seeks to insert a new section 272BB in the Income-tax Act, which deals with the penalty for failure to comply 
with the provisions of section 203A relating to the aUotment of tax-deduction account number to the person responsible for 
deduction of tax at source. The new section provides for a penalty of a sum which may extend up to five thousand rupees. 
This amendment will take effect from 1st June, 1987. 
Clause 71 seeks to amend section 273B of the Income-tax Act to include a reference to the new section 272BB so as to 
shift the burden of proving a reasonable cause for failure to comply with the provisions of section 203A on the person 
concerned. 
This amendment will take effect from 1 st June, 1987. 
Clause 72 seeks to omit section 280ZA of the Income-tax Act, as the provisions relating to transfer of an industrial 
undertaking from urban areas have been incorporated in the new section 54G. 
This amendment will take effect from 1st April. 1988 and will, accordingly, apply in relation to the assessment year 
1988-89 and subsequent years. 
Clause 73 seeks to omit sections 285 and 286 of the Income-tax Act, relatin, to information to be given in the 
prescribed manner by (i) persons respodsible for paying interest, and (ii) compames regarding shareholders to whom 
dividends have been paid, respectively. This is consequential to the substitution of new section 206. 
This amendment will take effect from 1st June. 1987. 
Clause 74 seeks to amend section 293 of the Income-tax AcL 
Under the existing provisions, it has been provided that no suit shall lie in any civil court to set aside or modify any 
assessment order made under the ACL The proposed amendment seeks to provide that no suit shall lie in any civil court to 
set aside or modify any ordez made under the ACL 
This amendment will take effect from 1st March. 1987. 

87 
Clause 7S seeks to amend items S and 22 of the Eleventh Schedule to the Income-tax Act. 
Under item S of the Eleventh Schedule, aerated waters in the manufacture of which blended flavouring concenttates in 
any form are used are one of the non-priority articles or things to which section 32AB and other sections of the Act would 
not be applicable in certain cases. It is proposed to make a clarificatory amendment in the item to indicate that blended 
flavouring concenuates would include, and would have included, synthetic essences in any form. 
The Explanation below item 22 of the Schedule defines "office machines and apparatus" to include all machines and 
apparatus used in offices for data processing. It is proposed to make a clarificatory amendment to exclude computers from 
the expression "data processing" so that the benefits of the provisions of section 32AB and other sections may be made 
available in respect of computers. It is also proposed to exclude office machines and apparatus used for transmission and 
reception of messages from the non-priority list of articles or things as contained in this item. 
These amendments will take effect from 1st April, 1988 and will, accordingly, apply in relation to the assessment year 
t 988-89 and subsequent years. 
Clause 76 seeks to make certain amendments of a consequential nature in different provisions of the Income-tax Act. 
Clause 77 seeks to amend section 2 of the Wealth-tax Act relating to definitions. 
It is proposed to provide that a building or part thereof referred to in clauses (iii), (iiia) or (iiib) of section 27 of the' 
Income-tax Act shall be includible in the net wealth of the person who is deemed to be the owner under these clauses of 
that building or part thereof. This has been introduced to achieve uniformity and consistency in the provisions of the 
Income-tax Act and other direct tax laws. 
This amendment will take effect from 1st April, 1988 and will, accordingly, apply in relation to the assessment year 
1988-89 and subsequent years. 
Clause 78 seeks to insert a new clause (xxv b) in section 5 of the Wealth-tax Act relating to exemptions. 
Under the proposed provision, any deposit made under the National Savings Scheme referred to in section 80CCA of the 
Income-tax Act will not be includible in the net wealth of the assessee. 
This amendment will take effect from 1st April, 1988 and will, accordingly, apply in relation to the assessment year 
1988-89 and subsequent years. 
Clauses 79 to 89 seek to amend the provisions relating to settlement of cases in Chapter V A of the Wealth-tax Act. 
These provisions under the Wealth-tax Act have been broadly brought at par with those of corresponding provisions of 
the Income-tax Act. 
These amendments will take effect from 1st June, 1987. 
Clause 90 seeks to amend sub-section (2A) of section 31 of the Wealth-tax Act. 
Under the existing provisions, the Board is empowered to waive any interest payable on account of non-payment or delay 
in payment of tax, on the recommendation made by the Commissioner, if the Board is satisfied, that such payment would 
cause genuine hardship. The proposed amendment seeks to empower the Commissioners to exercise the powers under these 
provisions. This amendment will take effect from 1st April, 1987. 
Further, under the existing provisions, interest can be waived, only if the amount is payable and paymc~t of such 
amount is likely to cause genuine hardship. The proposed amendment seeks to provide that the interest levied. can be 
waived if the amount of interest is paid or payable'"and such paymem has caused or is likely to cause genuine hardship. 
This amendment will take effect from 1st October, 1984. 
Clause 91 seeks to amend section 43 of the Wealth-tax Act. 
Under the existing proVisions, it has been provided that no suit shall l.ie in any civi~ court t? ~t aside. o~ modify any 
assessment made under the Act. The proposed amendmem seeks to prOVide that no SUIt shall he In any CIvil coun to set 
aside or modify any order made under the Act 
This amendment will rake effect from 1st March, 1987. 
Clause 92 seeks to amend section 2 of the Gift-tax Act relating 00 definitions. 
It is proposed to insert a new Explanation to clause (xii) to provide that a transfer of ~ny building or part the,reof referred 
to in clauses (iii), (iiia) or (iiib) of section 27 of the Inc0!lle-~ A~t by the person wit? IS deemed under the SlId clauses .LO 
be the owner thereof made voluntarily and without conslderaUon In money or money s worth, shall be deemed to be a gift 
made by such person. 

88 
This amendment will take effect from 1st April, 1988 and will, accordingly, apply in relation to the assessment year 
1988-89 and subsequent years. 
Clause 93 seeks 10 amend section 42 of the Gift-tax Act. 
Under the existing provisions, it bas been provided that no suit sballlie in any civil court to set aside or modify any 
assessment made under the ACL 1be poposed amendment seeks to provide that no suit shall lie in any civil court to set 
aside or modify any m:Ier made lJllCb' the Act. 
This amendment will take effect from 1st March, 1987. 
Clause 94 read with the Second Schedule seeks to amend the Customs Tariff Act, 1975, to-
<a) raise the rate of basic customs duty on crude peb'Oleum and oils obtained from bituminous minerals; 
(b) restructure the basic customs duty rates in respect of the following goods on specific-cum-ad valorem basis-
(1) inorganic cbemicals; 
(2) organic chemicals; 
(3) aanning or dyeing extracts, dyes, pigments and other similar chemicals; 
(4) essential oils and resinaids; perfumery and other similar preparations; 
(5) soap, organic surface-active agents, washing and lubricating preparations, artificial waxes and other similar 
chemicals; 
(6) albuminoidal substances; glues; enzymes and other similar chemicals; 
(7) miscellaneous chemical products; 
(8) plastics and articles thereof; 
(9) iron and steel; 
(c) raise the rate oHmic customs duty on project imports; 
(d) change Chapter Notes in respect of Chapter 98 so as to provide for specific exclusions in respect of goods which 
would not be covered by the new heading No. 98.06; 
(e) create a new heading No. "98.06" which would cover parts of machinery, appliances, instruments and articles of 
Chapters 84 10 86, 89 and 90 of the Fim Schedule. 
Clause 95 seeks to levy up to the JIst March, 1988 auxiliary duties of customs on all imported goods at the rate of 50 
per cenL of their value. 
Clause 96 seeks to amend section 37 of the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944, so as to empower the Central 
Government to make rules for providing for the giving of credit of sums of money with respect to raw materials used in the 
manufacture of excisable goods. 
Clause 97 read with the Third Schedule seeks to amend the Schedule to the Central Excise Tariff Act, 1985, to-
(a> raise the basic excise duty on-
(1) cheese; 
(2) spices; . 
(3) miul!mroJs prqaaIioas of areaIs, Dour, starch and milk; 
(4) IIlimDI wMI:I'S Md ar:raIIod WIItI'S; 
(5) Pan Masala 
(6) zinc oxide; 
(7) organic surface-active agents; 
(8) PI .. ed glues and adhesives; 
(9) conveyor belting; 
(10) tra~ goods; 
(11) cork and articles of cork; 
(12) paprz and paper board; 
(13) viscose filament yam; 
(14) allied, impregnated, laminatt:d and indusIrial fabrics; 
(15) footMar. 
(16) micles of stone, plaster, cement. asbestos and mica; 
(17) ceramic products; 
(18) glass and glass mirrors; 
(19) copprz wile Olher ttum electrical grade; 
(20) metal conl8iners; 
(21) eIecIric l1lOkJI'S and genezaJOrs; 
(22) pimary c:dIs aad baUeries; 
(23) cJec:tric Iam~ 
(b) change the tariff deiuiplioo of-
(1) sub-heading No. 1904.10 relating to prcparal foods obtained &om cqeals; 
~ J 

89 
(2) sub-heading No. 3907 .80 relating to polybutyl tcrephthalate; 
(3) heading No. 49.01 relating to products of printing industry; 
(c) change the Chapter Notes in respect of Chapter 24 and make consequential changes in the tariff description of sub-
heading No. 2404.11 so as to specifically cover cut-tobacco in this sub-heading; 
(d) change the tariff description and restructure the duty rates in respect of-
(1) hydrogenated vegetable fats and oils; 
(2) pasta products; 
(3) chewing-tobacco; snuff; 
(4) chl<n1eS; 
(5) soap; 
(6) tread rubber and otha retreading materials; 
(7) particle boards; fibre boards; and plywoods; 
(8) cotton fabrics and man-made fabrics; 
(9) glazed tiles; 
(10) electric fans. 
Clause 98 seeks to levy up to the 31st day of March, 1988, special duties of excise on all excisable goods at the rate of 
10 per cent. of the duty leviable under !he Centtal Excise Tariff Act 
Clause 99 read with !he Fourth Schedule seeks to amend the First Schedule to the Additional Duties of Excise (Goods of 
Special Importance) Act, 1957, ~ 
(1) raise additional excise duty on free sale sugar, 
(2) change !he tariff description of sub-heading No. 2404.11 so as to specifically cover cut-tobacco in this sub-
heading; 
(3) change the tariff description and restructure the duty rates in respect of chewing tobacco and snuff; 
(4) change !he tariff description and restructure the dutY rates in respect of cotton fabrics and man-made fabrics. 
Chapter V (containing clauses 100 to 107) provides for the levy of foreign exchange conservation (travel) tax on all 
foreign exchange released for any foreign travel by any person. 
Clause 101 defines "foreign currency", "foreign exchange", "foreign travel" and certain o!her expressions used in !he 
Chapter. 
Clause 102 seeks to provide for the levy of a tax on all foreign exchange released for any foreign travel by any person. 
The tax will be levied at a rate of fifteen per cent on the rupee equivalent of every sum of foreign exchange so released and. 
will be collected by the authorised dealers or money changers au!horised to deal in foreign exchange under the Foreign 
Exchange Regulation Act, 1973. 
C;lause 103 confers upon the Central Government power to grant exemptions from the payment of the tax by notification 
havmg regard to the purposes of the travel and o!ha special circumstances. 
Clause 104 provides for penalties and adjpdication of penalties. 
The other clauses of this CIulpter deal with incidental and supplementary matters including the power of the Central 
Govanment to malce rules relating to the foreign exchange conservation (travel) tax. 
Clause 108 seeks to amend the Schedule to the Oil Industry (Development) Act, 1974 which specifICS ceilings on levy of 
excise duty as a cess on crude oil and natural gas. 
'The amendment proposes to raise the ceiling to one thousand rupees per tonne on crude oil and three hundred rupees per 
thousand cubic metres on natural gas. 
Clause 109 seeks to amend section 5 of the Customs and Excise Revenues Appellate TiibuDal Act, 1986, which deals 
with the qualifications for appointment as President and other Members of the Customs and Excise Revenues Appellate 
Tnbunal. 
The proposed amendment seeks to clarify that in computing the pc:riod during which a penon has been a memlJ.er of tbe 
Indian Customs and Central Excise Service, Group 'A', for the appoinbnent of Technical Member, dIere shall ~ mcl~ 
any pc:riod durina which the penon has been a member of the Incfian Customs Service Class I, or Ihe Central ExClSC ServU:e 
Oass I, as the case may be, rl the Indian Revenue Service immediately before the constitution of Ihe Indian Customs and 
Central Excise Servicc. Group 'A', 

~ 
Cit 
( 
per 
( 
Om 
mar 
( 
90 
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLA nON 
Sub-clause (d) of clause 7 of the Bill seeks to insert two new sub-sections (5A) and (5B) in section 32AB of the Income-tax 
Act relating to invesbIlent deposit account Under new sub-section (SA), it is provided that any amount standing to the credit of 
the assessee in the deposit account shall not be allowed to be withdrawn before the expiry of a period of five years from the date 
of deposit except for the purposes specified in the scheme to be made under that section. Sub-clause (e) of this clause seeks to 
amend sub-section (6) of this section so as to provide for a time limit to be specified in the said scheme before which any 
amount standing to the credit of the assessee in the deposit account should be utilised. 
Clauses 19, 20, 21 and 23 seek to amend sec·jons 54, 54B, 54D and 54F of the Income-tax Act to provide that if the 
amounts of capital gain arising under those se.ctions are not appropriated by the assessee towards the purchase of the new asset 
within the period specified therein, they are required to be deposited in an account in any such bank or institution as may be 
specified in, and utilised in accordance with, any scheme which the Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, frame in this behalf. 
Clauses 24 of the Bill seeks to introduce a new section 54G in the Income-tax Act which provides for exemption of capital 
gains on transfer of assets in cases of shifting of an industrial undertaking from urban area. Sub-section (2) of this new section 
provides that the amount of capital gain which is not appropriated by the assessee towards the cost and expenses incurred in 
relation to any of the purposes mentioned in sub-section (1) of that section within one year from the date on which the transfer 
of the original asset took place or which is not utilised by him for all or any of the purposes aforesaid before the date of 
furnishing the return of income under section 139 of the Act, is required to be deposited by him before furnishing such return in 
an account in any such bank or institution as may be specified in, and utilised in accordance with, any scheme which the Central 
Go,"emment may, by notification in th~ Official Gazette, frame in this behalf. 
Clause 45 of the Bill seeks to insert a new sub-section (2) in section 192 of the Income-tax Act which provides for tax to be 
deducted at source under the head "Salaries" in a case where the assessee is employed simultaneously under more than onc 
employer or where he has held successively employment under more than one employer. In such cases, the assessee wiJJ be 
required to furnish to the person responsible for making the payment of the tax deducted at source (being one of the employcrs) 
such details of the income under the head "Salaries" due or received by him from the other employer or employers, the tax 
deducted at source therefrom and such other particulars, in such form and verified in such manner as may be prescribed by rules 
made under the Act. Under a new sub-section (2B) inserted in this section, where an assessee who receives any income 
chargeable under the head "Salaries" has in addition any income chargeable under any other head of income for the same financial 
year, he is required to send to the person responsible for making the payment regarding the salary income, the particulars of such 
other income and of any tax deducted therefrom in such form and verified in such manner as may be prescribed by rules made 
under the Act. 
Clause 50 (b) of the Bill proposes to amend sub-section (2) of section 195 of the Income-tax Act which enables a person 
responsible for paying to a non-resident any interest, not being interest on securities or other sums, etc., to deduct income-tax 
thereon at the rates in force. Under the said sub-section (2), if such pel'SQn considers that the whole of such sum would not be 
income chargeable in the case of the recipient, he may make an application to the Income-tax Officer to determine, by geneTal or 
special order, the appropriate proportion of such sum so charged. The amendment seeks to provide that the said determination 
should be made in the prescribed manner instead of by general or special order, as provided in the section. 
Clause S2 (b) of the Bill seeks to insert a new sub-section (2A) in section 197 of the Income-tax Act which provides for the 
issue of a certificate for deduction at lower tate. The new sub-section (2A) empowers the Central Board of Direct Taxes to make 
rules specifying the cases in which, and the circumstances, under which, an application may be made for the grant of such 
certificate and the conditions subject to which such certificate may be granted., and for providing for all other matters connected 
thezewitb. 
Clause S6 of the Bill seeks to amend section 203 of the Act which provides for the issue of tax-deduction certificate by the 
pmon who deducts the laX payable wder the Act. The amendment seeks to provide that the certificate shall be issued within 
sucb period as may be prescribed by the rules from the time of credit or payment of the same or from the issue of a cheque or 
warrant for payment of any dividend to a shareholder instead of issue of a certificate at the lilll~ of the credit or payment of the 
sum or at the time of the issue of a cheque or W8I1'8Dt for the payment of any dividend to a shareholder as at present 
(I Clause 57 of abe Bill seeks to insert a new section 203A which provides for the allotment of tax-deduction account number. 
Sult-leCtion (1) of abe new sectim requires every person deducting tax in accordance with the provisions of the Act to apply for 
the IIloIment« a .-deduction acc;ount number within such time as may be prescribed by rules made under the Act. Such rules 
may also JWvide abe dccuments relating to certain transactions in which ~ n","bet' shall be quoted. 

91 
Clause 58 of the Bill seeks to substitute a new section 206 in the Income-tax Act which requires ptnOIl8 deducting the tax 
under the Act to furnish the prescribed returns. This section provides that the pelSOIl who deducts tax shaD prepare within Ibe 
time prescribed under the rules, after the end of each financial year and deliver or cause to be delivered to the income-tax 
authority prescribed by rules, such returns in such form and verified in such manner and setting forth such particulars as may be 
prescribed by rules made under the AcL 
Clause 61 seeks to insert new section 245BA in the Income-tax Act. Sub-section (5) of this section provides for the 
functioning of the Benches of the Settlement Commission, in the case of illness. etc .• of the Members constituting a Bench 
subject to such rules as may be made under the Act. Clause 81 of the Bill seeks to insert on the same lines a new section 
22BA in the Wealth-tax ACL 
Clause 96 of the Bill seeks to insert a new clause (xvib) in section 37 of the Central Excises Act to empower the Centtal 
Government to make rules to provide for the credit of sums of money with respect to raw materials used in the manufacture of 
excisable goods. 
Clause 106 of the Bill empowers the Central Government, by notif1C8tion in the Official Gazette, 10 make rules for carrying 
out the PWTlOses of Chapter V of the Bill relating to levy of Foreign Exchange Conservation (Travel) Tax. Sub-clause (2) of 
this clause enumerates the matters with respect to which the Central Government may make rules. 1bese matters relate, inter 
alia, to the collection of Foreign Exchange Conservation (Travel) Tax, the authorities by whom adjudication of penalties or 
other functions under the Chapter shall be discharged, the manner in which such tax or penalties due unc:b' the Chapta' shall be 
payable. the procedure for adjudication of penalties. appeals against orc:b's made under the Chapter, the manner in which and the 
time within which such appeals may be preferred and the fees payable therefor, the refunds and other particulars which may be 
required to be furnished for the purposes of the Chapter and any other matter which is required 10 be provided for by rules under 
the Chapter. 
The matters in respect of which schemes or rules may be made in accordance with the aforesaid provisions are matters of 
procedure and detail, and it is not practicable to provide for them in the Bill itself. 
The delegation of legislative powers is, therefore, of a normal character. 

LOKSABHA 
A 
BIlL 
to give effect to the financial proposals of the Central Government 
for the financial year 1987-88. 
(Shri Rajiv Gandhi, 
Prime Minister 
and Minister of Finance.) 