THE INCEST OFFENCES BILL, 2012
By
DR. MAHENDRASINH P. CHAUHAN, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for punishment for the offences relating to incest and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-third Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Incest Offences Act, 2012.
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) ‘‘prescribed’’ means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(b) ‘‘sexual exploitation’’ includes fondling, making sexually explicit remarks,
making avoidable and unwarranted physical contact, willful touching or patting, forcing
Bill No. 14 of 2012
AS INTRODUCED  IN LOK SABHA
Short title.
Definitions.
5

2
for the use of pornographic material or indulging in molestation by deceit or by
threatening.
(2) the words and expressions used herein and not defined in this Act but defined in
the Indian Penal Code, 1860 or the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 shall  have the  same
meanings, respectively, assigned to them in those laws.
3. (1) Whoever knowingly engages or attempts to engage in sexual intercourse with a
person, who is his close family member, shall be guilty of an offence of incest and shall be
punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall be not less than ten years and
shall also be liable to fine:
Provided that if the close family member is a child under eighteen years of age, the
offender shall be punished with life imprisonment.
(2) Whoever knowingly sexually exploits or attempts to sexually exploit any person,
who is his close family member, shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term
which shall be not less than five years but which may extend upto seven years, and shall also
be liable to fine.
(3) For the purposes of sub-sections (1) and (2), the Court shall not take cognizance of
the fact that the act or attempt of sexual intercourse with or sexual exploitation of the close
family member  has happened with the consent of that member.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, "close family members" means the
following persons:—
(a) a parent including step parent or grandparent, of either sex;
(b) a child or other lineal descendent; and
(c) a brother or sister including half-brother or half-sister; and
(d) a guardian, uncle, aunt or any other close relative.
4. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, in
any trial under this Act, the burden of proof as to the innocence shall be on the accused and
the victim shall have the right to lead evidence in rebuttal.
5. The proceedings under this Act shall be held in camera, if it is so desired by the
victim, by a Special Court and, as far as possible, before a women magistrate.
6. Any statement of the victim under this Act shall be recorded at her or his residence
or at the place of her or his choice and as far as possible by a woman police officer in the
presence of the victim's parents or guardian or near relatives or social worker of the locality,
as the case may be.
7. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, an
offence under this Act shall be cognizable and non-bailable.
8. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, no
court other than a High Court or the Supreme Court of India shall have the authority to grant
anticipatory bail to any person accused of committing an offence under this Act.
9. Save as otherwise provided under this Act, the provisions of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 shall be applicable to any trial under this Act.
10. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not
Incest
offences.
Burden of
proof.
45 of 1860.
2 of 1974.
Proceedings
to be in-
camera.
Statement of
victim to be
recorded at
residence.
Offences to
be cognizable
and non-
bailable.
Bar on
granting
anticipatory
bail.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Provisions of
the Code of
Criminal
Procedure to
be applied.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
2 of 1974.
2 of 1974.

3
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty:
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of a
period of three years from the commencement of this Act.
11. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
12. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Gazette of India, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be, after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modifications in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should  not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to
make rules.
5
10

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
As of today, there is no law on incest offences in India. Any incidence of incest is
treated as rape and if it is related to the abuse of a boy, it is covered under section 377 of the
Indian Penal Code. Last year, a Mumbai Court let off a father who raped his daughter as the
heinousness of his crime was not recognised as a separately punishable offence. Most of
the cases of incest offences go unreported in India because the family is almost considered
sacred and any act of child abuse, if it happens, is met with disbelief and denial. At times,
even the judges do not believe that a girl or boy can be abused by family members or
relatives. Activists demanding a law to tackle incest believe that it is a reflection of the
society's refusal to acknowledge that it exists. The society is in a state of denial that incest
does exist, whereas the bare truth is that it is prevalent in our society and only a miniscule
number of cases are reported. In contrast, many developed countries recognise incest as a
serious crime. The United Kingdom has a law to govern offences of incest since 1908, which
provides punishment with imprisonment up to a period of fourteen years. Such laws also
exist in Canada, Germany, Hungary, Ireland, Israel, Italy, the Netherlands, United States,
Brazil and in a host of other countries. Incest is more common in India than in other countries
as there is no law to govern such offences in our country. Child rights activists have been
demanding a specific law on incest for quite some time now. The demand was more vociferous,
when section 376 of the Indian Penal Code was amended to include policmen and hospital
and prison staff who abuse women in their custody and the issue of incest—where a parent
or relative abuses a child in his or her care—was overlooked. It is difficult to fathom the
agony and trauma of a child who has been a victim of molestation or incest offence by their
known or family members.  The child suffers this stigma throughout his or her life and has to
re-live the pain and trauma over and over again. It is, therefore, high time that a strict and
separate law is enacted to counter incest offences in our society.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; MAHENDRASINH  P.  CHAUHAN
November 16, 2011.
4

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLA TION
Clause 12 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
5

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for punishment for the offences relating to incest and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Dr. Mahendrasinh P . Chauhan, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—4119LS(S3)—07.03.2012.