THE NATIONAL RURAL EMPLOYMENT GUARANTEE
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2008
By
SHRI HANSRAJ  GANGARAMJI  AHIR, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the National Rural Employment Guarantee  Act, 2005.
B
E  it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  This Act may be called the National Rural Employment Guarantee (Amendment)
Act, 2008.
2. In section 2 of the National Rural Employment Guarantee Act, 2005
(hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), for clause ( b) the following clause shall be
substituted:—
"(b) "applicant" means any adult person who has applied for employment
under the Scheme.".
Short title.
Amendment
of section 2.
Bill No. 14 of 2008
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
42 of 2005. 5

2
3.  For section 3 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted:—
"3. (1) Save as otherwise provided, the State Government shall, in such
rural area in the State as may be notified by the Central Government, provide to
every adult person who volunteers to do unskilled manual work, such work on all
working days except the public holidays in accordance with the Scheme made
under this Act.
(2) Every person who has done the work given to him under the Scheme
shall be entitled to receive wages at the wage rate for each day of work.
(3) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the disbursement of daily wages
shall be made on a weekly basis or in any case not later than a fortnight after the
date on which such work was done.".
4. In section 4 of the principal Act, for sub-section (1), the following sub-section
shall be substituted:—
"4. ( 1) For the purposes of giving effect to the provisions of section 3,
every State Government shall, within six months from the date of commencement
of this Act, by notification, make a Scheme, for providing guaranteed employment
on all working days except public holidays to every adult person who, by
application, volunteers to do unskilled manual work subject to the conditions laid
down by or under this Act and in the Scheme:
Provided that until any such Scheme is notified by the State Government,
the Annual Action Plan or Perspective Plan for the Sampoorna Grameen Rozgar
Yojana (SGRY) or the National Food for Work Programme (NFFWP) whichever is
in force in the concerned area immediately before such notification shall be deemed
to be the action plan for the Scheme for the purposes of this Act.".
5. In section 7 of the principal Act—
(a) for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be substituted:—
"(2) Subject to such terms and conditions of eligibility as may be
prescribed by the State Government and subject to the provisions of this Act and
the Schemes and the economic capacity of the State Government, the
unemployment allowance payable under sub-section (1) shall be paid to the
applicants at such rate as may be specified by the State Government, by
notification, in consultation with the State Council:
Provided that no such rate shall be less than one-fourth of the wage rate
for the first thirty days during the financial year and not less than one-half of
the wage rate for the remaining period of the financial year.";
(b) for sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be substituted:—
"(3) The liability of the State Government to pay unemployment allowance
to an applicant, shall cease as soon as the applicant is directed by the Gram
Panchayat or the Programme Officer to report for work.";
(c) for sub-section (4), the following sub-section shall be substituted:—
"(4) The unemployment allowance payable to an applicant shall be
sanctioned and disbursed by the Programme Officer or such local authority
(including the Panchayats at the district, intermediate or village level) as the
State Government may, by notification, authorise in this behalf.".
Substitution of
new section
for section 3.
Guarantee of
rural
employment
to every adult
person.
Amendment of
section 4.
Employment
Guarantee
Schemes for
rural areas .
Amendment
of section 7.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
6. In section 9 of the principal Act, for clause (a), the following clause shall be
substituted:—
"(a) does not accept the employment provided to him under a Scheme; or.".
7. In section 15 of the principal Act, in sub-section (5), for clause (b), the following
clause shall be substituted:—
"(b) sanctioning and ensuring payment of unemployment allowance to the eligible
applicants;".
8. In Schedule II to the principal Act,—
(a) for paragraph 1, the following paragraph shall be substituted:—
"1. Every adult person who—
(i) resides in any rural areas; and
(ii) is willing to do unskilled manual work, may submit his name, age
and the address to the Gram Panchayat at the village level (hereafter in this
Schedule referred to as the Gram Panchayat) in the jurisdiction of which he
resides for registration of his name for issuance of a job card.";
(b) for paragraph 2, the following paragraph shall be substituted:—
"2. It shall be the duty of the Gram Panchayat to register the applicant, after
making such enquiry as it deems fit and issue a job card containing such details
of the applicant affixing his photograph, as may be specified by the State
Government in the Scheme.";
(c) for paragraph 4, the following paragraph shall be substituted:—
"4. Every adult person whose name appears in the job card shall be entitled
to apply for unskilled manual work under the Scheme.";
(d) for paragraph 5, the following paragraph shall be substituted:—
"5. All registered persons shall be entitled to employment in accordance
with the Scheme made under the provisions of this Act, for as many days as each
applicant may request, except on public holidays.";
(e) for paragraph 8, the following paragraph shall be substituted:—
"8. There shall be no limit on the number of days of employment for which
a person may apply, or on the number of days of employment actually provided
to him.";
(f) for paragraph 15, the following paragraph shall be substituted:—
"15. A period of employment shall ordinarily be at least fourteen days
continuously except public holidays.";
(g) for paragraph 20, the following paragraph shall be substituted:—
"20. The Gram Panchayat shall prepare and maintain or cause to be prepared
and maintain such registers, vouchers and other documents in such form and in
such manner as may be specified in the Scheme containing particulars of job
cards and passbooks issued, names, ages and addresses of the applicants
registered with the Gram Panchayat.".
Amendment
of section15.
Amendment
of Schedule II.
Amendment
of section 9.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS  AND REASONS
National Rural Employment Guarantee Act, 2005 was enacted with a view to provide
employment to the people of rural areas. However, as per section 3, sub-section (1) of the
Act, there is a provision to provide unskilled employment of only one hundred days to the
rural households. Agriculture and the other rural occupations in rural areas in the country
have nearly been marginalized due to the severe impact of globalization.  A large number of
farmers are expressing a desire to dissociate themselves from agriculture due to continued
losses. According to National Sample Survey Organization (NSSO), as many as forty percent
farmers have shown their interest in quitting Agriculture as occupation. In this scenario, the
employment of one hundred days to a household which is being provided under the Act is
not sufficient to provide reasonable income for leading a dignified life. Keeping this in view,
it is very much warranted to generate more employment in rural areas. There is need to
provide unskilled manual employment on all working days to every adult person in the rural
areas who volunteers to do the work.
This Bill provides for unskilled manual work on all working days to all adult persons in
rural areas who volunteer to do work by amending the National Rural Employment Guarantee
Act,  2005.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; HANSRAJ GANGARAMJI AHIR.
November 14, 2007
4

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to provide unskilled manual work to every adult who volunteers
to do such work, on all working days, except public holidays announced by the Central
Government or the State Government or the Government of a Union territory in accordance
with the schemes made under the National Rural Employment Guarantee Act, 2005. The Bill,
therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is
likely to involve an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees twenty thousand crore
from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.
5

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE NATIONAL RURAL EMPLOYMENT GUARANTEE ACT, 2005.
(42 OF 2005)
* * * * * * * *
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) * * * *
(b) "applicant" means the head of a household or any of its other adult members
who has applied for employment under the Scheme:
* * * * *
3. (1) Save as otherwise provided, the State Government shall, in such rural area in the
State as may be notified by the Central Government, provide to every household whose
adult members volunteer to do unskilled manual work not less than one hundred days of
such work in a financial year in accordance with the Scheme made under this Act.
(2) Every person who has done the work given to him under the Scheme shall be
entitled to receive wages at the wage rate for each day of work.
(3) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the disbursement of daily wages shall be
made on a weekly basis or in any case not later than a fortnight after the date on which such
work was done.
(4) The Central Government or the State Government may, within the limits of its
economic capacity and development, make provisions for securing work to every adult
member of a household under a Scheme for any period beyond the period guaranteed under
sub-section (1), as may be expedient.
* * * * *
4. (1) For the purposes of giving effect to the provisions of section 3, every State
Government shall, within six months from the date of commencement of this Act, by notification,
make a Scheme, for providing not less than one hundred days of guaranteed employment in
a financial year to every household in the rural areas covered under the Scheme and whose
adult members, by application, volunteer to do unskilled manual work subject to the conditions
laid down by or under this Act and in the Scheme:
Provided that until any such Scheme is notified by the State Government, the Annual
Action Plan or Perspective Plan for the Sampoorna Grameen Rozgar Yojana (SGRY) or the
National Food for Work Programme (NFFWP) whichever is in force in the concerned area
immediately before such notification shall be deemed to be the action plan for the Scheme for
the purposes of this Act.
* * * * *
7. (1) * * * * *
(2) Subject to such terms and conditions of eligibility as may be prescribed by
the State Government and subject to the provisions of this Act and the Schemes and the
economic capacity of the State Government, the unemployment allowance payable under
sub-section (1) shall be paid to the applicants of a household subject to the entitlement of
the household at such rate as may be specified by the State Government, by notification, in
consultation with the State Council: Provided that no such rate shall be less than one-fourth
of the wage rate for the first thirty days during the financial year and not less than one-half
of the wage rate for the remaining period of the financial year.
(3) The liability of the State Government to pay unemployment allowance to a household
during any financial year shall cease as soon as—(a) the applicant is directed by the Gram
Panchayat or the Programme Officer to report for work either by himself or depute at least one
adult member of his household; or (b) the period for which employment is sought comes to
Definitions.
Guarantee of
rural
employment
to households.
Employment
Guarantee
Schemes for
rural areas.
Payment of
unemployment
allowance.
6

7
an end and no member of the household of the applicant had turned up for employment; or
(c) the adult members of the household of the applicant have received in total at least one
hundred days of work within the financial year; or (d) the household of the applicant has
earned as much from the wages and unemployment allowance taken together which is equal
to the wages for one hundred days of work during the financial year.
(4) The unemployment allowance payable to the household of an applicant jointly
shall be sanctioned and disbursed by the Programme Officer or such local authority (including
the Panchayats at the district, intermediate or village level) as the State Government may, by
notification, authorise in this behalf.
* * * * *
9.  An applicant who—
(a) does not accept the employment provided to his household under a Scheme;
or
* * * * *
15.  * * * * *
(5) The functions of the Programme Officer shall include—
(a) monitoring of projects taken up by the Gram Panchayats and other
implementing agencies within the Block;
(b) sanctioning and ensuring payment of unemployment allowance to the eligible
households;
* * * * * * *
Disentitlement
to receive
unemployment
allowance in
certain
circumstances.
Programme
Officer.

 SCHEDULE II
(See Section 5)
CONDITIONS FOR GUARANTEED RURAL EMPLOYMENT UNDER A SCHEME AND
MINIMUM ENTITLEMENTS OF LABOURERS SCHEDULE II (See section 5)
CONDITIONS FOR GUARANTEED RURAL EMPLOYMENT UNDER A
 SCHEME AND MINIMUM ENTITLEMENTS OF LABOURERS
1. The adult members of every household who—
(i) reside in any rural areas; and
(ii) are willing to do unskilled manual work, may submit their names, age and the
address of the household to the Gram Panchayat at the village level (hereafter in this
Schedule referred to as the Gram Panchayat) in the jurisdiction of which they reside for
registration of their household for issuance of a job card.
2.  It shall be the duty of the Gram Panchayat to register the household, after making
such enquiry as it deems fit and issue a job card containing such details of adult members of
the household affixing their photographs, as may be specified by the State Government in
the Scheme.
******
4.  Every adult member of a registered household whose name appears in the job card
shall be entitled to apply for unskilled manual work under the Scheme.
5.  All registered persons belonging to a household shall be entitled to employment in
accordance with the Scheme made under the provisions of this Act, for as many days as each
applicant may request, subject to a maximum of one hundred days per household in a given
financial year.
******
8.  There shall be no limit on the number of days of employment for which a person may
apply, or on the number of days of employment actually provided to him subject to the
aggregate entitlement of the household.
******
15.  A period of employment shall ordinarily be at least fourteen days continuously
with not more than six days in a week.
******
20. The Gram Panchayat shall prepare and maintain or cause to be prepared and
maintained such registers, vouchers and other documents in such form and in such manner
as may be specified in the Scheme containing particulars of job cards and passbooks issued,
name, age and address of the head of the household and the adult members of the household
registered with the Gram Panchayat.
******
8

LOK   SALOK  SABHABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the National Rural Employment Guarantee Act, 2008 .
————
(Shri Hansraj Gangaramji Ahir, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—283LS(S5)—19.02.2008.