     AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 14 of 2022
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022
By
SHRI A. RAJA, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of  the Republic of India
as follows:–
1.(1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2022.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may,
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. After article 16 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted,
namely:—
“16A. Nothing in this Constitution shall prevent the State from making
any special provisions, by law, for the advancement of any socially and
educationally backward classes of citizens or economically weaker
sections of citizens or for the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled
Tribes, to provide for reservation in matter of employment in private
sector.’’
Short title and
commencement.
5
Insertion of
new article
16A.
Reservation in
matters of
employment
in private
sector.
10

2
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
India is a country of diverse people and religion. Some people have fared
better than the others and therefore the concept of reservation was introduced in
the system to bring at par the marginalized and backward classes of the people.
Article 16 prohibits discrimination in employment in any Government office.
However, the Government can allow reservation for any community if they are not
adequately represented in service or posts under the State.
In this scenario, when the public sector is shrinking, the provisions for
reservations of posts or appointments for weaker sections of the society, as
contemplated under article 16(4) or under the Mandal Commission Report, are
losing their significance, insofar as protection of the interests of the
Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Backward Classes are concerned. Therefore,
in order to bring Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, Backward Classes and
economically weaker sections in the national mainstream, it is proposed that the
State shall make special provision for reservation of posts, or appointments in
Government service and private sector.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Constitution with a view to provide
reservation in employment opportunities in private sector in favour of persons
belonging to socially and educationally backward classes, economically weaker
section, the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes.
Hence this Bill.
NEW DELHI;                                         A. RAJA
December  1,  2021.

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of  India.
————
(Shri A. Raja, M.P.)