     AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
                                                              Bill No. 14 of 2023
THE MAINTENANCE AND WELFARE OF PARENTS AND
SENIOR CITIZENS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2023
By
SHRI GOPAL CHINAYYA SHETTY, M.P.
A
BILL
 to amend the Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and
Senior Citizens Act, 2007.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of
India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and
Senior Citizens (Amendment) Act, 2023.
(2) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. In section 19 of the Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior
Citizens Act, 2007 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in sub-section
(2), for the words “types of services”, the words “types of services including
sports and yoga” shall be substituted.
Short title and
commencement.
5
Amendment of
section 19.56 of 2007.

2
3. In section 20 of the principal Act, after clause (i), the following clause shall be
inserted, namely:—
“(ia) free medical and healthcare facilities to the senior citizens in all
Government and private hospitals including full reimbursement of amount
spent on medicines and treatment.”.
4. In section 21 of the principal Act, in clause (i), after the words “radio and the
print,”, the words “and by organizing seminars, symposium and lectures” shall be
inserted.
5. After section 21, the following section shall be inserted, namely:—
“21A. (1) The State Government shall provide social security to all senior
citizens and ensure their protection from exploitation and ill-treatment to
ensure a peaceful life and healthcare for them.
(2) For the purpose of providing social security under
sub-section (1), the State Government shall, inter alia, provide the following
facilities:—
(i) monthly pension to each senior citizen, who is unable to
maintain himself and who does not have any children or relative,
in such manner and at such rate as may be prescribed;
(ii) subsidy to each senior citizen up to ninety percent for amount
spent on travel by road, air and railways;
(iii) providing free legal aid to all the senior citizens including
setting up of “fast track courts” for prompt disposal of cases
wherein senior citizens are involved; and
(iv) determining criteria for accreditation and registration of
voluntary organizations and trusts involved in the welfare of senior
citizen.”.
Social Security
for Senior
Citizens.
Amendment of
section 20.
5
10
15
20
25
Amendment of
section 21.
Insertion of new
section 21A.

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
In the modern era, senior citizens have become victims of globalization and
are often neglected by their family members. Senior citizens have to face several
kinds of problems, because after attaining the age of sixty years or above, they are
obviously retired and in such condition neither they get any work nor are they in
a position to work.
Often, it is also seen that the children of elderly people do not help them
financially. In such situation they have to face financial problems and they also face
many problems in buying medicines and other essential items, household items and
for two meals a day.
It is a fact that steps for facilities and other welfare measures are being taken
by the Central Government and other social institutions for senior citizens. But, still
a lot needs to be done for their happy and dignified stay in the society.
In 1991, the United Nations General Assembly had also requested the
Governments to formulate relevant policies in this regard.
Although, the Government has enacted the Maintenance and Welfare of Parents
and Senior Citizens Act, 2007 to provide for more effective provisions for the
maintenance and welfare of parents and senior citizens guaranteed and recognised
under the Constitution. However, there is a dire need to provide social security to the
senior citizens including  financial security, healthcare and shelter and protection
from abuse and exploitation.
Hence this Bill.
    NEW DELHI;         GOPAL CHINAYYA SHETTY
December 12, 2022.
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides for State Government to provide yoga and sports
facilities in the old age homes meant for the senior citizens. Clause 3 provides for the
State Government to provide free medical and healthcare facilities to the senior
citizens. Clause 4 provides for the State Government to organize seminars, symposiums
and lectures to create awareness about the provisions of this Act. Clause 5 provides
for the State Government to provide social security to the senior citizens including
monthly pension, subsidy in travel and free legal aid. The expenditure in relation to
the States shall be borne by the State Governments from their respective Consolidated
Funds. However, the expenditure in relation to Union territories shall be borne by the
Central Government. The Bill, therefore, if enacted would involve expenditure from
the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about
rupees seven hundred crore per annum would be involved from the Consolidated
Fund of India is likely to be involved.
 A non-recurring expenditure of rupees seven crore is also likely to be involved.
4

ANNEXURE
[EXTRACTS FROM THE MAINTENANCE AND WELFARE OF PARENTS AND
SENIOR CITIZENS ACT, 2007]
(ACT NO. 56 OF 2007)
* * * * *
19. (1) The State Government may establish and maintain such number of oldage
homes at accessible places, as it may deem necessary, in a phased manner, beginning
with at least one in each district to accommodate in such homes a minimum of one
hundred fifty senior citizens who are indigent.
(2) The State Government may, prescribe a scheme for management of old age
homes, including the standards and various types of services to be provided by them
which are necessary for medical care and means of entertainment to the inhabitants
of such homes.
* * * * *
20. The State Government shall ensure that,—
(i) the Government hospitals or hospitals funded fully or partially by the
Government shall provide beds for all senior citizens as far as possible;
* * * * *
21. The State Government shall, take all measures to ensure that—
(i) the provisions of this Act are given wide publicity through public media
including the television, radio and the print, at regular intervals;
* * * * *
5
Establishment
of old age
homes.
Medical
support for
senior citizens.
Measures for
publicity,
awareness etc.
for welfare of
senior citizens.

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
to amend the Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and
Senior Citizens Act, 2007.
————
(Shri Gopal Chinayya Shetty, M.P .)