Bill No. 14 of 2007
THE FARMERS WELFARE FUND BILL, 2007
By
SHRI ADHALRAO SHIV AJI PA TIL, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of Farmers Welfare Fund and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as
 follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Farmers Welfare Fund Act, 2007.
   (2)  It extends to the whole of India.
2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(i) "farmer" means any person engaged in agriculture and whose landholding
does not exceed five acres of land;
(ii) "Fund" means Farmers Welfare Fund constituted under section  (3) of this
Act; and
(iii) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
Short title
and extent.
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Definitions.5
10

2
Farmers
Welfare Fund.
3.  (1) The Central Government shall constitute a Fund to be known as the Farmers
Welfare Fund.
(2) The Central Government and the State Governments shall contribute to the
Fund in such proportion as may be prescribed.
(3) Such other sums as may be received by way of donation, contribution or
assistance or otherwise shall also be credited to the Fund.
4. (1) The Central Government shall set up a Farmers Welfare Board for the
purpose of administering the Fund.
(2) The Board shall consist of—
(i) a Chairperson, to be appointed by the Central Government;
(ii) one representative each of the Union Ministries of Power, Water Resources,
New and Renewable Energy, Rural Development and Finance;
(iii) one representative of the Planning Commission;
(iv) one representative of every State Government;
(v) three members representing the agro-based commerce and industry sector;
(vi) one representative of the farmers; and
(vii) the Secretary of the Union Ministry of Agriculture who shall be ex-officio
Secretary to the Board.
(3)  The conditions of service, salaries and allowances of Chairperson and other
members of the Board shall be such as may be prescribed.
(4) The Board shall have such number of officers and staff as required for its
efficient functioning.
5.  (1) It shall be the duty of the Board to formulate policies and guidelines regarding
welfare of the farmers.
(2) The Board shall utilize the Fund for the following purposes:—
(i) free education to the children of farmers;
(ii) free medical facilities for farmers and their families;
(iii) payment of disability allowance to farmers for injuries leading to
disability sustained at work;
(iv) life insurance cover to the farmers;
(v) compensation to the farmers or their families, as the case may be, in case
of accidents resulting in permanent disability or death;
(vi)  payment of old age pension to the farmers;
(vii) payment of subsistence allowance to the farmers during off-season; and
(viii) financial assistance to the farmers at the time of marriage of their
children, particularly daughters.
6. (1) Every State Government and the Union Territory  Administration, shall conduct
a district-wise survey, in such manner and with such details, as may be prescribed, of all
farmers within their respective jurisdictions and cause the same to be published in such
manner and form, as may be prescribed.
(2) Any complaint or objection relating to inclusion or omission of name of any
farmer shall be addressed to the District Magistrate concerned who shall, after due inquiry,
decide upon the rectification of the records.
Farmers
Welfare Board for
administering the
Fund.
Duties of the
Board.
Survey of
farmers.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
7. (1) Every bank and financial institution shall extend loans to farmers, whether for
farming or personal needs, without seeking any mortgage or guarantee or putting any other
condition.
(2) The rate of interest charged on such loans shall not exceed four per cent simple
interest per annum:
Provided that the rate of interest shall not be increased before five years from the
commencement of this Act and any subsequent increase in the rate of interest shall also not
be made before a lapse of five years.
8.  The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of the Act.
Banks to give
loans to
farmers
without any
guarantee.
Power to
make rules.
5
10

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Even though farmers and agriculture form the backbone of our economy, it is surprising
that Government does not have any proper policy for the welfare of farmers as well as their
family members. The condition of farmers who own small holding of land is even worse.
There are a few welfare schemes in existence but these have not resulted in any noticeable
improvement in their living conditions. There is no institutional arrangement to meet their
credit needs. For that, they have to depend upon the local bankers and mahajans who
charge exorbitant rates of interest. Once in debt, it becomes very difficult for them to come
out of this debt trap. In some parts of the country, farmers are committing suicide as they are
neck deep in debt. If this trend is not reversed soon, it can be easily imagined  what is going
to happen. It may also threaten the food security which we have attained after a lot of
struggle.
There is need for providing a net of social  security for them. Banks and financial
institutions should also provide loans to the farmers at low rates and without stringent
conditions with regard to guarantee and mortgage.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; ADHALRAO  SHIV AJI  PATIL
November 8, 2006.
4

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the setting up of a Farmers Welfare Fund to which the
Central and State Governments shall contribute in such proportion as may be prescribed.
Clause 4 provides for the formation of a Board to manage the Fund. Clause 5 provides for the
utilisation of Fund for welfare measures of the farmers. Clause 6 provides for district-wise
survey of all the farmers covered by the provisions of the Bill. The expenditure relating to
States shall be brone out of the Consolidated Funds of the respective States. However, the
expenditure in respect of Union Territories shall be borne out of the Consolidated Fund of
India.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund
of India. It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees twenty thousand
crores will be involved.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees twenty-five thousand crores would  also
be involved.
5

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
6

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of Farmers Welfare Fund and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri  Adhalrao Shivaji Patil, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—217LS(S-2)—14.02.2007.