Bill No. 14, 2021
THE OTHER BACKWARD CLASSES AND ECONOMICALL Y
WEAKER SECTIONS (CENSUS AND OTHER WELFARE
PROVISIONS) BILL, 2021
By
SHRI GANESH SINGH, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for separate enumeration of persons belonging to the Other Backward
Classes and the Economically Weaker Sections and provision of separate
budgetary allocation for their welfare and overall development.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-second Year of the Republic of India
as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Other Backward Classes and Economically
Weaker Sections (Census and Other Welfare Provisions) Bill, 2021.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
AS  INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title and
commencement.5

2
2. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any other law for the
time being in force, on and from the next decennial census, the Central Government
shall have separate enumeration of population of Other Backward Classes and
Economically Weaker Sections in the country.
3. After the completion of Census, the Central Government shall, on the basis
of population of Other Backward Classes and Economically Weaker Sections, as
ascertained in the Census, frame and implement comprehensive Welfare policies
for overall development of the Other Backward Classes and the Economically Weaker
Sections.
4. (1) The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by
Parliament by law in this behalf, make separate budgetary allocations for the welfare
and development of persons belonging to the Other Backward Classes and the
Economically Weaker Sections, in proportion to their population.
(2) The budgetary allocations so earmarked under sub-section (1) shall be
spent only on special schemes meant exclusively for the Other Backward Classes
and the Economically Weaker Sections, in such manner, as may be prescribed.
(3) The budgetary allocations earmarked under sub-section (1) shall not be
diverted for any other purposes or allowed to lapse.
5. The Central Government shall cause an annual report to be prepared after the
end of each year on the implementation of the provisions of this Act during that year
and cause that annual report to be laid before both Houses of Parliament.
6. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is
made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of
thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or
the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in
the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may
be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice
to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Separate
enumeration of
Other Backward
Classes and
Economically
Weaker Sections.
Power to make
rules.
Laying of annual
report.
Framing and
implementation
of
Comprehensive
Welfare Policy.
Budgetary
allocation for
Other Backward
Classes and
Economically
Weaker
Sections.
10
15
20
25
5
30

STA TEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The Mandal Commission in its report had stated that due to non-availability of
the caste data in the Census of 1931, the Commission has been facing many difficulties.
In this regard, the Chairperson of the Mandal Commission Shri B.P. Mandal had
written a letter to the then President of India on 31st March, 1980 requesting him to
get the caste based census done in respect of Other Backward Classes (OBCs). The
then Government communicated to the Mandal Commission that the census of the
year 1981 would not be done based on the caste and the current policy of conducting
census in India without considering upon caste would continue to be followed.
Under article 16(4) of the Constitution of India, the persons belonging to the
Other Backward Classes (OBCs) are being provided with reservations in the matter
appointment to the posts in Government services based on the social and educational
backwardness. Through 103rd Amendment to the Constitution, Economically Weaker
Sections (EWS) are being provided ten percent. reservation in Government and
non-Government Educational Institutions (except minorities based Educational
Institutions) besides providing them appointment in Government services.
The following passage in the Judgement delivered by Hon'ble Justice P.V . Sawant
of the Constitution Bench comprising of nine members of the Supreme Court (Para
522 Judgement Today, Clause-6, No. 9, 30 November 1992) elaborates the point more
succinctly:—
"The correct criterion for judging the forwardness of the forwards among
the Backward Classes is to measure their capacity not in terms of the capacity
of others in their class, but in terms of the capacity of the members of the
Forward Class, as stated earlier. If they cross the Rubicon of backwardness,
they should be taken out from the Backward Classes and should be made
disentitled to the provisions meant for the said classes."
There are various schemes and special provisions for the welfare of the Other
Backward Classes (OBCs) and Economically Weaker Sections (EWS) in the country.
Despite all these measures, there has not been any significant improvement in the
social, educational and economic status of Other Backward Classes(OBCs).  Therefore,
in absence of the population data of the Other Backward Classes (OBCs), it has
become difficult to work towards improving their social, educational and economic
conditions and also to take policy decisions.
The notification has been issued for conducting the census during the current
year of 2020 and no provision has been made regarding the census of Other Backward
Classes (OBCs) and Economically Weaker Sections (EWS).
The Bill seeks to provide that the Central Government shall—
(i) take a special census of the Other Backward Classes (OBCs) and
Economically Weaker Sections (EWS);
(ii) formulate and implement a welfare scheme for overall development of
persons belonging to Other Backward Classes and Economically Weaker
Sections;
(iii) make a separate budgetary allocation for welfare and development of
persons belonging to Other Backward Classes and Economically Weaker
Sections; and
3

4
(iv) ensure that budgetary allocation made for welfare of Other Backward
Classes and Economically Weaker Sections, not diverted for any other purposes
or allowed to be lapse.
Hence this Bill.
NEW DELHI; GANESH SINGH
March 11, 2020.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides for the Central Government to take a special census
of the Other Backward Classes (OBCs) and Economically Weaker Sections (EWS).
Clause 3 provides framing and implementation of Comprehensive Welfare Policy.
Clause 4 provides budgetary allocation for Other Backward Classes and Economically
Weaker Sections. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about
rupees five hundred crores per annum would be involved from the Consolidated
Fund of India.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.
5

6
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGA TED LEGISLA TION
Clause 6 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the provisions of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the
delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for separate enumeration of persons belonging to the Other Backward
Classes and the Economically Weaker Sections and provision of separate
budgetary allocation for their welfare and overall development.
————
(Shri Ganesh Singh, M.P .)