1
THE YOUTH WELFARE BILL, 2015
By
DR. RAMESH POKHRIYAL 'NISHANK', M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for a comprehensive policy for the development of the
youth in the country.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Youth Welfare Act, 2015.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) 'appropriate Government' means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases the Union Government;
Bill No.  14 of  2015
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Definitions.
5

2
(b) 'youth' means a person who has attained the age of fifteen years but is not
above the age of thirty-two years;
(c) 'youth organisation' means an organisation of youth which provides for
universal membership, without any discrimination on the basis of race, religion,
language, caste, creed or sex and the Constitution of which provides for its democratic
functioning in respective States and Union territories, as the case may be; and
(d) 'prescribed' means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. The appropriate Government shall provide to every eligible youth,—
(a) compulsory and free education including technical education;
(b) materials like books, stationery and uniform free of cost;
(c) free hostel facilities;
(d) scholarships to meritorious students;
(e) free transport facilities;
(f) pocket allowance at the rate of rupees two hundred to rupees two hundred
fifty per month according to the age of the youth, as may be prescribed;
(g) recreational facilities free of cost; and
(h) free access to all libraries and technical institutions.
4. The appropriate Government shall provide,—
(a) training in sports to every eligible youth and facilities for participation in
sports activities both inside and outside the country;
(b) representation to youth organisations in sports associations; and
(c) such other facilities, as may be prescribed, for the welfare of youth, who
represent the country in sports, throughout his lifetime.
5. The appropriate Government shall provide nutritious meals free of cost to all the
students in schools, colleges, universities, hostels and technical institutions.
6. The appropriate Government shall provide medical and health care facilities to the
youth free of cost.
7. (1) The appropriate Government shall appoint an Expert Committee consisting of
such number of eminent educationists and psychologists, as may be prescribed, in every
district.
(2) The Expert Committee shall recommend the type of education or training in a
vocation to be imparted to a youth of the district after he or she passes the tenth class
examination.
8. The appropriate Government shall evolve a scheme under which every eligible
youth shall be imparted training in modern apprenticeship trades and vocations.
9. The Central Government shall provide military training to all the able-bodied
youth and those who successfully complete the training shall be given preference in
employment in defence services.
10. The appropriate Government shall provide—
(i) employment to the youth after completion of their education or training; or
(ii) unemployment allowance at such rate, as may be prescribed, till they are
provided with gainful employment.
11. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the State Governments for carrying out the purposes
of this Act.
Compulsory
and free
educational
facilities.
Sports facilities
to the youth.
Provision of
nutritious meal
in schools, etc.
Medical and
health care
facilities to the
youth.
Appointment
of Expert
Committees.
Training of the
youth in trade
and vocation.
Military
training to the
youth.
Provision of
employment.
Central
Government
to provide
adequate funds.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

12. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
3
Power to make
rules.
5
10

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Even after six decades of independence, no clear-cut policy for youth has been laid
down in our country. The education should be the right of every youth and not a privilege of
a few and employment should be guaranteed to them. The youth should be linked directly
with the production process. The disparities between the rural and urban youth should be
eliminated gradually. The youth today is also facing serious health problems, absolute
inadequacy in sports and cultural facilities. A considerable chunk of youth population is still
reeling under poverty. A proper policy is required to be evolved for comprehensive
development of the youth and proper utilization of their energies and education. A
comprehensive youth policy for their all-round development is, therefore, absolutely
necessary.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RAMESH POKHRIYAL 'NISHANK'
December 23, 2014.
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for compulsory and free education and also supply of
materials like books, stationery and uniform free of cost and pocket allowance to all the
youth. It also provides for free hostel and transport facilities and scholarships to youth.
Clause 4 provides for training and participation of youth in sports activities. Clause 5 provides
for nutritious diet free of cost to all the students in schools, colleges, universities and
hostels. Clause 6 provides for medical and health care facilities to all the youth. Clause 7
provides for appointment of an Expert Committee to recommend the type of education that is
to be imparted to the youth. Clause 8 provides for formulation of a scheme under which the
youth will be imparted training in modern apprenticeship trades and vocations. Clause 9
provides for military training to able-bodied youth by the Central Government. Clause 10
provides for employment to all the youth after completion of their education, training or
vocation or unemployment allowance till they are provided with gainful employment. Clause 11
provides for payment of adequate funds to the State Governments for carrying out the
purposes of the Act.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund
of India in respect of the Union territories. The State Governments will incur the expenditure
from their respective Consolidated Funds in respect of their States supplemented by assistance
from the Central Government. An annual recurring expenditure of about rupees three hundred
crore is likely to be incurred from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five crore is also likely to be incurred.
5

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 12 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of detail only and as such the
delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.
6

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for a comprehensive policy for the development of the
youth in the country.
————
(Dr. Ramesh Pokhriyal 'Nishank', M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—4205LS(E)—09-02-2015.