As IntropucED IN Lok SABHA

03 per oa

Bill No. 14 of 2004

THE UNEMPLOYMENT ALLOWANCE BILL, 2004
By
‘Snai R. Samipasiva Rao, M.P.
A
BILL

| provide for unemployment allowance to all educated unemployed persons and for
matter connected therewith,

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (7) This Act may be called the Unemployment Allowance Act, 2004,
(2) Itextends to the whole of India

(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
ification in the Official Gazette, appoint.

2. The Central Government shall provide unemployment allowance (0 all educated
mployed youth at the rate of —

(0 rupees one thousand per month to those who have attained the age of seventeen
years and have passed tenth class examination;

(di) rupees one thousand five hundred per month to those who have attained the
age of eighteen years and have studied upto higher secondary and above;

Short title,
extent and
commencement

‘Unemployment
allowance


2

(iid) rupees two thousand per month to those who possess technical qualifications
in engineering, medicine, etc., or have some other professional qualification.

Unemployment 3. The unemployment allowance referred to in section 2 shall be paid to a person till he
allowance to inful Fs

sare” Secures gainful employment

employment,

Repayment of 4. Every person who has been provided with unemployment allowance under pro’

मापन ‘ment of this Act shall, on securing employment, repay the total unemployment allowance which he
“4४४७० had received, to the Government at the rate of —

(i) rupees fifty per month, if he was receiving unemployment allownace of
rupees one thousand per month;

(ii) rupees one hundred per month, if he was receiving unemployment allowance
of rupees one thousand five hundred per month; and

(iii) rupees one hundred fifty, if he was receiving unemployment allowance of
rupees two thousand per month.

Power to 5. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
make rules. carrying out the purposes of this Act.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

‘The number of unemployed youth is on the increase. The Government has failed to
| employment in the country. The unemployed youth have become restless and have

cd taking law into their own hands. They often fall victim to anti-social elements. Suicides
unemployed youth have also been reported in some cases.

The most unfortunate fact is that even those who possess technical qualifications like
‘engineering, medical etc. face the same problem. Liberalisation of economic policy has also
failed to generate employment in the country. Therefore, it is absolutely necessary that the
Government should come up with some schemes for providing employment or in the alternate
provide relief to all unemployed persons till they secure employment. Although, the assistance
sought to be given will not be sufficient for them but nevertheless it will be a great help and
a source of confidence to them. It has also been provided that unemployed youth who get
‘unemployment allowance shall have to repay the allowance received by them to the
Government after they secure employment.

The Bill seeks to achieve the above objective.

New Deni; R. SAMBASIVA RAO.
June 22,2004.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 2 of the Bill provides for payment of unemployment allowance to all educated
unemployed youth according to their qualification

The Bill, therefore, if enacted will involve an expenditure from the Consolidated Fund
of India. It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees three hundred
crore is likely to be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India,


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 5 of the Bill empowers to the Central Government to make rules for carrying out the
| of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only.

The delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for unemploymgnt allowance to all educated unemployed persons and for
matters connected therewith.

(Shri R. Sambasiva Rao, M.P.)

MGIPMRNO—812LS—28 06 2004.