1
THE  PLANTATIONS  LABOUR (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2010
By
ADV. P.T. THOMAS, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Plantations Labour Act, 1951.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Plantations Labour (Amendment) Act, 2010.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notifica-
tion in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.  After Chapter IV of the Plantations  Labour Act, 1951 (hereinafter referred to as the
principal Act), the following Chapter shall be inserted,  namely:—
"CHAPTER IV A
WELFARE  AND  INSURANCE  SCHEMES  FOR  WORKERS
18A. (1) The Central Government shall formulate and notify, from time to time,
Short title
and
commence-
ment.
Insertion of
new Chapter
IV A.
Bill No. 14 of 2010
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
69 of 1951
Formulation
of welfare
schemes for
workers.
5
10

2
Amendment
of section 30.
suitable welfare schemes including insurance schemes for workers on matters relating
to —
(a) life and disability cover;
(b) health and maternity benefits;
(c) old age protection; and
(d) any other benefits as may be determined by the Central Government.
(2) Any scheme notified by the Central Government under sub-section (1) may be—
(i) wholly funded by the Central Government; or
(ii) partly funded by the Central Government and partly funded by the State
Government; or
(iii) partly funded by the Central Government, partly funded by the State
Government and partly funded through contributions collected from the beneficiaries
of the scheme or the employers as may be specified in the scheme by the Central
Government:
Provided that the contribution of the beneficiaries in any scheme, which provides for
part contribution by the beneficiaries, shall not, in any case, exceed two per cent. of the
monthly wages of the beneficiary.".
3. In section 30 of the Principal Act, in sub-section (1),—
(i) in clause (a), for the words "twenty days", the words "fifteen days" shall be
substituted; and
(ii) in clause (b), for the words "fifteen days", the words "twelve days" shall be
substituted.
4. In section 32 of the principal  Act, after sub-section (1), the following proviso shall
be inserted, namely:—
"Provided that the period for which a woman worker shall be entitled to obtain from
her employer the maternity allowance under clause (b) shall not be less than six months for
each child birth.".
Amendment
of section 32.
5
10
15
20
25

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Plantations Labour Act, 1951 was enacted to provide for the welfare  of  labour,
and to regulate the conditions of work in plantations.
Working in plantations is a hazardous occupation and most of the workers  in plantations
fall sick due to various diseases such as malaria, dengue, encephalitis, elephantiasis, etc.
Hundreds of plantation workers also die every year due to insect bites and snake bites. At
present, there is no insurance scheme for the plantation workers nor there is any scheme for
old age pension and other welfare measures for the aged persons.
The Bill seeks to increase the number of annual paid leave and also extend the maternity
benefit payable to women workers for a minimum period of six months per child birth. The Bill
also seeks to empower the Central Government to formulate welfare and insurance schemes
relating to life and disability cover, health, maternity and old-age benefits for the welfare of
the plantation workers.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; P.T. THOMAS
December 16, 2009
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to empower the Central Government to formulate welfare and
insurance schemes for the welfare of plantation labourers  covering life and disability insurance
cover, maternity benefits and old-age benefits. Clause 4 provides for maternity allowance
payable to women worker for a minimum period of six months per child birth.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund
of India. It is likely to involve a recurring expenditure of rupees fifty crore per annum.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.
4

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Plantations Labour Act, 1951.
————
(Adv. P .T. Thomas, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—282LS(S-5)—24.02.2010.