1
THE DISCLOSURE OF LOBBYING ACTIVITIES BILL, 2013
By
SHRI KALIKESH NARAYAN SINGH DEO, M.P.
A
BILL
to set up an Authority for registration of lobbyists; to provide for disclosure of lobbying
activities that influence legislative and executive decision-making in order to increase
transparency in governance and for matters connected therewith.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fourth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Disclosure of Lobbying Activities Act, 2013.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette appoint; and different dates may be appointed for different provisions
of this Act and any reference in such provision to the commencement of this Act shall be
construed as a reference to the coming into force of that provision.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. 14 of  2013
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "Authority" means the Lobbyists Registration Authority constituted under
section 3;
(b) "client" means any person or an organisation that employs another person
or organisation for financial or other benefits to conduct lobbying activities on its
behalf;
(c) "communication with a public servant" means an oral or written or electronic
communication with any public servant;
(d) "consultant lobbyist" means any person or an organization that conducts
lobbying activity on behalf of a third party client, in return for financial or any other
form of benefit;
(e) "employee" means any person who is an officer or a partner or a director or a
manager of a lobbying organisation;
(f) "lobbying activity" means an act of communication with and payment to a
public servant with the aim of influencing—
(i) introduction, passing or defeat of a Bill or any amendment thereto in
either House of Parliament or legislature of a State;
(ii) formulation, modification, implementation or termination of any
Government policy or programme;
(iii) awarding of a grant, loan, licence, contract, permit or allocation of
funds to an individual or an organisation;
(iv) decision of a public servant to transfer an asset, business or institution
that currently produces goods and services for the public, to a private person or
to a privately-owned organisation; and
(v) nomination or promotion of any person for a position in public office;
but does not include a communication that is—
(a) made by a person or a media organisation with the aim of
disseminating news or providing information to the public;
(b) made in a speech, article, editorial or any other publication
or through radio, television or any medium of communication that is
accessible by or available to the public;
(c) testimony given before a committee constituted by the
Government;
(d) made in response to a request for tender; and
(e) made in response to a published Government notice or
circular, soliciting communication from the public on matters connected
with Government legislation, policies and programmes.
(g) "lobbyist" means any person or an organization which conducts lobbying
activity either on his behalf or on behalf of a third party client, in return for financial or
other benefit;
(h) "payment" means contributions made in cash or kind and includes cost of
meals, retreat, vacation, meeting, conference, travel or support for election campaign
and offering gifts in the course of lobbying activity;
(i) "public servant" shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in the
Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988;
(j) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
Definitions.
49 of 1988.
5
10
15
20
25
30
45
35
40

3
(k) "Register of Lobbyists" means register maintained by the Lobbyists
Registration Authority of all registered lobbyists in the country; and
(l) "registrant" means a lobbyist who is registered with the Lobbyists Registration
Authority.
CHAPTER II
LOBBYISTS REGISTRA TION AUTHORITY
3. (1) The Central Government shall, within three months of the coming into force of
this Act, constitute an Authority to be known as the Lobbyists Registration Authority to
exercise the powers conferred on, and to perform the functions assigned to it, under this
Act.
(2) The headquarter of the Authority shall be at New Delhi.
4. (1) The Authority shall consist of—
(a) a Chairperson who shall have special knowledge and experience of not less
than twenty-five years, in matters relating to anti-corruption policy, public
administration, vigilance, finance, law or management;
(b) two members, who shall have judicial background;
(c) two members representing the Union Ministry of Home Affairs;
(d) one member representing the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India;
and
(e) not more than five members from the Indian Audit and Account Service,
to be nominated by the Central Government.
(2) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service of
the Chairperson and members of the Authority shall be such as may be prescribed by the
Central Government.
(3) The Central Government may, in consultation with the Authority, may appoint
such number of officers and staff for efficient functioning of the Authority as it may consider
necessary.
(4) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service of
the officers and staff of the Authority shall be such as may be prescribed by the Central
Government.
CHAPTER III
R
EGISTRATION OF LOBBYISTS
5. (1) Every person or organization, which intends to undertake any lobbying activity,
shall apply to the Authority for registration in such form and manner as may be prescribed.
(2) Every applicant, while submitting the application, shall furnish the following
information:—
(a) name, address and place of business;
(b) in case the applicant is a consultant lobbyist, name, address and place of
business of its client and details of such organizations as have direct interest in the
outcome of the lobbying activity or play a direct role in the lobbying activity by
funding, controlling or supervising the lobbying activity;
(c) subject-matter or the area in which the applicant intends to engage in lobbying
activity; and
(d) list of employees who will engage with public servants during the course of
lobbying activity and whether any of such employee has held any public office at any
time, prior to being employed by the applicant.
Constitution of
Lobbyists
Registration
Authority.
Composition of
the Authority.
Lobbyists to
register with
the Authority.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
(3) Every consultant lobbyist shall inform the Authority about the particulars of a
public servant with whom the lobbying activity will be conducted.
(4) Where an applicant intends to undertake lobbying activity on behalf of more than
one client, a separate application for registration under sub-section ( 1)  shall be made for
each client.
6. A registrant who—
(a) does not intend to conduct any further lobbying activity; or
(b) is no longer employed by a client to pursue a particular lobbying activity
may apply for termination of registration.
CHAPTER IV
FILING OF REPORTS
7. (1) Every registrant shall prepare and submit to the Authority a half-yearly report
giving a true and full account of its lobbying activities during that period.
(2) The half-yearly report under sub-section (1) shall be submitted by the tenth day of
January and the tenth day of July, respectively, during a calendar year:
Provided that where the tenth day is not a business day, the half-yearly report shall be
submitted on the business day immediately following the tenth day.
(3) The half-yearly report shall contain,—
(a) in case the registrant is a consultant lobbyist, full name, address and place of
business of the registrant and the client;
(b) full name, address and place of business of any organization, other than the
client, who controls or plays a direct role in the lobbying activity by funding, controlling
or supervising the lobbying activity or any organization that has a direct interest in the
outcome of the lobbying activities;
(c) in case client is a corporation, the name and business address of the
corporation including the name, address and place of business of its subsidiaries;
(d) in case client is a partnership company, the name, address and place of
business of the partners involved;
(e) in case client is a public sector unit, the percentage of holdings of the
Government of India in it;
(f) name, address and place of business of foreign organization, if any, involved
or associated in the lobbying activity;
(g) in case of registrant undertaking lobbying activity on its own, a list of the
employees of the organization involved in the lobbying activity;
(h) a list of the employees of the consultant lobbyist who are engaged in the
lobbying activity;
(i) details of the subject-matter of lobbying activity,—
(a) whether lobbying was undertaken for awarding of a contract; or
(b) grant for financial benefit or to influence a legislation or a policy or a
programme;
(j) outcome of a lobbying activity, if any;
(k) name and designation of public servant with whom the lobbyist engaged
with;
(l) the amount, description and date of payment, if any, made by the lobbyist to
the public servant;
Termination of
registration.
Registrants to
file half-
yearly reports.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

5
(m) dates of communication or meeting with the public servant with whom the
lobbying activity was undertaken;
(n) true and full estimate of the total expenses incurred by the registrant with
regard to the lobbying activity;
(o) in case of a consultant lobbyist, a true and full account of the expenses
incurred by the client in connection with lobbying activities; and
(p) such other details as may be prescribed.
8. The half-yearly report shall be submitted in electronic form as well as in such other
form as the Authority may direct.
CHAPTER V
POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF THE  AUTHORITY
9. The Authority shall perform the following functions—
(a) give such recommendations to the Central Government with regard to the
implementation of this Act and framing of rules and norms for registration and submission
of reports as it may consider necessary;
(b) maintain a Register of Lobbyists containing such particulars as may be
prescribed;
(c) maintain and verify the accuracy of the information contained in the reports
submitted by lobbyists in such manner as it may deem fit;
(d) obtain such information from the public servant as it deems necessary for
corroborating the information given by the registrant;
(e) prescribe fee for every registration from time to time;
(f) issue a notice to any registrant who fails to submit a half-yearly report or
provides inaccurate or incomplete information;
(g) conduct an investigation, if it has reasons to believe that any person or an
organization is engaged or was at any time engaged in lobbying activities without
being registered as a lobbyist  in the Register of Lobbyists;
(h) prepare an annual report concerning the administration of this Act and
forward it to the Central Government; and
(i) the annual report referred to in clause (h) shall contain—
(a) summary of information contained in registrations and reports filed by
lobbyists;
(b) details of investigations conducted against any person or any
organization under clause (g); and
(c) penalty imposed on any person or an organization proved guilty of
committing an offence under this Act.
CHAPTER VI
P
ENALTIES
10. (1) Any person or organization who engages in lobbying activity without
registration with the Authority shall be guilty of committing an offence under this Act and
shall be punished with a fine which may extend to fifty lakh rupees.
(2) Where any registrant on receipt of a notice issued to him under clause (f) of section 9
fails to remedy a defect in the report submitted by him to the Authority within a period of
sixty days from the date of receipt of such notice, the registration of such registrant shall
either be suspended for such period as the Authority may deem fit or cancelled forthwith and
such registrant shall also be punished with fine which may extend to seventy five lakh
rupees or imprisonment which shall not be more than five years or with both.
Mode of
submitting
reports.
Powers and
functions of
the Authority.
Penalty.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

6
(3) The Authority shall communicate every decision of suspension or cancellation of
registration taken under sub-section (1) to concerned public servants.
CHAPTER VII
DISCLOSURE BY PUBLIC SERV ANTS
11. Every public servant shall furnish information regarding payments received by him
from a lobbyist during the course of a lobbying activity to the Authority, in such form and
manner, as may be prescribed.
CHAPTER VIII
P
UBLICATION OF INFORMATION
12. The Authority shall make available to the public every information provided to it
by the registrant through a website maintained by it, in such form and manner, as may be
prescribed.
CHAPTER IX
M
ISCELLANEOUS
13. (1) The Authority shall, as soon as may be, after the end of each financial year,
prepare and submit to the Central Government in such form, as may be prescribed, a report
giving an account of its activities during that financial year.
(2) The Central Government shall cause such report to be laid before both Houses of
Parliament, as soon as may be, after it is submitted.
14. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 or in any other law for the time
being in force or in any instrument having effect by virtue of any law other than this Act.
15. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is make,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of  thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such  modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Information
to be furnished
by public
servants.
Information
to be  made
available to
public.
Submission of
annual report.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to
make rules.
49 of 1988.
5
10
15
20
25
30

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Representative democracy necessitates that the interests of all individuals and groups
are heard and addressed during formulation of legislation or policy so that the resultant laws
and policies are in the interest of all sections of the governed. Lobbying provides an
opportunity for individuals and organizations to voice their views on Government decisions
that affect them and those around them and hence, forms an integral part of democratic
functioning.
However, there is a growing fear among the public that lobbyists, especially corporate
lobbyists, are gaining undue powers to influence public policy and that decisions arising
from such lobbying activities are detrimental to the interests of the exchequer and the public
at large.
Given the inherent advantages and necessity of lobbying, what we need is not
regulation that bans or prohibits lobbying, rather, we need a regulation that will set norms for
the functioning of lobbyists and provide for public availability of information regarding their
activities. Having access to information on who is engaging in lobbying activities, who is
being lobbied, who is funding these activities and the issues on which lobbying is being
conducted will create greater public awareness on lobbying activities. This will strengthen
transparency and accountability in governance and increase public confidence in the
Government. Public availability of information on lobbying activities will also serve as a
check and balance on the acts of and demands made by the lobbyists.
The Government has recently taken a huge step to bolster the transparency of national
governance through the Right to Information Act, 2005. This Bill is a move in the same
direction and addresses the above-mentioned issues.
N
EW DELHI;
November 8, 2012 KALIKESH  NARAYAN  SINGH  DEO
7

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for constitution of an Authority for Registration of
Lobbyists. Clause 4 provides for salary and allowances payable to the Chairperson, members,
officers and staff of the Authority. Clause 9 provides for maintaining a register of lobbyists,
conducting of investigation into matters of lobbying without registration and preparation of
annual report by the Authority. Clause 12 provides for publication of information submitted
by registrants to the Authority.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund
of India. It is estimated that a recurring  expenditure of about rupees five hundred crore will
be involved per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees two hundred and fifty crore is also likely to be
involved.
8

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 15 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power  is of a normal character.
9

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to set up an Authority for registration of lobbyists; to provide for disclosure of lobbying
activities that influence legislative and executive decision-making in order to increase
transparency in governance and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Kalikesh Narayan Singh Deo, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—4587LS—13.02.2013.