Short title and
commencement.
Amendment
of article 217.
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017
By
SHRIMATI MEENAKASHI LEKHI, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth  Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2017.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In article 217 of the Constitution, in clause (1), for the words "sixty-two years", the
words "sixty-five years" shall be substituted.
3. In article 224 of the Constitution, in clause (3), for the words "sixty-two years", the
words "sixty-five years" shall be substituted.
Bill  No. 14  of  2017
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Amendment
of article 224.
5

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Clause (1) of article 217 of the Constitution allows every Judge of High Court to hold
office until he attains the age of sixty-two years. Clause (3) of article 224 of the Constitution
provides that no person appointed as an additional or acting Judge of a High Court shall
hold office after attaining the age of sixty-two years. The age of retirement of the High Court
Judges, which was fixed at sixty years in the beginning, was enhanced to sixty-two years by
the Constitution (Fifteenth Amendment) Act, 1963. Since then, no revision has taken place in
this regard.
The Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public
Grievances, Law and Justice, in its 39th Report dated the 29th April, 2010, has recommended
to raise the retirement age of the Judges of the High Courts from sixty-two years to sixty-five
years. Hence, in view of this it is expedient and necessary to enhance the age of the
Supreme Court Judges from Sixty-two to Sixty-five years. Further, most of the reasons
adduced by the Fifth Central Pay Commission in support of its recommendation for increas-
ing the age of retirement of the Central Government employees, such as global practices,
increase in life expectancy, improved health standards, need for utilization of experience and
wisdom of senior employees, etc. would also apply to the Judges. Besides this, after their
retirement the judges are being appointed by Government in various Tribunals, Appellate
Tribunals and other bodies which is antithesis and not in consonance with the spirit of the
preamble of the Constitution. The increase in age of retirement will altogether stop the
employment of Judges after their retirement.
Independence of judiciary is an essential attribute of rule of law, which is a basic
feature of the Constitution. Judiciary must be free from all pressures including the pressures
from executive as well as psychological pressure on the Judges related to their future after
retirement. The Judges are required to ensure the independence and impartiality of judiciary
by keeping themselves free from any allurement of employment under the Government after
their retirement.
The Constitution of India, specifically prohibits the Chairman of Union Public Service
Commission and its Members and the Chairman of State Public Service Commission and its
Members for further employment either under the Government of India or under the
Government of any State. The Constitution of India, on the other hand nowhere restricts or
prohibits retired Chief Justice and Judges of the High Courts to hold further employment
either under the Government of India or under any of the State Governments.
Article 148 (4) provides that the Comptroller and Auditor-General shall not be eligible
for further office either under the Government of India or under the Government of any State
after he has ceased to hold his office.
The Chief Justice and Judges of the various High Courts, the Comptroller and Auditor
General of India, the Chairman of Union Public Service Commission, the Chairman of the
State Public Service Commission and the Members of these Commissions are constitutional
functionaries and they should be kept free from all kinds of allurement of employment under
the Government after cessation of their office.
It is presumed that reappointment of Judges would have effect of undermining the
independence and fairness of judiciary.
In view of the present state of vacancies of Judges in High Courts, it is extremely
difficult to clear the heavy pendency of cases in the High Courts. Increasing the age of
retirement by three more years would restrict occurrence of new vacancies on account of
superannuation  for the next three years during which time the existing backlog in vacancies
2

3
could be cleared. This would have a clear impact on reduction of pendency of cases in the
High Courts.
It is, therefore, proposed to increase the age of retirement of Judges and additional or
acting Judges of High Courts to sixty-five years.
Hence the Bill.
NEW DELHI; MEENAKASHI LEKHI
November 23, 2016.

4
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * *
217. (1) Every Judge of a High Court shall be appointed by the President by warrant
under his hand and seal after consultation with the Chief Justice of India, the Governor of the
State, and, in the case of appointment of a Judge other than the Chief Justice, the Chief
Justice of High Court, shall hold office, in the case of an additional or acting Judge, as
provided in article 224, and in any other case, until he attains the age of sixty-two years:
*                                              *                                               *                                              *
224. (1)  *                              *                                               *                                              *
(2)  *                                       *                                               *                                              *
(3) No person appointed as an additional or acting Judge of a High Court shall hold
office after attaining the age of sixty-two years.
Appointment
and conditions
of the Office
of a Judge of a
High Court.
Appointment
of additional
and acting
Judges.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shrimati Meenakashi Lekhi, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—4060LS(S3)—31-01-2017.