a REreee ed

AS InrRODUCED IN Lok SAnHA

25 Fen 200

Bill No. 14 of 2000
—_———

| SCHEDULED CASTES AND THE SCHEDULED TRIBES (RESERVATION IN
EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS) BILL, 2000

By
Stiri RASHTRAPAL PRAVINCHANDRA SoMABHA, MLB.
ik
BILL

‘9 provide for reservation for students belonging 10 the Scheduled Castes
and the Scheduled Tribes for admission in all courses of study
including technical courses.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as
follows:— है

1. (7) This Act may be called the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes
(Reservation in Educational Institutions) Act, 2000.

(2) It extends to the whole of India,

(3) It shall come into force at once.

( It shall apply to every educational institution, as defined in this Act,
Which is maintained by the appropriate Government or receiving grant-in-aid from
the appropriate Government or recognised by the appropriate Government or
University established by any Act of Parliament.or a State Legislature or deemed

Short title,
exiznt, com-
mencement
and applica-
tion.


Definitions.

Percentage of
reservation.

Duty to admit
students
belonging to
SCYSTs.

Eligibility of
children of
‘migrant labour
ete for
admission.

Caste
certificate and
verification.

2

University, Post Graduates, Centres and affiliated educational institutions bound
by any Act, rules or instructions or orders in force issued under an Act or by the
appropriate Government or authority but not inconsistent with this Act.

2. In this Act unless the context otherwise requires,—

(a) “appropriate Government” means the Central Government or the
State Government, as the case may be;

(b) “academic Year” means an academic year as defined in the relevant
Acts or rules or education code or directions issued by the appropriate
Government;

(c) “education” means all courses of study in all disciplines at all levels
including super-speciality courses;

(4) “educational Institution” means and includes every school or college
or an institution where course in any discipline is imparted or research is
conducted or training in any form is given at all levels and in all disciplines;

(e) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;

(0 “rules” means rules or instructions or directions made under this
Act or of those existing but not inconsistent with this Act and rules;

(g) “Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes” shall have the same
meanings assigned to them, respectively, under clause (24) and clause (25) of
article 366 of the Constitution of India and notified by the President of India
under articles 341 (1) or 342 (1) and as amended from time to time.

3. The appropriate Government shall provide for reservation of seats in all
courses of study or faculties in all educational institutions for the students
belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes at such percentage
as may be prescribed by the appropriate Government, from time to time, in proportion
to the population of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes to the total
population in the appropriate State or Union territory as per the latest census.

4. (7) It shall be mandatory for every educational institution and in-charge
thereof to admit the students belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled
Tribes in such proportion as may be prescribed under section 3.

Explanation:—The number of seats reserved for Scheduled Castes/Sched-
uled Tribes, as the case may be, shall not include admission on the basis of merit
of students belonging to Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes.

(2) Wherever sufficient students belonging to the Scheduled Castes or the
Scheduled Tribes are not available for admission in any course to fill up seats
reserved for a particular category, it shall be the duty of the admitting authority to
admit available candidates from the Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes, vice versa,
as the case may be, to the unfilled seats of the particular category.

5. In case of a child of a migrant labourer or an employee of All India Service
or Central Government or an employee in a service or employment where inter-
State transfers are done, belongs to a Scheduled Caste or Scheduled Tribe, as the
case may be, in the native State, but does not belong to a notified Scheduled Caste
or Scheduled Tribe in the migrated, transferred or allotted State, shall be admitted
in an educational institution as if the child belonged to a Scheduled Caste or the
Scheduled Tribe as notified in the State where, the parent has been transferred or
migrated.

6. (1) Every student belonging to a Scheduled Caste or Scheduled Tribe
seeking admission in any educational institution shall obtain caste certificate from
the competent authority empowered to issue such certificate from his native State.

201

क्‍

40

45


3

| Every student belonging to Scheduled Caste/Scheduled Tribe shall be
admitted in an educational institution subject to production of the caste certificate
within one month from the date of admission.

(3) On making admission, the Head of the educational institution, shall im-
mediately transmit the original caste certificate produced together with the ad-
mission form of the student to the Director of Social Welfare or Tribal Welfare
Department of the appropriate Government for enquiry and report to the educa-
tional institution of the correctness or genuineness of the social status claimed
by the concerned admitted candidate.

(4) On receipt of the original caste certificate, the Director of Social Wel-
fare or Tribal Welfare Department, himself or by an officer authorised by him in
that behalf or as per the existing procedure, shall verify or cause verification
conducted and send necessary report to the concerned educational institution
within a period of two months.

(5) In case the report is adverse to the student, the concerned institution
shall forthwith issue a show-cause notice to the student enclosing a copy of the
report received from the Director of Social Welfare or Tribal Welfare Department,
calling for an explanation within a specified time of not less than ten days.

(6) On receipt of the explanation, if any, within the specified time or extended
time which shall not be more than five days, and if the student seeks an opportunity
of personal hearing by himself, the same may be given thereon and the concerned
authority shall take appropriate decision thereon within a period of one month, as
per rules complying with the principles of natural justice and pass appropriate
orders as the case warrants with brief reasons in support of his conclusion.

(7) The aggrieved student or guardian may file an appeal against the said
order to the Secretary of the concerned Ministry of the appropriate Government
under whose control the educational institution functions.

(8) The Secretary shall, after giving an opportunity of being heard in person
to the aggrieved student and in case of minor by the parent or legal guardian, shall
decide the appeal with brief reasons in support thereof, within two months from
the date of filing of the appeal.

(9) The decision of the appellate authority shall be final and binding on the
parties concerned.

(70) The order shall be communicated to the student or guardian and Director,
Social or Tribal Welfare Department of the appropriate Government.

7. (1) The appropriate Government may prescribe relaxation in the upper age
limit in case of students belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled
Tribes and such age limit shall not be less than five years:

Provided that if any rule in force or operation, is more favourable to the
‘Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, that rule shall remain valid and operate
unless it is amended by the rules made under this Act.

(2) Every eudcational institution shall exempt payment of any fee for taking
‘admission to such extent as may be prescribed in case of students belonging to
the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes.

(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law or judgement or
ler or decree of a court or Tribunal or Authority to the contrary, the requirement
$ to certain percentage or marks, with reference to the qualifying examination or
trance examination, or both, if combined, for admission, in the appropriate course
study etc., shall not be applicable to students belonging to Scheduled Caste/
eduled Tribe.

Relaxation and
‘concessions.


Protection of
the action
taken in good
faith.

Liaison Officer.

Duty of the
Head of the
educational

institution.

Report.

4

Explanation: Relaxation of marks in favour of students/candidates belonging
to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes shall be only for admission into the
course of study or faculty and there shall be no relaxation of marks for qualifying
examination for degree course.

(4) Every student belonging to a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe shall
be paid travelling allowance for attending interviews for admission in any course.

8. No suit prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against any
educational institution or Head of the institution, for anything done in good faith
in implementation of the provisions of this Act or rules made thereunder or in
operation

9. Every Director of School Education (Secondary Education/Intermediate
Board/Higher Education etc.) by whatever name be called or an officer of the
appropriate Government who has ultimate supervisory jurisdiction over the
concerned educational institution shall nominate such number of officer or officers
not below the rank of District/Deputy Education Officer to ensure proper
implementation of this Act, who shall, in particular, be responsible for—

(i) proper and full implementation of this Act and rules made thereunder
or existing order, instructions or directions issued by the appropriate
Government;

(ii) making the annual inspection of the records of the educational
institutions in such a manner as may be prescribed or as is in vogue;

(iii) to do such other incidental work as may be necessary for effective
implementation of this Act or rules made under this Act or in force not
inconsistent with this Act or the rules made thereunder;

(iv) scrutinising annual reports received from each educational
institution and submit recommendations thereon to the appropriate
Government.

10. (1) Every educational institution shall maintain such records as may be
prescribed and shall furnish in every academic year to the appropriate Government
in such manner and within such time as may be prescribed

(2) Every educational institution shall submit an annual report on the
admission of the students/candidates belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the
Scheduled Tribes made in the educational institution or under its control to the
concerned District educational officer.

(3) It shall be the duty of the Head/Incharge of the educational institution to
make available such records or documents in particular of false claim of caste
status and action taken thereon and the result thereof, shortfall of reserved seats
for inspection by the liaison officer or the District Education Officer and furnish
such information or arrange such assistance as may be necessary for him to carry
out his functions under this Act. J

11. (7) The appropriate Government shall submit periodically, to the Central
Government, and to the Legislature of the State, every year the consolidated re-
port of the students admitted in higher education, false claims of social status
detected and the result of the action taken;

(2) The report shall also contain the number of unfilled seats and those filled
with general category candidates, with reasons therefor;

(3) The report shall be caused to be laid on the Table of both the Hou:
Parliament/Legislature of the State by the appropriate Government.

of

10


20

25

5

12. Whoever responsible for implementation of any provision of this Act or
rules made under this Act or in vogue, has been found contravened or failed to
implement the same or rules made by the appropriate Government under this Act or
are in operation shall.be punished with imprisonment which may extend upto six
months and with fine of not less than rupees three thousand or with both:

Provided that nothing in this section shall render any person liable to
punishment, if he proves that he had made every bona fide endeavour or
exercised utmost care, attention and diligence to implement the provision of the
Act and rules made under the Act or are in force.

13. (1) Whosoever knowingly makes a false claim that he is a member of a
Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe, as the case may be, and whosoever charged
with the responsibility of issuing a caste certificate, knowingly issues a false caste
certificate or knowingly attests an affidavit and subsequently it is proved that the
person does not belong to a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe, shall be
punished with imprisonment of not less than one year and fine which may extend
upto rupees ten thousand.

(2) Whenever any question arises whether the caste certificate is correct
and genuine the burden of proof that thé contents of the affidavit/caste certificate
is not false to his knowledge, shall lie on the accused/certificate issuing authority.

(3) The conviction under sub-section (2) of this section shall disqualify the
person for future admission in any other educational institution or appointment in
any establishment under the appropriate Government with status as Scheduled
Castes/Scheduled Tribe and the accused shall not be eligible to contest an election
to the House of the People or Legislative Assembly of a State and the provision of
the Representation of the People Act, 1951 shall be deemed to have been amended
accordingly.

14. The notification issued by the President of India under Article 341 (1) or
342 (1) of the Constitution of India or as amended by Scheduled Castes and
Scheduled Tribes orders (Amendment) Act, 1976 of the Social Status of the caste
or sub-caste/tribe shall be conclusive proof of the caste/sub-caste/tribe/sub-tribe.

15. (1) No prosecution for an offence under this Act shall be maintained
against an officer except by, or with sanction of, the appropriate Government.

(2) The appropriate Government shall consult the National Commission for
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes before grant of sanction under section
197 of Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 and the advice tendered by it shall be
binding on the Government.

(3) No court shall take cognizane of an offence punishable under this Act
save on a complaint by the aggrieved person or on a report by a competent Police
Officer or except as pgovided under sub-section (1).

(४) 1४० Court, inferior to that of a Metropolitan or a judicial Magistrate of
the First Class, shall try an offence punishable under this Act

(5) An offence under the Act shall be non-bailable,

16. Every educational institution shall be bound by the Act and rules made
under this Act or existing rules, not contrary to or inconsistent with the provisions
of this Act or as the Central Government may, by general or special order, in writing
from time to time, to give effect to the provisions of this Act

17. All rules made by the Government of India or the concerned
State Government or the Union Territory or Local body regulating
the implementation of the reservation of seats for admission in the educational

Penalty for
contravention
of provisions
of the Act

Penalty for false
claims or tssue
of false social
comtificate

Proof of
castes,

Cognizance of
the offence by
courts

Power of
Central
Government to
give

directions
Effect and

extent of the
operation of
existing rules,


Act to have
over-riding
effect.

Removal of
difficulties,

Annual
report to be
Aid in
Parliament

Power to make
rules,

6

institutions under its control to safeguard the interests of the Scheduled Castes
and the Scheduled Tribes, before the commencement of this act and which are
not inconsistent with the Provisions of this Act or rules made thereunder
shall be in force.

18. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything
inconsistent therewith contained in any other law, order, judgement or decree of
any court, tribunal or authority for the time being in force or any instrument
having effect by virtue of any law.

19. (1) [any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act,
the central Government may, by order to be published in the official Gazette,
make such provisions for removing any difficulty.

(2) Every instruction or direction or order made under sub-section (1) shall,
soon after it is made, be laid before each House of Parliament.

20. The Central Government shall lay a report every year giving full detail
of the implementation of the Act during the preceding year before each House of
the Parliament.

21. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the official Ga-
zette, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.

(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing,
Such rules may provide for all or any of कर following matters, namely,—

(a) the percentage of seats to be reserved for admission in educational
institutions for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes consistent
with the percentage of population in the latest census;

(b) guidelines for identifying educational institutions which are not
already covered under section 2(d) for inclusion therein;

(c) relaxation of upper age limit or percentage of qualifying marks for
admission into educational institutions/courses of study or faculty wherever
reservation for admissison is made;

(4) exemption from payment of application fee or relaxation thereof:

(०) authority to determine the travelling allowance payable,, if any, for
attending the interview for admission in the educational institutions, to the
candidates. belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes;

(A) rank of the officer to be nominated as a liaison officer or inspection
officer;

(g) forms prescribed for maintaining the records and documents relating
to the implementation of the Act;

(h) the authority to sanction Prosecution against the officer or officers
who have contravened the provisions of the Act:

(7 the procedure for inquiry by the educational institutions or appel-
late authority against false claim of social status by any of the candidate.

0) any other matter which is required to be or may be prescribed:

15

20

25

30

35

40


wy)

(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be, after it
made,, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more
Successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately fol-
lowing the session or the’ successive session aforesaid, both houses agree in
making any modification in the rules or both Houses agree that the rules should
ot be made, the rules shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or
e of no effect, as the case may be; so however, that any such modification or
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done
inder this Act or rules made thereunder.



SCHEDULE
AFFIDAVIT

I = son/daughter of
— of Village/Town within the jurisdiction of —~—————_________
— Police Station in ‘Taluk/Mandal

~— in the District/Division--—--_____________ ० the State/
Union Territory belong to
——— Community/Caste/Tribe which is recognised in item No, ————__—-
— as the Scheduled Caste/Scheduled Tribe under the Constitution (Scheduled
Caste/Scheduled Tribe) Order, 1950 as amended from time to time by the Scheduled
Caste/Scheduled Tribe List Modification Order, 1956, the Bombay Reorganisation
Act, 1960, the Punjab Reorganisation Act, 1966, the State of Himachal Pradesh
Act, 1970 the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation), 1971 and the Scheduled
Caste/Scheduled Tribe Order Amendment Act, 1976. | ————-,, son/daughter
of —————- further state that- myself and my parents ordinarily/normally
reside in the said Village/Town and within the jurisdiction of — Police
Station in ——————Taluk/Mandai in the District/Division——

of the —_____— State/Union Territory. I further solemnly verify and
state that the facts stated above are true and correct to the best of my knowledge
and belief and no part of the statement is incorrect or false.

signature
Attested by Gazetted Officer

Note: In case the candidate is son/daughter of a migrant labourer/transferee, it
should further be stated in the affidavit the date of migration/transfer and the
duration of stay in the migrated/transferred State in which the Caste/Tribe was
not recognised as a Scheduled Caste/Scheduled Tribe.

The following are cligible to attest the affidavit:

(1) District Magistrate/Additional District Magistrate/Collector, Deputy
Commissioner/Additional Deputy Comissioner/Deputy Collector/First Class
Stipendary Magistrate/Sub Divisional Magistrate/Taluk Magisrate/Executive
Magistrate/Extra Assistant Commissisoner.

(2) Chief Presidency Magistrate/Additional Chief Presidency Magistrate/
Presidency Magistrate.

(3) Revenue Officer not below the rank of Tehsildar and

(4) Sub-Divisional Officer/Mandal, Revenue/Development Officer of the area
where the candidate and/or his family normally resides.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The Constitution of India assures equality of opportunity and of status,
socio-economic justice to all the citizens of the country.

Due to practice of untouchability on the Scheduled Castes and people living
in the inaccessible scheduled areas, they have been denied education and
opportunity for higher education

Article 46 of the Constitution imposes a duty on the State to Promote with
special care of the educational interest, in particular of the Scheduled Castes
and the Scheduled Tribes and shall protect them from social injustice.

Article 38 imposes duty on the State that it shall Strive to promote the
welfare of the people by securing and Protecting as effectively as it may a social
order in which justice social, economic and political shall inform all the institutions of
national life and to endeavour to eliminate inequalities in status, facilities and Opportunities
among individuals as well as groups of people of the country.

Article 5140) imposes fundamental duty on every citizen to strive towards
excellence in all spheres of individual and collective activity so that the nation
consistently rises to higher levels of endeavour and achievement. For this purpose,
Special provision for the social and. educational advancement of the Scheduled
Castes and Scheduled Tribes, has been made.

It has been the policy of the Government of India and the State Governments
to provide, in implementation of the aforesaid Constitutional mandates,
reservation in admission in all educational institutions in all the courses of study,
faculties and disciplines to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes not
only in humanities but in engineering, technical, medical, post-graduation,
M.Phil., Ph.D., super-specialities and technical courses of study so that the every
Scheduled Caste and the Scheduled Tribe educated youth have opportunity to improve
intellectual excellence and secure equality of status and dignity in the society.

In Indira Sawheny case, the Supreme Court opined that reservation in
‘echnical, super-specialities and other advanced and specialised courses of study
shall not be made for the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes.

In another instance in Dr. Preeti Srivastava's case, the Supreme Court held
that reservation in super-specialities in medical courses of study is not in the
national interest and cannot be made and directed the Medical Council of India
to consider whether reservation for admission in Post-graduation course of study
can be provided to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes.

The five Judges Bench of the Supreme Court in post-graduation centre in
Chandigarh case, held that clubbing of the single post in post-graduation or in
super-specialities is illegal

It also held that relaxation of marks with disparity of ten marks between
general and reserved candidates for admission of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled
Tribes to the extent of reserved seats as illegal.

The aforesaid judgements defeat the very object of the reservation policy,
Purpose and constitutional animation and deny opportunity to the Scheduled
Castes and Scheduled Tribes of education and deprive them to strive towards
intellectual excellence in all spheres of their educational activities and to
improve their cultural advancement.


10

With a view to effectively implementing the policy of reservation to the
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in admission to the seats at the
prescribed percentage in all courses of study and in all faculties, disciplines,
professional courses etc. and to relieve the hardship to the Scheduled Castes
and the Scheduled Tribes from the afore-mentioned Judgements, it is proposed
to bring a law.

Hence this Bill.

New Deni; RASHTRAPAL PRAVINCHANDRA SOMABHAI.
23 December, 1999.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

No additional/fresh recurring or non-recurring expenditure is likely to
volve from the Consolidated Fund of India since the existing concerned
ments and Ministries are already implementing the scheme of reservation

1



MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 21 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for
carrying out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail
only, the delegation of the legislative power is of a normal character,


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for reservation for students belonging to the Scheduled Castes and
the Scheduled Tribes for admission in all courses of study including technical
courses.

(Shri Rashtrapal Pravinchandra Somabhai, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—3398LS—17-02-2000.