"a =

"2 MBN 7008
\

. As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

Bill No. 14 of 2006

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2006
By
इप्तारा KASHIRAM RANA, M.P.
Surther to amend the Constitution of India.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2006. ‘ Short title.
2. Inarticle 75 of the Constitution — Amendment
~ of article 75.

(i) in clause (1) the following proviso shall be added at the end:—

“Provided that the Prime Minister and the other Ministers shall be
appointed from amongst the elected members of the House of the People”;

(ii) In clause (1B), for the words “to either House of Parliament”, the words
“to the House of the People” shall be substituted;

e.
(iii) In clause (5), for the words “either House of Parliament”, the words “the
House of the People” shall be substituted.



2:
के ५५५८ 4
Amendment of 3. Sie 164 of the Constitution,
article 164. i
(i in clause (1), after the existing proviso, the following proviso shall be

inserted, namely:—
“Provided further that Chief Minister and the other Ministers shall

be appointed from amongst the elected members of the legislative 5
assembly of the State”.

(ii) for clause (1B), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—

“(1B) Amember of the Legislative Assembly of a State belonging to
any political party who is disqualified for being a member of the House
under paragraph 2 of the Tenth Schedule shall also be disqualified to be 10
appointed as a Minister under clause (1) for duration of the period com-
mencing from the date of his disqualification till the date on which the
term of his office as such member would expire or where he contests any
election to the Legislative Assembly of a State before the expiry of such
period, till the date on which he is declared elected, whichever is earlier.”. 15

(iii) in clause (4), for the words “Legislature of the State”, the words
“Legislative Assembly of the State” shall be substituted.



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Article 75 of the Constitution provides that the Union Council of Ministers shall
be responsible to the House of the People. Of Jate it has been observed that a large
number of Ministers are being appointed to the Council of Ministers from the Council
of States. The trend is worrying as representatives of people, i.e., the members of the
House of the People who have been elected by the people are not being given the
opportunity to serve the people who have elected them. Since the Council of
Ministers is responsible to the House of the People, it is desirable that the Ministers
should invariably be appointed from amongst the elected members of the House of
People. Similar situation exists in case of States having two Houses of the Legislature.
Corresponding provision is required to be made in case of the States also.

The Bill seeks to achieve the above objective.

New DELHI; KASHIRAM RANA.
February 8,2006.

we


ANNEXURE

EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * * * *

75. (1) The Prime Minister shall be appointed by the President and the other Other
Ministers shall be appointed by the President on the advice of the Prime Minister. as to Ministers

(1A) The total number of Ministers, including the Prime Minister, in the Council
of Ministers shall not exceed fifteen per cent. of the total number of members of the
House of the People.

(1B) A member of either House of Parliament belonging to any political party
who is disqualified for being a member of that House under paragraph 2 of the Tenth
Schedule shall also be disqualified to be appointed as a Minister under clause (i) for
duration of the period commencing from the date of his disqualification till the date on
which the term of his office as such member would expire or where he contests any
election to either House of Parliament before the expiry of such period, till the date on
which he is declared elected, whichever is earlier.

(2) * * * * *
(3) * * * * *
(4) * * * * *

(5) A Minister who for any period of six consecutive months is not a member of
either House of Parliament shall at the expiration of that period cease to be a Minister.

= * * * * *

164. (1) The Chief Minister shall be appointed by the Governor and the other Other provis
Ministers shall be appointed by the Governor on the advice of the Chief Minister, and as to Minis
the Ministers shall hold office during the pleasure of the Governor:

Provided that in the States of Bihar, Madhya Pradesh and Orissa, there shall be
a Minister in charge of tribal welfare who may, in addition, be in charge of the welfare
of the Scheduled Castes and backward classes of any other work.

(1A) The total number of Ministers, including the Chief Minister, in the Council
of Ministers in a State shall not exceed fifteen per cent. of the total number of members
of the Legislative Assembly of that State:

Provided that the number of Ministers, including the Chief Minister in a State
shall be not less than twelve:

Provided further that where the total number of Ministers including the Chief
Minister in the Council of Ministers in any State at the commencement of the Consti-
tution (Ninety-first Amendment) Act, 2003 exceeds the said fifteen per cent. or the
numbers specified in the first proviso, as the case may be, then the total number of
Ministers in that State shall be brought in conformity with the provisions of this
clause within six months from such date as the President may by public notification
appoint.

(1B) A member of the Legislative Assembly of a State of either House of the
Legislature ofa State having Legislative Council belonging to any political party who
is disqualified for being a member of that House under paragraph 2 of the Tenth
Schedule shall also be disqualified to be appointed as a Minister under clause (1) for
duration of the period commencing from the date of his disqualification till the date on
which the term of his office as such member would expire or where he contests any

4



5 a
election to the Legislative Assembly of a State or either a House of the Legislature of
a State having Legislative Council, as the case may be, before the expiry of such
period, till the date on which he is declared electedg whichever is earlier.

(2)
(3) है ss

(4) A Minister who for any period of six consecutive months is nota member of
the Legislature of the State shall at the expiration of that period cease to be a Minister.

* * * * *

* * *

* * * * * * *


LOK SABHA:

A =
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.

(Shri Kashiram Rana, M.P,)

MGIPMRND—5533LS(S-5)—22-02-2006.