1
THE EMPLOYMENT OPPOR TUNITIES AND UNEMPLOYMENT
ALLOWANCE TO YOUTH BILL, 2016
By
SHRI GOPAL CHINAYYA SHETTY, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for creation of employment opportunities and payment of unemployment
allowance to youth by the Government and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  ( 1) This Act may be called the Employment Opportunities and Unemployment
Allowance to Youth Act, 2016.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No. 150 of  2016
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title,
extent and
commencement
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "Fund" means the National Employment Fund constituted under section 5;
(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(d) "youth" means a citizen who has attained the age of eighteen years but has
not attained the age of forty years.
3. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
every youth shall have the right to gainful employment to be provided by the appropriate
Government in Government or private sector,  as the case may be.
4. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law in force for the time being,
every unemployed youth shall be entitled to receive unemployment allowance, at such rate,
as may be prescribed;
Provided that a youth who rejects the employment offered to him shall not be entitled
to unemployment allowance.
5. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
a National Employment Fund for payment of unemployment allowance under this Act.
(2) There shall be credited to the—
(a) grants by the Central Government and the State Governments; and
(b) grants from individuals and other organisations including international
organisations.
6. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of  any other
law, for the time being in force.
7. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Gazette of India, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry  of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
Definition.
Right to
gainful
employment.
Unemployment
allowance to
unemployed
adult citizens.
Constitution
of National
Employment
Fund.
Act not in
derogation of
any other law.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Crores of educated and technically qualified young persons are unemployed. They go
to employment offices again and again where vacancies are displayed and there they submit
their applications. But they do not get employment because creation of employment is nil in
both government and non-government sectors. Thousands compete for a single post. That
is why youth of the country is frustrated and their number is increasing day-by-day as new
lots of graduates, post-graduates and diploma and degree holders become a part of
unemployed persons.
These frustrated young persons are being exploited by anti-social and anti-national
elements and many unemployed youth are turning towards crimes and terrorism. Educated,
skilled and unskilled young  persons are migrating to foreign countries in search of employment
and better life. This brain drain is due to lack of employment opportunities in our country.
The Government should make concerted efforts at state and national level to check
this trend. The right to employment should be recognized and the payment of unemployment
allowance must be made compulsory.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; GOPAL CHINAYYA SHETTY
May 5, 2016.
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for payment of unemployment allowance to every
unemployed youth. Clause 5 provides for constitution of National Employment Fund for
payment of  unemployment allowance. It also provides that Central Government shall grant
to the Fund.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund
of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about rupees two thousand crore per
annum would be involved from Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees fifteen crore is also likely to be involved.
4

5
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the provisions of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of details only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for creation of employment opportunities and payment of unemployment
allowance to youth by the Government and for matters connected therewith
or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Gopal Chinayya Shetty, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—1148LS(S3)—02-07-2016.