1
THE NON-RESIDENT INDIANS (VOTING RIGHTS AND
WELFARE) BILL, 2014
By
DR. BHOLA SINGH, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for voting rights and setting up of a National Commission for Non-
Resident Indians for the purpose of providing assistance to them in the
countries where they reside and work and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Non-Resident Indians (V oting Rights and
Welfare) Act, 2014.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(i) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government
of that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
Bill No. 150 of  2014
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title and
extent.
Definitions.
5

2
(ii) "Commission" means the National Commission for Non-Resident
Indians set up under section 5;
(iii ) "Committee" means the Non-Resident Indian Coordination
Committee set up under section 9;
(iv) "Corporation" means the Non-Resident Indians Rehabilitation
Corporation set up under section 4;
(v) "Fund" means the Non-Resident Indians Assistance Fund set up
under section 8;
(vi) "non-resident Indian" means any person who is a citizen of India and
who stays abroad for employment or for carrying on any business or vocation
outside India; and
(vii) "prescribed" means prescribed by the rules made under this Act.
3. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force, every non-resident Indian shall have the right to vote in all elections to the
House of the People, legislative assemblies of the States/Union territories and local
bodies.
4. (1) The Central Government shall constitute a Non-Resident Indians
Rehabilitation Corporation in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The Corporation shall have a Fund to which shall be credited all monies
received from the non-resident Indians by way of investment in such manner as may
be prescribed.
(3) The Fund shall be utilized for projects aimed at rehabilitation of the non-
resident Indians including projects relating to housing, health care, education or tourism.
5. ( 1) The Central Government shall, within three months from the
commencement of this Act, set up a commission to be known as the National
Commission for Non-Resident Indians.
(2) The Commission shall consist of:
(i) an eminent person having special : Chairperson;
knowledge or practical experience in the field
of welfare of Non-Resident Indians
(ii) three Members of Parliament—two from : Members;
Lok Sabha and one from Rajya Sabha, to be
nominated by the Presiding Officers of the
respective Houses
(iii) three Members of Legislative : Members; and
Assemblies of the States from which large
number of people work abroad, to be
nominated by the Presiding Officers of the
respective Assemblies of the States
(iv) an eminent jurist and an eminent : Members.
journalist to be nominated by  the  Central
Government
(3) The Chairperson and other members of the Commission shall hold office for
a period of three years.
(4) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of
service of the Chairperson and other members of the Commission shall be such as
may be prescribed.
(5) The Commission shall have its head office in New Delhi.
(6) The Central Government shall provide such number of officers and staff to
the Commission as is required for its efficient functioning.
Right to vote
for Non-
Resident Indians.
Non-Resident
Indians
Rehabilitation
Corporation.
National
Commission for
Non-Resident
Indians.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

3
(7) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of
service of the officers and staff of the Commission shall be such as may be prescribed.
6. The Commission shall perform the following functions, namely:—
(i) make recommendations to the Central Government regarding
formulation of a welfare policy for the non-resident Indians;
(ii) study the problems being faced by the non-resident Indians and
suggest measures to overcome them;
(iii) take steps for the promotion of social, economic and cultural interests
of the non-resident Indians;
(iv) work out a method in coordination with other authorities for enabling
non-resident  Indians to exercise their right to vote during elections to the
House of the People, Legislative Assemblies of the States and local bodies;
(v) work in coordination with the Embassies and High Commissions of
India to solve the problems of the non-resident Indians in those countries; and
(vi) act as the nodal agency for all issues relating to non-resident Indians.
7. The Commission shall submit an annual report on its functioning to the
President who shall cause it to be laid in each House of Parliament within one month
if Parliament is in session, and if Parliament is not in session, within ten days of the
first sitting on commencement of the next session.
8. (1) The Central Government shall set up a Fund to be known as the Non-
Resident Indians Assistance Fund.
(2) The Central Government and the State Governments shall contribute to the
Fund in such ratio as may be prescribed.
(3) Such other sums as may be received by way of donation, contribution or
assistance from non-resident Indians or otherwise shall also be credited to the Fund.
(4) The Fund shall be used for meeting the expenditure incurred in the
implementation of measures undertaken for the welfare of non-resident Indians.
9. (1) Every Embassy or High Commission of India shall constitute a Non-
Resident Indian Coordination Committee to be headed by an officer not below the
rank of First Secretary and two other officers having such qualifications as may be
prescribed:
Provided that at least one of the members of the Coordination Committee shall
have knowledge of the mother tongue of the non-resident Indians living in that
country.
(2) The Committee shall keep the details of all the non-resident Indians living in
that country.
(3) The Committee shall render all assistance to the non-resident Indians in
case of any problem including problem relating to their jobs, health care or in
completion of all formalities in case of death.
(4) The Committee shall also render legal assistance to the non-resident Indians
whenever required.
10. (1) The appropriate Government shall designate the Block Development
Officer as the Nodal Officer in every Block to maintain a register for the citizens going
abroad containing such details as may be prescribed.
(2) It shall be the duty of every citizen going abroad for residence or work to
register himself with the Nodal Officer appointed under sub-section (1).
Functions of the
Commission.
Commission to
submit an annual
report.
Non-Resident
Indians
Assistance Fund.
Every Embassy
or High
Commission to
constitute a
Non-Resident
Indian
Coordination
Committee.
Block
Development
Officer to keep
details of
citizens going
abroad.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

11. (1) The appropriate Government shall appoint an officer not below the rank
of District Collector in every district to compile the details of all the citizens residing
within their respective jurisdiction and going abroad for residence or work and forward
the same to the respective Embassy or High Commission of India, as the case may be,
for information.
(2) It shall be the duty of every Nodal Officer so designated under
sub-section (1) of section 10 to forward to the District Collector the details of citizens
going abroad for residence or work in such manner as may be prescribed.
12. (1) The Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act by the Government and every notification
issued under section 13, shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made or issued,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session for a total period of thirty days
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if,
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive
sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
notification or both Houses agree that the rule or notification should not be made or
issued, the rule or notification shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form
or be of no effect, as the case may be, so, however, that any such modification or
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done
under that rule or notification.
District
Collector to
compile and
forward the
details of
citizens going
abroad to
Embassies/High
Commissions.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
4

5
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
There are millions of Indians working all over the world in different walks of life.
They are the Non-Resident Indians (NRIs) whose contribution to our economy cannot
be over looked.
There are eminent scientists, information technology experts, engineers, doctors,
nurses, teachers and large number of workers, both skilled and unskilled, among
them. Their problems are varied and many. There is no comprehensive legislation for
tackling their problems. This Bill is an attempt in that direction.
They are living in a foreign country and in case of any difficulty, they have to
fend for themselves. If they fall ill, there is nobody to take care of them. If, unfortunately,
they die, many formalities have to be completed about which their kins have no clue.
Moreover, in case of any legal wrangle, they have no idea whom to approach for help.
In case of their working conditions, pay, medical care, etc., there are many complaints
and there is no mechanism with our foreign missions to take care and attend to their
grievances.
On the other hand, it is very unfortunate that there is no mechanism in our
country to keep record of citizens going abroad for work. In the absence of any data,
it becomes difficult to formulate any policy for their welfare. Besides, the non-resident
Indians have also been demanding voting rights for a long time.
In view of the above, it is proposed in the Bill to provide them right to vote and
to set up a National Commission for Non-Resident Indians which will have mandate
to work for the welfare of non-resident Indians. In addition, a non-resident Indians
Assistance Fund is also proposed. It is also proposed to set up a Co-ordination
Committee in every Embassy/High Commission of India with the purpose of looking
after the welfare of the Indian citizens living there.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; BHOLA  SINGH
November 5, 2014.

6
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the constitution of a Non-Resident Indians
Rehabilitation Corporation. Clause 5 provides for setting up a National Commission
for Non-Resident Indians. Clause 6 provides that the Commissions shall study the
problems being faced by the non-resident Indians and take steps for tackling them.
Clause 8 provides for setting up of a Non-Resident Indians Assistance Fund.
Clause 9 provides for the constitution of Co-ordination Committee in every Embassy
or High Commission for providing assistance to the Indians living in those countries.
Clause 11 provides that the District Collector shall forward the details of Indian
citizens going abroad for work to Embassies/High Commissions concerned. The Bill,
therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It
is estimated that a recurring expenditure of rupees one hundred crore will be involved
per annum.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.

7
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 12 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of detail only.
The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for voting rights and setting up of a National Commission for Non-Resident
Indians for the purpose of providing assistance to them in the countries where they
reside and work and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
—————
(Dr . Bhola Singh, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—2779LS(S3)—02-12-2014.