Short title and 
commencement.
Aඌ ංඇඍඋඈൽඎർൾൽ ංඇ Lඈ඄ Sൺൻඁൺ
Bill No. 150 of 2022
THE NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR INDIAN SYSTEM OF 
MEDICINE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022
By
Dඋ. Sൺඇඃൾൾඏ Kඎආൺඋ Sංඇ඀ൺඋං, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the National Commission for Indian System of Medicine Act, 2020.
Bൾ it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:–
1. (1) This Act may be called the National Commission for Indian System of Medicine 
(Amendment) Act, 2022. 
(2) It shall come into force with immediate effect.

2. In Section 2 of the National Commission for Indian System of Medicine Act, 2020 
(hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), after clause (l), the following clause shall be 
inserted, namely:
“(la) “mixopathy” means to integrate or attempt to integrate or any such other 
related activity to integrate, the different kinds of alternative medical systems including, 
but, not limited to Ayurveda, Homoeopathy and Unani with modern medical sciences.
3. In Section 10 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), after clause (i), the following 
clause shall be inserted, namely:–
“(ia) prohibit the practice of mixopathy by the medical practitioners.”.
4. In section 26 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), after clause (i), the following 
clause shall be inserted, namely:–
“(j) prohibit the practise of mixopathy by the medical practitioners.”.
5. In section 55 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), after clause (zq), the following 
proviso shall be inserted, namely:–
“Provided that, notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the Commission 
shall not make any regulations which allows or promotes the practice of mixopathy by 
the medical practitioners.”.
Amendment of 
section 2.
Amendment of 
section 10.
Amendment of 
section 26.
Amendment of 
section 55.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Several recent developments show that there is an increasing effort to integrate 
various medicine systems in the country. The Central Council of Indian Medicine, through 
a notification, amended the lndian Medicine Central Council (Post Graduate Ayurveda 
Education) Regulation, 2016. The amendments allowed MS (Ayurveda) Shalya Tantra and 
MS (Ayurveda) Shalakya Tantra to perform surgery independently. The notification provides 
a list of thirty-nine such procedures of surgery. Further, NITI Aayog has also formed four 
committees to integrate all systems of medicine. These committees are in medical education 
clinical practice, public health, medical research and administration.
Such a policy shift is an attempt to mix the knowledge, procedures and techniques 
of modern Medical Sciences with traditional Ayurveda and other alternative systems. This 
integration of alternative medical systems such as Ayurveda and Homoeopathy with modern 
medical sciences has been termed as Mixopathy. 
This retrograde step of unscientific mixing of systems of medicine will only produce 
hybrid doctors, not specialised in any medical system. With the amendments, all traditional 
systems and the modern system will lose their identity and further development. The present 
system offers the patient a choice to choose either modern medicine or any other alternative 
system of medicine. However, the new policy of integrative medicine would effectively 
nullify this choice as well. The Government should rather provide support to alternative 
medical systems to develop their own surgical procedures as per their ancient texts and 
relevant sources. 
Thus, there arises a need to amend the National Commission for lndian System of 
Medicine Act, 2020 to prohibit the practice of mixopathy and the integration of different 
systems of medicine.
Hence this Bill.
Nൾඐ Dൾඅඁං;                                                         SANJEEV  KUMAR SINGARI
7 July, 2022.

ANNEXURE 
Eඑඍඋൺർඍ ൿඋඈආ ඍඁൾ Nൺඍංඈඇൺඅ Cඈආආංඌඌංඈඇ ൿඈඋ Iඇൽංൺඇ Sඒඌඍൾආ ඈൿ 
Mൾൽංർංඇൾ Aർඍ, 2020
(Aർඍ Nඈ. 14 ඈൿ 2020)
*   *   *   *
2. (l) “Member” means a Member of the Commission referred to in section 4 and 
includes the Chairperson thereof;
*   *   *   *
10. (1) The Commission shall perform the following functions, namely:—
(i) frame guidelines for determination of fees and all other charges in respect of fifty 
per cent. of seats in private medical institutions and deemed to be Universities which are 
governed under the provisions of this Act;
*   *   *   *
26. (1) The Board of Ayurveda, in respect of the discipline of Ayurveda, and the Board 
of Unani, Siddha and Sowa-Rigpa, in respect of the disciplines of Unani, Siddha and Sowa-
Rigpa, of the Indian System of Medicine, shall perform the following functions in respect of 
their respective disciplines, namely:—
(i) grant recognition to medical qualifications at all levels.
*   *   *   *
55. (2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, 
such regulations may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(zq) the manner in which the Commission shall list and maintain the medical 
qualifications which have been granted recognition before the date of commencement of 
this Act, under sub-section (4) of section 36.
Deﬁnitions.
Power and 
functions of 
Commission.
Powers and 
functions of 
Autonomous 
Boards.
Power to make 
regulations.

LOK SABHA
__________
A
BILL
further to amend the National Commission for Indian System of Medicine Act, 2020.
_________
(Dr. Sanjeev Kumar Singari, M.P .)