1
THE COMPULSORY TEACHING OF YOGA IN EDUCATIONAL
INSTITUTIONS BILL, 2019
By
SHRI TIRA TH SINGH RAWAT, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory teaching of yoga in all educational institutions and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Compulsory Teaching of Yoga in Educational
Institutions Act, 2019.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No. 150 of  2019
Short title and
commencement.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "Advisory Council" means the Advisory Council for Yoga Education
constituted under section 6;
(b) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(c) "educational institution" means a primary or a middle or a secondary or a
senior secondary level school imparting education to children, by whatever name
such institution is called, but does not include a minority educational institution;
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(e) "yoga education" means teaching of yoga postures or asanas and such
other yoga exercises as would promote the control of the body by bringing in flexibility,
strength and endurance and of the mind by enhancing alertness and meditation.
3.  From such date, as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette specify, the yoga education shall be taught as a compulsory subject in all educational
institutions from such class onwards as may be determined by the Central Government on
the recommendation of the Advisory Council constituted under section 6.
4.  The appropriate Government shall, immediately after issuance of the notification
under section 3, issue directions for compulsory teaching of yoga in all educational institutions,
within its jurisdiction.
5.  Subject to such rules, as may be prescribed, the appropriate Government shall
ensure appointment of such number of teachers with such qualifications, as may be specified,
for teaching yoga in educational institutions.
6.  (1) The Central Government shall, within three months of the coming into force of
the Compulsory Teaching of Yoga in Educational Institutions Act, 2014, by notification in
the Official Gazette, constitute an Advisory Council for Yoga Education.
(2) The Advisory Council shall consist of such numbers of persons, having special
knowledge or practical experience in the field of yoga education or school education, as the
Central Government may deem fit.
7.  The Advisory Council shall perform the following functions, namely:—
(a) recommend to the Central Government the syllabus of yoga education for
each class upto senior secondary level;
(b) recommend to the Central Government the class from which onwards the
yoga education is to be taught in educational institutions;
(c) recommend to the appropriate Government the qualifications of teachers to
be appointed in educational institutions for teaching yoga;
(d) recommend to the appropriate Government the institutions which may be
given recognition for training teachers in yoga education for the purpose of their
appointment in educational institutions; and
(e) co-ordinate with the appropriate Government and school authorities with a
view to ensuring effective implementation of the provisions of this Act.
Definitions.
Compulsory
teaching of
yoga education
in educational
institutions.
Appropriate
Government to
issue directions
for compulsory
teaching of
yoga in all
educational
institutions.
Appointment
of yoga
teachers for
yoga
education.
Constitution of
Advisory
Council for
yoga
education.
Functions of
the Advisory
Council.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
8.  Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the provisions of this Act
shall apply to minority institutions only if the management of such institutions convey
to the appropriate Government their willingness to include the yoga education in their
school curriculum.
9.  The appropriate Government shall derecognize such educational institutions,
which do not comply with the provisions of section 4, after giving such institution a
reasonable opportunity of being heard.
10.  The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament
by law in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the State Governments for carrying
out the purposes of this Act.
11.  The  provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything
inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
12.  (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Act to apply
to minority
educational
institutions in
certain
situation.
Derecognition
of educational
institutions for
non-
compliance of
the provisions
of the Act.
Central
Government
to provide
fund.
Overriding
effect of the
Act.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Modern education system in schools lays emphasis on imparting quality education.
However, our modern education is missing out on yoga education and is, therefore, incomplete
without it. Yoga education is not new to us but we are forgetting to blend it with the standard
school curriculum. Yoga has been a valuable and necessary tool for education.
Yoga education is gaining popularity across the world. Considering the importance of
yoga education, many western countries have already included yoga in their national school
education system. It is well accepted that yoga not only improves the physical and mental
health but also disciplines the mind and improves the power of concentration. Many studies
show that the practice of yoga inhibits many curative qualities. Moreover, yoga education is
cost-effective as it requires modest infrastructure and money. Yoga is a non-competitive
activity as it enables the participants to enjoy physical workout without experiencing any
pressure.
Introduction of  Yoga education in schools will make positive impact on the health and
psycho-social well-being of the students, enrich their thinking, understanding and imagination
and improve the teaching and learning abilities. Yoga will not only enhance the ability of
students to deal with the stress and pressures of daily life but also help in realizing them their
full potential.
In modern fast paced times, yoga not only enable to cope up with increasing stress,
depression, aggression, anger, emotional and mental exhaustion in our daily life but also
teach us the art of balanced living. Therefore, yoga is considered as a way of living with
health and peace of mind. It is, therefore, urgently required that yoga education is made
compulsory in all educational institutions from primary to senior secondary level so that we
can foster confidence and self-esteem in the minds of our upcoming generations in schools.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to provide for making yoga education compulsory in all
educational institutions right from primary school level to senior secondary level in order to
make it a part of school curriculum.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; TIRATH SINGH RAWAT
June 26, 2019.
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 5 of the Bill provides for appointment of yoga teachers for imparting yoga
education in educational institutions. Clause 6 provides for constitution of an Advisory
Council for yoga education by the Central Government. Clause 10 provides for payment of
adequate funds to the State Governments for carrying out the purposes of the Act. The Bill,
therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. At this
stage, it is not possible to give exact estimate of expenditure, both recurring and
non-recurring, which will be incurred from the Consolidated Fund of India, if the Bill is
enacted into a law. However, it is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure to the tune
of rupees one hundred crore will be involved.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.
5

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 12 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
6

MGIPMRND—1120LS(S3)—05-07-2019.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory teaching of yoga in all educational institutions and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Tirath Singh Rawat, M.P.)