1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL,  2018
By
SHRI DUSHY ANT CHAUTALA, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2018.
 (2) It shall come into force with at once.
2. After article 16 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely:—
“16A. Every citizen, who has attained the age of eighteen years and is qualified
or deserving or willing to get employed shall have the right to employment:
Provided that any such citizen, who is not provided with employment, shall be
entitled to unemployment allowance at such rate as Parliament may, by law, determine.”.
Bill  No.  150 of  2018
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title and
commencement.
Insertion of
new article
16A.
Right to
Employment.
5

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Fundamental rights enshrined in our Constitution are not merely statements or
words which are written in the book of law. These rights are essential for building a holistic
society which espouse the principles laid down in the preamble of the Constitution. It is
necessary that time and again we review our Constitution and insert necessary provisions as
and when required which purport to be the need of the hour.
Currently we are witnessing an unprecedented scale of rise of aspiration among citizens
in our country. We have seen during the last two decades that India has emerged as one of
the largest economies in the world. It recently became the fifth largest economy of the world.
Over the last ten years our country has been in that phase of demographic divide that can
yield the best results in both social and economic terms in the world. Hence it is the need of
the hour that energies and aspiration of our youth are channelized in the most productive
and positive manner for the welfare and development of our country.
The former Deputy Prime Minister Ch. Devi Lal ji espoused the values of fraternity,
liberty and socio-economic empowerment of the rural section in our country. His efforts
towards building a robust rural Indian economy bore fruits during his tenure in the later
1970s in the Union Government and previously in the State of  Haryana during the 1960s and
early 1970s.
In later years, whenever pro-farmers Governments took over in any State across the
country, we have witnessed how empowerment of  youth can deliver the best results for the
holistic development of any State. However with the changing economic scenario, the
economic condition in different jurisdiction across the world are becoming tertiary sector
centric and hence the necessity for generating employment have increased many folds.
In such a backdrop, it is necessary that every youth who is qualified, deserving and
willing to seek employment gets necessary opportunities of employment. Our nation has
witnessed that whenever the energies of its youth is channelized in a constructive manner, it
has fed to emergence of socio-economic development.
We have seen how successive Governments have taken measures for the empowerment
of the Yuva Shakti of this country either through skill development or under work generation
schemes under the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act, but the
results have not been up to the mark. The same is corroborated from the fact that the number
of unemployed persons in India is expected to rise from 18.3 million in 2017 to 18.6 million in
2018 and 18.9 million by 2019.
Hence it is the need of the hour to make right to employment as a fundamental right of
the citizens.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; DUSHYANT CHAUTALA
July 17, 2018.
2

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides for making the right of employment a fundamental right of
the citizens. It further provides that every citizen who has not got any employment shall be
entitled to get an unemployment allowance at such rate as may be prescribed by the Parliament
by law. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund
of India. It is estimated that recurring expenditure of about rupees five thousand crore per
annum would involve from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one thousand crore is also likely to be
incurred.
3

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Dushyant Chautala, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—1775LS(S3)—19-09-2018.