As INTRODUCED In Lok SaBHA on

"35 DE 388

Bill No. 150 of 1986

THE STANDARDS OF WEIGHTS AND MEASURES (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 1986

A
BILL
5 to amend the Standards of Weights and Measures Act, 1976.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-seventh Year of the
Republic of India as follows: —

1, (1) This Act may be called the Standards of Weights and Mea-
sures (Amendment) Act, 1986.

(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government

10
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint,

60 of 1976, 2. In section 72 of the Standards of Weights and Measures Act, 1976,
for clause (a), the following clause shall be substituted, namely: —

‘(a) no court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable
under this Act except upon a complaint, in writing, made by—
(i) the Director;
(ii) any other authorised officer;
(iit) any person aggrieved; or '
(iv) a recognised consumer association whether the person

20 aggrieved is a member of such association or not.

Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause “recognised con-

sumer association” means a voluntary consumer association register-

1 of 1956, ed under the Companies Act, 1956 or under any other law for the
time being force;’.

Short

title and
commence.
ment.

Amend-
ment of
section 72


mo shal Zod ya ५

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The Standards of Weights and Measures Act, 1976 is an important
and potent consumer protection legislation which is designed to establish
standards of weights and measures and to regulate inter-State trade or
commerce. in weights, measures and packaged commodities. The «ct
at present does not confer any right on the aggrieved consumer or re-
cognised consumer associations to file complaints in. the court.

2. To promote voluntary consumer movement and ensure involvement
_ of consumers as well as recognised consumer associations in the enforce-
ment of this Act, it is considered desirable to confer specific right on
the consumer aggrieved or recognised consumer associations for filing
complaints to be taken cognizance of by courts. Accordingly, it is pro-
posed to amend clause (a) of section 72 of the Act to confer rights on
the aggrieved consumer or a recognised consumer association to file a
complaint in courts. Opportunity has also been taken to explain the
expression “recognised consumer association” under the Act so as
to 71९85" 8 voluntary consumer association registered under the Com-
panies Act, 1956 or under any other law for the time being in force.

“ "3, The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.

New DELHI; है H. K. L. BHAGAT.
The Ist December, 1986. है J ;

&



ANNEXURE

Extracr rrom THE STANDARDS OF WEIGHTS AND Measures Act, 1976
(60 oF 1976)

* * * * *

72. Notwithstandin

ig anything contained
Procedure, 1973

in the Code of Criminal

Cogni-
zance of
. ३ offences,
(a) no court shall take cognizance of an offence ‘punishabie ete.
under this Act except upon a complaint, in writing, made by the
Dir

ector or any other authorised officer;

* * * *


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to amend the Standards of Weights and Measures Act, 1976.

‘

(Shri H. हू, L, Bhagat, Minister of Parliamentary Affairs,
Food and Civil Supplies)