1
Short title and
commencement.
THE GUARDIANS AND WARDS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017
By
SHRIMA TI POONAM MAHAJAN, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Guardians and Wards Act, 1890.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Guardians and Wards (Amendment) Act, 2017.
(2) It shall come into force as on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No. 150 of  2017
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2.  After Section 18 of the Guardians and Wards Act, 1890, the following section shall
be inserted, namely:—
"18A. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in
force, the Court shall not grant any remedy under sections 7, 12 and 25 to any person
who is accused of committing an offence punishable under the Protection of Children
from Sexual Offences Act, 2012 (hereinafter referred to as the POCSO Act, 2012) against
the minor or ward in respect of whom such remedy is claimed, unless the same is
proved to be in the best interests of such minor or ward, as the case may be.
Explanation.—For the purpose of sub-section (1), it shall be sufficient if
the person is named as the accused either in a complaint filed with the police or
if such an accusation is made against such person in any of the pleadings taken
before the Court.
(2) Where an accusation under sub-section (1) is made against any guardian in
any proceeding before the Court, then notwithstanding any criminal proceedings
initiated against such guardian, the Court shall determine the best interests of the
minor or ward after conducting a detailed inquiry.
(3) During inquiry under sub-section (2), the court shall forward a copy of the
pleadings setting out such accusation to the Special Juvenile Police Unit or the local
police in whose jurisdiction the minor or the ward who is the alleged victim of such
offence resides and the police authority shall, on receiving the said copy, act in
accordance with sections 19 and 21 of the POSCO Act, 2012.
(4) The Court shall, pending the inquiry under sub-section (2), draw a rebuttable
presumption that granting any custody or visitation or any kind of face to face
interaction or access to the guardian accused of committing any offence punishable
under the POSCO Act, 2012 in respect of the minor or a ward, as the case may be, shall
not be in the best interest of such minor or a ward.
(5) The Court shall direct parties to the dispute to lead evidence in support of
their respective stand for or against the grant of measures provided under sections 7,
12 or 25.
(6) In case the minor is being treated by a child psychiatrist or a child
psychologist, the Court shall appoint such child psychiatrist or child psychologist as
a welfare expert under Order XXXIIA, Rule 4 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908:
Provided that in case the child is not being treated by such a psychiatrist
or the psychologist, then the Court shall seek the assistance of the Child Welfare
Committee or the State Commission for Protection of Child Rights, who, either
by themselves or through any person so appointed by them, shall be deemed to
be a welfare expert under Order XXXIIA, Rule 4 of the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908.
(7) Every welfare expert appointed under sub-section (6) shall examine the minor
who is the victim of offences punishable under the POCSO Act, 2012 and a report
thereof to the Court.
(8) The Court shall permit the parties to the dispute to examine and cross examine
such welfare experts and lead any other evidence which they deem fit.
(9) The Court shall upon conclusion of evidence in respect of the remedy claimed
under section 12, hear both parties and pass suitable orders:
Provided that in case the Court decides to grant remedy under section 12
to the guardian accused of the offences punishable under the POCSO Act, 2012,
then it shall provide detailed reasoning as to why the presumption under
sub-section (4) above is rebutted.
Insertion of
new section
18A.
Prohibition
of visitation
and custodial
rights of an
offending
guardian.
8 of 1890.
32 of 2012.
32 of 2012.
32 of 2012.
5 of 1908.
5 of 1908.
32 of 2012.
32 of 2012.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(10) In case the Court comes to the conclusion that the guardian claiming remedy
under section 12 has committed the offence punishable under the POCSO Act, 2012;
then the inquiry shall be deemed as an inquiry under section 18 of the Protection of
Women from Domestic Violence Act, 2005 and the Court shall treat such minor as a
victim(s) of domestic violence under section 3(c) of the Protection of Women from
Domestic Violence Act, 2005 and further direct that the offending guardian shall be
prohibited from coming in face to face contact or any other kind of contact with the
minor who is the victim of such offence punishable under the POCSO Act, 2012.
Explanation.—
(1) The burden of proof in the inquiry set forth above shall be the
preponderance of probabilities and not beyond reasonable doubt;
(2) If the parent accused of child sexual abuse has been acquitted by the
criminal court, the same shall be ignored by the Court and it shall conduct its
own independent inquiry in the manner set forth above without being influenced
by the order of acquittal by the criminal court;
(3) Mere acquittal by the criminal court shall not exempt the offending
parent from facing the inquiry set forth above.".
32 of 2012.
43 of 2005.
43 of 2005.
32 of 2012.
5
10
15

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS  AND REASONS
The Union Ministry of Women and Child Development in its study on child abuse
conducted in 2007 stated that out of 53% of children reporting child sex abuse, 50% had
suffered intra familial abuse.
India is obligated to evolve adequate measures to protect child sex abuse victims from
their offending parents which aligns with the right against discrimination and the right to
health and dignity contained in Articles 15 and 21 of the Constitution respectively. Coupled
with society's denial of incest, an offending father despite the said prohibition accompanying
bail, can influence the child through lawfully awarded interim visitation rights thereby stalling
prosecution efforts against him. No explicit legislative prohibition exists against the granting
of custody or visitation rights to fathers committing a sexual offence pending conviction in
a criminal trial. Experts caution against the granting of monitored visitation to offending
parents because their very presence may trigger in the child traumatic memories of abuse,
feelings of being unsupported and lead to recanting of allegations against the offender
thereby resulting in compromising criminal trial against the parent.
The rationale behind Government preparing guidelines from custodial and visitation
claims by offending fathers is aimed towards ensuring that the child should not be forced to
meet him. The child's relationship with mother should be strengthened by recognising her as
the sole guardian. Unless absolutely necessary, the Court should not issue orders repeatedly
for mediation, custody or visitation in the families involved. Moreover, orders granting
visiting rights to an offending father should be issued only after consultations with mental
health experts clearly find such visitation to be in the child's best interests. Finally, acquittal
in a criminal trial should not automatically absolve the father of liability. Either the Family
Court or a specially constituted Court should initiate an independent inquiry using the
standard of preponderance of probability to be certain of innocence.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; POONAM MAHAJAN
July  03, 2017.
4

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Guardians and Wards Act, 1890.
————
(Shrimati Poonam Mahajan, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—1064LS(S3)—25-07-2017.