AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

Bill No. 150 of 2021

THE PROVISIONS OF THE MUNICIPALITIES (EXTENSION TO
THE SCHEDULED AREAS) BILL, 2021

By
Dr. HEENA VIJAYKUMAR GAVIT, M.P.
A

BILL

to provide for the extension of the provisions of Part IXA of the Constitution
relating to the Municipalities to the Scheduled Areas.

BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-second Year of the Republic of
India as follows:—

1. (7) This Act may be called the Provisions of the Municipalities Short title.
(Extension to the Scheduled Areas) Act, 2021.

2. In this Act, the expression "Scheduled Areas" mean the Scheduled Areas _ Definition.
as referred to in clause (/) of article 244 of the Constitution.


0802 BOA Al Papi oA

-*
try neve ee Tati SNE के AGA a8 HI
| ts 3 Be PaaS rd Fas de ster
7 हि -
ee -
oe - - oe
a
_
a 7



ow

TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

No. 150 of 2021

THE PROVISIONS OF THE MUNICIPALITIES (EXTENSION 10
THE SCHEDULED AREAS) BILL, 2021

By
Dr. HEENA VIJAYKUMAR GAVIT, M.P.
A

BILL

to provide for the extension of the provisions of Part IXA of the Constitution
relating to the Municipalities to the Scheduled Areas.

BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-second Year of the Republic of
India as follows:—

1. (1) This Act may be called the Provisions of the Municipalities  Shorttitle.
(Extension to the Scheduled Areas) Act, 2021.

2. In this Act, the expression "Scheduled Areas" mean the Scheduled Areas Definition.
as referred to in clause (/) of article 244 of the Constitution.


|
- पु हु
पु a
Spann व 9, co TI का A 5
ः
ः 7
प
: 7 _ हु
हि हु
पि |
ः
ee

1०४७०) A. i Ae AMT grees ye alee हि
|. ee Os कक oe
7 So : रा पु | प

7 - a ae हि 7 _
oy

a es er

es



2

Extension of Part 3. The provisions of Part IXA of the Constitution relating to the
IXA of the Municipalities are hereby extended to the Scheduled Areas, subject to following
Constitution. —_ exceptions and modifications:—

I. Article 243Q relating to "Constitution of Municipalities" shall apply with
the following exceptions and modifications—

(J) For the purposes of self-governing institutions in the Urban Scheduled
Areas, all urban centres may be designated, as the case may be, as 'Nagar
Panchayats’, 'Municipal Councils’, 'Municipal Corporations’ and ‘Industrial
or Mining Townships’.

(2) The Governor may, in consultation with or in pursuance of the
recommendations of the Tribes Advisory Council, by public notification,
declare and classify an area as an urban area of appropriate category having
regard to its population, the percentage of employment in non-agricultural
activities, the infrastructure, social services, development potential and
such other factors, as he may deem fit.

(3) The tribal habitation in an urban setting shall be treated as a separate
unit for the purposes of local self-government. The habitants, whose
economy is predominantly rural, shall be included in Gram Sabha and the
habitants, who have got assimilated in the urban economy with agriculture
and allied activities receding into the background, shall be included in
Tribal Mohalla or Ward Sabha.

II. Article 2438 relating to "Constitution and composition of Wards

Committees, etc.," shall apply with the following exceptions and modifications:—

(a) There shall be constituted a Standing Committee for tribal affairs in
each Municipality located within the Scheduled Area.

The Committee shall comprise of tribal members of the Municipality
along with the Chairman.

Recommendations of this Committee shall ordinarily be binding on
the Municipality;

(0) There shall be constituted a Standing Committee for rural development
in each Municipality responsible for the advancement of those engaged in
agriculture and allied activities.

Ill. Article 243T relating to "Reservation of Seats" shall apply with the

following exceptions and modifications:—

(J) Seats may be reserved for the Scheduled Tribes in every Municipality in
the Scheduled Area in proportion to their population in the Municipal area
or one-third of the total number of seats, whichever is higher;

(2) The seats of all the Gram Sabhas, Tribal Mohallas, Ward Sabhas
included in the Municipality in the Scheduled Areas may be reserved for the
Scheduled Tribes. The remaining seats shall be allotted by rotation among
other wards in the Municipality;

20

25

30

35

40


1 अति yet
emeie जो) ing

Tee >त्क्श et TT

thos कप पल omnes anh

net Yq vuole aT fs

हि _
wate nw
jig etter

senitudoy DERE alin a
bra eric: antieulldt ade



20

25

30

35

40

3

(3) The Chairperson of the urban body shall be a member of the Scheduled
Tribes;

(4) In all programmes of development like housing colonies, trading centers,
etc., and in educational institutions or industrial training institutions,
reservation shall be made in favour of the tribal people in proportion to their
population in the concerned district and there shall be no de-reservation
whatsoever;

(5) Nagar Panchayat may be constituted in an area identified as transitional
area from rural to urban area. The composition of Nagar Panchayats in
Scheduled Areas shall, as far as possible, be as per the structure of
Municipal Committees:

Provided that not less than one-half of the members of Nagar
Panchayat shall be from Scheduled Tribes.

IV. Article 243W relating to “Powers, authority and responsibilities of
Municipalities, etc.," shall apply with the following exceptions and
modifications:—

The Legislature of a State shall, by law, endow the Municipality in the
Scheduled Area with such powers and authority as may be necessary to enable it
to function as institution of self-government and such law shall contain
provisions for the devolution of the following powers and responsibilities upon
Municipality with respect to—

(J) preparing five year development plans and annual plan with reference to
resources available for the development of human resources, socio-
economic advancement of the community, provision for reinforcement of
the infrastructure and augmentation of civic amenities in the area;

(2) fostering tribal endogenous institutions;

(3) undertaking schemes and adopting measures, including the giving of
financial assistance relating to development of khadi, cottage and small-
scale industries, cooperative movement, water supply, public health and
sanitation and hospitals, communication, primary and secondary education,
adult and non-formal education, welfare of students, electrification
including distribution, non-conventional energy sources, women and child
development, social welfare and other aspects of general public utility;

(4) managing of Haats and markets;

(5) maintaining places for rest and stay, which are neat, open and congenial
for the tribal people visiting the town;

(6) protecting and maintaining all cultural and religious places of tribal
people located within the municipal limits;

(7) identifying and removing unauthorized occupation of land;

(8) acquiring land for the purposes of education, health, railways,
communication, defense, electricity generation, water supply, sanitation


गो... ६ 0 जाए geiared ait
Tua itive i,

६ . mtqste पर alqacy indie २१ ३७

कह Le हक ale शा bes

* atu ea 10 ae Ff Fle एसी wri कक wernt? aT कै) -

thin exnkigmauig is को ६

fie! क्र प१ oF Lee Uy
met eet 3100 का inte aM eT
i da eines ait हा myitaierey थे.



4

projects, laying electricity lines and making provision for water supply,
sewerage and drainage pipelines:

Provided that on acquisition of land, the affected person shall be paid —
(a) reasonable and adequate compensation; and
(0) alternative means of livelihood:

Provided further that no Scheduled Tribe person shall be rendered landless
as a consequence of acquisition of land as aforesaid.

V. Article 243X relating to "Power to impose taxes by, and Funds of,
the Municipalities" shall apply with the following exceptions and modifications:—

No urban tax shall be leviable on a tribal who continues to live in his
traditional style.

Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause, the following may be the
norms to determine whether a Tribal continues to live in his traditional style or
otherwise, namely:—

(J) whether he belongs to any of the communities notified as Scheduled
Tribe for that State or Union territory;

(2) whether he is a bonafide resident of the urban area concerned; or

(3) whether he continues to pursue traditional occupation of farming, petty
business as artisan, labourer, or the like.

If a tribal is living with his family, the deciding factor shall be the main
occupation of the family and not that of the individual member as long as he lives
together in the same house.

If the other conditions are fulfilled, the income shall not be the criterion.

VI. Article 243ZF relating to "Continuance of existing laws and
Municipalities" shall apply with the following modifications:—

Notwithstanding exceptions and modifications subject to which Part IXA of
the Constitution has been extended to the Scheduled Areas by this Act, any
provision of any law relating to Municipalities in force in the Scheduled Areas
immediately before the date of commencement of this Act, which is inconsistent
with this Act shall continue to be in force until amended or repealed by a
competent Legislature or other competent authority or until the expiration of one
year from the date on which this Act comes into force whichever is earlier:

Provided that all the Municipalities existing immediately before such date
shall continue till the expiration of their duration unless sooner dissolved bya
resolution passed to that effect by the Legislative Assembly of that State or, in
the case of a State having Legislative Council, by each House of the Legislature
of that State.

20

25

30

35


7 न आओ
विन 1 eines

4

- OE

oes



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS,

The Constitution of India mandates establishment of autonomous councils to govern
tribal areas, but the same is not available to Scheduled Areas. Dilip Singh Bhuria Committee
which was constituted in 1995 had recommended that two Bills be brought into effect to bring
decentralised governance to the Scheduled Areas: Municipal Extension to Scheduled Areas
(MESA) Bill for urban areas and Panchayat Extension to Scheduled Areas (PESA) Bill for rural
areas. These Bills sought to provide safeguards to the tribal inhabitants against exploitation.

While PESA was passed in 1996 and panchayats have been formed under it, MESA still
has not been passed. Yet, municipal governments have been formed in Scheduled Areas. The
conflict that municipal governance faces in Scheduled Areas is because of this lack of legislative
protections. In practice there is a huge variation in matters of municipal governance in Scheduled
Areas. There is a consistent practice of setting up of municipalities in areas under the Fifth
Schedule, though the legality of the same has been challenged. The absence of a legislation like
MESA means that when areas are converted from rural to urban governance systems, they are
likely to be exploited.

Urbanisation is inevitable and is taking place in tribal dominated areas as well. Urban
areas need governance systems which are geared towards their particular needs. This includes
decentralised provision of services such as solid waste management, water supply, and urban
planning. At the same time, the culture in these areas need to be preserved and any governance
system needs to be sensitive towards this. This Bill seeks to achieve the required purpose and
constitutionally bring municipal governance to the Scheduled Areas and help inhabitants gain
more control over their own governance. This Bill aims to protect the land rights of tribals and
provides for a Standing Committee on Tribal A ffairs in each municipality.

The erstwhile Planning Commission and National Advisory Council had also pointed out
this void in its reports from time to time and stressed for proper implementation of the provisions
of Fifth Schedule of the Constitution in countering Left-wing extremism. The Standing
Committee on Rural and Urban Development in 2003 in its 50th Report had also recommended
the passing of MESA Bill.

Hence this Bill.

New DELHI; HEENA VIJAYKUMAR GAVIT
November 18, 2021.


: - 7 7 हि पर हु

ः | ... इ#08#जर AltA APSO 12301 2178

omninacns) हो nt, ot sialiove ice al ase aft गत auomm faites.
a 30051 Led! 7९९] os Gale: फल staal

ogi alone svamononse 44. mnt cabitqnee eibal a 0: 7a

ai कठा | "को. का

fyb

nT

ae gultigen ql मल & xi
hiles.orerm ia oF

ify 213 अपर ys smbtage sarse
fo: >a chang agrivige Yo go"



LOK SABHA

BILL

to provide for the extension of the provisions of Part IXA of the Constitution relating to the
Municipalities to the Scheduled Areas.

(Dr. Heena Vijaykumar Gavit, M.P.)