  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bill No. 150 of 2026 
 
THE TAXATION AND OTHER LAWS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2026 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Payment and Settlement Systems Act, 2007 and the Income-tax 
Act, 2025, and to amend the Finance Act, 2026.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy -seventh Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:— 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Taxation and Other Laws (Amendment)                   
Act, 2026. 
(2) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, it shall be deemed to have come 
into force on the 1st day of April, 2026. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Short title and 
commencement. 
 

2 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of 
Act 51 of 2007. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Substitution of 
new Schedule 
for Schedule I. 
 CHAPTER II 
AMENDMENT TO THE PAYMENT AND SETTLEMENT SYSTEMS ACT, 2007 
2. In the Payment and Settlement Systems Act, 2007, in section 10A, for the 
words, figures and letters “the electronic modes of payment prescribed under                   
section 269SU of the Income -tax Act, 1961”, the words “one or more electronic 
modes of payment as the Central Government may, by notification, specify” shall be 
substituted with effect from the date of publication of this Act in the Official Gazette. 
CHAPTER III 
AMENDMENTS TO THE INCOME-TAX ACT, 2025 
3. In the Income-tax Act, 2025 (hereafter in this Chapter referred to as the principal 
Act), for Schedule I, the following Schedule shall be substituted, namely:— 
‘SCHEDULE I 
[See section 9(12)] 
CONDITIONS FOR CERTAIN ACTIVITIES NOT TO CONSTITUTE BUSINESS 
CONNECTION IN INDIA 
1. (1) The eligible investment fund referred to in section 9( 12) shall be 
a fund established or incorporated or registered outside India, which collects 
funds from its members for investing it for their benefit, and fulfils the 
following conditions:— 
(a) the fund is not a person resident in India; 
(b) the fund is— 
(i) a resident of a country or a specified territory with which 
an agreement referred to in section 159(1) or (2) has been entered 
into; or 
(ii) established or incorporated or registered in a country or 
a specifie d territory as the Central Government may, by 
notification, specify; 
(c) the aggregate participation or investment in the fund, directly 
by persons resident in India, does not exceed 5% of the corpus of the 
fund as on the 1st April and the 1st October of the tax year, and— 
(i) for the purposes of calculation of such aggregate 
participation or investment in the fund, any contribution up to 
twenty-five crore rupees made by the eligible fund manager during 
the first three years of operation of the fund shall not be taken into 
account; or 
(ii) where the said aggregate participation or investment in 
the fund exceeds 5% on the 1st April or the 1st October of the tax 
year, the condition mentioned in this clause shall be deemed to be 
satisfied, if it is satisfied within four months of the 1st April or the 
1st October, as the case may be, of such tax year; 
(d) the fund shall not carry on or control and manage, directly or 
indirectly, any business in India; and 
(e) no person acting on behalf of the fund engages in any activity 
which constitutes a business connection in India other than the activities 
undertaken by the eligible fund manager on its behalf. 
(2) The eligible fund manager referred to in section 9(12), in respect of 
an eligible investment fund, shall be any person who is engaged in the activity 
of fund management and fulfils the following conditions:— 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35 
 
 
 
 
 
 
40 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
45 
 
 
 
 
 
 
43 of 1961. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30 of 2025. 

3 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
40 
 
(a) the person is not an employee of the eligible investment fund 
or a connected person of such fund; 
(b) the person is registered as a fund manager or an investment 
advisor in accordance with the specified regulations; 
(c) the person is acting in the ordinary course of his business as a 
fund manager; and 
(d) the person along with his connected persons shall not be 
entitled, directly or indirectly, to more than 20% of the profits accruing 
or arising to the eligible investment fund from the transactions carried 
out by the fund through the fund manager. 
(3) Every eligible investment fund shall, in respect of its activities in a 
tax year, furnish within ninety days from the end of the tax year,–– 
(a) a statement in the prescribed form to the prescribed income-tax 
authority containing information relating to the fulfilment of the 
conditions specified in this Schedule; and  
(b) provide such other relevant information or documents, as may 
be prescribed. 
(4) The provisions of this Schedule shall apply as per such guidelines 
and in such manner, as the Board may prescribe in this behalf. 
2. In this Schedule, the expressions— 
(a) “connected person” shall have the meaning assigned to it in                    
section 184(5); 
(b) “corpus” means the total amount of funds raised for the purpose 
of investment by the eligible investment fund as on a particular date; 
(c) “specified regulations” means–– 
(i) the Securities and Exchange Board of India (Investment 
Advisers) Regulations, 2013; or  
(ii) the Securities and Exchange Board of India (Portfolio 
Managers) Regulations, 2020; or 
(iii) such other regulations made under the Securities and 
Exchange Board of India Act, 1992 (15 of 1992), as may be 
notified in this behalf.’. 
4. In Schedule IV to the principal Act, in the Table,— 
(a) in serial number 13A, in column D,— 
(i) for clause (d), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:— 
“(d) the contract manufacturer produces specified electronic 
goods on behalf of the foreign company for a consideration; and”; 
(ii) in clause ( e), for the figures “2030 -2031”, the figures                 
“2040-2041” shall be substituted; 
(b) in serial number 13C, in column D, clause (a) shall be omitted; 
(c) after serial number 13C and entries relating thereto, the following 
shall be inserted, namely:— 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of 
Schedule IV. 

4 
  A B C D 
“13D. Any interest on 
Government 
security, and any 
capital gains arising 
from the sale, 
exchange or transfer 
of such Government 
security. 
A Foreign 
Institutional Investor. 
Such exemption shall 
be subject to furnishing 
of information in such 
form and manner, as may 
be prescribed. 
13E. Any interest on 
Government 
security, and any 
capital gains arising 
from the sale, 
exchange or transfer 
of such Government 
security. 
Bank for 
International 
Settlements. 
Such exemption shall 
be subject to furnishing 
of information in such 
form and manner, as may 
be prescribed.”; 
(d) after serial number 13E as so inserted and the entries relating thereto,          
the following shall be inserted, with effect from the 1st day of October, 2026, 
namely:— 
A B C D 
“13F. Any income on 
sale of rough 
diamonds. 
A foreign 
company–– 
(a) engaged in 
the business of 
diamond mining; or 
(b) being a 
sightholder of the 
company referred to 
in clause (a); or 
(c) being a 
broker, aggregator 
or a tender and 
auction entity 
connected with sale 
of rough diamonds. 
(a) The sale of rough 
diamonds is carried out in 
any notified special zone            
as referred to in         
section 9(9)(c)(ii)(C); 
(b) such foreign 
company maintains and 
furnishes such 
information in such form 
and manner, as may be 
prescribed; and 
(c) such exemption 
shall be available up to 
the tax year ending on the 
31st March, 2041. 
13G. Any income 
accruing or arising 
on account of 
storage of 
components in a 
warehouse in a 
custom bonded  
area. 
A foreign 
company, which 
stores components 
in a warehouse in a 
custom bonded area 
for providing them 
to a contract 
manufacturer to be 
used for 
manufacturing of 
specified electronic 
goods. 
(a) Such exemption 
shall be available on sale 
of components by  such 
foreign company; 
(b) such contract 
manufacturer produces 
electronic goods on 
behalf of any foreign 
company; 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35 
 
 
 
 
 
40 
 
 
 
 
 
45 
 
 
 
 
 
50 
 
 

5 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
40 
 
A B C D 
   (c) such exemption 
shall be subject to 
furnishing of information 
in such form and manner, 
as may be prescribed; and 
(d) such exemption 
shall be available up to 
the tax year ending on the 
31st March, 2041.”; 
(e) after Note 2 below the Table, the following Note shall be inserted, 
namely:— 
‘Note 2A: For the purposes of Sl. No. 13A, the expression “specified 
electronic goods” means— 
(a) mobile phones; or 
(b) laptops, all-in-one personal computers and tablets; or 
(c) servers and ultra small form factor (USFF); or 
(d) sub-assemblies to the finished goods mentioned in clauses (a) 
to (c); or 
(e) hearables and wearables and accessories related to the finished 
goods mentioned in clauses (a) to (c).’; 
(f) in Note 3 below the Table, for clause ( c), the following clause shall be 
substituted, namely:— 
‘(c) “specified data centre” means a data centre which— 
(i) is operated by an Indian company, whether by way of owning 
or leasing; and  
(ii) satisfies such other conditions as may be prescribed.’; 
(g) after Note 3 below the Table, the following Note shall be inserted, 
namely:— 
‘Note 4: For the purposes of Sl. Nos. 13D and 13E,––  
(a) “Bank for International Settlements” means the Bank for 
International Settlements established at the Hague Conference in 1930 
and headquartered at Basel, Switzerland; 
(b) “Foreign Institutional Investor” shall have the meaning 
assigned to it in section 210(6)(a); 
(c) “Government security” shall have the same meaning as 
assigned to it in section 2( f) of the Government Securities Act, 2006        
(38 of 2006).’; 
(h) after Note 4 as so inserted, the following Notes shall be inserted with effect 
from the 1st day of October, 2026, namely:— 
  
 

6 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of 
Schedule V. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of 
Act 4 of 2026. 
 ‘Note 5: For the purposes of Sl. No. 13F, the expression “rough 
diamond” means any diamond that is unworked or simply sawn, cleaved or 
bruted and falling under the Tariff Heading 7102 10, 7102 21, or 7102 31 of 
the First Schedule to the Customs Tariff Act,  1975 (51 of 1975) and 
accompanied by the Kimberley Process Certificate. 
Note 6: For the purposes of Sl. No. 13G,— 
(a) “contract manufacturer” means an Indian company which 
produces specified electronic goods on behalf of any foreign company 
in a custom bonded area; 
(b) “custom bonded area” means a warehouse as referred to in 
section 65 of the Customs Act, 1962 (52 of 1962); and 
(c) “specified electronic goods” shall have the meaning assigned 
to it in Note 2A.’. 
5. In Schedule V to the principal Ac t, in the Table, in serial number 5, in 
column D, clause (b) shall be omitted. 
CHAPTER IV 
AMENDMENT TO THE FINANCE ACT, 2026 
6. In section 3 of the Finance Act, 2026,— 
(a) in sub-section (4), in clause (b), in the Table, for serial number 9 and 
the entries relating thereto, the following shall be substituted:— 
A B C D 
“9. 200 or 201. Every domestic 
company other than a 
special purpose vehicle 
referred to in Schedule V 
[Note 2]. 
10%. 
9A. 200 or 201. Every domestic 
company, being a special 
purpose vehicle referred to 
in Schedule V [Note 2].  
25%.”; 
(b) in sub -section (12), in clause ( b), in the Table, for serial number 9 
and the entries relating thereto, the following shall be substituted:—  
A B C D 
“9. 200 or 201. Every domestic 
company other than a 
special purpose vehicle 
referred to in Schedule V 
[Note 2]. 
10%. 
9A. 200 or 201. Every domestic 
company, being a special 
purpose vehicle referred to 
in Schedule V [Note 2]. 
25%.”. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
40 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

7 
 
 
 
 
Ord. 2 of 2026. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
CHAPTER V 
MISCELLANEOUS 
7. (1) The Income-tax (Amendment) Ordinance, 2026 is hereby repealed. 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the 
provisions of the said Ordinance, shall be deemed to have been done or taken under 
the corresponding provisions of this Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Repeal and 
saving. 

8 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Income -tax Act, 2025 (the said Act) was enacted to consolidate and 
amend the law relating to income-tax, which came into force on the 1st April, 2026. 
2. In recent months, on account of evolving geopolitical developments and
related disruptions in international trade and supply chains, the global economic 
landscape has undergone considerable uncer tainty. Hence, a need has arisen to 
undertake certain immediate taxation measures with a view to mitigate the impact 
of external economic shocks, ensure stability in the domestic economy, and support 
key sectors affected by the prevailing global conditions , which require certain 
amendments to the provisions of the said Act to be carried out on an urgent basis in 
the larger public interest. 
3. As Parliament was not in session and circumstances existed which rendered
it necessary to take immediate action, the  President, in exercise of the powers 
conferred by clause ( 1) of article 123 of the Constitution, promulgated the 
Income-tax (Amendment) Ordinance, 2026 on the 5th June, 2026. 
4. The Ordinance was promulgated with the objective of mitigating the impact
of external economic shocks, ensuring stability in the domestic economy and 
supporting key sectors affected by the prevailing global conditions by amending 
certain provisions of the Act. Subsequent policy assessment in view of representations 
received from stakeholders after the enactment of the Finance Act, 2026 has indicated 
that, while the objective sought to be achieved through the Ordinance continues to 
remain relevant, additional taxation measures are necessary to comprehensively  
achieve the same objective. Further, having regard to the continuing global 
developments and the need for a timely and coherent response, it is considered 
appropriate to incorporate these measures in the present Bill itself. 
5. In accordance with sub -clause ( a) of clause ( 2) of article 123 of the
Constitution, the Income-tax (Amendment) Ordinance, 2026 is to be replaced by an 
Act of Parliament, and accordingly, it is proposed to introduce the Taxation and 
Other Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2026 in Parliament. Further, in order to provide ease 
of doing business and tax certainty, as reasoned above, few other amendments are 
also proposed as part of the said Bill. 
6. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
NEW DELHI;       NIRMALA SITHARAMAN. 
The 31st July, 2026. 

9 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
This Bill seeks to replace the Income-tax (Amendment) Ordinance, 2026 and 
further to amend the Income-tax Act, 2025 and to amend the Finance Act, 2026 
which is administered by the Department of Revenue through Central Board of 
Direct Taxes, and to amend the Payment and Settlement Systems Act, 2007 which 
is administered by the Department of Financial  Services. Thus, no additional 
expenditure is contemplated on the enactment of the Bill. 

10 
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
The provisions of the Bill, inter alia, empower the Board to make rules for 
various purposes as specified therein. 
Clause 4 of the Bill seeks to amend Schedule IV of the Income-tax Act, 2025 
by inserting four line items as Sl. Nos. 13D, 13E, 13F and 13G.  
Sl. No s. 13D and 13E provide for tax exemption on interest income on 
government security and also tax exemption on any capital gains arising from the 
sale, exchange or transfer of Government security in the hands of Foreign 
Institutional Investor and Bank for International Settlements. Column D of the Table 
in amended Schedule IV against Sl. Nos. 13D and 13E empowers the Board to 
provide by rules the form and manner wherein information has to be furnished by 
the Foreign Institutional Investor and Bank for International Settlements to claim 
such exemption.  
Sl. No. 13F provides for tax exemption on income of sale of rough diamonds, 
in the hands of a foreign company, engaged in the business of diamond mining or a 
foreign company functioning as a sightholder, broker, aggregator or a tender and 
auction entity for such business, for a pe riod of fifteen years up to tax year ending 
on 31st March, 2041. Column D of the Table in amended Schedule IV against Sl. 
No. 13F empowers the Board to provide by rules the form and manner wherein 
information has to be maintained and furnished by such foreign company to claim 
such exemption. 
Further, Sl. No. 13G provides for tax exemption on income accruing or arising 
on account of storage of components in a warehouse in a custom bonded area, in the 
hands of a foreign company which stores components in a warehouse in a custom 
bonded area for providing them to a contract manufacturer to be used for 
manufacturing of specified electronic goods, for a period of fifteen years up  to tax 
year ending on 31st March, 2041. Column D of the Table in amended Schedule IV 
against Sl. No. 13G empowers the Board to provide by rules the form and manner 
wherein information has to be furnished by such foreign company to claim such 
exemption. 

11 
Memorandum explaining modifications contained in the Bill to replace the 
Income-tax (Amendment) Ordinance, 2026 
The Taxation and Other Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2026, which seeks to  
replace the Income-tax (Amendment) Ordinance, 2026 with an Act of Parliament in 
accordance with Article 123(2) of the Constitution of India, inter alia, proposes to 
make the following amendments to the Income-tax Act, 2025, the Finance Act, 2026 
and the Payment and Settlement Systems Act, 2007, namely:— 
(a) in clause 2 of the Bill, in the Payment and Settlement Systems
Act, 2007, amendment of section 10A in order to remove the reference of 
provision of Income -tax Act and also to provide that no bank or system 
provider shall impose, whether directly or indirectly, any charge upon a person 
making or receiving a payment by  using one or more electronic modes of 
payment as may be notified by the Central Government; 
(b) in clause 3 of the Bill, in the Income -tax Act, 2025, amendment of
Schedule I to rationalise the conditions for the eligible investment fund and 
eligible fund manager in order to promote fund management activity and 
provide tax certainty; 
(c) in clause 4 of the Bill, in the Income -tax Act, 2025, in
Schedule IV, in the Table— 
(i) amendment of Sl. No. 13A to provide longer period of
exemption till ta x year 2040 -41 to provide certainty and also to make 
certain consequential amendments; 
(ii) amendment of Sl. No. 13C to remove the condition  for
notification of foreign company and specified data centre and also to 
allow the lease model of ownership of spe cified data centre to be 
operated by Indian company for the purposes of ease of doing business 
and also to make certain consequential amendments; 
(iii) insertion of new serial number 13F and respective clauses to
provide exemption to a foreign company, eng aged in the business of 
diamond mining or a foreign company functioning as a sightholder, 
broker, aggregator or a tender and auction entity for such business, for a 
period of fifteen years up to tax year ending on 31st March, 2041 and 
also to make certain consequential amendments; 
(iv) insertion of new serial number 13G and respective clauses to
provide exemption to a foreign company which stores components in a 
warehouse in a custom bonded area for providing them to a contract 
manufacturer to be used for manufacturing of specified electronic goods, 
for a period of fifteen years up to tax year ending on 31st March, 2041 
and also to make certain consequential amendments; 
(d) in clause 5 of the Bill, in the Income -tax Act, 2025, in
Schedule V, in serial number 5, in column D, omission of clause (b) to provide 
exemption on dividend received by a unit holder, even where special purpose 
vehicle of the business trust has exercised the option under section 200 to 
move to new tax regime;  
(e) in clause  6 of the Bill, in the Finance Act, 2026, in section 3,
amendment of sub-section (4)(b) and (12)(b) to levy an additional surcharge 
of fifteen percent on special purpose vehicle where it moves to new tax regime. 

12 
Bank, etc., not 
to impose 
charge for using 
electronic 
modes of 
payment. 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACT FROM THE PAYMENT AND SETTLEMENT SYSTEMS ACT, 2007 
(51 OF 2007) 
*                       *                          *                           *                   * 
10A. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, no bank or system 
provider shall impose, whether directly or indirectly, any charge upon a person 
making or receiving a payment by using the electronic modes of payment 
prescribed under section 269SU of the Income-tax Act, 1961. 
*                       *                     *                           *              *  
————— 
EXTRACTS FROM THE INCOME-TAX ACT, 2025 
(30 OF 2005) 
*                       *                 *                           *              *  
SCHEDULE I 
[See section 9(12)] 
CONDITIONS FOR CERTAIN ACTIVITIES NOT TO CONSTITUTE BUSINESS CONNECTION IN 
INDIA. 
1. (1) The eligible investment fund referred to in section 9(12), means a fund
established or incorporated or registered outside India, which collects funds from 
its members for investing it for their benefit and fulfils the following conditions:–– 
(a) the fund is not a person resident in India;
(b) the fund is––
(i) a resident of a country or a specified territory with which an
agreement referred to in section 159(1) or (2) has been entered into; or 
(ii) established or incorporated or registered in a country or a
specified territory as notified in this behalf; 
(c) the aggregate participation or investment in the fund, directly, by
persons resident in India does not exceed 5% of the corpus of the fund as on the 
1st April and the 1st October of the tax year, subject to the conditions that— 
(i) for the purposes of calculation of such aggregate participation
or investment in the fund, any contribution made by the eligible fund 
manager during the first three years of operation of the fund, not 
exceeding twenty-five crore rupees, shall not be taken into account; 
(ii) where the aforesaid aggregate participation or investment in
the fund exceeds 5% on the 1st April or the 1st October of the tax 
year, the condition mentioned in this clause shall be deemed to be 
satisfied, if it is satisfied within four months of the 1st April or the 1st 
October of such tax year; 
(d) the fund and its activities are subject to applicable investor
protection regulations in the country or specified territory where such fund is 
established or incorporated or is a resident; 
(e) the fund has a minimum of twenty-five members who are, directly
or indirectly, not connected persons; 
(f) any member of the fund along with connected persons shall not have
any participation interest, directly or indirectly, in the fund exceeding 10%; 
43 of 1961. 

13 
 
  (g) the aggregate participation interest, directly or indirectly, of ten or 
less members along with their connected persons in the fund, shall be less 
than 50%; 
(h) the fund shall not invest more than 25% of its corpus in any entity; 
(i) the fund shall not make any investment in its associate entity; 
(j) the monthly average of the corpus of the fund shall not be less 
than one hundred crore rupees subject to the following:–– 
(i) if the fund has been established or incorporated in the tax 
year, then corpus of fund sh all not be less than one hundred crore 
rupees at the end of twelve months from the last day of the month of 
its establishment or incorporation; and 
(ii) this clause shall not apply to a fund which has been wound 
up in the tax year; 
(k) the fund shall not c arry on or control and manage, directly or  
indirectly, any business in India; 
(l) the fund is neither engaged in any activity which constitutes a  
business connection in India nor has any person acting on its behalf whose 
activities constitute a business connection in India other than the activities  
undertaken by the eligible fund manager on its behalf; 
(m) the remuneration paid by the fund to an eligible fund manager in  
respect of fund management activity undertaken by him on its behalf is not 
less than the amount calculated in such manner, as may be prescribed. 
(2) The conditions specified in paragraph (1)(e), (f) and (g) shall not apply, 
in case of— 
(a) an investment fund set up by the Government or the Central Bank 
of a foreign State or a sovereign fund; or 
(b) such other fund as the Central Government may, by notification,  
specify in this behalf, subject to conditions, if any. 
(3) The eligible fund manager, referred to in section 9(12), in respect of an 
eligible investment fund, means any person who is engaged in the activity of 
fund management and fulfils the following conditions:–– 
(a) the person is not an employee of the eligible investment fund or a 
connected person of the fund; 
(b) the person is registered as a fund manager or an inves tment 
advisor in accordance with the regulations as specified; 
(c) the person is acting in the ordinary course of his business as a 
fund manager; 
(d) the person along with his connected persons shall not be entitled,  
directly or indirectly, to more than 20% of the profits accruing or arising to 
the eligible investment fund from the transactions carried out by the fund  
through the fund manager. 
(4) Every eligible investment fund shall, in respect of its activities in a tax  
year, furnish within ninety days fr om the end of the tax year, a statement  in the 
prescribed form to the prescribed income -tax authority containing information  
relating to the fulfilment of the conditions specified in this Schedule, and also  
provide such other relevant information or documents, as may be prescribed. 
(5) The provisions of this Schedule shall apply as per such guidelines and 
in such manner as the Board may prescribe in this behalf. 
  

14 
 
  (6) The Central Government may, by notification, specify that any one or 
more of the conditions specified in sub -paragraph (1) or ( 3) shall not apply or 
shall apply  with such modifications, as specified in case of an eligible 
investment fund and its eligible fund manager, if–– 
(i) the eligible fund manager is located in an International Fi nancial 
Services Centre; and 
(ii) has commenced its operations on or before the 31st March, 2030. 
2. In this Schedule,— 
(a) “associate” means an entity in which a director or a trustee or a  
partner or a member or a fund manager of the investment fund, or a 
director or a trustee or a partner or a member of the fund manager of such 
fund, holds,  either individually or collectively, share or interest, being 
more than 15% of its share capital or interest, as the case may be; 
(b) “connected person” shall have th e meaning assigned to it in  
section 184(5); 
(c) “corpus” means the total amount of funds raised for the purpose 
of investment by the eligible investment fund as on a particular date; 
(d) “entity” means any entity in which an eligible investment fund 
makes an investment; and 
(e) “specified regulations” means the Securities and Exchange Board 
of India (Portfolio Managers) Regulations, 2020 or the Securities and 
Exchange Board of India (Investment Advisers) Regulations, 2013, or 
such other regulations made und er the Securities and Exchange Board of 
India Act, 1992 (15 of 1992), which may be notified in this regard. 
*                       *                          *                           *                   * 
SCHEDULE IV 
(See section 11) 
INCOME NOT TO BE INCLUDED IN TOTAL INCOME OF ELIGIBLE NON-RESIDENTS, 
FOREIGN COMPANIES AND OTHER SUCH PERSONS 
In computing the total income of a tax year of any eligible person mentioned 
in column C of the Table below, the income mentioned in column B of the said 
Table shall not be included, subject to the conditions mentioned in column D of the 
said Table, and the expressions used in columns B to D shall have the meanings 
respectively assigned to them in the Notes below the said Table. 
*                       *                          *                           *                   * 
Table 
Sl.No. Income not to be 
included in total income 
Eligible persons Conditions 
A B C D 
*                       *                          *                           *                   * 
13A. Any income arising 
on account of providing 
capital goods, 
equipment or tooling to 
a contract manufacturer, 
being a company 
resident in India. 
A foreign 
company, who is 
providing capital 
goods, equipment 
or tooling to the 
contract 
manufacturer for 
use in electronic 
manufacturing in 
India. 
(a) Ownership of 
such capital goods, 
equipment or tooling 
remains with the 
foreign company; 
(b) such capital goods, 
equipment or tooling is 
under the control and 
direction of the contract 
manufacturer; 
 
  

15 
 
  A B C D 
   (c) the contract 
manufacturer is located 
in a custom bonded 
area, that is, a 
warehouse referred to 
in section 65 of the 
Customs Act, 1962   
(52 of 1962); 
(d) the contract 
manufacturer produces 
electronic goods on 
behalf of the foreign 
company for a 
consideration;  
(e) such exemption 
shall be available up to 
the tax year 2030-2031. 
*                       *                          *                           *                   * 
13C. Any income accruing 
or arising in India or 
deemed to accrue or 
arise in India by way of 
procuring data centre 
services from a 
specified data centre. 
A foreign 
company. 
(a) Such foreign 
company is notified by 
the Central Government 
in this behalf; 
(b) such foreign 
company does not own 
or operate any of the 
physical infrastructure 
or any resources of the 
specified data centre; 
(c) all sales by such 
foreign company to 
users located in India 
are made through a 
reseller entity being an 
Indian company; 
(d) such foreign 
company maintains and 
furnishes such 
information in such 
form and manner, as 
may be prescribed; and 
(e) such exemption 
shall be available up to 
tax year ending on the 
31st March, 2047. 
*                       *                          *                           *                   * 
Note 3: For the purposes of Sl. No. 13C,— 
*                       *                          *                           *                   * 
(c) “specified data centre” means a data centre which is— 
(i) set up under an approved scheme and is notified in this 
behalf by the Central Government in the Ministry of Electronics and 
Information Technology; and 
(ii) owned and operated by an Indian company. 
*                       *                          *                           *                   * 
  

16 
 
  SCHEDULE V 
(See section 11) 
INCOME NOT TO BE INCLUDED IN TOTAL INCOME OF CERTAIN ELIGIBLE PERSONS 
INCLUDING INVESTMENT FUNDS, BUSINESS TRUSTS AND THEIR UNIT HOLDERS 
In computing the total income of a tax year of any eligible person 
mentioned in column C of the Table below, the income mentioned in column B 
of the said Table shall not be included, subject to the conditions mentioned in 
column D of the said Table, and the e xpressions used in columns B to D of the 
said Table shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in Notes below 
the said table. 
*                       *                          *                           *                   * 
Table 
Sl.No. Income not to be 
included in total income 
Eligible persons Conditions 
A B C D 
*                       *                          *                           *                   * 
5. Any distributed 
income referred to in 
section 223. 
Any unit 
holder of a 
business trust. 
Exemption shall not 
be allowed on that 
proportion of the 
income which is of the 
same nature as–– 
   (a) interest 
received or 
receivable from a 
special purpose 
vehicle by the 
business trust; or 
(b) dividend 
received or 
receivable from a 
special purpose 
vehicle by the 
business trust (in a 
case where the 
special purpose 
vehicle has 
exercised the option 
under section 200); 
or 
(c) income of a 
business trust, 
being a real estate 
investment trust, by 
way of renting or 
leasing or letting 
out any  real estate 
asset owned 
directly by such 
business trust. 
*                       *                          *                           *                   * 
  

17 
 
  ———— 
EXTRACT FROM THE FINANCE ACT, 2026 
(4 OF 2026) 
*                       *                          *                           *                   * 
3. (1) *                       *                          *                           *                   * 
(4) For the purposes of sub-section (3),— 
*                       *                          *                           *                   * 
(b) in respect of income chargeable to tax under the section as 
specified in column B of the Table below, in the case of a person as 
specified in column C of the said Table, the amount of income -tax 
computed shall be increased by a surcharge, for the purposes of the Union, 
calculated at the rate or rates as specified in column D of the said Table, of 
such income-tax. 
TABLE 
Sl. 
No. 
Section Person Rate of surcharge 
A B C D 
*                       *                          *                           *                   * 
9. 200 or 201. Every domestic company. 10%. 
*                       *                          *                           *                   * 
(12) For the purposes of sub-sections (10) and (11),— 
*                       *                          *                           *                   * 
(b) in respect of income chargeable to tax under the section as 
specified in column B of the Table below, in the case of a person as 
specified in  column C of the said Table, the amount of “advance tax” 
computed shall be increased by a surcharge, for the purposes of the Union, 
calculated at the rate or rates as specified in column D of the said Table, of 
such “advance tax”. 
TABLE 
Sl. 
No. 
Section Person Rate of surcharge 
A B C D 
*                       *                          *                           *                   * 
9. 200 or 201. Every domestic company. 10%. 
*                       *                          *                           *                   * 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Income-tax 
under Act 30 of 
2025. 

LOK SABHA 
———— 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Payment and Settlement Systems Act, 2007 and the 
Income-tax Act, 2025, and to amend the Finance Act, 2026. 
———— 
(Smt. Nirmala Sitharaman, Minister of Finance and Corporate Affairs) 