As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA ON 
• 
Bill No. 150 of 1980 
THE HIGH COURT AND SUPREME COURT JUDGES (CONDI. 
TIONS OF SERVICE) AMENDMENT BIf.L, 1980 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the High Court Judges (ConditJions of Service) 
Act, 1954, and the Supreme Court Judges (Conditions of Service) 
Act, 1958. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-first Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
5 1. This Act may be called the High Court and Supreme Court Judges Short 
(Conditions of Service) Amendment Act, 1980. title. 
CHAPTER II 
AMENDMENT OF THE HIGH COURT JUDGES (CONDITIONS OF SERVlICE) 
ACT, 1954 
10 2. In section 2 of the High Court Judges (Conditions of Service) 
28 ol 1954. Act, 1954 (hereafter in this Chapter referred to as the High Court 
Judges Act), in clause (h) of sub-section (1), for sub-clause (ii), the 
following sub-clause shall be substituted, namely:-
"(ii) the amount, actually taken, of each period Of leave on full 
I 5 allowances at a rate equal to the monthly rate of the salary;". 
3. In section 9 of the High Court Judges Act, to sub-section (1), the 
following proviso shall be added, namely:-
"Provided that where leave on full allowances is Jl'anted to a 
Judge on medical certificate the monthly rate of leave allowances 
shaD for the first one hundred and twenty days of such leave, he a 
, f LI_ 1 " rate equal to the monthly rate IUS sa ary. ; 
Amend-
ment 
of 
section 2. 
Amend-
mentol 
section 9. 

Amend-
mentof 
sections 
14 80015. 
Inser-
tion of 
new 
section 
22D. 
Exemp-
tion 
from 
liabi-
lity to 
pay 
income-
tax on 
certain 
per-
quisites 
or al-
lowance 
receiv-
ed by 
a Judge. 
Amend-
ment of 
First 
Sche-
dule. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 2. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 9. 
Amend-
ment of 
sections 
1~ and 
14 and 
Sche-
dule. 
2 
4. In the High Court Judges Act, in the Exp~ation to section 14 and 
in section 15, for the words "pensionable civil poSt", wherever they occur, 
the words "pensionable post" shall be substiltuted and shall be deemed' 
always to have been substituted. 
5. After section 22C of the High Court Judges Act, the following S 
section shall be inserted and shall be deemed to have been inserted with 
effect from the 1st day of April, 1975, namely:-
'22D. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Income-tax Act, 
1961,-
(a) the value of rent-free official residence provided to a J 0 
Judge under sub-section (1) of section 22A; or 
(b) the allowance paid to him under sub-section (2) of 
that section, ~ 
shall not be included in the computation of his income chargeable 
under the head "Salaries" under section 15 of the Income-tax Act. J 5 
1961.'. 
6. In the First Schedule to the High Court Judges Act,-
(a) in paragraph 1 of Part I, for the words "pensionable civil 
post", at both the places where they occur, the words "pensionable 
post" shall be substituted and shall be deemed atways to have beeI1 20 
substituted; 
(b) in paragraph 1 of Part nI, for the words "civil pensionable 
post", the words "pensionable post" shaD be substituted aDd shMI be 
deemed always to have been substituted. 
CHAPI'ERIII 
AMENDMENT OF THE SUPREME COURT JUDGES (CONDITIONS OF SERVICE) 
ACT, 1958 
7. In section 2 of the Supreme Court Judges (Conditions of Service) 
43 of 1961. 
Act, 1958 (hereafter in this Chapter referred to as the Supreme Court 41 of 1958. 
Judges Act), in clause (h), for sub-clause (iii), the following sub-clause 30 
shall be substituted, namely:-
"(iii) the amount, actually taken, of each period of leave on full 
allowances at a rate equal to the monthly rate of the salary;". 
8. In section 9 of the Supreme Court Judges Act, to sub-section (1), 
the following proviso shall be added, namely:- 3S 
"Provided that where leave on full allowances is granted 'to a 
Judge on medieal Certificate, the mGIlthly rate of leave abowances 
shall, for the first one hundred and ltweDty days of such leave, be . a 
rate equal to the monthly rate of his salary.". 
9. Ia the Supreme Court Judges Act, in the Explanation to aeetion 13, 40 
in section 14, in paragraph 1 of Part I, and in paragraph 1 of Part ID, of 
the Schedule, for the words "pensionable civil post", wherever they occur, 
the words "pensionable pGfJtf' shalt be substituted and shaQ be dleemed 
always to have been substituted. 

43 of 1961. S 
3 
10. After section 23C of the Supreme Court Judges Act, the follow5ng 
leetion shall be inserted and shall be deemed to have been inserted 
with effect from the 1st day of April, 1975, namely:-
'23D. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Income-tax 
Act, 1961, the value of rent-free official residence provided to a 
Judge under sub-section (1) of section 23 shall not be included in 
the computation of' his income chargeable under the head "Salaries" 
under section 15 of the Income-tax Act, 1961:'. 
Inser-
tion of 
new 
section 
23D. 
Exemp-
tion 
from 
liabi-
lity to 
pay 
income-
tax 
on 
certain 
per-
quisites 
receiv-
ed by 
a Judge. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Under the High Court Judges (Conditions of Service) Act, 1954, and 
the Supreme Court Judges (Conditions of Service) Act, 1968, respec-
tively, when a High Court Judge Or a Supreme Court Judge avails of 
leave on full allowances, he can draw full salary (equal to monthly rate 
of pay) for the first 45 days and leave allowance at the rate of Rs. 2220 
per month for the rest of such leave. It is felt that this provision is 
inadequate inasmuch as it does not permit a Judge to take medical leave 
on full monthly salary beyond 45 days at a time even though he is in a 
bad state of health. It is accordingly "roposed that the High Court 
Judges and the Supreme Court Judges may be allowed full salary (equal 
to monthly rate of pay) for the first 120 days of leave on full allowances, 
if such leave is availed of on medical grounds. 
2. For the purposes of calculating pension under the High Court 
Judges (Conditions of Service) Act, 1954, and the Supreme Court Judges 
(Conditions of Service) Act, 1958, a person who has held a "pensionable 
civil post" before becoming a Judge of a High Court or the Supreme 
Court is entitled to count his service as a Judge of such Court as service 
in that post and also to a speciai additional penSion for such service. This 
benefit is not available to a person who has held a "pensionable military 
post" before becoming a Judge of a High Court or the Supreme Court. 
It is accordingly proposed to remove this distinction between persons 
who have held pensionable civil posts and pensionable military posts 
before appointment as Judges. 
3. A High Court Judge or a Supreme Court Judge is at present entitled. 
without payment of rent, to the use of an official residence. Where a 
High Court Judge does not avail himself of the U'Se of such residence, 
he may be paid every month an allowance of an amount equal to twelve 
and a half per cent. of his salary. The value of rent-free accommoda-
tion "rovided to a Judge is being treated as a perquisite under the 
Income-tax Act and is taxed accordingly. It has been represented that 
the value of rent-free accommodation provided to Judges should be free 
of income-tax, as otherwise the benefits provided on this account would 
be illw;ory. It is accordingly proposed to exempt from income-tax the 
value of rent-free official residence provided to a High Court Judge or a 
Supreme Court Judge and the allowance payable to a High Court Judge 
in lieu theredf fro~ the assessment year 1975-76 commencing on 1st 
Apru, 1975. 
4. The Bill seeks to amend the High Court Judges 
Service) Act, 1954, and the Supreme Court Judges 
Service) Act, 1958, to achieve the above objectives. 
(Conditions of 
(Conditions of 
NEW DELHI; P. SHIV SHANKER. 
'J'he 28th July~ ~~60. 
4 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Under clause 3 of the Bill, which seeks to amend section 9 of the High 
Court ~udges (Conditions of Service) Act, 1954, a High Court Judge will 
be entitled to leave allowances at the monthly rate of his salary for the 
first 120 days, if the leave is availed of on a medical certificate. At pre-
sent, the monthly ratp. of leave allowances payable to a High Court Judge 
while on leave on full allowances for the first 45 days is Rs. 4,000 in tl,le 
case of a Chief Justice and Rs. 3,500 in the case of a puisne Judge, and 
at the rate of Rs. 2,220 for the rest of such leave. Since allowances equal 
to monthly rate of salary will now be payable for an additional period of 
75 days, the additional expenditure involved will be Rs. 1,780 per month 
(Rs. 4,000 minus Rs. 2,220) or Rs. 4,450 on each occasion in respect of 8 
Chief Justice and Rs. 1,200 per month (Rs. 3,500 minus RIS. 2,220) or 
Rs. 3,200 on each occasion in res,ect of a puisne Judge. 
2. Under clause 8 of the Bill, which seeks to amend section 9 Of the 
Supreme Court Judges (Conditions of Service) Act, 1958, a Supreme 
Court Judge will be entitled to leave allowances at the monthly rate of 
hi's salary for the first 120 days, if the leave is availed of on a medical 
certificate. At present, the monthly rate of leave allowances payable to 
a Supreme Court Judge while on leave on full allowances for the first 
45 days is Rs. 5,000 in the case of the Chief Justice of India and Rs. 4,000 
in the case of a puisne Judge, and at the rate of Rs. 2,220 for the rest of 
such leave. Since allowances equal to monthly rate of salary will now be 
payable for an additional period of 7f1 days, the additional expenditure 
involved will be Rs. 2,780 per month (Rs. 5,000 minus Rs. 2,220) or 
Rs. 6,950 on each occasion in respect of the Chief Justice of India and 
Rs. 1,780 per month (Rs. 4,000 minus Rs. 2,220) or Rs. 4,450 on each 
occ3si'un in respect 0'£ a puisne Judge. 
3. For the purposes of calculating pension under the High Court 
Judges (Conditions Of Service) Act, 1954, and the Supreme Court .Judges 
(Conditions of Service) Act, 1958, a pers~ who has held a pensIonable 
civil post before becoming a Judge of a High Court or the Supreme .Co~t 
. entitled to count his service as a Judge of such Court as seI'Vlce In 
~~t post and also to a special additional pensi~n for such 
. under the provisions of Part III of the First Schedule Sp.rvlce . .' f S . ) A t 1954 t th High Court Judges (CondltIons a ervlce c , , 
ad pe t III of the Schedule to the Supreme Court Judges (Condi-an ar d . 'bl 'f 
• .. C',_ • e) Act 1958 These benefits are not a mlSSI e 1 a person bans 0... .;x:rvlc , . . 
had held a pensionable milftary post before becommg a Ju~ge. Clauses 
4 6 and 9 of the Bill seek to make necessar~ amendme.nts m the above 
, thl's discrimination. It IS not pOSSible to work out two Acts to remove . .' t . h ddT a1 expenditure that Will be mcurred on his account 
pr~isely t e a d.t l IOn '11 depend on the number of Judges who have had as such expen I ure WI S C urt . . b f appointment as Judges of the upreme 0 or 
military service t~ are may be and the length of their service. There 
a High Court, as e case which' has come to the notice of the Govern-
IS, however, only one case, 
s 

6 
ment, 0'£ a retired High Court Judge who has had military service before 
becoming a Judge of the High Court. He is at present getting an annual 
pension of Rs. 8,000 in respect of his service in a pensionable military post. 
He does not get any pension for his subsequent service as a Judge of the 
High Court. By the proposed amendment, the quantum of his basic ser-
vice pension will increase from Rs. 8,000 per annum to Rs. 10,000 per 
annum. In addition, he will get an additional pension of Rs. 3,500 per 
annum for his service as High Court Judge. Thus, his total pension will 
be increased to Rs. 13,500 per annum instead Of .Rs. 8,000 per annum as 
at present. A non-recurring expenditure amounting to Rs. 22,000 will 
also be payable to him as arrears for about four years. 
4. The expenditure in .respect 01 leave allowances and increased 
pension, if any, payable to Judges of the Hfgh Courts, except the 
Delhi' High Court, will be a charge on the Consolidated Fund of the 
States. The expenditure on the leave allowances and increased pension, 
if any, payable to Judges of the Delhi High Court and the Judges of the 
Supreme Court will be a charge on the Consolidated Fund of India. 
50. The Bill will not involve any other recurring or non-recurring 
expenditure. 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE HIGH COURT JUDGES (CONDITIONS OF SmmCE) ACT, 1954 
(28 OF 1954) 
• • • • • 
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,- • 
• • • • • 
(h) "service for pension" includes-
• • • • • 
(ii) forty-five days or the amount actually taken, which-
ever is less, of each period of leave on full allowances; 
• • • • 
9. (1) The monthly rate of leave allowances payable to a Judge while 
on leave on full allowances shall be for the first forty-five days of such 
leave a rate equal to the monthly rate of his salary, and thereafter two 
thousand two hundred and twenty rupees . 
• • • • 
14. Subject to the provisions of this Act, every Judge shall, on h1a 
retirement, be paid a pension in accordance with the scale and provisions 
in Part I of the First Schedule: 
Provided that no such pension shall be payable to a Judge unless 
(QJ) he has completed not less than twelve years of service for 
pension; or 
(b) he has attained the age of sixty-two years, and, in the case 
of a Judge holding office on the 5th day of October, 1963, sixty years; 
or 
(c) his retirement is medically certified to be necessitated by 
ill-health: 
Provided further that if a J'adge at the time of his appointment is 
in receipt of a pension (other than a disability or wound pension) in 
resp,ect of any previous service in the Union or a State, the pension 
payable under this Act shall be in lieu of, and not in addition to, that 
pEnsion. 
Explanation.--In this section 'Judge' means a Judge who is not a 
member of the Indian Civil Servic~ or has not held any other pensionable 
civil post under the Union or a State and includes a Judge who being 
a member of the Indian Civil Service or having held any other pen-
sionable civil post under the Union or a State has elected to receive the 
pension payable under Part I of the First Schedule. 
15. (1) Every Judge-
• • • • • 
(b) who is not a member of the Indian Civil Service but has 
held any other pensionable ci~l post ~der. the Union or a. State, 
shall on his retirement, be paid a pensIOn m accordance WIth the 
scale' and proviSiOns in Part III of the First Schedule: 
Provided that every guch Judge shall elect to receive the penaion 
payable to him either under Part I of the First Schedule or, 8S the ease 
'1 
Deft-
nition&. 
Leave 
allow-
ancel. 
Penlion 
pay-
able to 
Judi •. 
Special 
provi-
.ion for 
pensiOD 
in 
respect 
ot 
Judi-
who are 
mem-
beraot 
nrvice. 

Deft-
nitiOIl8. 
Leave 
aUoW!* 
--. 
• 
8 
may be, Part II or Part III of the First Schedule, and the pension 
payable to him shall be calculated accordingly. 
• • • • 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
(See sections 14 and 15) 
PDSloNS OF JUDGES 
PART I 
• 
1. The provisions of this Part apply to a Judge who is not a mem .. 
ber of the Indian Civil Service or has not held any other pensionable 
civil post under the Union or a State and also apply to a Judge who, 
being a member of the Indian Civil Service or having held any other 
penSionable civil post under the Union or a State, has elected to receive 
the pension payable under this Part. 
• • • • • 
PART III 
1. The provisions of this Part apply to a Judge who has held any 
civil pensionable post under the Union or a State (but is not a member 
of the Indian Civil Service) and who has not elected to receive the 
pension payable under Part 1. 
• • • • • 
EXTRACTS FROM THE SUPREME COURT JUDGES (CONDITIONS OF SERVICE) 
ACT, 1958 
(41 OF 1958) 
• • • • • 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
• • • • • 
(h) "service for pension" includes-
• • • • • 
(iii) forty-five days or the amount actually taken, which-
ever is less, of each period of leave on full allowances' , 
• • • • • 
'.(1) The monthly rate of leave allowances payable to a Judge 
whUe on leave on full allowances shall be for the first forty-five days 
of such leave a rate equal to the monthly rate of the salary and there-
Uter two thousand two hundred lOlnd twenty rupees. 
• • • • • 

9 
. 13. Subject to the provisions of this Act, a pension shall be pByable 
In accordance with the provisions of Part I of the Schedule to a Judge 
of the Supreme Court on his retirE'ment if but only if-, , 
(a) he has completed not less than seven years of service for 
pension as a Judge in India; or ~ 
(b) he has attained the age of sixty-five years; or 
(c) his retirement is medically certified to be necessitated by 
ill-health. 
Explanati<>n.-In this section, "Judge" means a Judge who is not a 
member of the Indian Civil Service or has not held any other pension-
able civil post under the Union or a State and includes a person who 
was in service as a J'Ildge on the 20th May, 1954, and also includes a 
Judge who being a member of the Indian Civil Service or having hefd 
any other pensionable civil post under the Union or a State has elected 
to receive the pension payable under Part I of the Schedule. 
14. (1) Every Judge-
• • • • • 
(b) who is not a member ,Qf the Indian Civil Service but bas 
held any other pensionable civU post under the Union or a State 
shall, on his retirement, be patH. a pension in accordance with the 
provisions of Put III ¢ the Sahedule~ 
Provided that every' -such, Jud,. shall eJect.- z8eive -t~ ~on 
payable to him either under PaItt t of the Schedule or, as the case may 
be, Part II or Part III of the Schedule, and the pension payable to him 
shall be calculated accordingly. 
• • • • • 
THE SCHEDULE 
(See sections 13 and 1.) 
PENSIONS OF JUDGES 
PART I 
1. The provisions of this Part~l?pl:y.t~ a Judge who is n~t a mem~r 
of the Indian Civil Service or has not held any other pensIonable civll 
post under the Union or a State and also apply to a person who was in 
· a Judge on the 20th May, 1954, and to a Judge woo, servIce as . ." he 
b . ember of the Indian CIVIl ServIce or havmg held any ot r emg a m ed . · bl 'viI post under the Union or a State, has elect to receive penslona e CI 
the pension payable under this Part. 
• • • • • 
PART III 
.. of this Part apply to a Judge who has held any 1 The provISIons her '. . 'viI t ulllie;r the Union or a State (but is not a mem 
penslonabl~ Cl ro; ~ C!~(It) and who has not elected to receive the of the Indian, _VI ~T. 
· nAlI'.ble under Pert I. penSIon _or 
• • • • • 
Pension 
payable 
to 
Judges. 
Special 
provi-
sions for 
pension 
in reB-
pectof 
Judges 
who 
are 
members 
of 
.ervice. 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the High Court Judges (Conditions 0'1 Service) Act, 
1954, and the Supreme Court Judges (Conditions of Service) Act, 
1958. 
(Shri P. Shiv ShtJnkelf', 
Mtniste1' of lAw, 
Junice (1M ComP4"11 
Affair.). 