1
THE COMPULSORY EMPLOYMENT AND WELFARE MEASURES
FOR DISADVANTAGED PERSONS BILL, 2017
By
SHRI KUNWAR PUSHPENDRA SINGH CHANDEL, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory employment and welfare measures for disadvantaged
persons and for matters connected therewith.
BE  it enacted by the Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Compulsory Employment and Welfare Measures for
Disadvantaged Persons  Act, 2017.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 151 of  2017
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "Board" means the National Board for Special Group constituted under
section 4;
(b) "disadvantaged persons" means widows, mentally retarded youth, poor old
age persons and disabled who are unemployed; and
(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
a National Board for Disadvantaged Persons to ensure for employment and welfare
measures for such persons.
(2) The Board shall consist of a Chairperson and ten other members, out of which
one representative each from the States of Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh and Bihar who
shall have special experience in conducting of various social schemes, to be appointed by
the Central Government in consultation with the State Governments concerned, in such
manner as may be prescribed.
(3) The headquarter of the Board shall be at such place as may be prescribed.
(4) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of
the Chairperson and other members of the Board shall be such as may be prescribed.
(5) The Central Government shall make available such officers and staff to the
Board as it may require for its efficient functioning.
4. The Board shall—
(i) take steps to ensure employment for livelihood of disadvantaged persons;
(ii) take steps for development of managerial system in small and cottage
industries for manufacturing of products as per their demand in the market by
accommodating the disadvantaged persons for employment in such industries;
(iii) take steps to review the managerial skill of these industries in every six
months for ensuring employment notwithstanding decline in the products manufactured
by small and cottage industries;
(iv) take responsibility for sale and marketing of products manufactured by the
disadvantaged persons and the profit gained by selling of such products shall be
transferred to the account of beneficiaries;
(v) extend the benefits of various social security schemes which are run by the
Central Government to the disadvantaged persons;
(vi) recommend to the Central Government that the product manufactured and
sale thereof by the disadvantaged persons be kept outside the purview of Goods and
Services Tax;
(vii) launch special campaigning programme for promotion of sale of the product
manufactured by the disadvantaged persons; and
(viii) take steps for providing financial assistance to the disadvantaged persons
in the form of allowances for one year or till the sale of the products is increased
during low demand of manufactured products in the market.
5. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide requisite funds to the National Board for carrying out the purposes
of this Act.
6. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act;
Definitions.
Constitution
of the
National
Board for
Special Group.
Functions of
the Board
Central
Government
to provide
requisite funds.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
5

4
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
India is a fast developing country. However, a large portion of the population is
deprived of employment in the country or being paid a meager salary. Even today, it has
become more difficult for the widows, poor old-aged persons, mentally challenged youth
and disabled persons to get the employment. This weakens the self-confidence amongst
them making it difficult to live with dignity in the society. It is, therefore, necessary that the
Government makes special efforts to ensure employment opportunities for this group so that
they may lead a dignified life. For this purpose, the Government shall have to encourage the
small and cottage industries, their demand in the market and make efforts to meet constant
demand of marketing of the products manufactured by these industries by engaging the
widows, poor old-aged persons, mentally retarded youth and disabled persons in such
industries so as to enable them to lead life with respect and dignity.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; KUNWAR PUSHPENDRA SINGH CHANDEL
June 30, 2017.

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for constitution of a National Board for Special Group for
employment and welfare measures of such categorised persons. Clause 5 provides that the
Central Government shall provide requisite funds to the National Board for carrying out the
purposes of this Act. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from
the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that recurring expenditure of rupees
one thousand crore per annum would be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees five hundred crore is also likely to be involved.

6
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 6 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of details only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory employment and welfare measures for
disadvantaged persons and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Kunwar Pushpendra Singh Chandel, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—1120LS(S3)—26-07-2017.