Aඌ ංඇඍඋඈൽඎർൾൽ ංඇ Lඈ඄ Sൺൻඁൺ
Bill No. 151 of 2022
THE SANCTIONS ON COUNTRIES ENGAGING TERRITORIAL 
INCURSIONS INTO INDIA BILL, 2022
By
Sඁඋං M.K. Rൺ඀ඁൺ ඏ ൺඇ, M.P.
ൺ
BILL
to provide for economic, diplomatic and political sanctions against the countries 
which engage in forceful incursions into Indian territory and for 
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
 WHEREAS India gives highest regard and mutual respect for other countries territorial 
integrity and sovereignty; 
 AND WHEREAS India follows a principle of mutual non-aggression; 
 AND WHEREAS India believes in equality and cooperation with other countries for 
mutual benefit;
 AND WHEREAS India has resolved to solve all its issues through peaceful bilateral 
negotiations; 

Sanctions 
on a country 
which engages 
in territorial 
incursion into 
India.
Mode and 
Nature of 
Sanctions.
 AND WHEREAS India champions in peaceful co-existence; 
 AND WHEREAS India believes in the principle of non-interference in the domestic 
affairs of other countries and strictly follows the principles as enshrined under Article 2(4) 
of the United Nations Charter;
 Bൾ it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:–
 1. (1) This Act may be called the Sanctions on Countries Engaging Territorial Incursions 
into India Act, 2022.
  ( 2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, specify.
 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:–
   ( a) “aggressor” means the foreign nation which tries to defy International law to 
 forcefully occupy India’s territorial region by an act of aggression and territorial incursion;
   ( b) “diplomatic sanctions” means withdrawal of diplomatic relations with those 
 foreign nations which entered into territorial aggression with India including boycott of 
 diplomatic events, multilateral programmes being organized in that nation;
   ( c) “economic sanction” means withdrawal of customary trade and financial 
 relations for foreign and security policy purposes with those foreign nations which 
 enters into territorial aggression with India;
   ( d) “Indian territory” means all those regions as specified under article 1 of the 
 Constitution; and
   ( e) “territorial incursions” means the use of defence force by a foreign nation 
 against the sovereignty, territorial integrity or political independence of India.
 3. (1) From the date of enactment of this Act, if any foreign nation engages in an act 
of territorial incursion into India or attempts to directly or indirectly promote secession 
movements in India creating internal disturbances to the peace and harmony of India, that 
nation shall be put under economic, diplomatic and political sanctions as mentioned under 
section 4.
  ( 2) For the purpose of sub-section (1), the Cabinet Committee on Security shall 
analyze the severity of the threat emanating from territorial incursion from a foreign nation 
and shall recommend for the sanctions to be imposed on that nation.
  ( 3) The order containing sanctions shall be signed by the President at the 
recommendations of the Cabinet Committee on Security.
  ( 4) The order under sub-section (3) shall lie in force as long as the aggressor maintain 
status quo ante.
 4. (1) The President shall on the recommendations of the Cabinet Committee on Security 
impose three types of sanctions on a foreign nation engaging in an act of territorial incursion 
into India namely:–
   ( a) economic sanctions including:–
     ( i) stoppage of all trade relations with that nation;
     ( ii) all goods which have the aggressor as “country of origin’’ shall not be allowed 
   to enter into any port of India;
Short title and 
commencement.

Countries 
which may 
be sanctioned 
under this Act.
Power to remove 
diﬃculties.
Restrictions on 
imports.
     ( iii) banning of Indian firms from importing goods of the aggressor;
     ( iv) total boycott of the aggressor from the cyberspace including banning of 
   various application softwares and electronic communications if the aggression is of 
   cyber in nature;
   ( b) diplomatic sanctions including:— 
     ( i) boycott of all events being organized by the aggressor nation; 
     ( ii) calling of the aggressor’s diplomatic representatives for an explanation 
   immediately following the event of aggression:
     Provided that if the explanation is not found satisfactory the Central Government 
   may seize diplomatic relations with the aggressor nation; and
   ( c) political sanctions including:—
     ( i) disengagement in any political dialogues with the aggressor unless the 
   aggressor restores status quo ante; and
     ( ii) restricting political representatives from engaging into any conversations 
   with Indian representatives until status quo ante is strictly maintained.
 5. For the purpose of this Act, the following countries may be sanctioned under this 
Act,—
   ( a) countries which directly engage in territorial aggression into India;
   ( b) countries which support the aggressor directly or indirectly; and
   ( c) countries which attempts to destabilize Indian democracy including democratic 
 institutions using cyber warfare.
 6. No importer in India shall be allowed to import any goods or services from the 
sanctioned nation under this Act:
  Provided that if any importer imports any goods or services from the sanctioned 
nation his import license may be revoked and he may also be liable to such penalties as may 
be decided by the Central Government, from time to time.
 7. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central 
Government may make such order or give such direction not inconsistent with the provisions 
of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or expedient for the removal of any difficulty:
  Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of the period of two years 
from the date of commencement of this Act. 
  

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
 Over the past few years several countries bordering us have tried to impose their 
military might on our country in the form of various aggressions. These countries have 
started commenting upon our internal security matters. Government of India has been giving 
befitting reply to such aggressions and comments on our internal and external security. 
A need was felt for a legislation required to impose restrictions on those countries that tries 
to destabilize our country’s democracy.
 Our country should cut all relations with those countries that displays such aggression 
on our borders. Economic, political and diplomatic sanctions once imposed will bring 
those countries to negotiating tables. India always respects territorial sovereignty and the 
resolution of disputes through peaceful means. However, we cannot have economic, political 
and diplomatic relations with such countries which on the one hand engages in territorial 
aggression and on the other tries to dump their products in our economy. Hence sanctions at 
various levels will help us fight war without weapons enabling us to achieve status quo ante 
at the shortest possible time. 
 Hence this Bill.
    Nൾඐ Dൾඅඁං;                                                                                        M.K. RAGHA V AN
1 July, 2022

                 
LOK SABHA
ൺ
BILL
to provide for economic, diplomatic and political sanctions against the countries 
which engage in forceful incursions into Indian territory and for 
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto
(Shri M.K. Raghavan, M.P .) 