1
Bill No. 151 of  2019
THE  PREVENTION  OF  VIOLENCE  AGAINST  DOCTORS,  MEDICAL
PROFESSIONALS  AND  MEDICAL  INSTITUTIONS  BILL,  2019
By
DR. SHRIKANT EKNATH SHINDE, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the prevention of violence against doctors, medical professionals and
medical institutions and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Prevention of Violence Against Doctors, Medical
Professionals and Medical Institutions Act, 2019.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.5
Short title and
commencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “doctor” means a person who is qualified in modern allopathic medicine and
surgery or allied procedure (radiology, physiotherapy, psychology, occupational
therapy, diet and nutrition) along with that of practitioners of Homocopathy, Ayurveda,
Unani system of medicine, Yoga and naturopathy, Siddha or any other form of treatment
as recognized by the Medical Council of India, Dental Council of India, Ministry of
Health and Family Welfare, Ministry of AYUSH, College of Physicians and Surgeons
or any other recognized body by the Government of India and also those in possession
of a recognized degree or professional qualification sought overseas to Indian soil to
treat people who are sick or come to him for any form of service, advice or consultation;
(b) “medical professionals” means all those people who practice or profess
services associated to medical profession including those of nurses, radiologists,
technicians, medical social workers, pharmacists, medical administrators, para-medical
staff and practitioners including those seeking or imparting medical education, as the
case may be;
(c) “medical institutions” means all institutions involved in discharge of medical
or corresponding services including government or private hospitals, teaching
institutes, primary health centres, dispensaries, pharmacies, radiology or imaging
centres, casualty and trauma care centres, health and wellness centres, management
and consulting centres, pharmacy, mobile medicare units, e-medicine and tele-medicine
centres;
(d) “offenders” means a person who either by himself or as a member or leader of
a group of persons or organization commits or attempts to commit, abet, provoke or
incite the commission of violence under this Act;
(e) “property” means any property movable or immovable, medical equipment or
machinery; owned by or in possession of or under the, control of any doctor, medical
professional or medical institution;
(f) “violence” means an act which causes or may cause any harm, injury or
endanger of the life of or intimidation, obstruction or hindrance to any doctor or
medical professional in discharge of  his duties, or causes to be the reason for any
damage or loss to the property or reputation (inordinately) of a doctor, medical
professional or a medical institution;
(g) “witness” means an observer, on-looker, spectator or any other person
ordinarily present at ‘locus-delicti’ irrespective of his affinity to the doctor, medical
professional or the medical institution in question; and suffers any loss or damage by
virtue of his presence at the place of offence; and
(h) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. Any act of violence against a doctor, medical professional or medical institution
shall be prohibited and mitigated at all levels.
4. Any offence committed under this Act shall be cognizable and non-bailable and
triable by the Court of Judicial Magistrate of the First Class.
5. (1) Whoever, commits or attempts to commit or abets or incites the commission of
any act of violence in infringement of the provisions of section 3, shall be punished with
imprisonment which shall not be less than two years but which may extend upto five years
and with fine which shall not be less than rupees five thousand but which may extend upto
rupees five lakh in addendum to recovery of the entire damage to the property or belonging
of all concerned including the witnesses if any; in actual.
(2) If  the accused does not pay or is financially incompetent to pay the penalty at that
time it shall be recovered as if it were an arrear of land revenue and any property belonging
Definitions.
Prohibition of
violence.
Cognizance of
offence.
Penalty and
compensation.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
to his immediate relatives (as per the existing provisions of the Indian Penal Code 1860), may
be attached in recovery of the said penalty.
6. It shall be the responsibility of every doctor, medical professional or medical
institutions, as the case may be, before start of any treatment or procedure to make an
explanatory note containing:—
(a) the present medical condition of the patient;
(b) expected procedures and treatment;
(c) possible outcome;
(d) expected time to be taken for recovery;
(e) chances of failure of the prescribed procedures; and
(f) expected expense per unit of medication, procedure, treatment and service
pertaining details as applicable, to be provided with, and categorically explained to the
patient in person or his nearest kin, attendant or escort, as the case may be and a
confirmation of understanding either in writing or a verbatim ascent in front of minimum
two attesters shall also be obtained:
Provided that such explanatory note does not limit the doctor or the medical professional
to cater to any emergency or trauma case without obtaining the patient’s or his relative’s
ascent and the medical professional shall listen to the call of the duty first and the explanation
may be made at a later stage as early as convenient to both the parties.
7. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, in order
to provide able and timely assistance to the victims of medical negligence or mismanagement,
establish a District-Wise Committee or for the area as may be specified in such notification
to hear appeals and grievances of the victims of medical negligence or mismanagement and
to aid and advice such victims for taking recourse to an appropriate forum for a suitable
relief and at its own cost:
Provided that the maximum time to provide for a suitable relief to the parties shall not
exceed four sittings and one month.
(2) Notwithstanding anything prescribed in this Act, the deliberations made hereto
may be held by a court of law of competent jurisdiction within the territories of the Union of
India.
(3) The Committee established under sub-section (1) shall consist of experts one each
from the field of medicine, law, consumer movement, health management and human rights
and shall be chaired by the Member of Parliament of the respective constituency.
(4) Any appeals, arguments or rebuttals presented to this effect by either of the parties
shall be kept transparent and open for media and public scrutiny without any prejudices.
(5) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of
experts mentioned in the sub-section (3), and the procedure to be followed by the committee
shall be such as may be prescribed.
8. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by
law in this behalf, provide,   from time to time, adequate funds for carrying out the
purpose of this Act.
9. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may by order published in the official Gazette, make such provisions not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to be necessary for removing the
difficulty:
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of a period to
two years from the commencement of this Act.
Explanatory
Note.
Cases of
medical
negligence.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
45 of 1860.

4
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament.
10. The provisions of this Act and rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force.
11. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force.
12. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that  rule.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Act to
supplement
other laws.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15

5
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
India is the second most populous country in the world with a little over 1.36 billion
people. It is a home to almost eighteen per cent. of the world population with the surface area
share of just two per cent. (of the world). It being a developing economy, increased urbanization
rapid  deforestation, little or no check on pollution levels, it’s geographical position (making
it more prone to tropical diseases) coupled with equally dense population; it is buy natural,
that the health condition of this country could not be the best. Rising cost of health & care
services and shortage of enough doctors and medical centres makes the problem all the more
gruesome. On an average, this country has 1 doctor to every 1700 patients. This is a national
average and the condition is even worse in rural areas. No wonder why; seldom; the sudden
impulse of revenge from his miseries is outpoured on a doctor in its entirety by an ignorant
common man.
Over seventy-five per cent. of doctors across country are reported to have faced
atleast some form of violence. The cases of violence against doctors by kins or attendants of
patients has become a serious problem off-late compelling many doctors and medical
professionals to go out on stike for days seeking security of themselves and their belongings.
Some studies have shown that doctors face maximum violence when providing emergency
services with close to forty-nine per cent of such incidences reported from ICUs or after a
patient had undergone surgery. Reasons attributed to this violence range from variety of
issues including prescription of unnecessary investigations, delayed and unsatisfactory
approach of a doctor in attending the patients, medical bills far higher than the estimated
expense, request of advance payments to withholding a deceased body until settlement of
final billing and many more. Broadly speaking a common factor attributing to strife between
doctors, medical institutions and the patients in alomost all cases is the lack of transparency
and trust with respect to the procedures and pricing.
Doctors are care givers, the most-noble profession and have been deemed next to God
from times  immemorial. It is only in recent times that the assault on doctors and vandalisation
of medicals institutes has started gaining prominence. Ever increasing prices of drugs,
equipments, consumables etc.; availability of substandard and unresearched information at
the finger tip; declining personal connect of a doctor with his patient; would to mouth
feedback platforms without enough medical justification and many more have all contributed
their bit in creating a disaccord between a Doctor-Patient relationship. Absence of a stringent
Union Law with appropriate provisions and punishments for the offenders has also contributed
severely in furthering the number of cases of violence against doctors, medical professionals
and medical institutions. Need for a harmonious, transparent and trustworthy relationship
between a doctor and his patient is the most-dire need of this country more-so because of
the already meager number of doctors and care givers that we have at present.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to provide for the prevention of violence against doctors,
medical professionals and medical institutions in the most amicable manner.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; SHRIKANT EKNATH SHINDE
June  26, 2019.

6
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 7 of the Bill provides for establishment of district-wise Committee to provide
timely assistance to the victims of medical negligence. Clause 8 provides that the Central
Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, provide,
from time to time, adequate funds for carrying out the purpose of this Act. The Bill, therefore,
if enacted and brought into operation, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund
of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees one hundred crore of recurring expenditure per
annum would involve from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of  about rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.

7
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 12 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of this Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the prevention of violence against doctors, medical professionals and
medical institutions and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Dr. Shrikant Eknath Shinde, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—1644LS(S3)—16-07-2019.