54 of 1985.

10

As INTRODUCED IN Lox SaBHA oN

Bill No, 151 of 1986
—————_———————

THE STANDARDS OF WEIGHTS AND MEASURES (ENFORCEMENT)
AMENDMENT BILL, 1986

A ,
BILL 4

to amend the Standards of Weights and Measures (Enforcement) Act,
1 1985.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-seventh Year of the
Republic of India as follows:—

1. (1) This Act may be called the Standards of Weights and Measures
(Enforcement) Amendment Act, 1986. 1 .

(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.

2. In section 36 of the Standards of Weights and Measures (Enforce-
ment) Act, 1985 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), for the
words “shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may ex-
tend to one year, and, for the second or subsequent offence, with im-
prisonment for a term which may extend to three years and also with
fine”, the following shall be substituted, namely: —

“shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which shall not
be less than three months but which may extend to one year, and,
for the second or subsequent offence, with imprisonment for a term
which shall not be less than six months, but which may extend to
three years, and also with fine”.

Short

title and
commence-
ment.

Amend-
ment of
section 36.


Amend-
ment of

section 37.

Amend
ment of

section 38,

Amend-
ment of

section 63.

2

3. In section 37 of the principal Act, for the words “shall be punished
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, and, for
the second. or subsequent offence, with imprisonment for a term which
may extend to five years and also with fine”, wherever they occur, the
following shall be substituted, namely: —

“shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which shall not
be less than six months but which may extend to two years, and, for
the second or subsequent offence, with imprisonment for a term
which shall not be less than one year but which may extend to five
years and also with fine”.

4, In section 38 of the principal Act, for the words “shall be punished
with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees, and, for the second
or subsequent offence, with imprisonment for a term which may extend
to one year and also with fine”, as both the places where they oecur,
the following shall be substituted, namely:— 15

“shali be punished with fine which shall not be less than five
hundred rupees but which may extend to two thousand rupees, and,
for the second or subsequent offence, with imprisonment for a term
which shall not be less than three months but which may

extend to one year and also with fine”. हे
2

1. 5. In section 63 of the principal Act, for clause (a), the following
clause shall be substituted, namely: —

‘(a) no court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable
under this Act except upon a complaint, in writing, made by—

Y (i) the Controller;

(ii) any other officer authorised in this behalf by the Con-
troller by general or special order;

25

(iii) any person aggrieved; or

(iv) a recognised consumer association whether the person
aggrieved is a member of such association or not. 30

Explanation—For the purposes of this clause “recognised con-
sumer association” means a voluntary consumer association regis-
tered under the Companies Act, 1956 or under any other law
for the time being in force.

1 of 1956.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The Standards of Weights and Measures (Enforcement) Act, 1985
provides for the enforcement of the standards established by or under
the Standards of Weights and Measures Act, 1976. It is an important.
legislation designed to provide better protection to consumers by ensur-
ing metrological accuracy in commercial transactions, industrial
measurements and measurements needed for ensuring public and human
safety. The Act at present does not confer any right on the aggrieved
consumer or recognised consumer associations for filing complaints to
be taken cognizance of by courts. To promote voluntary consumer
movement and to ensure involvement of consumers as well as recognis-
ed consumer associations in the enforcement of this Act, it is considered
desirable to confer specific rights on the aggrieved consumer or recognis-
ed consumer associations for filing complaints for taking cognizance of
such complaints by courts. Accordingly, it is proposed to amend clause
(a) of section 63 of the Act to confer rights on the aggrieved consumer
or any recognised consumer association to file a complaint in courts.
It is also proposed to define “recognised consumer association” under
the Act so as to mean a voluntary consumer association registered under
the Companies Act, 1956 or under any other law for the time being
in force.

2. It is also observed that minimum penalties have not been provided.
for serious offences like manufacturing, sale, etc. of non-standard
weights or measures, counterfeiting of seals or stamps, sale or delivery
of commodities by non-standard weights or measures. It is proposed to
make suitable amendments in sections 36, 37 and 38 of the Act so as to
provide for minimum penalties to be awarded by courts.

3. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects,

New Deu; H. K. L. BHAGAT.
The 1st December, 1986.


Penalty
for manu-
facturing,
etc., of
non-
standard
weights or
measures.

Penalty
for
counter-
feiting of
seals, etc.

ANNEXURE

EXTRACTS FROM THE STANDARDS OF WEIGHTS AND MEASURES (ENFORCEMENT).
Act, 1985

(54 oF 1985)

* * = % *
36. Whoever—

(a) makes or manufacturers, or causes to be made or manufac-
tured (except where he is permitted under the Standards Act so to
do), any weight or measure in accordance with any standards
other than the standards established by or under the Standards
Act, or

(b) (i) sells or otherwise transfers, or causes to be sold or
otherwise transferred, or

(ii) lets, or causes to be let, on hire,
any weight or measure which has been manufactured in accordance with
any standards other than the standards established by or under the
Standards Act, shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which
may extend to one year, and, for the second or subsequent offence, with

imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and also
with fine.

37. (1) Whoever—

(i) counterfeits any seal specified by or under this Act or the
Standards Act, or

(ii) sells or otherwise disposes of any counterfeit seal, or
(iti) possesses any counterfeit seal, or

(iv) counterfeits any stamp, specified by or under this Act or
the Standards Act or any rule made under either of those Acts, or

(०) removes any stamp made, whether under this Act or the
Standards Act or any rule made under either of those Acts, or
tampers with any stamp so made, or

‘(vi) removes any stamp made, whether under this Act or the
Standards Act or any rule made under either of those Acts, and

affixes the stamp so removed on, or inserts the same into, any other
weight or measure, or

(vii) increases or diminishes or alters in any way any weight or
meastre with a view to deceiving any person or knowing or

having reason to believe that any person is likely to be deceived
thereby, '

shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to
two years, and, for the second or subsequent offence, with imprisonment

for a term which may extend to five years and also with fine.

4


2 of 1974.

2 &

(2) Whoever obtains, by unlawful means, possession of any seal
specified by or under this Act or the Standards Act and uses or causes
to be used, any such seal for making any stamp on any weight or mea-
sure with a view to representing that the stamp made by such seal is
authorised by or under this Act or the Standards Act shall be punish-
ed with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, and,
for the second or subsequent offence, with imprisonment for a term which
may extend to five years and also with fine.

(3) Whoever, being in lawful possession of a seal specified by or
under this Act or the Standards Act uses, or causes to be used, such
seal without any lawful authority for such use, shall be punished with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, and, for the
second or subsequent offence, with imprisonment for a term which may
extend to five years and also with fine.

(4) Whoever sells, or offers or exposes for sale or otherwise disposes
of any weight or measure which, he knows or has reason to believe,
bears thereon a counterfeit stamp, shall be punished with imprisonment
for a term which may extend to two years, and, for the second or sub-
sequent offence, with imprisonment for a term which may extend to
five years and also with fine.

38. (1) Except where he is permitted under the Standards Act so to
do, whoever sells, or causes to be sold, delivers, of causes to be de-
livered, any commodity, article or thing by any weight, measure or
number other than. the standard weight’ or measure, ‘shall 106 ~punished
with fine which may extend to two;thousand rupees, and, for the second
or subsequent offence, with imprisonment for a term which may extend
to one year and also with fine.

(2) Whoever renders, or causes to be rendered, any service in terms
of any weight, measure or number other than the standard weight or
measure, shall be punished with fine which may extend to two thousand
rupees, and, for the second or subsequent offence with imprisonment
for a term which may extend to one year and also with fine.

* * , * * *

63. Notwithstanding any thifig contained in the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973,—

(a) no court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable
under this Act except upon a complaint, in writing, made by the
Controller or any other officer authorised in this behalf by the
Controller by general or special order;

* * * * *

Penalty
for sale
or deli-
very of
commodi-
ties, etc.,
by non-
standard
weight or
measure,

Cogniz-
ance of
offences.


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to amend the Standards of Weights and Measures (Enforcement) Act,
1985.

(Shri H. हू, L. Bhagat, Minister of Parliamentary
Affairs, Food and Civil Supplies)