Bill No. 151 of 1994
ee ee

THE VOLUNTARY DEPOSITS (IMMUNITIES AND EXEMPTIONS)
BILL, 1991

a
BILL

to provide jor certain immunities to persons making voluntary deposits
२21 nat Housing Rank and for certo exeaptions from
direct taxes in relation to such deposits and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto,

the Nati

Wnnrzas for effective economic and social Planniig it is necessary to
canalise for certain social objectives black money which has become a
serious threat to the national economy;

AND WHEREAS with a view to such canalisation, the Central Govern-
5ment has decided to allow voluntary deposits being made with the
National Housing Bank in accordance with 2 scheme to be formulated by
that Bank whereunder forty per cent. of the amount of such deposits will

AND WHEREAS it is expedient to Provide for certain immunities and
exemptions to render it possible for persons in Possession of black money
to make such deposits;


2

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-second Year of the Republic
of India as follows: —

Short A 2) This Act may be called the Voluntary Deposits (Immunities
file and and Exemptions) Act, 1991.
‘extent.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
Defini- 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
tions,

(०) “deposit” means a voluntary deposit made by any person
With the National Housing Bank in accordance with the scheme on |
after the commencement of this Act but before the specified date.

Explanation—For the purposes of this clause, “specified date”

(b) “National Housing Bank” means the National Housing Bank
established under section 3 of the National Housing Bank Act, 1987;

(०) “net deposit” means sixty per cent. of the amount of deposit
made by any person with the National Housing Bank in accordance
with the scheme;

(d) “person” includes—

(an individual,

(i) a Hindu undivided family,
(iii) a company,

Gv) a firm,

(2) an association of persons or a body of individuals,
whether incorporated or not, and

(vi) every artificial juridical person, not falling within any
of the Preceding sub-clauses,

but does not include a local authority;

(०) “scheme” means a scheme formulated by the National
Housing Bank under the National Housing Rank Act, 1987 for the
purpose of enabling—

(i) any person to make deposit with that Bank;

(ii) such Bank to credit forty per cent. of the amount of
such deposit to a special fund created for financing slum clearance
and low cost housing for the poor; and

(४) the depositor to utilise the net deposit for any purpose
specified by him;

0) था other words and expressions used in this Act but not
defined and defined in the Income.tax Act, 1961 shall have the
» meanings respectively assigned to them in that Act.

35



20
1961

25

35

3. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other = ior

lime being in force—

(@) no person, who has made a deposit with the National Housing
Bank in accordance with the scheme, shall be required to disclose,
for any purpose whatsoever, the nature and source of the deposit;

(6) no inquiry or ‘nvestigation shall be commenced against any
person under any such law on the ground that he has made the
deposit;

(c) the fact that a person has made the deposit shall not be
taken into account and shall be inadmissible as evidence in any pro-
ceedings relating to any offence or the imposition of any penalty
under any such law.

(2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall apply in relation to prosecution

of iso, for any offence punishable under Chapter IX or Chapter XVII of the
of i9g5. 15 Indian Penal Code, the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act,
of 1987, 1985, the Terrorist and Disruptive Activities (Prevention) Act, 1987, the
of 1988, Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 or for the purpose of enforcement of
any civil liability,

4. Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of section 3,—

(@ the deposit shall not be taken into account for the purpose of
any proceeding under the Income-tax Act, 1961 and, in particular.
the depositor shall not be entitled to claim any set-off or relief in
any assessment, re-assessment, appeal, reference or other proceeding
under that Act or to re-open any assessment or re-assessment made
under that Act on the ground that he has made such deposit.

Explanation—For the avoidance of doubt, it is hereby declared
that the provisions of the Income-tax Act, 1961 will apply to any
income which accrues or arises or is deemed to accrue or arise to
the depositor from the amount of the net deposit;

(b) the deposit shall not form part of the assets of any assessee
for the purposes of computing his net wealth under the Wealth-tax
Act, 1957 in relation to any assessment year commencing before the
Ist day of April, 1992.

5. In the National Housing Bank Act, 1987—

(a) in section 14—

(@ in clause (b), after the words “scheduled banks”, the
words “or to any authority established by or under any Central,
State or Provincial Act and engaged in slum clearance” shall be
inserted;

(ii) after clause (h), the following clause shall be inserted
namely:—

“(hh) formulating a scheme for the purpose of accepting
deposits referred to in clause (a) of section 2 of the Voluntary

Deposits (Immunities and Exemptions) Act, 1991 and credit-
ing forty per cent. of the amount of such deposits to a special
fund created under section 37;”;

Deposit
not to be
taken

into
account

in certain
cases.

Amend-

ment of

Act 53 of
1987.


=

(b) in section 15, in sub-section (1), to clause (०) the
Proviso shall be added, namely:—

“Provided that nothing contained in this clause shall apply t
deposits accepted under the scheme formulated by the Bank in
pursuance of clause (hh) of section 14;”;

(©) in section 55, in sub-section (6), for the word “regulation”,

wherever it occurs, the words “regulation or scheme” shall be sub-
stituted.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

With a view to canalising for certain social objectives black money
which has become a serious threat to the national economy, the Govern-
ment has decided to allow voluntary deposits being made with the
National Housing Bank in accordance with a scheme to be formulated
by that Bank. 40 per cent. of the amount of such deposits will be credited
by the National Housing Bank to a special fund, created under the
National Housing Bank Act, 1987, for financing slum clearance and low
cost housing for the poor and 69 per cent. of the amount of such deposits
can be utilised by the depositors for purposes specified by them. It is
considered necessary to provide for certain immunities and exemptions
to render it possible for persons in possession of black money to make
such deposits.

2. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.

New DEvur; MANMOHAN SINGH
The 3rd September, 1991.

PRESIDENT’s RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLES
117 AND 274 OF THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

[Copy of letter dated 4th September, 1991 from Dr. Manmohan Singh,
Minister of Finance, to the Secretary-General, Lok Sabha]

The President, having been informed of the proposed Bil] for institu-
tion of 2 Scheme for mobilising the Black money for achieving social
cbjectives of slum clearance and low cost housing for the poor and for
providing certain immunities and exemptions to enable persons to make
deposits in the said scheme and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto, recommends under clause (1) of article 117 and clause
(1) of article 274 of the Constitution, introduction of the above Bill in
Lok Sabha. | हि


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 5 of the Bill seeks to insert a new clause (hh) in section
of the National Housing Bank Act, 1987. The said new clause (hh) em-
powers the National Housing Bank to formulate a scheme for the purposes
of accepting deposits referred to in clause 2(a) of this Bill and crediting
40 per cent of the amount of such deposits to a special fund created under
that Act. The scheme will also contain other details relating to applica-
tion forms for making deposits and withdrawal, ete.

2. The matters in respect of which the scheme is to be formulated by
the National Housing Bank are matters of administrative detail and
procedure and it is not practicable to provide for them in the Bill itself.
The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.


ANNEXURE
Extracts FROM THE Nationa, Housive Bank Acr, 1987

(53 oF 1987)

* * * * *
CHAPTER IV

Busivess or ar Nationa Housinc BANK

14. Subject to the provisions of this Act, the National Housing Bank
may transact all or any of the following kinds of business, namely:—

* * के * *

(b) making of loans and advances or rendering any other form
of financial assistance whatsoever to housing finance institutions and
scheduled banks;

* * * * *

45. (1) The National Housing Bank may, for the purpose of carrying
out its functions under this Act—

* * हू * *

(c) accept deposits repayable after the expiry of a period which
shall not be less than twelve months from the date of the making of
the deposit on such terms as may generally or specially be approved
by the Reserve Bank;

* * * * के

a

35. (7) * * * * *

(5) The Central Government shall cause every regulation made
under this Act to be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each
House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following
the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in
making any modification in the regulation or both Houses agree that the
regulation should not be made, the regulation shall thereafter have effect
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so,
however, that any, such modification or annulment shall be without
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that regulation

* * * * *

Business
of the
National
Housing
Bank,

Borrow-
ings and
accep-
tance of
deposits
by Na-
tional
Housing
Bani

Power
of the
Board to
make
regule-
tions,


LOK SABHA

a
BILL
to provide for certain immunities to persons making voluatary |
certain

with the National Housing Bank and for

direct taxes in relation to such deposits and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.

(Shri Manmohan Singh,
Minister of Finance.)