10K SABRA 
COR..ltI GENnA 
to 
THE ELECTRICITY (SUPPLY) AMENDMENT BILL, 1977 
;-Th be/As :1ntroduced in Io.k Sabha 7 
1. Page 2, in the marg~.nal heading to clause 7,-
for "section 57" ~ "section 57 A" 
2. Page 3, line 34,-
for "so to ~o" ~ "so to do" 
3. Page 4, line 9,- '. 
4. 
after "aggregate" insert "of" 
.. clause 15, 
Page 5' tL in the marginal heading to 'bhe 'proposed seet.ion-68..,..-
for "depreci.aton" m.a.!l.. "depr&Ciat.1on n 
5. Page 5, line 19,-
for "servants" ~ "servant" 
,. Page', line 19,-
for "(vi) (b)" ~ "(vib) " 
7. Page 11, lines 19 ali 20,-
for "accordinly" ~ "!lccordingly" 
8. Page 11, line 23,-
fo r ''purpo se " ~ "purpo se s" 
',. Page 11, :1n the marginal heading to section 60,-
3,:fter "obligations of M ~ "of''' 
10. Page 12, line 20,-
for "~ction 63" ~ "section'·'l)" 
11. Page 15, line 18,-
for "dissatified n ~ '''d1.gPJ.ati~fied'' 
1£. Page 16, against line 12, insert the marginal ci:t'3.tion,-
"11 of 1922." 
AgrahaYaIla 26, 1 ~ (Saka) .' 

54 of 1948. 
AI; INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA ON 
2 0 OEC \977 
Bill No. 151 of 1977 ra._ _____ _ 
THE ELECTRICITY (SUPPLY) AMENDMENT BILL, 1977 
A 
BILL 
Further to amend the Electf'icity (Supply) Act, 194'8. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-eighth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
1. This Act m9y be called the Electricity (SuP'Ply) Amendment Act, Short 
1977. title. 
s Z. In section 1 of the Electricity (Supply) Act, 1948 (hereinafter Ar.1end-
rE'ferred to as the principal Act), after sub-Section (4), the following :~~n°:' 
sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-
"(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (4),-
(a) where any provision of this Act, to which sub-section 
10 (4) applies, is in force in any State immediately before the com-
mencement of the Electricity (Supply) Amendment Act, 1977, 
that provision as amended by the Electricity (Supply) Amend-
ment Act. 1977, shall, on and from such commencement, be in 
force in that State; 
IS (0) the provisions of this Act, to which sub-section (4) 
applies, which are not in force in any State on the commencement 
of the Electricity (SuWly) Amendment Act, 1977, shall come 
into force in that State on such date as the State Government 
may, with the concurrence of the Central Government, by DOti-
30 fication in the Official Gaze1te! appoi~t,1'. 

Amend-
ment of 
.ection 3. 
Insertion 
of new 
section 
12A. 
Board 
may 
have 
capital 
structure. 
Am~nd­
ment of 
section 15. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 57. 
2 
3. In section 3 of the principal Act, in sub-section (6), in the opening 
paragraph. for the word "servants", the wot'd "employees" shall be 
substituted. 
4. After section 12 of the principal Act, the following section shall 
be inserted, namely:-
"12A. (1) The State Government may, if it considers expedient 
so to do, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that the Board 
shall, with effect from such date as may be specified in the notifica-
tion, be a body corporate with such capital, not exceeding ten cI'OreS 
s 
of rupees, as the State Government may specify from time to time. 10 
(2) The State Government may. from time to time, with the 
approval of the Sta.te Legislature, increase the maximum limit of 
the capital referred to in sub-section (1) to such extent a3 that 
Government may deem fit, so, however, that the increased maximum 
limit of capital aforesaid shall not exceed the amount representing 
the aggregate of the outstanding loans of the Board. IS 
(3) Such capital may be provided by the State Government, from 
time to time, after due appropriation made by the State Legislature 
by law for the purpose and subject to such terms and conditions 
as may be determined by that Government.". 
5. In section 15 of the principal Act, in the opening paragraph, for 
the word "servants", the word "employees" shall be substituted. 
6. In section 57 of the prinCipal Act,-
(a) the words "and the Seventh Schedule" shall be omitted; 
20 
(b) for the words "the said Schedules". in both the places where 2S 
they occur', the words "the said Schedule" shall be substituted. 
Amend- 7. In section 57A of the prinCipal Act, in sub-section (1), the words 
:~~:S7. "and the Seventh Schedule" shall be omitted. 
Substitu-
tion 
of new 
aection 
for sec-
lion 59. 
General 
principles 
for 
Boarc18 
finance. 
8. For section 59 of the princip'al Act, the following section shall be 
substituted, namely:-
"59. (1) The Board shall, <.'iter taking credit for any subventiOn 
from the State Government under section 63, carryon its operations 
under this Act and adjust its tariffs so as to ensure that the total 
revenues in any year of account shaU, after meeting all expenses 
prop'erly chargeable to revenues, including operating maintenance 3S 
and management expenses, taxes (if. any) on income and profits, 
deptreciation and interest payable On all debentures, bonds and loans, 
leave such surplus, as the State Government may, ft'om time to time, 
specify. 
(2) In specifying the surplus under sub-section (1), the State 40 
Government shall haVe due regard to the availability of amounts 
accrued by way of depreCiation and the liability fOJ: loan. emortiza-
tion and leave-

5 
3 
(4) a reasonable sUm. to contribute towards the cost of capital 
works; and 
(b) where in respect of the Board, a notification has been 
dssued under sub-section (1) of section 12A, a reasonable sum 
by way of return on the capital pTovided by the State Govern-
ment under sub-section @) of that section, and the amount of 
the loans (if any) converted by the State Government into 
capital under sUb-section (1) of section 66A.". 
9. In section SO of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),- Amend-
10 
ment of (4) for the words "two months", the words "one year" shall be sectioh 80. 
substituted; 
(b) the words, brackets and figures "before the iSSUe of the 
notification under sub-section (4) of section I" shall be omitted. 
10. In section 61 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), for the words Amend-
IS "members, oftlcers and servants", the words "members and oftlcers and ment of 
{)ther employees" shall be substituted. section 81. 
11. In section 62 of the principal Actl in sub-section (2), after tr.e 
words "extreme urgency", the words CI , it shall be expended in accordance 
with the regulations made by the Board with the previous approval of 
20 the State Government and" shall be inserted. 
12. In section 65 of the principal Act,-
Ocr:) in sub-section (-2), for the words "issue of bonds or stook", 
the words "issue of debentures or bonds" shall be substituted; 
Cb) in sub-sectioll, (4), for the words "Stock issued", the words 
25 "Debentures or bonds issued" shall be substituted. 
30 
3S 
45 
13. After section 66 of the principal Act, the following section shall 
be inserted, namely:-
"66A. (J) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 12A, 
where any loan has been obtained from the State Government by 
a Board, in respect of which Board a notification has been made 
unde;r· 8Ub-sectiOll Gl) of that section, Or any loan is deemed to be 
advanced to such Board by the State Government under sub-section 
(2) of section 60, the State Government may, if in its opinion it is 
necessary in the public interest SO to so, by order, direct that the 
amount of such loan or any part thereof shall be converted into 
capital provided to the Board on such terms and conditions as appear 
to that Government to be reasonable in the circumstances of the 
case, . even if the terms of such loan do not include a term providlng 
for an option for such conversion. 
(2) In determining the terms and conditions of such conversion, 
the . State Government shall have due regard to the following cir-
cumstances, that is to say, the financial position of the Board, the 
terms of the loan, the rate of interest payable on the loan, the capital 
of" the Board, its loan liabilities and its reserves. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, where the 
State Government has, by an order made under sUb-section (1), di-
Amend_ 
ment of 
BeCtion82. 
Amend_ 
ment of 
section 65. 
Insertion 
ot new 
section 
86A. 
Conver-
sion of 
a!nOWlt of 
loana 
Into 
capital. 

Subatltl,l-
tion of 
new 
section 
for 
section 67. 
Priority 
olllabili-
tieaof 
Bovd. 
4 
rected that any loan or any part thereof shall be converted into capi-
tal, and such order has the effect o~ increasing the capital of the 
Board, the capital of the Board shall stand increased by the 
amount by which the conversion increases the capital of the 
Board in excess of the capital specified under sub-section (1) of S 
section 12A: 
Provided that the amount of the loan so converted together with 
the capital provided under sub-section (3) of Section 12A shall not 
exceed the amount representing the aggregate the outstanding loans 
of the Board after such conversion.". 10 
14. (1) For section 67 of the principal Act, the follOwing section shall 
be substituted, namely:-
"67. V) If in any year, the revenue receipts ate not adequate to 
enable compliance with the requirements ·of section 59, the Board 
shall, after meeting its operating, maintenance and management IS 
expenses and after provisi.on has been made for the payment of 
taxes (if any) on income and profits, distribute the revenue receipts, 
as far as they are available, in the following order, namely:-
(i) payment of interest on loans not guaranteed under 
section 66; 20 
(;iri.) Teptayment of principal of any loan raised (including 
redemption of debentUI'es or bonds issued) under section 65 
which becomes due for payment in the year; 
(om) payment of interest on loans guaranteed under section 
~ ~ 
(:iu) payment of interest on sums paid by the State Govern-
ment in pursuance of guaTantees under section '66; 
(v) payment of interest on loans advanced to the Board by 
the State Government under section 64 or deeMed to be advanced 
under sub-section (2) of section 60; 30 
(vi) repayment of principal of any loan guaranteed by the 
State Government under section 66 which becomes due for pay-
ment in the year; 
(vi.Ii.) repayment of principal of any loan advanced to the 
Board· under section 64 which becomes due for payment in the 3S 
year, 
and if any balance amount is left thereafter, the same shall be 
utilised for the other purposes specified in section 59 in such manner 
as the Board may decide. . 
(2) If for any reason beyond the control of the Board, the re- 40 
venue receipts in any year ate not adequate to meet its operating, 
maintenance and management expenses, taxes (if any) on incomes 
and profits and the liabilities referred, to In cla.uses (i.) and (iii) rA 
sub-section (1), the short fall shall. with the previous sanction of the 
State Government, be paid out of its capital.". 45 

S 
15. For section 68 of the principal Act, the following section shall be Substitu-
substituted, namely:- tion of 
new sec-
tion for 
section 68. 
S 
10 
"68. (1) Subject to the provisions of section 67, the Board .sha11 
provide each year for deprecia,tion such sum calculated in accordance 
with such principles as the Central Government may, after consul-
tation with the Authority, by notification in the Official Gazette, lay 
down from time to time. 
(2) Where in any particular year depreciation cannot be adjusted 
against revenues, the same may be carried over to subsequent years. 
(3) The provisions of this section shall apply to the charging of 
depreciation for the year in which the ElectTicity (Supply) Amend-
ment Act. le77, comes into force.". 
16. In section 69 of the principal. Act, ill sub-section (4), for the words 
".forwarded annually to the State Government", the words "forwarded 
IS to the Authority and to the State Government within six months of the 
close of the year to which the acCounts and audit report relate" shall 
be substituted. 
20 
30 
3S 
17. In section 74 of the principal Act. for the words "officer or 
servants", the words uofficer or other employee" shall be substituted. 
:1.8. In section 75A of the principal Act, after sub-section (3), the 
foHowing sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-
U(3A) (a) The Generating Company shall carryon its operations 
under this Act and adjust its tarifts so as to ensure that the total 
revenues in any year of account shall, after meeting all the expenses 
properly chargeable to revenues including operating, maintenance 
and management expenses, taxes (if any) on income and profits, 
depreCiation and interest payable on all debentures, bonds and loans, 
leave such surplUs as the promoting government or promoting gov-
ernments, as the case may be, may, from time to time, specify. 
('b) In specifying the surplus under clause (a). the promotiug 
government or promoting governments, as the case may be, shall 
have due regard to the availability of amounts accrued by way of de-
preciation and the liability for loan amortization and leave a reason-
able amount to contr'ibute towards the cost of capital works and for 
payment of dividend on shares.". 
18. In section 79 of the principal Act,-
(a) in clause (c), for the words "officers anfl servants", the words 
"officers and other employees" shall be substituted; 
(0) after clause U), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:-
" (jj) expending sum not included in statement submitted 
under sub-section (1) or sub-section (5) of section 61. under 
sub-section (2) of section 62;"; 
(c) in the proviso, for the word, brackets and letter "and (d)", 
4S the brackets,. letters and word ", (d) aM W)" shall be substituted. 
Charging 
of depre-
ciaton 
by Board. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 69. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 7 •• 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
75A. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 79. 

Amend-
mentof 
section 81. 
Amend-
ment of 
s'ection 
82. 
Amend-
ment of 
Fourth 
Schedule. 
Amend-
ment of 
Sixth 
Schedule. 
Omission 
tJf 
Seventh 
Rchedule. 
Amend-
ment of 
Eighth 
Schedule 
and 
Ninth 
Schedule. 
ZOo In section 81 of the principal Act, for the words "members, officers 
and servants", the words "members and officers and other employeeS!" 
shall be SU!bstituted. 
21. In section 82 of the principal Act, for the words "member, ofllcer 
or servant", the words "member or officer or other employee" shall be S 
substituted. 
22. In the Fourth Schedule to the principal Act,-
(a) in paragraph II, for the words and figure "on the scale s;t 
oUlt in paragraph III", the words and figure "calculated in accordance 
with the provisions of paragraph VI of the Sixth Schedule", shall be 10 
substituted; 
(b) paragraph III shall be omitted. 
23. In the Sixth Schedule to the principal Adt,-
(1) in paragraph V A,-
(a) in sub-paragraph (1) ,-
(i) for the words "amount of development rebate", the 
''Words "amount of investment allowance" shall be substituted; 
(ii) for the words, brackots, figures and letter "under 
IS 
clause ('"i) (b) of sub-section (2) of section 10 of the Indian 11 of 1922 
Income·tax Act, 1922,", the words, figures and letter "under 20 
section 32A of the Income-tax Act 1961" shall be substituted' 43 of 1961. , , 
(b) in the proviso to sub-paragraph (4), after the words 
"amount of the Reserve", the brackets and words "(whether such 
amount is in the form of cash or o~her assets)" shall be inserted; 
(2) for paragraphs VI, VII, Vill, JX, X and XI, the following 2S 
paragraph shall be substituted, namely: ~ 
"VI. (a) The licensee shall provide each year for deprecia-
tion such sum calculated in accordance with such principtes as 
the Ce-ntral Government may, after consultation with the Autho-
rity, by notification in the Oftlcial Gazette, lay down from time 30 
,to time. 
(b) Where in any particular year depreciation cannot be 
adjusted against revenues, the same may be carried over to sub-
sequent years. 
(e) the provisions of this paragraph shall apply to the charg- 35 
ing of depreciation for the year in which the Electricity (Supply) 
Amendment Act, 1977, comes into force."; 
(3) ·in paragraph XVII, clause (8) shall be omitted. 
24. The Seventh Schedule to the principal Act shall be omitted. 
25. In clause (a) of paragraph 1 of the Eighth Schedule, and clause (f> 40 
of paragraph 1 of the Ninth Schedule to the principal Act, for the words 
"ofllcers and servants". the words "oftleers and other employees" 'Shalt 
be substituted. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
In orde!' to en&Ure that the Electricity Boards are able to function on 
sound commercial principles, the financial provisions of the Electricity 
(Supply) Act, 1948, are proposed to be amended by the Bill. The main 
changes proposed to be made in that Act by the Bill are the following. 
2. With a view to make the Electricity Boards financially viable, 
it is proposed that a State Government may provide f,unds tp the 
State Electricity Board in the form of equity, if the State Government 
so desires. This ts necessary because the interest liabm,ty devolving on 
the State Electricity Boards makes it difficult for them to present a pic-
ture of financial stability. For this purpose, a new section 12A is pro-
p.sed to be inserted in the Act by clause 4 of the Bill. 
3. Section 59 of the Electricity (Supply) Act is proposed to be amend-
ed 'by clause 8 of the Bill to give a pos~t~ve direction to the Electri«'ty 
Boards that after meeting all their expe-nses, there should be provision 
for a surplus for contribution towards immediate investment needs. A 
similar amendment is also proposed to be made in regard to the Generat-
ing Companies by inserting a new sub-section (3A) in section 7SAl blY 
clause 18 of the Bill. 
4. A new. section 66A is proposed to be inserted in the E1ectricllt~ 
(Supply) Act by clause 13 of the Bill so as to enable the State Govern-
ment to convert any loan advanced by it to the State Electricity Boai'd 
into share capital. 
5. The amount of capi:taI provided by a State Government under sec-
tion 12A (3) or that capital together with the amount converted into 
:Capital under section 66A should not exceed the aggrega~e of the OIU~ 
standing loans of the Electricity Board, 
6. Clause 14 of the Bill seeks to amend section 67 of the Act to re-
arrange the priorities for distribution of the revenues of the State Elec-
tricity Boards after meeting the operation, maintenance and management 
expenses and the liabilities, if in any year the revenue receipts are not 
adequate to enable compliance with the requirements of section 59. This 
is being. done to ensure that the Boards discharge their liability towards 
interest on loans from financial institutions as well as repayment of 
principal amount before the opera~ing surplus is appropriated towards 
depreciation and general reserve. 
7. Section 68 of the Act is proposed to be am~nded by clause 15 of the 
BibI to provide that the method of calculating depreciation shouldl be in 
accordance with the principles laid down by the Central Government in 
consultation with the Central Electricity Authority. A similar provision 
is proposed to be made in regard to licenReeS by the amendment of the 
Sixth Schedule by clause 23 (2) of the Bill. 
8. The Bill seeks to achieve the aforesaid objects. 
NEW DELHI; P. RAMACHANDRAN. 
'The 12th Decem'be,o, 197'7, 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Sub-clause (b) of clause 19 of the BiJil seeks to insert a new clause (jj) 
in section 79 of the Electricity (Supply) Act, 1948, to enable the ma.king 
of regulations to provide for the expending of sum not included in state-
ment submitted under sub-section (1) or sub-section (5) of section 61. 
This is a matter ofi detail which cannot be provided in the Act itself. The 
delegation of legislative power is therefore of a nonnal character. 
.. 
• 

9 of 1910. 
ANNEXUR! 
ExTRACTS FROM THE ELECTRICITY (SUPPLY) Ac'l', 1948 
(54 OF 1948) 
• • • • • 
3. (1) • • ,.. • • • • ,.. • • 
(f» The Authority may appoint 'a Secretary and such other officel'S! 
and servants as it considers necessary for ,the perfonnance of its functions 
under this Act on such terms as to salary, remuneration, fee, allowance, 
pension, leave and gratuity, as the Authority may, in consultation with 
the Central Government, fix: 
Provided that the appointment of the Secretary shall ,be subject to the 
approval of the Central Government. 
• • • • • 
15. The Board may appoint a Secretaory and such other officers and 
servants as may be required to enable the Board to carry out its functions 
under this Act: 
Provided that the appointment of the Secretary shall be subject to the 
approval of the State Government. 
• • • • • 
57. Tl}.e provisions of the Sixth Schedule and the Seventh Schedu1~ 
shaLl be deemed to be incorporated in ,the licence of every licens~ 'Dot 
being a local authority-
(a) in the case of a licence granted ,before the commencement of 
this Act, from the date of the commencement of the lb,.'ensee's nexrt 
• succeeding year of account; and 
(b) in 'the case of a licence granted after the commencement of 
this Act, from the date of the commencement of supply, 
and as from the said date, the licensee shall comply with the provisions of 
the said Schedules accordingly, and any provisions of the Indian Electri-
.city Act, 1910, and the licence gran,ted to him thereunder and of any 
other la,w, agreement or instrument applicable to the licensee shall, )n" 
relation to the licensee, be void and of no effect in SO far as they are 
inconsistent with the provisions of Section 57A and the said Schedules. 
S7A. (1) Where the provisions of, the Sixth Schedule and the Seventh 
Slchedule are under section 57 deemed to be incorporated in the licenae 
of any licensee, the following provisions shall have effect in relation to 
the said licensee, namely:-
(a.) 'the Boaro or where no Board is constituted under this Act, 
the State Government-
(i) may, if satisfied that the licensee has failed to comply 
with any of the provisions of the Sixth Schedu]e; and 
9 
Constitu-
tion of 
the Con-
, tral 
ElectJi-
city 
Autho. 
rity. 
Appoint-
ment of 
t;taff. 
Licensee's 
charges to 
('onsu-
r:'Ier~. 
Rating 
c')m. 
mittees. 

Ie • - , 
(ii) shall, when so requested by the licensee in writing, con-
stitute a ratmg comnuttee to examine the licensee's charges fOIl" 
the supply of electricity and to make recommendations In that! 
behalf to the State Government: 
Provided that wheL'e it is p,l'Oposed to constitute a rating com-
mittee under this section on account of the failure of the licensee to 
comply with any provisions of the Sixth Schedule, such committee 
shall not be constituted unless the licensee has been given a notice in 
writing of thirty clear days (which period, if the circumstances so 
w~rant may ·be extended from time to time) to show cause against 
the action proposed to be taken: 
Provided further ,that no such rating committee shall be consti-
tuted if the alleged failw'e of the licensee to comply with any provi-
sions of the Sixth Schedule raises any dispute or dJtfereri.ce as to the 
interpretation of the said provisions or any matter arising therefrom 
and such diffe.'ence or dispute has been referred by the licensee to 
the arbitration of the AutlwL'ity under paragraph XVI of that Sche-
dule before th~ notice referred to in the precedIng proviso was given 
or is so refencd within the period of the said' notice: 
Provided ludher that no rating committee ~hall be constituted 
in respect of a licensee within three years from the date on Which. 
sUch a commit lee has reported in respect of that licensee, unless the 
State Governm~nt declares that in its opinion ciroum:,tances have 
arisen renderin g the orders passed on the recommenuatiOllS of the 
previous ratint: committee unfair to the licensee or any of his con-
sumers: 
(b) a rating committee under clause (a) shall,-
(i) wh, ·re such committee is to be constituted under sub-" 
clause (i) ul that clause, be COllstttUted not later than three 
months after the expiry of the notice referred to in the first pro-
viso to that clause: 
(ii) where such committee is to be constituted at the request 
of t~ licensee, be constituted within three months of the4 date 
of such request; 
(c) a rating committee shall, after giving the licensee a reason-
a.ble opportunity of being heard and after taking into consideration 
the efficiency of operation and management and the potentialities of 
his undertaking. report to the State Government within three months 
from the· date of its constitution, making recommendations with 
reasons theraf<>r, regarding the charges for electricity which the 
iUcensee may make to any class or classes of consumers so, however, 
that the recommenda,tions are not likely to prevent the licensee from 
earning clear profit sufficient when taken with the sums available in 
the Tariffs and Dividends Control Reserve to afford him a reasonable 
return as defined in the Sixth Schedule during his next succJeeding 
three years of Rccount. 
Provided that the State Government may, if it so deems neces-
sary, extend the said period of three months by a further period not 

II 
exceeding three months within which the report of the rating com-
mittee may be submitted to it; 
(d) within one month after tl\e receipt of the report under clause 
(c), the State Government shall cause the report ·~o be published in 
the Offici9.1 Gazette, and may at the same time make an order in ac-
cordance therewith fixing th~ Jicensee's charges for the supply of 
electrid~y with. effect from such (bte, not earlier than two months or 
later than t.hree months, after the date of pUiblication of the reportt 
as may be specified in the order and the lie~nsee shal1 forthwith give 
effect to such order; 
(e) ·the charges for the R11Pp1V rI elect:icitv fixed under clause 
(d) shall be in operation for such period not exceeding three years 
as the State Government rna.,.. r-pet:!ify in the order: 
Provided that nothing in this 1'1auPe shall be d~med to prevent 
a licensee from reducing at an~ timE' any charges so fixed. 
• • • • • 
59. ,The Board shall not, as far as pl'ac.ticab1e and after taking credit 
for any subventions from the State Government under section 63, carry 
on its operations under this Aet at a loss, and shall adjust its char~es ae-
corcUnly from time to time: 
Provided that where necessary any amounts due for meeting the 
operating. maintenanc(> and management expenses of. the Board or for 
the purpose of clauses (i) and (ii) of section fV1 mav. to !ruch extent as 
may be sanctioned by the State GovernmE."nt, be paid ont of capital. 
60. (1) • • • • • 
(?) All eXPP.Dditure which the Shtte Government may. not lAter than 
two mont.hs af1:el- the first con'!':titutio'l Of the Hoard. nechre to h'lve fleen 
incurred befOTf> the is~e of the notification under suh-section (4) of 
section ] on capiit'a1 account in l'onnection with th.~ pumo~es of thi!; Act 
shall he neemcd to be 8 1Mn ar'lvanr.~ to the Board under sedinn R4 on 
the date of the !!laid det'1lRration. And R11 thf' fl!1'Rets 8Cf!l1ired bv Auan ex-
penriiture shall thereupon vest in the Board. 
• • • • • 
61. (1) • • • • • 
(2) The saM Rtatement sha11 inrlu"lr a shtement of the salaries of 
members, officers and servantA of fhp Board and ,.,f such other p'!rtl-
cutars as may be prescribed. 
• • • • • 
62. (1) • • • • • 
(2) 'Where any such sum i~ pxpended under circumstances of extreme 
Ul'~enCV a reDOrt. thereon indicatinl! the source from which it iA pro-
posed to meet the expend;ture shan he mRde as soon 8A practicable to 
thl' State Government. 
• • • • • 
Genera] 
prinriples 
for 
Board's 
finanC't'. 
Board to 
assume 
obliga-
tions of 
of State 
Govern-
ment in 
respect of 
matters 
b wh!ch 
this Act 
appJips . 
Annual 
financial 
statement. 
Restric-
tion on 
unbudget-
ed expen-
diture. 

Power of 
Board to 
borrow. 
Priorities 
of liabili-
ties of the 
Board. 
12 
65. (1) • • • • • 
(2) Rules made by the State Government for the purposes of this 
section may· empower the Board to boo-ow by the issue of bonds or 
stock or otherwise and to make arrangements with bankers, and may 
apply to the Board with such modifications as may be necessary to be 
consistent with this Act the provisions of the Local Authorities Loans 
Act, 1914, and the rules made thereunder as if the Board were a local 
authority. 
• • • • • 
(4) Stock issued by the Board under this section shall be issued, 
transferred, dealt with and redeemed in such manner as may be 
prescribed. 
• • • • • 
67. The revenues of the Board shall, after meeting its operating, 
maintenance and management expenses and after provision has been 
made for the payment of taxes on its income and profits be distributed 
as far as they are available in the following order, namely:-
(i) interest on bonds not guaranteed under section 66; 
(ii) interest on stock not so guaranteed; 
(iii) credits to depreciation reserve under section 63; 
(i~) interest on bonds guaranteed under section 66; 
(~) interest on stock so guaranteed; 
(m) interest on sums paid by the State Government under 
guarantees under section 66; 
(vii) the write-down of amounts paid from capital under the 
proviso to section 59; 
(viia) the write-down of amounts in respect of intangible 
assets to the extent to which they are actually appropriated in any 
year for the purpose in the books of. the Board; 
(viii) contribution to general reserve of an amount not exceed-
ing one-half of one peT centum per CI.nnum of the original cost of 
fixed assets employed by the Board so however that the total 
standing to the credit of such reserve shall not exceed fifteen pet' 
centum of the original cost of such fixed assets; 
(iz) interest on loans advanced or deemed to be advanced to 
the Board under section 64, including arrears of such interest; 
(z) the balance to be appropriated to a fund to be called the 
Development Fund to be utilised for-
(0) purposes beneficial, in the opinion of the Board, to 
electrical development in the State; 
(b) repayment of loans advanced to the Board under section 
64 and required to be repaid: 
Provided that where no such loan is outstanding, one-half 
of the balance aforesaid shall be credited to the Consolidated 
Fund of the State. 
9 of 1914. 

30 of 1966. 
• 
13 
68. The Board shall create a depreciation reserve and as far as com-
pliance with the provisi)ns of section 67 makes it p;acticable, shall, 
at the end of every yea", credit to such reserve from its revenue an 
amount calculated in accordance with the straight line method of 
depreciation, that is to S"y, such an amount as is arrived. at by dividing 
ninety per cent. of the original cost of the assets, after taking fnb 
eccount the sums already written off and set aside in the books of the 
Board, by the prescribed perion in respect of such assets: 
Provided that the contribution in respect of any asset to the 
depreciation reserve under this section shall cease at the end of the 
prescribed period or when the asset ceases to be U'led by the Board, 
whichever is earlier: 
Provided further that if in any year it is not practicable fully to 
comply with the provisbns of this section. the amount by whfch the 
sums actually credited falls short of the amount required under this 
section in respect of that year, shl:lll be carried forward and togethet' 
with simple interest thereon at the Reserve Bank rate ruling at the 
beginnin~ of that year, shall be credited to the said reserve as soon ae; 
it is found p,ssible in accordanre with section 67, so to do: 
Providen further that the accumulations in the depreciation reserve 
may be invested in the business of the Board, or utilised for repayment. 
of the principal of any loan raised under section 65 or for repayment 
of sums paid by the St."'l.te G'lVernment under guarantees under section 66. . • .• - ! I .. ,'--..".,- ~ 
ExpZanation.-In this section, "prescribed period"-
(i) in relation to an aAset which became available to the Boarn 
for its Use in its husiness before thp. commencement of the Electri· 
city (Supply) Amp..,nment Act, 1966. means the pre~cribed perion 
a~ defined in the Sixth Schedule reducen by the number of year~ 
durin~ which such asset was used or capable of being used, such 
years being commlted from the beginning of the vear next follow-
ing that in which th'lt aSRet became so available to thp 'Roard anti 
up to the end of the year endinv, on ot" after such commencement: 
(iil in relation to any other asset, means the prescribed period 
as so defined 1n the said Schedule. 
ft. (1) • • • • • 
(4) The accounts of the Board as certified by the Comptr.oller and 
Auditor-General of India or any other person authorized by him in thiq 
behalf together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarden 
annually to the State Government and thqt Government mav issue sue!' 
instructions to the Board in respect thereof ae; it deems fit and the Boarrl 
shall comply with such instructions. 
• • • • • 
DE;precla-
tion 
reserve. 
Account. 
and 
audit. 
'14. Any officer or servant of the board or of 8 Gf.'nerAtin~ Cbm- Powert of 
pany generally or specially authorised by the Board or by the entry. 
Generating Company, RS thp. rq!'lp' m'lv be, in this behalf may at any 
reasonable time after giving thE' owner or occupier reasonable notice 

Power to 
make 
regu-
lations. 
Members, 
officers 
and 
servants of 
the Board 
to be 
public 
servants. 
Protection 
to persons 
acting 
under this 
Act. 
14 
enter upon any land or premises and there do such things as may be 
reasonably necessary for the purposes of lawfully using any trans-
mission lines or main transmission lines, or of making any survey, 
examination or investigation preliminary or incidental to the exercise 
of powers or the performance of· duties by the Board or by the 
Generating Company, as the case may be, under this Act. 
* • * • • 
79. The Board may make regulations not inconsistent with this Act 
and the rules made thereunder to provide for all or any of the following 
matters, namely:-
• • • • • 
(c) the duties of officers and servants of the Board, and their 
salaries, allowances and other conditions of service; 
* • • • • 
Provided that regulations under clauses (a) "and (d) shall be made 
only with the previous approval of the State GoveI'!lIUent and regula-
tions under clauses (h) and (i) shall be made with the concurrence of 
the Authority. 
• • • • • 
81. All members, officers and servants of the Board shall be deemed, 
when acting or purporting to act in pursuance of any of the provisions 
of this Act, to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of 
the Indian Penal Code. 
82. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against 
any member, officer or servant of the Board for anything which is in 
good faith done or intended to be done under this Act. 
• • • • • 
45 of 1860. 

THE FOURTH SCHEDULE 
(See sections 23 and 37 and First and Third Sched\des) 
PRICE FOR UNDERTAKINGS, GENERATING STATIONS AND MAIN TRANSMISSION 
LINES PUIIC'HASQ> BY THE BoARD 
• • • • • 
II. The price to be paid for any undertaking, generating station or 
main transmission line as the case may be purchased by the Board 
under this Act shall be such sum as may be certified by an auditor 
appointed by the State Government in this behalf to have been the 
amount properly incurred on and incidental to the establishment of 
the undertaking, station or main transmission line, as the case may be, 
l.ss depreciation there~n on the scale set out in paragraph III: 
Provided that there shall be added to such sum as aforesaid on 
account of such purchase of the generating station or main transmission 
line such reasonable compensation as may be determined by the Board 
having due regard to the fact that a portion of the undertaking is to be 
acquired: 
Provided further that if the Board or the licensee is dissatified with 
the sum so certified, the matter shall, in default of agreement between 
them, be determined by arbitration as provided in section 76. 
III. The scale of depreciation referred to in paragraph II shall be 
in respect of the portion of the prescribed period prior to the date of 
vesting,-
(a) for land owned under full title, including the cost of clear-
ing the site, nil; 
(b) for other assets specified in the Table appended to the 
Seventh Schedule, the amount which would be produced by the 
end of the said portion of the prescribed period if during that 
portion an allowance were made annually on account of deprecia-
tion in accordance with the provisions of paragraph VI of the Sixth 
Schedule. 
• • • • • 
IS 

±HE SIXTH SCHEDULE . 
(See sections 57 and 57A) 
FINANCIAL PRINCIPLES AND THEIR APPLICATION 
• • • • • 
VA. (1) There shall be created a reserve to be called the Develop-
ment Reserve to which shall be appropriated in respect of each 
accounting year a sum equal to the amount of income-tax and super-
tax calculated at rates applicable during the assessment year for which 
the accounting year o£ the licensee is the previous year, on the amount 
of development rebate to which the licensae is entitled for the accounting 
year under clause (vi) (b) of sub-section (2) of section 10 of the Indian 
Income-tax Act. 1922: 
Provided, that if in any accounting year, the clear profit [excluding 
the special appropriation to be made under item (va) of clause (c) of 
sub-paragraph (2) of paragraph XVII] together with the accumu-
lations, if any, in the Tariffs and Dividends Control Reserve less the 
sum calculated as aforesaid falls short of the reasonable return, the 
sum to be appropriated to the Development Reserve in respect of such 
accounting year shall be reduced by the amount of the shortfall . 
• • • • • 
(4) On the purchase of the undertaking, the Development Reserve 
shall be handed over to the purchaser and maintained as such Develop-
ment Reserve: 
Provided that where the undertaking is purchased by the Board or 
the State Government, the amount of the Reserve may be deducted" 
from the price payable to the licensee. 
VI. (1) There shall be allowed in each year in respect of deprecia-
tion of fixed assets employed in the business of electricity supply such 
an amount as would, if set aside annually throughout the prescribed 
period and accumulated at compound interest at 4 pe,. centum pe,. 
annum, produced by the end of the prescribed period an amount equal 
to 90 per cent. of the original cost of the asset after taking into account 
the sums already written off or set aside in the books of the undertaking. 
Annual interest on the accumulated balance will be allowed as an 
expense from revenue as well as the annual incremental deposit: 
Provided that, within 3 months from the date upon which these 
prinCiples are enacted, a licensee may elect to adopt the straight-line 
method of depreciation accounting in lieu of the compound interest 
method abOVe prescribed. Straightline method of depreciation account-
ing means the method whereby an allowance is made in each year in 
respect of depreciation Of fixed assets employed in the business of such 
an amount as is arrived at by dividing ninety per- cent. of the original 
cost of the asset by the prescribed period in respect of such asset. 
(2) The year in which any asset becomes available for use in the 
business and the relative cost thereof shall, in the absence of satisfac-
tory record, be determined by the State Government. All sums credit-
ed to depreciation account shall be invested only in the business of 
16 

it 
eieCtrieity.mpply· of . the undertaking or where it· is not -practicable·w",· 
so .btWlt ·them in' investments approved by the' State &vermnent!- .. ", .( ~ 
(3) Any sums invested in investments approved by the State GOv:':"" 
ernment under sub-paragraph (2) shall, as soon as practicable; ,'be 
utilised in the business of electricity supply of. the undertaking. and if 
such sums are not so utilised they shall not form part of tJle· capital 
base~'Qnderclause {d) of sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph XVII . 
• ,' ," j. 
W: (1) Where any fixed asset ceases to be available for UIe tHrough 
ob .... ence, inadequacy, superfluity or for any· other. reason; ·it shall 
be -described in the books of the licensee as no longer in use aDd no 
further depreciation in respect thereof shall be allowed 8S . a· charge 
ag~t r~yenue. 
(2) The" written down cost of such fixed asset including expenses 
incurted ·on. the dismantling thereof shall be charged' against the 
Cont~geriCf~ Reserve: 
" ',.' 
~ that where the accumulations in the Contlnge~. Ra-
ser\''' an· not sufficient to permit the charging of the entire. written 
down cost of the asset and the dismantling expeJUJe&. the excess 
amount may be included in the capital base for the purpose of claulie 
(4) Of sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph XVII. 
(3) The amount for which any such fixed asset is sold or the amount 
of its scrap value when actually realised shall be credited to the 
Contingencies Reserve. 
VIII. When any asset has been written down in the books of Ute 
undertaking to 10 per cent. or less of its original cost, no further depre· 
ctation shall be allowed in respect of that asset. 
IX. When any fixed asset is sold for an amount exceeding its written 
down cost the excess after deducting all taxes payable thereon shall be 
credited to the Contingencies Reserve. 
X. Except with the previous consent of the State Government, no 
sums shall be carried forward to a reserve and no dividend. in exceas 
of 3 per cent. shall be paid on share capital and no other distribution 
of profits shall be made to the shareholders in respect of any year of 
account so long as any Of the following sums remain to be written off 
in the books of the undertaking, namely:-
(i) normal depreciation due for that year ofi account calculated 
in accordance with the provisions of paragraph VI; 
(ii) equated instalment in respect of arrears of depreciation, 
computed in accordance with the provisions at paragraph XI, for 
that year of account; 
(iii) arrears,if any, in respect of normal depreciation referred 
to in clause (i), accumulated after the date of application of the pro-
visions of the Sixth Schedule to the licensee; 
(iv) arrears, if any, in respect of equated instalments referred 
to in clause (ii). 
XI. Arrears of depreciation calculated in accordance with paragraph 
VI may be written off by equated payments over the remainder of the 

18 
pNlCribed period and the amount 80 set aside in the books Of the under-
taldn. may be taken into account in any year as a apeclal appropria-
tiOD for .. purposes of assessing the clear profit. 
XVII. For the purposes of this Schedule-
(8) "Preaeribed period" means-
in respect of each of the assets specified in the table 
appended to the Seventh Schedule, the number o~ years or 
period specified therein, in relation to such asset. running in each 
case from the beginning of the year of account next followilll 
that in which the particular asset became available for use in the 
business: 
Provided that, on the application of the Ucensee, the State 
Government may vary the prescribed period in respect of any 
assets in use on the date when this Sch~ule comes into foree 
if, having regard to the physical condition of such assets the 
application of the table to such assets would be unreasonable. 
Any question arising out of the decision of the State Govern-
ment on any such application shall be referred to the Authority 
tor arbitration. 
• • • • • 

THE SEVENTH SCHEDULE 
',~, '.,\ ... , 
: ". ~. ,~.' 
(Sec sections :17, 57A and 68 and the Fourth aDd U\e lixth ~) 
TABLE j 
-------------------_._------
~ription of allet Number or yean or 
period -
-----------.-----_._-- -------)--------
A. Land owned under full title 
B. Land held under lC'aJe-
(II) for inve.tment in th~ land 
(h) for cost of dr.ring ~itr 
r:. Aue ... purchll/lC"d n('w-
(II) ""at and machinery in generating llatiom, including plant 
tOuodationa-
(i) hydro-electric . 
(ii) Iteam-electri<: 
(iii) dieael-electrk . 
(b) Cooling towen and circulating water sy~tell1l! 
(c) Hydraulic works fomling part of a hydro-electric lyateM, 
induding-
(i) dams, spilwaYb. wein, canall, r('inforced concrete f1umea 
Infinity. 
T flO! period of the 'eMe, 
ar the period mnaia-
ing unelq)ired on 
-lftIDou of the Ie .... 
The period of the .euc 
l'm1alDinr. \llleXpired 
at the date of ciean.llll 
tbe .i~~; 
Thirty-five. 
Twenty-five. 
FifteCl1. 
Thirty. 
and ~yphon. OnC" hundrrcl. 
(ii) reinJorced concrete pipe-line. and surge taw, .teel pipe-
linea, lluicC" gate~, st('C"I.urge tanka, hydraulic control valve. 
and other hydraulic works. Forty. 
(Ii) Buildings and civil engin~ring worlu of Ii permanent character, 
not mentioned abovl'--
(i) Offier ... and .howroonu . '. - • 
(ii) containing thermo-electric perabng plant. 
(iii) containing hydro-electric generating piau . 
(ill) temporary erectioDiluch .. ~ooden Itruct~. 
(illll) roacb other than kutcha roada _. • • 
(u) otben 
'. 
I') Truuformers, tran.former kiaalu, .ub-atation equipment and 
other fixed apparatus (including plant {oundati.cma)- . 
Flity. 
Thirty. 
Thlrty-fivf. . 
Five. 
One hl1Jldftd. 
Fifty. 
(i) tranaformers (includiDI foWldatioa) havm, • rating of 
100 kiloyo\t ampera aDd over. • • • •• Thirty-fin, 
(ii) othen _Twaaty-fiw. 
(f) SwitcliFar, including cable CODDeCUoIlli. 
(jf) Lilhtning arrestors-
(i) ,tatiOD type • • 
eli) Pole type . . 
(iii) lynchrOl101II coudenten. 
Twenty. 
Twenty. 
yan-.. 
'I'hirty-fi~ . 
_____ --.--------~+---------~------~--~~----__ L_ ____________ --
19 

(,) Batteries Ten. 
(h) (I) Undefll'Ound cabltl inc1ud1llljoiDt bolita and dilconnect· 
iDl boxa . . . . . . . • Forty. 
(a> Cable duct sy.tem • Sixty. 
(i) Overhead lintl. Includill( IUpporta-
(i) Unea on fabricated steel IUpport. operatiDl at nominal 
voltaps biPer than 66 IWovolu. •• . 11Iirty-fiVf'. 
(ii) line~ on.teehupports operatiq at nominal voltagei. higher 
than 13' !l kilovolt, but not exceediDa 66 1r.Uovolt.. • Thirty. 
(iii) UnCI on ateel or reinforced concrete supports. 
(i.) 1M on treated wood 5Uppt"t5 
(j) Meters • 
(t) Self-propelled vehicle&. 
(I) Static machine toob • 
(III> Air-conditioning plant-
(i) Italic. 
(ii) portable 
(II) (i) 081ce rurniturc and 6tdDl~. 
(ii) Office equipment 
(iii) intc:mal wirilll. indudin« fitlil' 1\'1 1I"c1I1JlFflrlltu~ .. 
(iD) Itreef..light fittings. 
(0) Apparatullet on hire-
(i) other than motOl'll. 
(ii) moton. 
e,} Communication equipmellt-
(Ii) Telephone lineI and telephODCl •• 
D. Aueu purc:bued lecOlld hand and &lletll not othe~'iIe providtd for 
iothb table. . 
------------ ---
Twenty. 
Fifteen. 
Seven. 
Twenty. 
Pifteen. 
&even. 
Twcat,.. 
Ten. 
Fifteen. 
Fifteen. 
Twenty. 
Fifteen. 
Twenty. 
.. 
Such rl"8lLr:l'ck pe-
riod .. the State Go~­
~ ;deeermine. 
;ri eatcIl cue hMIIJ 
r:9ard to the utuft. 
~ a'nd CODdid on of 
tQ kt at the time 
0I·1&' ..... doa by ttae 
owner. 

THE). · ... [<.scHEDULE 
(See tM First and Third Schedu1e&) 
DI'l'BJtMINATIPN OJ' COST OF PRODUCTJOl'f UF E.LlIl:nUClTY A.T aDfDATDIO 
STATJOl'fS 
! 
.~ 
I. For the purposes of the First and Third Schedules, the COlt of 
production of electricity at a generating station shall be ucertaiMcl by 
calculating and taking into accoWlt the following costs, char,.. .net 
a)Jowances in respect of the year of account, namely:-
(0) sums expended for fuel, oil, water and stores consumed, for 
salaries and wages, and any contribution by the Ucel\He for paD-
sions, provident fund, superannuation and insurance of oftleen.nd 
servants 1 for repairs and maintenance and for ren~wals not eharge-
able to capital account; 
... ... • 
THE NINTH SCHEDULE 
(See the r~rst Schedule) 
.",~ ~'. '.' 
ALLOCATJO"N OF C08T8 OF P'MOOVCTJON At QZJCBIlA'l'lNO STATION. 
I. For the purposes of this Schedule-
• • ... • 
(j) "cost of repairs, maintenance and renewala" means th. 
sums expended for repairs and maintenance anti for renewals not 
chargeable to capital accoWlt, together with the proportion at 
salaries and wages and any contrlbutiona made by the OWD8r' of 
the station for pensions, provident fund, superannuation and insur-
ance at oftlcers and servants properly attributable to repairs, main-
~nce and renewsM. 

LOll -MIRA ... 
lot ••• 
' •.. ", ~. i. 
".',.' , ;::. 
".:i ~;.I,.J:;.,;' , .. ~ :.:.:" j • " r". . ~ - ~ ... 
,.;., .. 
.. ;.; 
A 
BILL 
"'......,. to A~ the Electriritll (""IiI) Act, 1841. 
I' ,'. : I I 
j ..• 