Aඌ ංඇඍඋඈൽඎർൾൽ ංඇ Lඈ඄ Sൺൻඁൺ
Bill No. 151 of 2024
THE ESTABLISHMENT OF SPORTS INFRASTRUCTURE 
IN VIRUDHUNAGAR BILL, 2024
By
Sඁඋං Mൺඇංർ඄ൺආ Tൺ඀ඈඋൾ B., M.P.
ൺ
BILL
to provide for establishment of a modern sports infrastructure with state-of-the-art facilities 
for various sports disciplines, training Centres and recreational amenities 
in the Virudhunagar in the State of Tamil Nadu 
and for matters connected therewith.
 B ൾ it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:–
 1. ( 1) This Act may be called the Establishment of Sports Infrastructure in Virudhunagar 
Act, 2024.
Short title and 
commencement.

  ( 2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,–
  ( a) “Fund” means the Virudhunagar Sports Establishment and Development Fund 
constituted under section 6; and
  ( b) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
 3. (1) The Central Government shall, within six months of coming into force of this 
Act shall develop State-of-the-art Sports Infrastructure in Virudhunagar district of 
the State of Tamil Nadu to promote sports at grassroot level in such manner as may be 
prescribed.
  ( 2) The Sports Infrastructure developed under sub-section (1) shall have 
requisite stadiums, indoor and outdoor courts, swimming pools, fitness centers and 
administrative buildings.
 4. The Sports Infrastructure developed under sub-section (1) of section 3 shall,–
  ( a) provide state-of-the-art infrastructure for training and development of sportsperson 
in various sports disciplines;
  ( b) promote public participation in sports and physical fitness activities to enhance 
overall health and well-being; and
  ( c) create employment opportunities and stimulate economic growth through 
sports-related tourism and activities.
 5. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
constitute a Governing Body to oversee the planning, construction, and management 
of the development of Sports Infrastructure under sub-section (1) of section 3 in such 
manner as may be prescribed.
  ( 2) The functions, composition and other terms and conditions of the Governing 
Body shall be such as may be prescribed.
 6. (1) The Central Government shall by notification in the official Gazette, constitute 
a Fund to be known as Virudhunagar Sports Establishment and Development Fund.
  ( 2) The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament 
by law in this behalf, grant sums of money to the Fund as the Central Government may 
think fit for establishment and development of sports in Virudhunagar.
  ( 3) The Fund may also be credited with money sourced through public-private 
partnerships, grants and donations received for sports city in Virudhunagar.
  ( 4) The Central Government shall conduct regular audit to ensure transparency, 
efficiency and accountability in utilization of funds in such manner as may be prescribed.
 7. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central 
Government may, by order published in the Gazette, make such provisions not inconsistent 
2
Definitions.
Establishment 
of Sports 
Infrastructure in 
Virudhunagar. 
Objectives of 
development 
of Sports 
Infrastructure.
Implementation 
and Monitoring. 
Constitution of 
Virudhunagar 
Sports 
Infrastructure 
Establishment 
and 
Development 
Fund.
Power to remove 
difficulties.

with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient, for removing the 
difficulty:
    Provided that no such order shall be issued after the expiry of a period of two 
  years from the date of commencement of this Act. 
  ( 2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be 
laid before the Parliament.
 8. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules 
for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 
  ( 2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the 
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or 
be of no effect, as the case may be; however, any such modification or annulment shall be 
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
3
Power to make 
rules.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
 The Virudhunagar constituency in the State of Tamil Nadu, known for its rich cultural 
heritage and vibrant community, currently lacks adequate sports infrastructure to support 
the physical and recreational needs of its residents. Recognizing the significant benefits 
of sports in promoting health, well-being and community spirit, there is a pressing need to 
develop Sports Infrastructure in Virudhunagar.
 The primary objective of this proposed legislation is to create state-of-the-art facilities 
for various sports disciplines, training centres and recreational amenities. This initiative aims 
to provide local athletes and enthusiasts with access to high-quality facilities for practice, 
competitions and physical fitness activities. By fostering a culture of sportsmanship and 
active living, the Sports will contribute to improving public health outcomes and enhancing 
the overall quality of life in Virudhunagar.
 Further, the development of Sports Infrastructure is expected to stimulate economic 
growth by attracting sports-related tourism, creating job opportunities in sports management 
and hospitality sectors and promoting local businesses. This legislation underscores our 
commitment to investing in the development of youth, promoting inclusivity in sports and 
strengthening community bonds through recreational activities and competitive events.
 In conclusion, the development of Sports Infrastructure in Virudhunagar represents a 
significant step towards realizing the constituency’s potential as a hub for sports excellence 
and fostering a healthier, more active lifestyle among its residents.
 Hence this Bill.
     Nൾඐ Dൾඅඁං;                                                                                       MANICKAM TAGORE B.
July 12, 2024   
       
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
 Clause 3 of the Bill provides for development of Sports Infrastructure in Virudhunagar 
district of State of Tamil Nadu to promote sports at grassroot and competitive level. 
Clause 5 provides for constitution of a Governing Body by Central Government to oversee 
the planning, construction and management of the Sports Infrastructure. Clause 6 provides 
for the constitution of Virudhunagar Sports Establishment and Development Fund. It also 
provides for the Central Government to provide grants to the Fund. The Bill, therefore, if 
enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that 
a recurring expenditure of about Rupees One Thousand Crore per annum will be involved 
from the Consolidated Fund of India.
 A non-recurring expenditure of about Rupees One Thousand Crore is also likely to be 
involved.
5

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
 Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out 
the purposes of this Bill. As the rules will relate to matter of details only, the delegation of 
legislative power is of a normal character. 
6

LOK SABHA
ൺ
BILL
to provide for establishment of a modern sports infrastructure with state-of-the-art facilities 
for various sports disciplines, training Centres and recreational amenities 
in the Virudhunagar in the State of Tamil Nadu 
and for matters connected therewith.
 
 
(Shri Manickam Tagore B., M.P .) 