1
THE RIGHT TO SHELTER BILL, 2016
By
SHRI GOPAL CHINAYYA SHETTY, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the right to shelter to the persons living below poverty line or falling
under low income group by providing a dwelling unit to every such family in the
country and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Right to Shelter Act, 2016.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. 151  of  2016
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the content otherwise requires,—
(a) “family” means a citizen, his spouse and dependent children;
(b) “person living below poverty line” means a person whose monthly income
from all sources is such as may be determined by the Central Government, from time
to time after taking into consideration all such relevant factors as it may deem fit:
Provided that different criterion may be fixed for different classes of persons in
various States and Union territories.
(c) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(d) “shelter” means a dwelling unit comprising at least one living room, one bed
room, one kitchen and one toilet.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, within a period of five years from the coming
into force of this Act, provide free of cost, one all weather shelter to each family living
below poverty line in the country:
Provided that while providing the shelter, the Central Government shall take into
account the number of members in the family.
(2) For the purpose of sub-section (1), the Central Government shall, in consultation
with the concerned State Government, cause to be notified a list of all families living below
poverty line in each State and Union territory, in such manner, as may be prescribed.
(3) The priority of allotting the shelter in a State or Union territory shall be determined
by draw of lot to be conducted in such manner as may be prescribed.
4. (1) The Central Government shall, within a period of seven years from the coming
into force of this Act, provide a shelter at fifty per cent. of the cost to each family, having an
annual income of less than rupees five lakh:
Provided that while providing the shelter, the Central Government shall take into
account the number of members in the family.
(2) For the purpose of sub-section (1), the Central Government shall, in consultation
with the concerned State Government, cause to be notified a list of all families having an
annual income less than rupees five lakh in each State and Union territory in such manner
as may be prescribed.
(3) The priority of allotting the shelter in a State or Union territory under this section
shall be determined by the draw of lot to be conducted in such manner as may be prescribed.
5. ( 1) The Central Government shall, after every four years, undertake the
maintenance of the dwelling unit provided under section 3 and charge such nominal amount
for the purpose as may be prescribed.
(2) The Central Government  shall, after every four years, undertake the maintenance
of the dwelling unit provided under section 4 and charge fifty per cent. of the maintenance
cost.
6. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to be provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of the period of three years
from the date of commencement of this Act.
7. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of, any
other law, for the time being in force, providing shelter to persons living below poverty line
and earning less than rupees five lakh per annum.
Definitions.
Central
Government
to maintain
the dwelling
unit.
Central
Government
to provide a
dwelling unit
to families
living below
poverty line.
Central
Government
to provide a
dwelling unit
at fifty per
cent. of the
cost.
Power to
remove
difficulty.
Act to have
effect in
addition to
other Acts.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
8. (1) The Central Government may, by  notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days,
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if,
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses
agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under
that rule.
Power to
make rules.
5
10

S-3\F\BILL 2016\LS\1259LS
4
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Roof over one's head is a minimal basic requirement of human being. It gives a feeling
of security and lays the foundation of sustainable quality of life. Increasing disparity in
income has led to the homelessness in our country. While some people living in palaces or
big houses, some don't even have access to a shelter. The housing with its rising cost has
become unaffordable. According to an estimate there are around 13 crore homeless people
in India. Not only that, each of these homeless have atleast 5-6 members dependent on them
that makes a huge section of the country which doesn't have roof over their head. These
homeless people face vagaries of weather from chilling cold in winters to heat waves during
summer. Many of these homeless people die every year. Most of these homeless persons
are poor or live below poverty line.
These homeless people are prone to reduce access to healthcare, limited access to
education, increased risk of suffering from violence and abuse, general discrimination from
other people, and most importantly drug abuse. They are wrecked from inside and lost their
hopes while living their life in aloofness.
Children of homeless families are often missed out on education and medical treatment
and are at the high risk of suffering addiction, abuse and illness. These children often fall
into wrong hands and at times become criminals. Therefore, it is in the interest of the society
and national building that State should provide shelter.
Ours is a welfare state and it is the duty of the State to ensure that every poor citizen
should have roof over his head. It will improve their quality of life, instill a sense of security
and lead them to be a healthy and better citizen. Therefore, it is proposed that every family
living below poverty line should be provided a dwelling unit free of cost and every facility
earning less than rupees five lakh should be provided a dwelling unit at fifty per cent. of the
cost. The proposed Bill also provides for maintenance and succession of the dwelling unit
given by Central Government.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; GOPAL CHINAYYA SHETTY
May 5, 2016.

S-3\F\BILL 2016\LS\1259LS
5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides that the families living below poverty line shall be
provided a dwelling unit free of cost. Clause 4 provides that families earning below rupees
five lakh shall be given a dwelling unit at fifty per cent. of the cost. Clause 5 provides that
Central Government shall also undertake the maintenance of these dwelling units.
The Bill, therefore,  if  enacted would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund
of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about rupees Five hundred crore per
annum would be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one thousand crore is also likely to be
involved.

S-3\F\BILL 2016\LS\1259LS
6
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the right to shelter to the persons living below poverty line or falling under
low income group by providing a dwelling unit to every such family in the country and
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Gopal Chinayya Shetty, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—1259LS(S3)—02-07-2016.