1
THE INDIAN PENAL CODE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2014
By
DR. KIRIT PREMJIBHAI SOLANKI, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  This Act may be called the Indian Penal Code (Amendment) Act, 2014.
2. After section 304A of the Indian Penal Code, 1860, the following section shall be
inserted, namely:—
“304AA. ( 1) Whoever, being a registered Medical Practitioner or a person
assisting such registered Medical Practitioner, causes the death of any person during
the course of his treatment including surgical treatment due to any wilful medical
negligence not amounting to culpable homicide, shall be punished with imprisonment
for a term which may extend to one year and also with fine, which may extend to rupees
fifty thousand.
Short title.
Bill No. 152  of  2014
Insertion of
new section
304AA.
Wilful
medical
negligence
not
amounting to
culpable
homicide.
45 of 1860.
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(2) No arrest under sub-section ( 1) shall be made till the offence of causing
death due to wilful medical negligence is established.
Explanation.— For the purpose of sub-section (2), the offence of causing death
due to wilful medical negligence shall be taken as established only if the findings of the
inquiry made by the Investigating Officer supports the fact of death due to wilful
medical negligence.”.
5

3
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
It has been noticed that in case of death during or after medical treatment, the relatives
of the deceased lodge criminal medical negligence complaints against treating doctor under
section 304 or 304A of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 and demand arrest of treating doctors.
Ideally, the medical criminal negligence is required to be established on the basis of prima facie
evidence formed on the basis of examination of reports of post mortem, pathological lab tests
or opinion of experts in medical field.
Therefore, every due care and caution is required to be exercised in prosecuting doctors
for medical negligence, if any, in the interest of society. In case of death of patient due to
medical negligence on the part of treating doctors, the investigating officer should exercise
due care before registering a case of medical negligence. The police officials should not
arrest a doctor for medical negligence on the basis of mere opinion of relatives or on receipt
of complaints from them. Rather, experts' opinion, post mortem reports, forensic report and
other evidence should be given due weightage to make a case of medical negligence.
The Bill seeks to provide that in wilful medical negligence cases, doctors should not be
held criminally responsible or arrested immediately on complaints unless there is prima  facie
evidence supporting the charges of negligent act.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW D ELHI; KIRIT PREMJIBHAI SOLANKI
November 5, 2014.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
————
(Dr. Kirit Premjibhai Solanki, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—2716LS(S3)—02.12.2014.