1
Short title and
commencement.
THE CODE OF CIVIL PROCEDURE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2018
BY
SHRI BHARTRUHARI  MAHTAB, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act, 2018.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (hereinafter referred to as the Code), for
section 35A, the following section shall be substituted, namely:—
"35A. (1) If any suit or other proceedings, including an execution proceedings
but excluding an appeal or a revision, any party objects to the claim or defence on the
ground that the claim or defence or any part of it is, as against the objector, false or
5 of 1908.
Bill No. 152 of 2018
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Substitution of
new section for
section 35A.
Costs in
respect of false
or vexatious or
defences.
5

2
vexatious to the knowledge of the party by whom it has been put forward, and if
thereafter, as against the objector, such claim or defence is disallowed, abandoned or
withdrawn in whole or in part, the Court, if it so thinks fit, may, after recording its
reasons for holding such claim or defence to be false or vexatious, make an order for
the payment to the objector by the party by whom such claim or defence has been put
forward, of such compensatory, punitive and prohibitive costs as appear to the Court
to be in the interest of justice.
(2) In determining the amount of costs under sub-section ( 1), the Court shall
give due regard to the inconvenience faced by the objector against whom false or
vaxatious claims were made, the costs of litigation, the loss of reputation of the objector
due to such claims and the loss of judicial time:
Provided that no Court shall make any such order for the payment of an amount
exceeding the limits of its pecuniary jurisdiction.
(3) No person against whom an order has been made under this section shall, by
reason thereof, be exempted from any criminal liability in respect of any claim or defence
made by him.
(4) The amount of any compensation awarded under this section in respect of a
false or vexatious claim or defence shall be taken into account in any subsequent suit
for damages or compensation in respect of such claim or defence.".
3. For section 35B of the Code, the following section shall be substituted, namely:—
"35B. (1) If, on any date fixed for the hearing of a suit or for taking any step
therein, a party to the suit—
(a) fails to take the step which he was required by or under this Code to
take on that date, or
(b) obtains an adjournment for taking such step or for producing evidence
or on any other ground,
the Court shall make an order imposing such compensatory, punitive and
prohibitive costs as appear to the Court to be in the interest of justice and payment of
such costs, on the date next hearing following the date of such order, shall be a
condition precedent to the further prosecution of—
(a) the suit by the plaintiff, where the plaintiff was ordered to pay such
costs;
(b) the defence by the defendant, where the defendant was ordered to pay
such costs.
Explanation.—Where separate defences have been raised by the defendants or
groups of defendants, payment of such costs shall be a condition precedent to the
further prosecution of the defence by such defendants or groups of defendants as
have been ordered by the Court to pay such costs.
(2) In determining the amount of costs under sub-section ( 1), the Court shall
give due regard to the inconvenience faced by the other party due to delays caused by
the delinquent party, the costs of litigation and the loss of judicial time:
Provided that no Court shall make any such order for the payment of an amount
exceeding the limits of its pecuniary jurisdiction.
(3) The Court may, for reasons to be recorded, exempt invocation of
sub-section (1) if it so deems fit.".
Substitution of
new section
for section
35B.
Costs for
causing delay.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Delays in judicial processes are order of the day. According to an estimate, judicial
delays costs our nation around 0.5 per cent of Gross Domestic Product (GDP) in terms of lost
man-hours, litigation costs, disruption in productive activities. A major cause of prolonged
judicial proceedings is the tendency among parties to litigation to seek adjournments on one
excuse after the other. Moreover, many a time parties make false or frivolous claims in judicial
proceedings and employ it as a dilatory tactic to delay timely conclusion of the proceedings.
Though there are provisions in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 under section 35A
and section 35B, these provisions have largely proved to be inadequate to address the
malaise of prolonged judicial proceedings due to various reasons.
Firstly, section 35B of the Code makes it discretionary for the courts to impose costs
for causing delays. As a result, litigants often try to delay judicial proceedings and get away
without any penalty. Acknowledging the importance of invoking section 35B of the Code of
Civil Procedure, the Supreme Court observed in Vinod Seth's case that section 35B providing
for costs for causing delay should be regularly employed to reduce delay. The Supreme
Court has, in many recent cases, imposed costs as high as twenty-five lakh rupees for
wasting judicial time.
Secondly, section 35A provides for only compensatory costs in respect of false or
vexatious claims or defences and disregards the need to impose punitive costs on delinquent
parties so as to prohibit them from making false or vexatious claims or defences.
Thirdly, the said section 35A lays down an upper limit of a mere three thousand rupees
for compensatory cost and that too is seldom invoked. Though the Supreme Court and the
High Courts have plenary powers under their writ jurisdiction to award higher costs, the
exercise of power to impose cost by the lower courts is largely fettered by the monetary
ceiling laid down under section 35A.
It is, therefore, high time that section 35A and 35B are amended to make them more
effective in addressing delays in courts.
With the above objects in view, the Bill seeks to amend the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908 with a view to—
(a) provide that it shall be mandatory for courts to impose costs for causing
delays, and in only exceptional cases, for reasons to be recorded, the courts may do
away with such imposition of such costs;
(b) provide for imposition of punitive costs in addition to compensatory costs in
cases of false or vexatious claims or defences;
(c) do away with the maximum ceiling of three thousand rupees on costs imposable
under section 35A of the Code; and
(d) provide that the Court shall give due regard to factors such as the
inconvenience faced by the aggrieved party, costs of litigation and loss of judicial time
while imposing cost on delinquent parties so that the costs imposed are prohibitive.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
N
EW DELHI; BHARTRUHARI  MAHTAB
July 10, 2018.
3

ANNEXURE
(EXTRACTS FROM THE CODE OF CIVIL PROCEDURE, 1908)
(NO. 5 OF 1908)
* * * * * * *
35A. (1) If any suit or other proceedings including an execution proceedings but
excluding an appeal or a revision, any party objects to the claim of defense on the ground
that the claim or defense or any part of it is, as against the objector, false or vexatious to the
knowledge of the party by whom it has been put forward, and if thereafter, as against the
objector, such claim or defence is disallowed, abandoned or withdrawn in whole or in part,
the Court if it so thinks fit, may, after recording its reasons for holding such claim or defence
to be false or vexatious, make an order for the payment to the object or by the party by whom
such claim or defence has been put forward, of cost by way of compensation.
(2) No Court shall make any such order for the payment of an amount exceeding three
thousand rupees or exceeding the limits of it pecuniary jurisdiction, whichever amount is
less:
Provided that where the pecuniary limits of the jurisdiction of any Court exercising the
jurisdiction of a Court of Small Causes under the Provincial Small Cause Courts Act, 1887
(9 of 1887) or under a corresponding law in force in any part of India to which the said Act
does not extend and not being a Court constituted under such Act or law, are less than two
hundred and fifty rupees, the High Court may empower such Court to award as costs under
this section any amount not exceeding two hundred and fifty rupees and not exceeding
those limits by more than one hundred rupees:
Provided further that the High Court may limit the amount or class of Courts is
empowered to award as costs under this Section.
(3) No person against whom an order has been made under this section shall, by
reason thereof, by exempted from any criminal liability in respect of any claim or defence
made by him.
(4) The amount of any compensation awarded under this section in respect of a false
or vexatious claim or defence shall be taken into account in any subsequent suit for damages
or compensation in respect of such claim or defence.
35B. (1) if, on any date fixed for the hearing of a suit or for taking any step therein, a
party to the suit—
(a) fails to take the step which he was required by or under this code to take on
that date, or
(b) obtains an adjournment for taking such step or for producing evidence or on
any other ground, the Court may, for reasons to be recorded, make an order requiring
such party to pay to the other party such costs as would, in the opinion of the Court,
be reasonably sufficient to reimburse the other party in respect of the expenses incurred
by him in attending the Court on that date, and payment of such costs, on the date next
following the date of such order, shall be a condition precedent to the further prosecution
of—
(a) the suit by plaintiff, where the plaintiff was ordered to pay such costs.
(b) the defence by the defendant, where the defendant was ordered to pay
such costs.
Compensatory
costs in
respect of
false or
vexatious
claims or
defenses.
Cost for
causing delay.
4

5
Explanation— Where separate defences have been raised by the
defendants or groups of defendants, payment of such costs shall be a condition
precedent to the further prosecution of the defence by such defendants or
groups of defendants as have been ordered by the Court to pay such costs.
(2) The costs, ordered to be paid under sub-section (1) shall not, if paid, be included in
the costs awarded in the decree passed in the suit; but if such costs are not paid, a separate
order shall be drawn up indicating the amount of such costs and the names and addresses of
the persons by whom such costs are payable and the order so drawn up shall be executable
against such persons.
* * * * * * *

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.
————
(Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—1780LS(S3)—01.10.2018.